1 
 
 
41 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recomme ndations 
contained in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-2014) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment)  
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 


2 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sab ha) on  Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment ( Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.2.2014 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on   7.2.2014 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935(Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4 
 INTRODUCTION  6 
CHAPTER -I Report 7 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
18 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
30 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted. 
31 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in  respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature. 
33 
 Annexure  
Annexure  Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 17.12.2013             
 
36 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action  taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
38 
                                         
 
    
   
 
 
                                               
                                         
  

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL        
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-2014) 
    
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
                      *10. Shri Madhu Kora  
11. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
              13. Smt. Mausam Noor 
14. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
15. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Kabir Suman 
21. Vacant  
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
   **22. Shri K.R. Arjunan 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
           #26. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
27.       Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
28.        Prof. Mrinal Miri 
29. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
31. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
32. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Shri Madhu Kora nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 18.9.2013. 
**  Shri K.R. Arjunan nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  7.9.2013. 
#   Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member of  Committee w.e.f. 7.9.2013. 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kusal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chair man of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present 
this Forty-First Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-sixty Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands for 
Grants (201 3-14) of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  (Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment). 
  
2. The Thirty-sixty Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 2nd 
May, 201 3. The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on      2nd 
August, 2013.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 17th December, 2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of t he Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI:      HEMANAND BISWAL    
17th December, 2013       Chairman, 
26th Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants, 2013 -2014 relating to the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment).  
1.2 The Thirty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 nd 
May, 2013.  It contained 12 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Paragraph Nos.  2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.31, 2.49, 2.51, 2.52 2.65 and 2.66. 
 (Total 9  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
- Nil - 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted. 
Paragraph Nos. 2.32. 
(Total1 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos. 2.50 and 2.71.  
  (Total 2  - Chapter V)  
 
 
 

8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report.  
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Reduced Annual budgetary allocation for the Department 
   
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para No. 2.17) 
 
1.5  The Committee note d that the Department had sought an allocation of Rs. 18550 
crore for the annual plan 2013 -14, which was curtailed to one third i.e. Rs. 6065 crore  by 
the Planning Commission. The Committee further note d that the 12th Plan allocation to the 
Department is only Rs. 29400 crore inspite of the fact the three working groups of the 
Planning Commission constituted for finalising the 12 th Plan allocation of the Department 
had proposed an allocation of Rs. 4.26 lakh crore for the Plan period. The Committee 
expressed their unhappiness at the meagre allocation made to the Department for the 12 th 
Plan as well as the allocation made in the budget 2013 -14.  The Com mittee desired that 
the Department  should convey their concern to the Planning Commission, pursue 
vigorously with the Planning Commission for increase in allocation of funds in the 12th Plan 
so that in the existing schemes for the welfare of SCs and OBCs get successfully 
implemented and the Department is able to undertake new initiatives and expansion of 
some schemes like Pre -Matric scholarship for SC and OBC students for 6, 7 and 8 
classes.  The Committee felt that this would go a long way in achieving th e goal of helping 
the target groups in getting access to education and financial independence.  

9 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in this reply have stated: 
 
“As per guidelines issued by the Planning Commission, the Department was 
required to formulate the Annual Plan proposal (2013 -14) with the gross 
budgetary support equivalent to 5%, 10% and 15% of the BE 2012 -13. The 
Department of SJ&E had submitted its actual requirements at Rs.18,550 
crore for 2013-14. But Planning Commission allocated Rs. 6065.00crore only 
for the year 2013 -14.The concern raised by the Committee has been 
communicated to the Planning Commission  for taking action as 
recommended. 
 
Regarding the scholarship schemes, this Ministry has been making efforts to 
increase the budgetary allocations  for schemes of Pre -matric and Post -
matric scholarship. The Ministry has been constantly pursuing its pending 
demand for allocation of more funds for the OBC sector  with the Planning 
Commission. Minister (SJ&E)  vide his letter dated 27.7.2012 addressed to 
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, had requested to increase the 
budgetary allocation under Pre -matric and Post -matric scholarship schemes 
for OBC students. The Planning Commission was once again reminded by  
Secretary (SJ&E) vide letter dated 4.1.2013 to consider our request for 
enhanced allocations under scholarship schemes for OBCs and this was 
further highlighted during the discussions on Annual Plan -2013-14 of the 
Ministry with the Planning Commission.      
As regards enhancement of allocation under pre matric scholarship scheme 
for SC students studying in classes IX and X to the students in classes VI to 
VIII, a proposal, has been sent to Deputy Chairman Planning Commission for 
according 'in principle' ap proval for extending the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme of Pre-Matric Scholarship for SC students studying in Classes VI to 
VIII.  Planning Commission has also been requested to allocate an additional 
outlay of Rs. 2529 crores.  The 'in principle' approval is still awaited.  Hon'ble 
Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment  has last reminded Dy. 
Chairman, Planning Commission on15.07.2013”. 
  
 
  

10 
 
1.7 The Committee note that despite the Department (Social Justice and 
Empowerment) constantly pursuing with Planning Commission for increased 
budgetary allocation for 2013 -14, for the schemes for the welfare of SCs and OBCs,  
the Planning Commission has been far from respon sive to the issues of social 
empowerment.  Further, even the ‘in -principle’ approval for extending Pre -matric 
scholarship to Scheduled Castes students studying in Class VI to VIII taken up with 
Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, at Minister ’s (Social Ju stice and 
Empowerment) level has not been received.  While expressing their disappointment 
at the callous approach of the Government, the Committee desire the Department to 
bring their recommendation to the notice of Planning Commission and vigorously 
pursue for increased allocation for the Department.    
 
  

11 
 
B. Non-utilization of funds in the Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC 
students. 
 
                                     Recommendation (S. No.5, Para No. 2.32) 
 
1.8  The Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC students is an important scheme for 
the educational empowerment of SC students by providing financial assistance to 
Scheduled Caste students for pursuing research studies leading to MPhil, PhD and 
equivalent research degree in universities, research institutions and scientific institutions.  
The Committee were dismayed to note that against an allocation of Rs. 125 crore, RE was 
reduced to Rs. 25.00 crore but the Actual expenditure was nil in 2012-13.  The explanation 
of the Department to the Committee was that the funds could not be released in 2012 -13 
as University Grants Commission (UGC), which is the implementing agency, neither 
furnished the list of beneficiaries nor the utilization certificate for Rs. 150 cro re of the 
previous years.  Taking a serious note on the tardy implementation of the scheme, the 
Committee recommended that the Ministry strictly monitor the scheme in coordination with 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC so as to ensure that  the 
universities award the required number of fellowships to deserving SC students and that 
there is 100% utilization of funds. 
1.9  The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
“Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme for SC students is implemen ted by the 
University Grants Commission. Funds could not be released during the year 2012 -
13 as UGC did not furnish the required UCs and Rs. 153.20 crores as unspent 
balance was available with them during 2012 -13. The Minister of Social Justice & 
Empowerment has taken up the matter with the Minister of Human Resource 
Development to  instruct the University Grants Commission (UGC) for immediate 
rendition of the balance UCs and to implement the Scheme effectively”. 
  

12 
 
1.10 The Committee had earlier expressed concern at the non -utilization of funds 
allocated under the scheme of Rajiv Gandhi Nation al Fellowship for SC students 
during 2012 -13 due to non -submission of requir ed UC s of previous year by UGC 
and desired the Ministry to strictly monitor the scheme in c o-ordination with 
Ministry of Human Resource Development.  The Committee have no w been 
informed that the Minister  of Social Justice and Empowerment has taken up the 
matter with the Minister of Human Resource Development to instruct UGC for 
immediate rendit ion of the balance UC to implement the scheme effectively.  The 
Committee would like the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment also to 
take up the matter with the individual universities where slots are being allotted 
under Rajiv Gandhi National Fel lowship Scheme and give a status report  on the 
utilization of funds and UCs submitted, to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
 
  

13 
 
C. Utilization of funds earmarked for the various Ministries under SCSP 
                                 Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 2.51) 
1.11  The Committee note d that SCSP has been in force since 1979 -80 with a view to 
ensuring proportionate flow of resources for the development of Scheduled Castes 
involving 62 Ministries.  However in the year 2010, the number of Ministries, which were 
required to earmark funds in  proportion to the Scheduled Caste population was curtailed 
from 62 to 25 following the recommendations of a task force constituted under Dr. 
Narendra Jadhav.  25 Central Ministries are now required to earmark funds in varying 
percentages of their plan out lay so that at least 16.2% of the total Gross Budgetary 
Support to Central Plan outlay gets earmarked under SCSP.  However the Committee are 
shocked that, as per the data available, the proportion of funds earmarked under SCSP by 
the various Ministries stood at 9.32% in 2011-12, 9.49% in 2012-13 and 9.92% in 2013-14.  
The Committee also find that two main Ministries which are expected to play pivotal role in 
the development of Scheduled Castes i.e. Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of 
Panchayati Raj have not been earmarking the stipulated funds under SCSP. The Ministry 
of Rural Development is allocating only 1/3 of the stipulated amount. While expressing 
strong disapproval, the Committee recommend ed that the Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerm ent should play a proactive role not only in persuading the Central 
Ministries in allocating funds for SCSP as per stipulated norms but also help them in 
devising plans and projects for the upliftment of the target groups by strict monitoring and 
keep the Committee apprised. 
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
“A Working Group was constituted by the Ministry to prepare draft Scheduled 
Castes Sub Plan Bill covering whole of India except J& K for providing legislative 
backing to earmark the Scheduled Castes population proportionate funds out of the 
Plan Outlay under SCSP. The Working Group has submitted draft SCSP Bill, 2013. 

14 
 
It has been proposed, inter-alia, to have an Administrative and Tec hnical Support 
Unit in the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for examining the 
SCSP proposals. The draft Bill has been discussed with the concerned Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs. The proposed legislation will ensure 
stipulated am ount being allocated to SCSP from the Plan Outlay of Central 
Ministries/Departments, as has been recommended by the Task Force  which was 
set up under the chairmanship of Dr. Narendra Jadhav, Member, Planning 
Commission”. 
 
“Minister (SJ&E) in a communicatio n dated 18.03.2013 and again on 25.06.2013 
addressed to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission has expressed a view that 
this Ministry is prepared to assume the role of the Nodal Department as envisaged 
in the XII Plan and agrees to appraise and monitor the SCSP of all the participating 
Central Ministries/Departments as well as of the State Governments. The then 
Secretary (SJ&E) reiterated the same in the first meeting of IMC held in March, 
2013”. 
  

15 
 
1.13 The Committee had expressed their unhappiness at the less earmarking of 
funds under SCSP by the various Ministries which stood at 9.32% in 2011 -12, 9.49% 
in 2012 -13 and 9.92% in 2013 -14 against the stipulated 16.2%  of the total 
expenditure.  The Committee had desired that the Department of Social Justice and  
Empowerment should play a proactive role not only in persuading the Central 
Ministries in allocating funds for SCSP as per the stipulated norms but help them in 
devising plans and projects for upliftment of the target groups.   The Committee are 
happy that it has been proposed that an Administrative and Technical Support Unit 
in the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for examining the SCSP 
proposals is being set up.  Also a draft Bill is in the pipeline which would ensure 
stipulated amount being allocated to SCSP from the plan outlay of Central 
Ministries.  The Committee desire that the Department of S ocial Justice and 
Empowerment pu rsue the matter with the Planning Commission and take 
expeditious action in introducing the proposed legislation  as also setting up the 
technical support unit for examining SCSP proposals. 
 
 
  

16 
 
D. More funds for education schemes of OBCs. 
                              Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No. 2.65) 
1.14  The Committee noted that the Backward Class division of the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment runs the Post -Matric and Pre -Matric scholarship schemes as 
also scheme of Hostels for OBC boys and girls.  The Committee find that only a small 
percentage of OBC students  are getting access to the scholarships, and therefore the 
scope of the schemes need to be expanded to cover more children in accordance with the 
OBC population in the country. The Committee therefore recommend ed that more funds 
may be allocated under the education schemes for OBCs and the income ceiling revised 
so as to bring it at par with the ceilings for similar schemes for the SC students. 
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated: 
“As the requirement of funds of States/UTs every year has been substantially 
higher than the budgetary allocation, the matter was taken up by the Ministry in the 
past with Planning Commission for a higher allocation. During the last financial year 
i.e. 2012-13, against a demand of Rs. 466.00 Cr of the State Governments/UTs, the 
Budget Allocation was only Rs. 50.00 Cr for the scheme of Pre matric scholarship 
for OBCs. Due to persistent efforts of the Ministry, the allocation under the scheme 
has been enhanced to Rs.150.00 Cr in 2013 -14. The scholarship rates and income 
ceiling under the scheme of Pre -Matric Scholarship could not be revised so far due 
to budgetary constraint. During the year, with the in-principal approval of the 
Planning Commission, a proposal  for revision of Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme to 
enhance income ceiling and scholarship rates has already been initiated”.  
“Under the scheme of Post Matric Scholarship for OBCs also, the requirement of 
funds projected by States/UTs every year has been su bstantially higher than the 
budgetary allocation. The matter was therefore taken up by the Ministry with the 
Planning Commission for a higher allocation. However, the allocation under the 
scheme was only Rs 625.00 cr. in 2012 -13 against an estimated requir ement of 
about Rs 2301.00 cr.  Due to persistent efforts of this Ministry, the allocation under 
the scheme has been enhanced to Rs 900.00 Cr in 2013-14”. 

17 
 
1.16 The Committee had desired the Ministry  to take up with the Planning 
Commission for allocation of more funds fo r the education schemes for OBCs and 
revision of income ceilings  to bring at par with the ceiling for SC students.   The 
Ministry have informed that  with the ‘’in-principle’’ approval of the Planning 
Commission for Pre-matric scholarship scheme for OBC s, a proposal to enhance 
income ceiling and scholarship rates has been initiated.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to vigorously pursue with Planning Commission to expedite the  approval 
so that new income ceiling of scholarship rate could be brought in effect during the 
current financial year.  The Committee also desire that the matter regarding  release 
of more funds for the OBC sector in the next financial year 2013 -14 should b e 
pursued well in advance with the Planning Commission. 
 
 
   
  

18 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
                                     Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No. 2.16) 
 
2.1  The Committee are constrained to note the underutilization of funds in Plan 
allocations of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for the year 2012 -13.  
Against a budgetary allocation of Rs. 5415 crore for the Department, the revised estimates 
were reduced to Rs. 4750.76 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 4657.36 crore.  As 
informed by the Department, the cut was due to new expenditure norms whereby the 
Department must spend 67% of the allocation under each scheme by December.  The 
Secretary submitted before the Committee that the major default was in the schemes 
pertaining to the NGO sector, and the delay being caused by the fact that the 
recommendations about grants to NGOs came to the Department from the State 
Governments usually in Decem ber – January and processing of the proposals took place 
thereafter.  Taking cognizance of the revised expenditure norms and in order to ensure 
that there is no reduction in allocation at RE stage in any scheme, the Committee 
recommend that the Department impress upon the State Governments to send forward the 
proposals of NGOs, well in advance i.e. in the first quarter of the year itself so that they 
could be processed and funds sanctioned before the third quarter of the year to avoid 
reduction in allocatio n.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry bring these new 
expenditure norms to the notice of the States and persuade them to send their proposals 
early in the first quarter of the financial year. 
 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 In so far as the Scheme of Grant–in Aid to Voluntary Organizations working for SCs 
is concerned, during the current financial year, the States have been requested to submit 
complete proposals in one lot to the Ministry latest by 31.7.13,through a letter dated 
24.5.2013 addressed to the concerned Secretaries to the State Governments.  Proposals 
are awaited from all the States except Assam. The proposals from the Assam Government 
have been received on 31.7.13. The states are being reminded to send the complete 
proposals immediately. 
Similarly, for the Scheme of Assistance to Voluntary Organization working for 
welfare of OBCs, this Ministry vide letter dated 20.5.2013 has requested all State 
Governments to submit the proposals of the NGOs by 30 th August, 2013 so that the funds 
could be released on time. A reminder is being issued. 
As regards Integrated Programme of Older persons also, the recommendations of 
the Standing Committee regarding early submission of the proposals of NGOs by the 
State Governments and UT administrations have been brought to their notice  vide letter 
dated 31.7.2013 and proposals have been sought by 30.8.2013. Similarly, under the 
scheme of Assistance for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse, in the 
year 2013 -14 the proposals have been invited from the NGOs by 10.8.2013 vide letter 
dated 11.7.2013. 
During the Regional Conferences held in May -June, 2013, the State Governments 
were also requested to expedite the proposals of NGOs in respect of all the schemes. 
 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 

20 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.17) 
 
2.3  The Committee note that the Department had sought an allocation of Rs. 18550 
crore for the annual plan 2013 -14, which was curtailed to one third i.e. Rs. 6065 crore by 
the Planning Commission. The Committee further note that the 12 th Plan allocation to the 
Department is only Rs. 29400 crore inspite of the fact the three working groups o f the 
Planning Commission constituted for finalising the 12 th Plan allocation of the Department 
had proposed an allocation of Rs. 4.26 lakh crore for the Plan period. The Committee 
express their unhappiness at the meagre allocation made to the Department f or the 12 th 
Plan as well as the allocation made in the budget 2013-14.  The Committee desire that the 
Department  should convey their concern to the Planning Commission, pursue vigorously 
with the Planning Commission for increase in allocation of funds in the 12th Plan so that in 
the existing schemes for the welfare of SCs and OBCs get successfully implemented and 
the Department is able to undertake new initiatives and expansion of some schemes like 
Pre-Matric scholarship for SC and OBC students for 6, 7 an d 8 classes.  This would go a 
long way in achieving the goal of helping the target groups in getting access to education 
and financial independence.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 As per guidelines issued by the Planning Commission, the Department was 
required to formulate the Annual Plan proposal (2013-14) with the gross budgetary support 
equivalent to 5%, 10% and 15% of the BE 2012 -13. The Department of SJ&E had 
submitted its actual requirements at Rs.18,550 crore for 2013 -14. But Planning 
Commission allocated Rs. 6065.00crore only for the year 2013 -14.The concern raised by 
the Committee has been communicated to the Planning Commissionfor taking action as 
recommended. 

21 
 
 
Regarding the scholarship schemes, t his Ministry has been making efforts to 
increase the budgetary allocations for schemes of Pre-matric and Post-matric scholarship. 
The Ministry has been constantly pursuing its pending demand for allocation of more funds 
for the OBC sector  with the Planning Commission. Minister (SJ&E) vide his letter dated 
27.7.2012 addressed to Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, had requested to 
increase the budgetary allocation under Pre -matric and Post -matric scholarship schemes 
for OBC students. The Planning Commission was once again reminded by Secretary 
(SJ&E) vide le tter dated 4.1.2013 to consider our request for enhanced allocations under 
scholarship schemes for OBCs and this was further highlighted during the discussions on 
Annual Plan-2013-14 of the Ministry with the Planning Commission.      
 
As regards enhancement of allocation under pre matric scholarship scheme for SC 
students studying in classes IX and X to the students in classes VI to VIII, a proposal, has 
been sent to Deputy Chairman Planning Commission for according 'in principle' approval 
for extending the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Pre -Matric Scholarship for SC students 
studying in Classes VI to VIII.  Planning Commission has also been requested to allocate 
an additional outlay of Rs. 2529 crores.  The 'in principle' approval is still awaited.  Hon'ble 
Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment has last reminded Dy. Chairman, Planning 
Commission on15.07.2013. 
 
  
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
 

22 
 
                                 Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.18) 
 
2.5  The Committee also feel that the synchronisation of the Central and State 
Governments schemes and pooling of resources for Social Sector Projects would improve 
the utilization of funds with better outputs. The Committee accordingly recommend that the 
matter should be taken up with the Planning Commission in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Planning 
Commission for taking suitable action on all the concerns raised by the Committee.     
                                    Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.31) 
2.7  The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has 
the responsibility of empowering the Scheduled Castes through its various schemes most 
important of them being the Post -Matric and Pre-Matric scholarship schemes. Allaying the 
worry of the Committee, the representatives of the Department testified that the State 
Governments / UTs Administrations ‘have been advised to ensure that cash payment of 
scholarships is avoided and scholarships is paid through post offices/Bank accounts’.  The 
representative further submitted that Government have decided to introduce a system of 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to the individual beneficiaries under the scholarship  
schemes in their Aadhaar enabled Bank Accounts.  The availability of digitized list of 
beneficiaries seeded with Aadhaar number would be a pre -requisite for release of funds.  
Having noted the fact that the scholarships reach the beneficiaries at the fag end of the 
year due to the cumbersome procedures, the Committee hope that the new system would 
help the SC students in getting the scholarship money early at the start of the academic 
session.   The Committee however caution that digitized lists along with  Aadhaar number 
of all beneficiaries of the scheme would need to be submitted by the State Governments in 

23 
 
a time bound manner for the success of the new system of Direct Benefit Transfer and the 
Department would have to monitor the same scrupulously. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, in the regional meetings held with 
the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of the Department of Social Welfare/SC Welfare/BC 
Welfare of the States/UTs held in May -June 2013, has discussed the  modalities for 
implementing the Direct Benefits Transfer. A timetable to follow the modalities would be 
prepared for the States/UTs in consultation with them. 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
                                 Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.49) 
2.9 The Committee note that the Central Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan was introduced in 1980, with the main objective to give a 
thrust to  family oriented schemes for economic development of the Scheduled Castes 
below the poverty line. The Committee are however dismayed to note that the allocation of 
Rs. 1200 crore for the scheme in BE 2012 -13 was reduced to 1050 core and the release 
of fund s was only Rs. 872 crore due to States not meeting the stipulated conditions in 
submission of UCs, audited figure of expenditure, etc.   The Committee express their 
disapproval of the lackadaisical approach of States in submission of documents resulting 
in less release of crucial funds meant for historically disadvantaged sections of society.  
The Committee recommend that the Department should take up the matter with the 
defaulting State Governments at higher level and impress upon them to timely submit the  
documents so that the entire amount allocated under the scheme gets utilized for 
approved purposes.    
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 Regular reminders have been issued at the levels of Joint Secretary to all the 
States who are availing assistance under the Scheme and especially with the States like 
Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Manipur, Punjab, Sikkim, Uttar 
Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi and Pudducherry who have availed either no or partial Central 
Assistance during 2012-13. The matter was also taken up by the Secretary ( Social Justice 
& Empowerment )with the Chief Secretaries of six major States viz. Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Haryana, Odisha, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh covered under the Scheme.  
The matter of not furnishing the stipulated documents in time was also discussed in 
the Annual Regional Review Meetings with the Social Welfare Secretaries of State 
Governments/UT Administrations held in May-June 2013 in New Delhi.   
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013) 
                                 Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.51) 
2.11  The Committee note that SCSP has been in force since 1979 -80 with a view to 
ensuring proportionate flow of resources for the development of Scheduled Castes 
involving 62 Ministries.  However in the year 2010, the number of Ministries, which were 
required to earmark funds in proportion to the Scheduled Caste population was curtailed 
from 62 to 25 following the recommendations of a task force constituted under Dr. 
Narendra Jadhav.  25 Central Ministries are now required to earmark funds in varying 
percentages of their plan outlay so that at least 16.2% of the total Gross Budgetary 
Support to Central Plan outlay gets earmarked under SCSP.  However the Committee are 
shocked that, as per the data available, the proportion of funds earmarked under SCSP by 
the various Ministries stands at 9.32% in 2011 -12, 9.49% in 2012 -13 and 9.92% in 2013 -
14.  The Committee also find that two main Ministries which are expected to play pivotal 
role in the development of Scheduled Castes i.e. Ministry of Rural Development and 

25 
 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj have not been earmarking the stipulated funds under SCSP. 
The Ministry of Rural Development is allocating only 1/3 of the stipulated amount. While 
expressing strong disapproval, the Committee recommend that the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment should play a proactive role not only in persuading the Central 
Ministries in allocating funds for SCSP as per stipulated norms but also help them in 
devising plans and projects for the upliftment of the target groups by strict monito ring and 
keep the Committee apprised. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 A Working Group was constituted by the Ministry to prepare draft Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan Bill covering whole of India except J&K for providing legislative backing to 
earmark the Scheduled  Castes population proportionate funds out of the Plan Outlay 
under SCSP. The Working Group has submitted draft SCSP Bill, 2013. It  has been 
proposed, inter-alia, to have an Administrative and Technical Support Unit in the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for examining the SCSP proposals. The 
draft Bill has been discussed with the concerned Central Ministries/Departments and 
States/UTs. The proposed legislation will ensure stipulated amount being allocated to 
SCSP from the Plan Outlay of Central Ministries/Departments, as has been recommended 
by the Task Force  which was set up under the chairmanship of Dr. Narendra Jadhav, 
Member, Planning Commission. 
 
Minister (SJ&E) in a communication dated 18.03.2013 and again on 25.06.2013 
addressed to Deputy  Chairman, Planning Commission has expressed a view that this 
Ministry is prepared to assume the role of the Nodal Department as envisaged in the XII 
Plan and agrees to appraise and monitor the SCSP of all the participating Central 
Ministries/Departments as well as of the State Governments. The then Secretary (SJ&E) 
reiterated the same in the first meeting of IMC held in March, 2013.  

26 
 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.52) 
2.13  The Committee further note that the average budgetary allocation actually 
earmarked by the 25 Ministries is 14.30% which is about 2% less than the stipulated 
16.2%. The Committee note that the Planning Commission has set up an inter -Ministerial 
Committee to look into the matter. The Committee desire that the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment take up the matter with the Planning Commission so that the 
IMC examine the issue in right earnest and give its recommendations to Planning 
Commission in a time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The IMC with Secretary (SJ&E) as one of the members has so far held three 
meetings. It is expected that the Committee will soon finalize its report and submit it to the 
Planning Commission. Minister (SJ&E) vide her DO letters dated  18.03.2013 and 
25.06.2013 has requested the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission  for appropriate 
revision of SCSP guidelines. 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10, Para No. 2.65) 
 
2.15  The Committee note that the Backward Class division of the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment runs the Post -Matric and Pre -Matric scholarship schemes as 
also scheme of Hostels for OBC boys and girls.  The Committee find that only a small 

27 
 
percentage of OBC students are getting access to the scholarships, and therefore the 
scope of the schemes need to be expanded to cover more childre n in accordance with the 
OBC population in the country. The Committee therefore recommend that more funds may 
be allocated under the education schemes for OBCs and the income ceiling revised so as 
to bring it at par with the ceilings for similar schemes for the SC students. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.16 As the requirement of funds of States/UTs every year has been substantially higher 
than the budgetary allocation, the matter was taken up by the Ministry in the past with 
Planning Commission for a higher allocation. During the last financial year i.e. 2012 -13, 
against a demand of Rs. 466.00 Cr of the State Governments/UTs, the Budget Allocation 
was only Rs. 50.00 Cr for the scheme of Pre matric scholarship for OBCs. Due to 
persistent efforts of the Ministry, the allocation under the scheme has been enhanced  to 
Rs.150.00 Cr in 2013 -14. The scholarship rates and income ceiling under the scheme of 
Pre-Matric Scholarship could not be revised so far due to budgetary constraint. During the 
year, with the in-principal approval of the Planning Commission, a proposal  for revision of 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme to enhance income ceiling and scholarship rates has 
already been initiated.  
 the scheme of Post Matric Scholarship for OBCs also, the requirement of funds 
projected by States/UTs every year has been substanti ally higher than the budgetary 
allocation. The matter was therefore taken up by the Ministry with the Planning 
Commission for a higher allocation. However, the allocation under the scheme was only 
Rs 625.00 cr. in 2012 -13 against an estimated requirement o f about Rs 2301.00 cr.  Due 
to persistent efforts of this Ministry, the allocation under the scheme has been enhanced to 
Rs 900.00 Cr in 2013-14. 

28 
 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
 
                        Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.66) 
 
2.17  The Committee are deeply concerned that the BE for OBC boys and girls hostel 
scheme has remained static at Rs. 45 crore from 2010 -11 to 2013 -14, but the RE has 
shown downward trend ranging progressively from Rs. 33 crore to Rs. 15 crore.   What 
disturbs the Committee most is that the expenditure continued to decline in these years 
from Rs. 25.59 crore to Rs. 14.76 crore. The Committee were apprised that the scheme is 
under revision and there is a proposal to build integrated hostels and revise the period o f 
construction and cost of construction to bring it at par with the similar scheme for the SC 
students.  Obviously, this would involve considerable increase in allocation for the 
scheme. The Committee recommend early revision of the scheme so that availabi lity of 
hostel facilities helps in the educational development of OBCs. Further, the anxiety and 
deep concern of the Committee may be brought to the notice of all concerned so that 
adequate funds are sanctioned for the successful implementation of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
 2.18 The Scheme is presently under revision on the pattern of the Scheme of 
Construction of Hostels for Scheduled Castes students.  It is proposed to revise the 
financial norms and the period of construction. Further, while sanctioning hostels, 
preference will be given to integrated hostels (which are part of established educational 
institutions) over stand -alone hostels. Accordingly, hostels are also proposed to be 
sanctioned to universities/ educational institutions as extension to the existing hostels with 

29 
 
the aim of having integrated hostels as far as possible. During the Regional Conferences 
in May-June, 2013 with State Secretaries, all States/UTs have been requested to send the 
proposals for construction of Hostels for OBC Boys and Girls. 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER – I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.32) 
 
4.1  The Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for SC students is an important scheme for 
the educational empowerment of SC students by providing financial assistance to 
Scheduled Caste students for pursuing research studies leading to MPhil, PhD and 
equivalent research degree in universities, research institutions and scientific institutions.  
The Committee however are dismayed to note that against an allocation of Rs. 125 crore, 
RE was reduced to Rs. 25.00 crore but the Actual expenditure was nil in 2012 -13.  The 
explanation of the Department to the Committee was that the funds could not be released 
in 2012-13 as University Grants Commission (UGC), which is the implementing agency, 
neither furnished the list of beneficiaries nor the utilization certificate for Rs. 150 crore of 
the previous years.  Taking a serious note on the tardy implementation of the scheme, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry strictly monitor the scheme in coordination with 
the Ministry of Human Resource Development and UGC so as to ensure  that the 
universities award the required number of fellowships to deserving SC students and that 
there is 100% utilization of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2  Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship Scheme for SC students is implemented by the 
University Grants Commission. Funds could not be released during the year 2012 -13 as 
UGC did not furnish the required UCs and Rs. 153.20 crores as unspent balance was 
available with them during 2012 -13. The Minister of Social Justice & Empowerment has 
taken up the matter with the Minister of Human Resource Development toinstruct the 

32 
 
University Grants Commission (UGC) for immediate rendition of the balance UCs and to 
implement the Scheme effectively. 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
  
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (S.No.7, Para No. 2.50) 
 
5.1 As per the data available to the Committee as many as 13 States fell short of 
earmarking funds in proportion to SC population during 2010 -11 and 16 States during 
2011-12.  The Committee are dismayed that even after so many years of implementation 
of the scheme, the number of defaulting States is very high and despite the fact that the 
development of these disadvantaged groups remains the focal poin t of the developmental 
strategy.  As approval of the State Plans is done by the Planning Commission, the 
Committee desire that the Planning Commission devise some mechanism of penal action 
and accountability against the erring States so that they strictly enforce the guidelines in 
allocating funds in proportion to their SC population.  The Committee further recommend 
that the Department should take expeditious action to revamp the scheme in the light of 
the recommendations made by the National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad 
who have recently carried out a study in this regard and the keep the Committee apprised. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Planning 
Commission. To effectively implement the Scheduled Caste Sub Plan/Tribal Sub-Plan, the 
essential instrument for accomplishing inclusive growth, a Secretary level  Inter-Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) had been constituted by the Planning Commission vide Order dated 
17.01.2013 , whose Terms of Reference are:- 
(i) To suggest new and innovative schemes, which have potential to bridge the gaps 
in development between SCs/STs and others and; 
(ii)  To prepare guidelines for effective implementation of SCSP during 12th Plan. 

34 
 
The IMC has so far held three meetings to firm up the revision of Guidelines for 
effective implementation on SCSP during 12 th Five Year Plan and circulated a preliminary 
Draft Report of the Committee in the third meeting of the IMC held on 17.6.2013. 
The Ministry has undertaken an exer cise for revision of the extant guidelines of the 
Scheme of SCA to SCSP in pursuance of the Evaluation Study report of NIRD, 
Hyderabad. A draft Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memo on proposed revisions 
has been circulated vide OM dated 25 -06-2013 to c oncerned Ministries/Departments for 
inter-ministerial consultations.  
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013). 
 
                                     Recommendation (Sl. No.12, Para No. 2.71) 
5.3 The Committee note that in pursuance of their earlier recommendation in the 28 th 
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the “Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
Bill, 2007” and the recommendation of the working group on 11 th Plan for formulation of 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme for construction of old age homes, an outlay of Rs. 80 crore 
was earmarked in the BE of 2012 -13 and the Department had approached the Planning 
Commission for ‘in principle’ approval of the Centrally Spons ored Scheme. Surprisingly, in 
a recent development, the Planning Commission taking a different position on the issue 
have come to the view that running old age homes is largely a non -recurring expenditure 
and it would therefore be more appropriate for the State Governments to run the old age 
homes. Although the Committee acknowledge that the onus for running the old age homes 
should be on the State Governments, yet they feel that liberal Central Assistance should 
be provided for construction of old age home s in each district so that the scheme takes off 
and constraint of funds does not become a hindrance in execution of the scheme by the 
States.  The Committee are happy to note that certain new schemes are proposed to be 

35 
 
launched for the senior citizens duri ng 12 th Plan. Considering the growing ageing 
population and the changing socio -economic milieu and the impact of globalized world on 
our cultural mores, the Committee consider it imperative that the schemes contemplated 
are implemented expeditiously.  The Committee also desire that immediate steps such as 
setting up help-lines for senior citizens should be taken. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Working Group on Social Welfare constituted by the Planning Commission for 
formulation of the 12 th Five Year Plan (2012-17) had recommended a number of new 
Schemes for the welfare of Senior Citizens including formulation of a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme for establishment of old age homes in each district. The Planning Commission 
has included formulation and implementat ion of the following new Schemes during 12 th 
Five Year Plan: 
(i) Awareness generation for the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007; 
(ii) Setting up Helplines for Senior Citizens at the National and District Levels; 
(iii) Setting up a National Commission for Senior Citizens; 
(iv) Creation of a National Trust for the Aged; and 
(v) Scheme for Implementation of various provisions of the New National Policy on 
Senior Citizens; 
 
The Ministry has constituted an Expert Committee to formulate the above 
mentioned Schemes.  The Expert Committee has been asked to complete its task 
expeditiously.  
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -35/2013-Plan Division Dated 
2nd August, 2013)                   
 
NEW DELHI:      HEMANAND BISWAL    
17th  December,  2013       Chairman, 
26th  Agrahayana , 1935 (Saka)    Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
  

36 
 
ANNEXURE  
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY,   17th DECEMBER, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
8. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
9. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
11. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
12. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
  

37 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
and apprised them that the sitting has been convened for consideration and adoption of 
the draft Thirty -ninth Report on the subject "Implementation of schemes for welfare of 
Senior Citizens",  Fortieth Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants,  2013 -14 of the 
Department of Disability Affairs (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment), Forty -first 
Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 2013 -14 of the Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment) and Forty-second Action 
Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 2013-14 of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirty -ninth, Fortieth, Forty-
first and Forty-second Report of the Committee without  any amendment. 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
  

38 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   THIRTY-SIXTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
 Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 12  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos.  2.16, 2.17, 2.18, 2.31, 
2.49, 2.51, 2.52, 2.65 and 2.66. 
 
9 75.00 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies - Nil 
0 0 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted.  
 
1 8.33 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.50 and 2.71). 
2 16.67 
 
 