1 
 
 
21 
  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2011 - 2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
TWENTY – FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 


2 
 
TWENTY - FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2012 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.3.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March,  2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter- I. 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 ANNEXURE 
 
 
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 5.3.2012.             
        
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
 
                                         
 
    
   
 
 
         
                                                                 
              
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2011-2012) 
       
 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
13. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana  
14. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
17. Shri Kabir Suman 
  *18. Smt. Usha Verma  
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
   MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
**27. Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28. Shri Baishnab Parida 
29. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
__________________________________________________________________ 
* Smt. Usha Verma ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 3.1.2012. 
** Dr. Ram Dayal Munda was expired on 30.9.2011. 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Senior Executive Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty -
First Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendat ions 
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
  
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 4 th 
August, 2011.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 8.11.2011.  The Report was considered and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting  held on 
5.3.2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered 
to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
05 March, 2012        Chairman, 
15 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteen th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants -2011-12 relating to 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Sixteenth-Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 4 th August, 2011.  It contained 21 recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the recommendations have been received and are categorized as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the  
Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 2.4, 3.31, 3.32, 3.37, 3.39, 3.54, 3.66, 3.80 and 3.109 
 
(Total 9 – Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government - NIL 
 
(Total 0 – Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have bee n commented upon by 
the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 3.35, 3.38 and 3.81 
(Total 3 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature.  
Paragraph Nos. 3.33,  3.34, 3.36, 3.91, 3.92, 3.108, 3.125, 3.126 and 
3.127 
(Total 9 – Chapter V) 

8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished  to 
them at the earliest and in any cases not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Monitoring of Funds released  to NGOs  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.35) 
 
1.5 The Committee had found that there were four ongoing schemes of the Ministry 
which were open to the participation of voluntary/non -governmental organizations and 
substantial amount of funds  were flowing to NGOs for implementation of these 
schemes. On the office expenses of NGOs through the Ministry ha d maintained that the 
grants were released as per the financial norms laid down in the scheme document and 
they did not entertain any case unle ss it was recommended by the State Government 
and the State level disciplinary committee, cases of misuse of grants by some NGOs 
had come to the notice of the Committee which were reflected in exorbitant office/travel 
expenses of NGOs. Therefore, the Commi ttee had strongly recommended the Ministry 
to devise/frame stringent norms/ guidelines for control of office/travel expenses of 
NGOs so as to avoid misuse of public money. The Committee had also desired that the 
Ministry should also furnish a detailed stat ement on the funds released to the NGOs 
and expenditure made by them under the various heads. 
 
 

9 
 
1.6 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their Action Taken Reply have stated  as under :- 
"This Ministry gives grants to NGOs/VOs under various schemes as per the 
financial norms laid down in the scheme guidelines. The NGOs/VOs have their  
own/ other sources of funding also. The Ministry is concerned with the grants 
provided to them under its own  schemes.  The details of BE,RE, Expenditure 
under the scheme  “Grant-in-aid to Voluntary Organization Working for the 
Welfare of Scheduled Tribes”   for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 is as under:- 
(Amount in crore) 
 
Year  BE RE  Expenditure 
2009-10 47.25 46.75 46.54 
2010-11 55.00 55.50 52.60 
 
Under the Scheme „Grant -in-aid to VOs working for the Welfare of ST‟ the 
admissible grant under „Conveyance and TA for Staff‟ is limited to Rs. 10,000/ - 
per annum and under „Contingencies/ office maintenance‟ it is limited to Rs. 
15,000/- per annum." 
 
 
1.7 In view of  large number of complaints of misuse of funds by NGOs coming 
to notice, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to devise/frame stringent 
norms/ guidelines for control of office/travel expenses of NGOs so as to avoid 
misuse of public money.   The Committee are however constrained to note that 
though the Ministry has furnished t he details of Expenditure under the scheme 
“Grant-in-aid to Voluntary Organization Working for the Welfare of Scheduled 
Tribes” for the year 2009 -10 and 2010 -11, the Ministry has not  mentioned about 
any concrete steps taken to monitor efficient utilization of grants by NGOs.  The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendation desire the Ministry to 
look into the matter of complaints of misuse of funds by NGOs seriously and take 
effective steps to ensure that Government grant s meant for welfare of Sche duled 
Tribes are not squandered by any agency/NGOs in exorbitant office/travel 
expenses or any other administrative expenses.   

10 
 
B. Setting up of Monitoring Cell  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para 3.38) 
1.8 As far as monitoring of schemes of the Ministry is concerned, the Committee are 
given to understand that there is provision of visits of officials which is an on -going and 
continuous process to discuss/ inspect the projects sanctioned to State  Governments. 
The Committee had  also been informed that if any shortcoming was noticed regarding 
the implementation of the scheme, the officer who visit ed the State Governments 
informed the concerned Section about the said short -coming. However, the 
underutilization of funds in three important schemes of the Ministry i.e. scheme under 
Tribal Sub Plan, scheme under Proviso to Article 275(1) of the Constitution and scheme 
for Development of Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs) point to the fact that there were 
areas where monit oring needs to the be strengthened and made more effective. Even 
the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs had admitted during evidence that monitoring 
needs to be improved. In the opinion of the Committee over and above the steps 
already taken, setting up  of a monitoring Cell in the Ministry would ensure regular and 
strict monitoring of various schemes. Therefore, the Committee  had recommended that 
the Ministry should think in the line of setting up a Monitoring Cell to ensure continuous 
and meticulous mon itoring of the various welfare schemes in a concerted and focused 
manner. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Re ply on the above recommendation  the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs have informed the Committee as under:- 
"Monitoring of the schemes/programmes is an ongoing process and mechanisms 
followed in this regard  is given below:  

11 
 
 Officer undertake on the spot visits to the States/UTs for ascertaining the 
progress of implementation of various schemes/programmes of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 Review Meetings with State representatives/functionaries. 
 Concerned Division also write to the State Government for periodic 
progress repots etc. 
Further, on the request of Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Rural Development 
has agreed that all the programmes of this Min istry shall be reviewed by the 
District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (V&MCs), constituted by the 
Ministry of Rural Development for reviewing the implementation o f rural 
development programmes." 
 
 
1.10  The Committee had opined that setting up o f a monitoring Cell in the 
Ministry would ensure regular and strict monitoring of various schemes  and  had 
recommended that the Ministry should think in the line of setting up a Monitoring 
Cell to ensure continuous and meticulous monitoring of the various welfare 
schemes in a concerted and focused manner.   Though the Ministry have 
maintained that they have taken several measures by sending officer s to 
undertake on the spot visits to the States/UTs, Review Meetings with State 
representatives/functionaries and writing to the State Government fo r periodic 
progress reports , etc,  the Committee have not been informed of any specific 
steps taken by Minist ry for setting up of Monitoring Cell.   In the opinion of the 
Committee unless Monitoring Cell is set up in the Ministry, continuous and 
meticulous monitoring of the various welfare schemes  cannot be ensured.   The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate  their ear lier recommendation to set up a 
Monitoring Cell  in the Ministry to enable them   to ensure continuous and 
meticulous monitoring of the various welfare schemes in a concerted and 
focused manner.  The progress achieved in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee.  

12 
 
C.  Review of Jarawa Policy 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 3.81) 
1.11 During the Study Visit of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment to the UT of Andaman &  Nicobar islands in February, 2011, it was 
brought to the notice of the Committee that the policy on the Jarawa tribe of Andaman 
Island notified by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India in December, 2004 
is being implemented strictly to ensure protection and welfare of Jarawas. The 
Committee had also found that in the year, 2007, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs had set up 
an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Tribal Affairs for preparation 
of Policies for remaining PTGs for A&N  Islands and monitoring of implementation of 
Jarawa Policy.  In pursuance of the provision of clause VI (e) of the policy on Jarawa 
Tribe, a Sub -Committee of the Expert Committee to review the existing “Policy on 
Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands, 2004” ha d been constituted under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Tribal Affairs on 27.9.2010.  The Committee had also observe d that 
divergent views were being expressed on the review of the “Policy on Jarawa Tribe of 
Andaman Islands, 2004".  The Committee had felt that the Jarawa tribes were living in 
the Andaman forests f or years and with time they had become part of our rich cultural 
heritage.  However, at this juncture when many of the Jarawas themselves are now 
willing to come to the mainstream and live modern lif estyle, it would not be appropriate 
to suppress their voice and leave them in total isolation, unattended and without care.  
Therefore, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to review the policy of Jarawa 
tribes keeping the above fact in perspective a nd bring necessary changes in the above 
policy which should aim at facilitating a slow and smooth process of transition i.e. 

13 
 
bringing the Jarawas into the mainstream with minimum damage to the cultural heritage 
as well as the Jarawas themselves.  
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have inter-alia stated:- 
"The Sub-Committee of Expert Committee to review the Jarawa  Policy had two 
meetings earlier on 8-4-2011 and 7-6-2011 and the final meeting was held on 14-
10-2011.  The Sub -Committee of Expert Committee considered the 
recommendations of a Group of Experts constituted by A&N Administration to get 
perception of Jaraw as Tribe, in pursuance of decisions taken during the 
presentation held before the Hon‟ble Chairperson of NAC on 22 -6-2011 at New 
Delhi.   
During the meeting of the Sub -Committee of Expert Committee, the Chief 
Secretary of A&N Administration highlighted the  provisions of the present policy 
and the recommendations of the Group of Experts.  The Sub - Committee of   
Expert Committee considers that there is no need for a change in the policy at 
this juncture, as the recommendations made are already covered by the  present 
policy and that for changes in the policy, if required in future, A&N Administration 
may undertake evidence based research studies, topics for which could be 
suggested by the Group of Experts."  
 
 
1.13 Keeping in view that  many of the Jarawas the mselves are now willing to 
come to the mainstream and live modern lifestyle, it would not be appropriate to 
suppress their voice and leave them in total isolation, unattended and without 
care.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to revie w the 
policy of Jarawa tribes keeping the above fact in perspective and bring necessary 
changes in the above policy which should aim at facilitating a slow and smooth 
process of transition i.e. bringing the Jarawas into the mainstream  with minimum 
damage to the Jarawas themselves  and their cultural heritage as well .  The 
Committee are constrained to note from the action taken reply that t he Sub - 
Committee of   Expert Committee considers that there is no need for a change in 
the policy at this juncture, as the recommendations made are already covered by 
the present policy and that for changes in the policy, if required in future, A&N 

14 
 
Administration may undertake evidence based research studies, topics for which 
could be suggested by the Group of Experts.  In the opinion of the Committee 
there is a need to undertake evidence   based on research studies and  topics as 
suggested by the  Group of  Experts.  The Committee , therefore,  reiterate their 
earlier recommendation to review the policy of Jarawa tribes and bring necessary 
changes in the above policy which should aim at facilitating a slow and smooth 
process of transition i.e. bringing the Jarawas into the mainstream  with minimum 
damage to the ir cultural heritage as well as the Jarawas themselves.  The 
Committee also desire that Group of Experts should also be involved in the above 
process.   
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.4) 
 
2.1 Fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants, 2010 -11 of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs was presented to Parliament on 20th April, 2010.   Although the Action 
Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry, the Committee regret to observe 
that as per Direction 73A of 'Directions by the Speaker' necessary statement regarding 
the status of implementation of recommendations contained in the original Report has 
not been made by the Minister in the House.  While deprecating this inordinate delay, 
the Committee desire that requisite action in this connection should be taken 
expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Hon'ble Minister of Tribal affairs will make the Statement regarding the Status of 
implementation of recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs during the coming Winter Session of the Parliament. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 3.31) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that during the year 2010 -11 an expenditure of Rs.3134.16 
crore (provisional) has been incurred against RE (Plan) of Rs.3205.70 crore i.e. in terms 
of percentage the expenditure has been 97.74%.  The committee also note that the 

16 
 
budgetary outlay of the Ministry for the year 2011 -12 has been enhanced  to Rs. 
3723.01 crore as compared to last year‟s budgetary outlay of Rs. 3206.50 crore.  The 
committee are happy to note that unlike the previous years where BE funds has been 
substantially reduced at RE stage i.e. from Rs.2121 crore to Rs.1970 crore in 20 08-09 
and from Rs. 3205.50 crore to Rs. 2000 crore in 2009 -10, there has been no reduction 
of BE funds at RE stage in the year 2010 -11.  The committee are given to understand 
that this has been possible because of regular monitoring of the expenditure posi tion.  
While expressing their happiness over the above development the committee hope that 
the Ministry would continue with their initiatives so as to avoid slashing of BE funds at 
RE stage during the year  2011 –12. The Committee also urge the Ministry to plan and 
incur their expenditure in a phased manner so that it is evenly spread throughout the 
year and also persuade State Governments/UT Administrations to send proposals 
under various schemes along with the Utilisation Certificates of the previous years  
grants so that there is 100% utilization of funds under all the schemes. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 For proper and full utilization of BE under the various schemes of the Ministry by 
the State Governments/UT Administrations in a phased manner, the Min istry has been 
pursuing by convening meetings of State Secretaries/Commissioners of the concerned 
Departments, review meeting with the officers of the State Governments/UT 
Administrations, writing letters, through telephonic communications and field visits . As a 
result the State Governments/UT Administrations could submit complete proposals 
along with the physical and financial progress reports and an amount of Rs.1982.17 
crores against the BE of Rs.  3723.01 crores which amounts to 53.24% of BE could be 

17 
 
utilized by second quarter i.e. 30.9.2011 and these efforts would continue in the rest of 
the year in adherence to above observations of the Committee. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.32) 
2.5 The Committee observe that although there has been significant improvement in 
utilization of funds during 2010 -11, funds to the tune of Rs.72.9733 crore were 
surrendered by the Ministry under the crucial scheme s of SCA to Tribal Sub Plan 
(Rs.10.2373 crore), Grant under Proviso to Article 275(1) of the Constitution 
(Rs.26.6690 crore) and Development of Primitive Tribal Groups (Rs.10.3179 crore). The 
Committee are not convinced with the Ministry‟s reasoning that t he surrender of funds 
by the Ministry is not always absolute as surrender in one scheme is re -appropriated in 
another; funds are dropped in one or added/ supplemented in another leading to 
maximization of expenditure and minimization of saving. In the opin ion of the 
Committee, once funds are earmarked for the schemes the Ministry should strive to 
achieve 100% utilization and funds in each and every scheme should be utilized with 
utmost care and financial prudence so that individual schemes do not suffer. Th e 
Committee desire that an exhaustive review of guidelines of the various schemes 
should be undertaken to make them more flexible so that State Governments can 
implement the schemes as per their local conditions. At the same time some 
accountability should  also be fixed on State Governments for implementation of the 
schemes as well as utilization of allocated funds. The Committee feel that it will go a 
long way in improving utilization of funds. 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Ministry keeps on pursuing with the State Governments/UT Administrations 
to utilize 100% fund under all the schemes. On the basis of the feedback received from 
the State Governments/UT Administrations, guidelines are also revised. Guidelines for 
setting up of EMRS out of the grant under Article 275 (1) has accordingly been revised 
in June 2010. Onus of implementation of the schemes rests with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations. It is, therefore, incumbent upon them to utilize the 
funds in a proper and timely manner. The Ministry releases funds to the State 
Governments/UT Administrations only after physical and financial reports for the 
previous releases and proposals, complete in all respects, conforming to the guidelines, 
have been received from th em. During the various review meetings, the State 
Governments/UT Administrations are persuaded continuously for timely and proper 
utilization of funds. 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.37) 
 
2.7 The Committee are happy to note that the constitution of the National Council of 
Tribal Welfare (NCTW) under the chairmanship of Prime Minister at the central level to 
review the scheme for development of Scheduled Tribes. The Co mmittee are given to 
understand that the constitution of the above Council fulfills the long felt need of a body 
under the Prime Minister at central level to review the schemes for development of STs. 
The Committee hope that the above step will definitely go a long way in ensuring 
effective implementation of various schemes for welfare of tribal people. 

19 
 
 
 The Committee also note with satisfaction that in pursuant to the Committee‟s 
earlier recommendation relating to inter Ministerial coordination, the Minis try have 
constituted a Coordination Committee with representatives from Ministries of Human 
Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare, Rural Development etc. for 
monitoring, planning and progress of the schemes/programmes being implemented for 
overall development of Scheduled Tribes. While congratulating the Ministry for the 
above initiative, the Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure that the above 
Coordination Committee meets at regular intervals to address and sort out issues and 
helps in bridging critical gaps in the developmental process. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The Coordination Committee Constituted for monitoring, planning & progress of 
the schemes/programmes being implemented for overall development of Scheduled 
Tribes(STs) meets at regular interval under the Chairmanship of Secretary(TA) to 
address and sort out issues and helps in bridging critical gaps in the developmental 
process.  In the last meeting held on 14.09.2011, representatives from Ministry of Rural 
Development, Labour & Employment, Drinking Water & Sanitation, Power, Planning 
Commission, Health & Family Welfare participated.  The Coordination Committee is 
meeting quarterly so that issues regarding the bringing of critical gaps in the 
development process are addressed. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 3.39) 
 
2.9 On the issue of awareness about various schemes, the Committee observe  that 
apart from inserting advertisement about the schemes in local and regional 
newspapers, the Ministry also conducts workshops/seminars through Universities/Non -
Government Organizations (NGOs) and various TRIs specifically aimed at generating 
awareness about various schemes it implements for the benefit of the Scheduled 
Tribes. A revised brochure containing information about the schemes and programme 
for the welfare of tribals has also been published in the form of Pamphlet. The 
Committee have been infor med that in order to make the awareness campaign 
regarding various welfare and development schemes under implementation for the 
Scheduled Tribes more effective, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has proposed to 
outsource a study entitled “Impact Assessment of  Awareness campaign with 
recommendations for making campaigns more effective.”  It is also anticipated that the 
findings of the study would facilitate planners and implementers in designing 
appropriate awareness campaigns using different media and fora, in cluding traditional 
methods, to reach those residing in far flung areas and facilitate them to claims the 
benefits of Government‟s welfare and development schemes/programmes. While 
welcoming the above move, the Committee desire the Ministry to get the afor esaid 
study conducted in a definite time frame. In addition to this, the Committee also desire 
that the Ministry should launch a Multi media campaign using print, broadcast and 
electronic media as well as outdoor publicity for dissemination of information to 
generate awareness relating to various welfare schemes for tribals.    
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The proposed study entitled “Impact Assessment of Awareness Programmes and 
Methodologies adopted by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs with recommendations for 
making these more effective” would be tried to be completed during the current financial 
year.  The suggestion of the Committee to launch a Multi media campaign using pri nt, 
broadcast and electronic media as well as outdoor publicity for dissemination of 
information to generate awareness relating to various welfare schemes for tribals has 
been noted.  The Ministry would take into account the suggestions of the Committee, 
while designing the multi media campaign for the proposed awareness campaign, to be 
taken up following the findings of the study.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 3.54) 
 
2.11  The Committee fund that under the scheme of Special Central Assistance (SCA) 
to Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) launched during 1974 grant is provided to the State 
Governments based on annual allocation made by the Planning Commission. This is 
treated as an additive  to the State Plan, for areas where State Plan provisions are not 
normally forthcoming to bring about economic development to tribals. The Committee 
also find that from the Tenth Five Year Plan period the objective and scope of SCA to 
TSP has been expanded  to cover employment -cum-income generation activities and 
infrastructure incidental thereto. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry 
allocates funds under SCA to TSP annually to all the 22 States covered under the 
programmes. However, the Commit tee note with concern that some States have not 

22 
 
availed the entire allocation of funds during the last three years. During 2008 -09 as 
many as nine States, during 2009 -10 twenty States and during 2010 -11 eight States 
have not availed the entire allocation r esulting in gross under utilization of funds 
earmarked for the scheme. The Committee also observe that some States such as 
Assam, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, etc. 
have not availed any funds consecutively for two years. The scheme of SCA to TSP has 
a lot of potential for uplifting the tribal people and it is necessary that SCA funds which 
are crucial for welfare of tribal people should flow to all States. Therefore, the 
committees strongly recommend that the matter s hould be taken up with the concerned 
State Chief Secretaries at the earliest and these States should be persuaded to sent 
viable proposals for availing the funds for the benefit of tribes. The progress made in 
this regard may be conveyed to the Committee w ithin three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The Ministry has been taking serious note of the observations/recommendations 
made by the Committee from time to time regarding the need for ensuring release of 
allocated funds to all the 22 TSP States under SCA to TSP. During 2010 -11 and also 
2011-12 the Ministry has been interacting with the State Governments for submission of 
proposals alongwith UC, progress report etc. Review meetings are also held with 
Secretaries/ Commissioners of the nodal Department of the States concerned to 
sensitize them of the n eed for submission of proposals and also to discuss the issues 
involved.  The above recommendation of the Committee  has been brought to the notice 
of the Chief Secretaries of the above mentioned seven States seeking their intervention 

23 
 
for submitting propo sals under SCA to TSP. Out of these States, 1 st installment has 
been released to Assam and Kerala. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 3.66) 
 
2.13 The Committee observe  that during 2010 -11 under the scheme of provision of 
Article 275(1) of the Constitution out of the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1046.00 crore, an 
amount of Rs. 999.89 crore has been spent. Though the actual expenditure under the 
scheme has shown remarkable improvement over the previous two years still the actual 
expenditure falls short of the budgetary allocation. Non submission/belated submission 
of complete proposals along with requisite utilization certificates etc. by the states of 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam , Goa, J&K, Meghalaya, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, and 
Uttarakhand have been cited as the reasons for non -release of amount and saving 
under the scheme. In view of the fact that an enhanced amount i.e. Rs. 1197.00 crore 
has been proposed under the scheme du ring the year 2011-12, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should vigorously pursue with all State Governments/UTs 
Administrations to ensure timely submission of fresh proposals along with utilization 
certificates of previous years so as to avoid major savings under the scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 In respect of scheme of  Grant under Article 275(1) of the Constitution,   all the 
State  Governments have been addressed more than once to submit proposals with 
progress reports, UC etc.  in time so that the entire BE allocation can be utilized during 
2011-12. Four meetings have also been held with representatives of various State 

24 
 
Governments apart from telephonic follow up from time to time. The Ministry is making 
all out efforts to ensur e that the entire BE allocation under the scheme is utilized during 
2011-12.   
During 2011 -12, proposals have been received from Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
J&K, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Uttrakhand so far. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para 3.80) 
2.15 The Committee note with concern that during 2008 -09, Rs. 19206.784 lakh were 
released to States/UTs for the development of PTGs out of which Rs. 18133.854 lakh  
were utilized whereas during 2009 -10, Rs. 8361.751 lakh were released out of which 
only Rs. 8361.181 lakh were utilized.  The Ministry have stated the unutilized fund is 
mainly due to lack of progress in providing agricultural land to PTGs families and UC s 
are also pending from some of the States.  The Committee also find that   no funds 
were released to as many as nine states during 2009 -10.  The Committee have been 
informed that the slashing of BE funds at RE stage is the main reason for non release of 
funds to these States during 2009-10.  In the opinion of the Committee "Development of 
Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs)" being an important scheme of the Ministry wherein lot 
of funds flow to several States for the welfare of PTGs, funds should not have been 
reduced under the scheme.  Since an enhanced allocation of Rs. 240 crore has been 
made under the scheme for 2011 -12, the Committee desire the Ministry to take 
adequate steps for full utilization of funds.  Also under no circumstance funds should be 

25 
 
allowed to be reduced at the RE stage so that the scheme does not suffer due to 
paucity of funds.   
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the State 
Governments to immediately provide agricultural land to PTGs families so that funds 
which are released for the welfare of  PTGs do not remain unutilized.   
Reply of the Government 
2.16 During 2010-11 the budget under „Development of PTG‟ scheme was enhanced 
to Rs. 244.20 crore from Rs. 185.00 crore at RE stage. This year the budget allotm ent 
for this scheme is Rs. 244.00 crore and the expenditure till September,2011 is Rs. 
146.60 crore. Thus, during the first 6 months the expenditure has been more than 50%. 
The Ministry is already pursuing with State Governments to send complete proposals so 
that the money meant for PTG can be fully utilized for their benefit. This ministry is 
pursuing the matter through meetings, letters, telephonically and personal contacts with 
state officials. Providing agricultural land to PTG families  is included in the CCD Plan of 
Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh,  Maharashtra and Gujarat.  These States  have been 
requested  to  complete the activities of   providing  land to PTG families at the earliest.   
The trend of expenditure of the current year (2011 -12) indicates that the budget under 
this scheme shall be fully utilized.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para 3.109) 
2.17 The Committee observe  that the Scheme of Strengthening Education among 
Scheduled Tribes (STs) Girls in Low Literacy Districts envisages setting up of District 
Educational Support Agency by the respective State Governments in each of 54 

26 
 
identified low literacy districts which would inter-alia promote awareness among parents 
towards the importance of girls education.  However, the Committee are unhappy to 
note that till now except the State of Gujarat none of the other States have established 
the District Ed ucational Support Agencies.  On the steps taken in this regard the 
Ministry have simply stated that other States have been reminded for setting up of 
DESA.  However, in the opinion of the Committee merely reminding the States to set up 
these agencies will not suffice and there is a need to sensitize the States about the 
intensity of the issue that unless DESAs are set up awareness about the girl's education 
can not be promoted among the parents.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry 
to take urgent necessary steps to sensitize and motivate the State Governments about 
the dire need and importance of DESAs and impress upon them   to set up DESAs in 
their States at the earliest.      
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The officials of the state governments have already been reminded about the 
urgency to set up DESA to promote awareness among parents of ST girl students about 
education. This ministry is constantly in touch with the state officials about this issue.       
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
   
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON IN CHAPTER – I 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.35) 
 
4.1 The Committee find  that there are four ongoing schemes of the Ministry which 
are open to the participation of voluntary/non -governmental organizations and 
substantial amount of funds are flowing to NGOs for implementation of these schemes. 
On the office expenses of NGOs thr ough the Ministry have maintained that the grants 
are released as per the financial norms laid down in the scheme document and they do 
not entertain any case unless it is recommended by the State Government and the 
State level disciplinary committee, cases of misuse of grants by some NGOs have come 
to the notice of the Committee which are reflected in exorbitant office/travel expenses of 
NGOs. There is need to streamline and control the office less travel expenses of NGOs 
by devising stricter norms/guidelines of expenditure for them. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend the Ministry to devise/frame stringent norms/ guidelines for control 
of office/travel expenses of NGOs so as to avoid misuse of public money. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should also furnish a detailed statement on the funds 
released to the NGOs and expenditure made by them under the various heads. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 This Ministry gives grants to NGOs/VOs under various schemes as per the 
financial norms laid down in the scheme guidelines. The NGOs/VOs have their own/ 
other sources of funding also. The Ministry is concerned with the grants provided to 

29 
 
them under its own  schemes.  The details of BE,RE, Expenditure under the scheme “ 
Grant-in-aid to Voluntary Organization Working for the Welfare of Scheduled Tribes”   
for the year 2009-10 and 2010-11 is as under:- 
(Amount in crore) 
 
Year  BE RE  Expenditure 
2009-10 47.25 46.75 46.54 
2010-11 55.00 55.50 52.60 
Under the Scheme „Grant -in-aid to VOs working for the Welfare of ST‟ the 
admissible grant under „Conveyance and TA for Staff‟ is limited to Rs. 10,000/ - per 
annum and under „Contingencies/ office maintenance‟ it is limited to Rs. 15,000/ - per 
annum.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para 3.38) 
4.3 As far as monitoring of schemes of the Ministry is concerned, the Committee are 
given to understand that there is provision of visits of officials which is an on -going and 
continuous process to discuss/ inspect the projects sanctioned to State Governments.  
The Committee have also been informed that if any shortcoming is noticed regarding 
the implementation of the scheme, the officer who visits the State Governments informs 
the concerned Section about the said short -coming. However, the underutilization of 
funds in three important schemes of the Ministry i.e. scheme under Tribal Sub Plan, 
scheme under Proviso to Article 275(1) of the Constitution and scheme for Development 
of Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs) point to the fact that there are areas where monitori ng 

30 
 
needs to the be strengthened and made more effective. Even the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs admitted during evidence that monitoring needs to be improved. In the 
opinion of the Committee over and above the steps already taken, setting up of a 
monitoring Cell in the Ministry would ensure regular and strict monitoring of various 
schemes. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should think in the 
line of setting up a Monitoring Cell to ensure continuous and meticulous monitoring of 
the various welfare schemes in a concerted and focused manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 Monitoring of the schemes / programmes is an ongoing process and 
mechanisms followed in this regard is given below:  
 Officer undertake on the spot visits to the States/UTs for ascertaining the 
progress of implementation of various schemes/programmes of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 Review Meetings with State representatives/functionaries. 
 Concerned Division also write to the State Government for periodic 
progress repots etc. 
Further, on the request of Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Ministry of Rural Development 
has agreed that all the programmes of this Ministry shall be reviewed by the District 
Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (V&MCs), constituted by the Ministry of Rural 
Development for reviewing the implementation of rural development programmes.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 

31 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para 3.81) 
4.5 During the Study Visit of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment to the UT of Andaman & Nicobar islands in February, 2011, it as  
brought to the notice of the Committee that the policy on the Jarawa tribe of Andaman 
Island notified by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India in December, 2004 
is being implemented strictly to ensure protection and welfare of Jarawas. The 
Committee also find that in the year, 2007, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has set up an 
Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Tribal Affairs for preparation of 
Policies for remaining PTGs for A&N Islands and monitoring of implementation of 
Jarawa Policy.  In pursuance of the provision of clause VI (e) of the policy on Jarawa 
Tribe, a Sub -Committee of the Expert Committee to review the existing “Policy on 
Jarawa Tribe of Andaman Islands, 2004” has been constituted under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, T ribal Affairs on 27.9.2010.  The Committee also observe that divergent 
views are being expressed on the review of the “Policy on Jarawa Tribe of Andaman 
Islands, 2004".  The Committee feel that  the Jarawa tribes have been living in the 
Andaman forests for years and with time they have become part of our rich cultural 
heritage.  However, at this juncture when many of the Jarawas themselves are now 
willing to come to the mainstream and live modern lifestyle, it would not be appropriate 
to suppress their voice  and leave them in total isolation, unattended and without care.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to review the policy of Jarawa tribes 
keeping the above fact in perspective and bring necessary changes in the above policy 

32 
 
which should aim at facilitating a slow and smooth process of transition i.e. bringing the 
Jarawas into the mainstream  with minimum damage to the cultural heritage as well as 
the Jarawas themselves.   
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The Sub -Committee of Expert Committee to review the Jarawa Policy had two 
meetings earlier on 8 -4-2011 and 7 -6-2011 and the final meeting was held on 14 -10-
2011.  The Sub -Committee of Expert Committee considered the recommendations of a 
Group of Experts constituted by A&N Administration to get perception of Jarawas Tribe, 
in pursuance of decisions taken during the presentation held before the Hon‟ble 
Chairperson of NAC on 22-6-2011 at New Delhi.   
   During the meeting of the Sub -Committee of Expert Committ ee, the Chief 
Secretary of A&N Administration highlighted the provisions of the present policy and the 
recommendations of the Group of Experts.  The Sub - Committee of   Expert Committee 
considers that there is no need for a change in the policy at this jun cture, as the 
recommendations made are already covered by the present policy and that for changes 
in the policy, if required in future, A&N Administration may undertake evidence based 
research studies, topics for which could be suggested by the Group of Experts.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.33) 
 
5.1 The Committee in their previous Report on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) had 
recommended the Ministry to earnestly pursue the matter relating to filling up of vacant 
posts with concerned authorities at appropriate levels to strengthen the staff at the 
earliest. The Committee are disturbed to see the reply of the Ministry in this regard that 
Department of Expenditure has recently agreed to the creation of only 11 posts in the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs for Policy Implementation Cell and as far as the posts of Deputy 
Directors/ SOs and Assistants are concerned, the Ministry has been asked to function 
on the desk pattern instead of conventional pattern which would enable the Ministry to 
manage the work with the existing staff. The Committee also observe that a proposal for 
creation of some additional posts was turned down by Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry are at present running several important 
schemes and the creation of mere 11 posts against the required 21 posts will not s erve 
the purpose. The Committee also feel that the Ministry had failed in convincing the 
DOP&T and Ministry of Finance the urgent need for creation of additional posts for 
efficient and smooth functioning of the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommend  
the Ministry to once again take up the matter of expansion of staff strength with the 
competent Authority at the earliest so that requisite sanction for additional posts are 
obtained and all the  vacant posts are filled up  without further delay. Meanwhil e, the 

34 
 
available staff may be efficiently utilized for successful implementation of various 
welfare schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 As against the demand of the Ministry for 21 posts for the Policy Implementation 
Cell, the Department of Expenditure had agreed to sanction 11 posts with the conditions 
that the draft National Tribal Policy is approved and Policy Implementation Cell is 
created. The demand for the remaining 10 posts would be taken up after the creation of 
the said Policy Implementation Cell. 
 As regards filling up the existing vacancies the Ministry has been pursuing Cadre 
Controlling Authorities for filling up of existing vacancies in various grades. 
 Regarding the proposal for creation of 27 additional posts for this Ministry in 
order to expand the staff strength the proposal was not agreed to by Ministry of Finance 
initially as it was held by them that in view of the extant austerity instructions, further 
creation of posts within four months of approval of earlier proposal for creation of  
11posts for National Tribal Policy Cell, it would not be possible without matching 
savings.  On the advice of Standing Committee, this Ministry again sent the proposal for 
reconsideration stating the requirement of current additional posts for meeting the  
requirement of increased activity and new initiatives taken by the Ministry and is not to 
be linked with the issue of 11 posts created for an exclusive reason.  After 
reconsideration also, Ministry of Finance did not agree to the proposal advising that th e 
proposal may be deferred in view of the economy instructions issued by that Ministry on 
11.07.2011.  The Ministry has again decided to take up the matter with Ministry of 
Finance and the proposal is being sent shortly. 

35 
 
 The Ministry has noted the recomme ndation of the Committee and would take 
steps to optionally use the available staff for the successfully implementing the various 
schemes.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.34) 
 
5.3 The Committee observe that Dr.Mungekar Committee has given several 
important recommendations to improve the delivery system in States which include 
inter-alia the need for re-strengthening and revamping the ITDPs and flow of SCA funds 
through ITDPs, selection of district level officers in tribal majority districts, addressing 
the health issues in tribal areas in a mission mode etc. However, on the status of 
implementation of these recommendations, the Ministry have informed that the Report 
is yet to be discussed in a Committee of Secretaries meeting for which notes are being 
submitted. The Committee level that the recommendations of Dr.Mungekar Committee 
have far reaching implications as far as the implementation and improvement of the 
schemes of this Ministry are concerned. In the opinion of the Committee unless the 
delivery system are improved, schemes will not be implemented effectively and it is 
absolutely necessary that some structural changes are brought in at the grass root 
level. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to pursue for early 
discussion of the Report at the Committee of Secretaries meeting and its acceptance by 
the Government so that the much needed improvement can be made for effective the 
implementation of schemes. 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 Dr. Mungekar Committee‟s Report contains recommendations on various issues 
regarding Standards of Administration and Governance in the Scheduled Areas.  All 
these issues are very important for uplifting the lot of Tribal people.  Comments received 
from the stakeholders are being examined before the matter is placed before the 
Committee of Secretaries. Necessary action in this regard has already been initiated. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.36) 
 
5.5 The Committee are unhappy to note that though the process of formulation of 
National Tribal Policy had been strarted  during 2006 and a draft was ready as early as 
May, 2007 yet the draft policy has not been finalized and is still under consideration. 
The Committee are given to understand that the draft National Tribal Policy aims at 
addressing several important issues t hat concern tribals such as alienation of Tribal 
Land; Tribal Forest Interface; Displacement, Resettlement & Rehabilitation; 
Enhancement of Human Development Index, Creation of Critical Infrastructre, Violent 
Manifestations; Conservation & Development of p articularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups 
(PTGs) TSP strategy; Administration of Tribal Areas etc. The Committee also find that 
the draft policy has already been discussed and considered at numerous platforms and 
the Ministry now propose to place it before the National Council for Tribal Welfare. The 
Committee feel that the process of finalization of the Draft Tribal Policy has been 
stretched too far and it is high time the policy is given its final shape, made ready with 

37 
 
clear perspectives on several key issues  concerning tribals. Therefore, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to expedite the matter and get the final nod for the National Tribal 
Policy at the earliest so that the benefit of this important Policy really accrue to the 
needy and poor tribals. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 The draft National Tribal Policy is to be laid before the National Council of Tribal 
Welfare (NCTW) as directed by PMO. The draft Policy has already been put up before 
the Standing Committee of NCTW and now it is to be put up before NCTW  for 
consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para 3.91) 
 
5.7 The Committee are unhappy to note that under the scheme of National Overseas 
Scholarship for Higher Studies  Abroad again st the budgetary allocations of Rs.2.00 
crore, Rs.0.50 crore, and Rs.1.00 crore respectively, the actual expenditure incurred 
have been Rs.0.0118, Rs.0.3080 and Rs.0.30 crore during the years 2008 -09, 2009-10 
and 2010-11. The Committee are als o constrained to note that out of the 29 selected 
candidates in previous selection years only seven got admission to foreign accredited 
Universities during 2006 -07 to 2009 -10. Moreover, there was shortfall in achieving 
physical targets as the number of can didates who actually got admission into foreign 
accredited Universities was 2 and 8 during 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 against the annual 
targets of 15. The Ministry have stated that they do not give any training/counseling to 
the students for getting admission in to foreign accredited University because the 

38 
 
selected candidates who are selected under the scheme are highly qualified and 
meritorious students who are well versed in using the net and exploring the feasibility of 
admission in foreign Universities themsel ves. However, the Committee view that the 
admission process in foreign Universities is a cumbersome process and because of this 
many students are not able to manage admission for themselves even if they are highly 
qualified and meritorious. In the opinion of the Committee the Government, besides the 
issue of  award for pursuing higher studies abroad, should also give requisite training/ 
counseling so as to prepare them for getting admission into foreign accredited 
Universities so that target set under the scheme are achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.8 The Ministry is disseminating information about the scheme through State 
Governments, website of this Ministry and further steps would be taken for 
dissemination/training/counseling regarding the scheme as suggested.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para 3.92) 
 
5.9 The Committee find that no evaluation study of the scheme has been conducted 
during the last three years. The Committee feel that there is a strong need to get the 
evaluation study done in order to assess the progress made and also to find out the 
difficulties being faced by the students in getting admission in foreign accredited 
Universities. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to undertake an evaluation 
study of the scheme for ascertaining the impact of the scheme at the earliest so that the 
corrective measures can be taken at the beginning of the Twelfth Five Year Plan.  
 

39 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 The Ministry would undertake the evaluation study for the Scheme of National 
Overseas Scholarship for ST candidates at the earliest. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para 3.108) 
5.11 The Committee note that the scheme of Strengthening Education among 
Scheduled Tribes (STs) Girls in Low Literacy Districts aims to bridge gap in literacy 
levels between the general female population and tribal women, through facilitating 
100% enrolment of tribal girls in the identified Districts or Blocks, more particularly in 
naxal affected areas and in areas in habited by PTGs.  The Committee note with 
concern that initially in 2008 -09 though the budgetary allocation under the scheme had 
been kept at Rs. 60.00  crore, slowly it has come down to Rs. 40.00 crore during 2010 -
11 and 2011 -12.   Late receipt of approval of competent authority for revised scheme, 
election process and delayed receipt of recommendation from many State Level 
Committees have been cit ed as the reasons for scaling down of the budgetary 
allocation over the years. The Committee feel that being an important scheme aiming at 
bridging the gap in literacy between general female population and tribal woman, the 
budgetary allocation for the sch eme should have increased instead of reduced 
allocation and the scheme should have picked up by now.  Therefore, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should project for higher budgetary allocation under the scheme 
so that more and more tribal girls are benefited under the scheme.   
 
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.12 The scheme is demand driven and the funds are released as per the complete 
proposals received. Under this scheme, the Autonomous societies of the State 
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are recipients 
of major portion of the  allotted budget. Lack of complete proposals from the States of 
Gujarat, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh resulted in low expenditure during the year 
2010-11. A meeting with the officials of these states was convened by the Joint 
Secretary on  22 -06-2011 to di scuss the implementation of this scheme. The Principal 
Secretary of Rajasthan also attended this meeting as he had shown keen interest to set 
up an autonomous society under this scheme in Rajasthan. This Ministry is vigorously 
pursuing the matter with thes e two states and with consistent efforts the grant of 
Autonomous Society of Madhya Pradesh has been regularized till 2010 -11. During 
2010-11, 17 new projects were sanctioned under this scheme.  Higher allocation shall 
be demanded depending upon the expenditure position. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para 3.125) 
 
5.13 The Committee are unhappy to note the slow progress with regard to distribution 
of title deeds under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers 
(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 as against 30,56,468 lakh (30,03,617 individual 
and 52,851 community) claims received only 11,27,400 lakh (11,23,731 individual and 
3,669 community) title deeds have been distributed. The Committee also observe that in 
many of the States though the claims have been received in large numbers, the number 

41 
 
of cert ificates of title deeds distributed is far less than the claims received. The 
Committee note with serious concern that the implementation of the Act has not 
progressed at all in the State of Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand where out of total 
number of 2291, 21781 and 182 claims received respectively not a single title deed has 
been distributed so far in the se States. In the opinion of the Committee the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs being at the helm of affairs as far as the tribal rights are concerned should  
see and ensure that States are progressing well in implementation of the Act and 
issues/problems in way of implementation are addressed and cleared on time. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take up the issue of early 
distribution of righ ts with the above three States at the earliest so that distribution 
process kicks off without any further delay. The Committee also desire the Ministry to 
persuade and facilitate the implementation process in all other States where the 
implementation has been slow by taking up specific steps and reviewing their progress 
at regular intervals. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.14 It is observed from paras 3.110 to 3.112 of the  Sixteenth Report  of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice & Empowerment that the obse rvations/ recommendations 
of the Committee in para 3.125, above, are based on the status of implementation of the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) 
Act, 2006 in various  States, as on 28.02.2011.  
As per the information collected in the Ministry upto 30.09.2011, a total number 
of 31,49,269 claims have reportedly been filed in various States/UTs at the level of 
Gram Sabha.  As against these claims, a total number of 12,30,663 titles have been 

42 
 
distributed, another 13,216 titles are ready for distribution, and 15,77,831 claims have 
been rejected.  A total number of 28,08,494 claims have thus been disposed of, which 
works out to a disposal of 89.17% of the total claims filed.  The implementation of the 
Act therefore, seems to be progressing well.  
 As regards the implementation of the Act in the States of Bihar, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttarakhand, it may be mentioned that as on 30.09.2011, in the State of Bihar, a total of 
2,343 claims have been filed under the Act against which 22 titles have been distributed 
and 1,151 claims have been rejected.  A total of 1,173 claims have thus been disposed 
of, which amounts to disposal of 50.06% of the total claims filed.   In the State of 
Uttarakhand, a total of 182 claims have been  filed and one claim has been rejected.  As 
regards the State of Tamil Nadu, the position is that a total number of 21,781 claims 
have been filed in the State and out of which 3,723 titles are ready for distribution.  The 
State Government has not been able  to distribute the titles due a restrictive High Court 
order.   
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has been advising all the States/ UTs, from time to 
time, including those States, such as Bihar and Uttarakhand where implementation 
process has been slow, to ta ke all necessary steps, for early and effective 
implementation of the Act. The Ministry has advised all the State Governments, on 
20.07.2010, to provide the Gram Sabhas with the assistances of facilitators in order to 
(a) overcome the difficulties experien ced by the claimants in accessing the requisite 
evidence in support of their claims; (b) avoid the delays in preparation of a map 
delieneating the area of each recommended claim; (c) facilitate claims, especially those 
of Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs); (d ) enhance capacity building of the Forest Rights 

43 
 
Committees constituted by the Gram Sabha for assisting the Gram Sabha, etc. As in the 
case of the Gram Sabhas, the State Governments were also advised to provide the 
Sub-Divisional Level Committees also with  the assistance of facilitators for capacity 
building of these Committees for discharge of functions assigned to them. The State 
Governments were further advised to (a) launch a special campaign for generating wide 
spread awareness about the community righ ts, if necessary, by retraining field level 
functionaries; (b) convene meetings of the State Level Monitoring Committees regularly 
to take stock of field level problems; and (c) communicate the resolutions of the Gram 
Sabha/decision of the SDLC to the clai mants within 60 days from the date of 
resolutions/decision to enable him to seek redressal as provided in the Act. The State 
Governments were advised to meet the expenses on the engagement of facilitators out 
of the grants under Article 275 (1) proviso.   
The Ministry has also been reviewing the progress of implementation of the Act 
by holding review meetings with various State Government Officers; through visits of 
senior officers to various States/ UTs and also by writing letters to Chief Ministers/ 
Administrators/ Chief Secretaries and the concerned Principal Secretaries of the State/ 
UT Government. The Ministry is also clarifying the issues raised by the States/ UTs 
Governments in connection with the implementation of the Act.  The Ministry had also 
advised the State Government of Tamil Nadu to take all necessary steps for getting the 
High Court stay vacated at the earliest and ensure distribution of titles to all eligible 
claimants without delay.  The State Government has informed that all possible effor ts 
are being made by the State Government to get the stay vacated by the Hon‟ble High 
Court.  

44 
 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para 3.126) 
 
5.15 The Committee observe that the Jo int Committee of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
and the Ministry of Environment & Forests, constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
N.C. Saxena to study the implementation of Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Ri ghts) Act, 2006 has submitted its Report in 
which it has given some important recommendations (i) process and institutions of the 
FRA, (ii) Implementation of FRA of grant of Individual and Community Forest Rights, (iii) 
Implementation of Development Projec ts (iv) Implementation for special groups, 
namely, Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups,  Nomadic Pastoralists, Shifting 
Cultivators and Forest villagers, (v) Protected Areas and Critical Wildlife Habitats, (vi) 
Future structure of Forest Governance, (vii ) Enhancing Livelihoods through Non -timber 
Forest Produces, (viii) Convergence of Development Programmes for Tribal and Forest 
Dwellers, etc. The Committee have also been informed that the 
recommendations/suggestions of the Committee are under examination for appropriate 
action. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to take an early view on the 
Report after consulting all the stake holders and implement the 
recommendations/suggestions within a definite time frame. The Committee may be 
apprised of the precise action taken in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
 
5.16 As the recommendations/suggestions given in the Report of the Joint Committee 
of Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Environment & Forests constituted under the 

45 
 
Chairmanship of Dr. N.C. Saxena to study the implementation of Scheduled Tribes and 
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 require 
consultation with various stake -holders it would take some more time to finalize the 
views of the Ministry on the same. The Committee would be apprised of the progress in 
this regard.  
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para 3.127) 
 
 
5.17 The Committee note  with concern that several development projects coming up 
in forest areas have resulted in displacement of tribal people. The Ministry have 
informed that at present this Ministry considers clearance of those irrigation/flood control 
projects where STs are affected/displaced and the Ministry do not have any role in 
clearance for other projects wherein tribal people are directly or indirectly affected.  
Clearances are issued subject to the condition that all measures contained in RR Policy, 
2007 and policy of  the concerned State Governments are taken into consideration for 
rehabilitation of displaced STs.   However, the Committee feel that the nodal Ministry 
looking after the needs of tribal people the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should have larger 
role in this  regard.  Therefore, the Committee desire that being the Ministry of Tribals 
Affair‟s clearance should be made mandatory not only in irrigation/flood control projects 
but in respect of all developmental projects which involve displacement of tribal people. 
 
 
 

46 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.18 The note for Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in this regards was drafted and has 
been sent for comments of stakeholders.  Comments are awaited 
[Ministry of Tribal affairs OM No. 16015/07/2011-PC & V dated 4th November, 2011] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
05 March, 2012        Chairman, 
15 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
  

47 
 
ANNEXURE  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON MONDAY, 5TH MARCH, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', PHA, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Premchand Guddu 
6. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
7. Shri Mohan Jena 
8. Shri G. V. Harsha Kumar 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
10. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
11. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
  
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
13. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
14. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
15. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri Deepak Mahna - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.C. Choulda - Deputy Secretary 
 

48 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chair man welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitti ng had been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft Reports of the Committee i.e. Nineteenth Report on Action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Just ice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on the subject "Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry 
of Social Justice and  Empowerment  and three Action Taken Reports (Twentieth, 
Twenty-First and Twenty-Second) on Demands for Grants (201 1-12) of the Ministries of 
Minority Affairs, Tribal Affairs and Social Justice and Empowerment respectively. 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration all the draft Reports and adopted 
the same with some additions in the 19 th Report on Action taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
"Scholarship Schemes for SCs/OBCs" pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment.  The Committee authorized the Chair man to finalize the draft Reports  
and present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  

49 
 
APPENDIX  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   SIXTEENTH  REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
 Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
21  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.4, 3.31, 3.37, 3.39, 
3.54, 3.66, 3.91, 3.92 and 3.109). 
 
9 42.85 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies - Nil 
 
0 0.00 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph Nos. 
3.35, 3.38 and 3.81) 
3 14.30 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.32, 3.33, 3.34, 3.36, 
3.80, 3.108, 3.125, 3.126 and 3.127). 
 
9 
 
42.85 
 
 