1 
 
 
 
28 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2011 - 2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) 
ORDERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
TWENTY – EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August,  2012/Bhadrapada, 1934(Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
TWENTY - EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2011-2012) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) 
ORDERS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.8.2012 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on   24.8.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August,  2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 INTRODUCTION  
 REPORT  
 ANNEXURES  
ANNEXURE I The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment)  
Bill, 2012. 
 
ANNEXURE II Number of Castes etc. specified as Scheduled Castes in 
regard to States/UTs. 
 
ANNEXURE III Details in regard to the names of Scheduled Castes 
contained in six Presidential Orders. 
 
ANNEXURE IV Statement showing details of the proposals pending with 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
ANNEXURE V Statement showing details of proposals for modification in 
the list of Scheduled Castes, pending with the Registrar 
General of India (RGI). 
 
ANNEXURE VI Statement showing details of the proposals pending with the 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes.  
 
ANNEXURE VII Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 13.6.2012. 
 
ANNEXURE VIII Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 20.7.2012. 
 
ANNEXURE IX Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the S tanding Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 22.8.2012. 
 
 
 APPENDIX  
 Statement of Observations/Recommendations 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
 
 
                               

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2011-2012) 
       
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Premchand Guddu 
7. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri H.D. Kumaraswamy 
12. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
13. Shri R. Dhruva Narayana  
14. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
                        ####15.   Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18. Shri Kabir Suman 
                            **19.   Smt. Usha Verma  
  20.   Vacant 
21.       Vacant 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
          ***24. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
          ##25. Shri Chiranjeevi Konidala 
          ##26. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
         ***27. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
                           28. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
        ###29. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
    *30. Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
 31. Shri Baishnab Parida 
                        #32. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
 33. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
 34. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
  *  Dr. Ram Dayal Munda was expired on 30.9.2011. 
 **  Smt. Usha Verma ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 3.1.2012. 
***  Retired w.e.f. 2.4.2012. 
  #  Retired w.e.f. 2.4.2012 and re-nominated w.e.f. 4.5.2012. 
##  Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 4.5.2012. 
### Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.7.2012. 
#### Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 13.7.2012. 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  

5 
 
 
 
1. Shri C.S. Joon  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit  the Report on their behalf present 
the   Twenty-eighth Report of the Committee  on  "The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) 
Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012" of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 21.5.2012 and was referred to the 
Committee by the Hon‟ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25.5.2012 under Ru le 331E (b) of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and 
report. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment,  Registrar General of India and Na tional 
Commission for Scheduled Castes for tendering evidence and placing their considered 
views before the Committee and also for furnishing written notes and information as 
desired by the Committee in connection with the examination of the Bill. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bill at their sitting held 
on 22.8.2012. 
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
6. The Committee place on reco rd their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
22 August, 2012        Chairman, 
31 Shravana, 1934 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
  

7 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012 was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 21st May, 2012.  The Bill was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on 25th  May, 2012 for examination and 
report  thereon.   A copy of the Bill , as introduced in Lok Sabha , is appended 
(Annexure I).  The objective of the Bill is  to insert certain castes in respect of Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tripura in the Scheduled Castes Order, 1950 and to omit 
entry 3 of the Schedule to the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978. 
Background 
1.2 The Constitutional provisions in regard to specification of “Scheduled Castes” are 
as under:- 
 Article 366:     Definitions 
  "(24)  “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or 
groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be 
Scheduled Castes for the purpose of the Constitution." 
"Article 341:      Scheduled Castes 
(1)     The President may with respect to any State or Union Territory and where 
it is a State after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, 
specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or 
tribes which sh all for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be 
Scheduled Castes in relation to that State or Union Territory, as the case may be. 
 
(2)  Parliament may by -law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled 
Castes specified in a notification iss ued under clause (1) any caste, race or tribe 
or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as aforesaid a 
notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any subsequent 
notification." 

8 
 
 
1.3  The Ministry have informed that t he criteria followed for consideration of 
specification of a caste etc. as a Scheduled Caste is „extreme social, educational and 
economic backwardness arising out of traditional practice of untouchability.‟   
1.4 After promulgation of the Constitution, in exercise of powers conferred by clause 
(1) of Article 341 of the Constitution, the President made the following six  Presidential 
Orders between 1950 and 1978, for specifying castes as Scheduled Castes in relation 
to various States/Union Territories:- 
(i)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, 
(ii)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951, 
(iii)  The Constitution (Jammu & Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956, 
 (iv)  The Constitution (Dadra & Nagar Haveli) Scheduled Castes Order, 1962, 
 (v)  The Constitution (Pondicherry) Scheduled Castes Order, 1964,  
 (vi)  The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978.  
 
1.5 The Ministry have informed the Committee that t he first Order of 1950, as 
amended from time to time, is for 24 States as follows:- 
(i) Andhra Pradesh, (ii) Assam, (iii) Bihar, (iv) Chhattisgarh, (v) Goa, (vi) 
Gujarat,  (vii) Haryana, (viii) Himachal Pradesh, (ix) Jharkhand,(x) Karnataka,(xi)  
Kerala, (xii) Madhya Pradesh, (xiii) Maharashtra, (xiv) Manipur, (xv) Meghalaya, 
(xvi) Mizoram, (xvii) Orissa, (xviii) Punjab,(xix) Rajasthan, (xx) Tamil Nadu, 
(xxi)Tripura, (xxii) Uttar Pradesh, (xxiii) Uttaranchal and ( xxiv) West Bengal. 
 
1.6 The second Order of 1951, as amended from time to time, is for 3 Union 
Territories as follows:- 
(i) Delhi, (ii) Chandigarh and (iii) Daman and Diu. 
  

9 
 
 
1.7    The above mentioned Orders have been amended from time to time by the 
following Acts of Parliament enacted as per Article 341(2) of the Constitution between 
1956 and 2007:- 
(i)   The Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 
1956, 
(ii)  The Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 
1976, 
(iii)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 1990, 
(iv)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002, 
(v)   The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes) Orders 
(Amendment) Act, 2002, 
(vi)   The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Second Amendment) Act, 
2002,  
(vii)  The Scheduled Castes and  Scheduled Tribes Order (Amendment) Act, 
2002, and  
(viii)  The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Act, 2007. 
 
1.8     Presently, 1208 castes etc. have been specified as Scheduled Castes in relation 
to various States and Union Territories (State/UT wise number is at Annexure -II). 
Details in regard to their names are contained in the six Presidential Orders, as 
amended from time to time (copy at Annexure-III).      
1.9     The Ministry have specified the following procedure for inclusion and exclusi on 
from the list of Scheduled Castes :-  
(i)     The complete proposal with ethnographic support, to modify the existing 
list of Scheduled Castes is made by the concerned State 
Government/Union Territory Administration. 

10 
 
 
(ii) The proposal is then referred to the  Registrar General of India (RGI), for 
seeking comments. 
 
(iii) The proposal once not agreed to by the RGI, is referred back to the 
concerned State Government/Union Territory Administration, for seeking 
further justification of their proposal, in the light of the comments of the 
RGI. 
 
(iv)  The proposal, if received back from concerned State Government/Union 
Territory Administration, with further justifications, is again referred to the 
RGI for consideration. 
 
(v) If the proposal is not agreed to by the RGI the second t ime, the 
Government of India may consider rejection of the proposal. 
 
(vi) The proposal agreed to by the by the RGI, is referred to the National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC), for seeking comments. 
 
(vii)  If the proposal is not agreed to by the NCSC, it is rejected with the 
approval of Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment. 
 
(viii) Such proposals, which have been agreed to by the RGI and the NCSC are 
processed further and introduced as a Bill for consideration and passing 
by the Parliament, as required under Ar ticle 341(2) of the Constitution of 
India. After the Bill is passed by both the Houses of Parliament and assent 
of the President is obtained the amendments are notified.  
 
Further modifications in lists of Scheduled Castes under consideration  
1.10   The Ministry have further informed that lists of Scheduled Castes were last 
revised vide the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Act, 2007.   
Thereafter, proposals have been received from the State Governments of Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha , Tripura and Sikkim for certain modifications in the list of 
Scheduled Castes of these States. The proposals were processed as per approved 
Modalities. The NCSC and the RGI have accordingly conveyed their concurrence to the 

11 
 
 
proposed modifications.  To giv e effect to them, it is proposed to amend the following 
two Presidential Orders : -  
(i)      The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950; - in respect of Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Odisha & Tripura and  
(ii)       The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978.  
1.11 The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012 involves 12 
amendments.  The details of the proposed 12 amendments are as follows :- 
Sl.  
No.  
State/ Union 
Territory 
Inclusion 
as 
synonym 
Exclusion Other 
modification 
Total 
1 Kerala 2 - - 2 
2 Madhya Pradesh 1 - - 1 
3 Odisha 4 - 1* 5 
4 Tripura 3 - - 3 
5 Sikkim - 1 - 1 
 Total 10 1 1 12 
                *Changing the name of Orissa to Odisha. 
  

12 
 
 
1.12 A statement showing existing entry, proposed modification, entry as it would read 
after modification and remarks in respect of 12 proposed amendments is as under :- 
State/ 
Union 
Territory. 
Existing entry Proposed 
modification 
Entry, as it 
would read 
after 
proposed 
modification 
 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 
Amendment in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 
Kerala 
 
46.Palluvan Inclusion  of 
Pulluvan as 
synonym of 
Palluvan 
46.Palluvan, 
Pulluvan Kerala State had informed that the word 
„Pulluvan‟ was mis-spelt as „Palluvan‟ in 
the initial list of SCs and suggested 
necessary correction. State 
Government, RGI and NCSC have 
agreed that instead of deleting 
„Palluvan‟ from SCs list, it should be 
retained along with „Pulluvan‟. 
 
61. Thandan 
(excluding 
Ezhuvas 
and Thiyyas 
who are 
known as 
Thandan, in 
erstwhile 
Cochin and 
Malabar 
areas) and 
(Carpenters 
who are 
known as 
Thachan, in 
the erstwhile 
Cochin and 
Travancore 
State) 
Inclusion of 
Thachar 
(other than 
Carpenter) 
as synonym 
of “Thandan 
(excluding 
Ezhuvas and 
Thiyyas who 
are known 
as Thandan, 
in erstwhile 
Cochin and 
Malabar 
areas) and 
(Carpenters 
who are 
known as 
Thachan, in 
the erstwhile 
Cochin and 
Travancore 
State)” 
61. Thandan 
(excluding 
Ezhuvas and 
Thiyyas who are 
known as 
Thandan, in 
erstwhile Cochin 
and Malabar 
areas) and 
(Carpenters who 
are known as 
Thachan, in the 
erstwhile Cochin 
and Travancore 
State), Thachar 
(other than 
Carpenter) 
Contention of the Government of Kerala 
that on the basis of anthropological 
study, „Thandan‟ and „Thachar (other 
than Carpenter)‟ belong to one and the 
same community has been accepted by 
both RGI and NCSC. 

13 
 
 
 
 
1 2 3 4 
5 
 41.Jaggali Inclusion of 
Jaggili, Jagli as 
synonym of 
Jaggali 
41. Jaggali, 
Jaggili, Jagli According to Government of Orissa 
„Jaggili, Jagli‟ are  synonyms to the 
notified „Jaggali‟ community. They 
are one and the same community 
having same socio - cultural and 
economic features. RGI has no 
objection to the proposal and NCSC 
has concurred. 
69.Pan, Pano, 
Buna Pana, 
Desua Pana 
Inclusion of 
Buna Pano as 
synonym of 
Pan, Pano, 
Buna Pana, 
69. Pan, 
Pano, Buna 
Pana, Desua 
Pana, Buna 
Governments of Orissa, RGI and 
NCSC have agreed that „Buna Pano‟ 
is a section of „Pan, Pano‟. 
1 2 3 4 5 
 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
18. Dahait, 
Dahayat, 
Dahat 
Inclusion of   
Dahiya as 
synonym of 
Dahait, Dahayat, 
Dahat 
18. Dahait, 
Dahayat, 
Dahat, 
Dahiya 
Recommendation of Government of 
Madhya Pradesh to include „Dahiya‟ as 
a synonym of „Dahait‟, „Dahayat‟, 
„Dahat‟, has been endorsed by the RGI 
on the basis of anthropological study 
contained in publication viz. „People of 
India- the Scheduled Castes‟, in which 
„Dahiya‟ has been reported as „Dahait‟.  
The NCSC has concurred. 
 
Odisha Part XIII-
Orissa  
Change of the 
heading,  of Part 
XIII-Orissa  
Part XIII-
Odisha 
The name of the State of Orissa has 
been changed to Odisha vide the 
Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011, 
w.e.f. 01.11.2011.   
 
2.Amant, 
Amat, 
Dandachhatra 
Majhi 
Inclusion of 
Amata, Amath 
as synonym of 
Amant, Amat, 
Dandachhatra 
Majhi  
2. Amant, 
Amat, 
Dandachhatr
a Majhi, 
Amata, 
Amath 
Government of Orissa informed that 
„Amata, Amath‟ are synonyms / 
phonetic variation of the „Amant, Amat,‟ 
a SC in Orissa and bear the same 
socio- cultural characteristics with the 
latter. Both RGI and NCSC have 
concurred. 
 
13.Bedia, 
Bejia 
Inclusion of 
Bajia as 
synonym of 
Bedia, Bejia 
13. Bedia, 
Bejia, Bajia 
Government of Orissa informed that 
„Bajia‟ community is socially, 
educationally and economically 
backward and with a view to remove 
misgivings arising out of phonetic 
variations, this community may be 
included in the SCs list of Orissa. RGI 
and NCSC have concurred. 

14 
 
 
Desua Pana Pano 
Tripura 4. Chamar, 
Muchi 
Inclusion of 
Chamar- 
Rohidas, 
Chamar- 
Ravidas as 
synonym of 
Chamar, Muchi 
4. Chamar, 
Muchi, 
Chamar- 
Rohidas, 
Chamar- 
Ravidas 
Government of Tripura 
recommended „Chamar - Rohidas,‟ 
„Chamar- Ravidas‟ as synonyms of 
„Chamar, Muchi‟ in Tripura. Both, 
RGI and NCSC have concurred. 
7. Dhoba Inclusion of 
Dhobi as 
synonym of 
Dhoba  
7. Dhoba, 
Dhobi Government of Tripura informed that 
Dhoba and Dhobi are same castes. 
Both, RGI and NCSC have 
concurred. 
12. Jalia 
Kaibarta 
Inclusion 
Jhalo- Malo as 
synonym of 
Jalia Kaibarta 
12. Jalia 
Kaibarta, 
Jhalo- Malo 
Government of Tripura informed that 
„Jhalo- Malo‟ is a synonym of „Jalia 
Kaibarta‟. Both, RGI and NCSC have 
concurred. 
 
Amendment in the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 
 
1 2 3 4 
5 
Sikkim 3. Majhi  
( Nepali) 
Deletion of 
existing entry 
Majhi (Nepali) 
- 
Government of Sikkim, referring to 
the recommendation made by State 
Backward Classes Commission has 
vide its letter dated 31.01.2004,   
proposed that „Majhi‟ be deleted from 
the SC Order, 1978 and included in 
the Central List of Other Backward 
Classes. RGI has supported the 
proposal of the State Government 
stating that “As is revealed from the 
reports of the State Government and 
the Sikkim Commission for Backward 
Classes, the Majhis themselves want 
to come out of „social s tigma‟ of a 
Scheduled Caste. According to them, 
Majhis are not considered as 
„untouchables‟ among Gorkha and it 
hurts their sentiments.” NCSC has 
concurred. 
 
 

15 
 
 
1.13 In response to a query on the estimated population of these communities and 
their economic status, the Ministry have stated :- 
"The estimated population of the communities, proposed for inclusion in the list of 
Scheduled Castes in the present Bill is not available. It has been reported by the 
State Governments that these communities are socially , educationally and 
economically backward". 
 
1.14. The Registrar General of India further clarified during evidence :- 
“……the question was, these communities which are stated for inclusion, what is 
their population.  But those communities which are not SCs/STs today, we do not 
have the population of those communities.  We have only those who have been 
included.  We give the population figures of SCs/STs".   
 
The RGI further informed  that after the data on  socio economic and caste 
Census conducted in 2011 are processed , every caste details will be available.   
 
When asked the time when the census figure is likely to be av ailable, the RGI 
stated:  
 
“The work is so huge that 17 Centres are working 24x7 since the Census 
Government got over.  The work is so huge that it is not possible to do it earlier.  
Finally, the forms are all hand written forms.  We have introduced techno logy to 
scan them and then try to do things faster so we are able to bring down the time 
from four years to two years…  The details of the second phase of census, which 
was conducted in 2011 are under process and our sincere efforts would be to 
bring it ou t before March, 2013.  If we are able to complete it earlier, we will 
release it earlier. 
 
1.15  When it was enquired w hether inclusion/ exclusion of castes in " The 
Constitution ( Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950" as proposed in the Bill is supported by 
the views of experts, individuals, organisations and institutions in the fields of 
anthropology, ethnography and other social sciences, the Ministry have stated :- 
"Complete proposal with ethnographic support, to modify the existing list of 
Scheduled Castes is  made by concerned State Government/Union Territory 
Administration. They  also take help of their research organisations like  Tribal 

16 
 
 
Research Institutes, Social Studies Institutes, and Universities, while  formulation 
of the proposal".  
 
1.16  When enquired whether public hearing and public opinion has been sought for 
addition and /or deletion of these castes, the Ministry have stated that :- 
"The Modalities, inter-alia suggests that the NCSC, while examining proposals, 
may associate, through panel or othe r means, expert individuals, organisations 
and institutions in the fields of anthropology, ethnography and other social 
sciences. It is also laid down that they may also consider holding public hearings 
in the areas relevant to claims under examination.  I t is, however, not binding on 
the Commission to do so. The NCSC which has been consulted in the matter has 
informed as under:- 
 
"………the proposal of the State Government alongwith comments of the RGI on 
modification of SC list is placed before the Hon'ble C ommission's meeting for 
views/comments. The Hon'ble Commission considered the matter and expressed 
its views. Thereafter, the Commissions views also communicated to the Nodal 
Ministry. Further, the Commission does not hold public opinion or conduct an y 
public hearing in this regard". 
 
1.17 The Ministry have informed that from the Reports of the State Government and 
Sikkim Commission for Backward Classes that 'Majhis' themselves want to come out of 
social stigma of a Scheduled Castes and therefore deletion of the caste from "The 
Constitution (Sikki m) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 ". When enquired w hether public 
opinion was sought from the community, the Ministry have informed as under :- 
 
"The Government of Sikkim , having considered the recommendation of Sikk im 
Commission for Backward Classes had recommended deletion of 'Majhi' 
community from the list of Scheduled Castes in relation to Sikkim. The said 
Commission had inter-alia observed that, "The Majhis seemed to have reluctantly 
accepted the status of Schedu led Castes……..they are not considered as 
'untouchables' by other Nepali communities or Scheduled Tribes. Hence they 
have requested for deletion from the list of SC and inclusion as OBC in the 
Central list…" The Commission in this regard had made extensive spot studies of 
the 'Majhi' dominated areas and gathered information from the members of the 
community. Knowledgeable elder members of the community and the 
representatives of the Majhi community were also invited for the discussion".  
 

17 
 
 
 
1.18 The Ministry was asked to submit the details of the other proposals received from 
the State Governments for inclusion in the Scheduled Castes list . In response, the 
Ministry have stated that 36 such proposals received from various State Governments 
for inclusion in the  Schedule Castes list are under different stages of consideration, as 
indicated in the following details:-    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.19   Also giving details of the pendency of cases with the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment, Registrar General of  India and National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes, the Ministry have given the following detailed information :- 
Sl. No. No. of 
Proposals 
Present stage of consideration, as per 
approved Modalities 
 
1. 15 Referred to Registrar General of India (RGI), for 
obtaining their comments. 
 
2. 4 Referred to National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes (NCSC), for obtaining their comments. 
 
 
3. 16 Under consideration for  rejection , as the RGI 
had not agreed to the views of the concerned 
State Government,  even on second reference. 
  
4. 1 Comments from both the RGI and NCSC have 
been obtained. To be processed further. 
 
Total 36  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Agency, where 
proposals are presently 
pending.  
 
Number of  proposals 
1 Ministry of Social Justice and 17 (Details are given in Annexure-IV) 

18 
 
 
 
 In regard to the reasons for long pendency of cases, the Ministry have  informed 
that p rocessing of proposals for deciding claims for inclusion in, exclusion from and 
other modifications in the list of Scheduled Castes is a time consuming process, as it 
requires consultation with various agencies, such as Registrar General of  India and 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes, which take considerable time.  
 
1.20 Explaining further about the time taken for clearing proposals, the Ministry have 
informed that i n accordance with the approved Modalities, the proposal received from  
the concerned State Government/ Union Territory Administration is initially referred to 
the RGI for seeking its comments.  The proposal agreed to by the RGI, is referred to 
NCSC for seeking comments. The proposal not agreed to by the RGI  the first time, is 
referred back to the concerned State/UT, for their consideration in the light of comments 
of the RGI.  Further information , when received from them , is again referred to the RGI 
for comments, and such proposals which are again disagreed by the RGI on sec ond 
reference, are considered for rejection by the Ministry. However, such proposals, which 
have been agreed to by both RGI and NCSC,  are further processed by the Ministry in 
consultation with concerned Ministries for obtaining approval of the Cabinet for  
introduction of a Bill for consideration and passing by the Parliament,  as required under 
Empowerment 
 
 
2 Registrar General of India 18 (Details are given in Annexure-V) 
 
3 National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes 
 
7  (Details are given in Annexure-VI) 
 

19 
 
 
Article 341(2)  of the Constitution of India.  The time taken by the Ministry, for complete 
examination of a proposal, therefore, varies from case to case. 
 
1.21 When it was enquired about  the number of cases referred back to the State 
Governments for further clarification during the last three years and number of replies 
since received, the Ministry have replied :- 
 
"8 complete proposals, which were received from th e State Governments/ Union 
Territory Administration, and in which the comments from both the RGI & NCSC 
have been received, were referred back to concerned States for clarification. 
Replies in all such cases are awaited. Ministry is not aware of any time f rame 
fixed by the States, in this regard. 
 
 A proposal for deletion of 'Dewar' community from the list of Scheduled 
Castes in Odisha has also been referred to the State Government for seeking 
clarification". 
 
1.22 Giving details about the kind of work done by RGI in identification of a caste as 
Scheduled Ca ste, it has been informed that t he procedure followed by RGI in 
identification of a caste as a Scheduled Caste is based on the criteria laid down by the 
Lokur Committee in 1965.  The test of extreme social, educational and economic 
backwardness of castes arising out of traditional practice of untouchability are the 
criteria for identification of caste as a Scheduled Caste. Examination of a proposal for 
deciding claims for inclusio n in, exclusion from and other modifications in the list of 
Scheduled Castes requires extensive research, consultation of books, reports and 
journals etc. 
 
1.23 The representatives of the RGI further informed that t he office of RGI does not 
conduct field based anthropological studies for getting up - dated information on the 

20 
 
 
socio-economic and ethnic profile of the concerned caste proposed to be included in the 
Scheduled Castes list. The information on the concerned c aste are taken from the old 
and contemporary published anthropological and ethnographic literature of repute as 
well as Census Reports of pre -independence period. In addition to that information 
furnished by the State Government/Union Territory Administrat ion are also taken into 
account. In so far as the proposal for exclusion of caste from list of Scheduled Caste is 
concerned, the data relating to the distribution, literacy, occupations and other socio - 
demographic variables collected on concerned SC/ST du ring the decadal censuses are 
used, while examining the proposal.  
1.24 To a specific query on the rejection of castes, the Registrar General of India 
informed before the Committee during evidence :- 
"Procedurally, there is a same set of literature which i s available.  There is no 
new literature.  We have to refer to the same literature.  We cannot produce new 
literature to say something different from what we have given before.  It is my 
respectful submission". 
 
1.25 To a query on the population of the cas tes to be included and the financial 
aspect, the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment informed the 
Committee :- 
"The Registrar General is in the process of completing this exercise.  If you read 
our Financial Memorandum, part I, line 3, it  says : "This will entail some 
additional recurring and non -recurring expenditure on account of benefits of 
schemes meant for the development  of Scheduled Castes to which the persons 
belonging to the newly added communities will become entitled".  We have  
mentioned that.  Further it is said : "It is not  possible to estimate with any degree 
of precision the likely expenditure which would have to be incurred on this 
account due to non -availability of caste wise data".   We are admitting that the 
amount will rise.  So, we have to make adequate money allocation.  We  have 

21 
 
 
only said that we cannot estimate how much will be the exact allocation.  But we 
are admitting that there has to be an increase in allocation". 
  

22 
 
 
1.26 The Committee note that "The Constitutio n (Scheduled Castes) Orders 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012"  as introduced in Lok Sabha on 21st May, 2012 seeks to 
insert certain castes in "The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950" in 
respect of States of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tripura and to o mit 
caste ‘Majhi’ (Nepali) from  "The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 
1978".  The proposals for modification in the Scheduled Castes Order, 1950 and 
the Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 have been dul y 
processed by the Minist ry of S ocial Justice and Empowerment in consultation 
with the concerned State Governments, Registrar General of India and the 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes.  The Bill seeks to introduce inclusion 
of synonym of 2 castes  in Kerala, 1 in Madhya Pr adesh, 4 in Odisha, 3 in Tripura 
in The Constitution  (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950" and deletion of a caste from 
"The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978" and also the change of 
name of the State of Orissa to Odisha.  The Committee, approv e the amendments 
in the Bill in its entirety.   
  

23 
 
 
1.27 The Committee are constrained to note that data on the estimated 
population of the communities proposed to be included in Scheduled Castes list 
through this Bill is not available with the Ministry of S ocial Justice and 
Empowerment, however, the State Governments have reported that these 
communities are socially, educationally and economically backward.  The 
Registrar General of India informed during evidence that after the results of 
socio-economic and caste Census conducted in 2011 are released, which is likely 
by March, 2013, the details of population figures of every caste would be 
available.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should try to 
make available as early as possible the caste-wise data as per the new Census so 
that s ocio-economic details of each caste are readily available for use by the 
various Government agencies especially for determining the  social and 
economic impact of the of inclusion/exclusion of castes in the SC lists.   
In regard to the financial aspect of the Bill, the exact amount of expenditure 
on the inclusion of synonyms of 10 castes has not been shown in the Financial 
Memoranda of the Bill.  During the evidence, the Secretary also admitted that this 
would entail some additional recurring and non -recurring expenditure on account 
of benefits of schemes meant for development of Scheduled Castes to which the 
persons belonging to the newly added communities will become entitled as a 
result of this Bill.  It was also informed that in the Financial Memorandum it was 
not possible to estimate with any degree of precision the likely expenditure which 
would have to be incurred on this account due to non -availability of Caste -wise 
data.   The Committee are in no doubt that such Caste -wise data could be 

24 
 
 
obtained by t he Government from 2011 Census records and can be used in 
preparing Financial Memorandum of the Bill.  At this stage, the Committee can 
only hope that the Government will take appropriate steps to make use of Caste -
wise data and show expenditure in the Bil ls brought out in future on this subject 
matter. 
  

25 
 
 
1.28 The Committee are constrained to note that as many as 17, 18 and 7 
proposals from State Governments for amendment in the SC orders are pending 
with Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Registra r General of India and 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes respectively. The Committee have 
been informed that there is a specified procedure for deciding claims for 
inclusion in and exclusion from and other modification in the list of Scheduled 
Castes requiring consultation with the above mentioned agencies.  Since the 
whole process is long drawn and sometimes it may take many years for the State 
Government proposals to reach the Bill stage, the Committee, wish to emphasis 
that a sound system needs to  be put in place under which each 
organization/agency involved i.e. State Government, Registrar General of India 
(RGI), National Commission for Scheduled Castes (NCSC) and the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment are made to follow strict time schedu le to 
process the proposals received so that the benefits may reach the intended 
populace in shortest possible time.  The Committee hope that the Government 
will take appropriate steps in right direction. 

26 
 
 
1.29 The Committee have been apprised that the off ice of Registrar General of 
India does not conduct field based anthropological studies for getting updated 
information on the socio-economic and ethnic profile of the caste proposed to be 
included in the Scheduled Caste list.  The information on the concer ned caste are 
taken from the old and contemporary published anthropological and 
ethnographic literature of repute as well as Census Reports of pre -independence 
period besides the information furnished by the State Government/Union 
Territory Administration are also taken into account.  The Committee are unhappy 
to note that RGI is referring to old literature of pre -independence era in 
determining the socio -economic status of castes for clearing proposals for 
inclusion/exclusion of castes and there is no new literature on the demographic 
and economic status of castes.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Government should collect and use updated data on economic and social 
status of the various Castes for processing new proposals for 
inclusion/exclusion of Castes in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 
as amended from time to time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI:          DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
22 August, 2012            Chairman, 
31Shravana, 1934 (Saka)         Standing Committee on  
     Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
  

27 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
NUMBER OF CASTES ETC. SPECIFIED AS SCHEDULED CASTES  
IN REGARD TO STATES/UTS 
 
Sl. No. State/ Union Territory Number of castes 
etc. 
1 2 3 
States 
1 Andhra Pradesh 60 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 0 
3 Assam 16 
4 Bihar 23 
5 Chhattisgarh 44 
6 Goa 5 
7 Gujarat 36 
8 Haryana 37 
9 Himachal Pradesh 57 
10 Jammu and Kashmir 13 
11 Jharkhand 22 
12 Karnataka 101 
13 Kerala 55 
14 Madhya Pradesh 48 
15 Maharashtra 59 
16 Manipur 7 

28 
 
 
17 Meghalaya 16 
18 Mizoram 16 
19 Nagaland 0 
20 Orissa 93 
21 Punjab 39 
22 Rajasthan 59 
23 Sikkim 4 
24 Tamil Nadu 76 
25 Tripura 34 
26 Uttar Pradesh 66 
27 Uttaranchal 65 
28 West Bengal 60 
Union Territories 
29 Andaman & Nicobar 
Island 
0 
30 Chandigarh  36 
31 Dadra & Nagar Haveli  4 
32 Daman & Diu  5 
33 NCT of Delhi  36 
34 Lakshadweep  0 
35 Pondicherry  16 
 Total 1208 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS OF THE PROPOSALS PENDING WITH MINISTRY OF 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(i) Proposals in which RGI did not agree to the point of view of the State 
Governments even on a second reference 
 
 
The cases shown in the above table for inclusion in the Scheduled Castes list were 
referred to RGI twice, however, the RGI did not agree for the same on both the occasions. As 
per approved Modalities, the final decision on these claims is under consideration of the Ministry 
since  June,  2010 [Sl. No(.xiv)&(xv)],   October,  2010 [Sl. No.(i)-(xii)],  and    January,   2011 
[Sl. No.( xvi)] except the case at Sl. No. (xiii). The case at Sl. No. (xiii) is under process. The 
comments from RGI has been received only on 21.06.2012. 
(ii) Proposal in which comments from both the RGI and NCSC have been obtained 
and  is to be further processed by the Ministry 
 
State Community Proposal in brief Date of receipt of 
comments of NCSC 
Odisha Khatia Inclusion as synonym of Katia at Sl. No. 44 13.06.2012 
 
  
Sl. 
No.  
State Name of community 
1 Odisha (i) Agheri Kela, Sinduria Kela, 
(ii)Goudia Kela, 
(iii) Pana Baishnab, Pano Baishnab, 
(iv) Kalandi, Kalandi Baishnab, Kalindi 
Baishnab, 
(v) Kandra Baishnab, Kandara Baishnab, 
(vi) Bauri Baishnab, 
(vii) Dhoba Baishnab, 
( viii) Gokha Baishnab, Gokah Baishnab, 
(ix) Kesuria, 
( x) Bhina/ Tula Bhina, 
( xi) Mehantar, Mehentar and 
(xii)  Sitra. 
(xiii) Tiar, Tior 
2 Chhattisgarh (xiv) Mahra/ Mahara 
(xv) Chik Ganda/ Chik/Cheek 
3 Uttarakhand (xvi)  Namasudra, Pod, Poundra 

30 
 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS OF PROPOSALS FOR MODIFICATION IN THE LIST OF 
SCHEDULED CASTES, PENDING WITH THE REGISTRAR GENERAL OF INDIA (RGI) 
 
* A further clarification in these cases has been forwarded to RGI vide this Ministry's letter dated 
18.06.2012 in response to RGI's letter dated 13.06.2012. 
  
S.
N. 
State Name of community 
 
 
 
 
Proposal in brief 
 
 
 
 
Date of 
reference made 
to RGI by the 
Ministry 
1. Madhya 
Pradesh 
1. Sakhwar Inclusion as synonym of Chamar ( 
Sl. No. 14) 
06.10.2008 
2. Orissa 
2 Chik, Chik Badaik 
Inclusion as synonym of Badaik 
(Sl.No. 4) 
07.05.2008 
3.Situria 
Inclusion  as synonym of  
Ghantarghada ( Sl. No. 30) 
02.03.2010* 
4.Jayantara Pano, Jena 
Pano  
Inclusion as synonym of Pan, 
Pano ( Sl. No. 69)  
15.07.2011* 
5.Poundra, Pod, etc 
Bengali refugee) 
Inclusion as new entry 15.07.2011* 
6.Khadal, Khodal, 
Khadola 
Inclusion as synonym  of Khadala ( 
Sl. No. 46) 
15.07.2011* 
3. 
 
Kerala 7..Malayan  Modification of existing entry 07.10.2009 
8. Adi Andhra Deletion of existing entry ( Sl. No. 
1) 
07.10.2009 
9. Chandala Deletion of existing entry ( Sl. No. 
16) 
07.10.2009 
10.Koosa Deletion of existing entry ( Sl. No. 
31) 
07.10.2009 
11.Madiga Inclusion as new entry 07.10.2009 
12. Ajilla, (Sl. No. 4), 
Nalakeyava ( Sl. No.41) 
Nalkadaya ( Sl. No. 42) 
and Koppalan 
Clubbing of existing entries (Sl. 
No. 4, 41, 42) and inclusion of a 
new community Koppalan as 
synonym at Sl. 4. 
07.10.2009 
13. Peruvannan Inclusion as synonym of Vannan, 
Mannan, etc. communities 
21.03.2011 
4. Karnataka 14. Bovi ( Non- Besta), 
Kallu Waddar, Mannu 
Waddar 
Inclusion as synonym   of Bhovi, 
etc. at Sl. No. 23 
07.05.2010 
5. Chhattishgarh 15.Audhelia , Adholia, 
Adhoria , Adhoulia   
Inclusion as synonym  of Audhelia 
( Sl. No.1)  
18.08.2011 
6. Bihar 
 
 
16.Tanti ( Tatwa)  Inclusion as synonym of Pan 
Sawasi, Panr ( Sl. No. 20) 
19.09.2011 
17. Kanu Inclusion as new entry 08.12.2011 
18. Prajapati ( Kumhar) Inclusion as new entry 10.04.2012 

31 
 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
STATEMENT SHOWING DETAILS OF THE PROPOSALS PENDING WITH THE 
NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR SCHEDULED CASTES  
 
State Name of community Proposal in brief Date of 
reference 
made to 
NCSC 
1 2 3 4 
Odisha 1. Gaudia Kela Inclusion as synonym of Kela, 
Sapua Kela, etc. ( Sl. No. 45) 
02.03.2010* 
2. Adhuria Domb, Adhuria 
Dom 
Inclusion as synonym  of Dom, 
Dombo, etc. (Sl. No. 27)  
02.03.2010* 
3. Rajak, Rajaka Inclusion as synonym of 
Dhoba, Dhobi (Sl. No. 26) 
02.03.2010* 
4.Betra Inclusion  as  synonym  of Turi 
(Sl. No. 91) 
02.03.2010* 
5. Patratanti Deletion from Scheduled Caste 
list (Sl. No. 76) 
09.08.2011 
6. Bariki 
Deletion from Scheduled Caste 
list (Sl. No. 8) 
09.08.2011 
7. Kummari 
Deletion from Scheduled Caste 
list (Sl. No. 49) 
09.08.2011 
 
*The ethnographic information along with recommendation of the State Government 
and comments of Registrar General of India has been again furnished to NCSC vide 
this Ministry's letter dated 18.06.2012, as requested by NCSC vide their letter No. 
7/Inclusion& Exclusion/2012-SSW-I, dated 13.06.2012.  
  

32 
 
 
ANNEXURE - VII  
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 13 TH 
JUNE, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room  'E',  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Shri Premchand Guddu 
5. Dr. Manda Jagannath  
6. Shri Mohan Jena 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
11. Shri Baishnab Parida 
12. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  -  Additional Director 

33 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT/ORGANIZATION 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name 
 
Designation & Organization  
 
1. Shri K.M. Acharya Secretary,  
Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
2. 
 
Shri Sanjeev Kumar 
 
Joint Secretary, 
Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
3. Dr. C. Chandramauli Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner 
4. Dr. R.C. Sethi Additional Registrar General of 
India 
5. Dr. Pratibha Kumari Assistant Registrar General 
6. Shri T. Theethan Joint Secretary, 
National Commission for 
Scheduled Castes (NCSC) 
 
1. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the Members and representatives of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment to the sitting of the Committee. He 
informed that "The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012  
which seeks to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 has been 
referred by Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha to the Committee for examination and Report.  
He requested the Secretary to brief the Committee on the contents of  the aforesaid Bill 
as well as its objectives and reasons and also drew his attention to the provisions of 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.   

34 
 
 
2. The Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment explained the 
various provisions of the Bill as well as the background and need for the proposed 
legislation. 
3. Thereafter, the Members raised various queries, which inter-alia pertained to 
inclusion of synonyms of some castes from the States of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha and Tripura in the Constit ution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and deletion of 
a caste from the list of Scheduled Castes for the State of Sikkim as given under the 
Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978, criterion and parameters for 
identification of Scheduled Castes, t ime taken by various agencies in clearance of the 
proposals by State Governments for inclusion/deletion of a caste, number of such 
proposals pending with Registrar General of India, National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes, Ministry of Social Justice and E mpowerment and those referred back to State 
Governments.  An issue regarding inclusion of 'Dewar' caste in the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 was also raised.  
4. The representatives of the Ministry responded to the queries raised by the 
Members to the extent possible.  The Hon'ble Chairman directed them to furnish replies 
to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting by 20th June, 2012. 
5. The Hon‟ble Chairman thanked the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry 
for giving valuable information to the Committee on the subject and expressing their 
views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
 
 

35 
 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

36 
 
 
ANNEXURE - VIII 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON FRIDAY, 20 TH JULY, 
2012 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
'G.074',  Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
6. Shri Mohan Jena 
7. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
8. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
9. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
11. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
12. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
15. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
16. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
17. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
18. Shri Baishnab Parida 
19. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
20. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
 

37 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Deepak Mahna  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri P.C. Choulda  -  Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT/ORGANIZATION 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation & Organization 
1. Shri Anil Goswami Secretary, Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
2. Shri Anoop Kumar Srivastava Additional Secretary, Ministry 
of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Joint Secretary, Ministry of  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
4. Dr. C. Chandramouli Registrar General & Census 
Commissioner 
5. Dr. R.C. Sethi Additional Registrar General 
of India 
6. Dr. Pratibha Kumari Assistant Registrar General  
7. Dr. Shyam S. Aggarwal Secretary, National 
Commission for Scheduled 
Castes 
 
 

38 
 
 
At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, Registrar General of India and National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes to the sitting of the Committee and d rew their attention to the 
provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The 
Committee then took their evidence on "The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Orders 
(Amendment) Bill, 2012".  
2.  The representatives of the Ministry o f Social Justice and Empowerment and 
Registrar General of India (RGI) clarified the queries put forth by Hon'ble Chairman and 
Members of the Committee on the criteria and procedure for selection of castes for 
inclusion/exclusion in Scheduled Castes list, t he status of approval of various proposals 
sent by the State Governments  and  reasons for the delay in their clearance and 
scrutiny of the proposals  by the Registrar General based on the available literature and 
data and financial aspect of inclusion of castes.   
3. Hon‟ble Chairman then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment, Registrar General of India (RGI) and National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes for giving valuable information to the Committee on the Bill  an d 
expressing their views in a free and frank manner on various issues.                         
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
    
The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

39 
 
 
ANNEXURE - IX  
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 22 nd 
AUGUST, 2012 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Committee Room 'C',  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
3. Shri Devidhan Besra 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
6. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
11. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
12. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri C.S. Joon - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain - Director  
3. Shri P.C. Choulda -  Additional Director 

40 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft Twenty -eighth Report of the Committee on "The Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012" pertaining to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration of the draft Twenty -eight Report 
and adopted the same without any amendment.  The Committee authorized the 
Chairman to finalize the draft Report and present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
  

41 
 
 
APPENDIX  
 
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Sl. No.              Para                       Observations/Recommendations 
(1)                      (2)                                                (3) 
1. 1.26 The Committee note that "The Constitution (Scheduled 
Castes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2012" as introduced in Lok 
Sabha on 21st May, 2012 seeks to insert certain castes in "The 
Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950" in respect of 
States of Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tripura and to 
omit caste „Majhi‟ (Nepali) from  "The Constitution (Sikkim) 
Scheduled Castes Order, 1978".  The proposals for 
modification in the Scheduled Castes Order, 1950 and the 
Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 have 
been duly processed by the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in consultation with the concerned State 
Governments, Regis trar General of India and the National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes.  The Bill seeks to introduce 
inclusion of synonym of 2 castes  in Kerala, 1 in Madhya 
Pradesh, 4 in Odisha, 3 in Tripura in The Constitution  
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950" and deleti on of a caste from 
"The Constitution (Sikkim) Scheduled Castes Order, 1978" and 
also the change of name of the State of Orissa to Odisha.  The 
Committee, approve the amendments in the Bill in its entirety.   
 
2. 1.27 The Committee are constrained to note that data on the 
estimated population of the communities proposed to be 
included in Scheduled Castes list through this Bill is not 
available with the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
however, the State Gover nments have reported that these 
communities are socially, educationally and economically 
backward.  The Registrar General of India informed during 
evidence that after the results of socio -economic and caste 
Census conducted in 2011 are released, which is l ikely by 
March, 2013, the details of population figures of every caste 
would be available.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should try to make available as early as possible 
the caste -wise data as per the new Census so that socio -
economic details of each caste are readily available for use by 
the various Government agencies especially for determining 

42 
 
 
the  social and economic impact of the of inclusion/exclusion of 
castes in the SC lists.   
In regard to the financial aspect of the Bill, the exact 
amount of expenditure on the inclusion of synonyms of 10 
castes has not been shown in the Financial Memoranda of the 
Bill.  During the evidence, the Secretary also admitted that this 
would entail some additional recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure on account of benefits of schemes meant for 
development of Scheduled Castes to which the persons 
belonging to the newly added communities will become entitled 
as a result of this Bill.  It was also informed that in the Financial 
Memorandum it was not  possible to estimate with any degree 
of precision the likely expenditure which would have to be 
incurred on this account due to non -availability of Caste -wise 
data.   The Committee are in no doubt that such Caste -wise 
data could be obtained by the Governm ent from 2011 Census 
records and can be used in preparing Financial Memorandum 
of the Bill.  At this stage, the Committee can only hope that the 
Government will take appropriate steps to make use of Caste -
wise data and show expenditure in the Bills brought  out in 
future on this subject matter. 
 
3. 1.28 The Committee are constrained to note that as many as 17, 18 
and 7 proposals from State Governments for amendment in 
the SC orders are pending with Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, Registrar General of India and National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes respectively. The 
Committee have been informed that there is a specified 
procedure for deciding claims for inclusion in and exclusion 
from and other modification in the list of Scheduled Castes 
requiring consultation with the above mentioned agencies.  
Since the whole process is long drawn and sometimes it may 
take many years for the State Government proposals to reach 
the Bill stage, the Committee, wish to emphasis that a sound 
system needs to b e put in place under which each 
organization/agency involved i.e. State Government, Registrar 
General of India (RGI), National Commission for Scheduled 
Castes (NCSC) and the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment are made to follow strict time schedule  to 
process the proposals received so that the benefits may reach 
the intended populace in shortest possible time.  The 
Committee hope that the Government will take appropriate 
steps in right direction. 
 

43 
 
 
4. 1.29 The Committee have been apprised that the office of Registrar 
General of India does not conduct field based anthropological 
studies for getting updated information on the socio -economic 
and ethnic profile of the caste proposed to be included in the 
Scheduled Caste list.  The information on the concerned caste 
are taken from the old and contemporary published 
anthropological and ethnographic literature of repute as well as 
Census Reports of pre -independence period besides the 
information furnished by the Sta te Government/Union Territory 
Administration are also taken into account.  The Committee are 
unhappy to note that RGI is referring to old literature of pre -
independence era in determining the socio -economic status of 
castes for clearing proposals for inclu sion/exclusion of castes 
and there is no new literature on the demographic and 
economic status of castes.  The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Government should collect and use 
updated data on economic and social status of the various 
Castes for processing new proposals for inclusion/exclusion of 
Castes in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 as 
amended from time to time.  
 
 