1 
 
 
9 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants for the year 2009-2010 of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka) 


2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2009-2010) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment on Demands for Grants for the year 2009-2010 of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.8.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  19.8.2010 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka) 
 
9 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
                                                                     
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….        
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                                        
        
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by       
the Government……………………………………………………                     
  
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not         
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……                      
                                         
 CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies            
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..                               
     
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies            
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                                   
     
ANNEXURES 
                                                            
ANNEXURE I Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty Third Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment – 
Present Status of Implementation 
 
ANNEXURE II Planning Commission order constituting the Task Force to Re -
examine and revised the guidelines of scheduled Caste Sub -Plan & 
Tribal Sub Plan (SCSP and TSP) 
 
ANNEXURE III Details of BPL SC families covered during 2005 -06 under the Scheme 
of SCA to SCSP 
 
ANNEXURE IV Salient Features of Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY)  
ANNEXURE V Centrally-sponsored Pilot Scheme of 
Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) –Guidelines 
 
ANNEXURE VI Release of Central Assistance under Centrally Sponsored Pilot 
Scheme of PMAGY 
 
ANNEXURE VII Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee  on 
Social  Justice and Empowerment held on   12.8.2010                   
 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on   the                     
recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  
Lok Sabha)  
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2009-2010) 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri T.R. Baalu# 
3. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal* 
4. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
5. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
6. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
7. Smt. Rama Devi 
8. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
9. Shri Premchand Guddu  
10. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
11. Shri Baliram Jadhav   
12. Dr. Manda Jagannath   
13. Shri Mohan Jena  
14. Shri Baliram Kashyap 
15. Shri Basori Singh Masram  
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
17. Shri Yashvir Singh**  
18. Dr. N. Sivaprasad  
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
21. Vacant  
22. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
23. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya$ 
24. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya$$ 
25. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
26. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
27. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
28. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee@ 
30. Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
31. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav@@ 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
#Shri T.R. Baalu nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 11.1.2010. 
*Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 23.9.2009. 
**Shri Yashvir Singh ceased to be a Member of Committee w.e.f. 13.10.2009. 
$Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya expired on 21.12.2009. 
@Shri Abdul Wahab Peevee ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 2.4.2010. 
$$ Smt. Jharna Das Baidya nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 26.4.2010. 
@@ Shri Nand Kishore Yadav ceased to be a Member of Committee consequent upon his retirement from Rajya 
Sabha w.e.f. 4.7.2010. 

5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri. A. Mukhopadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Ninth Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants – 2009-2010 relating to the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid i n Rajya Sabha on 17 th 
December, 2009.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 8.7.2010. The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committ ee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 12.8.2010. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
12 August, 2010         Chairman, 
21 Shravana, 1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants, 2009-2010 relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
1.2 The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
17th December, 2009 .  It contained 1 9 recommendations.  Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under :- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 3.24, 3.25,  4.19, 4.36, 5.10, 6.19 and 
7.6. 
 (Total 10 – Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
(Nil - Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which re plies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been commented upon 
by the Committee in Chapter I: 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.26, 4.37 and 5.11 

8 
 
 (Total 3 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: 
 Paragraph Nos. 1.4, 4.18, 4.27, 4.48, 6.12 and 6.13 
 (Total 6 - Chapter V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the recommendations 
contained in chapter – I and final replies in respect of the recommendations 
contained in Chapter – V of the Report may be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comment. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.26) 
 
1.5 Keeping in view the poor performance of the various schemes of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, more particularly those related to educational 
empowerment and scholarship schem es, the Committee had noted that there was a 
general ignorance and lack of awareness among the target groups that such 
schemes exist for them and availing the benefits under these schemes can really 
help them cross the below poverty line.  As such, these s chemes which are there to 
make a qualitative difference in the lives of certain sections of the society have failed 
to even touch their lives.  The Committee had learnt that the people in the interior 
villages of many States are not even aware of the Babu Jagjivan Chhatrawas Yojna 
for SC/OBC Boys and Girls, Top Class Education Scheme or for that matter the 
National Overseas Scholarship Scheme. Even though so many schemes are being 
implemented by the Ministry, the fact remains that very few persons know about 

9 
 
these schemes. The Committee had, therefore, recommended  that the Ministry 
should give wide publicity to all their schemes so that the benefits of these scheme s 
accrue to those sections of society for whom these are meant for.  Publicity should 
be given about various schemes in the vernacular Press, regional newspapers. 
Awareness campaigns should be organized in schools, educational institutions so as 
to generate awareness about the schemes amongst the target groups.  While doing 
so, the Ministry may vigorously pursue the implementation of the legal provisions 
discouraging/banning the use of the word „Harijan‟.   
 
Reply of the Government  
 
1.6 Publicity of Minist ry‟s schemes is being done through the website of the 
Ministry; advertisements in newspapers & a radio programme namely Sanwarti 
Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen . For giving wide publicity to its schemes a Radio Broadcast 
is done on every Sunday and Tuesday through different channels.  
It is however noteworthy that the Schemes of Post -matric Scholarships for SC 
and OBC has already covered about 38 and 10 lakhs students respectively. Under 
the schemes of Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna for SC students and Hostels 
for OBC students, the proposals are invited from, and assistance is released to State 
Governments/UT Administrations. The locations of SC hostels run by the State 
Governments are well known in the respective local areas, and state governments 
suitably public ize them. The Scheme of Top Class Education for SC students is 
meant only for SC students studying in selected premier institutions which are 
requested every year to send scholarship proposals in respect of eligible students. 
The Scheme of Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship is administered by the UGC, which 
invites applications for it in a well publicized manner. Newspaper advertisements are 

10 
 
issued by the Ministry inviting the applications under the Scheme of National 
Overseas Scholarship every year.  
A circu lar dated 10 th February, 1982, had been issued to the State 
Governments/UT Administrations requesting them to issue instructions to the 
concerned authorities not to use the word “Harijan” in the Scheduled Caste 
certificates.  
 
1.7 Keeping in view the poor performance of  various education related 
schemes, the Committee had recommende d that the Ministry should give  wide 
publicity to all their schemes more particularly in the vernacula r press and 
regional newspapers and organize awareness campaigns in schools,  
educational institutions . The Committee had also recommended that  while 
doing so the Ministry should vigorously pursue the implementation of the legal 
provisions discouraging/banning the use of the word „Harijan‟. From the 
Action Taken Reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that t o this 
effect the Ministry had issued a circular on 10th February, 1982 to the State 
Governments/UT Administrations requesting them to issue instruction to the 
concerned authorities not to use the w ord „Harijan‟ in scheduled caste 
certificates. The Committee observe that t he circular issued way back in 1982 
is very old which has lost its sanctity and purpose leading to its non -
compliance by States/organizations/institutions. No further  step/follow up 
action has been taken by the Ministry discouraging/dissuading the use of the 
word Harijan.  As such, t here is widespread use of the word „Harijan‟ across 
the country deprecating the status of the underprivileged sections of the 
society.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to issue fresh 
guidelines, instructions to States/UTs directing them to strictly ensure the 

11 
 
non-use of the word „Harijan‟ not only in SC certificates but also otherwise.   In 
case States/UTs fail to comply with the  direction the Gover nment should 
consider taking punitive action against those States/UTs. Steps/action taken in 
this regard may be intimated to the Committee within three months of 
presentation of this Report.    
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.37) 
1.8 The Committee had observed that during the year 2008 -09, as against the 
boys‟ hostels, the Government could construct more number of hostels for SC girls. 
The reason advanced by the Ministry was that the States had sent more number of 
proposals for Hostels for SC girls as the pattern for funding for hostels for girls ha d 
been changed and not many States sent proposals for hostels for boys because of 
the requirement of 50% committed liabilities on the part of State Governments.  The 
Committee strongly fe lt that the 50% co mmitted liability in respect of hostel for SC 
boys should be done away with and the funding pattern for hostels for SC boys 
should also be changed from 50% to 100% or at least from 50% to 75% so as to 
enable more number of States to come out with viable pr oposals for hostels for SC 
boys. At the same time, the Committee had desired  that the Government should 
explore the feasibility of public -private partnership in construction and maintenance 
of the hostels.   
Reply of the Government 
1.9 The Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana was revised in the year 2008  for 
providing 100% Central Assistance for girls‟ hostels. There is no proposal to revise 
the scheme for boys‟ hostels at present. The present plan outlay of the Ministry also 
does not permit the liberaliza tion in the funding pattern. This matter would however 

12 
 
be examined during the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17). The Scheme is being 
implemented through the State Governments/UT Administrations and the Central 
and State Universities/Institutions are being provi ded central assistance as per the 
provision of the scheme, both for fresh construction of hostel buildings and for the 
expansion of the existing hostel facilities. Under the existing scheme, NGOs and 
deemed universities in the private sector having good tr ack record are also eligible 
for central assistance, though  only for the extension of their existing hostel facilities. 
The responsibility for maintenance of hostels vests with the State Governments/UT 
Administrations and it seems advisable to provide ade quate degree of freedom to 
them in deciding the manner in which they would like to maintain the hostels.  
1.10 The Committee had observed that under the „Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana‟ as against the construction of more number of girl‟s 
hostels, only a limited number of boy‟s hostels could be constructed due to 
the existing provision of 50% committed liability for States/UTs . Therefore, the 
Committee in their First Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) had 
recommended that the funding pattern for construction of boys hostel should 
also be changed from 50% to 100% or at least from 50% to 75%  since many 
States are not sending the proposals due to the 50% committed liability in 
case of boy‟s hostels .  The Committee are not happ y with  the reply  of the 
Ministry in this regard that the scheme having been revised in 2008, there is no 
proposal to revise the scheme for boys hostels at present and also the present 
outlay of the Ministry does not permit the liberalization in the funding  pattern.  
The Committee are of the view that SC boys are as much in need of the hostel 
facilities as of the SC girls and the negligence in construction of hostels for 
boys living in the remotest areas  due to 50% committed liability is detrimental 

13 
 
to the w elfare of SC boys .  Ther efore, the Committee recommend  that the 
Ministry should review the funding pattern of the scheme to make it somewhat 
flexible in order to enable the financially weak States/UTs to send more 
proposals for construction of hostels for boys under the scheme .  Further, 
while the Committee are in agreement with the Ministry‟s contention that 
adequate degree of freedom needs to be given to States in deciding the 
manner of maintaining the hostel, the Committee at the same time feel that at 
the time of sanctioning the hostels the Ministry should direct the States/UTs to 
ensure minimum standards in t he hostels in terms of facility and  hygiene and 
fresh funds should be released to only those States/institutions which adhere 
to this norm.      
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 5.11) 
1.11 The Committee had observed that the NBCFDC under its Education Loan – 
„New Aakansha Scheme‟ extends loans to the backward Classes for pursuing 
general/ professional technical education or training at graduate and higher level.  
Financial assistance for project linked training for u pgradation of technical and 
entrepreneurial skills are also provided to eligible members of the other Backward 
Classes living below the double poverty line under the scheme. The Committee were 
constrained to note that the number of beneficiaries under the Education Loan 
Scheme had reduced from 2801 in 2007 -08 to only 1319 during the year 2008 -09. 
On the reasons for slow pace of implementation of the scheme, the Committee were 
informed that at present the ceiling of annual family income of beneficiaries bein g 
very low, i.e., Rs. 55000, a large section of meritorious students of the Backward 
Classes could not get benefit of the scheme. The Committee have also learnt that 
the proposal for revising the income ceiling from Rs. 55000 to Rs. 2.25 lakh is being 

14 
 
examined and once this is raised more number of OBC students would be eligible for 
the benefit under the education loan. The Committee were also of the view that the 
ceiling of level of income as it exists at present is very low and unrealistic 
considering the  consumer price index. Therefore, the Committee desire d that the 
Ministry should revise the guideline of the scheme at the earliest and raise the 
income ceiling to Rs.2.25 lakh so that the momentum of the scheme does not slow 
down and more number of beneficiaries are able to avail the benefits of the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 The income limit for the beneficiaries was kept at „below the poverty line‟ at 
the time of inception of the Corporation.  Subsequently, the income limit was revised 
to „belo w double the poverty line in view of the Planning Commission‟s Press 
Release on „Poverty Estimates for 1999-2000 dated 22.2.2001.   
The issue of enhancement in the annual family income of the beneficiaries up 
to Rs 2.25 lakh was last placed by the NBCFDC b efore the Board of Directors in its 
75th Board Meeting held on 26.6.2009. After the approval of the Board, the proposal 
was forwarded to the Ministry in August, 2009. As the present income limit is based 
on the poverty line, Ministry has requested the Planning Commission to intimate the 
latest p overty estimates to enable us to revise the family income limit of 
beneficiaries. The enhancement in the annual family income of the beneficiaries 
shall be considered immediately on receipt of the latest poverty line estimates from 
the Planning Commission.  
 
1.13 Having observed the slow pace of implementation of the Education Loan 
– „New Aakansha Scheme‟  of the NBCFDC where the number of beneficiaries 
was very low due to the low income ceiling i.e. Rs. 55000, the Committee had 

15 
 
desired the Ministry to revise the existing guidelines and raise the ceiling from 
Rs. 55000 to Rs. 2.25 lakh.  From the action taken reply of Ministry  the 
Committee understand that the Ministry have taken up the matter with the 
Planning Commission since the income limit is based on po verty line and 
requested the Planning Commission to intimate the latest poverty estimates to 
revise the income limit of beneficiaries.  Assuming that the  latest poverty 
estimates should be readily available with the Planning Commission , the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to obtain the latest figures /estimates at 
once from the Planning Commission and work on revising the income ceiling 
limit for the beneficiaries to make it more flexible and bring more number of 
beneficiaries under the fold of the scheme. The Committee may be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard within three months of presentation of this 
Report. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE  
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No.3.21) 
2.1 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
has not received adequate attention of the Planning Commission as far as the 
budgetary allocation is concerned.  A quick glance at the combined figures both Plan 
and Non-Plan reveals that while annual budgetary allocation to the Ministry was Rs. 
2200 crore in the year 2007 -08, it has increased only marginally to Rs. 2400 crore in 
2008-09 and then to Rs. 2500 crore during 2009 -10.  The Committee feel that this 
token increase in the allocation to the Ministry over the past three years does not 
correspond with the budgetary/resource requirement under various schemes being 
implemented by the Ministry.  The Committee are given to understand that as 
against an amount o f Rs. 5000 crore asked for by the Ministry in its annual plan 
proposals, the Planning Commission have sanctioned only half of the amount.  The 
Ministry have learnt that the Planning Commission did not consider the budgetary 
allocation of this Ministry to t he extent asked for as the requirements of flagship 
schemes such as Sarva Shiksha Abiyan, ICDS, NREGP etc. under other Ministries 
were so huge that it was not possible to accommodate the request of Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment for higher allo cation during 2009 -10.  Though the 
Ministry have maintained that they have made strenuous efforts in persuading the 
Planning Commission for increased budgetary allocation, the Committee feel that the 
Ministry have failed to convince the Planning Commission  for increased allocation.  
This is more so because if the requirement of other poverty alleviation schemes is 
huge as per Planning Commission‟s reasoning, it is with the same logic that the 
budgetary allocation of this Ministry should be stepped up as the  target group of this 

17 
 
Ministry is more than 60% of the country‟s population covering various 
disadvantaged sections of the society.  Being a large Ministry with vast jurisdiction of 
work, it has to cater to the multifaceted developmental needs of large sec tions of the 
society such as SCs, OBCs, People with Disabilities, Senior Citizens and victims of 
drug abuse.  The financial allocation under both plan and non -plan heads is not 
commensurate with the mandate of the Ministry.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should gear up its machinery and approach the 
Planning Commission in a more convincing and forceful manner for an enhanced 
allocation urgently so as to enable them to fulfil their mandate resourcefully and 
more effectively.  The Commi ttee desire that in case the Planning Commission 
remains unconvinced, the detailed response of the Commission may be sent to the 
Committee for examination. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The matter regarding increase i n the Gross Budgetary Support to  the Ministry 
of Social Justice & Empowerment was taken up with the Planning Commission and 
Ministry of Finance repeatedly, including at the highest level . Consequently, the plan 
budget of the Ministry has been increased to Rs.4500 crore in 2010-11 as compared 
to Rs.2500 crore in 2009-10, which represents an increase of 80% over BE 2009-10  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.22) 
2.3 The Committee are distressed to note that some of the very important and 
core schemes of the Ministry such as Special Central Assistance to Scheduled 
Castes Sub -Plan, Deen Dayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme, the Scheme of 

18 
 
Assistance to Disabled for Purchase/Fitting of Aids and Appliances, Post -Matric 
Scholarship scheme and Coaching and Allied schemes are going to be adversely 
affected due to non-increase in the budgetary allocation of the Ministry as well as for 
these schemes.  Most importantly, it has come to the notice of the Committee that 
because of budgetary constraints the Ministry are not able to undertake a revision in 
their Post-matric Scholarship Scheme.  The Scheme of Pre-matric Scholarship for all 
Scheduled Caste students for which the Planning Commission has already given in 
principle approval could not take off till now because of inadequate allocation to the 
Ministry.  The financial implication of revision/launch of schemes are high and 
resources required to meet the need under various schemes are huge whereas the 
actual amount sanct ioned to the Ministry by the Government of India is grossly 
inadequate.  The Ministry are also not taking the schemes seriously and not paying 
the requisite attention to its schemes on the pretext that most of their schemes are 
only in the form of gap -fillers.  The Committee regard financial support for 
progressive stages of education as critical input for social justice and empowerment, 
especially in a context where public -private partnership has been introduced for 
education.  In order to reverse the abov e situation, the Committee, urge the Ministry 
to vigorously pursue and take up the matter at the highest level and brief the 
Planning Commission in the right perspective so as to get an enhanced allocation for 
the Ministry at least during the next financia l year so that revision of its various 
schemes may be done without further delay and the purposes of the scholarship 
schemes do not suffer due to inadequate allocation.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Vigorous efforts were made by the Ministry to have the Plan allocation 
enhanced substantially, including at the highest level.   Consequently the Plan 

19 
 
allocation for 2010-11 has been enhanced by 80% over the previous years‟ outlay, to 
Rs. 4500 crore.  The need for the enhanced outlay was projected inter alia, to enable 
revision of the post matric scholarship schemes for SCs and OBCs as well as to 
provide a boost to the schemes in the disability sector.    
 The Plan allocation for the Post matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled 
Castes have  increased from Rs.750.00  crore in 2009 -10 to Rs.1700.00 Crore  in 
2010-11, and for the Post matric Scholarship Scheme for OBCs from 135.00 crore to 
Rs. 350.00 crore . With this, revision of these two schemes is being undertak en 
during the current year, 2010-11.  
 There is also a 73% increase in the plan budget for the Disability Sector for 
2010-11 over the previous year and an amount of Rs. 450 crore h as been allocated 
for various schemes in the disability sector including , inter alia, Deen Dayal Disabled 
Rehabilitation Scheme & Scheme for Assistance for fitting aids and appliances. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.23) 
2.5    The Committee note that during the year 2008 -09, funds to the tune of Rs. 
39.30 crore remained unutilized by the Ministry. Most of the amount remained 
unutilized was from the amount earmarked for the North -Eastern Region. Out of the 
total Rs.94.75 crore  earmarked for the North -Eastern Region, only Rs.55.37 crore 
could be utilized and funds to the tune of Rs.39.30 crore remained un - utilized. The 
reason for underutilization in the North -Eastern Region cited by the Ministry was that 
adequate number of proposals could not be received from this region. North Eastern 
Region being a conglomeration of a number of States constitutes a major segment of 

20 
 
Scheduled Caste population. Apart from the fact that there is existence of a large 
number of poor and destitute population in the North East Region, the Region is also 
gripped with drug addicted population reeling under the spell of drugs and narcotic 
substances because of its geographic proximity to neighbouring countries. As such, 
much need to be done as far as the  harmonious development of the Region and 
bringing its population to the mainstream is concerned. In this context, the 
Committee observe that it is very unfortunate that sufficient numbers of proposals 
are not coming from the North -eastern Region. The Comm ittee, therefore, earnestly 
desire that the Ministry should make some extra efforts in finding out the reasons as 
to why proposals are not coming from the Region. If needed, the Government should 
prepare sample pilot proposals on various projects for distr ibution among the 
implementing Agencies. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should 
impress upon the States of North Eastern Region to come out with viable proposals 
and take necessary steps to ensure uninterrupted progress in the implementation of 
planned projects/schemes so that funds earmarked are utilized within the time frame 
envisaged and intended benefits reach the target groups.  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The following steps are being taken to improve utilization of funds in the NE 
region :- 
a) To boost the expenditure in the region and to identify the problems being 
faced by the State Governments in utilizing the funds, the Ministry has been 
organizing meetings with Social Welfare Secretaries of NER States , as well 
as representatives of non -Government organizations in the region for the 
last two years. During the year  2009-10, such a meeting was organised on 
12.11.2009 at Guwahati to discuss the overall low utilization of funds 

21 
 
allocated to NE states under vari ous schemes of the Ministry including the 
issues relating to implementation of various schemes of the Minis try of 
SJ&E. The thrust of the meeting was to ensure optimum utilization of funds 
made available to NER states through schemes/programmes of the Mini stry 
so that the most   disadvantaged sections of society are not deprived of the 
benefits of these schemes. The State Governments were impressed upon to 
furnish an adequate number of proposal s to the Ministry.  As a result of 
these efforts, a substantial number of proposals were received  from the 
North Easter n Region.  Consequently the over all utilisation of funds by 
North Eastern States rose to 74% in 2009-10 as compared to   58% in 2008-
09. Efforts to ensure even better utilisation in future will continue. 
b) Additional Secretary (SJ&E), had requested the Chief Secretaries of  all the 
States in NER in February, 2009 to advise the Welfare Secretaries of the 
States to examine the requirement of funds under various schemes of the 
Ministry of SJ&E and send the proposals under various schemes urgently so 
that the funds earmarked for the North Eastern Region are fully utilized.  
c) The Secretary (SJ&E) had requested the Secretary, Ministry of DONER and 
Secretary North Eastern Council in April 2009 to help and guide in improving 
utilization of Plan funds earmarked for the NER.  
d) The Ministry will continue to seek  help of the Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region (DONER)  and the North Eastern Council, as done in  
the  past,   to impress upon the NE States to send  complete proposals on 
an adequate scale under the various schemes implemented in the region by 
this Ministry 
e) In order to generate awareness, details of various schemes implemented by 
the Ministry have been placed on its website. Further, a radio programme 

22 
 
namely ‘Sanwarti Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen’  on various schemes of the 
Ministry is being broadcast in all regional languages , including those  of the 
NE States, through All India Radio. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.5, Para No. 3.24) 
2.7 Most of the schemes of the Ministry are deemed to be demand driven and the 
States are the implementing agencies for these schemes.  They can in fact be 
demand driven only if supply is assured.  Due to severe financial constraints many 
States are not able to provide their matching share of 50% for various schemes.  
Keeping this in mind, the Committee in their earlier reports had recommended for 
changing the funding pattern for some of the schemes.  The Committee are happy to 
note that some success has been achieved in this regard and in the last financial 
year the funding pattern for Pre -matric Scholarship for SC Children of those 
Engaged in Unclean Occupatio ns and Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana for 
Hostels for Girls has been changed from partial funding to 100% funding by the 
Central Government.  The Committee hope that the performance of these two 
schemes would definitely improve with this change in the  funding pattern.  At the 
same time, the Committee do not support the Ministry‟s stand that they are not going 
to send further proposals for 100% funding for more number of schemes to the 
Planning Commission due to lack of adequate allocation.  As also rev ealed in the 
recently held Welfare Minister‟s Conference, the State Governments are still facing 
budgetary constraints in providing their committed liability and leaving the matter for 
the States themselves to take it up with the Finance Commission will no t suffice.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the approach of the Ministry should 

23 
 
continue to be positive and they should not show any laxity in insisting the Planning 
Commission for change of funding pattern from 50% to 100% in respect of more 
number of schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The North Eastern Region States have already been exempted from bearing 
the burden of the committed liability  under the schemes of Post-matric Scholarship 
for SC students and Pre -matric and Post -matric Scholarship Schemes for OBC 
students. With effect from 1 .4.2010, the Government has revised , inter alia,  the 
funding pattern under the Scheme of Hostel for OBC Boys and Girls from 50% to 
90% of central assistance in case of NER States including Sikkim.  
The plan budget of the Ministry has been increased to Rs.4500 crore in 2010 -
11 as compa red to Rs.2500 cror e in 2009 -10. H owever, t he enhanced allocation 
during 2010-11 is barely enough to meet the requirement of revision of Scholarship 
Schemes for Scheduled Castes and OBC s, Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojna, 
Special Central Assistance to SCSP, Rajeev Gandhi Nat ional Fellowship, and Deen 
Dayal Disabled Rehabilitation Schemes . The issue regarding change of funding 
pattern of plan schemes from 50% to 100% will be considered during formulation of 
the XII Five Year Plan.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1-23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6, Para No. 3.25) 
 
2.9 The Committee notes that utilization certificates (UCs) are not furnished at the 
appropriate time to the Ministry by the Implementing Agencies. They deplore the 
attitude of senior officials of various State Governments and the implementing 
agencies for not furnishing the Utilization Certificates as the figures show that 80 

24 
 
UCs involving an amount of Rs. 670.50 lakh are still outstanding  /pending in respect 
of grants a s on 1.7.2009. The Committee also observe that the provision of not 
considering the proposals of those States from where the UCs are pending and also 
deducting an amount equivalent to pending UCs in respect of those states whose 
proposals are considered has not yielded any positive result.  Rather, the Committee 
feel that the Ministry should, as per the General Financial Rules (GFR) instructions, 
closely and actively monitor flow of funds and instantly try to recover the unutilized 
amount along with minimum  interest so that the States and Implementing Agencies 
are in some way compelled to utilize the disbursed money in a time bound manner. 
This will not only ensure a tight monitoring mechanism but also help in liquidation of 
pending UCs. The Committee also u rge the Ministry to sensitize the senior officials 
of the State Governments on the serious implications of their casual approach on the 
overall performance with regard to development of SCs/OBCs. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard within six months of 
submission of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Ministry is pursing with the implementing agencies for sending the 
utilization certificate s under the various schemes  and monitoring the pendency of 
UCs from time to time.  Funds are released to the State Governments only after it is 
ensured that the utilization certificates for the previous releases are received.  The 
matter was  taken up with State Governments dur ing the Conference of State 
Ministers/Secretaries of Social Justice to sensitize them to the need for furnishing  
utilization certificates on time  under various schemes . The State Governments/UT 
Administrations have also been requested at the level of Chief Se cretary in June, 
2010 to clear the backlog of the Utilization Certificates pending with them. The 

25 
 
Ministry will continue to closely monitor the pendency of utilization of certificates and 
take appropriate action to bring it down.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 4.19) 
2.11 The Committee find that the data on the number of SC population who have 
able to cross the poverty line after availing the benefits of the S cheduled Caste Sub 
Plan is an important prerequisite for proper assessment of the effectiveness of the 
scheme. It is in this context that the Committee in their Thirty -Third Report had 
recommended that the Ministry should ascertain the number of families w ho have 
crossed the BPL line after availing the benefits of the scheme. The Committee, 
however, are surprised to note that so far assessment regarding number of 
beneficiaries who were able to cross the poverty line has been received from only 
eight States and this crucial data is still not coming from all the States. The 
Committee wonders as to how the Ministry is going to assess the impact of this 
scheme without this vital data. Since the self -employment projects in all the States 
must have been functional  by now, the Committee once again reiterates their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to direct all the States to provide the data on 
the number of beneficiaries without further delay. The Committee may be apprised of 
the progress in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 To assess the impact of the Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan on assisted beneficiaries, the concerned State/UT 
Governments receiving funds und er the Scheme were requested to furnish the data 

26 
 
of beneficiaries assisted in the year 2005-06 who were able to cross the poverty line. 
The defaulting States/UTs were reminded on 15.02.2010 at the level of Chief 
Secretary to provide the relevant informatio n.  Information has now been received 
from 11 States. Details of BPL families who have been reported by the States to 
have crossed the poverty line during 2005-06 under the scheme of SCA to SCSP are 
at Annex III. Eight States from which partial or no infor mation has been received are 
being persuaded. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11, Para No. 4.36) 
2.13 The Committee note that under the scheme of Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana during the year 2008 -09 whereas a target of 140 was set for 
construction of SC girls hostels, the actual achievement fell far short of the target as 
only 64 hostels were constr ucted.  Similarly, in case of boys hostels, whereas a 
target of 140 hostels was set, the Ministry could not achieve even half of this target.  
The Ministry have attributed the reasons to laying down of uniform specification   for 
hostels resulting in less number of construction of hostels.  The Committee, 
however, are not convinced by the reply of the Ministry and feel that while there was 
a need for bringing out these specifications for better hostel facilities for SC boys and 
girls, yet the scheme should not have been left to suffer because of the procedural 
formalities with regard to modification of the guidelines and the targets should have 
been achieved.  The Committee, in this regard, have also learnt that even the C&AG 
in their Audit Para findings hav e raised serious concern over the unfruitful 
expenditure incurred under the scheme. The Committee recommend that the 

27 
 
procedural formalities with regard to the scheme should be streamlined at the 
earliest and every effort should be made to achieve the targe ts set for the current 
financial year. The Committee are also of the view that as the targets projected is 
very low the Ministry should also try to exceed the targets by more numbers under 
both the components of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 Physical norms for construction of hostels have been developed in 2009 -10 in 
consultation with School of Planning and Architecture (SPA), New Delhi for the 
guidance of the implementing agencies. From 2010 -11, the targets under the 
scheme are being fixed in  term of additional hostel seats instead of number of 
hostels, as was done in the past. This is because hostels can be of different 
composition, e.g. 50 seats or 100 seats, and are therefore not comparable. About 
2150 additional seats have been created through sanction of new hostels in 2009 -10 
and a  target  of about 6000 additional seats has been set for 2010-11.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14, Para No. 5.10) 
2.15 The Committee note that the National Backward Classes Finance and 
Development Corporation (NBCFDC) is providing financial assistance to the OBC 
population at concessional rate of interest through State Channelising  Agencies 
(SCAs) for a number of viable i ncome generating activities thereby helping them to 
cross the below poverty line.  It becomes easier for the beneficiaries to avail the 
loans if the State Governments provide State Guarantee to these loans.  The 
Committee, however, find that a very discour aging and non -desirable trend has 

28 
 
developed over a period of time where many States are showing their reluctance to 
act as State Guarantor to NBCFDC loans. The Committee have learnt that   the 
States of Assam, Bihar, Manipur and Uttar Pradesh are not provi ding the state 
guarantee thereby depriving many prospective beneficiaries from availing NBCFDC 
loans.  The Committee also observe that some States are also charging guarantee 
fee (in some cases it is up to 2% charged by State Governments from State 
Channelising Agencies).  Whereas   this minimal charge is not contributing to the 
State treasuries in a substantial way, this provision is certainly acting as a deterrent 
in availing the NBCDFC loans by the OBCs. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
strongly that the Ministry should impress upon the States to act as State guarantor 
and also not to charge any guarantee fees from SCAs, so that the poor OBC people 
do not get debarred from availing NBCFDC loans.   
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The NBCFDC have pursued wi th the State Governments and State 
Channelizing Agencies to provide appropriate guarantee to cover the extent of loan 
when there is shortfall in guarantee. The issue of providing adequate guarantee by 
the State Governments was also discussed in the Nationa l Conference of Managing 
Directors of State Channelizing Agencies held on 31.7.2009 wherein SCAs were 
advised to obtain adequate state government guarantee for drawl of allocated funds. 
They were also requested to take up the matter with their state govern ment to take a 
lenient view and issue appropriate guarantee on behalf of SCAs without charging 
any guarantee fee. Besides, NBCFDC has also written separately to the Managing 
Directors of the SCAs of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim for 
arranging State Guarantee during 2009 -10. The Ministry has requested the State 
Governments at the level of Chief Secretaries vide d.o. letter dated 2.7. 2010 to 

29 
 
ensure that the State Governments provide adequate State Guarantee to the State 
Channelizing Agenci es without charging any guarantee fee so as to enable the 
eligible beneficiaries to avail of loans from NBCFDC.     
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 6.19) 
2.17 The Committee observe that though the scheme of „Incentives to Employers 
in the Private Sector for Providing Employment to Persons with Disabilities‟ was 
launched with a lot of hope and hype with the unique idea of attracting the private 
employers to emplo y more disabled people in the private sector through a 
Governmental contribution towards the employee‟s provident fund, however, all the 
expectations and enthusiasm over the scheme have died down. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the scheme has fai led miserably in sensitizing the private 
sector to the urgent need for paying attention to the employment/job related needs of 
the disabled people. The statistics made available to the Committee as well as the 
critical observation of the scheme from severa l quarters presents a very 
discouraging and gloomy picture. The justification on the poor performance of the 
scheme as advanced by the Ministry that the economy in general showed a down 
trend during the year 2008 -09 leading to such a fate of the scheme is not at all 
acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feel that though the economy showed 
a downward spiral during this period, yet the process of employment generation was 
still going on in the various sectors of the economy. While the Committee understand 
the limitations of the Ministry relating to the  „non -binding‟ and „voluntary‟ nature of 
the scheme, yet concerted efforts should have been made to at least popularize the 
„concept‟ among the private players through rigorous canvassing, widespread 

30 
 
propaganda and publicity.  The Committee feel that leaving the subject at the mercy 
of the private sector has not worked.  Since the scheme has failed to evoke any 
interest among the private sector, the Committee recommend that the performance 
of the scheme shou ld be closely watched and intensive efforts should be made to 
popularize the scheme by utilizing the entire amount earmarked for the purpose 
during the remaining period of the current year.  The Committee are of the view that 
if the scheme still fails to a ttract the private sector, the Ministry should think of 
discontinuing the scheme in its present form and make efforts to bring in a legislation 
with mandatory provisions.   
Reply of the Government 
2.18 After introduction of the scheme of Incentives to Empl oyers in the Private 
Sector for Providing Employment to Persons with Disabilities, wide publicity was 
given to it through the print and other media.  All Chief Ministers were also requested 
to publicize it and closely monitor its implementation. Other steps taken to publicize 
the scheme include : -  
 Publication of Advertisements about the scheme in newspapers periodically by 
the Ministry of Social Justice And Empowerment, Employees Provident Fund 
Organization and Employees State Insurance Corporation.  
 Recipients of National Awards in the category of Best Employers of Persons with 
Disabilities were requested individually to employ more persons with disabilities 
and publicize the scheme.  
 Meetings with representatives of employers, state governments and NGOs were 
held at Delhi and certain other state capitals (Kolkata, Hyderabad and Jaipur) to 
publicize the scheme.  

31 
 
 Ministries of Social Justice & Empowerment and Labour & Employment, the 
Employees Provident Fund Organization and the Employees State Insurance 
Corporation have prominently publicized the scheme on their websites. 
A High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) was constituted under the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of Labour &  Employment and Secretary of 
this Ministry as Co -Chairperson to monitor implementation of the Scheme.  So far 
five meetings of the Committee have been held.  Representatives of Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation o f Indian 
Industry (CII), National Association of Software and Service Companies 
(NASSCOM), Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry of India 
(ASSOCHEM) and PHD Chamber of Commerce and Industry are also invited to 
meetings of the HLMC.   
The Ministry has released funds to EPFO and ESIC to enable them to pay the 
employers‟ contribution as soon as valid claims are received and also to launch wide 
publicity of the scheme.  In  2008 -09, the Ministry incurred an expenditure of Rs. 
6.50 crore out of which Rs. 2 .00 crore was released to EPFO and Rs. 1.00 crore to 
ESSIC for publicity as well as advance towards employers contribution. According to 
feedback received in HLMC meetings and from EPFO and ESIC, employers in the 
private sector do not find the scheme attra ctive enough. Suggestions have been 
received for providing additional incentives such as exemption in income tax, as well 
as customs and excise duties for the employers. 
The Ministry of Finance has been requested to consider providing additional 
incentives which will be more attractive and help in motivating the private sector to 
employ large number of persons with disabilities. 

32 
 
Performance of the Scheme is being regularly reviewed in conjunction with 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and corrective steps w ill be taken as 
appropriate.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 7.6) 
2.19 The Committee have  been informed that in pursuance of the Finance 
Minister‟s Budget announcement, the Ministry are planning to launch the Pradhan 
Mantri Aadarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) on pilot basis to cover 1000 villages with 
more than 50% SC population and an allocation of R s. 100 crore has been 
earmarked for the scheme during the year 2009 -10.  The Committee are happy to 
note that for the first time a serious thought has been given for  area oriented 
integrated development of villages with SC concentration through convergent  
implementation of  existing Central and State schemes. While the Committee 
appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry, the actual impact of the scheme in 
achieving integrated development of area having SC people concentration will be 
seen only after it is actually implemented. The Committee recommend that while 
every effort should be made to finalize the intricate details of the scheme at the 
earliest and implement it in an efficient manner, a thorough homework should be 
done before the launch of the scheme taking into consideration the on ground 
conditions of the target villages.  The Committee hope that efforts would be made to 
utilize the entire amount judiciously during the current financial year and no scope 
would be left to the Planning Commission for the reversal of the amount allocated for 
the purpose during the next financial year.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken in this direction by the Ministry.   

33 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.20 After approval of competent authorit y for launch of  Pradhan Mantri Adarsh 
Gram Yojana (PMAGY) on pilot basis in 1000 SC majority villages of five states, viz. 
U.P, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Bihar (225 villages each) and Assam (100 villages), 
guidelines of the Scheme were circulated on 11.3.201 0 inviting proposals for central 
assistance. A Note on salient features of PMAGY and a copy of its guidelines are 
enclosed as Annex IV and Annex V respectively.     
An Orientation Meeting on the new Scheme was held at Delhi on 20.03.2010 
which was attended  by the representatives of the concerned Central Ministries and 
the five State Governments.  
On receipts of  complete proposals, full central assistance due has so far 
been released to three States, viz. Rajasthan, Bihar and Assam. Details in regard to 
the three states may be seen in Annex VI.  
Additional Secretary (SJ&E) and Joint Secretary (SCD) visited Sri 
Ganganagar on 12.05.2010 to take an orientation meeting with the State/District 
officials and other stakeholders in connection with the operationalisa tion of PMAGY 
in Rajasthan. All concerned officers at the State Government as well as the peoples 
representatives participated in the meeting.  
Government of Uttar Pradesh has raised the issue of inadequate central 
assistance under the scheme and the Minis try is in correspondence with the State 
Government on the subject.  
The National Institute of Rural Development, Hyderabad has been selected to 
act as the technical resource support institute for the scheme at the national level. 

34 
 
NIRD is holding an orientation programme for key State & District level officers on 
July 15-17, 2010.    
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
- NIL  -  

36 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.26) 
 
4.1 Keeping in view the poor performance of the various schemes of the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment, more particularly those related to educational 
empowerment and scholarship schemes, the Committee note that there is a general 
ignorance and lack of awareness among the target groups that such schemes exist 
for them and availing the benefits under these schemes can really help them cross 
the below poverty line.  As such, these schemes which are there t o make a 
qualitative difference in the lives of certain sections of the society have failed to even 
touch their lives.  The Committee have learnt that the people in the interior villages of 
many States are not even aware of the Babu Jagjivan Chhatrawas Yojna for 
SC/OBC Boys and Girls, Top Class Education Scheme or for that matter the 
National Overseas Scholarship Scheme. Even though so many schemes are being 
implemented by the Ministry, the fact remains that very few persons know about 
these schemes. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
give wide publicity to all their schemes so that the benefits of these schemes accrue 
to those sections of society for whom these are meant for.  Publicity should be given 
about various schemes in the  vernacular Press, regional newspapers. Awareness 
campaigns should be organized in schools, educational institutions so as to generate 
awareness about the schemes amongst the target groups.  While doing so, the 
Ministry may vigorously pursue the implementa tion of the legal provisions 
discouraging/banning the use of the word „Harizan‟.   

37 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.2 Publicity of Ministry‟s schemes is  being done through the website of the 
Ministry; advertisements in newspapers & a radio programme namely Sanwarti 
Jayen Jeevan Ki Rahen . For giving wide publicity to its schemes a Radio Broadcast 
is done on every Sunday and Tuesday through different channels.  
It is however noteworthy that the Schemes of Post-matric Scholarships for SC 
and OBC has already covered about 38 and 10 lakhs students respectively. Under 
the schemes of Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna for SC students and Hostels 
for OBC students, the proposals are invited from, and assistance is released to State 
Governments/UT Administrations.  The location s of SC  hostels run  by the State 
Governments are well known in the respective local areas, and state governments 
suitably publicize them . The Scheme of Top Class Education for SC students  is 
meant only for SC students studying in selected premier institutions  which are 
requested every year to send scholarship proposals in respect of eligible students. 
The Scheme of Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship is administered by the UGC, which 
invites applications for it in a well publicized manner. Newspap er advertisements are 
issued by the Ministry inviting the applications under the Scheme of National 
Overseas Scholarship every year.  
A circular dated 10 th February, 1982 , had been issued to the State 
Governments/UT Administrations requesting them to issue  instructions to the 
concerned authorities not to use the word “Harijan” in the Scheduled Caste  
certificates.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 Chapter-I of the Report) 

38 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 4.37) 
4.3 The Committee also observe that during the year 2008 -09, as against the 
boys‟ hostels, the Government could construct more number of hostels for SC girls. 
The reason advanced by the Ministry is that the States have sent more number of 
proposals for Hostels  for SC girls as the pattern for funding for hostels for girls has 
been changed and not many States sent proposals for hostels for boys because of 
the requirement of 50% committed liabilities on the part of State Governments.  The 
Committee strongly feels that the 50% committed liability in respect of hostel for SC 
boys should be done away with and the funding pattern for hostels for SC boys 
should also be changed from 50% to 100% or at least from 50% to 75% so as to 
enable more number of States to come out  with viable proposals for hostels for SC 
boys. At the same time, the Committee would also like that the government should 
explore the feasibility of public -private partnership in construction and maintenance 
of the hostels.   
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana was revised in the year 2008  for 
providing 100% Central Assistance for girls‟ hostels. There is no proposal to revise 
the scheme for boys‟ hostels at present. The present plan outlay of the Ministry also 
does not perm it the liberalization in the funding pattern. This matter would however 
be examined during the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17). The Scheme is being 
implemented through the State Governments/UT Administrations and the Central 
and State Universities/Institution s are being provided central assistance as per the 
provision of the scheme, both for fresh construction of hostel buildings and for the 
expansion of the existing hostel facilities. Under the existing scheme, NGOs and 

39 
 
deemed universities in the private sect or having good track record are also eligible 
for central assistance, though  only for the extension of their existing hostel facilities. 
The responsibility for maintenance of hostels vests with the State Governments/UT 
Administrations and it seems advisab le to provide adequate degree of freedom to 
them in deciding the manner in which they would like to maintain the hostels.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 5.11) 
4.5 The Committee further observe that the NBCFDC under its Education Loan – 
„New Aakansha Scheme‟ extends loans to the backward Classes for pursuing 
general/ professional technical ed ucation or training at graduate and higher level.  
Financial assistance for project linked training for upgradation of technical and 
entrepreneurial skills are also provided to eligible members of the other Backward 
Classes living below the double poverty line under the scheme. The Committee are 
constrained to note that the number of beneficiaries under the Education Loan 
Scheme has reduced from 2801 in 2007 -08 to only 1319 during the year 2008 -09. 
On the reasons for slow pace of implementation of the schem e, the Committee have 
been informed that at present the ceiling of annual family income of beneficiaries 
being very low, i.e., Rs. 55000, a large section of meritorious students of the 
Backward Classes could not get benefit of the scheme. The Committee hav e also 
learnt that the proposal for revising the income ceiling from Rs. 55000 to Rs. 2.25 
lakh is being examined and once this is raised more number of OBC students would 

40 
 
be eligible for the benefit under the education loan. The Committee are also of the 
view that the ceiling of level of income as it exists at present is very low and 
unrealistic considering the consumer price index. Therefore, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should revise the guideline of the scheme at the earliest and raise 
the income ceiling to Rs.2.25 lakh so that the momentum of the scheme does not 
slow down and more number of beneficiaries are able to avail the benefits of the 
scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The income limit for the beneficiaries was kept at „below the pover ty line‟ at 
the time of inception of the Corporation.  Subsequently, the income limit was revised 
to „below double the poverty line in view of the Planning Commission‟s Press 
Release on „Poverty Estimates for 1999-2000 dated 22.2.2001.   
The issue of enhancement in the annual family income of the beneficiaries up 
to Rs 2.25 lakh was last placed by the NBCFDC before the Board of Directors in its 
75th Board Meeting held on 26.6.2009. After the approval of the Board, the proposal 
was forwarded to the Ministry in August, 2009. As the present income limit is based 
on the poverty line, Ministry has requested the Planning Commission to intimate the 
latest p overty estimates to enable us to revise the family income limit of 
beneficiaries. The enhancement in the annual family income of the beneficiaries 
shall be considered immediately on receipt of the latest poverty line estimates from 
the Planning Commission.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 Chapter-I of the Report) 

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.4) 
5.1 The Committee are not satisfied with the implementation aspect of the 
Recommendations contained in their Thirty -third Report on Demands of Grants, 
2008-09 of the Ministry of Social Justice and  Empowerment as only 4 out of 13 
recommendations have been implemented.  The Committee desire expeditious 
implementation of the remaining recommendations already accepted by the 
Government. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 In Para 1.2 of Chapter I of the First Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2009-10), the Committee reviewed the progress of implementation of the 13 
recommendations made in its Thirty-third Report on Demands for Grants,  2008-09. 
The position of the 13 recommendations is summarised as under:  
 
Category of Recommendations 
of 33rd Report of the Committee 
 
Total 
No. 
S. No. of the 
Recommendation  
Corresponding Para 
No. of the  
Recommendation  
Recommendations implemented 
 
4 6, 9, 11,13 3.23, 4.19, 5.10, 6.7  
Recommendation which the 
Committee does not wish to 
pursue  
1 4 3.21 
Recommendations under 
process of implementation 
8 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 
10, 12 
1.4, 3.19, 3.20, 3.22, 
4.17, 4.18, 4.20, 5.11 
 

42 
 
 The present status of action taken by the Government on the 8 
recommendations shown in the third category above is given in the Statement at 
Annex I.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8, Para No. 4.18) 
5.3 The Committee are constrained to note that even after issue of the guidelines 
of the Planning Commission to ensure allocation under Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan 
to be shown distinctly under minor head (789) of the Central Ministries, not all 
Ministries have started showing their allocation under SCSP under separate budget 
head. The Ministry have maintained that as per the statement 21 of the Expenditure 
Budget, only 17 Central Ministries/Departments have made allocation und er Plan 
Schemes for Scheduled Castes and those allocations are also not clear -cut as it 
shows the combined allocation for STs as well SCs. The Committee are not happy 
with this position and urge the Ministry to impress upon the Planning Commission to 
come out in strict terms with the Central Ministries as far as earmarking of allocation 
under SCSP is concerned. The Committee desire that the Planning Commission 
should be briefed about the serious implications of this casual approach of the 
Ministries towards  the cause of development of SC community and they must be 
advised for incorporation of a clause on time frame instead of leaving the provision 
open ended so that the Ministries strictly adhere to such time frame for earmarking 
their budgetary allocation under SCSP. 
 
 

43 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 Guidelines on formulation, implementation and monitoring of SCSP have 
been issued by the Planning Commission from time to time.  Consolidated guidelines 
in this regard  to Central Ministries/Departments were issued by the Commission in 
December, 2006. The matter regarding implementation of Scheduled Caste Sub -
Plan (SCSP) by Central Ministries/Departments, including separate earmarking for 
SCSP under the designated Budget Head '789' is being pursued by the Ministry with 
the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. 
In order to ensure compliance of the above guidelines by Central 
Ministries/Departments, the Ministry in September, 200 8, took up with the Finance 
Ministry at the highest level , the  matter of Central Ministries not separately 
earmarking funds under  SCSP, and requested for issuing of necessary instructions 
to them to ensure that, at least from the financial year 2009 -10, an appropriate 
portion of the plan budget of every Ministry/Department was invariably shown under 
the minor head “789”. Simultaneously, the  Planning Commission was also 
requested to address all the Ministries in this regard to ensure that the SCSP outlays 
were reflected under the mino r head “789”  by all Central Ministries/Departments, as 
part of Annual Plan/Budget exercise for 2009 -10. The matter was suitably followed 
up.   
In response to the above, the Ministry of Finance, in December, 2008, 
requested the Principal Adviser (PC -SP), Planning Commission, to ensure  
implementation of guidelines issued by the Commission for allocating funds for 
SCSP (and TSP) at the time of finalizing Plan outlay of 2009 -10 of 
Ministries/Departments, and that such allocation be shown distinctly under the minor 

44 
 
heads (SCSP -789 and TSP - 796), created for the above purpose.  Copies of this 
letter were also sent to Financial Advisers of all Ministries.  
The Secretary, SJ&E, in September 2009, requested the Secretary, Planning 
Commission, to be apprised of the Ministry -wise status of (i) earmarking of 
proportionate outlays under SCSP, and (ii) its classification under the minor head 
789, in 2009-10. Response of the Planning Commission was however not received. 
Since November, 2009, the Ministry has  been requesting the Planning 
Commission about the urgent need for a major revision of SCSP guidelines. T he 
Ministry has also been repeatedly requesting the Planning  Commission to convene, 
at the earliest, next meeting of the Central Tripartite Committee, constituted by the 
Planning Commission under the Chairmanship of Member in -charge of BCW 
Division, especially to  discuss non -implementation of SCSP  by Central 
Ministries/Departments.  
The Planning Commission has now constituted a Task Force vide their Order 
dated 4.6.2010 (copy enclosed at Annex II) to re -examine and revise the extant 
Guidelines regarding  Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan and Tribal Sub -Plan (TSP) . First 
meeting of the Task Force is scheduled for 7.7.2010. Rationalization of the SCSP 
guidelines by the Task Force would result in their better implementation.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.4.27) 
5.5 The Committee observe that there is a substantial delay in the revision of the 
Post-Matric Scholarship scheme with regard to the scholarship/financial component 
i.e. the maintenance allowance, reimbursement of fees, study tour charges, thesis 

45 
 
typing and printing charges etc. as well as the income ceiling component. The 
Committee find that the maintenance allowance being awarded to the day scholars 
at the rate of Rs. 330 per month for  Group I& Group II courses , Rs. 1 85 for Group 
III courses and Rs. 140 for Group IV courses is very low and just not sufficient to 
meet the needs of the SC students.  Similarly, the amount of maintenance allowance 
given to the Day Scholars under the Post - Matric Scholarship Scheme at the r ate of 
Rs 710 for Group I, Rs 510 for Group II, Rs. 365 for Group III courses and Rs. 235 
for Group IV is grossly inadequate. The rates of other allowances are no different. 
Keeping in view the present rate of skyrocketing prices of commodities in the market, 
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to upgrade these r ates as per the 
present consumer price Index. The income ceiling limit for Post -Matric scholarship 
should be increased from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 2 lakh immediately. On the status of the 
revision of the scheme, the Committee have been informed that the revisio ns are 
long overdue and the Ministry are yet to revise the guidelines of the Post -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme. The Committee take serious note of it and recommend that the 
Ministry should be ready with the revised guidelines with upgraded ceiling limits and 
also increased financial assistance within a stipulated time frame. Since this 
scholarship scheme is the only baseline Scholarship scheme to cater to the needs of 
SC students beyond Post -Matriculate, the revision should be a total revamping 
taking into acc ount every parameter of the scheme viz. income criteria, rates of 
scholarship,  norms for award of scholarship, the time and the mode of payment, etc. 
The scope and coverage of the scheme should also be expanded keeping in view 
the specific requirements of the States and the Union Territories.  
 
 

46 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 With necessary enhancement in the Plan Outlay in 2010 -11, the scheme of 
Post Matric Scholarship for Scheduled Caste students is being revised in 2010 -11 
taking all relevant aspects into consideration. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No.13, Para No. 4.48) 
5.7 The Committee note that as against an allocation of Rs. 36 crore, only 
Rs.21.50 crore has been sanctioned/ released to voluntary organizations during the 
year 2008-09.  Similarly while the number of NGOs assisted has come down from 
349 in 2005 -06 to 274 in  2008-09, the number of beneficiaries has further come 
down to 29974 in 2008 -09 against the target of 59000 beneficiaries and the number 
of 38305 in the year 2006 -07.  While a number of NGOs are working on the field as 
per the information made available to  the Committee, however they fail to 
understand as to why the Ministry have not been able to utilize the funds fully 
allocated for the purpose.  Apart from non receipt of complete proposals, imposition 
of model code of conduct for general elections and def icient documentation have 
been cited by the Ministry as the main reasons for under utilization of the funds.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should work in close coordination and 
cooperation with State Governments to ensure timely receipt of pr oposals.  The 
procedure relating to consideration and approval of proposals be streamlined and 
simplified and data be properly codified and maintained in order to identify fake 
NGOs working in different names.  The Committee desire that the funds should be  
given only to genuine NGOs working in far flung areas after verifying their credibility 

47 
 
records.  At the same time NGOs accountability has to be ensure d through constant 
monitoring. The Committee, in this regard, would like the Ministry to constitute a 
standing monitoring unit for the developmental schemes for the Scheduled Castes 
and OBCs by involving the people‟s representatives. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 This Ministry in its  letter No.1-31/2006-Cdn dated 21.3.2007, addressed to 
Secretaries in-charge of Welfare of Scheduled C astes in States/UTs, has inter -alia, 
mentioned that in the beginning of the financial year, the Ministry would convey 
scheme-wise notional allocation of funds (in respect of sc hemes of grants -in-aid to 
NGOs) to the States/UTs, whic h in turn  would submit their consolidate d 
recommendations within those  allocations by 30 th June every year. In addition, 
States are requested separately each year while conveying notional allocation, under 
each scheme to send the proposals from NGOs duly recommended and verified by a 
specified date.  The participation of States/UTs has also been ensured as any 
project proposal needs to be recommended by their Grant -in-aid Committee.  
Inspections of various projects of organizations are also conducted by officers of the 
States/UTs.   
To ensure regular monitoring of the developmental schemes for SCs and 
OBCs as well as other major programmes of the Ministry at State/District level, the 
Ministry is examining the possibility  of getting them monitored through State and 
district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees on the lines of those set up by  the 
Ministry of Rural Development for its Schemes.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 

48 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16,  Para No. 6.12) 
5.9 The Committee express their happiness that after going through a long 
exercise of holding regional level consultations and taking into account the UN 
Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the Ministry are working on a 
comprehensive amendment to the „Persons with Disability Act which was enacted 14 
years back in 1995. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry have 
formulated a comprehensive amendment to the Act and several of its provisions 
such as accessibility of roads, accessibility of transport, accessib ility to public 
buildings which were in the nature of Directive Principles are being converted into 
time bound provisions so that these take place within a time limit rather than the 
present open-ended provisions where it is entirely left to the sweet will  of the central 
Government, State Government or the local body as the case may be.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should complete the exercise at 
the earliest so that benefits of the amended provisions could be provided to the 
affected persons in the society. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.10 After consultation with various stakeholders and discussion in the Central 
Coordination Committee (CCC) meeting in the month of July 2009, a draft 
amendment was formulated in September, 2009. The sa me was circulated to the 
State Governments, Union Territories and concerned Central Ministries seeking their 
suggestion on the proposed amendments. The draft was also posted on the 
Ministry‟s website inviting comments from the general public and a presentation on it 
was also made before the Ministry‟s Parliamentary Consultative Committee on 
5.2.2010.   A number of suggestions were received from State Governments, Union 

49 
 
Territories, Central Ministries and Civil Society .  A Committee has now been set up  
on 30.4.2010 to  study the suggestions received and to prepare the  draft of a new 
Legislation to replace the existing Persons with Disabilities Act. The Committee has 
been asked to complete this work by 31.8. 2010.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerm ent O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17,  Para No. 6.13) 
5.11 The Committee note with dismay that as far as the State -wise details of 
grants-in-aid released and the number of beneficiaries covered in the last five years  
under the Deen Dayal Disabled Rehabilitation scheme (DDRS) is concerned the 
beneficiary coverage has not been very significant and consistent. While the number 
of beneficiary covered under the scheme increased from 170551 in 2004 -05 to 
195282 in 2005-06, it decreased to 126631 in the year 2006-07. Though there was a 
jump in the beneficiary figure to 262726 in 2007-08, again it came down to 197642 in 
the year 2008 -09. In this regard, the Committee observe that while the reason for 
inconsistent coverage of t he beneficiary may be attributed partly to the 
disproportionate allocation of funds under the scheme thereby resulting in its poor 
performance which the Ministry at present are trying to rectify through a notional 
allocation to every State, the deeper reas ons for the sluggish performance are still 
not clear and have to be examined. The Committee feel that the full utilization of 
funds or granting approval to more number of DDRCs have not achieved anything on 
the ground. The country‟s disabled population as per 2001 census stands at a 
staggering 2,19,06,769 i.e., near 2.20 crore.  The Committee are of the view that 
over the last few years, some more disabled people must have been added to this 
number and in order to look after their needs and aspirations, the  Ministry needs to 

50 
 
have a fresh look at the ongoing DDRC Scheme, which despite a five year run, has 
failed to address the needs of the disabled.  In the light of this, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take necessary steps to make the DDRC 
scheme more effective.  In this regard, efforts should also be made for collection of 
data of the people with disability, disability wise from the States and UTs.   
 
Reply of the Government 
5.12     District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC) Scheme is being revised in 
2010 to make it more effective.  It is proposed to set up 100 DDRC s in un-served 
districts during the remaining two years of the XI Five Year Plan period, of which 50 
are proposed to be set up in the current financial year.  
Latest data on disability would be available after Census, 2011, is completed.  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O. M. No. 1 -23/2009/(PS)PREM dated 
7.7.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI  
        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
12 August, 2010      Chairman 
21 Shravana, 1932 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
        Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
  

51 
 
Annexure-I 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Thirty Third Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment – Present Status of 
Implementation 
  
S. 
No 
Para 
No. 
Recommendations/observation Present Status 
1 2 3 4 
1 1.4 The Committee are not satisfied with the 
implementation aspect of the Recommendations 
contained in their Twenty -fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants, 2007 -08 of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment as only 6 out 
of 19 recommendations have been 
implemented.  The Committee desire 
expeditious implementation of the remaining 
recommendations. 
Out of 13 recommendations shown 
pending for implementation, Committee 
did not desire to pu rsue 4 
recommendations in view of the action 
taken by the Government. Final Action 
Taken Note in respect of remaining 9 
recommendations, has been submitted 
to Lok Sabha Secretariat vide OM. 
dated 4 th July, 2008, which reveals the 
following position in rega rd to the 9 
recommendations: 
i. Two recommendations (Para No. 
1.19 and 5.1) have been fully or 
partially implemented.  
ii. With regard to three 
recommendations (Para No. 1.7, 
1.10 and 5.7), Committee was 
apprised of action taken by the 
Ministry.  
iii. Two recommendations (Para 1.13 
and 5.5) relate to implementation of 
the Scheme of SCA to SCSP on 
which updated information is given 
to the Committee in reply to 
recommendation at S. No. 8 (Para 
No. 4.18) of the First Report of the 
Committee on Demand for G rants 
(2009-10); and another  (Para 5.3) 
relates to change in funding pattern 
of CSS for which updated position is 
given in reply to  recommendation at 
S. No. 5, (Para No. 3.24) ,and  
iv. The remaining one recommendation 
(Para 1.16) is regarding introduction 
of a Scheme of Pre -matric 
Scholarship for SC Children which 
the Ministry would be able to 
consider taking up only at the time of 
formulation of Twelfth Five Year 
Plan (2012 -17), in view of  limited 
Plan allocation in the XI Plan. 

52 
 
2 3.19 The Committee note that the budgetary 
allocation to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment for the year 2008 -09 has been 
pegged at a level below the projections made by 
the Ministry.  As against the projection of Rs. 
2726 crore, the amount allocate d to the Ministry 
is Rs. 2400 crore.  According to the Ministry the 
reduction in the allocation will affect 
achievements in major schemes like Special 
Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes 
Component Plan, Self Employment Scheme for 
Rehabilitation of Scave ngers, Pre and Post 
Matric Scholarship for OBC students, scheme 
for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance 
(Drugs) Abuse, etc.  Considering the Ministry‟s 
record of optimum utilization of allocated funds 
which is 98.95% of the outlay during 2007 -08 
and to enable them to effectively fulfil their 
mandate of empowering the vulnerable sections 
of our society, the Committee hope that 
Government would consider provision of 
additional funds to the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment at RE stage.  
Vigorous e fforts were made by the 
Ministry during 2009 -10 to have the 
Plan allocation enhanced substantially, 
including at the highest level.  
Consequently the Plan allocation for 
2010-11 has been enhanced by 80% 
over the previous years‟ outlay of Rs. 
2500 crore, to Rs. 4500 crore.  
3 3.20 The Committee have  been informed that the 
rates under the schemes of Pre -Matric 
Scholarship for children of those engaged in 
unclean occupations, Post-Matric and Pre-Matric 
scholarships for OBC students and hostels for 
OBC boys and girls were fixed in nineties.  In 
order to  neutralize the effect of price rise, the 
revision of scholarships is necessary.  Further, 
the cost of construction has also gone up 
necessitating the revision of cost norms for 
hostel scheme.  Therefore, the Ministry is in the 
process of revising these Ce ntrally Sponsored 
Schemes.  In the opinion of the Committee 
these revisions would help in minimizing the 
gaps and disparities (education development) 
that exist between general population and 
socially disadvantaged groups and will also 
neutralize the effect of price rise, thereby making 
these schemes more viable and ensure 
maximum coverage of beneficiaries.  The 
Committee desire the Government to revise 
these schemes at the earliest. 
The Pre -matric Scholarship Scheme for 
the Children of those Engaged in 
Unclean Occupations was revised in 
2008.  The scheme of hostels for 
Scheduled Castes Boys & Girls was 
also revised in the year 2008 while the 
Scheme for Hostels for OBC Boys and 
Girls has been revised in 2010.  
The Plan allocation for the Post matric 
Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled 
Castes has increased from Rs.750.00 
crore in 2009 -10 to Rs.1700.00 Crore in 
2010-11, an increase of 127%. Similarly 
the Plan allocation for the Post matric 
Scholarship Scheme for OBCs has 
increased from 135.00 crore to Rs. 
350.00 crore, an increase of 159%. The 
revision of these two schemes is being 
undertaken during the current year, 
2010-11.  
4 3.22 It is a matter of concern that 12814 Utilization 
Certificates for various welfare schemes 
amounting to Rs. 735 crore are still outstanding 
from States/UTs/Voluntary Organizations.  The 
Committee view with concern this situation as 
the Ministry would not able to release funds if 
utilization certificates in respect  of funds 
allocated are not submitted in time.  This in turn 
The Ministry is pursuing the matter to 
obtain all the outstanding Utilisation 
Certificates for grants released by it.  
State Govts/UT Administrations have 
been further requested at the level of  
Chief Secretaries in June 2010 to take 
necessary action so that number of 
outstanding UCs could be minimized 

53 
 
affects timely implementation of various 
schemes consequently. The Government ought 
to impress upon the States/UTs/Voluntary 
Organizations to exercise fiscal prudence and 
submit utilization certi ficates in time to ensure 
un-interrupted flow of Central funds 
expeditiously. Fresh/subsequent 
releases of grants to NGOs during a 
year are made only on receipt of 
audited accounts and Utilization 
Certificates in respect of previous grants 
sanctioned which have become due. 
5 4.17 The Committee observes that during 2007 -08 
some States with sizable SC population have 
not allocated funds for their SCSP as per the 
percentage of their SC population namely; 
(Andhra Pradesh – SC population 16.20%, 
SCSP outlay 7.53%, Himachal Pradesh – SC 
population 24.70%, SCSP outlay 11.00%, and 
Punjab – SC population 28.90%, SCSP outlay 
26.02%.  Other States like Bihar – SC 
population 15.70%, Kerala SC population 9.8% 
and Rajasthan – SC population 17.20% have 
not allocated any funds from their annual plan to 
their SCSP.  Keeping in view the fact that the 
allocations under Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan in 
proportion to the percentage of SC population in 
the State is the main criteria for r elease of 
grants by the Centre under the scheme, the 
Committee express their displeasure at the non -
adherence to the norms by some States, as this 
deprives them of their rightful Central share of 
SCA funds.  The Committee, desire that all the 
States/UTs sh ould be persuaded to allocate 
funds for SCSP in proportion to their SC 
population so that they could get their entitled 
share of SCA funds from the Centre. 
Guidelines for formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCSP) 
have b een issued by the Planning 
Commission from time to time. Latest 
guidelines to this effect were issued by 
the Planning Commission to State 
Governments/UT Administrations and to 
Central Ministries/Departments in 
October 2005 and December 2006 
respectively. A s per these guidelines, 
State Governments/UT Administrations 
and Central Ministries are, inter -alia, 
required to earmark funds for SCSP from 
total plan outlay at least in proportion of 
SC population to the total population and 
place the earmarked funds und er 
separate budget head/sub-head.   
As per available information, 24 States 
and 3 UTs having sizeable SC population 
are implementing SCSP. Efforts will 
continue to be made to ensure full 
compliance with SCSP guidelines, by 
States. 
6 4.18 It is a matter of concern that the Ministry do not 
have any data highlighting the number of 
beneficiaries who were successful in crossing 
below the poverty line figure after having availed 
of the benefits of the scheme of SCA to SCSP.  
It has simply been c onveyed that it is for the 
Planning Commission to decide.  The 
Committee regret to observe that this is nothing 
but a casual approach on the part of the 
Government vis -à-vis its mandate for working 
towards bringing the target group into the 
mainstream of d evelopment by making them 
self-reliant.  The Committee desire that this 
aspect needs to be given serious attention and 
the Ministry should make all possible efforts to 
collect this data from all concerned 
implementing agencies for future planning of 
their schemes. 
May kindly see the reply at Sl. No. 9 
(Para 4.19) of the Statement giving 
replies of the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the 
Committee in its First Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009-10). 
7 4.20 In spite of clear cut instructions from the 
Planning Commission, directing all Central 
Ministries / Departments to formulate SCSP for 
SCs in their Annual Plan, only 7 Ministries / 
Departments out of 51 have complied till now.  
May kindly see the reply at Sl. No. 8 
(Para 4.18) of the Statement giving 
replies of the Government on the 
observations/recommendations of the 

54 
 
The Committee express their d eep concern and 
total displeasure over this sorry state of affairs 
and recommend the Ministry to ensure 
expeditious compliance by the remaining 
Central Ministries / Departments of the 
guidelines issued by the Planning Commission 
in this regard. 
Committee in its First Report on 
Demands for Grants (2009-10). 
8 5.11 The Committee note that the 
Government have instituti onalised Drug Abuse 
Monitoring System (DAMS) with the broad 
objective for creating a database in respect of 
persons abusing drugs, types of drugs used and 
method of consuming drugs from the 
Treatment-cum-Rehabilitation Centre supported 
by the Ministry.  Ho wever, It is a matter of 
concern that though the scheme for prevention 
of alcoholism and substance (drugs) abuse has 
been prevalent for years, yet the Ministry have 
no authentic data of the number of alcoholics 
and drug addicts in the country as no detaile d 
survey has been conducted for this purpose so 
far.  It is indicative of the casual approach of the 
Government in eradicating the menace of 
alcoholism and substance abuse from the 
country.  The Committee desire that the 
Government may utilize the services  of DAMS 
to obtain an authentic nationwide data of 
alcoholics and substance abusers at the earliest 
so that an effective action plan could be chalked 
out to rid the nation of its ill effects.  The 
Committee also suggest that feasibility of 
introducing „Guj arat Pattern of Prohibition‟ may 
be examined to eradicate alcoholism from the 
country.  
Recognizing the fact that the number of 
alcoholics and drug addicts as well as 
the other information emerging from 
DAMS is limited to treatment seekers in 
the participating centers under the 
system which might not be sufficiently 
representative, the Ministry requested 
the National Sample Survey 
Organization on 28.8.2006 to conduct a 
detailed household survey to assess the 
extent, patterns and trends of drug 
abuse in the country.   The NSSO had 
constituted a Committee under the 
chairpersonship of Prof. Arijit  
Choudhary, Retd. Professor, Indian 
Statistical Institute (ISI), Kolkata, to 
suggest an appropriate survey 
methodology for undertaking a pilot 
survey on drug abuse.  The committee 
submitted its report in March, 2009.  The 
Steering Committee of NSSO in its 
seventh meeting held on 21.05.2009 
agreed to the survey methodology 
proposed by the above mentioned 
Committee and suggested that the pilot 
survey may be carried out  in 2-3 States.  
Accordingly, the NSSO has now started 
the pilot survey in the States of Pu njab 
and Manipur and the city of Mumbai. 
    As per entry no. 8 under “State List” in 
the Seventh Schedule of the 
Constitution, “Intoxicating Liquor” 
(including their production, manufacture, 
possession, transport, purchase and 
sale”) is a State subject.  Bombay 
Prohibition Act, 1949 (BPA, 1949) is in 
force in the State of Gujarat. It  provides 
inter alia that no  person shall produce/ 
manufacture liquor, import, export, 
transport, possess, sell, buy bottle for 
sale, consume or use liquor, any 
intoxicating drug or opium. It provides 
the penalty of imprisonment up to three 
years and fine for contravention of its 
provisions. In view of the fact that the  

55 
 
 
  
production, manufacture, possession, 
transport, purchase and sale of 
intoxicating liquor is a state subject, 
adoption of the “Gujarat Pattern of 
Prohibition” is essentially for individual 
State Governments to consider keeping 
in view its financial implications and 
enforceability. Curbing alcoholism, 
however, requires a comprehensive 
approach with strong emphasis on 
education and information dissemination 
on a sustained basis to create a high 
degree of public awareness a nd 
generate support for activities that will 
dissuade harmful alcohol use practices. 

56 
 
Annexure – II 
 
M-11012/2/2010-SCSP/TSP 
Government of India 
Planning Commission 
 
 
Yojana Bhawan, Sansad Marg 
       New Delhi 
Dated : 04.06.2010 
 
OFFICE ORDER 
 
Sub :- Task Force to re -examine and revise the extant Guidelines of the 
Planning Commission for implementation of Scheduled Caste Sub-Plan 
(SCSP) and Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) 
 
 
1. In pursuance of the decision taken in the Meeting of the Full Planning 
Commission held  on 23 rd March, 2010, a Task Force comprising the following is 
constituted : 
 
I. Dr. Narender Jadhav, Member, Planning Commission 
 
-  Chairman 
II. Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
-    Member 
III. Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
-    Member 
IV. Pr. Secretary, Department of Social Justice, Cultural 
Affairs & Special Assistance Government of 
Maharashtra, R.No. 137 Mantralay Annexe, 
Mumbai – 400032 
 
-    Member 
V. Pr. Secretary, Department of SCs & STS Welfare 
Mantralaya, Balabh Bhawan, Bhopal, State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
 
-    Member 
VI. Pr. Secretary, Department of Social Justice Block No. 
5, New Sachiwalaya, Gandhi Nagar, Gujarat 
 
-    Member 
VII. Pr. Secretary, Adi Dravidar & Tribal Welfare 
Department,  
Secretariat, 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Chennai – 600009 
-    Member 

57 
 
VIII. Adviser, J&E, Planning Commission -    Member Secretary 
 
2. Terms of reference of the Task Force shall be : 
 (i) To re-examine and revise the extant Guidelines issued by the Planning 
Commission for implementation of SCSP and TSP: 
 (ii) to understand the operational difficulties in consultation with 
implementing Ministries and suggest remedial action so that SCSP and 
TSP can be implemented effectively in future. 
3. The Task Force shall submit their Report within three months from the date of 
notification order.  It will have the power to co -opt any other person as a special 
invitee. 
4. The expenditure of the official members for attending the meetings of the 
Task Force w ill be borne by the respective parent Department/Ministry as per the 
rules applicable to them.  The expenditure regarding TA/DA of non -official Members 
will be borne by the Planning Commission according to the existing instruction on the 
subject. 
 
 
      Sd/-------- 
(S. Kesava Iyer) 
Under Secretary to the Government of India 
To : 
Copy to : 
1. PS to Deputy Chairman 
2. PS to Member (NJ) 
3. PS to Members Secretary 
4. PS to Adviser (SJ) 
5. Under Secretary, Account - 1 
  

58 
 
 
Annexure - III 
                  
Details of BPL SC families covered during 2005-06 under the Scheme of 
SCA to SCSP  
S.NO
. 
States/UTs Rural/urb
an/Total 
Number of BPL 
SC families 
assisted with 
SCA to SCSP  
Number of families who have 
been able to cross the poverty 
line 
1 2 3 4 5 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh  
Rural. 78,033 16407 
  Urban 18,180 5089 
  Total 96213 21496 
2 Haryana                        Rural 11,229 13229 
  Urban 4335 - 
  Total 15564 - 
3 Jammu & 
Kashmir                
Rural 420 420 
  Urban 106 106 
  Total 526 526 
4 Karnataka                 Rural 11,720 11,720 
  Urban 2,265 2,265 
  Total 13,985 13,985 
5 Kerela                   Rural 499 38 
  Urban - - 
  Total 499 38 
6 Maharashtra                 Rural 8,599 5,886 
  Urban 14,748 9,759 
  Total 23,357 15,645 
7 Madhya 
Pradesh            
Rural - - 
  Urban -  
  Total 7,444 4,914 
8 Punjab               Rural 4,869 2,093 
  Urban 1,566 674 
  Total 6,435 2,767 
9 Uttar 
Pradesh               
Rural 56,964 31330 
  Urban 10,052 5527 
  Total 67016 36857 
10 West Bengal              Rural - - 
  Urban -  
  Total 15443 8030 
11 Tamilnadu                Rural 58972 23589 
  Urban 109520 43808 
  Total 168492 67397 
 

59 
 
Annexure  - IV 
 
Salient Features of Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) 
1. Objectives  
 PMAGY aims to  ensure integrated development of the selected villages 
having more than 50% SC population, into “model villages” so that, inter alia, 
 
(i) they have all requisite physical and social infrastructure for their socio -
economic development, and satisfy the norms mentioned in para 2.1 of 
the Scheme to the maximum possible extent; 
 
(ii) disparity between SC and non -SC population of the village in terms of 
common socio -economic indicators (e.g. literacy rate, completion rate 
of elementary education, IMR/ MMR, ownership of productive assets,  
etc.) is eliminated, and the indicators are raised to at least the level of 
the  national average; and  
 
(iii) untouchability, discrimination, segregation, and atrocities against SCs 
are eliminated, as are other social evils  like discrimination against 
girls/women, alcoholism and substance (drugs) abuse, etc., and all 
sections of society are able to live with dignity and equality, and in 
harmony  with others.  
 
2 Components  
 The Scheme has the following two main components  
1. Territorial Area-related Component 
2. Functional Area-related Components 
 
2.1 The first component of the scheme is territorial in nature, is centred on 
individual villages, and has the following two sub-components:  
 
(i) Convergent implementation of existing sche mes of Central and State 
Governments  in the selected villages, and  
(ii) Gap-filling funds from PMAGY in which Central Government‟s 
contribution will be at the average rate of Rs. 10.0 lakh per village (with 
State Government making a suitable, preferably match ing, contribution) 
for meeting specifically identified developmental requirements of the 
selected villages which cannot be met under the existing schemes of the 
Central and State Governments. 
 
Sanction of central assistance towards the gap -filling component will be 
subject to the State Government agreeing to the conditions spelt out in para 11 
of the Scheme guidelines.  
 
2.2 Functional area -related component is inter alia  meant to facilitate 
implementation of the Scheme by way of strengthening of administrative machinery 

60 
 
for its planning and implementation, capability building of key personnel, developing 
a proper management information system etc.  
For this component, State Government will be el igible for central assistance 
up to 6% of the outlay for territorial area -related components, of which 1% can be 
considered for release during 2009 -10 for Technical Resource Support and baseline 
survey.  
3. Implementation Modalities 
 
 The Scheme will be implemented by State Governments . For over -all 
guidance and monitoring of the Scheme, an Advisory Committee will have to be 
established at the State level under the co -Chairmanship of Ministers in charge of 
Rural Development and Social Justice. In addition , a State-level Steering -cum-
Monitoring Committee (SSMC) under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary will 
need to be set up to lead and monitor its implementation. The Member -Secretary of 
the SSMC will act as the State Programme Director, PMAGY.  Similar ly, the State 
Government would also need to designate a Programme Director for the Scheme at 
the District and Block levels. The Programme Directors will act as the Chief 
Executive for the PMAGY at their respective levels. 
 
4. Training of Key Functionaries 
 
For successful implementation of the Scheme, key functionaries at different 
levels will need to be provided necessary orientation and training. Training for the 
State-level functionaries and the State level Technical Resource Support (TRS) 
Institution wil l be organized shortly by the Central Government. After that, TRS 
Institutions at the State and District levels will be expected to do it for lower levels. 
 
5. Identification of Villages  
 
 State Government should identify requisite number of villages with  >50% SC 
population, to be covered in the pilot phase, as far as possible from one district 
only, in the interest of focused attention. However, if the State feels strongly, it may, 
for sufficient reasons, select the villages from two, or a maximum of thre e, 
contiguous districts. 
 
6. Time-frame  
 
Activities to be undertaken under the gap -filling component of PMAGY will be 
expected to be completed within one year of the launch of scheme, i.e. within 2010 -
11. Convergent implementation of the existing schemes,  however, will continue in 
order to ensure achievement of basic “model village” milestones, as far as possible, 
within three years, i.e. by 2012 -13.  In order to ensure this, State Govts, would need 
to strictly adhere to timelines indicated in Para 12.9 of  the Guidelines enclosed at 
Annex - V  
 
  

61 
 
Annexure - V 
 
Centrally-sponsored Pilot Scheme of 
 PRADHAN MANTRI 
ADARSH GRAM YOJANA 
(PMAGY) 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
Government of India 
March, 2010 
 
 


62 
 
1. Background 
 
1.1 Scheduled Castes, who constitute 16.2% of our population as per last (2001) 
Census, have historically suffered social disabilities and educational and economic 
deprivation arising out of them. Accordingly, special provisions have been enshrined 
in the Cons titution for advancement of their interests. These provisions range from 
measures to remove any kind of social disabilities imposed on them to ensure 
equality of opportunity in every sphere, to measures of positive discrimination to 
bring them on par with rest of the population. 
 
1.2 Securing "to all its citizens, JUSTICE, social, economic and political"  is 
the first goal mentioned in the Preamble to the Constitution of India. Article 46 of Part 
IV ("Directive Principles of State Policy") of the Constitution enjoins upon the State to 
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes. Article 38 (2) in the same Part also enjoins upon the State to  minimise 
inequities in income, and to endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities 
and opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people 
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations. 
 
1.3 Special safeguards provided in the Constitution for Scheduled Castes are 
listed at Annexure V(a). 
 
1.4 Areas of SC concentration  
 
1.4.1 Population of SCs according to the Census 2001 was 16.67 crores which 
constituted 16.2% of the total population. About 80% of the SC population is in rural 
areas. The highest proportion of SC population is in Punjab. Four Sta tes –Punjab 
(28.9%), Himachal Pradesh (24.7%), West Bengal (23%) and Uttar Pradesh (21.2%) 
- have more than 20% population belonging to SCs.  Annexure V ( b) gives, in 
descending order, State/UT-wise percentage of SC popn.  
 
1.4.2 According to Census, 2001, Cooch Bihar in West Bengal is the only District in 
the country with >50% SC population. Two more Districts, namely Sonbhadra  in 
Uttar Pradesh, and Nawanshahar  in Punjab, have >40% SC population. No. of 
Blocks in the country wit h >40% SC population is 135, out of which 34 have >50% 
SC population. In 71,419 villages SCs constitute >40% of the total population, which 
includes 44,080 villages with >50% SC population. The State/UT -wise break up of 
Districts, Blocks and Villages with> 50% and >40% SC population, with States 
arranged in descending order in terms of no. of villages with over 40% SC 
population, is at Annexure V (c). 
 
1.4.3 The Govt. has taken a no. of initiatives for development of SCs, which have 
yielded positive outcomes, and have also resulted in narrowing the gap between the 
Scheduled Castes and rest of the population. However, the objective of bringing SCs 
at par with the general population is still far from being achieved. The gap between 
SCs and the total population, measured in terms of indicators of socio-economic and 
educational development as well as in access to basic amenities, is summarized in a 
statement at Annexure V (d). 

63 
 
1.5 Development of Scheduled Castes: Efforts so far 
 
1.5.1 In view of the disabilities s uffered by the Scheduled Castes and  serious 
social and  economic disparities between Scheduled Castes and the general 
population, a large no. of initiatives have been taken by the Government, some of 
which are mentioned below.  
 
1.5.2 Special Component Pl an (SCP) for SCs/Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan 
(SCSP) 
 
1.5.2.1 The strategy of Special Component Plan (SCP) for Scheduled Castes   
was evolved in 1979, with  objectives similar to the Tribal Sub Plan, i.e. to  expedite 
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes. However, in contrast to the 
Tribal Sub Plan which focused on the area development approach to provide 
necessary facilities in areas of tribal concentration, SCP was envisaged to help poor 
SC families through composite economic development programmes to cover all the 
major occupational groups amongst SCs such as agricultural labourers, marginal 
and small farmers, share-croppers, fishermen, sweepers, and scavengers and urban 
unoragnised labourers below the poverty line. In addition, SCP also sought to 
improve the living condition of SCs through provision of drinking water supply, link 
roads, house sites, establishment of services such as pri mary schools, health 
centres, veterinary centres, panchayat ghars, nutrition centres, rural electrification, 
common work places, common facility centres etc. in the “SC bastis”. Though the 
term “SC bastis” was not defined in terms of concentration of  SC p opulation, it was 
envisaged that community investments in infrastructure, located in SC 
bastis/mohallas/localities, may be included in SCP. It was suggested that wherever 
51% of the beneficiaries are of the Scheduled Castes and not less than 50% of the 
benefits go to SC, the entire outlay could be shown under SCP.   
 
1.5.2.2 The name SCP was changed to “Scheduled Castes Sub Plan” (SCSP)  in 
2006. Consolidated guidelines on formulation, implementation and monitoring of 
SCSP were issued by the Planning Commiss ion to State Govts. and Central 
Ministries in October, 2005 and December, 2006, respectively. These guidelines, 
inter alia, envisage the following: 
 
(i) Kind of outlays which can be categorized as SCSP 
 Only  schemes which ensure direct benefit to individuals or families 
belonging to Scheduled Castes may be included 
 Outlay on area oriented schemes directly benefiting Scheduled 
Castes hamlets/villages having a majority of SC population may be 
included 
 Priority to be given for providing basic minimum services lik e 
primary education, health, drinking water, nutrition, rural housing, 
rural electrification and rural link road 
 Schemes to develop agriculture and allied activities like animal 
husbandry, dairy etc. that provide a source of livelihood to the SC 
population should be included 
 Innovative projects that draw upon institutional finance to 
supplement plan allocations may be drawn up 

64 
 
 Wage component, especially under rural employment schemes, 
should not be included 
(ii) Earmarking of funds for SCSP in the total Plan at least in proportion to 
SC population 
(iii) Placing the earmarked funds under a separate budget-head 
(iv) Making the Deptt. concerned with SC Welfare in States the nodal 
Deptt. and constituting a dedicated unit in every Central Ministry/Deptt. 
for formulation and implementation of SCSP 
(v) Making the SCSP funds non-divertible and non-lapsable. 
 
1.5.3 Schemes of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  
 
  In addition to the overall strategy of SCSP, a number of schemes are being 
implemented for the welfare and develo pment of SCs, including schemes by the 
Ministry of SJ&E, which can be broadly categorized into following groups: 
 
 Schemes of Educational Development  
 Schemes of Economic Development  
  Social Empowerment and Other Schemes  
 
 List of programmes of the Ministry of SJ&E in the above three categories is 
given in Annexure V (e). 
 
1.5.4 Important Programmes of Other Ministries 
 
 There are many other programmes of the Government which, though covering 
all social groups, are specially  relevant for SCs. Some of these programmes  form 
part of  "Bharat Nirman", and include other flagship programmes like Integrated Child 
Development Services, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid Day Meal, National Rural 
Health Mission etc. Major programmes of the Ce ntral Govt., other than of the 
Ministry of SJ&E, which are specially relevant for SCs, have been summarized in 
Annexure V (f). 
 
1.5.5 Schemes listed in Annexures V  (e) and V ( f), and other relevant schemes of  
Central and State Govts. should  be implemented in a convergent manner in the 
villages selected under PMAGY . 
 
1.6 Lack of area approach so far in SC Development 
 
 Except for the SCSP to a certain extent,  most of the schemes/ programmes 
for SCs have centered on individual beneficiaries. This strategy has been largely 
dictated by the fact that the SC population is relatively scattered - in contrast to the 
Scheduled Tribes, who generally live in contiguous, identifiable pockets. While it is 
true that SC population is not as geographically concentrated as the ST, they also do 
have pockets of concentration which need special attention in terms of integrated 
development, as mentioned in section 1.4 above. 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
1.7 Announcement in the Budget Speech, 2009-10 
 
The Finance Minister, in his Budget Speech, 2009-10, delivered on 6.7.2009, 
announced launching of a new scheme, namely “Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram 
Yojana”, on pilot basis, to cover 1000 villages with more than 50% SC population. 
The relevant para of the speech reads as under: 
 
 “Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) 
 46 (v) There are about 44,000 villages in which the population of Scheduled 
castes is above 50 percent. A new scheme called  Pradhan Mantri Adarsh 
Gram Yojana  (PMAGY) is being launched this year on a pilot basis, for the 
integrated development of 1000 such villages. I propose an allocation of Rs. 
100 crore for this scheme. Each village would be able to avail gap funding of 
Rs. 10 lakh over and above the allocations under Rural Development and 
Poverty Alleviation Schemes. On successful implementation of the pilot 
phase, the Yojana would be extended in coming years.” 
 
The pilot PMAGY scheme is being launched in 2009 -10 in pursuance of the 
above announcement. 
 
2. Vision of an “Adarsh Gram” (Model Village) 
 
2.1 A Mo del village is one which has adequate physical and institutional 
infrastructure, in which minimum needs of all sections of the society are fully met, 
they live in  harmony with each other, as also with the environment, and a village 
which is progressive an d dynamic.  These villages should be covered with all the 
facilities necessary for dignified living, creating thereby an environment in which all its 
residents are enabled to utilise their potential to the fullest. These villages should, 
inter alia, satisfy the  following norms:  
 
I. Physical Infrastructure 
 
i. Should be connected to the nearest major road by an  all -weather road. 
Likewise, in case of a multi -hamlet village, all hamlets should be connected 
with each other by an all-weather road. 
ii. Access for all to safe drinking water on a sustainable basis. 
iii. All houses  should have electricity. 
iv. The village should have slush -free internal roads, and adequate street 
lighting. 
v. Village should have adequate communication facilities, such as post -office, 
telephones, and, if possible, internet, and Bharat Nirman Common Service 
Centre (being established by the Deptt. of Information Technology). 
vi. Availability of adequate banking facilities through regular (brick and mortar) 
branches in the village or in close proximity, and th rough Business 
Correspondent/Business Facilitator Model.   
vii. All residents should have adequate housing, and there should be no 
homeless family. 

66 
 
 
II. Sanitation and Environment 
 
viii. The village should have a high degree of sanitation - it should be free from 
dry latr ines, and open defecation, and should have sanitary toilets, drains 
and an efficient waste disposal system. It should, as far as possible,  fulfil 
“Nirmal Gram Puraskar” norms.  
ix. The Village should take care of its environment through (1) planting trees, (2) 
water harvestation and maintenance of  water bodies (3) use of renewable 
sources of energy, such as biogas, solar energy, wind energy, (4) use of 
smokeless chulhas, etc. 
 
III. Social Infrastructure, Human Development and Social Harmony  
 
x. Should have an Anganwadi centre and schools of appropriate levels. 
xi. The village should have adequate and attractive building for its anganwadi, 
school, health centre, panchayat, and community hall. 
xii. The village should have adequate facility for sports and other physical 
activities. 
xiii. All children in the age -group of 3 -6 should be enrolled in, and regularly 
attend the Anganwadi. Likewise, all children in the 6 -14 age group should be 
enrolled in, and regularly attend  school. 
xiv. All adults should be at least functionally literate,  and should have access to 
facilities for continuing education. 
xv. Access for all to primary health care and Reproductive Child Health (RCH)  
facilities, with proper pre-natal and ante-natal care for mothers. 
xvi. 100% institutional deliveries, full immunisation of children, and observance of 
the small family norm. 
xvii. The village as a community should take special care of its women, children 
(especially girls), senior citizens, and persons with disabilities.  
xviii. There should be no public consumption of liquor or any other intoxicating 
substances, and their use in general should be discouraged.  
xix. The village should have an active Gram Sabha/Gram Panchayat, 
women‟s/swarozgaris‟ Self-help Group, youth club and mahila mandal.  
xx. There should be no caste -based discrimination, complete eradication of 
untouchability, and a due sense of security and dignity among the weaker 
sections. 
xxi. Residents of the village should be aware of and exercise their constitutional 
and legal right s. Likewise, they should also be aware of and discharge their 
fundamental and civic duties.  
 
IV. Livelihood 
 
xxii. All youth and adults of the village should have adequate employment and 
means of livelihood, and there should be adequate arrangements for 
development of skills among them, so that as many of them as possible are 
in skilled employment. 
xxiii. Progressive and efficient practices, based on new technology,  should be 
used in all the economic activities pursued in the village, especially in 
agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries etc. 

67 
 
xxiv. Should have adequate access to remunerative prices for agricultural and 
other produce of the village. 
 
2.2  Physical and socio-economic infrastructure in the Model Village   
 
 In order to develop a village into a model village, it is  necessary to ensure that 
the village has adequate physical and socio -economic infrastructural facilities for its 
inhabitants. The ideal situation for a model village in terms of its physical and social 
infrastructural facilities can be conceived in the following framework.         
                     
Envisaged Physical and socio-economic Infrastructure of a Model Village 
PHYSICAL SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
 Road Network 
  Education & Skill Development 
 Water Supply 
  Health care 
 Sanitation 
  Post Office and Bank 
 Street lights 
  Livelihood security 
 Housing 
  Physical Security 
 Services for Persons with Disabilities and 
Senior Citizens etc. 
 
3. Objective of the Scheme 
 
In the above background, objective of PMAGY would be: 
 
To ensure integrated development of the selected 1000 villages with more 
than 50% SC population into “model villages” so that, inter alia, 
 
(i) They have all requisite physical and social infrastructure for their socio -
economic development, and satisfy the norms mentioned in para 2.1 to 
the maximum possible extent. 
 
(ii) Disparity between SC and non -SC population in terms of common 
socio-economic indicators (e.g. literacy rate, completion rate of 
elementary education, IMR/MMR, ownership of productive assets,  etc.) 
is eliminated, the indicators are raised to at least the level of the  
national average, and : 
 
a. All  BPL families, especially those belonging to SCs, have food 
and livelihood security, and are enabled to cross the poverty line 
and earn an adequate livelihood, 
b. All children complete at least eight years of education, and  
c. Incidence of malnutrition, especially among children and women, 
is eliminated. 
 
(iii) Untouchability, discrimination, segregation, and atrocities against SCs 
are eliminated, as are other social evils like discrimination against 
girls/women, alcoholism and substance (drugs) abuse, etc., and all 

68 
 
sections of society  are able to live with dignity and equality, and in 
harmony  with others.  
 
 The above objectives are intended to be achieved in a time span of about 
three years.  
 
4. Approach and Strategy 
 
4.1 Approach 
 
Integrated development of selected villages will be primarily achieved 
through implementation of existing scheme of Central and State Govts. in a 
convergent manner. Gap -filling funding of Rs. 10.0 lakh per village on an average 
will be provided by the Central Government (with expectation of a matching grant 
from the State Govts.) for meeting special requirements of villages which cannot be 
met from existing schemes, in the short term. 
Efforts will also be expected to be made to rope in Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) and also the private corporate sector, in the development of 
selected villages, and to dovetail their initiatives under Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) with PMAGY.   
4.2 Strategy 
 
Main components of the strategy to achieve each of the above objectives, 
alongwith the indicative list of corresponding ongoing programmes, are given in 
tabular form below: 
Sl.
No. 
Objectives Strategy Indicative list of Programmes 
1. Provision of 
requisite 
physical and 
social 
infrastructure in 
selected villages   
Convergent 
implementation of various 
ongoing programmes, 
with necessary 
supplementation/ gap -
filling 
 As given in Annexures V  (e) and  
V (f).      
  
2. All the BPL 
families, 
especially those 
belonging to 
SCs, are 
enabled to cross 
the poverty line 
and earn 
adequate 
livelihood, and 
have adequate 
(i) Rural poverty 
alleviation programmes   
to be implemented in a 
manner to ensure flow of 
adequate benefits to SCs 
(ii) To ensure adequate 
access to bank loans, 
entrepreneurial training, 
and marketing support to 
SC farmers, artisans, 
craftsmen, traders 
 National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Programme,  
 Swarnjayanti Gram 
Swarozgar Yojana,  
 Prime Minister's 
Employment Gene ration 
Programme  
 National Social Assistance 
Programme 
 Indira Gandhi National Old 
Age Pension Scheme 

69 
 
social security 
 
 (IGNOAPS) 
  Indira Gandhi National 
Widow Pension Scheme 
(IGNWPS) 
  Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme 
(IGNDPS) 
  National Family Benefit 
Scheme (NFBS) and 
  Annapurna. 
3. The SCs are 
able to live with 
dignity and 
equality with the 
others 
 
(i)  Better enforcement of  
legal provisions for the 
protection of weaker 
sections, especially SCs  
(ii)  If the village has been 
Identified as an atrocity -
prone  area, taking a slew 
of  measures to improve 
SCs' security therein. 
(iii) To restore 
lands/houses to SC 
land/house-owners, who            
have been unlawfully 
dispossessed. 
 Awareness building 
programmes- especially of the 
State Govt.  
 Scheme for Implementation 
of the Protection of Civil Right Act, 
1955 and the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 
1989 
 Schemes of Assistance to 
NGOs working in the field of social 
equality 
  
 
5. Selection of States and Villages for the Pilot Scheme 
 
5.1 As mentioned in para 1.4.2 above,  there  are 44,080 villages, spread across 
25 States and 2 UTs, having more than 50% SC population. As per the budget 
announcement, only 1,000 of such villages will be covered in the first year in the pilot 
phase, i.e. 2.3% of the total villages with >50% SC popu lation. In the pilot phase it is 
proposed to implement the scheme in five States, representing five regions of the 
country, as per details given below:  
 
 
Sl.No. Region State Total No. of 
villages with 
>50% SC Popn. 
No. of villages 
proposed to be 
selected for Pilot 
Phase 
1 North  Uttar Pradesh 10,266 225 
2 East Bihar 2,476 225 
3 West Rajasthan 2,467 225 
4 South Tamil Nadu 2,169 225 
5 North East Assam 883 100 
 Total  18,261 1,000 
 

70 
 
5.2 States are advised to, as far as possible, select all the villages for the pilot 
phase from one district only. However, if a State feels strongly, it will, for sufficient 
reasons, be allowed to select the villages from 2 -3 contiguous districts. This will 
ensure focused attention to the pilot scheme. States will also be ad vised to give 
preference to more backward districts while making selection under the scheme. 
 
5.3 Number of districts in each of the above five States, each of which has  more 
than the number of villages to be selected from the State (i.e. 100 in Assam and  225 
in other four States) is given at Annexure V (g).  It would thus be seen that each of 
the five States has at least one district which, by itself, has the number of villages to 
be selected from the State under PMAGY. States will therefore be expected t o, as 
far as possible, select all the villages for the pilot phase from one district only. 
However, if a State feels strongly, it may, for sufficient reasons,  select the specified 
no. of villages from two - or a maximum three - contiguous districts. This will ensure 
focused attention to the pilot scheme in a compact way.  
 
6. Target Group 
 
 While the proposed scheme will generally cover all  sections of society living 
in the selected villages with more than 50% SC population, special focus will be on 
development of weaker sections like: 
 
 Scheduled Castes, 
 Scheduled Tribes, 
 Women and children, 
 Persons with disability, and 
 the destitute. 
 
7. Components of the Scheme 
 
The proposed scheme will have two main components. The two components 
and their sub-components will be as follows: 
 
I. Territorial Area-related Component 
 
i. Convergent implementation of existing schemes  
ii. Gap-filling  
 
 
II. Functional Area-related Components 
 
i. Strengthening of Administrative Machinery for planning, 
implementation and monitoring,  including by training/orientation of 
key personnel 
ii. Technical Resource Support for the Scheme 
iii. Awareness Generation and Publicity 
iv. Management Information System (MIS) 
v. Evaluation 

71 
 
vi. State and National-level Awards for Best Performing Villages 
 
Details of the above components/sub-components are given below: 
.  
I. Territorial Area-related Component 
 
 The first component of the proposed scheme is territorial in nature, and 
is centered on individual villages.  It will have following two sub-components: 
 
 (i) Convergence  
 (ii) Gap-filling   
 
i. Convergence  
 
 A number of schemes are being implemented by the Central 
Government for providing physical and social infrastructure, poverty 
alleviation etc. While some of these aim to attain universal coverage within a 
stipulated time-frame, there are other major flagship programmes which are 
also specially relevant for SCs. A list of schemes of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment for development of SCs  are at Annexure V (e), 
while a list of universalized and other major  programmes of other 
Ministries/Deptts. of Central Govt.  is given at Annexure V (f). Besides, there 
are a number of schemes being implemented by the State Governments also.  
 
 The integrated development of villages with SC concentration will be 
achieved primarily through  convergent implementation of existing Central and 
State schemes.  Based on the development deficit of the area, the role of 
various existing schemes in bridging these gaps will be worked out at the level 
of Gram Panchayat, which will prepare the village plan.  In order to ensure 
that the benefits of all the major development programmes converge at the 
identified villages with SC concentration, so as to ensure av ailability of all the 
necessary services, it is proposed that: 
 
 Necessary instructions will be issued by the concerned 
Ministries/Departments/State Govts. to cover the selected SC 
concentration villages on priority under the universalized 
programmes.  
 In r egard to non -universalised schemes also, State Govts. will 
ensure that all the villages selected under PMAGY are necessarily 
covered by them within the XI Plan.  
 State Governments will also be requested to modify their schemes, 
to the extent necessary, to cover selected  villages on priority. 
 The strategy of SCSP will be effectively utilized to direct resources 
and associated benefits from the schemes of Central and State 
Governments towards the selected villages.  
 All universalized programmes will be imple mented in the selected 
villages in such a way that all eligible beneficiaries, especially SC 
beneficiaries, are fully covered.  
 

72 
 
It may, however, be noted that the list of non -universalised 
programmes mentioned in Annexure VI are in the nature  of a menu of  
schemes. These are to be implemented in the selected villages, depending 
upon needs of the village, and the parameters of the Scheme.  
 
ii.  Gap-filling  
 
This component will be used for meeting specifically identified 
developmental requirements of select ed villages which cannot be met under 
the existing schemes of the Central and State Governments. For this purpose, 
gap-filling funds for every selected village will be provided under PMAGY at  
an average rate, of Rs. 10 lakh per village. 
 
Only activities of a non-recurring nature would be funded through the 
gap- filling component. It will not be permissible to incur expenditure on 
recurring items like staff salaries, office expenses, etc. from this component. 
Purchase of vehicle and office equipment will also not be permissible. 
 
An indicative list of purposes for which money may be provided through 
the gap-filling component is  as under : 
 
 Anganwadi and Health Sub -Centre building (where it is not likely to 
be built  under existing schemes in the near future),  
 Housing for women teachers, 
 Panchayat building and Community Hall, 
 Facilities for sports and physical activities,  
 Paved streets,  culverts, and pukka covered drains 
 Information/internet Kiosk 
 
 
II. Functional Area-wise Components 
 
i. Strengthening of Administrative Machinery 
 
Besides strengthening of the administrative machinery through 
additional manpower, this will include training t o key personnel in discharging 
their assigned responsibilities. The capacity of the functionaries at the Gram 
Panchayat, Block Panchayat and District Panchayat will need to be enhanced 
through basic training in areas of  Planning, implementation and monito ring. 
Besides, training of State level functionaries will also be organized. The 
training programmes will give priority to the competencies required for 
effective planning, implementation and social audit. Efforts would be made to 
dovetail with the existin g training programmes of the Ministry of Panchayati 
Raj, for this purpose.  
 
To effectively carry out planning, statistical work, implementation, 
coordination and monitoring of the scheme at these levels,  administrative 
machinery would need to be strengthe ned.  For this purpose, State 
Governments will be expected to provide additional manpower at the District, 
and Block levels on the following pattern:  

73 
 
 
(i) For each District with more than 100 selected villages - A 
District Coordinator, and one assistant.  
(ii) For each Block with more than 20 selected villages - A Block 
Coordinator, with an assistant.  
 
At the Gram Panchayat level, State Govt. could consider paying an 
honorarium to a suitable village level functionary (e.g. Secretary of the Gram 
Panchayat)  who is given nodal responsibility for PMAGY. 
 
Levels and pay scales of the posts suggested at the District and 
Block level will be decided by the State Govts., keeping local parities in view, 
and they would be expected to be filled by deputation or on contract, so as not 
to create any long -term recurring liability. Central assistance for the above 
posts will be given, on re-imbursement basis, upto a maximum of 3% of the 
assistance released to the State under the  gap -filling component. Beyond 
this, expenditure towards this component will have to be borne by State Govt.  
 
ii. Technical Resource Support for the Scheme 
 
At the national level, the National Institute of Rural Development, 
Hyderabad, will provide technical resource support to the Scheme.  At the 
State level, the State Govt. will be expected to identify a suitable Institution for 
the purpose. 
 
These institutions will perform, inter alia, the following functions: 
 
 help in preparing guidelines for planning, appraisal, monitoring, etc. 
of the Scheme,  
 develop model illustrative village plans, and 
 prepare training modules and train key personnel connected with 
the Scheme.  
 
A final view about State level institutions to be engaged will be taken by 
the concerned State Govt. in consultation with the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment. However, a suggestive list of Institutions which could be 
considered for the purpose at the State level is given at Annexure V (h). 
 
At district and lower levels, technical resource support by way of 
planning, monitoring and training of personnel may be tapped locally from 
amongst : 
 
- District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) 
- Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) established 
under the scheme “Support to State Extension Programme for 
Extension Reforms” of Deptt. of Agri. & Coop. 
- Local Colleges ( esp. faculty members from Economics and Sociology 
Deptts.) 
- Panchayati Raj training institutions 

74 
 
- Any other training institution of State Govt. engaged in enhancing the 
planning capabilities of grass-roots level functionaries 
- Reputed NGOs 
 
iii.     Awareness Generation and Publicity 
 
Awareness generation through Information, Educatio n and 
Communication (IEC) in the selected 1000 villages and in the concerned 
Block and District, would be undertaken to give wide publicity to the scheme. 
Besides, social messages on various aspects relating to SCs will be 
disseminated. Awareness campaign to educate SCs of their rights, as also to 
sensitise other sections of the society about the specific problems faced by 
SCs, would also be undertaken.  
 
iv. Management Information System (MIS) 
 
An effective MIS would be put in place under which a computerized 
database on selected villages, including baseline values of key indicators will 
be maintained, and change in these values after PMAGY intervention will be 
monitored. MIS will also be used fo r monitoring progress in implementation of 
various schemes whose convergent implementation is sought to be achieved 
in the villages, as also the activities undertaken under the “gap -filling” 
component.  
 
The outlay proposed for this purpose will be utilize d for the following 
items: 
a. Development of a suitable MIS software for the scheme 
b. Hiring of manpower, with appropriate skills,  on short term 
contract, for operating the MIS 
c. Provision of computer facilities, where absolutely necessary, 
with internet connectivity 
 
v. Evaluation  
 
Independent evaluation of the scheme will be undertaken through 
reputed institutions working in the area of  social sciences, management etc,. 
For this purpose, a baseline survey of the socio -economic development and 
availability of basic infrastructure in the selected villages will first be done.  
 
vi. State and National-level Awards for Best Performing Villages 
 
In each State, 3 best performing villages will be selected, on the basis 
of performance indicators to be evolved in due course. S elected villages will 
be given an award of  Rs. 5 lakh each.  Of the 3 villages from each State, 
which get State awards, a further selection of 3 villages from the country as a 
whole, will be made for being given National Awards of Rs. 10 lakh each.  
 
  
  
  
  

75 
 
 8. Funding for Functional Area-wise Components 
  
For the six functional area -wise components, described above, assistance 
on pro-rata basis (i.e. as % of the outlay for territorial area -wise component) will 
be  provided, as given below:   
 
Sl.
No. 
Functional Area-wise Component Estd. reqt. as % of outlay for 
territorial area -wise 
components 
1 Strengthening of Administrative Machinery  upto 3% of gap-filling 
component on re-imbursement 
basis  
2 Technical Resource Support for the Scheme 1% 
3 Awareness Generation and Publicity  
1% 4  Management Information System (MIS) 
5 Evaluation 
6 Awards  to Best-performing Villages 
[5 lakh X 3 State awards X 5 States= 75 lakh]    
+  
[10 lakh X  3 National Awards=30 lakh] 
 
Total 1.05 Crore  
 
 
1% 
 Total 6% 
 
9. Time frame for completing activities under the two components of the 
Scheme 
 
Activities to be undertaken under the gap-filling component will be expected to 
be completed within one year of the launch of scheme. Convergent implementation 
of the existing sch eme, however, will continue  in order to ensure achievement of 
basic “model village” milestones, as far as possible,  within three years. Within the 
activities to be undertaken through convergent implementation, those relating to 
development of physical in frastructure  will be expected to be completed within one 
to two years. Improvement in social indicators, such as infant mortality, maternal 
mortality, universal immunization, 100% institutional delivery, 100% retention in 
schools of children in the group  6-14 may be accomplished within 3 years. 
 
10. Monitorable Targets 
 
 PMAGY will aim at overall development of selected villages so as to provide 
them with all the necessary facilities to ensure that the disparity between SC and 
non-SC population in terms of common socio -economic indicators  is eliminated and 
the indicators are raised to at least the level of the  national average. The 
performance of the scheme will be specifically monitored in terms of achievement of 
following targets at the end of third year of the PMAGY implementation: 
 
 As far as possible, elimination of p overty, but reduction in its incidence 
by at least 50% within three years.  
 Universal adult literacy 

76 
 
 100% enrolment and retention of  children at the elementary stage (I -
VIII). 
 Reduction of infant mortality rate (per thousand live births) to 30 and  
maternal mortality rate (per lakh) to 100, by 2012.   
 Village should fulfil the Nirmal Gram Puraskar norms of the Deptt. Of 
Drinking Water Supply, M/o Rural Devt.  
 Access to safe drinking water facility to all villagers on a sustainable 
basis.  
 100% institutional deliveries for pregnant women 
 Full immunisation of children 
 Achieving all weather road connectivity to the village  
 100% registration of deaths and births in the village 
 No child marriages, and child labour 
 No public consumption of liquor and other intoxicating substances 
 100% allotment of IAY houses to all eligible families 
 
Above targets are expected to be achieved by the end of the third year of 
implementation of the PMAGY. 
 
11. Conditions for release of Central assistance towards gap -filling  
component and submission of proposals by State Govts. for the purpose 
 
State Governments will be required to fulfill following conditions to be eligible 
for receiving Central assistance towards gap-filling component:  
 
 Concurrence to implement the scheme broadly in conformity with its 
parameters 
 Identification of requisite no. of villages in one district or in 2 -3 preferably 
contiguous Districts 
 Agreement to prepare a benchmark database in respect of each selected 
village, by 15th June, 2010 
 Agreement to a chieve scheme‟s objectives in a roughly three year time 
frame.   
 Listing of State Plan schemes relevant for PMAGY (on the lines of Central 
schemes mentioned in Annexures V (e) and V(f)  and concurrence to 
implement all the Central and State Govts.‟ schemes in selected villages in 
a convergent manner. 
 Identification of Technical Resource Support Institution at State and 
District level. 
 Enunciation of State Policy about matching share of gap-filling 
 Constitution of  State -level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee (see para 
12.3 below). 
 Designation of Programme Directors at the State, District, and Block levels 
(see para 12.3.4 below) 
 
State Govts., after fulfilling above conditions, will send a proposal, based on 
which gap-filling funds would be released by the Central Govt.  Proposal of the State 
Govt. should also clearly indicate its policy about providing matching share. While 
State Govts. are expected to provide a matching share towards gap -filling, it will not 
be mandatory. 

77 
 
 
12. Implementation Modalities at the Central, State, District, Block and 
Village levels 
 
12.1  Advisory Committees at the Central and State levels 
 
For over -all guidance and monitoring of the Scheme, Advisory Committees 
may be established at the Central and State levels. The Central Advisory Committee 
would be headed by the Union Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment (SJ&E). 
The State Advisory Committee may be headed by the State Minister for SJ&E or co -
chaired by him with the State Minister for Rural development. These Committees 
may have a suitable no. of public representatives, besides representatives of 
concerned Ministries/Deptts. and bodies, as mentione d in the context of the 
Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees mentioned in paras 12.2. and 12.3 below.  
 
12.2 Central Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
 
At the level of Central Govt., there will be a Central Steering -cum-Monitoring 
Committee, which will perform following functions: 
 
(i) Address day -to-day broad policy issues in implementation of the 
scheme 
(ii) Monitor implementation of the Scheme, and 
(iii) Issue supplementary implementation guidelines from time to time. 
 
Composition of the Central Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee is at Annexure 
V (i). It will meet once every quarter. 
 
12.3 State level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
 
12.3.1   At the State level, all policy matter pertaining to PMAGY will be 
decided by a State level Steering -cum-Monitoring Committee, whic h will also lead 
and monitor its implementation. While the State Govts. will decide the composition of 
the State -level Steering -cum-Monitoring Committee, its suggested composition is 
given in Annexure V (j).  
 
12.3.2  Main functions of the State level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
will be as follows: 
 
(i) To lay down State level guidelines for implementation of PMAGY, 
consistent with but in amplification of the Central guidelines - in particular, 
spelling out the manner in which District, Block and Gram Panchayats will 
plan, implement and monitor the Scheme. 
(ii) Identification of State Plan schemes which are also to be implemented 
convergently under PMAGY. 
(iii) Laying down State level guidelines for baseline survey. 
(iv) Defining role and responsibility of implementing  agencies at various 
levels, namely, District, Block, Gram Panchayat, and Village level. 
(v) Approval of broad District level plan, with such instructions as it may 
consider necessary 
(vi) Monitoring of PMAGY 

78 
 
 
12.3.3  The State level Steering -cum-Monitoring Committee will meet at least 
once every quarter. 
 
 
12.3.4 Programme Director at various levels 
 
The Member -Secretary of the Central and State level Steering -cum-
Monitoring Committee will act as the Programme Director, PMAGY, at the national 
and State levels, respectively. Similarly, the State Government would also designate 
a Programme Director at the District and Block levels. Normally the CEO of the 
District and Block level Panchayat would be expected to be designated as the 
District and Block level Programme Di rectors, respectively. The Programme Director 
will act as the Chief Executive for the PMAGY at their respective levels. 
 
12.4  Technical Resource Support and Capacity Building of key functionaries 
 
12.4.1  As mentioned above, identified institutions will p rovide Technical 
Resource Support for the scheme at the/Central and State level. Key functionaries 
involved in implementation of PMAGY will be given training in planning, 
implementation and monitoring of the scheme.   
 
12.4.2  At the national level, the Na tional Institute for Rural Development 
(NIRD), Hyderabad, will be the  Technical Resource Support Institution, and will play 
the following role:  
 
(i) Preparation of Model illiustrative village plan 
(ii) Orientation of State Govt. officials, officials of Technical resource 
Support Institutions, and key functionaries at Distt. and Block levels 
(iii) Preparation of model Implementation Manual for Distt., Block and 
Village levels. 
(iv) Guidelines for  baseline survey. 
 
12.4.3  State level Technical Resource Support Institutions w ill be required to 
do the following: 
 
(i) Adapt the NIRD manual to the needs and circumstances of the States, 
and prepare  it in State‟s language, 
(ii) Orientation of Distt. and Block level officials, 
(iii) Orientation of Gram Panchayat functionaries at Distt. Level, and  
(iv) Adapt the NIRD guidelines for baseline survey, and prepare it in the 
language of the State. 
 
12.5 Baseline Survey of Selected Villages 
 
State Govts. will have a  baseline database prepared for each village in 
respect of key indicators of socio -economic  and educational development of the 
total village and the SCs living therein, about availability of basis infrastructure, and 
the critical gaps to be filled through PMAGY. Changes in these values after PMAGY 
intervention will be monitored.  
 

79 
 
12.6 Preparation of Village Plans, and their Approval and Implementation  
 
12.6.1  The development plans will be need based. In order to ensure this, the 
preparation and appraisal/approval of Village plans will be decentralized. The 
development plans for selected village s will be prepared at the Gram Panchayat 
level after discussion in the Gram Sabha. These plans will be appraised and 
consolidated at the Block Panchayat level, and transmitted to  the District Panchayat. 
Village plans will be prepared, appraised/consolidat ed and approved by the 
Panchayati Raj Institutions, as described above, in light of broad parameters set by 
the State-level Committee.  
 
12.6.2  For preparation of village development plans, following steps should be 
taken:  
 
 (i) Identification of development needs of the village 
(ii) Identification of existing schemes which can be used for meeting above 
needs, 
(iii) Identification of needs, out of (i) above, which can not be met through 
existing schemes 
(iv) Prioritisation of  needs identified in ( iii) above, for  optimal use of the 
gap-filling fund of Rs. 10.0 lakh (+ State contribution) , to ensure that 
most important needs of the village are met.   
 
12.6.3  National institute of Rural Development (NIRD) is preparing some 
Model Illustrative Village Plans, which will be circulated to States. Based on this, for 
each State model village development plans should be prepared by the State -level 
Technical resource Support institution, to be identified by the State Govt, with NIRD‟s 
help, to the extent necessary.  
 
12.6.4  Consolidated Plan for the District, giving broad feature and outlays, will 
be sent by the District Panchayat to the State Govt. for being considered by the 
State level Steering -cum-Monitoring Committee, mentioned in para 12.3. The 
Committee will consider and approve the plans with such broad policy guidance as it 
may deem fit.  .  
 
12.6.5  Once the District Plans are so approved, Village level plans will be 
approved by the District Panchayats, based on guidelines/directions/approval of the  
State level Committee. 
 
12.6.6  Gap-filling funds for the selected villages in a State will be released to 
State Governments by the Ministry, on the basis of receipt of a consolidated 
proposal from them, and subject to the State fulfilling conditions stip ulated in para 11 
above. 
        
12.7 Convergent Implementation of Ongoing Schemes: Modalities 
 
12.7.1  Convergent implementation of ongoing Central and State Plan 
Schemes in PMAGY villages will be achieved through the following steps: 
 

80 
 
(i) Systematic listing of all Central & State Plan Schemes relevant for 
development of PMAGY vi llages (on the lines of Annex. V(f)  listing 
Central Plan Schemes). 
 
(ii) Clear understanding of the basic features of each of the above 
schemes by persons and bodies responsible for plannin g, 
implementation and monitoring of PMAGY, and necessary capacity 
building for the purpose. 
(iii) Identification of (a) village needs, and (b) Schemes which can be 
utilized for satisfying those needs, and preparation of Village Dev. 
Plans (VDPs) on that basis.  
(iv) Clear directions by the State Govt. to all concerned Deptts., to make 
available adequate resources under the identified schemes to the 
PMAGY Villages ( and to corresponding district)  in accordance with 
VDPs approved by the Distt. Panchayat, and time -bound 
implementation of the Schemes in such villages. 
(v) Officials of Deptts. responsible for the above Schemes being placed 
under the control of the Distt. Panchayat, to the extent not already 
done, so that they implement the Schemes as per Village Dev. Plan 
approved by the Distt. Panchayat. Also, making their officials at  
appropriate lower levels accountable to the concerned Block & Gram 
Panchayats. 
(vi) Effective coordination, monitoring and supervision of the convergent 
implementation process by the Gram, Block and  Distt. Panchayats and 
the State Govt. 
 
12.7.2  The above would, inter alia, require orders by the State Govt. to the 
concerned Deptts. 
a) placing them under the District Panchayat, and 
b) to allocate resources under their schemes to PMAGY villages on 
priority in accordance with the Village Dev. Plans approved by the 
Distt. Panchayats, to the maximum possible extent. 
 
12.7.3  In addition, convergent implementation would also require: 
 
(i) Capacity Building of District, Block and Gram Panchayats by the 
State and District-level technical resource support agencies. 
(ii) Adequate training to the District, Block and Panchayat 
Coordinators appointed under PMAGY. 
(iii) Nomination of a    suitable   Block-level   Officer  by    the Block  
Panchayat for each PMAGY village, who will close ly guide 
preparation of the Village Development Plan, and its 
implementation after approval by the Disttrict Panchayat. 
 
12.8 Review 
 
Performance under the Scheme will be reviewed by the Central level and 
State level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committees from time to time.  
 
 
 

81 
 
12.9 Timelines for various activities 
 
As PMAGY seeks to develop selected villages into “model villages” in a time -
bound manner, State Govts. are required to adhere to the following activity schedule, 
for various activities to be undertaken under the Scheme: 
 
Sl.No. Activity Nodal 
Responsibility 
Time Limit 
1 Orientation meeting of State Govt. 
officials 
M/o SJ&E and NIRD 20.3.2010 
2 Receipt of proposals from State Govts. State Govts. 25.3.2010 
3 Sanction of Central assistance towards  
gap-filling component by the M/o SJ&E 
of Central assistance  
M/o SJ&E March/April, 2010 
4 i) First meeting of the State -level 
Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee to 
lay down  State -specific guidelines for 
preparation of Village Plans 
ii) Issue of State -specific guidelines 
followed by orientation of District and 
Block  level functionaries  
State Govts.  
 
 
 
State Govt. and State 
level Technical 
Resource Support 
Institutions 
15.4.2010 
 
 
 
 
30.4.2010 
5 Orientation of Gram Panchayat/Village 
level functionaries 
Distt. Panchayat, 
DRDA and District -
level Technical 
Resource Support 
Institution 
15.5.2010 
6 Benchmark Survey of selected Villages State Govt. 15.6.2010 
7 Preparation of Village Plan by the Gram 
Panchayat and its transmission to the 
Block Panchayat 
Gram Panchayat 30.6.2010 
8 Appraisal/Consolidation of Village Plan 
by the Block Panchayat 
Block Panchayat 31.7.2010 
9 Consideration of Village Plans by the 
District Panchayat and transmission of 
broad District Plan to the State level 
District Panchayat 31.8.2010 
10 Approval of the State -level Steering -
cum-Monitoring Committee on the  
District level consolidated plans 
State Govt. 15.9.2010 
11 District Panchayat to accord final 
approval to the Village Plans, after 
incorporating advice of the State -level 
Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
District Panchayat 30.9.2010 
12 Implementation of gap-filling component State Govt. and 
Panchayati Raj 
Instituions involved in 
implementation of the 
scheme  
Upto 31.3.2011 
13 Convergent implementation of existing 
schemes 
From 2010-11 
onwards 
(normally, up to 
2012-13) 
 
 

82 
 
14 Achievement of targets under the 
Schemes mentioned in Sl.No. 13 
-do- By the target date 
laid down in the 
substantive 
scheme, or by 
31.3.2013, 
whichever is 
earlier.  
 
13. Monitoring  
 
13.1 Monitoring of the scheme will be done at National, State, District, Block and 
Village levels, as per details given below: 
 
Level Agency which will monitor 
National Central Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee [Annexure V (i)] 
State  State-level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
 [ Annexure V (j) ] 
District District level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees constituted by 
the M/o RD vide its Order No. Q-13018/2/2002-A.I (RD) –Vol.II 
[Annexure V (k)] 
Block Block Panchayat 
Village Gram Panchayat 
 
Global Positioning System (GPS)  based  monitoring will also be used, as far 
as possible.  
 
13.2 Flow of credit to PMAGY villages under Priority Sector Lending and 
Differential Rate of Interest Schemes will be monitored at various levels by the 
following existing Committees/agencies: 
 
 i) State-level Bankers‟ Committee 
 ii) District-level Coordination Committee of Banks, and District Lead Bank 
 iii) Block-level Bankers‟ Committee 
 
14. Social Audit 
 
The Gram Sabha will be expected to undertake social audit of PMAGY, on the 
same lines as it is required to do under Section 17 of the National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act, 2005. 
 
15. Submission of Progress Reports 
 
State governments are required to submit quarterly and annual progress 
reports on completion of activities envisaged to be undertaken  under the Village 
Plans, in the prescribed proforma. The proforma for this purpose will be developed 
and circulated to the State Governments, in due course. 
  

83 
 
Annexure V (a) 
(Ref. Para 1.3) 
Constitutional Provisions for Scheduled Castes 
Part of the 
Constitution 
(1) 
Sl.N. 
 
(2) 
Article 
 
(3) 
Brief provision of the Article 
 
(4) 
III. Fundamental 
Rights 
Social Safeguards 
1 17 Abolition of Untouchability 
2 25 (2) (b) Opening of Hindu religious institutions of public 
character to all classes and sections of Hindus 
Educational, Economic and Employment-related Safeguards 
3 15 (4) & 
(5) 
Special provisions, including in regard to admission 
in educational institutions, for the advancement of 
socially and educationally backward classes, 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
4 (i) 16 (4) Reservation of appointments and posts in public 
services in  favour of backward classes including 
SCs 
(ii) 16(4A)  Reservation in matters of promotion in public 
services 
(iii) 16(4B) Backlog vacancies to be treated as separate class 
of vacancies and not to be covered under the ceiling 
of 50%, for the purposes of 16 (4) and 16 (4A)  
IV. Directive 
Principles of State 
Policy 
5 46 “Promotion of Educational and Economic 
interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and other Weaker Sections  
 The State shall promote with special care the 
educational and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and 
shall protect them from social injustice and all forms 
of exploitation.” 
 Political Safeguards 
XVI. Special 
Provisions relating 
to certain Classes 
6 330 Reservation of seats for SCs and STs in the House 
of the People 
7 332 Reservation of seats for SCs and STs in Legislative 
Assemblies of the States 
IX. The Panchayats 8 243 D  Reservation of seats for SCs and STs in 
Panchayats 
IXA. The 
Municipalities 
9 243 T Reservation of seats for SCs and STs in 
Municipalities 
 Agency for monitoring safeguards 
XVI. Special 
Provisions relating 
to certain Classes 
10 338 National Commission for Scheduled Castes 

84 
 
Annexure V (b) 
 
(Ref. para 1.4.1) 
 
State-wise Total and SC Popn. and share of SCs in total Popn. 
 
Category in terms 
of  percentage of 
SC Population 
Sl. No. States/UTs Percentage of SC 
population in the total 
population of the State/UT 
I. > 20% 
1 Punjab 28.9 
2 Himachal Pradesh 24.7 
3 West Bengal 23.0 
4 Uttar Pradesh 21.2 
II. 15-20% 
5 Haryana 19.3 
6 Tamil Nadu 19.0 
7 Uttarakhand 17.9 
8 Chandigarh (UT) 17.5 
9 Tripura 17.4 
10 Rajasthan 17.2 
11 NCT of Delhi (UT) 16.9 
12 Orissa 16.5 
13 Karnataka 16.2 
14 Andhra Pradesh 16.2 
15 Puducherry (UT) 16.2 
16 Bihar 15.7 
17 Madhya Pradesh 15.2 
III. 10-15% 
18 Jharkhand 11.8 
19 Chhattisgarh 11.6 
20 Maharashtra 10.2 
IV. 5-10% 
21 Kerala 9.8 
22 Jammu & Kashmir 7.6 
23 Gujarat 7.1 
24 Assam 6.9 
25 Sikkim 5.0 
V. <5% 
26 Daman & Diu (UT) 3.1 
27 Manipur 2.6 
28 Goa 1.8 
29 D & N Haveli (UT) 1.9 
30 Arunachal Pradesh 0.6 
31 Meghalaya 0.5 
32 Mizoram 0.0 
33 Nagaland 0.0 
34 A & N Islands (UT) 0.0 
35 Lakshadweep (UT) 0.0 
                                                                                                              (Census 2001) 

85 
 
Annexure V (c) 
 
(Ref. para 1.4.2) 
 
State/UT-wise No. of Districts, Block and villages with  >50% & >40% SC 
Population 
Category of 
States /UTs 
as per no. 
of villages 
with >40% 
SC popn. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
No. of Districts, Block and villages with   
>50% SC Population >40% SC Population 
   Districts Blocks Villages Districts Block
s 
Village
s 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)    
I. States 
with 
>10,000 
villages 
1 Uttar 
Pradesh 
0 7 10266 1 33 17696 
2 West 
Bengal 
1 18 7555 1 44 10391 
 
 
II. States 
with 2,000 -
10,000 
villages 
3 Orissa 0 0 2514 0 0 4185 
4 Bihar 0 0 2476 0 0 4135 
5 Rajasthan 0 0 2467 0 3 4116 
6 Madhya 
Pradesh 
0 0 2079 0 0 3968 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 2594 0 4 3891 
8 Punjab 0 4 2095 1 28 3830 
9 Tamil 
Nadu 
0 2 2169 0 16 3562 
10 Karnataka 0 0 2150 0 0 3478 
11 Jharkhand 0 2 1891 0 2 2732 
12 Uttarakhan
d 
0 0 1442 0 0 2127 
 
III. States 
with 200 -
2,000 
villages 
13 Andhra 
Pradesh 
0 0 908 0 2 1882 
14 Chhattisga
rh 
0 0 987 0 0 1359 
15 Assam 0 0 883 0 0 1184 
16 Maharashtr
a 
0 0 576 0 0 1134 
17 Haryana 0 0 391 0 1 752 
18 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
0 0 500 0 1 735 
 
 
19 Gujarat 0 0 50 0 0 117 
20 Tripura 0 0 30 0 0 64 
21 Manipur 0 0 24 0 0 26 
22 Puducherr 0 0 14 0 0 25 

86 
 
IV. 
States/UTs 
with <200 
villages 
y 
23 Delhi 0 0 2 0 0 9 
24 Kerala 0 1 6 0 1 8 
25 Meghalaya 0 0 7 0 0 8 
26 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
0 0 3 0 0 3 
27 Sikkim 0 0 1 0 0 1 
28 Chandigar
h 
0 0 0 0 0 1 
  Total 1 34 44080 3 135 71419 
        (Census, 2001) 
 

87 
 
 Annexure V (d) 
(Ref. para 1.4.3) 
 
Development Status of SCs vis-à-vis the Overall Population 
 Indicator 
(with source of information 
and ref. year) 
Segment of the 
target group 
Sche-
duled 
Castes 
All 
I. Educational 
Development 
Literacy Rate 
(Census, 2001) 
 54.7 64.8 
Gross Enrollment Ratio 
(Selected Educational 
Statistics, MHRD, 2006-07) 
    
Primary 
Upper Primary    
Secondary 
Higher Education 
123.7 
75.6 
38.8 
9.35 
111.2 
73.6 
40.6 
12.4 
Dropout Rate 
(Selected Educational 
Statistics, MHRD, 2006-07) 
     
Class I-V 
Class I-VIII 
Class I-X 
36.0 
53.0 
69.0 
25.4 
46.0 
59.9 
II. Health & 
Nutrition 
Infant Mortality 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 50.7 41.5 
Maternal Mortality 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 - 301 
Institutional Deliveries 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 32.9 51.0 
Full Immunisation of children 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 39.7 53.8 
Percentage of women with 
anemia 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 58.3 51.3 
Percentage of anemic 
children 
(NFHS, 2005-06) 
 72.2 63.8 
III. Economic 
Development 
Incidence of Poverty 
(Planning Commission, 2004 -
05)     
Rural 
Urban 
36.8 
39.9 
28.3 
25.7 
Percentage of landlessness 
(NSSO, 2004-05) 
 78.0 57.0* 
Average size per operational 
holding (hectares)  
(Agri. Census, 1995-96) 
 0.91 1.4 
IV. % of 
Households 
with access to 
basic 
amenities 
Safe Drinking water 
(Census, 2001) 
 81.1 79.2* 
Toilet 
(Census, 2001) 
23.7 42.3* 
Electricity 
(Census, 2001) 
44.3 61.4* 
* Non-SC/ST 

88 
 
Annexure V (e) 
 
(Ref. para 1.5.3) 
 
List of Schemes/Interventions of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment 
for the Scheduled Castes 
 
 Schemes of Educational Development  
 Pre-Matric Scholarship to Children of those engaged in Unclean Occupations 
  Post-Matric Scholarship 
 Scholarship for "Top Class Education"  
  National Overseas Scholarship 
  Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship 
 Upgradation of Merit 
  Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatravas Yojana 
  Coaching and Allied Assistance 
 
 Schemes of Economic Development  
  Special Central Assistance to SCSP 
  Self Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers 
  National Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSCFDC) 
  National Safai Karmcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) 
  State Scheduled Castes Development Corporations   (SCDCs) 
 
 Social Empowerment and Other Schemes  
  Scheme for Implementation of PCR Act, 1955 and SC and ST (POA) Act, 
1989 
 Assistance to Voluntary Organisations working for the Welfare of SCs  
 National Award for outstanding work in combating untouchability and 
atrocities against SCs 
  Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 
  Babu Jagjivan Ram National  Foundation. 
 
 

89 
 
Annexure V (f) 
 
(Ref. para 1.5.4) 
 
Important Programmes of Other Ministries, especially relevant for SCs living in 
Rural Areas  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Concerned 
Ministry/ 
Deptt. 
Name of the 
Programme 
 
Activity to be undertaken and target 
date 
I Universalised Programmes 
A. Bharat Nirman Programmes 
1 Deptt. Of Rural 
Development, 
M/o RD 
 
Indira Awas Yojana Construction of 60 lakh houses for the 
rural poor – by 2009 
2 Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana 
All weather road to every habitation of 
over 1000 population (500 in hilly and 
tribal areas)- by 2009 
3 Deptt. of 
Drinking Water 
Supply, M/o 
RD 
National Rural Drinking 
Water Programme 
(formerly Accelerated 
Rural Water Supply 
Programme 
Safe drinking water to every habitation 
– by 2011. 
4 Ministry of 
Power and 
Ministry of 
New and 
Renewable 
Energy 
Sources 
Rajiv Gandhi Gramin 
Vidyutikaran Yojana 
Electricity to every village  (including 
street lighting)- by 2009 
B. Other Programmes 
5 Ministry of 
Women & 
Child 
Development 
Integrated Child 
Development Services 
To provide a package of nutrition, 
health and education-related services 
to children in age -group 0 -6 and to 
pregnant and lactating mothers 
6 Deptt. Of 
School 
Education and 
Literacy, M/o 
HRD 
 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA) and Mid -Day 
Meal 
Universalisation of eight years of 
elementary education by all children 
and to improve their nutritional status 
7 National Literacy 
Mission 
(being renamed as 
National Female 
Literacy Mission) 
To provide basic literacy skills to the 
non-literate population primarily in the 
age group 15-35. 
8 Deptt. of Rural 
Development, 
M/o RD 
National Rural 
Employment Guarantee 
Programme 
At least 100 days of employment per 
year to one persons from every BPL 
family 
9 Deptt. Of 
Drinking Water 
Supply, M/o 
RD 
Total Sanitation 
Campaign 
Construction of toilets and disposal of 
liquid and solid waste- by 2015 

90 
 
10 Ministry of 
Health and 
Family Welfare 
National Rural Health 
Mission   
Provision of basic health care in every 
village   
11 Ministry of 
Labour & 
Employment 
Rasthriya Swasthya 
Bima Yojana 
Comprehensive health insurance 
package for BPL households- by 2012 
 
II Other Major Programmes 
1 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
(i) Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit 
Programme 
(AIBP) 
(ii) Repair, 
Renovation & 
Restoration 
(RRR) of Water 
Bodies 
Central assistance is provided to States 
for undertaking projects  or schemes for 
irrigation development. 
2. Ministry of 
Agriculture 
 
Rashtriya Krishi 
Vikas Yojana 
The scheme aims to  achieve  4% annual 
growth in agriculture sector during XI Plan 
period through holistic development of 
agriculture and allied sectors. It  
envisages preparation of District 
Agriculture Plan, which will include animal 
husbandry and fishery, minor irrigation, 
rural d evelopment works, agricultural 
marketing,  water harvesting and 
conservation, etc. keeping in view the 
natural resources and technological 
possibilities of the district. Each State is 
also to  prepare a comprehensive State 
Agricultural Plan.   
 
          RKVY is a State Plan scheme for 
which funds is provide to State Govts. as 
100% grant by the Central Govt. 
3 National 
Horticulture 
Mission  
 
 
The scheme aims to provide new 
momentum to development of horticulture 
through a mission approach so as to 
generate employment and enhance farm 
income. upto 2008 -09, 357 districts have 
been taken up for the development of 
potential horticulture crops. 
4 Technology 
Mission for 
Integrated 
Development of 
Horticulture in N.E. 
Region (TMNE) 
          The Technology Mission for 
Integrated Development of Horticulture in 
N.E. Region, including Sikkim was started 
in 2001 -02 and extended to J&K, 
Himachal Pradesh an d Uttarakhand in 
2003-04. The scheme aims at 
establishing convergence and synergy 

91 
 
among ongoing programmes for 
horticulture devt. To achieve horizontal 
and vertical integration. The Mission, 
through its four Mini Missions, addresses 
all aspects of horticul ture devt. with an 
end-to-end approach. 
5 Deptt. of Rural 
Development, M/o 
RD 
National Social 
Assistance 
Programme 
 Indira Gandhi National Old Age 
Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS) 
  Indira Gandhi National Widow 
Pension Scheme (IGNWPS) 
  Indira Gandhi National Disability 
Pension Scheme (IGNDPS) 
  National Family Benefit Scheme 
(NFBS) and 
  Annapurna.  
6  Swarnjayanti Gram 
Swarozgar Yojana  
SGSY is a holistic programme covering 
all aspects of self employment, i.e. 
organisation of the rural poor into Self 
Help Groups, training and capacity 
building, planning of activity clusters, 
credit, technology, infrastructure and 
marketing.  
7 Deptt. Of Land 
Resources, M/o 
RD 
Integrated 
Watershed 
Development 
Programme 
Harnessing, conserving and developing 
degraded natural resources such as soil, 
vegetative cover and water.  
8 Ministry of Micro, 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises 
Prime Ministers 
Employment 
Generation 
Programme 
To generate employment opportunities in 
rural as well as urban areas of the 
country through setting up of new self -
employment ventures/ projects/micro 
enterprises 
9. Ministry of PRI Backward Regions 
Grant Fund 
To redress the regional imbalance in 
development by providing financial 
resources for supplementing and 
converging existing developmental 
inflows into 250 identified districts.  
10 Deptt. of 
Telecommunicatio
ns 
Telephone 
connectivity 
To every village - by November, 2007 
(since extended to December, 2008) 
11 Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare 
Janani Suraksha 
Yojana 
To reduce overall maternal mortality ratio 
and infant mortality rate, and to increase 
institutional deliveries in BPL families. 
12 Ministry of  Labour 
& Empt. 
Skill Development 
Initiative 
One million persons to be trained or their 
existing skills tested and certified under 
Modular Employable Skills framework, in 
five years.  
13 Craftsmen Training 
Scheme 
Supply of semi skilled Workers  through a  
network of more than 6,900 Industrial 
Training Institutes/Centres (ITIs/ ITCs)  
 

92 
 
14 Apprenticeship 
Training Schemes 
Training of apprentices in the Public and 
Private sector establishments, covered 
under the Apprentices Act, 1961.  
15 Ministry of New 
and Renewable 
Energy 
National Biogas 
and Manure 
Management 
Programme 
Setting up of family type biogas plants 
16 Solar Energy 
Programme 
Harnessing of solar energy through solar 
photovoltaic and solar thermal 
17 Banks (i) Priority Sector 
Lending 
(ii) Differential Rate 
of Interest 
Scheme 
Flow of adequate credit and support 
services for income generating activities 
to individual beneficiaries and SHGs 
under SGSY and other self -employment 
programmes of Govt. 
      Not less than 40% of the total 
advances under DRI sche me are to go to 
SCs/STs, and at least 2/3 rd of DRI 
advances are to be granted through rural 
and semi-urban branches. 
  
 
  

93 
 
Annexure V (g) 
 
(Ref. para 5.3) 
 
State-wise List of Districts in the Selected States with more than 225/100 
Villages with >50% SC Population (as per 2001 Census) 
Sl. 
No. 
State Sl.No. Name of the District No. of villages 
with >50% SC 
Popn. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
1 Azamgarh 597 
2 Sitapur 552 
3 Sonbhadra 513 
4 Hardoi 445 
5 Gorakhpur 398 
6 Ghazipur 356 
7 Mirzapur 355 
8 Unnao 351 
9 Bijnor 330 
10 Jaunpur 312 
11 Mau 276 
12 Lucknow 256 
13 Allahabad 255 
14 Kheri 251 
15 Barabanki 231 
16 Chandauli 230 
17 Raebareli 225 
 
2 
 
Tamil Nadu 
1 Kancheepuram  349 
2 Thiruvarur 272 
3 Viluppuram 262 
4 Cuddalore 232 
3 Rajasthan 1 Ganganagar 860 
2 Hanumangarh 336 
4 Bihar 1 Gaya 582 
5 Assam 1  Nagaon 102 
 
 
 
 
 

94 
 
Annexure V (h) 
 
(Ref. para 7.II.ii) 
 
 
Suggestive List of State-level Institutions for Technical Resource Support 
 
Sl.No. Region State Name of the Institution 
1 North  Uttar Pradesh 1. Govind Ballabh Pant Social Science 
Institute, Allahabad 
2.  Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, 
Lucknow  
2 South Tamil Nadu Madras Institute of Development Studies, 
Chennai 
3 East Bihar 1. Asian Development Research Institute, 
Patna 
2. L.N.Mishra Institute of Economic 
Development and Social Change, Patna  
4 West Rajasthan 1. Harish Chandra Mathur Rajasthan Institute 
of Public Administration, Jaipur  
2. Institute of Rural Management, Anand 
5 North East Assam North Eastern Hill University, School of Social 
Sciences, Shillong 
 

95 
 
Annexure V (i) 
 
(Ref. para 12.2) 
 
 
Composition of Central Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee under PMAGY 
 
1. Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empt.        Chairperson 
 
2. Representatives of following Deptts. (not below the rank of Jt. Secretary): 
I. Rural Development 
II. Planning 
III. Panchayati Raj 
IV. Women and Child Development 
V. School Education & Literacy 
VI. Health 
VII. Drinking Water Supply 
VIII. Home 
IX. Water Resources 
X. Power/Rural Electrification Corporation 
XI. New and Renewable Energy Sources 
XII. Information Technology 
XIII. Financial Services 
XIV. Other concerned Deptts., if any 
3. Secretary, National Commission for Scheduled Castes 
4. Head/Nodal officer of the National Technical Resource Support Institution  
5. At  least two experts and two social workers working in the field of SC 
welfare  
6. Joint Secretary, M/o SJ&E -  Member-Secretary 
  

96 
 
Annexure V (j) 
 
(Ref. para 12.3) 
 
 
Suggested Composition of State-level Steering-cum-Monitoring Committee 
under PMAGY 
 
1. Chief Secretary      Chairperson 
 
2. Representatives of following Deptts: 
I. Planning 
II. Panchayati Raj 
III. Woman and Child Development 
IV. Education 
V. Health 
VI. Drinking Water Supply 
VII. Home 
VIII. Public Works 
IX. Irrigation/Water Resources 
X. Energy 
XI. Information Technology 
XII. Other concerned Deptts., if any 
3. CEO(s) of the District Panchayat(s) of the Distt.(s) whose villages are 
being covered 
4. Head of the State-level Technical Resource Support Institution  
5. Representative of State SC Commission 
6. At  least two experts and two social workers working  in the field of SC 
welfare  
7. Representative of Convenor Bank of the State-level Bankers‟ Committee 
8. A representative each  of the Ministries of Rural Development and Social 
Justice & Empowerment, Govt. of India 
9. Principal Secretary, Social Welfare, of the State Govt.- Member-Secretary   
 
 
  

97 
 
Annexure – V (k) 
 
Copy of Order No. Q-13018/2/2002-A.I(RD)-Vol. II of the M/o RD regarding constitution 
of District level vigilance and Monitoring Committees 
 
No. Q-13018/2/2002-A.I.(RD)-Vol.II 
Ministry of Rural Development 
Department of Rural Development 
 
Krishi Bhavan, New Delhi 
Dated the 1st October, 2004 
ORDER 
 
Subject : Reconstitution of Vigilance & Monitoring Committees for Rural 
Development programmes at State/Union Territories level and District 
levels. 
   
 With a view to revitalizing the role and functions of the Vigilance & Monitoring 
Committees for making them important instruments of effective monitoring of the 
implementation of the programme of the Ministry, these Committees at State/Union Territory 
and District levels are reconstituted for each State/UT and District.  Detailed Guidelines 
containing the compositions, role and functions of these reconstituted Committees as well as 
instructions for conducting Meetings were issued on 18.12.2002 vide Order No. Q -
13018/2/2002-AI(RD) to all concerned.  It has been decided that with the coming into being 
of the XIVth Lok Sabha the District Viligance & Monitoring Committees constituted vide this 
Ministry‟s Order referred above to monitor the implementation of Ru ral Development 
Programmes headed by Members of the XIIIth Lok Sabha were dissolved vide this Ministry’s 
Order of even No. Dated 09.06.2004.   
 
2. However, Government of India are of the view that there is need to continue these 
Committees since they can perform very useful functions in monitoring the implementation of 
all the Programme of the Ministry.  It has now been decided to reconstitute District 
Vigilance & Monitoring Committees with the Members of the XIVth Lok Sabha 
nominated as Chairman/Co -Chairman.  The Detailed Guidelines and the list of 
Chairman/Co-Chairman nominated for the District Vigilance & Monitoring Committees 
are enclosed herewith. 
Other nominations to be made by the Ministry of Rural Development.  
3. The list of other Members to be nominated by the Ministry of Rural Development at 
State/UT and district levels will be issued separately.   However, it may be clarified that the 
Meetings of the Vigilance & Monitoring Committees can be convened even if all the 
Members of the Committee have not been nominated. 
Expenses on Meetings : 
4. All expenses on the Meetings of these Committees and other arrangements shall be 
booked under the DRDA Administration Head available with the districts, for which a 
separate provision will be made by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
           Sd/----- 
(Dr. N.K. Sahu) 
Director (Monitoring) 
Tel. No. 23383006 

98 
 
Distribution 
1. Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs. 
2. All the  Chairman/Co -Chairman of the Vigilance & Monitoring Committees at District 
Level. 
3. Secretary (RD)/Secretary (DWS) of all States/UTs with the request that all concerned 
may be instructed to take necessary action in the matter urgently. 
4. Secretary, Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs, New Delhi. 
5. District Magistrate/Collector/Deputy Comm issioner of all the districts of the country 
with a request that a notification in this regard may be issued immediately. 
Copy to : 
1. All Joint Secretaries of the Ministry of Rural Development. 
2. PS to Minister of Rural Development. 
3. PS to Minister of State (N). 
4. PS to Minister of State (P). 
5. All Area Officers of Ministry of Rural Development, Krishi Bhavan. 
6. Senior PPS to Secretary (RD)/Senior PPS to Secretary (WD). 
7. PPS to AS (LR)/AS&FA/CEA. 
8. Guard File. 

99 
 
Ministry of Rural Development 
(Monitoring Division) 
Revised Guidelines 
For 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 
 With a view to revitalizing the role and functions of the Vigilance &  Monitoring 
Committees for making them important instruments of effective monitoring of the 
implementation of the programmes of the Ministry, these Committees at State/Union 
Territory and District levels are reconstituted for each State/UT and District.  I t has been 
decided that with the coming into being of the XIVth Lok Sabha the District Vigilance & 
Monitoring Committees constituted to monitor the implementation of Rural Development 
Programmes headed by Members of the XIIIth Lok Sabha stand dissolved.  The 
Government of India is, however, of the view that there is a need to continue these 
Committees with some modifications in the composition since they can perform very useful 
function in monitoring the implementation of all the programmes of the Ministry.   These 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees replace all other Committees set up earlier for similar 
purpose. 
2. Objective 
 The Vigilance and Monitoring Committees are constituted with a view to fulfilling the 
objective of ensuring quality of expenditure, p articularly, in the context of large public funds 
being spent under all the programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development.  These 
Committees would keep a close watch over the implementation of the programmes as per 
the prescribed procedures and Guideline s.  The major objective of the reconstitution of 
Vigilance & Monitoring Committees include providing a crucial role for the Members of 
Parliament and elected representatives of the people in State Legislatures and Panchayati 
Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the implementation of the Rural Development programmes and to 
put in place a mechanism to monitor the execution of the Schemes of the Ministry of Rural 
Development, in the most effective manner and within the given time frame, as a result of 
which, the public funds are put to optimal use and the programme benefit may flow to the 
rural poor in full measure. 
3. These Committees are also to effectively liaison and coordinate with the Ministry of 
Rural Development and State Governments to ensure that all schemes of  the 
Ministry of Rural Development are implemented as per the programme guidelines 
issued by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
4. The constitution of these Committees and holding regular meeting are pre -requisites 
for the States/UTs to receive funds from the Ministry of Rural Development, under 
different programmes.  These Committees constitute an integral part of the system 
for effective implementation of Rural Development Programmes and are no less 
significant than the Audit Reports and Utilization Certi ficates, which are mandatory 
for the release of the second installment and in case certain districts do not hold 
regular meetings of the V&M Committees, the Ministry may consider withholding 
releases for such districts, as we do for the non-submission of Audit Reports etc. 
5. The Composition, Terms of Reference, Role and other details in regard to the 
Vigilance & Monitoring Committees are given in the following paragraphs :-   

100 
 
A. State Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 
1. Composition 
 The State level Vigilance & Monitoring Committees would be of the following 
compositions :- 
I. Chairman :  The Chairman of the Committee would be the Ministry, Rural 
Development Department of the concerned State. 
II. Member Secretary : the Secretary-in-charge of Rural Development Programmes in 
the State/UT would be the Members Secretary of the Committee. 
III. Members : The other Members of the Committee shall be as under : 
 
(i) Four MPs (Lok Sabha) to be nominated by the Ministry of Rural 
Development, Government of India. 
(ii) One MP (Rajya Sabha) representing the State/UT to be nominated by the 
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. 
(iii) Five MLAs to be nominated by the State Government. 
(iv) The Secretaries/Heads of Departments of Rural Development, Finance, 
Public W orks Department dealing with Rural Roads, Revenue, Planning, 
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Irrigation, PHE, Social Welfare, Co -operation, 
Forests and Fisheries etc. and other related departments. 
(v) Director, Institutional Finance. 
(vi) Managing Director/Head of SC/ST Development Corporation. 
(vii) Managing Director/Head of Women‟s Development Corporation. 
(viii) One representative of KVIC to be nominated by the Ministry of Rural 
Development. 
(ix) Four Member of Non -Official to be nominated by the Ministry of Rural 
Development, Government of India. 
(x) One representative each of two reputed NGOs/Voluntary Agencies to be 
nominated by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
(xi) One representative (Area Officer of the respective State/UT) of Ministry of 
Rural Development. 
2. Terms of Reference 
  
(i) The Vigilance & Monitoring Committee at Sate level would supervise, 
exercise vigilance and monitor the implementation of all Programmes of the 
Ministry of Rural Development. 
(ii) The Committee would monitor the flow of funds at various channels, including 
allocations, releases, utilization and unspent balances. 
(iii) The Committee should ensure that the schemes are implemented as per the 
guidelines issued by the Minis try of Rural Development and no  addition or 
alteration is done. 
(iv) The Committee would look into complaints received by them, in respect of the 
implementation of the Programmes, including complaints of mis -
appropriation/diversion of funds of various Programmes of the Ministry and 
recommend follow-up actions. 
(v) The Committee would take all necessary measures to ensure the programme 
benefits flow to the rural poor in full measure. 
 

101 
 
(vi) The Committee would consider all Evaluation Reports, Area Officers‟ Reports and 
such other Reports sent to them by the Ministry of Rural Development and would 
cause to take necessary follow up action and corrective measures wherever required. 
B. District Level Vigilance & Monitoring Committees 
1. Composition : 
 The Committee would compose of the following : 
I. Chairman :  The Chairman of the District Level Vigilance & Monitoring Commit tee would be a 
Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) elected from the District and nominated by the Ministry of Rural 
Development.  The nomination would be done as per the following criteria :  
 (i) Where there are more than one Member of Parli ament (Lok Sabha) in a district, t he 
Speaker (Lok Sabha), Deputy Speaker (Lok Sabha) or a Minister in the Union Council 
of Ministers shall be nominated as the Chairman. 
(ii) If, however, all are only Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha), one who is the senior 
most (in the Lok Sabha) shall be nominated as the Chairman. 
(iii) Further, in case of same/equal seniority, the deciding factor for the nomination of 
Chairman shall be the Member of Parliament having the largest part of the district 
under the jurisdictions of his/her Parliamentary Constituency. 
(iv) If the District has more than one Parliamentary constituency (Lok Sabha) as its 
segments and the senior most Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) has become a 
Chairman of District Level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee in some other distr ict, 
the next senior most Member of Parliament (Lok Sabha) shall be the Chairman.  
The other Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) representing the district shall be designated as 
Co-Chairman.  In the absence of the designated Chair man, Co -Chairman (if any), wi th consensus 
among the Co -Chairman present, would preside over the meeting.  If no Chairman/Co -Chairman is 
present, the Members who are present shall elect a Chairman from among themselves to preside 
over the scheduled meetings. 
II. Member Secretary :  The Member Secretary of the District level Vigilance & Monitoring 
Committee would be the District Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner/Chief 
Executive Officer of Zila Panchayat. 
III. Members : The other Members of the Committee shall be as follows : 
(i) All MPs (Lok Sabha) of the District to be designated as Co-Chairman. 
(ii) One Member of Parliament (Rajya Sabha) representing the State and exercising 
option to be associated with the District level Committee of the District (on first come 
basis), to be designated as Co-Chairman. 
(iii) All MLAs of the District. 
(iv) –Deleted- 
(v) One person to be nominated by the State Government/UT Administration. 
(vi) Chairperson of the Zilla Panchayat. 
(vii) All Chairpersons of Panchayat Samities.  
(viii) Chief Executive Officer of the Zilla Panchayat. 
(ix) Project Director, DRDA. 
  

102 
 
(x) One Member from a reputed NGO to be nominated by the Chairman in 
consultation with other Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) in the Committee. 
(xi) One Professional from the field of Social Work/Social Science to be 
nominated by the District Collector. 
(xii) One representative each of SC/ST, women and representative of minority 
community to be nominated by the Chairman in consultation with other 
Members of Parliament (Lok Sabha) in the Committee. 
2. Official Assistance : 
 
 Officers-in-charge of the Line Department (such as PWD, Water Supply, Irrigation, 
Forest, Agriculture) etc.  Executing the Programmes of Rural Development and any other 
related Department will assist the Committee in the discharge of the functions. 
  
3. Terms of Reference : 
 
(i) The primary responsibility is to effectively monitor the implementation of the 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry of Rural Development as also 
ensure that the funds are used for the purpose for which they are meant. 
(ii) This forum should effectively lia ison and coordinate with the Ministry of Rural 
Development and State Government. 
(iii) The Committee shall ensure that all schemes of MRD are implemented as per 
the Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
(iv) District level V&M Committees would under take continuous internal 
assessment of project implementation in relation to agreed schedules, and of 
the use of inputs, infrastructure and services by project beneficiaries.  The 
Committee would also trac k the progress of the implementation processes, 
especially of inputs and outputs, to ensure that the agreed targets are met.  
The Committee would undertake both I nput Monitoring (i.e. whether 
resources are being mobilized as planned) and Output Monitoring (i.e. 
whether services and projects are being delivered on schedule). 
(v) The Committee should look into complaints/alleged irregularities received by 
them in respect of the implementation of the Programmes, including 
complaints of wrong selection of beneficiaries, mis -appropriation/diversion of 
funds of vario us Schemes of the Ministry and recommend follow -up actions.  
The Committee shall have the authority to summon and inspect any record for 
this purpose.  The Committee any refer may matter for enquiry to the 
DC/CEO/PD or suggest suitable action to be taken as per rules which shall be 
acted upon by him within 30 days.  If such action is not initiated within this 
time the relevant programme funds to which the direction pertains to , may be 
withheld. 
(vi) The Committee shall exercise preventive vigilance so as to ens ure that 
irregularities, diversion and mis -appropriation of funds are avoided and the 
selection of beneficiaries is strictly in accordance with the Guidelines of the 
Programmes. 
(vii) The Member Secretary of the District Vigilance & Monitoring Committee shall 
fill up the formats as given at Annexure –I to I(G) and place before the 
meeting. 
(viii) The Committee would monitor all the Schemes of the Ministry of Rural 
Development implemented in the District : and, in particular;  
  

103 
 
(a) Closely watch the flow of funds at various channels including the funds 
allocated, funds released by both Centre and the State, utilization and 
unspent balances under each Scheme. 
(b) Monitor the works under the different schemes with special reference to the 
following :- 
 
(1) Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) :  Proper selection and execution of 
works, proper selection of beneficiaries, lifting of food grains and disbursal of cash 
component and food grains. 
(2) Swarnjayanti gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)  :  Proper selection of individual 
Swarozgaris and Self Help Groups, selection of activities, disbursement of subsidy, 
disbursement of credits, linkages with Financial Institutions and selection and 
execution of Special Project. 
(3) Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY)  :  Proper selection of beneficiaries, disbu rsement of 
financial assistance to the beneficiaries and progress of construction. 
(4) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)  :  Selection, execution and quality 
of works, fund flow and utilization. 
(5) DRDA Administration :  Sufficiency of staff in the DRDA and proper utilization of 
funds allocated under the Scheme by the Central Government.  The Committee shall 
ensure that the Guidelines in respect of DRDA Administration are also adhered to. 
(6) Watershed Development Programme under DPAP, DDP and IWDP (Hariyali)   :  
Selection of projects, selection of Project Implementing Agencies (PIA) and execution 
of projects. 
(7) Computerization of Land Records :  Progress of work in the district. 
(8) Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)  :  Coverage of population, 
coverage of habitations, quality and availability of water. 
(9) Sector Reforms Project/Swajaldhara  :  Progress of the project activities and funds 
utilization. 
(10) Rural Sanitation Programme  :  Progress of activities under the Total Sanitation 
Campaign, coverage and quality of work. 
(11) Any other Scheme of the Ministry :  Selection of beneficiaries and progress of 
implementation of the scheme. 
(ix) For action on any points pertaining to the State Government, the Committee shall 
forward their observation/recommendation to them. The Ministry of Rural 
Development shall be informed of any gross violation noticed. 
6. Meetings of the Vigilance & Monitoring Committee at each level are to be held at 
least once every Quarter, after giving sufficient notice to all the Members, including 
Hon‟ble MPs/MLAs. 
7. Member Secretary shall convene the meeting on the direction of the Chairman. 
8. TA/DA will be paid as per the norms applicable to the individuals from the DRDA 
administration head.  A separate provision will be made for this and other 
expenditures on the meeting by the Ministry of Rural Development. 
9. State Governments/UT Administration are required to provide the detailed status 
reports regarding the Vigilance & Monitoring Committees, after compiling the 
requisite information received from the districts.  The information has to be given in 
Proforma I  for State Level Vigilance & Monitoring Committee and Proforma II for 
District Level Vigilance & Monitoring Committees; these have to be submitted to 
the Ministry of Rural Development, quar terly by 25 th day of every succeeding 
quarter. 

104 
 
 
Annexure -VI 
 
Release of Central Assistance under Centrally Sponsored Pilot Scheme of 
PMAGY 
 
 State District  Block No. of 
selected 
villages  
Central Assistance 
Released (Rs. in crore) 
Bihar Gaya Khaijarsarai 13  
  
 
I Instl. 
31.3.10 
 
II Instl. 
15.06.10 
Total 
1.3 21.425 22.725 
 
Atri 08 
Manpur 19 
Bodh Gaya 22 
Tankuppa 20 
Wajirganj 24 
Fetehpur 22 
Mohanpur 25 
Mohra 08 
Konch 04 
Tekari 08 
Belaganj 07 
Paraiya 12 
Barachatti 20 
Bathani 02 
Nagar 11 
 Total   225   
 
 

105 
 
State District  Block No. of 
selected 
villages  
Central Assistance 
Released 
Rajasthan 1)Sri 
Ganganagar 
Anupgarh 66  
 
 
I Instl. 
31.3.10 
II Instl. 
12.5.10 
 
Total 
1.4 21.325 22.725 
 
Gharsana 53 
Padampur 41 
Total 160 
2) 
Hanumangarh 
Tibbi 30 
Pilibanga 35 
Total 65 
 Grand Total  225   
 
State District  Block No. of 
selected 
villages  
Central Assistance 
Released 
Assam 1)Nowgaon   1) Jugijan 10  
 
 
I 
Instl. 
 
II Instl. 
28.6.10 
Total 
Nil 10.10 10.10 
 
2) Pakhimoria 6 
3) Kaliabor 2 
4) Odali 3 
5) Lawkhowa 6 
6) Dhalpukhuri 6 
7) Raha 6 
8) Rupahi 1 
9) Kathiatoli 3 
10) Binnakandi 2 
 
 

106 
 
 
  
11) Lumding 1 
 
12) Pachim 
Kaliabor 
3 
13) Niz 
Lawkhowa 
1 
Total 50 
2) Morigaon  1) Mayang 27 
2) Kapili 4 
3) Bhubandhu 10 
4) Laharighat 9 
Total 50 
  Grand Total 100   

107 
 
ANNEXURE - VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 12 th AUGUST, 
2010. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
3. Smt. Rama Devi 
4. Shri Premchand Guddu 
5. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
6. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
 
  MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
9. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
10. Shri Ahmad Sayeed Malihabadi 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri A. Mukhophadhyay  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
 

108 
 
 
*****    *****   *****    ***** 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft   Ninth   Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the First Report on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment with minor modifications/amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report and 
present the same to both Houses of Parliament. 
 
5. *****    *****   *****   ***** 
 
6. *****    *****   *****   ***** 
 
7. *****    *****   *****   ***** 
 
8. *****    *****   *****   ***** 
 
9.           *****    *****   *****   ***** 
    
*****  *****  ***** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

109 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   FIRST REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
           Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations         19 
II. Observations/Recommendations which          10     52.63% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 3.21, 3.22, 3.23, 3.24,  
3.25, 4.19, 4.36, 5.10, 6.19 and 7.6) 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which           Nil      0% 
 the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
   
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in         3   15.79%  
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 3.26, 4.37 and 5.11) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in          6  31.58% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.4, 4.18, 4.27, 4.48,  
6.12  and 6.13) 
 