 
 
1 
 
14 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2010 - 2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained  in  the  Fifth Report of the 
Standing C ommittee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  
Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010 -2011)   of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
January,  2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 


 
 
2 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained  in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010-
2011)  of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9.3.2011 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      9.3.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
January, 2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 


 
 
3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                          PAGE 
    
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………………               
  
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………….    
 
 
CHAPTER I  Report……………………………………………………………  
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by  the Government………………………………
                     
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee 
do not   desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  
Government                                         
  
CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which 
replies   of  the Government  have not been accepted  
and have beencommented  upon by the Committee in 
Chapter-I     
 
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature     
 
ANNEXURE 
   
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee  
   on  Social  Justice and Empowerment held on  
   5.1.2011  
  
APPENDIX 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the 
Government on the                              
recommendations contained in the Fifth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha)     
     

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2010-2011) 
       
 
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2 Shri T.R. Baalu 
3 Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
4 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
5 Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8 Shri Premchand Guddu 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav   
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath   
11 Shri Mohan Jena  
12 Shri Baliram Kashyap 
13 Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
14 Shri Basori Singh Masram  
15 Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
16 Dr. Niramalli Sivaprasad  
17 Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
  #19. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede  
20 Vacant 
21  Vacant 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22  Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23  Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
                    ##25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
           *26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.  Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
29.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30.  Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31.  Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
______________________________________________________________ 
# Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27.9.2010 
## Shri Mahmood A. Madani nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
*  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 

 
 
5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
 1. Shri V.R. Ramesh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
 3. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma  - Senior Executive  Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
this Fourteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants -  
2010-2011 relating to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
  
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in R ajya Sabha on 20th 
April, 2010.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies indicating action taken 
on the recommendations contained in that Report on 21.7.2010.  The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice  and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 5.1.2011. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the L ok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
5 January, 2011        Chairman, 
15 Pausha,  1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
 Empowerment. 
 
  
  

 
 
7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth L ok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants, 2010-2011relating to Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and was laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 20 th April, 2010.  It contained 23 recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the  
Government : 
 
Paragraph Nos. 2.30, 2.32, 2.33, 2.34, 2.39, 2.41, 2.58, 2.76, 2.87, 
2.113, 2.117, 2.120, 2.129 and 2.134 
 
(Total 14– Chapter II) 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the replies of the Government - NIL 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and have been  commented 
upon by the Committee in Chapter I: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 2.37, 2.99 and 2.114 
(Total 3 – Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature.  
Paragraph Nos. 2.31, 2.35, 2.36, 2.38, 2.40 and 2.100 
(Total 6 – Chapter V) 

 
 
8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may 
be furnished to them at the ear liest and in any case not later than three 
months of the presentation of the Report. 
1.4 The committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.33) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted that as per Government of India (Allocation of 
Business) rules, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs was the nodal Ministry for overall 
policy, planning and coordination of programmes of development for the 
Scheduled Tribes.  In regard t o sectoral programmes and schemes of 
development of these communities, policy, planning, monitoring, evaluation etc. 
as also their coordination w ould be the responsibility of the concerned Central 
Ministries/ Departments, State Governments and Union Territory Administrations.  
The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs in the presentation to the Committee  had 
emphasized that each Central Ministry/ Department was the nodal and 
responsible for their programmes in tribal development welfare and the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs  had undertaken  only developmental and welfare interventions 
through gap filling plan schemes.   In this regard the Committee would like to 
point out that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs was constituted with the objective of 
providing more focused attention on the integrated socio -economic development 
of the most under – privileged sections of Indian society – the Scheduled Tribes 

 
 
9 
 
in a coordinated and planned manner.  The Ministry, therefore, should not 
undermine their key position in ensuring all round development and upliftment of 
tribal people.  Hence it need ed to keep track of various tribal developmental 
programmes of various Ministries / Departments / State Governments /Voluntary 
Organisations so that they c ould design schemes to complemen t their efforts so 
as to fill the critical gaps.  The Committee, had therefore, desired that the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs should closely watch the tribals welfare programmes of other 
Ministries and keep full information/ data on the programmes so that th ey were 
better armed while formulating programmes/schemes for ST and for getting the 
same approved from the Planning Commission. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.34) 
1.6 The Committee were, constrained to note the coordination of the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs with other Ministries like HRD, Health Affairs etc. which were also 
implementing programmes pertaining to tribal welfare was not upto the desired 
level.  Since close coordination with other Ministries was absolutely necessary for 
planned development of Scheduled Tribes ,   the Committee had recommended 
the Government to put in place a coordinating Committee under the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs with top officials of concerned Ministries/Departments as members 
who should meet at regular intervals to  oversee the progress/status of the 
schemes and identify the critical gap and take suitable action. 
 
1.7 The Ministry  in their action taken for both the recommendation s 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.33 and 2.34)  have stated that t he 
recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 

 
 
10 
 
1.8 The Committee had desired that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should 
closely watch the tribal welfare programmes of other Ministries and keep 
handy information of the said programmes  so that they were better 
equipped while formulating programmes/schemes for ST and for getting 
the same approved from the Planning Commission.  Similarly, the 
Committee had also recommended the Government to put in place a 
coordinating Committee under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs with top 
officials of concerned Ministries/Departments as members who should 
meet at regular intervals to oversee the progress/status of the schemes 
and identify the critical gap s and take suitable action.  The Committee are 
not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry which merely states the same 
has been  noted for compliance. Therefore, the Committee reitera te their 
earlier recommendation  on constituting a Coordinating Committee under 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  having top officials of concerned Ministr ies 
within a period of three month s.  The progress achieved in this regard may 
be communicated to the Committee.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.37) 
1.9 The Committee had noted that non -submission of utilization certificates of 
funds of previous years by the State Governments was a problem point due to 
which the Ministry was forced to withhold funds for the crucial schemes including 
SCA to TSP, Grants under Article 275(1), Schemes of Deve lopment of 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group. Though the Ministry ha d stated that the 
matter ha d been constantly pursued with the States through phones, letters, 

 
 
11 
 
review meetings, the  problem still persists with the result that the tribal people 
were be ing deprived of the crucial funds meant for their development due to 
inaction on the part of State Governments. The Committee, had therefore, 
recommended the matter be taken up urgently with State Chief 
Secretaries/Secretaries in-charge of the Tribal Welfa re Department and impress 
upon them the absolute necessity of furnishing Utilization Certificates of the 
funds released during the previous years. 
  
 The Committee  had viewed the inability of the Ministry to make funds 
available as per the intentions of Ar ticle 275(1) of the constitution very seriously. 
In this regard, the Committee had noted the difficulties being faced by States in 
furnishing Utilization Certificates viz. State capacity to execute the schemes, 
weak administration, extremism etc. Also the collection of expenditure reports 
from various implementing agencies at district level involves considerable time 
and only States which were administrative ly better placed were able to utilize 
Central Government funds in time. The Committee were of the view that above 
problems could not be addressed unless the States were administratively geared 
up and improve their delivery system. As these concerns were very genuine the 
Committee had desired that the Government take special administrative  
measures after identifying the weak points in these States and remedy the 
situation. Accordingly, an action plan be prepared and placed before the 
Government in order that a Constitutional provision was not get derailed by 
routine/ mundane questions related t o furnishing utilization certificates by the 
States.  
 

 
 
12 
 
1.10 In their action taken notes the Ministry have stated that they  regularly 
pursue these matters with the Secretaries  in the State Governments, through 
visits, personal meetings, letters and through  telephonic communication.  
Strengthening of delivery system and the administrative machinery in a State is 
possible only with active cooperation from the States.  Recently the Mungekar 
Committee has given some recommendations in improving the delivery system in 
the States and the State Governments shall be sensitized accordingly.  
Awareness at the level of targeted beneficiaries and strengthening of Panchayat 
institutions are the broad ways of strengthening the delivery mechanism in the 
States.  
 
1.11  The Committee had recommended that the matter pertaining to the 
utilization certificates of previous years be taken up urgently with State 
Chief Secretaries/Secretaries in -charge of the Tribal Welfare Department 
and impress upon them the absolute necessit y of furnishing Utilization 
Certificates of the funds released during the previous years.     The Ministry 
in their reply have stated that Mungekar Committee has given some 
recommendations in improving the delivery system in the States   and the 
State Governments shall be sensitized accordingly.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Government .  The Committee have not been 
apprised of the recommendation s of Mungekar Committee fo r improving 
the delivery system.    The Committee recommend the G overnment to 
urgently take a view on Mungekar Committee recommendation s and chalk 
out an action plan to address the critical issue of improving the delivery 
system in States without further delay.   

 
 
13 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.99) 
 
1.12 The Committee had noted that against the budgetary allocation of Rs.64 
crores during 2009 -10 for construction of hostels , the actual expenditure till 
31.1.2010 was only Rs.32.40 crores. However, the full allocation of 64 crores 
was released to States by the en d of financial year. Though the Ministry ha d 
informed that release was based on actual physical progress, the Committee had 
felt that release of 50% of allocation at the fag end of the financial year was not a 
healthy practice and needs to be avoided. 
 
 From the material provided by the Ministry the Committee  had noted that 
progress of construction of hostels in the States was not at all satisfactory. In the 
year 2007 -08, only Orissa with 252 hostels and Jharkhand with 8 hostels ha d 
been able to complete th e construction of sanctioned hostels. In case of Tripura 
and Manipur there was some achievement as out of 7 and 29 projects 
sanctioned, 3 and 16 ha d been completed. For other States like Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Hyderabad and Dadra a nd Nagar Haveli 
no hostel could be completed even after 3 years. Likewise for 2008 -09 Orissa 
had been able to complete 28 hostels out of 30 sanctioned, Rajasthan 13 out of 
41 sanctioned, Jharkhand 1 out of 11 but in other States there ha d been no 
achievement. While commending the extraordinary achievement of Orissa for 
completion of 280 hostels in two years viz. 2007 -08 and 2008-09, the Committee 
had  desired  the other States should also gear up and give priority to complet e 
all sanctioned hostels at an early date. 
 

 
 
14 
 
1.13 In their action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Government 
have stated that t he observation of the Committee has been noted.   In spite of 
the best efforts of the Ministry to sanction and release the funds under the 
schemes early in the financial year, there is, at times, an unavoidable delay in 
such releases because the States/UTs do not furnish the mandatory documents 
such as utilization certificates in respect of previous grants and physical progress 
reports in time. As part of an ongoing process the States/UTs are being 
continuously urged to monitor the financial and physical progress of funds and to 
send in their proposals to  the Ministry in time to expedite the sanction of funds. 
The issue of non -completion of hostels in the States of Karnataka, Himachal 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, University of Hyderabad and the U.T. of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli has been taken up with the State s/University/UT concerned. The 
concern of the Standing Committee in this regard has also been communicated 
to the States/University/UT. 
 
1.14 The Committee had noted that against the budgetary allocation of 
Rs.64 crores during 2009 -10 for construction of hostels the actual 
expenditure till 31.1.2010 was only Rs.32.40 crores. However, the full 
allocation of 64 crores was released to States by the  end of financial year. 
The Committee had felt that release of 50% of allocation at the fag end of 
the financial year was not a healthy practice and needs to be avoided.  The 
Committee had also noted that progress of construction of hostels in the 
States such as  Karnataka, Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Hyderabad and Dadra and Nagar Haveli wa s not at all satisfactory .  The 
Ministry in their action taken reply have stated that in spite of the their best 

 
 
15 
 
efforts to sanction and release the funds under the schemes early in the 
financial year, there is, at times, an unavoidable delay in such releases 
because the States/UTs do not furnish the mandatory documents such as 
utilization certificates in respect of previous grants and physical progress 
reports in  time. The Committee strongly recommend that the matter 
pertaining to the utilization certificates in respect of previous grants and 
non-completion of hostels may be taken up with the concerned State Chief 
Secretaries so that sanctioned hostels could be co mpleted within a definite 
time frame.  The Committee further recommend that some penal action be 
taken against the defaulting States.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 2.114) 
1.15 The Committee had found that under the scheme of “Top Class Education 
for Scheduled Castes Students”  125 institutes ha d been identified and the 
selection of candidates under the scheme both in Government and Private sector 
is made through competitive examination like AIEEE, PMT CAT. The scheme 
does not contain any component of special training/coaching to students to  
enable them to  get admission to these institutes. The Committee  had felt that in 
the absence of any criteria or any coaching/training to ST students these 
institutes were unreachable to ST students. The Committee had therefore, 
recommended  that the Government to facilitate the ST students to get admission 
in the top class institutes, a different criteria for ST students be worked out and 
some coaching/training be also imp arted to prepare them for entrance 
examination. 

 
 
16 
 
 
1.16 The Ministry have stated that t he concern of the Standing Committee 
regarding coaching and training to the ST students has been   noted. Further, 
schemes for coaching and training by NGOs as well as the  scheme of 
Upgradation of Merit are concurrently in operation for the benefit of ST students. 
The Top Class Education scholarship scheme recognizes the inherent merit of 
the ST students who gain admission on their own in premier institutes in 
accordance wi th the norms and standards for admission laid down by these 
institutes. Accordingly the scheme does not contain any clause to facilitate the 
ST students to get admission in these institutes because the scheme comes into 
operation for those students only af ter they have gained admission on merit in 
these institutes. 
 
1.17 The Committee had observed that the scheme of Top Class 
Education for ST students do es not contain any component of special 
training/coaching to students to  enable them to  get admission to these 
institutes and had felt that in the absence of any criteria or any 
coaching/training to ST students these institutes were unreachable to ST 
students. The Committee had , therefore, recommended   the Government 
to facilitate the admission of ST students in the top class institutes, a 
different criteria for ST students be worked out and some coaching/training 
be also imparted to prepare them for entrance examination.   The 
Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that  scheme 
recognizes the inherent merit of the ST students who gain admission on 
their own in premier institutes . The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate 

 
 
17 
 
their earlier recommendation that the Government to facilitate the 
admission of ST students in the top class institutes and for this purpose  a 
different criteria for ST students be worked out and some coaching/training 
be also imparted to prepare them for entrance examination.   

 
 
18 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.30) 
 
2.1 The Committee are unhappy to note that the budgetary allocations of Rs. 
3205.50 crores for 2009-10 has been drastically cut to Rs. 2000 crores in revised 
estimates by Ministry of Finance taking into account the utilization of funds by the 
Ministry till third quarter of the financial year. This indicates that the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs has been unable to adequately sensitise the States to submit 
complete proposal by the third quarter of financial year so that the funds could be 
released timely and allocation for the year could be utilized in full. Since Ministry 
is dependent on States for execution of various planned schemes for 
development of tribal welfare, delay/non -submission/incomplete propos als by 
States are the major cause for under -utilization of funds. The Committee have 
been given to understand that if State Governments are not performing, i.e not 
timely sending the complete proposals, the Ministry have no way to press beyond 
a point. 
 In view of above, the Committee, recommend in order to exert pressure on 
States for timely submission of complete proposals, the matter be taken up at the 
Planning Commission level so that at the time of discussion of the annual plans 
of the States, the Comm ission may take some action against the defaulting 
States.  
 

 
 
19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Ministry shall bring the above recommendation to the notice of the 
Planning Commission and also prevail upon them for ensuring appropriate follow 
up action.  
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.32) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that one time grant of Rs.500 crores was made for 
educational development of Tribal children in Naxal -affected areas for the year 
2009-10. The entire amount has since been released to 5 States for construction 
of hostels in Naxal affected areas.  
 
Keeping in view the importance of schemes, the Committee desire that a 
close monitoring be done by Ministry on the status of  the projects sanctioned 
under the programme to ensure the allocation is utilized for the intended purpose 
in a definite time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made by States in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The be neficiary States in respect of one -time Additional Central 
Assistance of Rs.500 crores for the educational development of tribal children in 
naxal-affected areas for the year 2009 -10 have been requested to send regular 
reports about the physical progress of the construction of the hostels and ashram 
schools for which the said funds have been released. The Ministry will obtain 

 
 
20 
 
these reports on quarterly basis. No further release of funds under the schemes 
of Hostels for ST Boys and Girls or Ashram Schools wo uld be considered unless 
utilization certificates and completion reports are obtained in respect of the earlier 
sanctioned funds.  Meetings with the concerned Officers and visit by the Officers 
of the Ministry will be conducted to  monitor the implementati on of the projects 
sanctioned under Additional Central Assistance. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.33) 
 
2.5 The Committee note that as per Government of India (Allocation of 
Business) rules, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is the nodal Ministry for overall 
policy, planning and coordination of programmes of development for the 
Scheduled Tribes.  In regard to sectoral programmes and schemes of 
development of these communities, po licy, planning, monitoring, evaluation etc. 
as also their coordination will be the responsibility of the concerned Central 
Ministries/ Departments, State Governments and Union Territory Administrations.  
The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs in the pre sentation to the Committee 
emphasized that each Central Ministry/ Department is the nodal and responsible 
for their programmes in tribal development welfare and the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs undertakes only developmental and welfare interventions through gap 
filling plan schemes. 
 
 In this regard the Committee would like to point out that the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs was constituted with the objective of providing more focused 
attention on the integrated socio -economic development of the most under – 

 
 
21 
 
privileged sections of Indian society – the Scheduled Tribes in a coordinated and 
planned manner.  The Ministry, therefore, should not undermine their key 
position in ensuring all round development and upliftment of tribal people.  Hence 
it need to keep tr ack of various tribal developmental programmes of various 
Ministries / Departments / State Governments /Voluntary Organisations so that 
they can design schemes to complement their efforts so as to fill the critical gaps.  
The Committee, therefore, desire t hat the Ministry of Tribal Affairs should closely 
watch the tribals welfare programmes of other Ministries and keep full 
information/ data on the programmes so that they are better armed while 
formulating programmes/schemes for ST and for getting the same approved from 
Planning Commission. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.34) 
 
2.7 The Committee are, however, constrained to note the coordination of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs with other Ministries like HRD, Health Affairs etc. which 
are also implementing programmes pertaining to tribal welfare is not upto the 
desired level.  Since  close coordination with other Ministries is absolutely 
necessary for planned development of Scheduled Tribes the Committee 

 
 
22 
 
recommend the Government to put in place a coordinating Committee under the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs with top officials of concern ed Ministries/Departments as 
members who should meet at regular intervals to oversee the progress/status of 
the schemes and identify the critical gap and take suitable action. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.39) 
 
2.9 The Committee note that there is no established system of 
monitoring/evaluation of the schemes of the Ministry being implemented by the 
States and NGOs. The monitoring/evaluation is done mainly through review 
meetings which are few in number and for the performance of NGO, the Ministry 
has t o rely on reports of State Governments. The Committee were informed 
during evidence that the Ministry is trying to seek cooperation of 
MORD/CAPART/CII and national institutions to do the review/ monitoring for 
them. The Committee fully endorse it and feel that engaging already established 
agencies will definitely help in improving the monitoring mechanism. 
 
While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee desire that 
a full fledged system of close monitoring and evaluation of schemes should be 

 
 
23 
 
put in place at the earliest so that the resources are utilized prudently and reach 
the targeted tribal people. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 It is important to monitor and evaluate various schemes under 
implementation in order to assess whether the fu nds are being optimally utilised 
and also whether the benefits of these schemes are reaching the target groups 
or not. As a starting point, it has been decided to take up five schemes of the 
Ministry being implemented by NGOs for monitoring and evaluation during the 
remaining years of the current Five Year Plan by outsourcing the evaluation to a 
national level Independent Monitoring Agency and Independent Evaluation 
Agency respectively. The procedural formalities for the same have been 
completed and the age ncies selected. It is expected that both the agencies will 
submit their first monitoring and evaluation report by March, 2011. This would 
enable the Ministry to put in place a full fledged system of close monitoring and 
evaluation of schemes.  
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.41) 
 
2.11 The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
have been implementing a number of welfare and development schemes for the 
Scheduled Tribes for decades. However, many of the tribals are not aware of 
these Schemes. Though the Ministry have taken some steps on publicity by 
releasing advertisements on special occasions like Independence Day and 
Republic Day highlighting the v arious schemes and the achievements and 

 
 
24 
 
advertising specific schemes through inserting them in regional newspapers for 
generating awareness of the public in particular of the ST population, yet these 
are not enough. The Committee also observe that the Mini stry also conduct 
workshops/Seminars through Universities/Non -Government Organisations 
(NGOs) and various TRIs specifically aimed at generating awareness about the 
various schemes it implements for the benefits of the Scheduled Tribes. 
However, sufficient steps have not been taken to popularize the schemes in 
remote and far flung areas. According to the Ministry the schemes are advertised 
in local and regional newspapers and some States have devised schemes -
specific publicity and training, especially for th ose who cannot read. The 
Committee desire that in order to generate publicity in remote and far flung 
areas, the Ministry should organize „Samwad Programmes‟ through NGOs and 
also distributing pamphlets in regional language in tribal areas. The Committee 
hope that these steps would certainly help the tribal people in availing the 
benefits of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 In order to make the awareness campaign regarding various welfare and 
development Schemes under implementation for the Schedu led Tribes more 
effective, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is in the process of outsourcing a study on 
“Impact assessment of awareness campaigns with recommendations for making 
campaigns more effective”. The findings of the study would facilitate planners 
and implementers in designing appropriate awareness campaigns using different 
media and fora, including traditional methods, to reach those residing in far flung 

 
 
25 
 
areas and facilitate them to claim the benefits of Government‟s  welfare and 
development schemes/programmes. 
 
The suggestion of the Committee regarding organisation of “Samwad 
Programmes” through NGOs and also distributing pamphlets in the regional 
language in tribal areas has been noted and would be appropriately dovetailed 
with the recommendations made in the aforementioned study. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.58) 
 
2.13 The Committee note that budgetary allocation of Rs. 900.50 crore for SCA 
to TSP was drastically reduced to Rs. 481.24 crore in the revised estimates i.e. a 
reduction of 46% by the Ministry of Finance taking into the account that only 
449.66 crore was relea sed upto 31.12.2009. The Committee feel that a cut of 
46% of the budgetary allocations in the revised estimates when 50% of the 
budgetary allocation was already released by 31.12.2009 is totally unjustified as 
it has left only a meager Rs.32 crores to be s pent in three months from January 
2010 to March 2010.  The Committee note that because of this reduction the 
Ministry has not been able to release funds to those States which submitted 
relevant details at a later stage and such States have had to shelve so me of this 
proposed activity. Unable to understand the decision of the Ministry of Finance 
for making unjustified cuts the Committee desire that their views may be brought 
to the notice of the Ministry of Finance and immediate steps be taken to allot and 
release funds for completion of work under the scheme. 
 

 
 
26 
 
 The Committee note for the year 2010 -11 a budgetary allocation of Rs. 
914.50 has been made. The Committee desire that the Ministry to sensitise the 
States to submit complete proposals well in time in order to have full utilization of 
allocation and to avoid reduction in the revised stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14 The recommendation of the Committee shall be brought to the notice of 
Ministry of Finance.  Since the funds lapse at the end of the fi nancial year, the 
activities proposed during 2009-10 and not provided with funds  were asked to be 
submitted to the Ministry under SCA to TSP during 2010 -11 so that funding of 
such activities can be done during the current year.  The States have already 
been sensitized in this regard and they were asked to submit proposals for 2010 -
11 with UC, progress report etc without delay so as to avoid reduction in the 
budget at RE stage.   However the responses received till June 2010 have been 
lukewarm and efforts are being made to ensure that all the concerned States are 
furnishing the requisite details without further delay. Matter is being constantly 
pursued. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.76) 
 
2.15 The Committee note with concern that under Book Bank scheme during 
2007-08 to 2009 -10 no funds were released to Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tami l Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, A&N 

 
 
27 
 
Islands and Daman & Diu and the beneficiaries coverage has been also „nil‟ for 
these States. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that 
these States have not sought funds under the above sche me. It appears that 
there has not been adequate publicity of this scheme in these States as a result 
ST students are not aware of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry to impress upon these States to publicize the scheme 
vigorously amongst the ST students so that they apply in large numbers and take 
benefit of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16 The recommendation of the Committee for further publicizing the scheme 
of Book Bank has been noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.87) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that the scheme of Vocational training in tribal areas 
in operation since 1992 -93 has been revised w.e.f. 1.4.2009 to emphasize the 
importance of quality in the vocational training to ST youth in institutions which 
have marketability and reliability of placement. The committee were informed that 
under the revised schemes the Ministry has received as many as 8 ongoing 
proposals and 49 new proposals from NGOs. The Committee are, however, 
constrained to note that budget allocation of Rs.14.7 2 crores for 2009 -10 for the 
scheme was reduced to Rs.2.00 crores at RE stage by Ministry of Finance which 
was adequate only for 8 ongoing projects and no new projects could be taken up. 

 
 
28 
 
For the year 2010 -11 a budgetary allocation of only Rs.9.00 crores ha s been 
made. 
 
 Expressing displeasure on the unjustified cut on the budgetary allocation 
for the scheme which is greatly benefiting tribals, by the Ministry of Finance and 
low allocation for 2010 -11, the Committee recommend the Ministry to prudently 
utilize the same and also seek extra allocation in the revised estimates so that 
the programme does not suffer for paucity of funds. 
 
 The Committee further desire that Vocational Training should be made 
part of mainstream and reservation in reputed ITIs and pol ytechnics should be 
given to tribal students that will ensure their employability. 
 
 The Committee are pleased to note that at the instance of the Ministry 
some manufacturing units like TATA company, motor ancillary unit have selected 
1000 persons for trib al areas and given them extensive training and appointed 
them. The Committee were informed that the Ministry has impressed upon more 
like CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM to select more students for tribals areas and employ 
them after joining suitable training. 
 
 While appreciating the initiatives of the Ministry, the Committee desire that 
Government should also work out a plan so that the STs are able to get suitable 
employment. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.18 The budget allocation for the scheme of Vocational Training Centre (NGO) 
is Rs. 3.00 crore for the current year (2010 -11).  Release of arrear grants of Rs. 

 
 
29 
 
0.875 crore is under process. There are 8 on -going projects and Rs. 2.40 crore 
shall be required to fund them during the current year.  If complete proposals are 
received in time, then this Ministry may demand extra allocation. 
 
 An independent agency has been assigned the work of carrying out 
monitoring of NGO projects.  This agency will gather informat ion regarding 
employment status of past trainees.  Based on this information, NGOs with better 
record in providing employment to its trainees shall be given preference. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 2.113) 
 
2.19 The Committee note the dismal performance of scheme of Top Class 
Education for tribal students. The scheme which was started in 2007 -08 has not 
picked up even after 3 years and the expenditure is of the order of only 10-20%. 
On the contrary, because of poor performance the allocations for the scheme 
were lowered from 10 crores in 2008 -09 to 4 crores in 2009 -10 and have been 
further lowered to 2.5 crore in 2010 -11. Correspondingly, physical targets were 
also lowered. Th e reason attributed is non -receipt of complete proposals from 
most of the institutes. The Committee are constrained to note that the scheme 
which were formulated with the objective of encouraging meritorious ST students 
have been allowed to decline due to reasons which can be easily addressed with 
better coordination with institutes. Taking a serious view thereon, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to make concerted efforts to make the programme a 
success. 
 

 
 
30 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20 2010-11 being the 4th year of the scheme of Top Class Education, it is 
expected that the initial problems in implementation of the scheme would be 
resolved and the procedure for release of funds would be smoothened as the 
institutes have now begun to comprehend the requirem ents of documentation 
under the scheme. The Ministry is committed to persistent and untiring efforts to 
ensure that the annual target of 625 ST students  under the scheme, is met. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
      
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 2.117) 
 
2.21 The Committee are unhappy to note the nil expenditure in Research and 
Training Programme for two years in succession due to non -receipt of proposals 
for any State/TRI. The funds which are meant as support to States/TRI for 
carrying out research/evaluation studies, organizing seminar, workshop, training 
etc are important in planning and formulating of programmes and to generate 
awareness etc. 
 
The Committee desire the Ministry to analyse the reasons for non -
submission of proposals by the State Governments and impress upon them the 
critical importance of the programme. The Committee expect that in the year 
2010-11, the full allocation for the programme would be utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 Under Research and Training (Head 2225), each year, a provision is kept 
for supporting the Tribal Research Institute (TRI) in the Union Territory (UT) of 

 
 
31 
 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to be released as 100% Grant -in-aid. Funds were 
surrendered at RE stage in the last two financial year in view of the request of the 
UT Administration for the reason that the posts for the TRI has not been filled up. 
 
The observation of the Committee for full utilization of the allocation during 
2010-11 is noted for compliance. The matter will be pursued with the UT 
Administration to functionalize the TRI during 2010-11.  
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para No. 2.120) 
 
2.23 The Committee are constrained to note the „nil‟ expenditure on the 
„Scheme of exchange visit s by Tribals‟, in 2008 -09 and 2009 -10 due to non -
receipt of complete proposals from the State Governments. The Committee need 
not emphasize the importance of the exchange visits which give much needed 
exposure to tribals from one State to interact with trib als in other State and 
strengthen, social and cultural ties amongst themselves. The Committee have 
been informed that Ministry has revised the guidelines during the current financial 
year and have received some proposals from some State Government. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to earnestly promote and facilitate more and more 
exchange visits of tribals and if need be seek increased allocation at RE stage   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The observation of the Committee is noted for  compliance. The Mini stry 
has already called for submission of proposals for organizing exchange of visits 
by tribals during 2010 -11 and will pursue with the State Government/ UT 
Administration so that the allocated funds are optimally utilized. 

 
 
32 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22, Para No. 2.129) 
 
2.25 The Committee note that the funds under the NSTFDC scheme could not 
be released during 2007 -08 owing to non -submission of evaluation study report 
by PEO of Plannin g Commission. The Committee also observe that in spite of 
the allocation in 2008 -09 and at RE state in 2009 -10, no amounts could be 
released. The Committee observe with serious concern that Planning 
Commission finally communicated that due to huge data gap  and increase in 
sampling and non -sampling error, the findings of the study is treated as closed 
without any final report. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that 
Ministry should pursue the Planning Commission to get the evaluation study of 
NSTFDC assisted schemes done by another agency so that impact of the 
scheme could be seen and funds could be allocated to NSTFDC for its various 
welfare schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.26 The concern of the Committee has been noted and the  matter is being  
brought to the notice of Planning Commission.  Ministry, however, got a short 
evaluation study done by the NIRD, Hyderabad for having impact assessment of 
NSTFDC-assisted schemes and to expedite the release of equity support to 
NSTFDC for its various welfare schemes. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 

 
 
33 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 2.134) 
 
2.27 The Committee regret to note the sorry state of affairs with regard to the 
distribution of title deeds under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional 
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006 as against 27.16 lakh 
claims filed only 7.59 lakh titles have been distributed so far.  The Committee 
observe with serious concern that the above Act is not bei ng implemented in 
many States.  Even for the States where the Ministry claims to have distributed 
the title deeds, it is a ground reality that many tribes have not actually been 
distributed the pattas relating to the titles. The Ministry have also tried to  put the 
onus on the State Governments by saying that they are not taking appropriate 
action on the implementation of the Act.  The Committee strongly feel that the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs being at the helm of the affairs as far as the tribal 
development is concerned are the sole authority to see that the Act is 
implemented in true spirit and the title deeds are actually distributed to the needy 
tribes.  The Committee recommend that the responsibility should be fixed in this 
regard and strong action is t aken against the States/Departments which are not 
implementing the Act. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28 The Forest Rights Act, 2006 does not prescribe any time limit for 
recognition and vesting of forest rights in the eligible forest dwellers Scheduled 
Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers. The responsibility for implementing 
the Act lies with the State/ UT Governments. The provisions of the Act and the 
processes to be followed from the receipt of claims to their final disposal are of a 

 
 
34 
 
quasi-judicial nature.  States have progressed in varying degrees in 
implementation of the Act.  While the State like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have 
established the prescribed structures and procedures, have received a large 
number of claims and have started distributing the title deeds, other States, 
because of various reasons, are still to catch up. 
      Ministry of Tribal Affairs h as been interacting with all the State Governments 
and UT Administrations urging them to take all necessary steps for expeditious 
implementation of the Act.  For this purpose, Hon‟ble Minister of Tribal Affairs, 
Cabinet Secretary, Secretary (Tribal Affairs ) and other senior officers of the 
Ministry have been writing letters to the States/ UT Governments and have also 
been visiting the States/ UTs to access and guide the pace of the 
implementation.  This Ministry is also holding periodical Review Conferences / 
Meetings with the States/ UT Governments and have been issuing directions/ 
clarifications to States/ UT Governments, whenever necessary. Ministry held a 
two day Conference on 4 -5 Nov. 2009 of the Chief Ministers, State Ministers 
(Social Welfare/Tribal De velopments & Forest Departments). In his inaugural 
speech Hon‟ble Prime Minister urged all the Chief Ministers and their colleagues 
to ensure effective and timely implementation of the Act.  Hon‟ble Minister of 
Tribal Affairs has addressed the Chief Minist ers of all States on 18.2.2010 for 
ensuring that work relating to the distribution of title deeds to all eligible claimants 
under the Act, is completed at the earliest.  A meeting of Committee of 
Secretaries was held in Cabinet Secretariat to review the im plementation of the 

 
 
35 
 
Act particularly in the States of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka and 
Maharashtra on 21.5.2010.   
        As a result of efforts and persistent persuasion  by the Ministry,  more than 
9.75 lakh titles have been distributed a nd more than 27000 titles were ready for 
distribution as on 30.6.2010. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 

 
 
36 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

 
 
37 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON IN CHAPTER – I 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.37) 
 
4.1 The Committee note that non submission of utilization certificates of funds 
of previous years by the State Governments is a problem point due to which the 
Ministry is forced to withhold funds for the crucial schemes including SCA to 
TSP, Grants under Article 275(1), Schemes of Development of Particularly 
Vulnerable Tribal Group. 
 
 Though the Ministry have stated that the matter has been constantly 
pursued with the States through phones, letters, review meetings, the  problem 
still persists with the result that the tribal people are being deprived of the crucial 
funds meant for their development due to inaction on the part of State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommend the matter be taken up 
urgently with State Chief Secretaries/Secretaries in -charge of the Triba l Welfare 
Department and impress upon them the absolute necessity of furnishing 
Utilization Certificates of the funds released during the previous years. 
  
 The Committee view the inability of the Ministry to make funds available 
as per the intentions of A rticle 275(1) of the constitution very seriously. In this 
regard, the Committee note the difficulties being faced by States in furnishing 
Utilization Certificates viz. State capacity to execute the schemes, weak 
administration, extremism etc. Also the coll ection of expenditure reports from 

 
 
38 
 
various implementing agencies at district level involves considerable time and 
only States which are administrative ly better are able to utilize Central 
Government funds in time. The Committee are of the view that above p roblems 
cannot be addressed unless the States are administratively geared up and 
improve their delivery system. As these concerns are very genuine the 
Committee desire that the Governme nt take special administrative  measures 
after identifying the weak poin ts in these States and remedy the situation. 
Accordingly, an action plan be prepared and placed before the Government in 
order that a Constitutional provision does not get vitiated by routine/ mundane 
questions related to furnishing utilization certificates by the States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 Ministry regularly pursues these matters with the Secretaries  in the State 
Governments, through visits, personal meetings, letters and through telephonic 
communication.  Strengthening of delivery system and the administrative 
machinery in a State is possible only with active cooperation from the States.  
Recently the Mungekar Committee has given some recommendations in 
improving the delivery system in the States and the State Governments shall be 
sensitized as appropriate.  Awareness at the level of targeted beneficiaries and 
strengthening of Panchayat institutions are the broad ways of strengthening the 
delivery mechanism in the States.  
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
39 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.99) 
 
4.3 The Committee note that against the budgetary allocation of Rs.64 crores 
during 2009 -10 for construction of hostels the actual expenditure till 31.1.2010 
was only Rs.32.40 crores. However, the full allocation of 64 crores was released 
to States by the end of financial year. Though the Ministry has informed that 
release is based on actual physical progress, the Committee feel that release of 
50% of allocation at the fag end of the financial year is not a healthy practice and 
needs to be avoided. 
 
 From the material provided by the Ministry the Committee note that 
progress of construction of hostels in the States is not at all satisf actory. In the 
year 2007-08, only Orissa with 252 hostels and Jharkhand with 8 hostels have 
been able to complete the construction of sanctioned hostels. In case of Tripura 
and Manipur there is some achievement as out of 7 and 29 projects sanctioned, 
3 and  16 have been completed. For other States like Karnataka, Himachal 
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Hyderabad and Dadra and Nagar Haveli no hostel 
could be completed even after 3 years. Likewise for 2008 -09 Orissa has been 
able to complete 28 hostels out of 30 sanctioned, Rajasthan 13 out of 41 
sanctioned, Jharkhand 1 out of 11 but in other States there have been no 
achievement. 
 
 While commending the extraordinary achievement of Orissa for 
completion of 280 hostels in two years viz. 2007 -08 and 2008-09, the Committee 
desire the other States should also gear up and give priority to completion of all 
sanctioned hostels at an early date. 

 
 
40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 The observation of the Committee has been noted. In spite of the best 
efforts of the Ministry to sanction and release the funds under the schemes early 
in the financial year, there is, at times, an unavoidable delay in such releases 
because the States/UTs do not furnish the mandatory documents such as 
utilization certificates in respect of previous grants and physical progress reports 
in time. As part of an ongoing process the States/UTs are being continuously 
urged to monitor the financial and physical pro gress of funds and to send in their 
proposals to the Ministry in good time to expedite the sanction of funds.  
 
 The issue of non -completion of hostels in the States of Karnataka, 
Himachal Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, University of Hyderabad and the U.T. of  
Dadra and Nagar Haveli has been taken up with the States/University/UT 
concerned. The concern of the Standing Committee in this regard has also been 
communicated to the States/University/UT. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19, Para No. 2.114) 
 
4.5 The Committee find 125 institutes have been identified and the selection 
of candidates under the scheme both in Government and Private sector and 
where selection of candidates is made through competitive examination like 
AIEEE, PMT CAT. The scheme does not  contain any component of special 

 
 
41 
 
training/coaching to students to get admission to these institutes. The Committee 
feel that in the absence of any criteria or any coaching/training to ST students 
these institutes are unreachable to ST students. The Commit tee therefore, 
recommend that the Government to facilitate the ST students to get admission in 
the top class institutions, a different criteria for ST students be worked out and 
some coaching/training be also imparted to prepare them for entrance 
examination. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 The concern of the Standing Committee regarding coaching and training 
to the ST students is noted. Further, schemes for coaching and training by NGOs 
as well as the scheme of Upgradation of Merit are concurrently in operat ion for 
the benefit of ST students. The Top Class Education scholarship scheme 
recognizes the inherent merit of the ST students who gain admission on their 
own in premier institutes in accordance with the norms and standards for 
admission laid down by thes e institutes. Accordingly the scheme does not 
contain any clause to facilitate the ST students to get admission in these 
institutes because the scheme comes into operation for those students only after 
they have gained admission on merit in these institutes. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

 
 
42 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.31) 
 
5.1 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry proposes to put on 
the internet the proposals received by them from States and if any proposal has 
a deficiency, the status of proposal will also b e on internet alongwith the contact 
number for any clarification. The Committee desire in addition to the above, the 
Ministry while releasing funds for any scheme to the State should also endorse a 
copy of it to the concerned district authorities so that t hey can also coordinate 
with the State for expeditious release of the same to the implementing agencies.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 Action has been initiated for placing the status of proposals received from 
the State Governments under various schemes on the internet of the Ministry.  
Suggestion of the Committee to endorse a copy of the Sanction Orders to 
the concerned District Collector/authorities is being examined.   
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.35) 
 
5.3 The Committee have been informed that Planning Commission has 
brought out Mungekar Committee Report suggesting how Ministry should 
function to be more effective at field level.  The Report of the said Committee 

 
 
43 
 
which has reported to have made drastic sugge stions in this regard is being 
examined by the Government.  The Committee desire the Government to take a 
view on the Report urgently and also place it before this Committee for their 
consideration. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 The recommendations of the Dr. Mungekar Committee have been 
examined and the views of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs as approved by the  
Hon‟ble Minister of Tribal Affairs have been forwarded to the  Prime Minister‟s 
Office for acceptance. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.36) 
 
5.5 The Committee note the Ministry was created in 1997 with a budgetary 
outlay of Rs. 687 crore and had staff strength of 95.  In 10 years of its existence,  
the work load of Minis try has increased manifold and correspondingly budgetary 
outlay has also increased 5 times to Rs. 3206 crore but staff strength has only 
marginally increased to 134.  Moreover, there are 29 vacancies, in various 
grades in the Ministry.  As per the Ministry ‟s contention, due to shortage of staff 
the work in almost all the Divisions of the Ministry has suffered and monitoring 
and evaluation of the existing programmes have been unable to receive due 
attention.  Moreover with increase in quantum of workload, it  has become difficult 
to cope with dead lines. 
 

 
 
44 
 
 In this regard the Committee in their second report on DFG had 
recommended that the matter of shortage of staff be taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance/DOP&T for creation of more posts and filling up of vac ancies.  The 
Committee has been informed that a proposal for creation of 27 additional posts 
in various grades to reinforce insufficient staff has been approved by Hon‟ble 
Minister of Tribal Affairs and the matter has now been taken up with the 
concerned departments.  
 
In view of critical shortage of staff in the Ministry which is adversely 
affecting the work, the Committee recommend the Ministry to earnestly pursue 
the matter with concerned Ministries at appropriate levels to strengthen the staff 
at the earliest.   The Committee would also like to urge upon the Ministry of 
Finance and DOP&T to urgently look into the need for strengthening of staff in 
the Ministry without any delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 With a view to ensure proper monitoring of various schemes of this 
Ministry, the Hon‟ble Minister has recently approved a proposal for creation of 27 
additional posts in various grades to reinforce the depleted staff.  The proposal 
as approved by the Hon‟b le Minister has already been submitted to Integrated 
Finance Division (IFD) of this Ministry for taking up with the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure and is under examination.  Other than this,  the  
concerned Cadre Controlling authorities  ha ve also been urged to fill  existing 
vacancies.  
  

 
 
45 
 
2. A study proposed by this Ministry on work measurement by SIU 
has also been agreed to by Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure.  It has been assured by them that the same will be included 
in their Annual Programme of Studies in 2010-11. 
 
3. It has also been noted that ever since this Ministry was created 
w.e.f. 29.10.1999, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, the 
cadre controlling authority for posts belonging to CSS/CSSS/CSCS, has 
not been able to fill up posts  at the cutting -edge level and as such a large 
number of posts (ranging from 17% to 30%) such as Section Officers, 
Assistants, UDCs, LDCs, etc. have always remained vacant.  This has 
adversely affected the Ministry in its effort to implement its given mandate.  
Therefore, this Ministry has also taken up the issue for creation of a 
separate cadre with DOP&T.  Recently, DOP&T has requested this 
Ministry for comments on certain issues and accordingly appropriate reply 
has already been sent to DOP&T for further consideration of the case.   
 
4. In addition the task of monitoring and evaluation of all NGO 
schemes/projects have been outsourced to two private agencies for next 
three years.  Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure h as also 
approved creation of 11 posts for a Policy Implementation Cell for the 
work relating to National Tribal Policy in this Ministry.  
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 

 
 
46 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.38) 
 
5.7 The Committee note that the Ministry take feedback on the various 
schemes/ programmes mostly during review meetings wherein the State/UTs 
bring to the notice of the Ministry any suggestion/difficulty in implementing the 
scheme.  Since proper feedback o n scheme/programmes is crucial to know their 
efficacy and impact, the Committee recommend that a IT -enabled service be 
implemented to get prompt feedback from the State Govts./ Associations / 
individuals and other implementing agencies on a regular basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8 The recommendation of the Committee for IT -enabled service to get 
prompt feedback from the State Govts./Associations/individuals and other 
implementing agencies on a regular basis, is under active consideration. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.40) 
 
5.9 The Committee observe that the Ministry had sent a concept note to the 
Planning Commission regarding Pre -Matric Scholarship scheme for ST students 
but the matter is still pending with the Government. The Committee strongly feel 
that scholarships for poor ST students at pre -matric stage will motivate and 
facilitate them to attend schools in large numbers. They, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to vig orously take up with the Planning Commission for early 
clearance of the scheme. 
 

 
 
47 
 
 The Committee are further unhappy to note that to their query on number 
of drop -outs from ST students who have not been able to complete schooling 
due to financial reasons, t he Ministry gave a casual reply that the same is not 
maintained by them but by the nodal Ministry of Education namely the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development. The Committee had expected the Ministry to 
obtain this information from the concerned Ministry  and furnish the same to the 
Committee. As recommended in their earlier recommendation, the Committee 
desire the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to have effective coordination with line 
Ministries and maintain such vital data which will greatly help them in for mulating 
schemes for the STs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 The directive of the Committee in respect of the Pre -Matric Scholarship 
scheme has been noted for compliance and the matter is being taken up 
concurrently with the Planning Commission for early clearance of the scheme. 
 
 The Ministry has asked the Ministry of Human Resource Development to 
furnish the relevant data in respect of dropout rates and schooling of ST students 
everywhere in the country. 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.100) 
 
5.11 The Committee have been informed that as per the provision of revised 
scheme applicable w.e.f. 1.4.2008 there is a time limit of 2 years for completion 
of hostels after release of f inal installments of funds. The Committee are firmly of 

 
 
48 
 
the view that this time limit is an usually long period for construction of a simple 
hostel building which should not take more than one year. They, therefore, 
recommend that this provision to be changed to make the time limit of completion 
of hostels after release of final installment of fund to be one year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.12 Time limit of 2 years for completion of hostels after release of final 
installment of funds was imposed at the time of revision of the scheme of Hostels 
for ST Boys and Girls in 2007 -08. The recommendation of the Committee to 
further restrict this time limit would be taken into consideration in the next 
review/appraisal of the scheme upon its becoming due. 
 
(Ministry of Tribal Affairs F. No. 16015/05/2010-PC & V dated 21.7.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:                DARA SINGH CHAUHAN,  
                    Chairman, 
5 January, 2011      Standing Committee on  
15 Pausha, 1932 (Saka) Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
  

 
 
49 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5 TH 
JANUARY, 2011. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room No. 
„G-074‟, PLB, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Premchand Guddu 
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
10. Shri Mohan Jena 
11. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
14. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
16. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
17. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
18. Shri Baishnab Parida 
19. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 

 
 
50 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider  
and adopt the following Draft Reports of the Committee: 
 
(i)     Draft Twelfth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
(ii)   Draft Thirteenth on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment.  
 
(iii)   Draft Fourteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Fourteenth Report 
without any amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the  draft Report and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  
  

 
 
51 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   FIFTH REPORT OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
          Total     Percentage 
 
 I.  Total number of Recommendations        23 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations which         14 60.86% 
have been accepted by the Government:               
(Paragraph Nos. 2.30, 2.32,2.33,2.34,2.39, 
2.41, 2.58,2.76,2.87,2.113,2.117,2.120, 
2.129 and 2.134)  
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which        Nil 0%      
 the Committee do not desire to pursue 
  in view of the replies of the Government: 
   
IV. Observations/Recommendations in        3  13.05% 
  respect of which replies of the  
Government  have not been accepted  
and have been commented upon by  
the Committee in Chapter I 
  (Paragraph Nos. 2.37, 2.99 and 2.114) 
 
V. Observations/Recommendations in      6  26.09% 
  respect of which replies of the  
  Government are interim in nature: 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.31, 2.35, 2.36, 2.38 
2.40 and 2.100) 
 
 
 