1 
 
33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) 
ORDER (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT  
 
              
   
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)  


2 
 
THIRTY THIRD REPORT  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2012-13) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) 
ORDER (SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012 
            
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2013 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.3.2013 
 
 
                
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934(Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE(s) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………………… 
 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………… 
 
6 
REPORT ……………………………………………………………………………. 
 
7 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 2012. 
 
20 
II. Modalities for deciding claims for inclusion in, exclusion from and 
other modifications in the Orders specifying Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes lists. 
 
25 
III. Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on Thursday, 7th  March, 2013. 
 
27 
IV. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment held on Tuesday, 19th  March, 2013. 
31 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2012-2013) 
       
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
12. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
13. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
14. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
15. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
16. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
17. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18. Shri Kabir Suman 
19. Vacant  
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
 *24. Shri Rishang Keishing 
25. Shri Mangala Kisan 
26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
_____________________________________________________________ 
*  Resigned from the Committee w.e.f. 22.2.2013  

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Yash Pal Sharma - Senior Executive Assistant 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on  Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment having been authorized by the Committee to  submit   the  Report  on  
their  behalf, do  present  this  Thirty -third Report of the Committee  on  “The 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 2012” pertaining to 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 14.12.2012  and was referred to the 
Committee by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 21.12.2012 under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs, the Registrar General of India, the National Commission for Scheduled 
Tribes and to Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department) for tendering 
evidence and placing their considered views before the Committee and also for 
furnishing written notes and information as desired by the Committee in connection with 
the examination of the Bill.  
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report on the Bi ll at their sitting held on 
19.3.2013.  
 
5. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
      
 New Delhi;   HEMANAND BISWAL, 
19 March, 2013     Chairman, 
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
  

7 
 
REPORT 
 
The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 2012 was 
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 14.12.2012.  The Bill was referred to the Standing  
Committee on Social  Justice and Empowerment on 21.12.2012 for examination and 
report thereon.  A copy o f the Bill as introduced in the Lok  Sabha is appended 
(Annexure-I).  The Bill seeks to amend 'The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 
1950' to modify the list of Schedul ed Tribes in the States of Kerala and Chhattisgarh. 
The Bill seeks re -inclusion of 'Marati" community of the Hosdurg and Kasargod Taluks 
of Kasargod district of Kerala in the list of Scheduled Tribes of Kerala and inclusion of 
'Abujh Maria' and 'Hill Korwa ' communities in the list of Scheduled Tribe s of 
Chhattisgarh.      
BACKGROUND  
1.1 Article 366(25) of the Constitution, defines Scheduled Tribes as follows:- 
  
“Scheduled Tribes means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups 
within such tribes or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342 to be 
Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this Constitution”.  
1.2 The Scheduled Tribes are notified b y the Presidential Order under Article 342(1) 
of the Constitution, which reads as follow:- 
 “342 Scheduled Tribes (1) The President may with respect to any State or Union 
Territory, and where it is a State, after constitution with the Governor thereof, by 
public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or group 
within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of this Constitution 

8 
 
be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State or Union Territory, as 
the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of Scheduled 
Tribes specified in a notification issued under clauses (1) any tribe or tribal 
community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but save as 
aforesaid a n otification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification.” 
 
1.3  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in a written note to the Committee, submitted that  
for the process of inclusion/exclusion/modification in the list of Scheduled Tribes, the 
criteria followed are:- 
(a) Indications of primitive traits; 
(b) Distinctive culture; 
(c) Geographical isolation; 
(d) Shyness of contact with the community at large; and 
(e) Backwardness 
 
 The Ministry further submitted that t hese cri teria are not spelt out in the 
Constitution but have become well established and accepted. 
Prescribed modalities for deciding claims on inclusion in/exclusion from and 
modifications in the ST list:  
 
1.4 In accordance with  the aforementioned constitutional provision and the criteria 
evolved, the Scheduled Tribes in relation to particular States or Union Territories were 
duly notified first in 1950 by an Order of the President, after consultation wit h the State 
Governments/ UT Administration concerned.  As per the extant procedure, any inclusion 
in or exclusion from and other modifications in the list of Scheduled Tribes can be made 

9 
 
only through an amending Act of Parliament. In order to ensure that only genuine 
communities are included in the l ist of Scheduled Tribes, the Cabinet Committee on 
SCs, STs and Minorities on 15.6.1999 , and further amended on 25.6.2002 , had laid 
down the modalities for determining the claims for inclusion in, exclusion from and other 
modifications in Orders specifying Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes lists  
(Annexure-II). As per the  modalities only those proposals , which have been justified 
and recommended by the concerned State Government/ UT Administration and the 
Registrar General of India (RGI) as well as the Na tional Commission for Scheduled 
Tribes (NCST) are to be considered for amending the  legislation. After the matter is 
approved by the Cabinet, a Bill is introduced in Parliament. In case a proposal is not 
supported by the RGI, it is referred back to the Sta te Government for reviewing or 
further justifying their recommendation in the light of the observations of the RGI.  In 
such cases, where the RGI does not agree to the point of view of the State 
Government/UT Administration on a second reference, the Gover nment of India may 
consider for rejection. Those cases with which the State Governments and the RGI are 
in agreement, but which the Commission (NCST) have not supported, would be rejected 
at the level of Minster for Tribal Affairs, Government of India. 
 
Background on propos ed inclusion/exclusion/re-inclusion of ‘Marati’ community 
of Kerala: 
 
1.5 According to Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the „Marati‟ community was first included in 
the list of Scheduled Tribes in 1956 in the State of Kerala in Kasargod taluk of 
erstwhile Malabar district  (at main Sl. No. „5‟), vide  the Scheduled Castes and 

10 
 
Scheduled Tribes list (Modification) Order, 1956. Vide the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 1976 , „Marati‟ (in Hosdrug and Kasargod 
taluks of Cannanore district) at Sl. No. 28 was included in the list of STs of Kerala. As 
per the approved modalities, on the recommendation of the State Government of 
Kerala, the Office of the Registrar General of India (ORGI) and the then National 
Commission for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (NCSCST) , the „Marati‟ 
community was excluded from the list of  Scheduled Tribes of Kerala, vide the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders (Amendment) Act, 2002.  
 
1.6 The State Government of Kerala vide its letter dated 21.11.2002 recommended 
re-inclusion of the „Marati‟ community in the list of STs of Kerala. Subsequently, the 
State Government, vide its letter dated 31.8.2010 recommended re-inclusion of „Marati‟ 
community in Kasargod district only. The recommendation of the State Gov ernment of 
Kerala was processed as per the afore cited modalities and referred to the office of 
Registrar General of India, New Delhi for its views/ comments. The Registrar General of 
India, recommended re -inclusion of „Marati‟ of the Hosdurg and Kasargod Taluks of 
Kasargod district of Kerala in the Sche duled Tribes list of Kerala State on 02.02.2012. 
The recommendations of the RGI were referred to the NCST for their comments. The 
National Commission for Scheduled Tribe s, convened a meeting on 13.6.2012 with the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the Registrar G eneral of India and the Chief Secretary of 
Kerala to consider the proposal of State Government of Kerala for re -inclusion of 
„Marati‟ community in the list of Scheduled Tribes in respect of the State  of Kerala. The 
NCST recommended re -inclusion of „Marati‟  community as Scheduled Tribes of Kerala  
as proposed. 

11 
 
1.7 About the inclusion of 'Marati' community of Kerala, the Secretary, Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs deposed: 
"In the case of „Marati‟ community, if you look, I can give the chronology how it 
has proceeded, but I think you are aware that „Marati‟ community was de -notified 
in January 2003 and then there was a proposal from the State Gove rnment to re-
include it for Kasa rgod District.  After it has been agreed, we have mooted this 
proposal". 
 
1.8 When enquired on what grounds the Marati community was excluded from the 
list in 2003 and what are the grounds on which it is now proposed for inclusion in the ST 
list, the representative of National Commission for Scheduled Tribes  submitted before 
the Committee: 
".....................On the one hand, in 2002, we proceeded with the exclusion and 
today we are going to re-include it. The issue is what the basis was in 2002 when 
we considered exclusion. We have gone through the records . We have seen that 
at that point of time, there was no scientific survey that was done, and there is 
some part which is based on the literature, on books or that sort of studies. That 
is a desk study. On the basis of desk study, they justified it and came  out with a 
statement. In fact, one of the justifications was that they are caste-Hindus - it was 
such a solid thing – and they do not have the traits of the primitive tribes. On that 
basis, we cannot recommend to include it. If the State Government itself  comes 
out with such a paper, which they say, is a supporting document for exclusion 
and which says that they are the caste -Hindus and do not have primitive traits, 
the Commission had to go  by it.  At that time, in 2002, the Commission was 
combined for SC and ST. In their wisdom, they took the view that if they were not 
having primitive traits and not having tribal characteristics, certainly there was no 
basis the Commission should justify their retention in the list. So, the Commission 
said „it is okay‟. But immediately after that, one of the members of our 
Commission visited that area, interacted with the people and gave a report that  
these people are similar to the people which are there in th e neighbouring State, 
Karnataka and  having the similar characteristics and they belong, more or less, 
to same sort of culture etc. Then, we recommended   „let us correct it and include 
it‟. Now, from 2003 to this time, there was some delay in the responses of the 
State Government. In 2010 only, the State Government came out with a detailed 
study report, which has been done by Dr. Mercy, which has said „Yes‟  for 
inclusion. But our member in 2003 itself had said that and we have 
recommended re-inclusion. That was the stand of the Commission".  

12 
 
1.9 When asked whether there was any field assessment in 2002 for exclusion of 
'Marati' community, or any assessment or survey for re -inclusion of this community, the 
representative of National Commission for Scheduled Tribes apprised the Committee as 
follows :- 
"....................Certainly, this assessment was not there in 2002 when we 
proceeded with exclusion. Honestly speaking, I could not find it on the record. 
There was no assessment and it was based on the literature and desk study.  
 
............ Today, in fact, the report of one of the research instit utions the State 
Government had examined and the RGI also examined it, and they say that the 
socio-economic conditions are same as were prevailing during the period when 
they were included.  As far as the Commission is concerned, we took a very 
balanced view in this particular case. We s ay why they should be restored again. 
We said that there is a  logic because when we excluded them, we did not find 
any scientific assessment and therefore, the position should be restored as it was 
prevalent. That is the stand the Commission has taken on this particular issue". 
 
 
1.10 Responding to a query regarding re-inclusion of 'Marati' community, the Registrar 
General of India submitted as follows :- 
"......., as far as this proposal for re -inclusion to Marati community is concerned, 
since the 1950s the Marati community enjoyed the status of Scheduled Tribes 
(ST) both in Dakshin Kannada and Hosdurg Taluk of Kasargod of Karnataka and 
Kerala respectively. But when re -organisation took place in 1956, part of the 
community living in Kasargod went to Kerala State and remaining part went to 
Dakshin Kannada. So, they were included with area restrictions, but in 1 978 
there was a communication from the Ministry of Home Affairs where they have 
suggested a number of deletions. So, at that time, my office made a comment 
that : “We had earlier felt that they should be retained in the statutory list as long 
as proper jus tification or more information supporting their exclusion is not 
provided.”  
But later on we have made further review of these marginal cases, and 
they have said that : “They have no objection to their deletions if they so desire.” 
So, as it was rightly po inted out, examination was not done at that time when the 
proposal came for deletion of this community, but, subsequently, the matter was 
again referred to us and at that time we had asked the State Government 
specifically that : “You cannot recommend once for deletion from the list and then 
again inclusion. It should be treated a little more seriously.”  

13 
 
We have said in our report at that time that : “You are therefore requested 
to look into this matter carefully and if required refer this matter to the Ke rala 
State Government seeking clarification in regard to their inconsistent approach 
and recommendation in the matter of Marati.” So, after this, the State 
Government has again given us a detailed report on the report done by an 
anthropologist plus other a dditional material from the Forest Department and 
from the Anthropology Department of the University of Mysore, etc. based on 
which we have made an assessment of the existing literature and concurred with 
the proposal to re-include this community into the list of STs of Kerala. So, this is 
how the history of the case proceeds". 
Background on proposed  inclusion of ‘Abujh Maria’ and ‘ Hill Korwa’ of 
Chhattisgarh:  
1.11 According to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, t here are certain groups among 
Scheduled Tribes which have been declining or have stagnant population, low level of 
literacy, pre -agricultural level of technology and are economically backward. These 
groups are one of the most vulnerable sections of  our society as they are few in 
numbers, have not att ained any significant level of social and economic development 
and generally inhabit remote localities having poor infrastructure and administrative 
support. 75 such groups in 17 States and one UT have been identified and categorized 
as Particularly Vulner able Tribal Groups (PTGs). Most of these groups are small in 
number, have not attained any significant level of social and economic progress and 
generally inhabit remote localities having poor infrastructure and administrative support. 
Priorities are, ther efore, required to be accorded for their protection and development, 
and checking the declining trend of their population. 
 
1.12 The communities of „Abujh Maria ‟ and „Hill Kor wa‟, though identified as PTGs , 
have not been enlisted in the list of STs of the State of Chhattisgarh. The Governor of 
Chhattisgarh had requested for enumeration for Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Gr oup 
communities of „Abujh Maria‟ and „Pahari Korwa ‟ in Census 2011, vide his letter dat ed 

14 
 
08th /09th March, 2011. The Government of Chhattisgarh had recommended  inclusion 
of „Abujh Maria‟ and „Hill Korwa‟ at serial no. 16 and 27 in the list of Scheduled Tribes in 
Chhattisgarh vide its letter dated 26.07.2011. The office of the  RGI supported  the 
proposal on  24.10.2011 on the ground  that „Abujh Maria‟ is a section of Maria Gond 
whereas Hill Korwa or Pahari Korwa is a section of Korwa tribe. These two communities 
possess all tribal characteristics. They have been identified as Primitive Tribes in the 
States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh because they lag far behind educationally, 
economically and socially than their main tribal counterpart. The  RGI therefore 
recommend that the Abujh Maria and Hill/Pahari Korwa and may be included as one of 
the sections of their main tribal communities viz. Gond and Korwa respectively in the 
Scheduled Tribe list of Chhattisgarh through proper notification and amendment.  
  
1.13 As required under the approved modalities, the matter was referred to the NCST 
for comments/views. The NCST convened a meeting on 13.6.2012 with Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs, RGI and the Chief Secretary of Chhattisgarh to consider the proposal of 
State Government of Chhattisgarh. In the said meeting it was decided that the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs may immediately take steps to include the name of „Abujh Maria‟ and 
„Hill Korwa‟ along with the name of the respective Mother Tribe in the list of Scheduled 
Tribes of Chhattisgarh State.  
 
1.14 Explaining the need for inclusion of „Abujh Maria‟ and Hill Korwa‟ communities of 
Chhatisgarh, the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs during evidence stated :- 
".........., for the „Abujh Maria‟ and 'Hill Korwa‟ communities  of Chhattisgarh, there 
has been a proposal for „Abujh Maria‟ a particularly vulnerable tribal group . This 
is one of the 75 PTGs recognised in the country.  Most of these PTGs have been 
included in the list of Scheduled Tribes. Abujh Maria and Hill Korwa communities, 

15 
 
though identified as PTGs, had  not been enlisted as Scheduled Tribes. The 
Government of Chhattisgarh recommended inclusion at serial no. 16 and 27 and 
the Registrar General and NCST supported the proposal and, hence, we mooted 
the proposal to Cabinet and that is in Parliament".   
 
1.15 The Registrar General of India also clarified during evidence :- 
"As far as the other two communities, namely, the Hill Korwa and Abujh Maria 
are concerned, we find that there is proper justification to include Abujh Maria. It 
is a section of the Maria Gond, and Hill Korwa or Pahadi Korwa is a section of 
the Korwa Tribe.  Since, they were excluded we have recommended that they 
should be properly included in the list of Chhattisgarh. This is the stand of the 
Registrar General.  
............ Earlier, it was thought that the Gonds living in the Abujh Maria region 
were called Abujh Maria, but we have said that it should be included separately. 
They were already PTGs, but they were not given the ST status. We have 
recommended -- on getting a specific request from the State Government -- and 
we have concurred with the proposal to  allow them to be included as a separate 
entry in the STs list of Chhattisgarh". 
  

16 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1.16 "The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 
2012" introduced in Parliament on 14.12.2012 seeks to modify the list of 
Scheduled Tribes in relation to the States of Kerala and Chhattisgarh .  As per the 
Statement of Objects  and  Reasons  of  the  Bill (No. 139 of 2012 ), this is being 
done "to fulfil the long standing demands for re -inclusion of 'Marati' community 
of the Hosdurg and Kasargod Taluks of Kasargod district of Kerala in the list of 
Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Kerala" and "for granting schedul ed 
tribes status to the Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs) namely 'Abhuj 
Maria' and 'Hill Korwa' in the list of Scheduled Tribes in  relation to the State of 
Chhattisgarh. 
1.17 The Committee note that the 'Marati' community  of   Kasargod Taluk of 
Malabar district  was first included in the list of Scheduled Tribes in 1956 in 
relation to the State of Kerala.  Subsequently, through an amendment Act of 1976 
'Marati' community in Hosdurg and Kasargod  Taluks of Cannanore district  was 
also 'included' in t he list of Scheduled Tribes of Kerala.    However, on the 
recommendation of the State Government , the 'Marati' Community was excluded 
from the list of Scheduled Tribes of Kerala    vide   amendment Act of 2002.   
Surprisingly,   even before the notification of the above Act of 2002 in January 
2003, the Government of Kerala had another change of mind when it 
recommended in November 2002 for re -inclusion of 'Marati' Community in the list 
of STs of the State.   The Committee are cons trained to find that it took ten yea rs 
for the  RGI and NCST to re -examine the proposal of State Government and 

17 
 
recommend their re-inclusion in ST list on the basis of anthropological studies 
and field survey which established that there was no perceptible change in their 
socio-economic condition s as prevailing in 1956.  The RGI testified before the 
Committee that while delisting the Community in 2002, the RGI was not fully 
convinced and did not find justification  in  it but still concurred with the proposal 
by stating that they (RGI) did not have objection to the deletion if the Government 
desired to do so.   Similarly, the representative  of the NCST deposed that no 
scientific assessment was done by NCST in 2002 and the Commission proceeded 
with the exclusio n exercise and this was done purely based on the available 
literature and 'desk study'.  Apparently, the Registrar General of India & National 
Commission for Scheduled Tribes did not exercise due diligence and care while 
giving their approval for exclusion  of the 'Marati' community in 2002.  The 
Committee find it intriguing that while the State Government of Kerala was 
mooting the proposal for re -inclusion in November 200 2, the notification for 
delisting of 'Marati' community was brought out in January 2003.  The Committee 
express their strong displeasure over the manner in which the Marati community 
was de-notified in 2003 and the inability of the RGI and the NCST to as sert their 
independent functioning.  The Committee hardly need to emphasise   that the 
statutory/constitutional bodies should function in an objective and independent 
manner and should exercise utmost caution in r ecommending 
inclusion/exclusion of   a community in the Scheduled Tribes lists. 
1.18 The Committee find the criteria for inclusion of tribes is   too subjective and 
somewhat archaic  therefore recommend that the matter be revisited and 

18 
 
comprehensive criteria evolved both for inclusion and exclusion based on 
comprehensive anthropological an d socio -economic studies and unassailable 
empirical evidence.  Further, the Committee recommend that the entire process of 
consultation regarding inclusion/exclusion of caste s/community in the ST list be 
comprehensively re-examined and the Committee apprised within 3 months of the 
presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
1.19 In regard to inclusion of the 'Hill Korwa' and 'Abhuj Maria'  communities in 
the Scheduled Tribe list  in respect of Chhattisgarh, the Committee find no 
objection and accordingly, recommend their inclusion as envisaged in the Bill.  
The Committee, however, seek justification as to why 75 groups in 17 States and 
one UT, which have been identified and categorised as Particularly Vulnerable 
Tribal Groups (PTGs), have n ot yet been accorded the schedule d tribe status.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the ground for not including these 
PTGs in the list of   Scheduled Tribes of the respective States within three months 
of the presentation of this  report alongwith the  considered views of RGI,   NCST 
and concerned States   in the matter. 
1.20 The Committee are baffled to note from   the Statement and Objects and 
Reasons of the Bill that the amendment to the law is intended to "to fulfil the long 
standing demands" for re-inclusion/inclusion of the said communities in the list 
of Scheduled Tribes .  Evidently, such a statement creates an erroneous 
impression as though castes are included in the list of S cheduled Tribes on the 
basis of long standing demand and not on the basis of objective criteria .  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that   all proposals for inclusion/exclusion of 

19 
 
castes in the Scheduled Tribes list should be based on objective and discernible  
criteria following the independent  but concurring recommendations of both the 
RGI & NCST.   
1.21 The Committee feel that while there are sufficient grounds and justification 
for re-inclusion of   'Marati' community in the ST list of K erala as envisaged in the 
Bill and accordingly recommend the inclusion of the 'Marati' community in the ST 
list in respect of Kerala, they are constrained to observe that the Government did 
not follow the prescribed procedure in the strictest manner as req uired while 
delisting the community in 2002-2003.  The Committee are distressed that a whole 
generation of the  Marati community was deprived of the benefit s of reservation 
between 2003 when it was delisted and  2013,  when it is sought to be re-included.   
Subject to these observation s, t he Committee  recommend that the 
Government initiate urgent necessary action to pass the Bill in Parliament in the 
current   Session itself so as to rectify a wrong done to the 'Marati' Community of 
the specified areas of Kerala  and also to include   the 'Hill Korwa' and 'Abhuj 
Maria' of Chhattisgarh in the ST lists of the respective States. 
 
 
      
 New Delhi;         HEMANAND BISWAL, 
19 March, 2013          Chairman, 
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on Social     
Justice and Empowerment. 
 
 

20 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
Modalities for deciding claims for inclusion in, exclusion from and other 
modifications in the Orders specifying Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
lists. 
 
 Modalities for deciding claims for inclusion in, exclusion from and other 
modifications in the Orders specifying Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have 
been notified.  Such proposals are required to be processed as indicated below :- 
(a) Cases favoured by both the St ate Governments and the Registrar General of 
India (RGI) in their most recent reports would be referred to the National Commission 
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes for their opinion.  They would be forwarded 
to the Commission individually or in ba tches, as may be practicable, along with the 
comments of the State Governments and the RGI as well as any relevant 
material/information furnished by them or by representations. 
(b) Some issues concern not one but several States e.g. the status of SC/ST 
migrants.  These would also be referred to the National Commission if the RGI and 
majority of concerned States have supported modification. 
(c) It may be suggested to the Commission that, while examining the above cases, 
they should associate, through panels or other means, expert individuals, organizations 
and institutions in the fields of anthropology, ethnography and other social sciences, in 
addition to the State Governments, RGI and the Anthropological Survey in India, on 
regional basis.  They may also co nsider holding public hearings in areas relevant to the 
claims under examination.  These guidelines cannot be binding on the Commission, but 
may be suggested in the interest of fuller examination of the cases.  The Commission 
would also be requested to giv e priority to cases in which the Courts have given 
directives regarding decision within a stipulated time period.  (In such cases, extension 
of time would be sought from the courts where necessary, citing these modalities for the 
determination of claims).  Such cases would be separately processed and sent for 
earlier decision. 
(d) Amending legislation would be proposed to the Cabinet in all cases in which the 
National Commission, RGI as well as the State Governments have favoured 
modification.  Those cases with which the State Governments and the RGI are in 
agreement, but which the Commission have not supported, would be rejected at the 
level of Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(e) Claims for inclusion, exclusion or other modifications that neith er the RGI nor the 
concerned State Governments have supported would not be referred to the National 

21 
 
Commission.  These would be rejected at the level of the Minister for Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
(f) In case of claims recommended by the concerned Sta te Governments/Union 
Territory Administrations, but not agreed to by the Registrar General of India, the 
concerned State Government/Union Territory Administration would be asked to review 
and further justify their recommendations in the light of the commen ts of the RGI.  On 
receipt of the further clarification from the State Government/Union Territory 
Administration, the proposal would be referred to the RGI for comments.  In such cases, 
where the RGI does not agree to the point of view of the State Governm ent/Union 
Territory Administration on a second reference, the Government of India may consider 
rejection of the said proposal. 
(g) Claims in respect of which the comments of either the RGI or the State 
Government or of both are awaited would remain under c onsideration until their views 
are received.  Thereafter, they would be dealt with in accordance with the modalities at 
(a) to (f) above. 
(h) Claims recommended suo -moto by the National Commission would be referred 
to RGI and the State Governments.  Depend ing on their responses, they would be 
disposed of in accordance with the modalities at (d) to (f) as may be applicable. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
(Note :- The Note for the 'Cabinet Committee on Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes 
and Minorities' moved by Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, vide their Note No. 
12016/36/96-SCD(RL Cell) dated 17.12.1998 and Note dated 17.01.2002)  
  

22 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 7 TH 
MARCH, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room 'E',  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri 
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Mohan Jena 
7. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
8. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
10. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
11. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
12. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
 
Designation  
 
1. Smt. Vibha Puri Das Secretary 
 
2. Shri A.K. Dubey Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 Dr. C. Chandramouli Registrar General of India 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR  
SCHEDULED TRIBES  
 Name 
 
Designation  
 Shri Aditya  Mishra Joint Secretary 
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE 
 Smt. Sharda Jain Joint Secretary & Legislative 
Counsel 
 

24 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs, Registrar General of India, National Commission for Scheduled Tribes 
and Ministry of Law & Justice to the sitting of the Committee.  He then asked the 
Secretary, Mi nistry of Tribal Affairs to brief the Committee on the contents of "The 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 2012" as well as its 
objects and reasons.    
3. Thereafter, the Members raised various queries, which inter-alia included :- 
(i) Criteria for inclusion in/exclusion from the Scheduled Tribes list. 
(ii) Need to conduct a fresh survey of communities. 
(iii) Rationale for exclusion and subsequent re-inclusion of  'Marati' community 
in Scheduled Tribe List. 
 (iv) Traits of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). 
4.  The Committee also directed that recent anthropological literature for examining 
the proposals be submitted to them. 
5. The representatives of the Ministries/Commission responded to the queries 
raised by the Members to the extent possible.  The Chairman directed them to furnish 
replies to those points which could not be replied to in the meeting.   
6. Before concluding, the Chairman thanked the representatives of the 
Ministries/Commission for giving valua ble information to the Committee on the Bill and 
expressing their views in a free and frank manner on the issues and questions  posed to 
them.                        

25 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
   The witnesses then withdrew. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

26 
 
ANNEXURE - IV 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY, 19TH MARCH, 2013. 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
24. Shri M. Anandan   
25. Shri Devidhan Besra   
26. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
27. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
28. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
29. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
  
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
  8. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
9. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 

27 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee and apprised them that the sitting had been convened for consideration and 
adoption of the draft (Thirty -third) Report of the Committee on "The Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order (Second Amendment) Bill, 2012". 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration of the draft Thirty -third Report and 
adopted the same with minor addition.  The Committee authorized the Chairman to 
finalize the draft Report and present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
          
 