1 
 
 
38 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2012 - 2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the   observations/recommendations 
contained in  the  Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)   on  the subject 
"Scheme of Multi-sectoral Development Programme" of the Ministry   of  
Minority Affairs. 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 

2 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2012-2013) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the   observations/recommendations 
contained in  the  Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)   on  the subject 
"Scheme of Multi-sectoral Development Programme" of the Ministry   of  
Minority Affairs. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.8.2013 
                                       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.8.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 

3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
 INTRODUCTION (iv) 
CHAPTER -I Report 1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
18 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
36 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of  the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration. 
37 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
38 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
ANNEXURE –I* Copies of the letters from Hon'ble Ministe r of Minority Affairs sent 
to the concerned Chief Ministers. 
 
39 
ANNEXURE –II* The details of State Level and District Level Committee meetings 
received from the States till date. 
 
79 
ANNEXURE –III* The Status of data uploaded by various States/Districts. 
  
84 
ANNEXURE -IV Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 4.6.2013.             
        
85 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Twenty -seventh Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabh  
87 
                                                                                       
 * will be available later on.                                        

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL        
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2012-2013) 
    
   SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap  
10. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
                    #12. Smt. Mausam Noor 
13. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
14. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
15. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
16. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
17. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
18. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
19. Shri Kabir Suman 
20. Vacant  
21. Vacant 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
                    *24. Shri Rishang Keishing 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
26.      Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.       Prof. Mrinal Miri 
##28. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
29. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
30. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
__________________________________________________ 
*   Resigned from the Committee w.e.f. 22.2.2013 
# Nominated w.e.f. 01.5.2013 
##  Shri Jesudasu Seelam ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 17.6.2013 consequent upon his 
appointment as Minister.  
 

5 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Devender  Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Shashi Bisht  - Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2012-13) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do pres ent this Thirty-eighth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -
seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Scheme of Multi -sectoral Development 
Programme" of the Ministry of  Minority Affairs.  
2. The Twenty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 9th May, 2012. The Ministry of Minority Affairs furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on th e recommendations contained in that Report on 
14.12.2012.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 4.6.2013. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommen dations 
contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
   
NEW DELHI;       HEMANAND BISWAL 
                  Chairman, 
04 June, 2013                                                     Standing Committee on 
14 Jyaistha, 1935 (Saka)               Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment  
 
  
 

7 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Socia l Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Scheme of Multi -sectoral 
Development Programme"  of the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
1.2 The Twenty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 9th May, 201 2.  It co ntained 16 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government :   
Paragraph Nos. 1.58, 1.59, 1.60, 1.61, 1.62, 1.63, 1.64, 1.65, 1.66, 1.67, 
1.69, 1.70, 1.71, 1.72 and 1.73.  
       (Total : 15 -Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government : 
 Nil 
                (Total :Nil -Chapter-III) 
 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration : 

8 
 
Nil                    
         (Total : Nil -Chapter-IV) 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
Paragraph No. 1.68.  
      (Total :1 – Chapter- V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final acti on taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case  not later than three m onths of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies re ceived from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
A. Change the unit area of planning from district to block level under MsDP. 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 1 Para 1.58) 
 
1.5  The Committee note d that the Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) 
launched in the year 2008 -09 is a flagship scheme of the Ministry of Minority Affairs for 
development of minority communities and is being implemented through the States/UTs 
in 90 Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs).  The Committee were informed that the 
population criteria used for identification of MCDs in the 29 States/UTs in districts with a 
‘substantial minority population’ of atleast 25% of the total population or districts having 
a large absolute minority population exceeding 5 l akhs with the percentage of minority 
population between 20% to 25%. The Committee however express ed their 
apprehension that the criteria of 25% of substantial minority population used for 
identification of MCDs is very high and would deprive the benefits t o many significant 
minority population districts which are also relatively backward in socio -economic or 
basic amenities. The Committee, therefore, had recommended that the criteria of 25% 
of substantial minority population used for identificat ion of MCDs be brought down to 
15% so that more and more MCDs could be covered under the scheme. 
 1.6 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply for Para 1.58 stated that: 
"The Ministry has proposed to change the unit area of planning under MsDP from 
District to Block d uring the 12 th Five Year Plan. Apart from this, it is proposed to 
cover cluster of minority concentration villages falling outside the identified 
minority concentration blocks and backward minority concentration towns/cities.  
EFC Memo in this regard has b een circulated to concerned 
Ministries/Departments on 27.09.2012. This would not only sharpen the focus on 
minority concentration areas but will also extend the benefit of this programme to 
other deserving areas". 
 

10 
 
1.7 The Committee note that the Ministry propose to change the unit area of 
planning under MsDP from District to Block during the 12 th Five Year Plan.  Apart 
from this, the Ministry also propose  to cover cluster of minority concentration 
villages falling outside the identified minority concentrat ion blocks and backward 
minority concentration towns/cities  with a view  to sharpen focus on minority 
concentration areas.  The Committee would like the Ministry to vigorous ly pursue   
the matter so that it can be implemented during the current year itself. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
B. Maintain separate data of BPL families living in Minority Concentration 
Districts (MCDs). 
Recommendation (S.No. 4, Para 1.61) 
1.8 The Committee note d that individual specific projects like Indira Awas Yojana 
(IAY) for BPL families have b een sanctioned under MsDP.  As envisaged under the 
programme, the benefits of IAY under MsDP are provided to all the BPL families in 
order of their serial number in the approved waiting list and not selectively to the 
families of Minority Communities.  The  Committee have been informed that to ensure 
maximum benefits of projects to the minority population, villages/localities having 
substantial minority population are given priority.  However, the Committee was 
dismayed to note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs have no data of BPL families 
belonging to minority community living in Minority Concentration Districts nor have the 
data of  such families who have benefit ed from Indira Awas Yojana (IAY).  The 
Committee was not happy with such casual approach of t he Ministry.  The Committee 
felt that in the absence of such data, the Ministry may not be in a position to assess the 
progress made in implementation of the programme in MCDs.  The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended to the Ministry to maintain separate  data of BPL families 
living in Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs) and the families who have benefited 
from Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) under MsDP in these districts as also the percentage it 
constitutes to the total sanctioned IAY houses and apprise the  Committee of the same.  
The Committee had also recommend ed the Government to give priority to minority 
community people in allocation of Indira Awas Yojana (IAY houses in MCDs).  The 
Committee further recommend that the Rajiv Awas Yojna, recently launched  for the 
slum dwellers and urban poor on the lines of Indira Awas Yojana, may be included in 

12 
 
Multi-sectoral Development Programme so that the BPL families of minorities living in 
urban or town areas may also be benefited by this scheme. 
1.9 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply for Para 1.61 have stated that: 
"The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and communicated to 
the concerned Chief Minister .The complete information from the States/UTs is 
yet to be received in this regard. It may be not ed that the approved guidelines of 
MsDP state that there would be no change in guidelines of any existing scheme 
under implementation in such districts for which the programme would provide 
additional funds & in case schemes for individual benefits are tak en up under the 
programme , there shall be no divergence from the existing norms for selection of 
beneficiaries from the list of  BPL families in the district so that benefits from the 
additional funds flow to all BPL families and not selectively. IAY hous es under 
MsDP are given as per seniority in BPL list.  This also ensures that there is no 
heart burn between people from different community living in a village.  However, 
in order to ensure that maximum benefits accrue to the people from minority 
community, the villages having substantial minority population are selected for 
construction of the houses as reported earlier. In so far as inclusion of slum 
dwellers &urban poor on the lines of IAY as per Rajiv Awas Yojna in MsDP is 
concerned, it may be consider ed to the extent it fits into the proposed 
restructured MsDP for the 12 th Five Year Plan as the planning unit is to be 
changed to block level in the 12th Plan". 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
1.10 The Committee note that although the Ministry are silent on the number of 
minority BPL families  covered under Indira Awas Yojana (IAY)/Multi -sectoral 
Development Programme (MsDP)/Rajiv Awas Yojana, t he Government are taking 
necessary action as per the provision of the se schemes and intend to pursue the 
matter in a focus ed manner in the T welfth Five Year Plan when the unit of 
planning is to be changed to b lock level.  The Committee urge  the Ministry to 
expedite the process and maintain separate data for minorities under BPL 
category as recommended in their Twenty-ninth Report. 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
C. Deficiencies in medical facility.  
Recommendation (S.No. 7, Para No. 1.64) 
1.11  During their Study visit to a Maternity Ward constructed with funds released under 
MsDP in Minority Concentrated Districts (MCD)  in Kolkata on 15 February 2011, the 
Committee noticed several deficiencies which include d absence of lift facilities and  lack 
of adequate number of doctors, gyn aecologist, pediatricians, caesarian operation 
facility, anesthesia, Intravenous facility and ambulance facilities.  The Committee  noted 
that the Ministry of Minority Affairs had sought from the Government of West Bengal the 
latest status of the action taken to remove the above deficiencies.  The Committee 
were, however, constrained to find that even after more than one year, the Report of the 
Government of West Bengal  was still awaited.  The Committee had therefore 
recommended that the Government should emphasize upon the Government of West 
Bengal to urgently take necessary action to overcome the deficiencies pointed out by 
the Committee during the study tour and submit a report to the Union Government in 
this regard as early as possible.   
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have stated that: 
"The matter has been taken up a number of times with the State Govt. of West 
Bengal. The latest reminder was sent on 06.12.2012. The State is yet to respond. 
The Committee will be apprised of the position as soon as the same is received 
from the State Government of West Bengal". 
 

15 
 
1.13  The Committee are deeply concerned that despite good follow up with th e 
Government of West Bengal, there has been no response with respect to the 
serious deficiencies and inadequacies noticed in the maternity wards of the 
Government Hospitals in the minority concentrated areas, particularly in Kolkata.  
The Committee, theref ore, urge that the Ministry take up the matter with the 
Government of West Bengal at the highest level so as to remove the serious 
deficiencies in the maternity wards of hospitals in Minority Concentration 
Districts (MCDs). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
D. Distribution of Mid Day Meals for students. 
Recommendation (S.No. 8, Para No. 1.65) 
1.14  During their visit to a Urdu school in Minority Concentrated District in Kolkata, the 
Committee had advised the official of the school to distribute mid day meals to the 
children attendin g the school.  In this regard, the Ministry had informed that the 
Government of West Bengal has been requested to give the latest status of the action 
taken to remove the deficiencies pointed out by the Study Group and the report of the 
Government of West Bengal is still awaited. The Committee felt sad to note that even 
after a gap of one year the report of the Government of West Bengal is still awaited. The 
Committee, therefore had desired the Government to implement the 
recommendations/suggestions of the Committee to distribute mid day meals to the 
children attending the schools sincerely and apprise the Committee of the precise action 
taken thereon. 
1.15  The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have stated that: 
"The matter has been taken up a number of times with the State Govt. of West 
Bengal in this regard. T he latest reminder was sent on 06.12.2012.  The State is 
yet to respond."  
In regard to mid day meals for students, the Ministry has added that "I t is 
pertinent to note here that funds are not released for mid-day meal scheme to the 
children under MsDP." 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
1.16   The   Committee note   that  Union Government has in principle accepted  
the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would urge the Ministry to 
take up the matter vigorously with t he State Government so as to make provision 
for mid day meal for school children in accordance with the national drive for 
nutrition support to primary education. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
E. Inclusion of Private Public Partnership(PPP) in MsDP. 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 9, Para 1.66) 
1.17   The Committee noted with concern that in respect of projects i.e. construction of 
dyeing unit and vocational training of computer and I.T. the proposals were submitted to 
the line Ministry for appraisal/comments who in turn sugge sted Private Public 
Partnership (PPP) mode.  Since, PPP mode is not envisaged under MsDP, it was 
decided to drop these projects and the concerned State Governments were advised to 
submit the revised alternative proposals for the amount involved in consonan ce with the 
guidelines of MsDP which was accepted by the concerned State Governments.  
Therefore, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should impress upon the State 
Governments urgently to submit revised alternative proposals for construction of dye ing 
unit, vocational training of computer and I.T. in consonance with the guideline of MsDP.  
The Committee further desire d the Government to consider inclusion of PPP mode 
projects also in the MsDP scheme. 
1.18 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply for Para 1.66 have stated that: 
"The alternative proposals in lieu of the proposals for construction of dyeing unit, 
vocational training of computer and I.T. in consonance with the guideline of 
MsDP have already been received and approved. The inclusion of PPP  mode 
projects also in the MsDP would be considered while approving the guidelines for 
the 12th Five Year Plan".    
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
1.19  The committee note that t heir r ecommendation in the matter has  been 
accepted by the Ministry.  They would, however, like to be ap prised of the 
progress made in this regard in due course.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
F. Essential infrastructures like Road Connectivity, Rural Electrification, etc.  
 
Recommendation (S.No. 10, Para 1.67) 
 
1.20 The Committee note d that as per guidelines issued fo r MsDP, existing scheme 
for infrastructure development such as rural electrification, road connectivity , etc. may 
be taken up in MCDs on priority basis.  The Committee were, however, informed that 
since these schemes are capital intensive, funds under MsDP  are insufficient to take up 
such projects and that is being taken care of by Central Government schemes like Rajiv 
Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) and Prime Minister’s Gramin Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) where there is enough allocation for these schem es with the 
concerned Ministries.  The Committee were of strong view that electrification and road 
connectivity are key to economic development of an area and usher ing in large scale 
upliftment of the Socio -economic condition s of people living in the area.   The 
Committee, therefore, had desired the Ministry to effectively co -ordinate with respective 
Ministries for implementation of these projects on a priority basis in MCDs especially in 
minority concentration villages or blocks which would greatly help in improving the 
quality of life of people living in these areas. 
1.21 The Ministry, in their Action Taken reply, have stated that: 
"The focus of the programme is on the sectors relating to health, education & skill 
development of the identified Minority Conc entration Districts (MCDs) in the first 
phase. The Ministry, of late, has, however, been considering the proposals for 
road connectivity also, if received from the States/UTs & not catered to by the 
line Ministry.  As such the projects for link roads in re spect of newly constructed 
sub-centres, for Rs.8.32 crore have been approved under MsDP.  For better 
coordination with line Ministries in other sectors, the Ministry is proposing to 
expand the basket of schemes covered under PM’s New 15 Point Programme". 

21 
 
1.22 The Committee note that after concentrating on health, education and skill 
development in the MCDs, the Ministry are now considering proposals for road 
connectivity, if received from the State Governments.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that the M inistry should inform all the State Governments having 
MCDs to submit their proposals expeditiously to them for availing the financial 
assistance.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the expanded 
basket of developmental programmes including ru ral electrification under the 
Prime Minister's New 15 Point Programme. 
  
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
G.  Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY)/Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) 
programme. 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 11, Para 1.68) 
 
1.23 The Ministry had informed that Rashtriya Sam Vika s Yojana (RSVY)/Backward 
Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) programme do not specifically target minorities who are 
not from the marginalized sections of the society.  The Central Government has been 
implementing these development programmes in selected backward di stricts like 
Champawat, Tehri Garhwal and Chamoli Districts of Uttarakhand.  It has been informed 
by the Ministry that this programme is not implemented in Pauri  Garhwal, Uttarakhand.  
The Committee are of the view that as the Geographical conditions of P auri Garhwal 
are same as of Chamoli District of Uttarakhand, Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana 
(RSVY)/Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) programme which are area 
development programmes should also be implemented in the District Pauri Garhwal. 
Reply of the Government 
1.24 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply for Para 1.68 have stated that : 
 "The subject matter does not pertain to Ministry of Minority Affairs".  
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
1.25 The Committee deplore the cavalier reply of the Ministry that 'the subject 
matter does not  pertain to them' with respect to the recommendation of the 
Committee for development of certain districts of Uttarakhand under Rashtriya 
Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY)/Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF).  The Committee 
wish to exhort the Ministry of the pri nciple of collective  responsibility of the 
council of Ministers to the Lok Sabha and the well established practice of taking 
up a matter not pertaining to them with concerned Ministry.  The Committee 
reiterate that the matter be taken up with concerned Ministry  and the Committee 
apprised in due course.  The concerned officers responsible for such a cavalier  
reply be cautioned and sent for appreciation course on Parliamentary Practice 
and Procedure in the Bureau of Parliamentary Studies and Training (BPST). 
 
  
 
 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Recommendation (S.No. 1, Para 1.58) 
2.1 The Committee note that the Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) 
launched in the year 2008 -09 is a flagship scheme of th e Ministry of Minority Affairs for 
development of minority communities and is being implemented through the States/UTs 
in 90 Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs).  The Committee have been informed that 
the population criteria used for identification of MCDs in the 29 States/UTs is districts 
with a ‘substantial minority population’ of atleast 25% of the total population or districts 
having a large absolute minority population exceeding 5 lakhs with the percentage of 
minority population between 20% to 25%.  The Committee however express their 
apprehension that the criteria of 25% of substantial minority population used for 
identification of MCDs is very high and would deprive the benefits to many significant 
minority population districts which are also relat ively backward in socio -economic or 
basic amenities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the criteria of 25% of 
substantial minority population used for identification of MCDs be brought down to  15% 
so that more and more MCDs can be covered under the scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Ministry has proposed to change the unit area of planning under MsDP from 
District to Block during the 12 th Five Year Plan. Apart from this, it is proposed to cover 
cluster of minority concentration villages falling  outside the identified minority 
concentration blocks and backward minority concentration towns/cities.  EFC Memo in 
this regard has been circulated to concerned Ministries/Departments on 27.09.2012. 

25 
 
This would not only sharpen the focus on minority concen tration areas but will also 
extend the benefit of this programme to other deserving areas. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 2, Para 1.59) 
2.3 The Committee note that the Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) 
being a special area development Programme envisages inclusive growth with benefits 
flowing to everyone in the district and not the minorities alone.  The unit of p lanning in 
the scheme is district level which is based on Census 2001.  The Committee observe 
that the scheme does not focus entirely on the minority population as districts also cover 
several blocks/villages which have substantial high non -minority population.  In such a 
scenario, the benefits envisaged for the minority population under MsDP are 
substantially flowing to the non -minority population in the MCDs which is not the main 
objective of the scheme.  The Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs admitt ed during the 
course of oral evidence that there was a need to bring down the unit of planning from 
the District to Gram Panchayat level or Block level but were constrained as the Census 
2001 does not give any data of the block level.  The Committee, there fore, desire that 
the Ministry should obtain the latest data of the block level of Census 2011 as early as 
possible and take immediate measures to bring down the unit of planning from the 
district level to the block level in order to cover more and more po pulation of the 
minorities in the minority concentrated blocks which otherwise could not be covered due 
to the population criteria adopted in the identification of MCDs. 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 This has been taken care of in the restructured MsDP prop osed for 12 th Five 
Year Plan. The Ministry will continue to implement the programme with greater focus on 
minority concentration areas.  As stated above, blocks have been proposed as the unit 
of planning instead of districts.  
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 1.60) 
2.5   The Committee are constrained to note that even after 3 years of launch of 
MsDP, the district plans of all the 90 MCDs have not been fully approved and there are 
still 28 MCDs whose plans have been approved only partially.  The Committee have 
been informed that the delay in full approval of district plans the 28 MCDs is mainly due 
to non -submission of adequate district plans by the States/UTs.  The Committee feel 
that getting the district plans approved is the first and primary task under the scheme 
and the delay has only worsened the implementation of the scheme.  In the absence of 
any clear plan, the Committee fear that the timely implementation of MsDP would be 
adversely affected.  The Committee takes a serious note of this and desire that the 
matter be taken up urgently  with the Chief Secretary/Chief  Minister of the concerned 
States to expedite the full approval of the district plans under MsDP. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Ministry has been pursuing the matter vigorously with the concerned 
States/UTs. The concern of the committee in this regard has been taken note of & a 

27 
 
letter from the Hon’ble Minister of Minority Affairs highlighting the issues raised by the 
Committee has already been sent to the concerned Chief Ministers. (copies enclosed in 
Annexure-I)  As a result, the district plans of Rs. 3733.90 crore have been approved 
against the 11th plan allocation of Rs. 3780 crore and thus plan for 98.78% of allocatio n 
have been approved.  Among this the plans of 82 districts have been approved in full 
and in remaining 8 districts very small amount is left. Further, the programme is being 
continued in the existing format in the current financial year & the proposals wo rth 
Rs.812.56 crore have already been approved in the current financial year as on date. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 4, Para 1.61) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that individual specific projects lik e Indira Awas Yojana 
(IAY) for BPL families have been sanctioned under MsDP.  As envisaged under 
programme, the benefits of IAY under MsDP are provided to all the BPL families in 
order of their serial number in the approved waiting list and not selectively  to the 
families of Minority Communities.  The Committee have been informed that to ensure 
maximum benefits of projects to the minority population, villages/localities having 
substantial minority population are given priority.  However, the Committee is di smayed 
to note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs have no data of BPL families belonging to 
minority community living in Minority Concentration Districts nor have the data of such 
families who have benefitted from Indira Awas Yojana (IAY).  The Committe e is not 
happy with such casual approach of the Ministry.  The Committee feel that in the 
absence of such data, the Ministry may not be in a position to assess the progress 

28 
 
made in implementation of the programme in MCDs.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend to the Ministry to maintain separate data of BPL families living in Minority 
Concentration Districts (MCDs) and the families who have benefited from Indira Awas 
Yojana (IAY) under MsDP in these districts as also the percentage it constitutes to the 
total sanctioned IAY houses and apprise the Committee of the same.  The Committee 
also recommend the Government to give priority to minority community people in 
allocation of Indira Awas Yojana (IAY houses in MCDs).  The Committee further 
recommend that the Ra jiv Awas Yojna, recently launched for the slumdwellers and 
urban poor on the lines of Indira Awas Yojana, may be included in Multi -sectoral 
Development Programme so that the BPL families of minorities living in urban or town 
areas may also be benefited by this scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted and communicated to 
the concerned Chief Minister .The complete information from the States/UTs is yet to be 
received in this regard. It may be noted that the approv ed guidelines of MsDP state that 
there would be no change in guidelines of any existing scheme under implementation in 
such districts for which the programme would provide additional funds & in case 
schemes for individual benefits are taken up under the pr ogramme , there shall be no 
divergence from the existing norms for selection of beneficiaries from the list of  BPL 
families in the district so that benefits from the additional funds flow to all BPL families 
and not selectively. IAY houses under MsDP are given as per seniority in BPL list.  This 
also ensures that there is no heart burn between people from different community living 
in a village.  However, in order to ensure that maximum benefits accrue to the people 
from minority community, the villages ha ving substantial minority population are 

29 
 
selected for construction of the houses as reported earlier. In so far as inclusion of slum 
dwellers &urban poor on the lines of IAY as per Rajiv Awas Yojna in MsDP is 
concerned, it may be considered to the extent i t fits into the proposed restructured 
MsDP for the 12 th Five Year Plan as the planning unit is to be changed to block level in 
the 12th Plan. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 5, Para 1.62) 
2.9 The Committee note with concern that against the total number of 2,95,162 Indira 
Awas Yojana (IAY) houses approved under the MsDP only 1,75,008 have so far been 
constructed for be neficiaries.  It has informed by the Ministry that shortfall is due to a 
gestation period of about (at least) six months for construction of these houses and the 
time taken by the States to finalize the list of beneficiaries.  The Committee are not 
happy with the reasons given by the Ministry.  The progress with regard to construction 
of houses under Yojana is not satisfactory. Therefore the Committee strongly 
recommend that Ministry should pursue the matter with State/UT Governments for 
completion of IAY h ouses approved under MsDP within a time bound manner so that 
more families could be benefited. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The concern of the committee in this regard has also been taken note of & a 
letter from the Hon’ble Minister highlighting the issues  raised by the committee had 
already been sent to the concerned Chief Ministers .Apart from this, constant reminders 

30 
 
are being sent to the States/UTs for timely execution of all approved projects.  As on 
30.09.2012, the progress in completion of IAY houses  as reported by the States/UTs is 
200879.  
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP-I dated 14.12.2012] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 1.63) 
2.11 The Committee are constrained to note that as against the 689 school and 2498 
primary health care centres approved under MsDP only 334 schools and 1623 primary 
health care centres have been constructed.  It has been informed by the Ministry that all 
projects involve construction work and hence there is a gestation period of more than a 
year to co mplete these projects and also States have to undertake tendering process 
before starting work.  This results in lesser number of construction units as against the 
approved units.  The Committee is not happy with the reasons cited by the Ministry in 
regard to construction of schools and primary health care centres.  Since the education 
is a key parameter for upliftment of minority population and health is equally important, 
therefore, the committee recommend that the Government should play more proactive 
role and urges the States/UTs for completion of approved schools and primary health 
care centres in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 The concern of the committee in this regard has also been taken note of & a 
letter from the Hon’ble Minister  highlighting the issues raised by the committee had 
already been sent to the concerned Chief Ministers. The Ministry also exhort s the 
concerned States/UTs repeatedly to complete the sanctioned projects in a time bound 

31 
 
manner by way of regular reviews, vis its & constant reminders. As on 30.09.2012, the 
progress in construction of schools and primary health centres as reported by the 
States/UTs is 556 and 1862 respectively. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
Recommendation (S.No. 7, Para 1.64) 
2.13 During the visit of the Study Group of the Committee to a maternity Ward 
constructed with funds released under MsDP in Kolkata on 15 February 2011, the 
Committee noticed several deficiencies which include absence of lift facilitie s, lack of 
adequate number of doctors, gynecologist and pediatricians, caesarian operation facility 
and also lack of anesthesia, Intravenous facility and ambulance facilities.  The 
Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs has sought from the Go vernment of 
West Bengal the latest status of the action taken to remove the above deficiencies.  The 
Committee are, however, constrained to find that even after more than one year the 
Report of the Government of West Bengal is still awaited.  It indicates the lack of 
dedication and casual approach on the part of the Ministry in handling the core issue of 
the above serious deficiencies.  Therefore, the Committee desire that the Government 
should emphasize upon the Government of West Bengal to urgently take n ecessary 
action to overcome the deficiencies pointed out by the Committee on the study tour and 
submit a report to the Government in this regard as early as possible.  The Committee 
may also be apprised about the action taken by the State Government to ove rcome the 
deficiency pointed out by the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The matter has been taken up a number of times with the State Govt. of West 
Bengal. The latest reminder was sent on 06.12.2012. The State is yet to respond. The 

32 
 
Committee will be apprised of the position as soon as the same is received from the 
State Government of West Bengal. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 8, Para 1.65) 
2.15 During the visit to Urdu school in Kolkata by the Study Group of the committee, 
the official of the school in Kolkata by the Study Group of the Committee, the official of 
the school were advised by the Study Group to distr ibute mid day meals to the children 
attending the school.  In this regard, the Ministry have informed that the Government of 
West Bengal has been requested to give the latest status of the action taken to remove 
the deficiencies pointed out by the Study Gr oup and the report of the Government of 
West Bengal is still awaited. The Committee feel sad to note that even after a gap of 
one year the report of the Government of West Bengal is still awaited. The Committee, 
therefore desire the Government to implement  the recommendations/suggestions of the 
Committee to distribute mid day meals to the children attending the schools sincerely 
and apprise the Committee of the precise action taken thereon. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The matter has been taken up a number of times with the State Govt. of West 
Bengal in this regard. The latest reminder was sent on 06.12.2012.  The State is yet to 
respond.  It is pertinent to note here that funds are not released for mid -day meal 
scheme to the children under MsDP. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 

33 
 
Comments of Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 9, Para 1.66) 
2.17   The Committee note with concern that in respect of projects i.e. construction of 
dyeing unit and vocational training of computer and I.T. the proposals were submitted to 
the line Ministry for appraisal/comments who in turn suggested Private Public 
Partnership (PPP) mode.  Since, PPP mode is not envisaged under MsDP, it was 
decided to dr op these projects and the concerned State Governments were advised to 
submit the revised alternative proposals for the amount involved in consonance with the 
guidelines of MsDP which was accepted by the concerned State Governments.  
Therefore, the Committe e desire that the Ministry should impress upon the State 
Governments urgently to submit revised alternative proposals for construction of dyeing 
unit, vocational training of computer and I.T. in consonance with the guideline of MsDP.  
The Committee further desire the Government to consider inclusion of PPP mode 
projects also in the MsDP scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The alternative proposals in lieu of the proposals for construction of dyeing unit, 
vocational training of computer and I.T. in consonanc e with the guideline of MsDP have 
already been received and approved. The inclusion of PPP mode projects also in the 
MsDP would be considered while approving the guidelines for the 12th Five Year Plan.    
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011-PP dated 14.12.2012] 
 
 

34 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No. 10, Para 1.67) 
 
2.19 The Committee note that as per guidelines issued for MsDP existing scheme for 
infrastructure development such as rur al electrification, road connectivity etc. may be 
taken up in MCDs in a priority basis.  The Committee have, however, been informed 
that since these schemes are capital intensive, funds under MsDP are insufficient to 
take up such projects and that is being  taken care of by Central Government schemes 
like Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) and Prime Minister’s Gramin 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) where there is enough allocation for these schemes with the 
concerned Ministries.  The Committee are of the strong view that electrification and road 
connectivity are key to economic development of an area and usher in large scale 
upliftment of the Socio-economic condition of people living in the area.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to effectivel y co -ordinate with respective Ministries for 
implementation of these projects on a priority basis in MCDs especially in minority 
concentration villages or blocks which would greatly help in improving the quality of life 
of people living in these areas. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20  The focus of the programme is on the sectors relating to health, education & skill 
development of the identified Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs) in the first phase. 
The Ministry, of late, has, however, been considering the proposals for road connectivity 

35 
 
also, if received from the States/UTs & not catered to by the line Ministry.  As such the 
projects for link roads in respect of newly constructed sub -centres, for Rs.8.32 crore 
have been approved under MsDP.  For better c oordination with line Ministries in other 
sectors, the Ministry is proposing to expand the basket of schemes covered under PM’s 
New 15 Point Programme. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
Comments of Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (S.No 12, Para 1.69) 
2.21 The Committee note that since the inception of the MsDP in 2008, an amount of 
Rs. 2359.39 crore has been released against which expenditure of only Rs. 1174.93 
crore has been reported by the States/UTs.  The Committee further note that an amount 
of Rs. 971.94 and Rs. 913.23 crore has been released by the Ministry against which 
expenditure of only Rs. 618.18 and Rs. 258.00 crores has been reported by the 
States/UTs in the years 20 09-10 and 2011-12, respectively.  The main reason given by 
the Ministry for the slow pace and less utilization of funds during the year 2009 -10 is 
delay in transfer of funds by States to district authorities/implementing agencies.  The 
Committee take strong objection to the slow manner in which the funds are being spent 
under MsDP after the release of huge amounts under the scheme.  The Committee feel 
that projects like dispensaries, hostels, polytechnics which form the core not only for 
development of the minorities but also development in infrastructure are not completed 
in time.  Keeping the funds with States/UTs or the implementing agencies without any 
substantial expenditure results in wastage of valuable financial resources which could 
have been utiliz ed in other much needed projects in the Country. The Committee 

36 
 
therefore strongly desire that the Ministry take concrete steps for reviewing the 
budgetary requirements under MsDP and also expedite the pace of expenditure under it 
by way of holding regular meetings at the highest level and also regular monitoring of 
projects and interaction with the implementing agencies.  
Reply of the Government 
2.22 The Ministry holds regular meetings with the States/UTs at the highest level.   
The Ministry has organized N ational Conference of State Ministers of Minority Welfare 
on 7th and 8th June, 2012.  The conference was held to review the progress of various 
schemes and programmes of the Ministry during 11 th Five Year Plan and to discuss the 
approach for the schemes an d programmes for 12 th Five Year Plan. Besides this, the 
programme is monitored through video conferences & regional conferences at regular 
intervals for effective implementation of the scheme.  The efforts are being made to 
keep the budgetary requirements under MsDP as realistic as possible keeping in view 
the pace of expenditure. An amount of Rs. 1682.07 crore has already been utilized by 
the States/UTs against the amount of Rs. 2162.03 crore released under MsDP till 2010 -
11 which is 77.80% of the released  funds.   Utilization Certificates for funds released 
during 2011-12 are due by 31st March, 2013. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 1.70) 
 
2.23   The Committee find from the written rep lies of the Ministry that Utilization 
Certificates (UCs of Rs. 18.80 crore of the amount released in the financial year 2008 -
09 and UCs of Rs. 160.37 crore of the amount released in the financial year 2009 -10 

37 
 
are overdue.  The Committee further note that t he Ministry has issued several 
reminders and also followed all the pending matters with the States/UTs through series 
of meetings.  The Officers of the Ministry have been deputed to visit the States for 
ensuring effective implementation of MsDP where in it  was especially emphasized by 
them to States/UTs to submit the overdue UCs for 2008-09 & 2009-10.  With the sincere 
follow-up action taken up by the Ministry with the concerned State Governments, the 
Ministry was able to obtain the UCs amounting to Rs. 7.0 4 crore pertaining to the 
financial year 2008 -09 and Rs. 33.13 crore of pertaining to the financial year 2009 -10.  
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry but at the same time the 
Committee are of the view that the matter should be taken up with the concerned State 
Ministries as well as State Chief Secretaries for timely submission of 100% Utilization 
Certificates for the released funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The concern of the Committee in this regard has also been taken note of &  a 
letter from the Hon’ble Minister highlighting the issues raised by the Committee had 
already been sent to the concerned Chief Ministers.   As a result of constant follow up, 
the Ministry has further been able to obtain overdue Utilization Certificates f or an 
amount of Rs. 6.42 crore & Rs. 59.37 crore pertaining to financial years 2008 -09 and 
2009-10 respectively. 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
Recommendation (S.No. 14, Para 1.71) 
2.25  The Committee note that State and  District Level Committees have been 
constituted in all 20 States/UTs which have MCDs for monitoring the implementation of 

38 
 
MsDP.  The Committee also note that the scheme in the PM’s New 15 point programme 
for the Welfare of the minorities are implemented i n all States/UTs throughout the 
country.  As per the PM’s new 15 point programme, the States/UTs are expected to 
constitute a State level Committee for implementation of the programme which also 
serves as the State level Committee for implementation of the  programme which also 
serves as the State level Committee for oversight of the implementation of MCDs.  Upto 
two Members of Parliament from Lok Sabha and one Member of Parliament from Rajya 
sabha representing the States have to be nominated by the Centre and two members of 
the Legislative Assembly shall be nominated by the State Government.  However, one 
of the members included in the State level Committee from Lok Sabha and Legislative 
Assembly should have been elected from any of MCDs of those States.  Th e 
programme envisages that the State level Committee should meet at least once every 
quarter. 
   The Committee however find from the replies furnished by the Ministry that 
except for Jharkhand, State level Committee meetings in 19 MCD States are not being 
held as per programme which envisages the holding of State Level Meetings at least 
once every quarter.  What is more disturbing is that not even a single State level 
meeting has been held by Meghalaya and Madhya Pradesh during the last 4 years.  
The Committee is further dismayed to note that details of State level Meeting attended 
by MPs/MLAs for only two States namely Kerala and West Bengal is available with the 
Ministry and for the remaining 18 States/UTs, the information has been sought by the 
Ministry from the concerned States/UTs.  The Committee also observed that no sitting 
MP from Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha has attended these sittings in both the States.  The 
Committee are of the view that it is very important for the State level Committee to meet 

39 
 
more often so that various programmes under MsDP can be periodically reviewed and 
concrete corrective measures taken in time.  The MPs/MLAs who are members of the 
State level Monitoring Committees should be invited and encouraged to attend such 
meetings so that va rious programmes under MsDP can be effectively monitored.  The 
Ministry should obtain and maintain data and details of the State level Committee 
Meetings, decisions taken in these meetings, shortcomings if any pointed out in these 
meetings, difficulties if  any faced in implementation of MsDP etc. so that the scheme 
can be monitored effectively at the National level and remedial action taken immediately 
to meet the shortcomings. 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 Efforts are being made to obtain the complete detai ls from the States/UTs as 
pointed out by the Committee. Instructions have also been issued separately to all the 
concerned  States/UTs  separately to invite the MPs/MLAs who are the members of the 
State level  Committees to attend such meetings.  The details of State Level and District 
Level Committee meetings received from the States till date are annexed. (Annexure-II) 
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 15, Para 1.72) 
2.27 The Committee have been inf ormed that IT enabled cells for monitoring the 
programme in the States/UTs and Districts for reporting the progress of implementation 
of the District Plans have been sanctioned for all States/UTs.  A computer software 
application has been developed for thi s purpose and out of 90 MCDs, 30 MCDs have 
started uploading the information in MIS-MsDP software.  It has also been informed that 
States from the North -Eastern region have resource problem.  NIC Cell of the ministry 

40 
 
has been providing assistance/guidance required by the districts so that the programme 
may be made fully operational as early as possible.  The Committee feel that the 
measures taken by the Ministry for reporting of progress of the MsDP, dispensation of 
information has been inadequate.  The Committee recommend  that the matter be taken 
up with the concerned Ministries as well as the Chief Secretaries of the States at the 
earliest for provision of adequate training to the staff in the matter and for initiating the 
process of uploading of information in the remaining 60 MCDs as early as possible.   
Reply of the Government 
 2.28 The matter has been taken up at the highest level with the concerned 
States/UTs.  29 districts in 13 States have already uploaded the village beneficiary 
details.  Besides this, the districts of West Bengal have also uploaded physical progress 
details and photographs in MIS -MSDP Software till November, 2012.  The Status of 
data uploaded by various States/Districts is annexed. (Annexure-III)  
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
Recommendation (S.No. 16, Para 1.73) 
2.29 The Committee have been informed that MsDP empowered Committee in the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs which appraises and approves the projects under the MsDP 
has held 50 meetings sinc e 2008 i.e. since inception of the programme.  The 
Empowered Committee (EC) which also functions as the Oversight Committee has 
reviewed the implementation of the programme.  When the Committee desired to know 
whether any visible change is taking place in regard to development of minorities in the 
MCDs after implementation of the scheme, the Ministry have informed that since the 
inception of the scheme, many infrastructural projects have been taken up and 
completed.  The National Productivity Council (NPC) based on the information provided 

41 
 
by NLMs, is assisting the Ministry in obtaining feedback on the schemes of the Ministry 
and the findings contained in the report which indicates that MsDP has generally been 
received well.  With regard to assessment of MsDP, it has been informed by the Ministry 
that a study to evaluate the impact of the schemes of the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
including MsDP has been entrusted to the Indian Council of Social Science Research 
(ICSSR).  ICSSR has conducted field survey and  their report is expected soon.  The 
Committee while endorsing the conduct of field survey by ICSSR for useful feedback in 
improvement of the scheme, desire that the Government emphasis upon ICSSR to 
expedite the submission of the final evaluation report e arly so that necessary remedial 
measures can be taken up and the scheme implemented in a better way during the 12 th 
Five Year Plan. 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 ICSSR has given draft evaluation report based on the field survey conducted by 
them.  ICSSR has been asked to submit one consolidated final evaluation report on the 
overall impact of MsDP so that the scheme can be implemented in a more effective way 
in the 12th Five Year Plan.  The consolidated final report is awaited.  
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 

42 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
 
-NIL-

43 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted and which require reiteration 
 
 
-NIL- 

44 
 
CHAPTER – V 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are interim in nature 
Recommendation (S. No. 11, Para 1.68) 
5.1 The Ministry have informed that Ras htriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY)/Backward 
Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) programme do not specifically target minorities who are 
not from the marginalized sections of the society.  The Central Government has been 
implementing these development programmes in selec ted backward districts like 
Champawat, Tehri Garhwal and Chamoli Districts of Uttarakhand.  It has been informed 
by the Ministry that this programme is not implemented in Pauri  Garhwal, Uttarakhand.  
The Committee are of the view that as the Geographical conditions of Pauri Garhwal 
are same as of Chamoli District of Uttarakhand, Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana 
(RSVY)/Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) programme which are area 
development programmes should also be implemented in the District Pauri Garhwal. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The subject matter does not pertain to Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
[Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. 3/77/2011 dated 14.12.2012] 
Comments of Committee 
(Please see Para 1.25 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       HEMANAND BISWAL 
                  Chairman, 
04 June, 2013                                                    Standing Committee on 
14 Jyaistha 1935 (Saka)              Social  Justice  and  
Empowerment 
  
 

91 
 
ANNEXURE - IV 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF TH E STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY, 4th JUNE, 2013 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL - CHAIRMAN 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Shri M. Anandan   
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri   
4. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
7. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
    
 RAJYA SABHA  
  
10. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
11. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
12. Shri Jesudasu Seelam 
13. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
14. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 

92 
 
****   ****    ****    **** 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then considered and adopted the draft  Thirty -eighth Report on 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-seventh Report of the Committe e on the subject “Scheme of Multi -sectoral 
Development Programme"  pertaining to the Ministry of Minority Affairs without  any 
modification/amendment. 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
5. ****   ****    ****    ****  
6. ****   ****    ****    **** 
7. ****   ****    ****    **** 
8. ****   ****    ****    **** 
9.      ****   ****    ****    ****   
  
****  ****  **** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

93 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
  Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 16  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.58, 1.59, 1.60, 1.61, 
1.62, 1.63, 1.64, 1.65, 1.66, 1.67, 1.69, 
1.70, 1.71, 1.72 and 1.73). 
15 93.75 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pu rsue in 
view of the replies -Nil 
0 0 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration - Nil  
0 0 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph No 1.68). 
1 6.25 
 
 
 