1 
 
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2010 - 2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010-
2011)   - Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
TWELFTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
January, 2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained  
in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010-2011)   - Ministry of Minority 
Affairs. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9.3.2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      9.3.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 January, 2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                      
PAGE
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………                       
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………….             
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………                         
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by              
the Government……………………………………………………                     
  
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not               
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government……                      
                                         
 CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies                   
of  the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented  upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..                               
     
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies         
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                                   
     
ANNEXURE 
 
   
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee  on          
     
  Social  Justice and Empowerment held on   5.1.2011……….             
      
APPENDIX 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the                          
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the  
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)……………                                            
                                         

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2010-2011) 
      
SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2 Shri T.R. Baalu 
3 Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
4 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
5 Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8 Shri Premchand Guddu 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav   
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath   
11 Shri Mohan Jena  
12 Shri Baliram Kashyap 
13 Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
14 Shri Basori Singh Masram  
15 Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
16 Dr. Niramalli Sivaprasad  
17 Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
  #19. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede  
20 Vacant 
21  Vacant 
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
22  Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23  Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
                    ##25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
           *26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.  Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
29.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30.  Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31.  Shri Nandi Yelliah 
______________________________________________________________ 
# Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27.9.2010 
## Shri Mahmood A. Madani nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
*  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri V.R. Ramesh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Dr. (Smt.)Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 
4. Smt. Shashi Bisht   - Executive  Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twelfth Report 
on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants – 2010-2011 relating to the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
  
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Raj ya Sabha on 20th April, 2010.  
The Ministry of Minority Affairs furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 26.7.2010.  The Report was considered and 
adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice  and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
5.1.2011. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
5 January, 2011        Chairman, 
15 Pausa, 1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 20 10-11 relating to the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs.  
1.2 The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th 
April, 20 10.  It contained 1 7 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: Paragraph Nos.  2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 3.38, 3.39, 5.18, 5.20, 6.19 
and 7.8. 
 (Total 9  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: Paragraph No.  4.17. 
 (Total 1 - Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I: Paragraph Nos.  3.37, 4.16 and 5.19. 
(Total 3 - Chapter IV) 

8 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos.   3.36, 8.10, 8.11 and 8.12. 
  (Total 4  - Chapter V)  
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the repli es received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. SCAs Programme of National Minorities Development and Finance 
Corporation 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.37) 
 
1.5 The Committee were given to understand that under the SCAs programme  of 
NMDFC, projects costing upto Rs. 5 lakh are financed.  Funds for this purpose were made 
available to the SCAs with an interest rate of 3% for further loaning to the beneficiaries at 
6%.  The Committee had observed that under term loan scheme, no funds were disbursed 
to the States like Manipur, Madhya Pradesh,  Meghalaya, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh during 
the last three years i.e. 2006 -07, 2007-08, 2008-09 and the current financial year 2009 -10 
due to reasons such as non-operation of SCAs in the States, mounting overdues, absence 
of State Government guarantee, non utilization of funds released earlier and poor recovery 
from the beneficiaries.  The Committee felt that the marketing assistance related term loan 
programme under the SCAs have a lot of potential  for the economic upliftment of the 
minority beneficiaries where they can undertake small scale entrepreneurial activities.  

9 
 
However, it is very unfortunate that due to weak SCAs many States are not able to avail 
the benefits under the scheme and there is an urgent need for strengthening and capacity 
building of the SCAs in order to make them efficient.  Therefore, the Committee  had 
strongly recommended that the Ministry should take necessary steps to make the SCAs 
operational in those States where these ar e defunct and non -functional or not functioning 
properly. SCAs should be strengthened and energized both economically and 
administratively at the grass root level.  The staff strength of the SCAs should be upgraded 
so that the shortage of staff does not affect the working of NMDFC. 
  
Reply of  the Government 
 
1.6  The Ministry, in their written reply have stated that the marketing assistance related 
term loan programme under the SCAs have a lot of potential for the economic upliftment of 
the minority beneficiaries as observed by the Committee but the SCAs are not in a position 
to utilize this opportunity as the infrastructure of the SCAs is weak.  
NMDFC through a Grants -in-aid scheme for strengthening of SCAs had requested 
the SCAs to submit proposals for Grants-in-aid.  Except for a few SCAs, most of the other 
SCAs did not come forward with proposals and so funds provided under this scheme 
lapsed. The matter of no n-functioning of State Channelising Agencies in the States like 
Manipur, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh etc. is regularly taken up with the 
respective State Governments. Letters have been written by the Chairperson, NMDFC to 
the Chief Ministers and by the Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs to the Chief 
Secretaries o f the respective States covering this issue for strengthening of the SCAs. 
Though an SCA has been nominated in Meghalaya it has not begun to implement any of 
the schemes of NMDFC.  
NMDFC has given special thrust to marketing assistance scheme  from the year  
2009-10. As compared to 257 beneficiaries covered under the marketing assistance 

10 
 
scheme in 2008 -09, NMDFC assisted 3,871 artisans during 2009 -10.  In order to 
strengthen and build capacity of the weak SCAs apart from the Grant in Aid Scheme, 
NMDFC is regularly following up with the concerned State Governments. 
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No.G-20011/2/2010-11-Budget dated  9th August, 2010) 
1.7   Considering the fact that no funds were disbursed to the States of Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh under the SCAs programme 
of NMDFC due to reasons such as non -operational of SCAs, mounting over dues 
etc., the Committee had rec ommended that the Ministry should take necessary 
steps for strengthening and capacity building of the SCAs. The Committee had also 
recommended that the staff strength of the SCAs should be upgraded so that the 
shortage of staff does not affect the implementation of schemes of NMDFC .   The 
Committee  find that under the Grants -in-aid scheme for strengthening of SCAs  
except for a few SCAs, most of other SCAs did not come forward with proposals 
and so funds provided under this scheme lapsed.  The Commi ttee also regret to 
note that though an SCA has been nominated in Meghalaya it has not   begun to 
implement any of the schemes of NMDFC.  The Committee are also unhappy to note 
that the Ministry have not taken any concrete steps to sensitise the above 
mentioned States directing them to make operational the non-functioning SCAs and 
initiating measures for upgrading  the staff strength of SCAs.  Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that  besides NMDFC  
writing to Chief Ministers on the issue,  the Ministry should also vigorously take up 
the matter with State Governments and impress upon them the imperative need for 
making the SCAs effective, functional and operational  so that funds under the 
scheme are n ot allowed to lapse and SCAs function in the most effective way to 
benefit the Minority population.  State Government s should be advised to take 
specific steps to upgrade the staff strength of SCAs for  the smooth functioning of 

11 
 
NMDFC schemes.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should find out the 
reasons for non-implementation of the scheme of NMDFC by the State of Meghalaya 
and recommend that the Ministry should take up the matter with the State o f 
Meghalaya as well as NMDFC so that the minority beneficiaries in the  State are not 
deprived of the benefits of the schemes of NMDFC. 
B. Multi-sectoral Development Programme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No.  4.16) 
1.8 The Committee had noted that t he Multi Sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) 
is a special area development scheme which was launched in 2008 -09 and being 
implemented through the State Governments/UTs in 90 Minority Concentration Districts 
(MCDs) having a substantial minority population , which are relatively backward and falling 
behind the national average in terms of socio -economic and basic amenities indicators.  
The Committee had also noted that a substantial amount of Rs. 989.50 crore was 
allocated under the scheme during 2009 -10.  H owever, they were dismayed to find that 
only Rs. 513 crore were spent upto  31.12.2009 and another Rs. 38. 016 crore were 
released from 31.12.2009 upto 15.3.2010.  Nonetheless, the Committee found that Rs. 
1400 crore had been allocated for the programme for 2010-2011 and the Ministry have so 
far considered and approved 77 district plans, of which plans for only 13 MCDs have been 
approved in full.  The remaining district plans for 64 MCDs have been approved partially 
and expected to be approved in full during 2010-2011.  The Committee were not satisfied 
with the slow pace of development under the scheme as a big amount i.e. Rs. 1400 crore 
has been allocated by the Government of India for the purpose for 2010 -2011.  They had 
recommended that the Ministry in coor dination with the State Governments should 
expedite the development process of all the 90 MCDs in a time bound manner so as to 
fulfill the objectives behind the scheme in these districts.  

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.9  The Ministry in their Action Taken note furnished to the Committee have stated that 
the scheme of Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) envisages preparation of 
district plans in such a manner that the development deficits of a district, identified by a 
baseline survey, are addressed for improvement of backwardness parameters of MCDs to 
bring them at par with the national average.  The Ministry has been approving proposals 
contained in the district plans of MCDs which address the identified development deficits 
and are prepared in accordance with the scheme of MsDP. For proposals in the district 
plans not made in accordance with the MsDP guidelines and not addressing the identified 
development deficits, the States/UTs have been advised to submit revised plans. So far 81 
district plans have been considered and approved, of which 18 are approved in full and 63 
in part. Although Rs.513 crore was released upto December, 2009, an amount of 
Rs.973.02 crore was released to the State Governments upto 31 st March, 2010 against an 
allocation of Rs.990 crore for 2009-10, which is 98% of allocation for MsDP. The first set of 
district plans were considered and approved in August, 2008 and first releases were made 
in October, 2008. It has been only one year and eight months since t he first release of 
funds. During this period, the Ministry has approved plans amounting to Rs.2412.57 crore, 
of which Rs.1270.55 crore have been released to the State Governments.  
 Several workshops and meetings have been held with the State Secretaries and 
Deputy Commissioners for preparation of district plans in a manner to address the 
identified development deficits as envisaged in the scheme of MsDP. In May 2010, a 
conference of Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union Territories dealing wit h 
minority welfare was held wherein the need for early submission of district plans was 
emphasized to ensure that the funds for 2010 -11 are released well in time to enable 
States/UT to implement the approved projects in a time bound manner.  Strict and 
meticulous monitoring of the various schemes in the States is undertaken by carrying out 

13 
 
field visits by the officers of this Ministry so as to avoid underutilization of funds and faster 
implementation of the programme. 
 
1.10 Having observed the importance of the Multi-sectoral development 
programme with the objective of addressing the development deficit of 90 minority 
concentrated districts so as to bring them at par with national average,  the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry in coor dination with the State 
Governments should expedite the development process of all the 90 MCDs in a time 
bound manner so as to fulfill the objectives behind the scheme in these districts.  
The Committee , however, regret to note that many of the district plans have not 
been approved and  since many of  the proposals in the district plans had not been 
made in accordance with the MsDP guidelines and not addressing the identified 
development deficits, the Ministry have advised the States/UTs to submit revised 
plans. The Committee note that out of the  81 district plans considered by the 
Ministry so far only 18 have been approved in full and 63 in part.  The Committee are 
not happy with the above  situation and recommend that  the Ministry should take 
urgent necessary steps in helping/assisting the States/districts which have sent  
deficient plans/proposals.  The Ministry should guide the se States in preparing and 
sending the district plans as per MsDP guidelines so that these are cleared early by 
the Ministry. The Committee further desire that  plans of 63 districts which have got 
partial approval should be reviewed for suitable modification  by involving the 
concerned State /District Administration  and  the modified plans approved fully  
within a stipulated time  frame,  preferably within a  period of three months .  The 
Committee may be informed about the concrete action taken in this regard.  
 

14 
 
C. Free Coaching and Allied Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No.  5.19) 
1.11 The Committee were given to understand that under  the Free Coaching and Allied 
Scheme, coaching for recruitment of constable and equivalent in police, security forces 
and railways is provided.  However, when the Committee desired to know the details on 
the number of benefic iaries who have actually gained employment after the coaching, th e 
Ministry have casually stated in their written reply that the information of beneficiaries who 
have gained employment in police, security forces and railways after availing benefits 
under t he scheme will be obtained and submitted to the Committee in due course. The 
Committee had taken a strong note of it as in their opinion  the above information should 
have been readily available with the Ministry .  The Committee had, therefore, directed the 
Ministry that the above information be made available to them at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 The Ministry, in their Action Taken note furnished to the Committee have stated that 
above information has  since been gathered.  One institute in Tripura had applied for 
coaching of 10 students for the entrance examination for constable in 2008 -09.  First 
installment was released. The proposal for release of second installment has been 
received from the institute th rough the State Government in July,  2010. Out of 8 
candidates who were imparted coaching for the post of Constable, two candidates have 
been selected as Constables in Tripura Police and two candidates did not attend the 
coaching after selection.   
 Another proposal from an institute in Gujarat for training / coaching of three hundred 
students for the post of constables was received. However, no fund was released to the 
institute as it did not provide the list of candidates for training/coaching as required under 
the scheme.  The institute was asked to provide list of students as on 22.05.2009.  A 

15 
 
reminder was issued on 26 th August, 2009 for furnishing the list of students.   Another 
reminder was sent on 9 th April, 2010 and no response has been received.  A l etter to the 
Chief Secretary, Gujarat was also addressed on 18.06.2010. 
1.13 Under the Free Coaching and Allied Scheme, the Ministry had 
coached/trained 4097 beneficiaries during the year 2007 -08 in 14 States, 5522 
beneficiaries during the year 2008 -09 in 20 States and 4682 beneficiaries upto 
28.2.2010 in 19 States.  In this background, the Committee had desire d to know the 
details about the number of  beneficiaries who have actually gained employment in 
services after the coaching.  The Committee are not happy with the reply furnished 
by the Ministry in this regard  where instead of making available  information on the 
number of beneficiaries  who have gained employment  in all States/UTs , Ministry 
have furnished inadequate/incomplete information pertaining to only two States  i.e. 
Tripura and Gujarat .  The Committee are of the view that there is a need to  keep 
track of the actual number of beneficiaries who gain  employment in services such 
as police, security forces and Railways after availing the coaching  facility from 
Institutes under the scheme  so as to know the reach and coverage of the scheme .  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that efforts should be made by the Ministry to 
ascertain information from the coaching institutes on the number of beneficiaries 
gained employment in different services in all the States/UTs where funds have 
flowed and the same should be made available to the Committee.   The Committee 
also desire that suitable measures be taken to  popularize the Free Coaching and 
Allied scheme in the States/UTs through extensive & vigorous publicity in electronic 
media like Radio Channels, in vernacular print media and by distributing pamphlets 
etc. so that large number of minority beneficiaries get the benefit of the scheme and 
get suitably employed after availing the coaching.   
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.22) 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry for the year 
2010-2011 has been enhanced  from Rs. 1740 crore during the last financial year to Rs. 
2600 crore during the current financial year.  The Committee are given to understand  that 
all the three scholarship schemes namely Merit –cum-means scheme, Post-matric scheme 
and Pre- matric scheme launched in 2007-08 and 2008-09 have become very popular and 
the pace of their implementation has now picked up for which the budgetary allocation in 
respect of the above schemes have been raised.  The Committee have also learnt that out 
of the increased allocation, a major chunk of the funds i.e. Rs. 1400 crore will be g oing to 
the ambitious Multi Sectoral Development Programme (MsDP). The Ministry have 
informed that since a large number of proposals are being received from the State 
Governments for release of funds for implementation of district plans for 90 Minority 
Concentration Districts (MCD), BE for this programme has been raised from Rs.990 crore 
in 2009 -10 to Rs.1400 crore during 2010 -11.  The Committee welcome the increase of 
allocation of funds to the Ministry and hope that this increase would certainly help them  to 
focus more resourcefully on the issues relating to development of the minority community. 
While congratulating the Ministry for the enhancement in the budget, the Committee 
recommend that all necessary steps should be taken to utilize the entire amount  
judiciously.   
 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Observations made by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for 
compliance. T he following steps have already been taken to utilize the entire amount 
judiciously:- 
(a) A meeting of all Principal Secretaries of States/UTs in charge of Minority 
Welfare was held on 14.05.2010 to review the performance of the past year 
and also to work out the strategy and set milestones for effective and prompt 
implementation of various sch emes/ programmes of the Ministry. Procedural 
difficulties were discussed/identified for simplification in the implementation 
of various schemes.    
(b) Release of advance grants to the States/UTs has been put into place for 
effective and prompt distribution of  scholarships to the beneficiaries subject 
to receipt of utilization certificates for the previous year.  
(c) Letters have been sent to all States/UTs for facilitating opening of no        
frill/Zero balance account for student from minority communities so tha t 
scholarships distribution can be expedited.   
(d) Six meetings of Empowered Committee have been held so far during 2010 -
11 and 31 district plans were considered and approved under Multi Sectoral 
Development Programme (MsDP).   
(e) Ministry of Minority Affairs ha s launched a media campaign during 2010 -11 
for dissemination of information for creating awareness about the schemes 
of the Ministry. Newspaper advertisements on Scholarship Schemes have 
been placed twice during June/July 2010 in 347 Newspapers (English -34, 
Hindi-92, other languages 221). Advertisements on Doordarshan and All 
India Radio have been disseminated from 12 th to 30th June and 10 th June to 

18 
 
15th July, 2010 respectively. Advertisement on Doordarshan telecast again 
from  20 th July to 20 th Augsut,2010. All India Radio has broadcast on prime 
time channels and on all 22 FM channels. 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.23) 
2.3 The Committee note with concern that there has been gross under utilization of 
allocated funds under both under the Plan and Non - Plan Heads of the Ministry during the 
year 2009 -10. Under the Plan Head against the budgetary estimate/revised estimate of 
Rs. 1740 crore, the actual expenditure has been only Rs. 1599.16 crore.  Similarly, under 
the Non - plan budgetary Head, as against the budgetary estimate of Rs. 16.50 crore, 
subsequently reduced to Rs. 15.50 crore at RE stage, the actual expenditure has been Rs. 
13.43 crore.  The Committee also observe that whereas the Ministry had utilized just 60% 
of its allocation i.e. Rs. 1080.75 crore as on 31.12.2009, the Ministry have shown the 
actual expenditure to be Rs. 1599.16 crore by 15.3.2010 which means that  su bstantial 
amount of funds (35%) were released during the last two & a half months only.  The 
reason cited by the Ministry for incurring less expenditure under some on -going planned 
schemes/programmes is that the process of implementation of all the 
schemes/programmes was kept in abeyance during the period of enforcement of „Model 
Code of Conduct‟ for General Elections upto May, 2009.   The Committee are not 
convinced with the above reason cited by the Ministry because in the opinion of the 
Committee „Code of Conduct‟ comes in the way of new schemes  and it does not come in 
the way of implementation of the ongoing schemes which are already declared. Though 
the Ministry have maintained that they are happy with the pace of the utilization as  they 
have already spent Rs. 1658 crore by 23.3.2010, which is little above 95% of the total 
outlay of the Ministry, the Committee had expected the utilization to be 100%. The release 

19 
 
of substantial amount of funds in the last quarter of the financial year should also have 
been avoided.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the under utilization of funds 
under various schemes should be strictly avoided and the Ministry should strive to achieve 
100% utilization for all their schemes and programmes.  Further, the Committee d irect the 
Ministry to stick to the General Financial Rules that funds should not be allowed to remain 
idle for long and should be released evenly throughout the year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Out of the plan allocation of Rs.1740 crore,  an expenditure  of Rs.1710.89 crore i.e 
more than  98% allocation earmarked for 2009 -10 has been utilized. Similarly, as against 
the Non-plan allocation of Rs.16.50 crore, subsequently reduced to Rs.15.50 crore at R.E. 
stage, the actual expenditure during 2009 -10 was Rs. 14.11 crore i.e 91% of R.E. The 
observations made by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for compliance. All 
necessary steps are being taken to ensure that:-   
(i) The release of substantial amount of funds in the last quarter of the financial 
year is avoided.   
(ii)  All efforts would be made to avoid under utilization of funds under various 
schemes.  
(iii)  The Ministry would stick to the General Financial Rules so  that funds are not 
be allowed to remain idle for long and should be released evenly throughout 
the year. 
 Some of the steps taken so far have been indicated in reply to para 2.22 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.24) 
2.5 The Committee also express their serious concern over the matter of increasing 
number of Utilization Certificates (UCs) pending with the States.  While the number of UCs 
pending were mere 39 involving an amount of Rs. 5.66 crore  on 1.4.2009, the number has 
increased to 98 UCs involving a huge amount of Rs. 165.09 crore.  In this regard the 
Committee are unhappy to note the overall unspent balances lying with the States which 
has now increased from Rs. 478 crore in 1.4.2009 to an alarming amount of Rs. 1083.55 
crore in 31.12.2009.  The reasons cited by the Ministry for huge number of UCs pending 
are withholding of grants to States/UTs due to their inability to furnish UCs, non utilization 
of funds of the previous year by the States , the non -drawing of grants by 9 SCAs of 
NMDFC and the large number of UCs pending under  the scheme of  MsDP where many 
States have not furnished the Utilization Certificates.  With regard to unspent balances, the 
Ministry have stated that wherever they h ave not received the UCs, they are treating them 
as unspent money lying with the States.  The Committee feel that the pendency of such 
large number of UCs involving huge amount is not a desirable trend and it is against the 
norms of General Financial Rules .  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
should closely and actively monitor the flow of funds to the States and instantly try to 
recover the unutilized amount and steps should be taken to reconcile the pending UCs.  
States should also be impressed upon about the serious consequences of huge pendency 
and the need for early clearance of UCs.  Strict and meticulous monitoring of the various 
schemes in the States should be done so as to avoid underutilization of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The matter is being regularly followed up with the respective States 
Governments/UTs/Implementing Agencies to   utilize the funds quickly under various 
schemes/programmes of the Ministry. The regular meetings and discussions are being 

21 
 
held with respective St ates Governments / UTs/ Implementing Agencies for closely  and 
actively monitoring the flow of funds to the States/UTs. No funds are being released 
without receipt of utilization certificates that are due in respect of the   pervious grant.  The 
further grant is released after adjustment of the unutilized amount of the previous grant. 
States/UTs are also being impressed upon about the serious consequences of huge 
pendency and the need for early clearance of UCs.  Strict and meticulous monitoring of 
the various schemes in the States is undertaken by making field vi sits by the officers of 
this Ministry so as to avoid underutilization of funds and ensure faster implementation of 
the schemes/programmes. 
 Some more steps taken so far have been indicated in reply to para 2.22 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 3.38) 
2.7 The Committee find that under the NGO programme of NMDFC micro credit upto 
Rs. 25000 can be given to each of the members of a minority Self Help Group (SHG).  
Funds for this purpose are made available to NGOs at 1% interest for further loaning at an 
interest rate of 5% per annum. In addition to loaning activity, NMDFC assists the targeted 
groups in skill up -gradation and marketing assistance.  However, the Committee regret to 
note that funds were not disbursed under the micro financing scheme to NGOs in States 
like Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, M.P. Maharashtra, Nagaland, Tripura and 
Uttarakhand during the last three years and the current financial year. The disbursement 
of funds was also not uniform and regular during the previous years where some States 
received the funds in some years and some did not get any funds.  The Committee are 
given to understand that lack of receipt of bankable proposals from credit worthy NGOs 
and receipt of incomplete proposals by NMDFC are the reasons for non disbursal of funds 
to the States.  As NGOs are an important link between the Government and the 

22 
 
beneficiaries, the Committee desire that the Ministry should try to attract viable proposals 
from genuine and credit worthy NGOs by undertaking an aggressive awareness campaign 
about the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 NMDFC extends micro credit to NGOs with very low security and also assists 
targeted groups for skill upgradation  and marketing assistance.   Based on its experience 
in dealing with NGOs and because of significant default levels and litigation, NMDFC has 
developed a methodology to scrutinize and grade the reliability of NGOs.  
 Based on this methodology the proposals  from a large number of NGOs are not 
found to be eligible for sanction based on check of documents in NMDFC and subsequent 
field scrutiny. In view of the above, the proposals of NGOs for micro finance from the 
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnatak a, M.P. Maharashtra, Nagaland, Tripura 
and Uttarakhand could not be sanctioned. It is noted that in these States the concept of 
Micro Finance Institutions amongst NGOs is relatively undeveloped.    
 As an alternative, the implementation of Micro Finance Sc heme through SCAs has 
been encouraged. Accordingly, NMDFC has organized a national level training for the 
SCA functionaries in the implementation of Micro Financing Scheme at Banker‟s Institute 
for Rural Development (BIRD) Lucknow during August 2009.  Such  trainings will continue 
to be held in future. 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 3.39) 
2.9 The Committee note with concern that the percentage of recovery of loans from the 
SCAs as well as from the individual beneficiaries in respect of NMDFC loan have been 
very poor.  Though the recovery percentage of SCAs  stood at 83.87% for the year 2006 -

23 
 
07, 83.17% for the year 2007 -08 and 82.96% for the year 2008 -09, the recovery 
percentage of individual beneficiaries has been far from satisfactory.  The overall recovery 
percentage has decreased over the years in turn affecting the loaning capacity of the 
SCAs/NMDFC.  Lack of infrastructure for carrying out the identification and selection of 
genuine loanees and lack of regular follow up by the SCAs with the beneficiaries have 
been stated to be the reasons for the poor recovery.  The lack of resources and lac k of 
field level infrastructure for monitoring has also been identified as the problem areas with 
regard to speedy recovery of the loan.  The Committee also observe that in order to 
strengthen the administrative capacity of SCAs, the Ministry have started the plan scheme 
of grant-in-aid to SCAs.  While hoping that the above steps would strengthen the SCAs, 
the Committee recommend the Ministry to advise the SCAs to work out a recovery 
schedule for repayment in easy installments for the beneficiaries and the beneficiaries who 
pay back the loans timely should be given incentive in the form of rebate in interest 
payment.  This would not only ensure easy recovery but also attract the beneficiaries to 
avail the loans.    
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 The low recov ery has been due to the lack of follow up by the SCAs primarily 
because of the weak infrastructure that exists in most of them.   NMDFC through a Grants-
in-aid scheme for strengthening of SCAs had requested the SCAs to submit proposals for 
sanction of GsIA but except for a few SCAs, most of the other SCAs did not come forward 
with proposals and so funds provided under this scheme lapsed.  
 In order to ensure the recovery of overdues payable by the SCAs to NMDFC, letters 
have been written by the Chairperson NMDFC to the Chief Minister of States in June 2010 
and by the Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs to the respective Chief Secretaries of 
State Governments in May 2010 requesting the States who are major defaulters to ensure 

24 
 
timely repayments to NMDFC s o that the level of financing of target groups is increased 
and the recycling of funds available for Term Loans and Micro Finance is not affected. 
 The grant of incentives to beneficiaries for timely repayment of loans is the 
prerogative of the SCAs keeping in view the policies of the respective State Governments.  
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 5.18) 
2.11 The Committee are constrained  to note that though 5522 students were coached 
through 71 institutes under the Free Coaching and Allied Scheme the number of students 
coached has come down to 4682 through 39 institutes during the year 2009 -10.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with the re asons cited by the Ministry that proposals could not 
be invited on time and the process of the releasing of funds was delayed due to 
enforcement of code of conduct and General Election at the beginning of the financial year 
2009-10.   The Committee note with equal concern that not a single student has benefitted 
from the scheme in the States of Andaman and Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadar and 
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Goa, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Lakshadweep and 
Pudduchery during the last two y ears i.e. 2007 -08, 2008 -09 and current financial year 
2009-10. The coaching assistance given to students was also not uniform and regular 
during the previous years where students in some States were coached/trained while 
students in some other States were left behind. The Committee strongly feel that minority 
population is spread throughout the country and their presence is visible in almost all the 
States, and hence adequate attention needs to be given for coverage of beneficiaries in all 
the States.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should direct the State 
Governments to give wide publicity to the scheme during the very beginning of the 
financial year itself so that proposals are invited, processed on time and release of funds 
not delayed.  
 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 During 2009-10, the number of beneficiaries was 5532 against the target of 5000.  
The numbers of institutes covered were 49 in 19 States.  During the year 2010 -11, as on 
30-06-2010, against a target of 5760 number of beneficiaries covered are 3550, (i.e. 6 1%) 
including 45 students in Goa and 441 students in Tamil Nadu.  Efforts would be made to 
cover all the States / UTs in future on the basis of receipt of the proposals from the 
States/UTs.  The Ministry would also avail the assistance of Central Agencies such as 
Centre for Development of Advance Computing (C -DAC), Central Institute of Plastic 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET), Electronic Corporation of India (ECIL) etc. to 
attempt to cover training programmes in the uncovered   States /UTs. During the yea r 
2010-11, the projected and committed liability towards payment of first installments and 
second installments together is higher than the budgeted provision of Rs.15 crore.  
Therefore, the advertisement for inviting new proposals has been deferred for the  present.  
As and when it is advertised, the Ministry will also request the State / UTs Governments to 
give wide publicity to the scheme within their respective jurisdictions. 
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 5.20) 
2.13 The Committee further find that under the Coaching and Allied Scheme, financial 
assistance is also provided to the students for the remedial coaching/tuition.  The 
Committee are  dismayed to note that during the last four years no viable proposals for 
remedial coaching/tuition for pursuing technical/professional courses has been sanctioned 
by the Ministry.  The Ministry‟s submission in this regard that even after talking to the 
States and requesting them to send proposals, the States are not coming forward and 
sending proposals is not acceptable to the Committee. The Committee feel that remedial 
coaching being of great help for the minority students in rural areas lagging behind in  their 

26 
 
education to improve their performance, proposals from States/UTs should have been 
overwhelming, had there been sincere efforts on the part of the Ministry.   The Committee 
are also of the opinion that the important aspect of „remedial coaching‟ under the Coaching 
and Allied Scheme has not been highlighted and given proper publicity by the Ministry.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to make special efforts, talk to the 
Chief Secretaries of the States/UT Governments in this regard and p ublicise the scheme 
in a big way so that viable number of proposals for remedial coaching/tuition for pursuing 
technical/professional courses are received and the funds allocated under the scheme are 
effectively utilized for benefit of minority students. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Ministry agrees with the importance of remedial coaching. In the meeting of the 
Principal Secretaries of Minority Welfare, held on 14.5.2010, concerns of the Hon‟ble 
Committee have been conveyed to the State/U.T. Governments. Further, a letter has been 
addressed to all the States / UTs on 18 th June, 2010, conveying the need to keep in view 
the role and importance of remedial coaching and send adequate number of proposals as 
and when proposals are sought.   
  
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 6.19) 
2.15 The Committee note that under the Pre -matric and Post -matric scholarship 
schemes though the overall utilization of funds has been good yet it  fell short of the 
budgetary estimates of  Rs. 200 crore and Rs. 150 crore respectively.  The Committee 
were also informed that funds were not released to the States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Nagaland, Sikkim and Lakshadweep under the Pre -matric scholarship and to the 
States/UTs of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Lakshadweep under the Post -matric 

27 
 
scholarship, since these States/UTs had not sent their proposals.  Though the Ministry 
have stated that they are making efforts for timely receipt of proposals from States  through 
letters, periodic review meetings and media campaign etc., the Committee find that these 
efforts have not been enough as far as 100% utilization of the schemes are concerned.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry in close coordinat ion with the 
States should try to attract sufficient number of proposals and achieve full utilization under 
both the schemes.  Efforts should be made to utilize the enhanced amount of Rs. 450 core 
and Rs. 265 crore sanctioned under the schemes.  Widespread  publicity should be given 
to both the schemes in minority dominant schools and steps should be taken with regard 
to sorting out specific problems being faced by the above States through consultation and 
interaction. Monitoring of the funds already release d in States should also be done so as 
to ensure that these are actually reaching the minority students. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 During the year 2009 -10, the budget provision under Pre -matric Scholarship 
Scheme was Rs.200 crore ; against which Rs.202.94 crore have been utilized.  Under 
Post-matric Scholarship Scheme the budget provision of Rs.150 crore was made in 2009 -
10 against which Rs.148.74 crore was utilized.  Together under both the schemes the 
Ministry spent Rs.351.68 cro re against Rs.350 crore which is slightly more than 100%.  
The physical target under Pre -matric scholarship scheme during 2009 -10 was 15,00,000 
against which 17,29,076 scholarships were sanctioned.  Under Post -matric scholarship 
scheme, 3,64,387 scholarshi ps were sanctioned against the physical target of 3,00,000. 
The physical achievement has been 115% in Pre-matric category and 121% in Post-matric 
category in 2009-10. 
 

28 
 
2. As these scholarship schemes are central sponsored schemes, these are 
implemented thr ough State Government / UTs Administrations.  Funds are 
released to the States / UTs on the basis of proposals received from them 
and after ensuring the utilization of funds released in the previous year.  In 
order to achieve the target for 2010 -11 under s cholarship schemes as well 
as under other schemes of the Ministry, a meeting of Principal Secretaries / 
Secretaries of the Minority Welfare Departments of all States / UTs was 
organized on 14.05.2010.  In that meeting all the States / UTs were urged to 
ensure that the schemes are properly advertised in their respective States / 
UTs.  Further, Chief Secretaries of States / UTs have been requested to take 
a meeting at their level. 
 
3. Ministry of Minority Affairs has launched a media campaign during 2010 -11 
for dissemination of information for creating awareness about the schemes 
of the Ministry. Newspaper advertisements on Scholarship Schemes have 
been placed twice during June/July 201 0 in 347 Newspapers (English -34, 
Hindi-92, other languages 221). Advertisements on Doordarshan and All 
India Radio have been disseminated from 12 th to 30th June and 10 th June to 
15th July, 2010 respectively. Advertisement on DD telecast again from 20 th 
July to 20 th Augsut,2010. All India Radio has broadcast on prime time 
channels and on all 22 FM channels. 
4. To ensure effective implementation of schemes / programmes of the 
Ministry, including these scholarship schemes, National Level Monitors 
(NLMs) have b een deputed for monitoring the implementation of the 
schemes / programmes in the field and provide feedback to enable this 

29 
 
Ministry to take corrective steps, if any.  Officers of this Ministry are also 
visiting the States / UTs to monitor implementation st atus of the schemes / 
programmes of this Ministry. 
5. All the observations / recommendations of the Hon‟ble Committee have been 
noted for compliance and guidance. 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 7.8) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that the main objectives of Maulana Azad Education 
Foundation (MAEF) are to formulate and implement educational schemes and plans for 
the benefit of the educationally backward minorities in particular and weaker sections in 
general, to facilitate establishment of residential schools, especially for girls.  MAEF‟s 
schemes are of two types, viz; grants-in-aid to NGOs for construction and expansion of 
schools/hostels, technical/vocational training centres etc.  and scholarships to  meritorious 
girl students.  The Committee are dismayed to learn that under the scheme of grants -in-
aid to MAEF as against the proposal of Rs. 175 crore, only Rs. 125 crore has been 
sanctioned for 2010 -2011.  The reason advanced by the Ministry in this reg ard is that an 
outlay of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated for MAEF‟s corpus fund for the Eleventh Five 
Year Plan and out of it Rs. 225 crore has been released to the foundation during 2007 -08, 
2008-09 and 2009 -10.  The balance Rs. 275 crore is to be releas ed in the remaining two 
years i.e. Rs. 125 crore in 2010 -2011 and Rs. 150 crore in 2011 -2012.  The Committee, 
keeping in view the hundred percent utilization during 2009 -10, are not satisfied by the 
plea/stand of the Ministry.  They feel that in view of th e huge population of the minority 
community of Muslims, Rs. 500 crore of corpus fund is insufficient.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that the corpus fund for the 11 th Five Year Plan should be enhanced 

30 
 
considerably particularly for the remaining plan per iod.  The Committee further 
recommend that in order to make the holistic development of the minority community 
(Muslims) alongwith the enhancement in the financial allocation for MAEF, residential 
schools system should also be introduced all over the count ry so that more and more 
people of the community could be educated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Corpus Fund of the Maulana Azad Education Foundation stood at Rs. 100 
crore, in December 2006. This was raised to Rs. 200 crores  by March, 2007.  Further, the 
Government has decided to augment the corpus fund of MAEF to Rs.700 crore during the 
11th Plan Period. The present paid up Corpus Fund of the MAEF is Rs.550 crore.  In 
accordance with approval of the Government for the 11 th Plan Period, another Rs.150 
crore would be released to the Foundation during the year 2011-12.  
 Since establishment of Residential Schools comes under the purview of Ministry of 
Human Resource Development, the recommendations of the H0n‟ble Committee in th is 
regard have been forwarded to the Ministry of Human Resource Development for 
necessary action at their end.  
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 

31 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 4.17) 
3.1 The Committee further note that a MsDP Empowered Committee in the Ministry 
appraises and approves the projects in the MsDP plans.  This Empowered Committee also 
serves as the over sight body at the Centre and shall monitor the implementation of the 
programme.  The Committee have also learnt that the State level and District level 
Committees which have been constituted for imp lementation of the PM‟s new 15 Point 
Programme for Welfare of minorities also serve as bodies for monitoring the 
implementation of MsDP in the States/UTs.  The scheme of MsDP also envisages for 
quarterly review of the progress of implementation by these Co mmittees.  The Committee, 
however, regret to find that no mechanism exists at the Block and Village levels which are 
the actual pedestals for implementation of the programme.  They urge the Ministry to 
ensure the establishment of bodies/Committees at the B lock and Village levels in 
collaboration with the State/UT administrations in order to implement the MsDP in a 
qualitative and efficient manner. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The district level committee constituted for implementation of the Prime Minister‟s  
New 15 Point Programme for the Welfare of Minorities, which consists of the District 
Collector/Deputy Commissioner, district level officers of the departments implementing the 
programme, representatives of the Panchayati Raj Institutions/Autonomous Distri ct 
Councils and representatives from reputed institutions dealing with minorities, also serves 
as the district level committee for monitoring the implementation of Multi -sectoral 
Development Programme (MsDP) in minority concentration districts. Recently, t he 

32 
 
guidelines for implementation of 15 Point Programme have been amended and Members 
of Parliament (MPs) and Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) have been included in 
the district and State level Committees. The projects approved under MsDP are mainly f or 
topping-up of existing Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) which have their own 
implementation and monitoring mechanism. The scheme of MsDP neither envisages any 
change in the guidelines of such CSS nor envisages creation of a separate implementing 
and monitoring mechanism. It depends on the implementing agencies of such CSS and 
the monitoring mechanism of the 15 Point Programme.  Accordingly, it is felt that the 
district level committee, which would have MPs and MLAs, representatives of the 
Panchayati Raj  Institutions, representing villages/blocks, would be able to ensure the 
implementation and monitoring of MsDP in a qualitative and efficient manner. 
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 3.37) 
4.1 The Committee are given to understand that under the SCAs programme  of 
NMDFC, projects costing upto Rs. 5 lakh are financed.  Funds for this purpose are made 
available to the SCAs with an interest rate of 3% for further loaning to the beneficiaries at 
6%.  The Committee observe that under term loan scheme, no funds were d isbursed to 
the States like Manipur, Madhya Pradesh,  Meghalaya, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh during 
the last three years i.e. 2006 -07, 2007-08, 2008-09 and the current financial year 2009 -10 
due to reasons such as non-operation of SCAs in the States, mounting overdues, absence 
of State Government guarantee, non utilization of funds released earlier and poor recovery 
from the beneficiaries.  The Committee feel that the marketing assistance related term 
loan programme under the SCAs have a lot of potential for t he economic upliftment of the 
minority beneficiaries where they can undertake small scale entrepreneurial activities.  
However, it is very unfortunate that due to weak SCAs many States are not able to avail 
the benefits under the scheme and there is an urg ent need for strengthening and capacity 
building of the SCAs in order to make them efficient.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should take necessary steps to make the SCAs operational 
in those States where these are defunct a nd non -functional or not functioning properly. 
SCAs should be strengthened and energized both economically and administratively at the 
grass root level.  The staff strength of the SCAs should be upgraded so that the shortage 
of staff does not affect the working of NMDFC. 
  
 

34 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The marketing assistance related term loan programme under the SCAs have a lot 
of potential for the economic upliftment  of the minority beneficiaries where they can 
undertake small scale entrepreneurial activities but as noted by the Committee, the SCAs 
are not in a position to utilize this opportunity. This is mainly because the infrastructure of 
the SCAs is weak.  
 NMDFC through a Grants in aid scheme for strengthening of SCAs had requested 
the SCAs to submit proposals for GsIA. Except for a few SCAs, most of the other SCAs 
did not come forward with proposals and so funds provided under this scheme lapsed. The 
matter of n o- functioning of State Channelising Agencies in the States like Manipur, 
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh etc. is regularly taken up with the respective State 
Governments. Letters have been written by the Chairperson, NMDFC to the Chief 
Ministers and by the Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs to the Chief Secretaries of the 
respective States covering this issue to allow strengthening for proper functioning of the 
SCAs. Though an SCA has been nominated in Meghalaya it has not begun to implement 
any of the schemes of NMDFC.  
NMDFC has since the year 2009 -10 given special thrust to marketing assistance 
scheme. As compared to 257 beneficiaries covered under the marketing assistance 
scheme in 2008-09, NMDFC assisted 3,871 artisans during 2009-10. 
 In order to strengthen and build capacity of the weak SCAs apart from the Grant in 
Aid Scheme, NMDFC is regularly following up with the concerned State Governments. 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

35 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 4.16) 
4.3 The Multi Sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) is a special area development 
scheme which was launched in 2008 -09 and being implemented through the State 
Governments/UTs in 90 Minority Concentration Districts (MCDs) having a substantial 
minority population, which are relatively backward and falling b ehind the national average 
in terms of socio -economic and basic amenities indicators.  The Committee note that a 
substantial amount of Rs. 989.50 crore was allocated under the scheme during 2009 -10.  
However, they are dismayed to find that only Rs. 513 cro re were spent upto 31.12.2009 
and another Rs. 38.016 crore were released from 31.12.2009 upto 15.3.2010.  
Nonetheless, the Committee find that Rs. 1400 crore have been allocated for the 
programme for 2010 -2011 and the Ministry have so far considered and ap proved 77 
district plans, of which plans for only 13 MCDs have been approved in full.  The remaining 
district plans for 64 MCDs have been approved partially and expected to be approved in 
full during 2010-2011.  The Committee are not satisfied with the slow pace of development 
under the scheme as a big amount i.e. Rs. 1400 crore has been allocated by the 
Government of India for the purpose for 2010 -2011.  They recommend that the Ministry in 
coordination with the State Governments should expedite the develop ment process of all 
the 90 MCDs in a time bound manner so as to fulfill the objectives behind the scheme in 
these districts.  
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The scheme of Multi -sectoral Development Programme (MsDP) envisages 
preparation of district plans in s uch a manner that the development deficits of a district, 
identified by a baseline survey, are addressed for improvement of backwardness 
parameters of MCDs to bring them at par with the national average.  The Ministry has 
been approving proposals contained  in the district plans of MCDs which address the 
identified development deficits and are prepared in accordance with the scheme of MsDP. 

36 
 
For proposals in the district plans not made in accordance with the MsDP guidelines and 
not addressing the identified d evelopment deficits, the States/UTs have been advised to 
submit revised plans. So far 81 district plans have been considered and approved, of 
which 18 are approved in full and 63 in part. Although Rs.513 crore was released upto 
December, 2009, an amount of  Rs.973.02 crore was released to the State Governments 
upto 31st March, 2010 against an allocation of Rs.990 crore for 2009 -10, which is 98% of 
allocation for MsDP. The first set of district plans were considered and approved in 
August, 2008 and first rele ases were made in October, 2008. It has been only one year 
and eight months since the first release of funds. During this period, the Ministry has 
approved plans amounting to Rs.2412.57 crore, of which Rs.1270.55 crore have been 
released to the State Governments.  
 Several workshops and meetings have been held with the State Secretaries and 
Deputy Commissioners for preparation of district plans in a manner to address the 
identified development deficits as envisaged in the scheme of MsDP. In May 2010, a 
conference of Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of States/Union Territories dealing with 
minority welfare was held and wherein the need for early submission of district plans was 
emphasized to ensure that the funds for 2010 -11 are released well in time to enab le 
States/UT to implement the approved projects in a time bound manner.  Strict and 
meticulous monitoring of the various schemes in the States is undertaken by carrying out 
field visits by the officers of this Ministry so as to avoid underutilization of fun ds and faster 
implementation of the programme. 
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

37 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 5.19) 
4.5 The Committee are  given to understand that under Free Coaching and Allied 
Scheme, coaching for recruitment of constable and equivalent in police, security forces 
and railways is provided.  However, when the Committee asked to furnish the details on 
the number of beneficiar ies who have actually gained employment after the coaching, the 
Ministry have casually stated  in their written reply that the information of beneficiaries who 
have gained employment in police, security forces and railways after availing benefits 
under the  scheme will be obtained and submitted to the Committee in due course. The 
Committee take a strong note of it and are of the view that the information on the above 
should have been readily available with the Ministry.  In this regard the Committee direct 
the Ministry that the above information should be made available to them at the earliest. 
 
Reply of  the Government 
4.6 Information has been gathered since then.  One institute in Tripura had applied for 
coaching of 10 students for the entrance examination for constable in 2008 -09.  First 
installment was released. The proposal for release of second installment has been 
received from the institute through the State Government in July,2010. Out of 8 candidates 
who were imparted coaching for the post of Constable, two candidates have been selected 
as Constables in Tripura Police and two candidates did not attend the coaching after 
selection.   
 Another proposal from an institute in Gujarat for training / coaching of three hundred 
students for the post of constab les was received. However, no fund was released to the 
institute as it did not provide the list of candidates for training/coaching as required under 
the scheme.  The institute was asked to provide list of students as on 22.05.2009.  A 
reminder was issued on 26 th August, 2009 for furnishing the list of students.   Another 

38 
 
reminder was sent on 9 th April, 2010 and no response has been received.  A letter to the 
Chief Secretary, Gujarat was also addressed on 18.06.2010. 
  
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

39 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 3.36) 
5.1 The Committee are happy to note that the authorized share capital of  NMDFC has 
increased from Rs. 850 crores to Rs. 1000 crores during the year 2009 -10.  Out of the 
Central Government‟s share which works out to be Rs. 650 crores (65%) as on 31 st 
December, 2009 the Government of India has contributed Rs. 645.36 crores towards the 
equity of NMDFC.  The Committee, however, note with concern that out of the States‟ 
share of Rs. 260 crore (26%) States like Goa, Meghalaya and Sikkim have not contributed 
their sh are so far.  Also some States have paid only 15%, 20% or 50% etc.  Union 
Territories such as Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu, and Lakshadweep, which 
are directly under the control of Government of India have also not contributed their share 
so far t o the equity of NMDFC.  The Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs during the 
evidence has accepted that wherever the States are not giving equity or the State 
Guarantee, the recovery of funds is not upto the mark.  In the event of non -contribution 
towards equity or non -giving of State Guarantee, the Ministry/NMDFC is not in a position 
to lend further funds to these States/UTs.  The Committee are not happy with the above 
position and recommend the Ministry to persuade the non paying States to contribute th eir 
shares. Matter should also be taken up with the States, which are contributing their share 
partially for sorting out the issues for which they are not able to contribute their share in 
full. The Committee also desire that the issue of State Guarantee n eed to be taken up with 
the concerned States so that the minority beneficiaries in these States are not deprived of 
availing loans from NMDFC.  
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The matter of non -contribution of equity by States and UTs to NMDFC has been 
taken up from time to time with the State Governments. It is true that if the shares of equity 
due are not received in full from the State governments, lending by NMDFC is constrained.  
As recently as in May 2010 the Secretary of this Ministry had written to all  the Chief 
Secretaries of States and UTs requesting the latter to release the remaining equity due to 
NMDFC during the current financial year 2010-11. 
 The equity Share Capital contribution received by NMDFC from the States till March 
2009 was Rs. 123.41 c rore. During the year 2009 -10 because of constant follow up from 
the Ministry and Corporation a further sum of Rs. 22.56 crore was received as equity 
contribution from 16 States.  During the current financial year 2010 -11(till 20.5.2010), Rs. 
6.65 Crore ha s been received as equity contribution from 7 States. Rs. 42.60 lakh as 
equity contribution has been received from the Government of Mizoram after a gap of nine 
years. An amount of Rs. 7.0 lakh has also been received from the Government of Tripura 
during the current financial year as equity contribution.  The matter of non -receipt of the 
share of equity contribution from the States of Sikkim and Meghalaya is under active 
correspondence. 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 8.10) 
5.3 The Committee are concerned to note that the population of a small minority 
community, namely, Parsis has declined from 1,14,000 in 1941 to 69,000 in 2001.  The 
constant decline in the number of this population/community who are very well-organized, 
well-educated and self -reliant is a cause of concern for the nation as a whole.  In this 
regard, the Committee have been informed that the National Commission for Minorities 
has conducted three studies on Parsis over a period of ti me and highlighted the main 
reasons for dwindling their numbers as late and non -marriages, fertility decline, 

41 
 
emigration, out -marriages, separation, divorces etc.  The Committee have also been 
apprised by the Ministry that in order to arrest the diminishin g population of the small 
minority community and arrest the trend a scheme would be formulated in 2010 - 2011 and 
an amount of Rs. One crore has also been allocated for this purpose.  The Ministry in this 
direction, had also held a meeting with the represen tatives of the Parsi community on 25 -
26 March, 2010 to discuss the issue of decline in the population of Parsis and the 
proposed plan scheme.  The representatives have promised to send their views formally to 
the Government in this regard.  In view of it, the Committee hope that after analyzing the 
considered views of the representatives of the community, a holistic approach and action 
plan would be formulated by the Ministry to address the core issues of the Parsi 
community specifically the trend of their declining population.  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The observations made by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
A concept note for seeking „in principle‟ approval of the Planning Commission was 
forwarded on 25 th May, 2010. On 23 rd July,2010, the  Planning Commission has turned 
down the proposal stating that they do not find justification for granting “in -principle” 
approval to the proposed scheme.  The matter has again been taken up with the Planning 
Commission on 29 th July,2010 to convey the reasons for their rejection so that necessary 
clarification can be given for reconsideration of the proposal. 
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 8.11) 
 
5.5 The Committee have been given to understand that a new scheme of „Interest 
Subsidy on Educational Loans for Overseas Studies‟ with the objective of providing 
financial assistance by way of extending interest subsidy on education loans to students of 
minority communities for pursuing higher studies abroad, is proposed to be implemented 
by the Ministry and an allocation of Rs. 2 crore has been made for the purpose in the 
budget of 2010 -2011.  The Committee are of the opinion that the above initiative of the 
Ministry will certainly help many minority students who wish to pursue higher studies 
abroad but cannot, due to financial constraints.  While hoping that the scheme would be 
appraised and approved by the competent authority early, the Committee desire that the 
amount allocated under the scheme would be utilized judiciously so as to benefit the 
minority students who want to avail education loans. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The observations made by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
While formulating the scheme, the observations of the Committee would be kept in view. A 
concept note for seeking „in principle‟ approval of the Planning Commission was forwarded 
on 18.06.2010. The Planning Commis sion has sought certain information prior to 
conveying the „in principle‟ approval of the scheme.   
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 8.12) 
5.7 The Committee note that a new scheme of strengthening State Waqf Boards is 
proposed to be implemented by the Ministry during the year 2010 -2011 in pursuance with 
the recommendation of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Waqf and an amount of Rs. 

43 
 
7.00 cror e has been earmarked for the purpose.  Under the scheme, Grants -in-aid is 
proposed to be provided for strengthening of State Waqf Boards.  The Committee observe 
that  the above step will help in improving the performance of the State Waqf Boards the 
condition of which  are at present poor and weak.  The Committee further observe that in 
order to preserve and promote the minor and endangered languages in the country, a 
small scheme of promotional activities of linguistic minorities has also been conceived by  
the Ministry for implementation during 2010 -2011 with an allocation of Rs. one crore.  The 
Committee also agree with the Ministry‟s perspective that minority languages/dialects are 
a strong part of our cultural diversity and their preservation  is a must.   The Committee 
hope that both the above schemes would be formulated in time and necessary steps will 
be taken for their early approval and implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The observations made by the Hon‟ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
The schemes will be formulated, appraised and approved in time and implemented 
thereafter.  The present status in respect of the two schemes is as under:- 
(a)  STRENGTHENING OF STATE WAQF BOARDS 
  Before initiating the process of formulating the scheme, a meeting with all the 
State Waqf Boards was held in this Ministry on 14 th   May, 2010 for seeking their 
inputs. Thereafter a meeting was held on 1 st June, 2010 with representatives of the 
Waqf Boards of Haryana, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Delhi and West Bengal to 
broadly configure the scheme. Visits were made to the three State Waqf Boards of 
Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar in July 2010 to assess the ground realities to 
help in formulation of t he scheme. Based on the discussions, a Concept Note is 
being proposed to be sent to the Planning Commission for seeking their „in 
principle‟ approval.        

44 
 
(b) PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES OF LINGUISTIC MINORITIES 
 
  Discussion has been held with the Acting Commissioner of Linguistic 
Minorities for seeking inputs. It is proposed to hold a meeting with Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Human Resource Development and Ministry of Culture to seek 
their views on the proposed scheme. The matter is also under correspondence with 
Planning Commission for obtaining their „in principle‟ approval.     
 
(F.No.G-20011/1/2010-11-Budget Dated 9th August, 2010) 
 
 
NEW DELHI        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
5 January, 2011       Chairman 
15 Pausha, 1932 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
         Social Justice and Empowerment. 
  
 
  

45 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
MINUTES  OF THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF THE  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON 
SOCIAL  JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5 TH JANUARY, 
2011. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room No. „G-074‟, 
PLB, New Delhi. 
PRES ENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH  CHAUHAN  -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Premchand Guddu 
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
10. Shri Mohan Jena 
11. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
14. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
16. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
17. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
18. Shri Baishnab Parida 
19. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 
  

46 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble  Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports of the Committee :- 
 
(i)     Draft Twelfth Report on Action taken by the Government on the  
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
(ii)  Draft Thirteenth on Action taken by the Government on the   
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Repor t on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
(iii)   Draft Fourteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Twelfth Report without any 
amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report and present the 
same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  

47 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE   SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
  Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 17  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 3.38, 
3.39, 5.18, 5.20, 6.19 and 7.8) 
9 52.94 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies (Paragraph No. 4.17). 
1 5.88 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph No. 
3.37, 4.16 and 5.19) 
3 17.65 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.36, 8.10, 8.11 and 
8.12). 
4 23.53 
           
 