1 
 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2010 - 2011) 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010-
2011)   of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
THIRTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
January, 2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 
 


2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained  
in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on   Demands   for Grants (2010-2011) of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9.3.2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  9.3.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
January, 2011/Pausha, 1932 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                       
PAGE 
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ……………………………………………………  
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………………………………   
 
CHAPTER I  Report………………………………………………………………  
                                           
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by              
the Government……………………………………………………                 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not               
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the  Government…                                                           
 CHAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies                   
of the Government  have not been accepted  and have been 
commented upon by the Committee in Chapter-I ….………..    
CHAPTER V Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies         
of the Government are interim in nature……………………..                                   
     
ANNEXURE 
   
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on           
  Social  Justice and Empowerment held on   5.1.2011 ……….   
        
APPENDIX 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the                              
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)……………   
                                                                  
                
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2010-2011) 
     
    SHRI  DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  - CHAIRMAN  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
  
2 Shri T.R. Baalu 
3 Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer  
4 Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
5 Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
6 Smt. Rama Devi 
7 Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8 Shri Premchand Guddu 
9 Shri Baliram Jadhav   
10 Dr. Manda Jagannath   
11 Shri Mohan Jena  
12 Shri Baliram Kashyap 
13 Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
14 Shri Basori Singh Masram  
15 Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
16 Dr. Niramalli Sivaprasad  
17 Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
18 Shri Manohar Tirkey 
  #19. Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede  
20 Vacant 
21  Vacant 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
22  Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23  Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
24  Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
                    ##25. Shri Mahmood A. Madani 
           *26. Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
27.  Dr. Ram Dayal Munda 
28.  Shri Baishnab Parida 
29.  Shri Praveen Rashtrapal 
30.  Shri Shivpratap Singh 
31.  Shri Nandi Yelliah 
_____________________________________________________________ 
# Shri Subhash Bapurao Wankhede nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 27.9.2010 
## Shri Mahmood A. Madani nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
*  Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 21.9.2010 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri V.R. Ramesh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director  
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth 
Report on the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendatio ns contained in 
the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants – 2010-2011 relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabh a and laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 th April, 
2010.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 20.9.2010. The Report was considered 
and adopted by the Standi ng Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held 
on 5.1.2011. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to 
them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI:      DARA SINGH CHAUHAN  
5 January, 2011         Chairman, 
15 Pausha, 1932 (Saka)                Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment. 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 20 10-11 relating to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment.  
1.2 The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  20th 
April, 20 10.  It contained 21 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorised as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Paragraph Nos.  2.22, 2.24, 2.28, 3.33, 3.42 and 5.25. 
 (Total 6  - Chapter II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
Paragraph No.  3.34. 
 (Total 1 - Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which need to be reiterated in 
Chapter I:  
Paragraph Nos.  2.23, 2.27, 5.11, 5.12 and 6.10. 
(Total 5 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
  Paragraph Nos.   2.25, 2.26, 3.19, 3.20, 3.32, 4.15, 5.24, 6.25 and 6.26. 
  (Total 9  - Chapter V)  

8 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them 
at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of the 
Report. 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the repli es received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2 Para No.2.23) 
1.5 The Committee have noted that while separate provisions have been made by the 
Ministry for educational development of SCs with Rs. 2115 crore and OBCs with Rs. 455 
crore  such a provision has not been made under the head of educational development of 
the persons with disability.  The Committee have also been informed that earlier too there 
was a Centrally sponsored scheme of providing scholarship to students with disability 
which has since been transferred to States in the 90‟s.  What is more disheartening to note 
is that it was a conscious decision of the Government of India taken up by Planning 
Commission and the Ministry was also a party to this decision.  The Ministry‟s argument 
that the educational development needs of the persons with disability  are t aken care of by 
other schemes such as Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA) does not hold water as  SSA being a 
big umbrella programme with provisions for all sections of society cannot give focused 
attention to the holistic educational requirements of the persons wi th disability. As far as 
States are concerned they have their own resource constraints.  Educational development 
is the key for overall development and security of this section and keeping in view the 
priority given to education by the Government, the righ t to education made a fundamental 
right under Part III of the Constitution, it is imperative that the educational needs of the 
persons with disability  are taken care of.  For this, the Committee recommend the Ministry 

9 
 
not to deviate from this priority and  urgently make some provision under the head 
„educational development of the persons with disability ‟.  The Ministry should revive the 
earlier provision/scheme in this direction and act to provide some kind of scholarship to the 
students with disability.   The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard as early as possible. 
1.6 The Ministry of Social Justice Empowerment in their action taken reply to the above 
recommendation has stated as under:-  
 “The Ministry is presently implementing a Scholarship Scheme for Students with 
Disabilities from a fund of the Ministry called the „National Fund for People with 
Disabilities‟. The salient features of the scheme are:- 
(i) Under the Scholarship Scheme, financial assistance is given to students with 
at least 40% disabilities certified as per the Persons with Disabilities Act 
1995 for pursuing post -Matric/Post-Secondary technical and professional 
courses including Ph. D & M. Phil from recognized institutions. Ho wever, to 
students with Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, Multiple Disabilities, and 
Profound or Severe Hearing Impairment, scholarships are awarded for 
pursuing secondary level courses also.  
(ii) Monthly family income (including income of the parent/gu ardian) of the 
beneficiary should not be more than Rs. 15,000/-.  
(iii)    Scholarship of (a) Rs.1000/ -p.m. for hostellers and Rs.700/ - p.m. for day 
scholars studying in professional courses at graduation and above level, and 
(b) Rs.700/- p.m. for hostelle rs and Rs.400/ - p.m. for day scholars pursuing 
Diploma/certificate level professional courses and in respect of students with 
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, Multiple Disabilities and Profound or 
Severe Hearing Impairment, for pursuing general/technica l/vocational 
courses after Class -VIII. Course fee is reimbursed up  to a ceiling of 
Rs.10,000/- per year.  
(iv)    Up to five hundred Scholarships are given annually to different categories of 
disabled students as under:  
S. 
No. 
Disability Male 
Students 
Female 
Students 
1 Students with orthopedic disability 58 Awards 58 
Awards 

10 
 
2 Students with blindness or low vision 58 Awards 58 
Awards 
3 Students with hearing disability 58 Awards 58 
Awards 
4 Students with Cerebral palsy, Mental 
Retardation,  Multiple Disabilities, 
Profound or  Severe Hearing 
Impairment  
76 Awards 76 
Awards 
 Total 250 250 
 
“Disability” is in the State list. As per available information the following State 
Governments are implementing their own scholarship Schemes for students with 
disability:- Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland 
and Goa. 
Special provision for students with disabilities under SSA has been enhanced from 
Rs.1200/- per child to Rs.3000/- per child w.e.f. 2010-11.  
A proposal to introduce Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship (RGNF) scheme for 
students with disabilities, to pursue M. Phil. & Ph.D. programmes on the line of the existing 
RGNF for SC & ST statement is under examination”.  
 
1.7 The Committee are not happy with the reply furnished by the M inistry on the 
introduction of provision of Scholarship  to students with disability.  Though the 
Ministry have maintained that they are implementing a scholarship scheme for 
students with disabilities from a fund called the ‘National Fund for People with 
Disabilities’, in the opinion of the Committee the above  scheme with m ere 500 
scholarships  is not sufficient to meet the educational needs of large number of 
people with various kinds of disability.  The Committee are also not convinced with 
the reply of the Ministry that disability is in the State list and ma ny States are 
implementing their own scholarship schemes for people with disability.  The 
Committee observe that out of 28 States and 7 UTs, only 16 States are implementing 

11 
 
their own scholarship schemes for students with disability.  It is also not known a s 
to how much scholarship are being given by the States to the students with 
disability, the terms and conditions on which these are given and the number of 
disabled students being covered under the schemes.  The Committee are of the 
view that since persons with disability belong to the most disadvantaged section of 
the society, the issue of educational empowerment of such people should be 
addressed at the National Level.  Therefore, the Committee recommend  that the 
Ministry should introduce and implement scholarship scheme for persons with 
disability covering all the States and UTs in the pattern of scholarship schemes as it 
exists for SCs/OBCs to take care of the educational needs of this section of society. 
The Committee desire that till such provision is  introduced, the Ministry should 
increase the number of scholarships under the scheme of ‘National Fund for People 
with Disabilities’ so that more people with disability are able to benefit from the 
financial assistance of the Government. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para  No. 2.27) 
1.8 The Committee had noted that funds to the tune of Rs. 100 crore could not be 
utilized in full and got blocked under the Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana because of 
non-approval of the scheme by the Planning Commission.  The Committee also observed 
that the Planning Commission ha d now approved the scheme on 11.3.2010 and an 
allocation of Rs. 400 crore has been made for the scheme during 2010 -11.  The scheme 
being a flagship programme of the Ministry aims at the integrated deve lopment of villages 
having more than 50%  Scheduled Caste population through convergent implementation 
of existing Central and State schemes.  Since a huge amount of Rs. 400 crore has been 
earmarked for the scheme, efforts should be made for successful imp lementation of the 
said programme during 2010 -11 by utilizing the entire amount allocated for the purpose.   
The Committee had also recommended the Ministry to look into the reasons for under –

12 
 
utilization/non-utilization of funds under the schemes of Const ruction of Old Age Homes 
for Indigent Senior Citizens, Financial Assistance to Women with Disability to look after 
their children after birth and Educational and Economical Development of De -notified and 
Nomadic Tribes, B. R. Ambedkar Foundation, Spinal In jury Centre, Research and Training 
and take suitable remedial measures to avoid the repeated under -utilization/non-utilization 
of funds in these schemes.  
Recommendation (Sl. No.19, Para  No. 6.10) 
1.9        The Committee were unhappy to observe the „nil‟  expenditure under the Scheme 
of Assistance for Construction of Old Age Homes for the Indigent Senior Citizens during 
the years 2007-08, 2008-09 & 2010-11.  The reason cited by the Ministry for incurring „nil‟ 
expenditure was that the scheme  was still awaiting approval of the Planning Commission 
despite regular follow up.  The Committee ha d been given to understand that the scheme 
had been initiated in the year 2007 -08 in pursuance of the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 with  the noble intention of constructing old age 
homes for senior citizens. However, even after three years since the above Act ha d come 
into force, concrete steps ha d not been taken to implement the above scheme.  In view of 
the fact that substantial allocati on of Rs. 100 crore ha d been made under the scheme for 
the year 2010 -11, the Committee  had recommended that the scheme should be 
formulated early and the details of the scheme  be worked out expeditiously within the first 
trimester of the financial year so that the entire amount allocated for the purpose could be 
utilized.   The Committee also desired that  the steps taken by the Ministry and Planning 
Commission may be intimated to the Committee within three months of presentation of this 
report. 
1.10    The Ministry in their action taken note g ave position of utilization of funds for 
various schemes as under:  

13 
 
Full budgeted amount was released to  B. R. Ambedkar Foundation and the Spinal 
Injury Centre during 2009 -10. The position in regard to other schemes is briefly 
given as below:  
(i) Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY):  After approval of competent 
authority for launch of  this scheme  on pilot basis in 1000 SC majority villages of 
five states, viz. U.P, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Bihar (225 villages each) and  Assam 
(100 villages), which was reviewed in March, 2010, guidelines of the Scheme were 
circulated to concerned States on 16..3.2010 inviting proposals for central 
assistance. A Meeting of these States and concerned Ministries was also  held on 
20.03.2010.  
On receipt of complete proposals, full central assistance due has so far been 
released to three States, viz. Rajasthan, Bihar and Assam. Besides, partial 
assistance of Rs. 1.3 crore has been released to Tamil Nadu and its complete 
proposal is likely to b e received soon. The Scheme was formally launched in the 
State of Rajasthan by the Union Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment, in 
the presence of the State Chief Minister and the Union Minister for Rural 
Development, on 23.07.2010 at village 18BB, B lock Padampur, Sri Ganganagar 
district, which is one of the 225 SC majority villages selected under PMAGY from 
two districts of Rajasthan viz. Sri Ganganagar (160 villages) and Hanumangarh (65 
villages).  
Government of Uttar Pradesh has raised certain issues about the scheme 
and has not agreed to implement it so far.   
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad, has been 
assigned the role of providing technical resource support to the scheme at the 
national level. It held an orientation programme for Secretaries, SC Welfare, of 
concerned States and Collectors/CEO, Zila Parishad of concerned districts on 15 -
17, July, 2010. Guidelines for baseline survey of PMAGY villages have also been 
finalized and sent to State Governments in August, 2010. for implementation after 
suitable adaptation.  Action has been initiated for expansion of the Scheme to cover 
a total of 2000 villages during 2010 -11, and another 2000 villages in 2011 -12 (i.e. a 
total of 4000 villages in the XI Plan) 
(ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age Homes for 
Indigent Senior Citizens :   Prior to Eleventh Five Year Plan, this Ministry was 
implementing a Non Plan Scheme, “Assistance to Panchayati Raj Instit utions/ 
Voluntary Organizations/ Self Help Groups for Construction of Old Age Homes/ 
Multi Service Centers for Older Persons”.  The Working Group for the 11 th Five 
Year Plan on Reforming the Social Deviants and Caring for Other Disadvantaged 
recommended for transfer of the Non-Plan Scheme to  Plan to facilitate construction 
of old age homes on a large scale to meet the demand gap.  The Parliamentary 
Standing Co mmittee on Social Justice & Empowerment had also urged the 
Government to formulate a long term plan to establish an adequate number of old 
age homes throughout the country for destitute senior citizens. Further, sub section 
(i) of  Section 19 (“Establishme nt of old age Home”) of the Welfare and 
Maintenance of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 reads as follows: -“(i) The 
State Government may establish and maintain such number of old age homes at 
accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased man ner, beginning with 
at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum of one 
hundred fifty senior citizens who are indigent” 

14 
 
 Keeping the above in view, the Ministry had initially formulated a Centrally -
sponsored Scheme of Assistance for  Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent 
Senior Citizens. Initially, the scheme was formulated for construction of 300 old age 
homes for indigent senior citizens at a cost of Rs 635 crore to cover at least 50% of 
the districts in the country.  The Plan ning Commission , however, provided a 
budgetary provision of only Rs. 60 crore for the proposed new Scheme in the 
Ministry‟s XI Plan. Subsequently, on the advice of the Planning Commission and 
the Department of Expenditure, the scheme was recast to fit with in the allocation of 
Rs. 60 crore with a physical target of only 100 old age homes in the 11th Plan, and a 
reduced pattern of funding. Although the Ministry did so as per the advice given by 
the Planning Commission, when the revised scheme was sent for the Commission‟s 
approval, it conveyed vide its letter dated 30 th July, 2009, that the scheme has not 
been approved on the ground that a token approach for setting up old age homes 
would not serve any purpose and the position would be reviewed during mid -term 
appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. As a result, the plan outlay of Rs 29 crore (Rs.1 
crore as token amount in 2007 -08 and Rs. 13 crore and Rs. 15 respectively in 
2008-09 and 2009 -10) allocated under the scheme during the first three years of 
the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) could not be utilized. With the increased plan 
outlay of the Ministry in 2010-11, an outlay of Rs. 100 crore has been earmarked for 
the proposed Scheme, in 2010 -11, a fresh proposal for introducing the new 
Centrally-sponsored Scheme in 2010 -11 has been sent for the approval of Full 
Planning Commission on 9.8.2010 and the matter is being pursued with it.   
(iii)  Scheme of Financial Assistance to Women with Disabilities to look after their 
Children after Birth: The Scheme could not be launched during  2009-10 in view of a 
ban by the Ministry of Finance on introduction of new schemes unless it follows from 
a budget announcement. However, we have requested Ministry of WCD to 
incorporate a  component in their proposed scheme, “Indira Gandhi Matatrva 
Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY) – Conditional Maternity Benefit Scheme” for pregnant and 
lactating women of 19 years of age and above for providing financial assistance to  
eligible mothers  with disabilities on the lines we had envisaged in our proposed  
scheme.  
(iv) Scheme for Educational and Economic Development of De -notified and Nomadic 
Tribes: The Scheme could not be launched during 2009 -10 as the Report of the 
National Commission set up to study the developmental aspects of de-notified tribes, 
nomadic and semi-nomadic tribes is still under consideration of the Government.  
(v) Research & Training Scheme:  Efforts are made to obtain proposals from reputed 
research and evaluation agencies and universities under the scheme each year. 
Meeting of the Research Advisory Committee w ill be held as necessary to consider 
and approve proposals received. 
 
1.11 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry are making efforts for 
effective utilization of funds under the Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana.  
However, they are not happy with the reply furnished by the Ministry with regard to 
utilization of funds in other  schemes.  I n regard to the scheme  of Assistance for 
Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent Senior Citizens , the Committee 
observe that though the  scheme had been conceived  and formulated as early as 

15 
 
2008-09, it  has not been able to kick of f due to lack of its proper conception and 
planning with the desired level of thrust it needed.  The Ministry have failed in 
convincing the Planning Commi ssion of the urgent need for sanction of adequate 
funds under the scheme for it s successful launching.  The scheme is the only 
flagship scheme of the Ministry to take care of the  emotional/psychological needs 
as well as security concerns of the destitute older persons and hence  it is very 
much important that the scheme is  not allowed to derail further .  Therefore, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to take up the matter with the Planning Commission 
for an early approval of the scheme with adequate funding so that  the scheme is 
able to take off soon.   
The Committee also view seriously the Ministry’s reply on the scheme of 
Financial Assistance to Women with Disabilities to look after their Children after 
Birth which could not be launched in 2009 -10 in view of the b an by the Ministry of 
Finance on introduction of new schemes unless it follow s from a Budget 
Announcement.  The Committee feel that either the scheme should not have been 
conceived in view of the above ban or in case it was conceived , earnest efforts 
should have been made  at the Ministerial level  to ensure that the scheme followed  
from the Budget Speech of the Prime Minister.  Now that the Ministry have 
maintained that they have requested the Ministry of Women and Child Development 
for incorporating Conditional Maternity Benefit Scheme in their Indira Gandhi 
Matatrva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY) so as to benefit the women with disability, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to constantly follow up with the Ministry of 
Women and Child Deve lopment and ensure that the above component  is definitely 
incorporated in their scheme.   
The Committee observe that a National Commission has been set up to study 
the developmental aspects of de -notified tribes, nomadic and semi -nomadic tribes.  

16 
 
While welcoming the setting up of the above Commission which would greatly help 
in identifying and addressing the issues concerning them, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to take up the matter of early completion of the study  with the  above 
Commission so that there is a considered view on launching of Scheme for 
Educational and Economic Development of De -notified and Nomadic Tribes.  The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to take all necessary  steps to utilize the 
entire amount of funds earmarked for the scheme of Research and Training.  
Recommendation (S. No. 15, Para No. 5.11) 
1.12 The Committee had found  that the assistive devices are provided free of cost to 
persons having income up to Rs. 6,500/ - per month and at 50 percent concession to 
persons with income between Rs. 6,500/ - and Rs. 10,000/ -.  The maximum admissible 
amount for purchase of a device was Rs. 6,500/ -.  On the one hand while the use of 
advanced assistive devices has brought a qualitative change in the lives of the persons 
with disability, on the other hand the cost of the devices have gone up due to 
advancement in technology making these be yond the reach of the persons with disability.  
There was an urgent need for early revision in the guidelines of the scheme to upgrade the 
ceiling limits and make these devices within the reach of the persons with disability. 
Therefore, the Committee recom mended the Ministry to urgently bring changes in the 
existing ceiling limits by revising the guidelines of the above scheme.  
Recommendation  (S. No. 16, Para  No. 5.12) 
1.13 The Committee had further noted that even though the appliances provided are of 
good quality and ISI marked even then the issue of breakage, wear and tear in the 
appliances do come and at the moment the ADIP scheme does not have any provision to 
address the issue of regular wear and tear in the costly devices distributed. In this regar d 
the Ministry ha d maintained that follow up camps are held to look into any defects. 
However, in the absence of such a provision in -built in the ADIP scheme for repair and 

17 
 
maintenance of these devices at regular intervals, the beneficiaries are often put into 
difficulty and inconvenience when these devices don‟t work properly.  The warranties 
coming with the devices as provided by the companies are not enough for this. As such, 
there is a need for inclusion of such a provision with financial assurance in t he scheme 
itself for repair and maintenance.  Therefore, the Committee had recommended the 
Ministry to take necessary steps in this direction and revise the guidelines of ADIP scheme 
if need arises to addres s the above issues and   action taken by the Minis try in this regard 
furnished to the Committee within three months of presentation of this report.  
1.14 The Ministry in their Action Taken Repl ies to both the recommendation s have 
informed that a  Committee has been formed in June, 2009 to consider revision of the 
ADIP Scheme. The Committee is examining inter alia the aspect of revision of income limit 
of the beneficiaries as well as cost norms of assistive aids and appliances.  
1.15 Having observe d the present income ceiling under the ADIP scheme for 
distribution of assistive devices to be very low and the admissible amount for 
purchase of the devices to be mere Rs. 6500/ -, the Committee had recommended 
that the Ministry should make an early revisi on in the guidelines of the scheme to 
upgrade the ceiling limits.  The Committee had also recommended that since 
regular wear and tear are very common in the assistive devices due to which the 
beneficiaries are often put into lot of inconvenience, the Mini stry should take steps 
and include a provision in the ADIP guidelines for addressing the above issue.  The 
Committee are distressed to note from the reply of the Ministry that apart from 
setting up of a Committee to look into the above issues no other concrete action 
has been taken in this direction.  It is also observed that though the above 
Committee had been set up in June, 2009 and more than  a year ha d since elapsed, 
the Committee has not given their report thereby  leading to substantial delay in the 

18 
 
revision in the ADIP scheme.  Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
expedite the furnishing of report by the Committee so that the guidelines of the 
ADIP scheme are revised early, preferably within a defined time frame. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard within three months of 
presentation of the Report.  

19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.1, Para No. 2.22) 
 2.1 The Committee observe that the budgetary allocation of the Ministry has been 
increased substantially from Rs. 2500 crore last year (2009 -10) to Rs. 4500 crore during 
the current financial year i.e. 2010 -11. Looking at the figures and comparing it with past  
allocations it indicates a marked increase of 80% over the budgetary allocation of the 
previous year.  This increase would definitely help the Ministry to focus more resourcefully 
on the needs of the social sector.  It would allow the Ministry to expand t he scope of the 
various schemes it is running at present.  The Committee have been given to understand 
that the Ministry would utilize the enhanced amount on long pending projects such as 
revision of the scholarship schemes, expanding the scope of disabili ty related schemes, 
Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana, establishment of the Indian Sign Language, 
Research & Training etc.  While appreciating the Ministry‟s endeavors in getting the 
planned budget enhanced and congratulating the Ministry for its success i n convincing the 
Planning Commission of the urgent need for augmenting the budget of this Ministry, the 
Committee hope that this enhanced allocation would be fully utilized.  Problems, if any in 
the way of its utilization should be identified, looked into and resolved in time.  The 
Committee further recommends that the Ministry should do an assessment of utilization of 
allocated funds at suitable intervals so as to avoid under -utilization and surrender of funds 
at the close of the financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Following steps have been taken by the Ministry so that funds allocated under 
various schemes are fully utilized:   

20 
 
(a) Scheme wise, quarterly plan expenditure targets have been fixed for the year 
2010-11. Progress of expenditure  under each  scheme is being reviewed on 
regular basis to ensure that funds are utilized on time 
  
(b) In order to ensure timely receipt of proposals from the State Governments, 
this Ministry vide   its letter no. 1 -31/2006-Cdn dated 21.3.2007, addressed 
to Secretaries in-charge of welfare of Scheduled Castes in States/UTs, has 
inter-alia, mentioned that in the beginning of the financial year, the Ministry 
would indicate the notional allocation  of funds to the States/UTs, which in  
turn would submit their consolidated r ecommendations within  those 
allocations and within a stipulated time frame every year. States are 
requested separately each year, under each scheme to send the proposals 
from NGOs duly recommended and verified by a specified date so that funds 
are released quickly and timely. Under other Schemes also, where financial 
assistance is given to States and not NGOs, State are being regularly 
pursued to send complete proposals on time. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated  
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.24) 
2.3      The Committee find that funds to the tune of Rs. 361.69 crore could not be utilized 
and were surrendered by the Ministry during the last six years.  Surrender and under -
utilization for the yea r 2009 -10 alone stood at Rs. 50.89 crore. On the issue of 
underutilization and surrender of funds in 2009 -10, the Ministry have stated that the 
amount allocated could not be utilized due to the fact that budget was passed in the month 
of July during 2009 -10.  In their written submission on percentage utilization and shortfall, 
the Ministry has claimed that they are happy with the 83% spent on various schemes from 
the overall allocation. Yet in another instance, the Ministry has stated that out of the total 
budgetary allocation they have utilized 67% up to the end of third quarter which is treated 
to be satisfactory in the budget parlance.  The Ministry‟s reasoning that surrender and 
savings occurred in various schemes due to non -receipt of adequate number of  proposals 
from the States/implementing agencies is also not acceptable to the Committee because 
the schemes are Central sector schemes, funds are released by the Central Government 
and hence ultimately it is the responsibility of the Ministry to ensure th at proposals 
complete in all respects are received and processed and money released and spent on 

21 
 
time.  The Committee are pained to note that while on the one hand the Ministry went on 
saying that any kind of revision in the scholarship schemes could not be undertaken due to 
want of funds, on the other hand huge amount of funds could not be utilized and ultimately 
surrendered.   When the Ministry is running important schemes with meag re allocations 
with a crore  or two because of acute shortage of funds, it is very much important that 
money allocated under each head should be utilized fully and saving/surrender of funds 
avoided. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The expenditure level of 83% mentioned in the above parag raph was as on 28.2. 
2010. By the end of the financial year i.e. 31.3. 2010, Ministry‟s expenditure level had risen 
to 98%. 
At the RE Stage, re -appropriation of funds within the schemes of the Ministry is 
exercised, as per the guidelines of the Ministry of  Finance, keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure  and potential savings likely to arise under various schemes/programmes of 
the Ministry to avoid the surrender of funds at the close of the financial year. However, 
trends indicate that 10% of the plan outl ay earmarked (except in case of schemes for SC 
Development where it is only 2%) mandatorily for NER is not fully utilized and therefore 
remains unspent due to lack of proposals from the NER States resulting in surrender of 
funds. For instance, during 2009 -10, out of total surrender of Rs. 50.89 core, Rs. 24.91 
crore (48.95%) were surrendered out of total funds (Rs. 96.24 crore) earmarked under 
various schemes for the States of the  North Eastern Region. Similarly, during 2008 -09, 
total surrender of Rs. 39.4 5 crore was solely on account of surrender out of funds 
earmarked for the NER.  
 The following steps are being taken to improve utilization of funds in the NE region: 
(a) To boost the expenditure in the region and to identify the problems being 
faced by the State Governments in utilizing the funds, the Ministry has been 

22 
 
organizing meetings with Social Welfare Secretaries of NER States, as well 
as representatives of non -Government organizations in the region for the 
last two years. During the year 2009 -10, such a meeting was held on 
12.11.2009 at Guwahati to discuss the overall low utilization of funds 
allocated to NE states under various schemes of the Ministry including the  
issues relating to implementation of various schemes of the Ministry of 
SJ&E. The thrust of the meeting was to ensure optimum utilization of funds 
made available to NER states through schemes/programmes of the Ministry 
so that the most   disadvantaged sec tions of society are not deprived of the 
benefits of these schemes. The State Governments were impressed upon to 
furnish an adequate number of proposals to the Ministry.  As a result of 
these efforts, a substantial number of proposals were received from th e 
North Eastern Region.  Consequently the overall utilization of funds by North 
Eastern States rose to 74% in 2009 -10 as compared to 58% in 2008 -09. 
Efforts to ensure even better utilization in future will continue. 
 
(b)  Additional Secretary (SJ&E), had reque sted the Chief Secretaries of all the 
States in NER in February, 2009 to advise the Welfare Secretaries of the 
States to examine the requirement of funds under various schemes of the 
Ministry of SJ&E for the following financial year 2009 -10 and send the 
proposals under various schemes for the next year urgently so that the funds 
earmarked for the North Eastern Region are fully utilized.  
 
(c)  The Secretary (SJ&E) also requested the Secretary, Ministry of DONER and 
Secretary North Eastern Council, in April, 200 9, to help and guide in 
improving utilization of Plan funds earmarked for the NER 
.  
(d) The Ministry will continue to seek help of the Ministry of Development of 
North Eastern Region (DONER) and the North Eastern Council, as in the  
past, to impress upon the NE States to send  complete proposals on an 
adequate scale under the various schemes implemented in the region by 
this Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.28) 
2.5 Effective monitoring is an important aspect of any scheme as the efficiency and 
outcome of the schemes are ensured with this vital tool.  On this important aspect the 
Committee observe that nodal officers appointed for the S tates/UTs to undertake field 
visits for on-the-spot study of implementing of the schemes by implementing agencies and 
NGOs could not undertake the number of prescribed visits to States due to their pre -
occupation with winter and Budget Sessions of Parliame nt. The Ministry have also 
furnished a very casual reason that due to their engagement in processing of the 

23 
 
proposals received from States/UTs, the nodal officers have not been able to have field 
visits on a significant scale.  Keeping in view that monitor ing is a vital mechanism for 
ensuring effective implementation of a scheme and that it acts as a vigil on the 
States/implementing agencies for any misutilization and diversion of funds, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should take all necessary st eps to ensure that the schemes 
implemented by them are closely and tightly monitored so as to avoid any laxity and 
complacency by the States/implementing agencies in implementing the schemes and 
utilization of funds.  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Steps taken by the Ministry for monitoring progress of implementation of schemes 
include the following: -   
(i) Review meetings are held with States from time to time.  Ministry also organizes 
an Annual Conference of State Welfare Secretaries wherein, inter alia, all schemes 
of the Ministry are reviewed.  
(ii) National Institutes and Composite Regional Centers under this Ministry have been 
assigned specific territorial responsibilities for monitoring implementation of the 
disability related schemes, including distribution of aids and appliances. 
(iii) Progress of schemes is monitored through periodic progress reports, and progress 
reports sent by States. 
As regards the schemes being implemented through NGOs , each NGO is required 
to be inspected by State Government officers every year, and release of grant is 
considered only after recommendation of the State level Grant -in-aid Committee, sent 
along with the inspection report and other relevant documents.   
The Mini stry also regularly monitors receipt of Utilization Certificates from the 
Grantee State and NGOs. No further grants are released by the Ministry to Voluntary 
Organizations/Implementing Agencies without obtaining valid UCs of the grants released 
in the previous years.   

24 
 
To ensure regular monitoring of its developmental schemes, at State and District 
levels, the Ministry is also examining the possibility of getting them monitored through 
State and district level Vigilance and Monitoring Committees on the line s of those set up 
by the Ministry of Rural Development.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para  No. 3.33) 
2.7 The Committee finds that at the moment the Ministry does not have any grievance 
redressal cell as far as its schemes on educational development in general and 
scholarship schemes in particular are concerned. On this, the Ministry have informed that 
they take up the matter as and when it is received and simply pass it on to the concerned 
state for rectification. There is no record as to how many of these were actually looked into 
and what follow up action was taken thereon. No wonder that the Committee, duri ng the 
course of their examination of the subject “Scholarship Schemes for SCs and OBCs” have 
received end number of grievances when views/suggestions/comments of people on the 
scholarship schemes were invited by the Committee. In the absence of such a cel l, large 
numbers of students/parents who have any complaint/issue/grievance are often left in 
lurch as their concern is not addressed to.  The students are also not aware that complaint 
if any about the disbursement or other aspect of the scheme should be brought to the 
notice of the Ministry, which in turn takes up the issue with the concerned State.  
Therefore, the Committee advise the Ministry to create a standing grievance redressal cell 
so that the students/parents get a platform for hearing of their c omplaints relating to the 
schemes on educational development of SCs and OBCs including the scholarship 
schemes. 
 

25 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Scholarship Schemes for SC and OBC students are Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes and therefore prime responsibility for implementing these schemes effectively as 
well as redressing the grievances of students lies with the State Governments/UTs. 
Whenever individual complaint regarding delay etc. is received by the Ministry, the matter 
is taken up with the concerned State Government/UT.  
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (S. No. 13, Para No. 3.42) 
 2.9     The Committee note with concern that the performance of the Ministry under the 
Coaching and Allied scheme for SCs and OBCs has not been up to the mark as out of Rs. 
8 crore allocated, the Ministry have spent only Rs. 2.79 crore and the number of 
beneficiaries has also come down during 2009-10.  If the proposals received for grants are 
incomplete or ille gible as per the Ministry‟s submission, they should co -ordinate with the 
institutes and rectify and ease the requirements under the scheme so that more number of  
coaching institutes come forward to impart training to SC/OBC beneficiaries.  Considering 
the fact that IT/BPO sector is booming in upcoming cities such as Pune, Ahmadabad, 
Bhubaneswar etc, the Ministry should try to tap admissible proposals for training in these 
cities also. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 A committee has been set up in July, 2010, to recommend and revision of the 
scheme. The Committee will go into all aspects of the matter including those mentioned 
above. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 

26 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para  No. 5.25) 
2.11 The Committee note that on the issue of evaluation of NHFDC, though steps have 
been initiated and the Ministry has got many evaluation studies conducted, the positive 
outcome of these studies have not been put to use.  The Committee also observe that 
some of the recommendations of the Agricultural Finance Corporation‟s study on the micro 
credit scheme of NHFDC such as supporting marketing activities of beneficiaries, 
strengthening of SCAs, adequate training for beneficiaries and reduced rate of interest for 
woman beneficiaries, etc. are timely and worth implementation.  The Committee therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to expedite seeking explanation from NHFDC regarding non -
implementation of the recommendations in the Evaluation and implement these 
recommendations in letter and spirit.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12    The action taken on recommendations in regard to supporting marketing activities 
of beneficiaries, strengthening of SCAs, adequate training for beneficiaries and reduced 
rate of interest for women beneficiaries are given below:- 
(i) Supporting marketing activities of beneficiaries:- 
a. NHFDC regularly provides marketing support to its beneficiaries by 
way of sponsoring them in various national and international 
exhibitions/trades fairs like Shilpotsav at Dilli Hat, IITF in Pragati 
Maidan, Delhi, Surajkund Mela, Faridabad etc; 
b. NHFDC has taken steps to provide training and orientation to its 
beneficiaries during the exhibitions held last year (2009 -10) i.e. 
Shilpotsav at Dilli Haat, IITF in Pragati Maidan, Delhi. 
c. NHFDC is in the process of acquiring two stalls on  lease in Dilli Haat, 
Pitampura for providing long term marketing support to its 
beneficiaries. 
(ii) Strengthening of SCAs:- 
          NHFDC has following capacity building measures for the SCAs to 
enhance their capacity to implement NHFDC Schemes:- 

27 
 
(a) Training of SCA officials   
(b) Workshop/Awareness Camps 
(c) Regional Level Conferences, and 
(d) Incentive to SCAs 
 
(iii) Reduced rate of Interest for women beneficiaries:- 
 NHFDC is already providing a special rebate of 1% on interest to 
women with disabilities in all the schemes of NHFDC under Mahila Samridhi 
Yojana. 
(iv) Adequate training for beneficiaries:- 
         NHFDC provides 100% grants for skill development training  to the 
persons with disabilities (PWDs) including existing beneficiaries. NHFDC 
also provides a stipend of Rs.1000/-per month to trainees. 
        During the last two financial years (2008 -09 & 2009 -10) NHFDC 
provided skill development training to 768 persons with disabilities  in various 
trades like mobile repairing, DTP operator, Tally, Basic of Computer, 
Carpentry, Bamboo Article making etc. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para  No. 3.34) 
3.1 The Committee are happy to note that many States have initiated action with regard 
to paying the scholarships through Post -offices/banks/smart cards by opening accounts in 
the name of individual students.  The Committee recommend that the States which are not 
implementing the above mentioned system should be asked to do so urgently.  The States 
which are implementing the system partially should also be advised to implement the 
system in full so that the students get their due scholarship hassle free and on time. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The Ministry will continue to pursue the matter with defaulting States/UTs on a 
regular basis to ensure that all students get their scholarship through Banks and Post 
Offices. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN COMMENTED UPON 
BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER - I 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.23) 
4.1 The Committee have noted that while separate provisions have been made by the 
Ministry for educational development of SCs with Rs. 2115 crore and OBCs with Rs. 455 
crore  such a provision has not been made under the head of educational development of 
the persons with disability.  The Committee have also been informed that earlier too there 
was a Centrally sponsored scheme of providing scholarship to students with disability 
which has since been transferred to States in the 90‟s.  What is more disheartening to note 
is that it was a conscious decision of the Government of India taken up by Planning 
Commission and the Ministry was also a party to this decision.  The Ministry‟s argument 
that the educational development needs of the persons with disability  are t aken care of by 
other schemes such as Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA) does not hold water as  SSA being a 
big umbrella programme with provisions for all sections of society cannot give focused 
attention to the holistic educational requirements of the persons wi th disability. As far as 
States are concerned they have their own resource constraints.  Educational development 
is the key for overall development and security of this section and keeping in view the 
priority given to education by the Government, the righ t to education made a fundamental 
right under Part III of the Constitution, it is imperative that the educational needs of the 
persons with disability  are taken care of.  For this, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
not to deviate from this priority and  urgently make some provision under the head 
educational development of the persons with disability.  The Ministry should revive the 
earlier provision/scheme in this direction and act to provide some kind of scholarship to the 

30 
 
students with disability.   T he Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard as early as possible. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The Ministry is presently implementing a Scholarship Scheme for Students with 
Disabilities from a fund of the Ministry called the „National Fund for People with 
Disabilities‟. The salient features of the scheme are:- 
(i) Under the Scholarship Scheme, financial assistance is given to students with 
at least 40% disabilities certified as per the under Persons with Disabilities 
Act 1995 for pursuing post-Matric/Post-Secondary technical and professional 
courses including Ph. D & M. Phil from recognized institutions. However, to 
students with Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, Multiple Disabilities, and 
Profound or Severe Hearing Impairment, scholar ships are awarded for 
pursuing secondary level courses also.  
(ii) Monthly family income (including income of the parent/guardian) of the 
beneficiary should not be more than Rs. 15,000/-.  
(iii)   Scholarship of (a) Rs.1000/ -p.m. for hostellers and Rs.700/ - p.m. for day 
scholars studying in professional courses at graduation and above level, and 
(b) Rs.700/- p.m. for hostellers and Rs.400/ - p.m. for day scholars pursuing 
Diploma/certificate level professional courses and in respect of students with 
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation, Multiple Disabilities and Profound or 
Severe Hearing Impairment, for pursuing general/technical/vocational 
courses after Class -VIII. Course fee is reimbursed up  to a ceiling of 
Rs.10,000/- per year.  
(iv)      Up to five hundred Scholarships are given annually to different categories of 
disabled students as under:  
 
S. 
No. 
Disability Male 
Students 
Female 
Students 
1 Students with orthopedic disability 58 Awards 58 
Awards 
2 Students with blindness or low vision 58 Awards 58 
Awards 
3 Students with hearing disability 58 Awards 58 
Awards 
4 Students with Cerebral palsy, Mental 
Retardation,  Multiple Disabilities, 
Profound or  Severe Hearing 
76 Awards 76 
Awards 

31 
 
Impairment  
 Total 250 250 
 
“Disability” is in the State list. As per available information the following State 
Governments are implementing their own scholarship Schemes for students with 
disability:- Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland 
and Goa. 
Special provision for students with disabilities under SSA has been enhanced from 
Rs.1200/- per child to Rs.3000/- per child w.e.f. 2010-11.  
A proposal to introduce Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship (RGNF) scheme for 
students with disabilities, to pursue M Phil & PhD programmes on the line of the existing 
RGNF for SC & ST statement is under examination.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM  dated 
20.9.2010). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para  No. 2.27)     
4.3 The Committee note that funds to the tune of Rs. 100 crore  could not be utilized in 
full and got blocked under the Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana because of non 
approval of the scheme by the Planning Commission.  The Committee also observes that 
the Planning Commission has now approved the scheme on 11.3.2010 and an allocation 
of Rs. 400 crore has been made for the scheme during 2010 -11.  The scheme being a 
flagship programme of the Ministry aims at the integrated development of villages having 
more than 50%  Scheduled Caste population through convergent implem entation of 
existing Central and State schemes.  Since a huge amount of Rs. 400 crore has been 
earmarked for the scheme, efforts should be made for successful implementation of the 
said programme during 2010 -11 by utilizing the entire amount allocated for the purpose.   

32 
 
The Committee also recommend the Ministry to look into the reasons for under –
utilization/non-utilization of funds under the schemes of Construction of Old Age Homes 
for Indigent Senior Citizens, Financial Assistance to Women with Disability  to look after 
their children after birth and Educational and Economical Development of De -notified and 
Nomadic Tribes, B. R. Ambedkar Foundation, Spinal Injury Centre, Research and Training 
and take suitable remedial measures to avoid the repeated under -utilization/non-utilization 
of funds in these schemes.  
Recommendation (Sl. No.19, Para  No. 6.10) 
4.4    The Committee are unhappy to observe the „nil‟ expenditure under the Scheme of 
Assistance for Construction of Old Age Homes for the Indigent Senior Cit izens during the 
years 2007 -08, 2008 -09 & 2010 -11.  The reason cited by the Ministry for incurring „nil‟ 
expenditure is that the scheme is still awaiting approval of the Planning Commission 
despite regular follow up.  The Committee have been given to under stand that the scheme 
had been initiated in the year 2007 -08 in pursuance of the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 with the noble intention of constructing old age 
homes for senior citizens. However, even after three years si nce the above Act has come 
into force, concrete steps have not been taken to implement the above scheme.  In view of 
the fact that substantial allocation of Rs. 100 crore has been made under the scheme for 
the year 2010-11, the Committee recommend that the  scheme should be formulated early 
and the details of the scheme worked out expeditiously within the first trimester of the 
financial year so that the entire amount allocated for the purpose could be utilized.   The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps t aken by the Ministry and Planning Commission 
within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 4.5     Full budgeted amount was released to  B. R. Ambedkar Foundation and the Spinal 
Injury Centre during 2009 -10. The position in regard to other schemes is briefly given as 
below:  
(i) Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY):  After approval of competent 
authority for launch of  this  scheme  on pilot basis in 1000 SC majority 
villages of five states, viz. U.P, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Bihar (225 villages 
each) and Assam (100 villages), which was reviewed in March, 2010, 
guidelines of the Scheme were circulated to concerned States on 16. .3.2010 
inviting proposals for central assistance. A Meeting of these States an d 
concerned Ministries was also held on 20.03.2010. 
  
On receipt of complete proposals, full central assistance due has so far been 
released to three States, viz. Rajasthan, Bih ar and Assam. Besides, partial 
assistance of Rs. 1.3 crore has been released to Tamil Nadu and its complete 
proposal is likely to be received soon. The Scheme was formally launched in the 
State of Rajasthan by the Union Minister for Social Justice and Empo werment, in 
the presence of the State Chief Minister and the Union Minister for Rural 
Development, on 23.07.2010 at village 18BB, Block Padampur, Sri Ganganagar 
district, which is one of the 225 SC majority villages selected under PMAGY from 
two districts of Rajasthan viz. Sri Ganganagar (160 villages) and Hanumangarh (65 
villages).  
Government of Uttar Pradesh has raised certain issues about the scheme 
and has not agreed to implement it so far.   
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Hyderabad, has been 
assigned the role of providing technical resource support to the scheme at the 
national level. It held an orientation programme for Secretaries, SC Welfare, of 
concerned States and Collect ors/CEO, Zila Parishad of concerned districts on 15 -
17, July, 2010. Guidelines for baseline survey of PMAGY villages have also been 

34 
 
finalized and sent to State Governments in August, 2010. for implementation after 
suitable adaptation.  Action has been initiated for expansion of the Scheme to cover 
a total of 2000 villages during 2010 -11, and another 2000 villages in 2011 -12 (i.e. a 
total of 4000 villages in the XI Plan) 
(ii) Centrally sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age 
Homes for Indigent  Senior Citizens:   Prior to Eleventh Five Year Plan, this 
Ministry was implementing a Non Plan Scheme, “Assistance to Panchayati 
Raj Institutions/ Voluntary Organizations/ Self Help Groups for Construction 
of Old Age Homes/ Multi Service Centers for Older  Persons”.  The Working 
Group for the 11 th Five Year Plan on Reforming the Social Deviants and 
Caring for Other Disadvantaged recommended for transfer of the Non -Plan 
Scheme to  Plan to facilitate construction of old age homes on a large scale 
to meet the demand gap.  The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Social 
Justice & Empowerment had also urged the Government to formulate a long 
term plan to establish an adequate number of old age homes throughout the 
country for destitute senior citizens. Further, su b section (i) of  Section 19 
(“Establishment of old age Home”) of the Welfare and Maintenance of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 reads as follows: -“(i) The State 
Government may establish and maintain such number of old age homes at 
accessible places,  as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, 
beginning with at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a 
minimum of one hundred fifty senior citizens who are indigent” 
 Keeping the above in view, the Ministry had initially formulated a Ce ntrally-
sponsored Scheme of Assistance for Establishment of Old Age Homes for Indigent 
Senior Citizens. Initially, the scheme was formulated for construction of 300 old age 
homes for indigent senior citizens at a cost of Rs 635 crore to cover at least 50% of 
the districts in the country.  The Planning Commission however provided a 
budgetary provision of only Rs. 60 crore for the proposed new Scheme in the 
Ministry‟s XI Plan. Subsequently, on the advice of the Planning Commission and 
the Department of Expenditure, the scheme was recast to fit within the allocation of 
Rs. 60 crore with a physical target of only 100 old age homes in the 11th Plan, and a 
reduced pattern of funding. Although the Ministry did so as per the advice given by 
the Planning Commission, when the revised scheme was sent for the Commission‟s 
approval, it conveyed vide its letter dated 30 th July, 2009, that the scheme has not 

35 
 
been approved on the ground that a token approach for setting up old age homes 
would not serve any purpose and the po sition would be reviewed during mid -term 
appraisal of the Eleventh Plan. As a result, the plan outlay of Rs 29 crore (Rs.1 
crore as token amount in 2007 -08 and Rs. 13 crore and Rs. 15 respectively in 
2008-09 and 2009 -10) allocated under the scheme during t he first three years of 
the Eleventh Plan (2007-2012) could not be utilized.  
 
 With the increased plan outlay of the Ministry in 2010 -11, an outlay of Rs. 
100 crore has been earmarked for the proposed Scheme, in 2010 -11, a fresh 
proposal for introducing the new Centrally-sponsored Scheme in 2010-11 has been 
sent for the approval of Full Planning Commission on 9.8.2010 and the matter is 
being pursued with it.   
  
(iii)  Scheme of Financial Assistance to Women with Disabilities to look after 
their Children after Birth: The Scheme could not be launched during 2009 -10 
in view of a ban by the Ministry of Finance on introduction of new schemes 
unless it follows from a budget announcement. However, we have requested 
Ministry of WCD to incorporate a  component in their proposed scheme, 
“Indira Gandhi Matatrva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY) – Conditional Maternity 
Benefit Scheme” for pregnant and lactating women of 19 years of age and 
above for providing financial assistance to  eligible mothers  with disabilities 
on the lines we had envisaged in our proposed  scheme. 
  
(iv) Scheme for Educational and Economic Development of De -notified and 
Nomadic Tribes: The Scheme could not be launched durin g 2009-10 as the 
Report of the National Commission set up to study the developmental 
aspects of de -notified tribes, nomadic and semi -nomadic tribes is still under 
consideration of the Government.  
 
(v) Research & Training Scheme:  Efforts are made to obtain proposals from 
reputed research and evaluation agencies and universities under the 
scheme each year. Meeting of the Research Advisory Committee will be held 
as necessary to consider and approve proposals received. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.11 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

36 
 
Recommendation (S. No. 15, Para No. 5.11) 
4.6 The Committee find that the assistive devices are provided free of cost to persons 
having income up to Rs. 6,500/ - per month and at 50 percent concession to persons with 
income between Rs. 6,500/ - and Rs. 10,000/ -.  The maximum admissible amount for 
purchase of a device is Rs. 6,500/ -.  On the one hand while the use of advanced assistive 
devices has brought a qualitative change in the lives of the persons with disability, on the 
other hand the cost of the devices have gone up due to advancement in technolog y 
making these beyond the reach of the persons with disability.  There is an urgent need for 
early revision in the guidelines of the scheme to upgrade the ceiling limits and make these 
devices within the reach of the persons with disability. Therefore, the  Committee 
recommends the Ministry to urgently bring changes in the existing ceiling limits by revising 
the guidelines of the above scheme.  
Recommendation  (S. No. 16, Para  No. 5.12) 
4.7 The Committee further note that even though the appliances provided are of good 
quality and ISI marked even then the issue of breakage, wear and tear in the appliances 
do come and at the moment the ADIP scheme does not have any provision to address the 
issue of regular wear and tear in the costly devices distributed. In this regard the Ministry 
have maintained that follow up camps are held to look into any defects. However, in the 
absence of such a provision in -built in the ADIP scheme for repair and mainte nance of 
these devices at regular intervals, the beneficiaries are often put into difficulty and 
inconvenience when these devices don‟t work properly.  The warranties coming with the 
devices as provided by the companies are not enough for this. As such, there is a need for 
inclusion of such a provision with financial assurance in the scheme itself for repair and 
maintenance.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take necessary steps 
in this direction and revise the guidelines of ADIP scheme if  need arises to address the 

37 
 
above issues.  Action taken by the Ministry in this regard may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of presentation of this report.  
Reply of the Government 
4.8 A Committee has been formed in June, 2009 to consider revision of the ADIP 
Scheme. The Committee is examining inter alia the aspect of revision of income limit of 
the beneficiaries as well as cost norms of assistive aids and appliances.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.15 of Chapter – I  of the Report) 

38 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para  No. 2.25) 
5.1    The Committee observes that for most of the NGO related programmes/schemes 
run by the Ministry, substantial amount of funds were released at the fag end of the 
financial year i.e. January to March. While the Secretary during the evidence has tried to 
justify the above action by saying that the release of funds to NGOs particularly in the case 
of schemes on disability and social defence sector during the last quarter of the financial 
year is O.K. with the Ministry because the NGOs still have sufficient time /full year to utilize 
the amount.  However, in the opinion of the Committee this is clearly against the sound 
budgetary principle, as funds released at the fag end are prone to be diverted and mis -
utilized and most of the time not subject to any kind of audit and monitoring. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should ensure that proposals complete in all 
respects are received well in advance preferably at the commencement of the financial 
year and processed expeditiously in batches.  Due ca re should be taken at this stage only 
so as to avoid the undesirable trend of rushing release of funds at the end of the financial 
year.  
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The Ministry on its part makes all efforts to get complete proposals, with State 
Government‟s recommendations, on time. However, State Governments response to this 
has been uneven. The Ministry will continue to vigorously pursue the matter with them.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
 

39 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para  No. 2.26) 
 5.3   On the launching of the Pre -matric scholarship to cover all SC students, the 
Committee during their examination of the Demands for Grants for 2009 -10 had been 
informed that the concept note for initiation of the scheme has been sent to the Planning 
Commission, which has already approved it  in principle.  However, since the financial 
implications were high, the scheme could not be launched during the last budget and it 
would be mooted only when there is an enhancement of allocation.  Now after having a 
look at the current Budget, the Committ ee fails to understand as to why the scheme of 
Pre-matric scholarship for all SC students does not feature in the current budget though 
there has been considerable enhancement in the budgetary allocation.  The Secretary, 
during the evidence has submitted t hat things have been put off till formulation of the XII 
Five Year Plan in this regard.  The Committee view this serious lapse on the part of the 
Ministry because during the current budget exercise itself some kind of provision of Pre -
matric scholarship co vering all SC students should have been initiated. The Committee 
direct the Ministry to take note of this and take necessary action in this regard so that the 
scheme is able to take off at least during the next financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
5.4  The plan budget of the Ministry has been increased to Rs.4500 crore in 2010-11 as 
against the demand of Rs 7000 crore. Although compared to Rs.2500 crore in 2009 -10, 
the increase is significant, but the enhanced allocation during 2010 -11 is barely enough to 
meet the requirement of revision of ongoing Scholarship Schemes for Scheduled Castes 
and OBCs, and of other Schemes like Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana, Special 
Central Assistance to SCSP, Rajeev Gandhi National Fellowship, and Deen Dayal 
Disabled Rehabilitation Schemes. Annual requirement of Pre -matric Scholarship Scheme 
for all SC Children is over Rs.8,000 crore (as against the  Ministry‟s Plan budget of 

40 
 
Rs.4500 crore in 2009 -10 and is not included in the Ministry‟s approved XI Plan. 
Introducing of the scheme will depend on the Ministry‟s getting massive further increase in 
its Plan outlay, which seems feasible only in the XII Plan.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 3.19) 
5.5 The Committee observe that there are serious discrepancies and mismatch of 
figures on the number of assisted population/beneficiaries who have crossed the below 
poverty line under the SCA to SCSP obtained by the Ministry from the concerne d 8 States 
for which the figures are available.  The Secretary himself was candid enough to accept 
during the evidence the figures to be rather odd and not correct.  The Committee consider 
that the Scheme of SCA to SCSP has tremendous potential for the ove rall development of 
the scheduled caste population and data/feedback on the physical progress, utilization of 
funds and consequent information on the raising standard of living of the SC population is 
an important input as far as the assessment of the sche me is concerned.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommends the Ministry to have a fresh look at the whole state of affairs. 
Instead of being contended with the information sent by States, Officers should be 
deputed to undertake an exercise of verifying and cros schecking the figures obtained from 
the concerned States so as to ascertain the accuracy and authenticity of the information. 
The States, which are not furnishing the requisite information on the number of 
beneficiaries, should be persuaded to send it at t he earliest. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 In addition to the information furnished by 8 States sent to the Committee earlier, 
the Ministry has now received information from Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and Tamil 
Nadu on the number of Scheduled Caste families who have been able to cross the poverty 

41 
 
line after having availed financial assistance under the scheme of SCA to SCSP during 
2005-06 which is summarized below:  
Sl. No State/UT No. of BPL families 
assisted during 2005-06 
No. of assisted families 
who crossed the poverty 
line 
1 2 3 4 
1 Andhra Pradesh 96213 21496(22.34%) 
2 West Bengal 15443 8030(51.99%) 
3 Tamil Nadu 168492 67397(40.0%) 
          Further, partial information has been received from eight States viz. Assam, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Orissa, Sikkim, Rajasthan, Chandigarh and Delhi.  They have been 
requested to expedite complete information.  The defaulting States/UTs viz. Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur, Uttarakhand, Tripura and Puducherr y have been 
reminded again to provide information at the earliest. 
             During the course of  evidence before the Committee, the Secretary had 
mentioned information from only two States, viz. Kerala and Karnataka  being prima facie 
anomalous,  Chief Secretaries of both States have been requested  to get their data 
verified and a report furnished to this Ministry at the earliest.  
Nodal Officers of this Ministry will also conduct sample verification of information 
reported by the concerned States.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para  No. 3.20) 
5.7 The Committee observe that not all the States/Uts  are formulating and 
implementing Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan as part of their annual plans by earmarking 
resources in proportion to their share in total population. The Committee also note with 
serious concern that the percentage of SCSP outlay in respect of  States after having 
reached to a benchmark of 17.16% during the year 2007 -08 has been showing a declining 
trend i.e. 14.22% in 2008 -09 & 13.34% in 2009 -10.  Also, all the Central Ministries are not 
uniformly earmarking their allocation under the scheme.  In this context, the Committee in 
their earlier Report presented to the Parliament on 17.12.2009 had recommended that the 
Ministry should take up the above issue with the Planning Commission in the right earnest.  
The Committee are happy to note that the M inistry have taken up the issue with the 
Planning Commission and the latter have also realized the fundamental lacuna in the 
existing guidelines and informed the Ministry that they are in the process of working out 
fresh guidelines for central Ministries.  The Committee are also in agreement with Planning 
Commission‟s observation that the present provision of uniform earmarking of 16% by 
States and the Central Ministries is not working out well and there is a need to review and 
reformulate the guidelines.  The Committee recommend the Ministry should not leave the 
matter there and take it forward with Planning Commission on the urgent need for an 
exhaustive review of the existing guidelines on SCA to SCSP to make these more rational, 
flexible and acceptable for the Ministries and the States. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8    Guidelines on formulation, implementation and monitoring of SCSP have been 
issued by the Planning Commission from time to time.  Consolidated guidelines in this 
regard for Central Ministries/Departments were issued by the Commission in December, 
2006. The matter regarding implementation of Scheduled Caste Sub -Plan (SCSP) by 

43 
 
Central Ministries/ Departments, including changes necessary in the SCSP guidelines, is 
being pursued by the Ministry with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance.  
As a result of the continuous efforts of the Ministry, t he Planning Commission has 
constituted a Task Force vide their Order dated 4.6.2010, under the Chairmanship of its 
Member, Dr. Narendra Jadhav, with the following terms of reference:  
(i) To re -examine and revise the extant Guidelines issued by the Planning 
Commission for implementation of SCSP and TSP; 
 
 (ii) To understand the operational difficulties in consultation with imple menting 
Ministries and suggest remedial action so that SCSP and TSP can be 
implemented effectively in future. 
The Task Force, is carrying out the above exercise, and will try to complete it as 
soon as possible.  Rationalization of SCSP guidelines pursuant to views of the Task Force 
would result in their better implementation. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 10, Para  No. 3.32) 
5.9       The Committee are  happy to note that the budgetary allocation under the post -
matric scholarship scheme has been increased significantly from Rs.750 crore during the 
year 2009-10 to Rs. 1700 crore during the year 2010 -2011. The Committee are given to 
understand that with th is enhanced allocation, the Ministry will undertake the much -
awaited revision in the scholarship amounts which are at present extremely low. Apart 
from fulfilling the much -felt needs of the students, this will certainly go a long way in the 
educational empowerment of the scheduled caste students. However, since the Ministry 
are yet to work out the details of the revision, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation on early revision of the scholarship and hope that in this exercise every 
aspect of the scholarship will be taken into account and the scheme is dovetailed and 

44 
 
revamped in  total ready to be implemented by the next academic session. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the decision taken in this regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
5.10 With necessary enhancement in the Plan Outlay in 2010 -11, the scheme of Post 
Matric Scholarship for Scheduled Caste students is being revised in 2010 -11 taking all 
relevant aspects into consideration. The revised scheme is expected to be  finalized in the 
next two months, and will be made effective from the academic session, 2010-11.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (S. No. 14,  Para  No. 4.15) 
5.11 The Committee are constrained to note that the progress of construction of hostels 
for OBC boys and girls has not at all been satisfactory, as during the last five years out of 
353 hostels sanctioned, only 140 hostels could be completed.  The reason for shortfall and 
non-materialization of the remaining sanctioned hostels as furnished to the Committee that 
ultimately OBC hostels are sanctioned to State Governments and grants get held up due 
to non -furnishing of Utilization Certificates by the States is not at all acceptable  to the 
Committee.  The Ministry‟s submission that there is a two year time period, tendering 
process and issue of technical sanction involved in construction of hostels is also not 
convincing because the Committee observe that even hostels sanctioned duri ng 2006-07, 
2007-08 and 2008 -09 could not be completed on time for reasons not known to the 
Committee.   The Committee observe that the present construction period of two years for 
hostels is an unusually long period allowing for prolonged delay in constru ction and also 
cost escalation due to increase in prices of cement and steel etc.   Considering the fact 
that huge constructions are completed in no time these days with advanced building 
materials and in comparison, hostels are small buildings with simple  dormitory type halls 

45 
 
accommodating hardly 100 to 200 students per hostel, the construction should not stretch 
beyond a year. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should ask State 
Governments to acquire land before issuing financial sanct ions, stipulate in its sanctions 
that construction be completed within a year and gear up its machinery for strict monitoring 
of the whole process of construction so that these hostels are completed in a time bound 
manner strictly within a year‟s time-frame.   
Reply of the Government 
5.12 After receipt of financial sanction from the Ministry, the State Government has to 
take action on tendering and award of contract, which takes considerable time. In most of 
cases, the States are not able to complete hostels even within the existing time fr ame of 
two years. There is already a provision in the scheme stipulating that availability of land 
should be confirmed by the State Governments/UTs, and sanctions are issued only after 
such confirmation is received from the State Governments.  
The recommendation regarding reduction in the time period for completion from the 
present two years to one year will be discussed in review meeting, with State 
Governments planned to be held in 2010-11 and suitable view will be taken thereafter.  
(Ministry of Social J ustice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 5.24) 
5.13 The Committee observes that the National Handicapped Finance Development 
Corporation (NHFDC) offers financial assistance in the form of con cessional loans to 
persons with disability through the State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs).  However, a look 
at the release of funds to SCAs in the year 2009 -10 shows that many States such as 
Assam, Goa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim and Tripura did not  receive any grant 
and as such there was no beneficiary coverage in these States.  Out of these States, the 

46 
 
States of Goa, Karnataka did not receive any grant even during 2008 -09.  The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to look into the specific problems be ing faced by these States 
and hurdles if any should be cleared so that the people with disability in these States are 
not deprived of the benefits of NHFDC.  
Reply of the Government 
5.14 The main reasons for non -release of funds to States of Assam, Goa,  Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Sikkim and Tripura are:- 
(i) Non-receipt of proposals from State Channelizing Agency (SCA); 
(ii) Non-submission of utilization details,  
(iii) Non-repayment of over dues; and 
(iv) In case of Madhya Pradesh, lack of sufficient Government Guarantee of  the State 
Govt. 
 
These issues have been taken up by the NHFDC with concerned State 
Governments. The bottlenecks in the implementation of NHFDC‟s Schemes were also 
discussed with SCAs during a National Conference of State Channelizing Agencies 
(SCAs) on 4.9.2009 organized by NHFDC. NHFDC had also organized two regional 
conferences at (i) Bhubaneswar, on 6.11.2009 and (ii) Gandhinagar, on 7.12.2009 in this 
regard. Ministry has also taken up the issue with State Governments to ensure improved 
implementation of NHFDC‟s Schemes. 
         The concerned State Governments have already been conveyed the observations 
of the Standing Committee by NHFDC on 15.6.2010 and have been requested to take 
immediate necessary action. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowermen t O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20,  Para  No. 6.25) 
5.15 The Committee note with concern that at present there is no National Policy on 
Drug and Substance Abuse Prevention and Rehabilitation.  About the steps taken in this 

47 
 
direction, the Committee have been informed that a sub -committee of the National 
Consultative Committee on De -addiction and Rehabilitation (NCCDR) has been 
constituted.  The Ministry have informed that there is a large number of people who are 
under the spell of some kind of drugs/alcohols and their de -addiction and rehabilitation is 
an area of national concern calling for collective action.  The Committee also endorse the 
above view/ information shared by the Ministry and consider that a national strategy to 
tackle the issue of drug addiction is a priority area and the constitution of the above  
Committee is definitely a positive development.  A National Policy on  Drug and Substance 
Abuse Prevention and Rehabilitation is absolutely necessary not only for curbing the 
increasing number of drug addicts in the country but also in rehabilitating the addicts and 
giving them a new lease of life. Most nations of the world have already formulated their 
national policy on drug abuse highlighting their strategy to curb the menace and India 
should not be left behind. While recommending the Ministry to exped ite the early 
finalization of the above policy within a stipulated time frame, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to ensure that the National Policy in this regard should be an all comprehensive 
one covering every aspect of the problem.   It should also be in  tune with the UN Charter 
of Drug Abuse.  Smaller issues of having preventive strategy in schools through 
dissemination of information and awareness to larger issue of tackling cross border trade 
of narcotics should also be incorporated in the above policy.  
Reply of the Government 
5.16 National Consultative Committee on De-addiction and Rehabilitation (NCCDR) in its 
meeting held on 10.12.2008, inter alia, decided that a Sub Committee be constituted to 
formulate a draft National Policy on Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drug) Abuse 
and Rehabilitation.  A Sub Committee, which was constituted subsequently, after 
discussions and deliberations, has prepared a draft National Policy on Prevention of 

48 
 
Alcoholism and Substance (Drug) Abuse and Rehabilitation.  The draft National Policy was 
discussed in a meeting of NCCDR held on 9 th September 2010, and further action is being 
taken in the light of suggestions received therein. States and concerned Ministries will also 
be consulted before finalizing the National Policy. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 1 -6/2010/(PS) PREM dated 
20.9.2010). 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21, Para  No. 6.26) 
5.17 The Committee observes that only one state i.e. the State of Rajasthan has availed 
the funds for organizing de -addiction camps for three successive years. In this regard, the 
Committee are not happy with the reason advanced by the Ministry that the scheme being 
demand driven, the fund could be disbursed to only one organization as demand had been 
made only by them. Drug addiction being an all pervasive phenomenon prevalent in the 
country, a sizeable population in States like Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, North Eas t being 
under its influence and more number adding each day, it is very unfortunate that the 
Ministry is not able to bring many States under the fold of the scheme. The Committee 
hopes that the Ministry will keep it in mind and improve the position by tryi ng to motivate, 
guide and appropriately assist the States so that organizations/NGOs from all the States 
throng to avail the grants for organizing de-addiction camps.  
Reply of the Government 
5.18 Notional allocation under the scheme for the year 2010 -11 w as conveyed to the 
States on 28 th June 2010 and they were asked to send their proposal by 30th July, 2010. 
The matter is being perused with defaulting States and will also be discussed in regional 
level review meetings, proposed to be held in October, 2010.  
NEW DELHI        DARA SINGH CHAUHAN 
5 January, 2011       Chairman 
15 Pausha 1932 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
         Social Justice and Empowerment. 

49 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5TH JANUARY, 2011. 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1550 hrs. in Committee Room No. „G-074‟, 
PLB, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI DARA SINGH CHAUHAN -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri T.R. Baalu 
3. Shri E.T. Mohamed Basheer 
4. Shri Bhudeo Choudhary 
5. Smt. Rama Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Premchand Guddu 
8. Shri Baliram Jadhav 
9. Dr. Manda Jagannath 
10. Shri Mohan Jena 
11. Shri G.V. Harsha Kumar 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
14. Shri Manohar Tirkey 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
15. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
16. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
17. Shri Narayan Singh Kesari 
18. Shri Baishnab Parida 
19. Shri Nandi Yelliah 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita Jain   - Director 
2. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Mishra - Deputy Secretary 
3. Dr. (Smt.) Sagarika Dash  - Under Secretary 
  

50 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports of the Committee :- 
 
(i)     Draft Twelfth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
(ii)  Draft Thirteenth on Action taken by the Government on the   
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.  
 
(iii)   Draft Fourteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Repor t on Demands 
for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirteenth Report without 
any amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Report and present the 
same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  

51 
 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   FOURTH  REPORT OF THE  STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
   
  Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 21  
II. Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.22, 2.24, 2.28, 3.3 3, 
3.42 and 5.25). 
 
6 28.57 
III. Observations/Recommendations which 
the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies (Paragraph No. 3.34). 
1 4.76 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and 
have been commented upon by the 
Committee in Chapter –I (Paragraph No. 
2.23, 2.27, 5.11, 5.12 and 6.10) 
5 23.81 
V. Observations/Recommendations in 
respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.25, 2.26, 3.19, 3.20, 
3.32, 4.15, 5.24, 6.25 and 6.26). 
9 42.86 
           
 