1 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2013 - 2014) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 (DEPARTMENT OF DISABILITY AFFAIRS)  
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on Demands for  
Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Social Justice  and Empowerment 
(Department of Disability Affairs) 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
  
40 

2 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 (DEPARTMENT OF DISABILITY AFFAIRS)  
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained  in  the  Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth  Lok Sabha) on Demands for  
Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Social Justice  and Empowerment 
(Department of Disability Affairs) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.02.2014 
 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on  07.02.2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February,  2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka) 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
3 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
6 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
7 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
20 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government. 
 
29 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted. 
 
30 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature. 
 
33 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE I Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment held on 17.12.2013.  
35 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment. 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  
37 
                             
                                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2013-2014) 
    
 
SHRI  HEMANAND BISWAL  - CHAIRMAN  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
4. Shri Devidhan Besra 
5. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
6. Smt. Rama Devi 
7. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal  
8. Shri Mohan Jena 
9. Shri Dinesh Kashyap 
                      *10. Shri Madhu Kora  
11. Shri Kirodi Lal Meena 
12. Kumari Meenakshi Natarajan 
              13. Smt. Mausam Noor 
14. Shri Wakchaure Bhausaheb R. 
15. Smt. Sushila Saroj 
16. Shri N. Dharam Singh 
17. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh  
18. Dr. Naramalli Sivaprasad 
19. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya   
20. Shri Kabir Suman 
21. Vacant  
 
 MEMBERS 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
   **22. Shri K.R. Arjunan 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
25 Shri Mangala Kisan 
           #26. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
27.       Shri Ahmad Saeed Malihabadi 
28.        Prof. Mrinal Miri 
29. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
30. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
31. Shri Shivpratap Singh 
32. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*  Shri Madhu Kora nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 18.9.2013. 
**  Shri K.R. Arjunan nominated to the Committee w.e.f.  7.9.2013. 
#   Dr. V. Maitreyan ceased to be a Member of  Committee w.e.f. 7.9.2013. 
 

5 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Neena Juneja  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present 
this Fortieth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Disability Affairs). 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 2 nd 
May, 2013.  The Department of Disability Affairs  furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 16.08.2013.  The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at 
their sitting held on 17.12.2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Thirty -Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        HEMANAND BISWAL 
17 December, 2013      Chairman 
26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Fift eenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands 
for Grants, 2013-14 relating to the Department of Disability Affairs (Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment). 
1.2 The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 2nd May, 2013 .  It contained 17 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
 
Paragraph  Nos.  2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.33, 2.34, 2.42,  2.48, 2.49, 
2.55, 2.60, and 2.61. 
 
 (Total 12  - Chapter II) 
 
          (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:  
 
-Nil- 
 (Chapter III)  
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted:  
 
Paragraph Nos.  2.27, 2.56 and 2.65.  
 
(Total 3 - Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
Paragraph Nos. 2.28 and 2.41.  
 
  (Total 2  - Chapter V)  
 

8 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken replies on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken replies in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
A. Perspective Plans for utilization of amount allocated in 12th Plan 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.20) 
 
1.5 The Committee urged the Department to resolve various other issues with the 
State Government and implementing agencies so that proposals are received well in 
time for according sanction and also take effective steps to ensure that there are no 
pending utilization certificate s. The Committee were apprised that a working group 
has been set up under the chairmanship of Secretary DDA for simplification of 
procedures for release of grant under various schemes of Department. The 
Committee felt  this is an innovative endeavor and wou ld help accelerate the 
responsibilities of the Department. The Committee also desire d that the Department 
work on strategy and make perspective plans to utilize the entire amount allocated in 
the 12th Plan which is Rs. 3284 core and apprise the Committee within  three months 
for further review. 
 
 
 

9 
 
1.6 The Ministry stated in their Action Taken Reply :- 
 
“The Department held regional meetings of State Secretaries of Welfare 
/Social Justice Department On 28 th May, 2013, 30 th May, 2013, 3 rd June, 
2013, 5th June 2013 and 7th June, 2013. A meeting of the State Secretaries of 
all the States was held on 11 th June, 2013 to address state specific issues.  
The State were requested to send the proposals in a time bound manner.  
Further, the Ministry has issued new guidelines for the States simplifying the 
procedure for recommendation of proposals.  A second round of meetings has 
now been proposed to review the proposals of the State scheme-wise”.   
 
  

10 
 
1.7 The Committee take note of the steps taken by Department of Disability 
Affairs for timely receipt of proposals from State s viz. holding of frequent  
regional meetings of State Secretaries of Welfare/Social Justice Department on 
State specific issues and issuance of new guidelines for the States for 
simplification of  procedures for release of grant under various schemes.   
Hopefully, these measures will make a marked improvement in the utilization 
of funds.  However, the Committee ’s recommendation on preparation of a 
perspective plan to fully utilize the 12 th Plan allocation of Rs. 3284 cr. has not 
been replied by the Department.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate  that the 
Ministry should work on such a perspective plan so that no amount remains 
unspent during the plan period. 
 
  

11 
 
B. Non-utilization of funds under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation 
Scheme 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.27) 
 
1.8 The Committee note d that under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation 
scheme, NGOs  are given assistance for providing a wide range of services to 
persons with disability. The Committee we re distressed to note the repeated 
underutilization of Budgetary allocations under the scheme. For the year 2010 -11 & 
2011-12 against BE of Rs. 120.00 crore for each year actual expenditure has been 
only Rs.82.27 & Rs.86.16 crore respectively. The position further deteriorated during 
2012-13, as the expenditure declined to Rs.46.59 crore i.e. only 35% of the 
allocation were spent. The Committee we re unhappy to note the explanation of the 
Department that the proposals are generall y received for release of grant-in-aid from 
State Governments in the third quarter of the financial year leading to consequent 
reduction of the budget at RE Stage. Taking note of the constant recurrence, the 
Committee deplore that no concrete action has be en taken to address the problem. 
While expressing their unhappiness at the sorry state of affairs, the Committee 
desired that the Department impress upon the State Government to send the 
proposals well in time in the first quarter. The Committee would also  like the 
Department to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance to relax the expenditure 
norms in such cases so that crucial funds for welfare of persons with different 
abilities do not lapse 
  
1.9 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
 
 
“The notional allocation under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation scheme 
has been conveyed to the state Govt. on 6 th May, 2013 requesting them to 
send the proposals of the NGOs latest by 31st July, 2013. 

12 
 
The Department Organized regional conferences  of state Secretaries of 
Welfare /Social Justice Department On 28 th May, 2013, 30 th May, 2013, 3 rd 
June, 2013, 5 th June 2013 and 7 th June, 2013. A meeting of the State 
Secretaries of all the States was held on 11 th June, 2013 to address state 
specific issues.  The State was request to send the proposals expeditiously.  
Besides regional workshops are also being held to impress upon the States to 
send the proposals expeditiously”.    

13 
 
1.10 The Committee had expressed their dissatisfaction  at the repeated 
gross under -utilization of funds under Deendyal Disabled Rehabilitation 
Scheme due to late receipt of proposals from  the State Governments .  The 
Committee had urged the Department to impress upon the State Governments 
to send the proposals well in time in the first quarter of the financial year.  The 
Committee had also desired that the Department take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance to relax the expenditure norms in such delayed cases so 
that crucial funds for welfare of persons with different abilities do not lapse.  
The Ministry have not responded to this.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate 
that the issue may be taken up with the Ministry of Finance and the Committee 
be apprised of the outcome thereof at the earliest.   
 
  

14 
 
C. Launching of Educational Schemes for persons with different abilities 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.48) 
 
1.11 The Committee were happy to note that the department of Disability Affairs is 
contemplating the launch of new schemes for educational empowerment of the 
PwDs on the lines of existing schemes for SCs/STs.  The Post -Matric scholarship 
scheme is under consideration of the Pl anning Commission and a budget of Rs.33 
crores has been kept for 2013 -14. The Committee hope d that the scheme will be 
implemented during the current year. The schemes such as the National Overseas 
scheme and Top Class Education Schemes, for which only a to ken amount of Rs.1 
crore has been kept, were still at approval stage. As implementation of the education 
schemes would greatly help in empowering the persons with different abilities, the 
Committee recommended that the Department convey their anxiety and c oncern to 
the Planning Commission and pursue with them for early finalization of these 
schemes so that the schemes could be implemented at the earliest. 
1.12 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
 
“The concept note for the post-matric scholarship scheme has been submitted 
to the Planning Commission for in-principle approval. The EFC note under the 
Top Class Education Scheme is being finalized. On the basis of consultations 
with the Planning Commission the National Overseas Scheme is now  being 
proposed as a Central Sector Scheme. The concept note  is under 
finalization”. 
 
  

15 
 
1.13 The Committee had stressed that implementation of educational 
schemes for the people with different abilities would greatly help in 
empowering the persons with different abilities.  The Committee had, 
therefore, desired that the Department convey their anxiety and concern to the 
Planning Commission for early finalization and launching of the se schemes.  
The Ministry have informed that the concept note for the Pos t-matric 
scholarship scheme has been submitted to the Planning Commission for in -
principle approval.  The EFC note under Top Class Education Scheme is being 
finalized and the National Overseas scheme is being proposed as a Centr al 
scheme.  The Committee re iterate that the approval of educational schemes 
should be pursued on priority basis so that they can be launched in the next 
financial year  so that the people with different abilities get access to higher 
education. 
 
  

16 
 
D. Modernization of National Institutes 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.56) 
 
1.14 The Committee were apprised that in order to modernize the National 
Institutes, a Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri B.S. 
Baswan. The report of the Committee is under examination in the Department. The 
Committee desire s that the Department should give top priority to modernize the 
National Institutes in this 12 th plan period itself. Efforts should be made to convert 
them into model institutes in the South East Asia regi on. The Committee would also 
like to know the detail of the work done by similar institutes the world over in the 
disability sector. The Committee also desired that an institute be set up for the PwDs 
whereby a complete research/academic set up can be esta blished to study various 
worldwide  developments, undertake comparative analysis of the measures being 
taken by various countries in the field of disability management and suggest 
innovative solutions considering the socio-economic milieu of the country. 
 
1.15 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated :- 
 
“Department is making all out efforts to make the National Institutes as 
Centres of Excellence.  NIs have been  asked to constitute advisory council to 
guide and advice them on various activities to identify and focus on the area 
of their core competence like corrective surgery for NIRTAR, Cuttack, 
rehabilitation of spinal injuries for NIOH, Kolkata, hearing handicapped for 
NIHH, Mumbai and Multiple Disabilities for NIEPMD, Chennai”. 
 
  

17 
 
1.16 The Committee were informed that the report of the Committee set up to 
look into the mod ernization of the National Institutes under Shri B.S. Baswan  
is under consideration of Government .  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the status of implem entation of the aforesaid Report .  The 
Committee had also desire d that an institute be set up for the persons with 
different abilities whereby a complete research/academic set up can be 
established to study various world -wide developments in the field of d isability 
and suggest innovative solutions.  The Ministry have not responded to this  
recommendation.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the same and desire that 
the Ministry to set up such a centre to keep abreast with the latest 
developments in the field of disability worldwide and the same can be adapted 
to suit the Indian conditions. 
 
 
  

18 
 
E. Monitoring of the schemes of the Department of Disability Affairs 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.65) 
 
1.17 The Committee noted that many steps have been taken by the Department of 
Disability Affairs to monitor and evaluate the implementation of their programmes 
and schemes and in this connection a Monitoring Committee already exists. Also 
officers of the Department have been appo inted as nodal officer for States/UTs to 
undertake field visits for on the spot study of implementation of schemes by 
implementing agencies including NGOs. However, the Committee express ed their 
displeasure at the low expenditure under all the schemes of t he Department as also 
the implementation aspect of their  performance. The Committee felt  that there is a 
need to set up State and district level Monitoring Committee on the lines of the 
Committees set up by the Ministry of Rural Development with representa tion of MPs, 
local MLAs as also Members of Panchayats for successful implementation of the 
various schemes of the Department of Disability Affairs. 
1.18 The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated : 
 
“The Department has nominated officers of the Department and its National 
Institutes as nodal officers for carrying out inspection and monitoring the 
implementation of the schemes.  Besides, regular State -wise meetings with 
the officers of the State Governments and the representatives of the NGOs 
are being organized to settle the pending issues and to expedite the process 
of receipt of proposals from the States and requisite documents from the 
NGOs”. 
 
  

19 
 
1.19 The Committee although have been informed that the Department has 
nominated officers of the Department and its National Institutes as nodal 
officers for carrying out inspection and monitoring th e implementation of the 
schemes, the Ministry is silent on the constitution of State and District level 
Monitoring Committees on the lines of those set up  by the Ministry of Rural 
Development with representation of MPs, MLAs as also Members of 
Panchayats for successfu l implementation of the schemes.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that for monitoring of the schemes for the differently abled 
persons special monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place similar to  the 
existing one for the schemes of the Ministry of Rural Development. 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 2.18) 
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note the gross underutilization of funds in the 
disability Scheme in the year2012 -13. The Department was given a mere budgetary 
allocation of Rs.548 crore (both plan and non -plan) which was, lamentably, reduced 
at Re s tage to Rs.308 corore and worse, the expenditure was only Rs.267.50 core 
which is less than 50% of the allocated amount. A budgetary allocation of Rs.611 
crore has been kept as BE for 2013 -14. The Department has given a number or 
reasons for underutilizati on which mainly include frequent changes in posting of 
Financial Adviser, change in procedure for requirement of documents, late receipt of 
proposals from the State Governments, incomplete proposals due to pending UCs, 
etc. The Committee however find these  reasons unacceptable and are deeply 
anguished that the budgeted funds for the people with different abilities which were 
due to them as their rightful share, have been allowed to lapse. The Committee are 
also unhappy at the non -posting of regular Financia l Adviser  in the Department for 
most pa rt of the year resulting in the non -sanction of the proposals of State 
Governments. The Committee therefore while recommending the Department to 
make all out efforts for full utilization of budgetary allocation of Rs .611 crore in 2013-
14 would also like the other Minister/Department to be sensitive enough to the need 
of PwDs and support the Department of Disability Affairs in their endeavour to 
achieve its laudable goals. The Department also needs to be fully strength ened in 
terms of adequate human resource and the Committee be apprised.. The Committee 
also recommend that the Department should be rechristened as the Department for 
the Differently abled and full and sustained publicity be given to the programmes and 
schemes of the Department so that the target groups avail the benefits thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.2 Keeping in view the observation of Hon’ble Committee, the Department has 
taken the following initiatives:- 
1. Matter regarding sanction of additional staff had been taken up with PMO and 
subsequently with Committee of Secretaries (COS) on directions of PMO. The 
matter was also discussed in Ministry of Finance and 69 posts have been 
sanctioned for the Department, in May, 2013.  
 
2. In order to sensitize the IFD/Finance, observation of the  Hon’ble Committee 
is mentioned in every case relating to the release of grant-in-aid under DDRS. 
 
 

21 
 
3. The process of renaming the Department is going on in consultation with the 
States Govt. /Department of Legislative Affairs. 
 
4. During the current year 2013 -14, the Department held five zonal review 
meetings at Delhi and also an exclusive meeting with State Secretaries of the 
Disability Sector.  The Chief Secretaries of all States have als o been 
requested to issue strict directions for submission of proposals timely. The 
Department is also organizing workshops in all the five zones (Eastern, 
Western, Northern, Southern and Central) through the National Institutes to 
give wide publicity to t he schemes and policies of the Department.  Three 
workshops in Southern, Eastern and Western Zones have already been held.   
Publicity is also being given through Radio Programme ‘Sanwarti Jayen 
Jeewan Ki Rahein”. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.19) 
 
 
2.3 The Committee note that the Department’s functioning has been constrained 
due to severe shortage of sanctioned staff at all levels. A proposal for creation of 4 
Bureaus for Policy and Coordination; Administration; Central Programmes and 
Coordination’s and Finance Wing in Phase -I  is reportedly, under consideration of 
Ministry of Finance which will increase the staff strength to 154 from the present 48 
posts. Fur ther a proposal for, new office accommodation is also pending with 
Ministry of Urban Development. While appreciating the problem and constraints of 
the newly created Department to vigorously pursue with concerned Ministries for 
sanctions of posts and offic e accommodation. The Committee would also urge upon 
these Ministries to urgently address the issues of the newly created Department so 
that it is enabled to function effectively and efficiently for the welfare and 
development of the target groups. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.4 Matter regarding sanction of additional staff had been taken up with PMO and 
subsequently with Committee of Secretaries (COS) on directions of PMO. The 
matter was also discussed in Ministry of Finance and 69 posts have been sanctions  
for the Department in May, 2013.  
The matter regarding space for the Department has been continuously taken 
up with the Ministry of Urban Development who in the month of May, 2013 intimated 
that they would not be in a position to provide suitable accommodation and 

22 
 
conveyed “no objection” to this Department to acquire accommodation on rent basis. 
Accordingly, Department Is identifying suitable accommodation as per rules. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 2.20) 
 
 
2.5 The Committee urge the Department to resolve various other issues with the 
State Government and implementing agencies so that proposals are received well in 
time for according sanction and also take effective steps to ensure that there are no 
pending utilization certificates. The Committee were apprised that a working group 
has been set up under the chairmanship of Secretary DDA for simplification of 
procedures for release of grant under various schemes of Department. The 
Committee feel this  is and innovative endeavour and will help accelerate the 
responsibilities of the Department. The Committee also desire that the Department 
work on strategy and make perspective plans to utilize the entire amount allocated in 
the 12th Plan which is Rs. 3284 core and apprise the Committee within  three months 
for further review. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.6 The Department held regional meetings of State Secretaries of Welfare 
/Social Justice Department On 28 th May, 2013, 30 th May, 2013, 3 rd June, 2013, 5 th 
June 2013 and 7 th June, 2013. A meeting of the State Secretaries of all the States 
was held on 11 th June, 2013 to address state specific issues.  The State were 
requested to send the proposals in a time bound manner.  Further, the Ministry has 
issued new guidelines for the States simplifying the procedure for recommendation 
of proposals.  A second round of meetings has now been proposed to review the 
proposals of the State scheme-wise.   
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of Chapter I of the Report.) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 2.21) 
 
 
2.7 The Committee are deeply concerned at the poor implementation of the 
schemes of the Department in the North East Region of the country where the 
expenditure has been less than 50% in DDRS, ADIP and SIPDA Schemes. The 
Committee desire that the Department ex hort the NGOs and implementing agencies 

23 
 
working in the disability sector as also help them to send viable proposals to take 
benefit of the scheme run by the Department of Disability Affairs. The Committee 
recommend that wide Publicity in Print and electron ic media should be given to the 
various schemes so that the target groups get the schematic benefits.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.8 A regional meeting of the States Secretaries of Welfare/Social Justice of the 
States of the North Eastern region was held  on 7 th June, 2013 where the state 
Governments were requested to send proposal under all the schemes to the 
Department urgently.  States were also requested to submit pending U.C.s in respect 
of past releases under the schemes so that funds could be releas ed in the current 
year. A regional workshop on rights and entitlements of persons with disabilities was 
also organized in Guwahati on 19 th -20th July, 2013.   Officers of the State 
Governments and  representatives of NGOs participated in the workshop. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7, Para No. 2.33) 
 
  
2.9 The Committee note that the objective of the ADIP scheme is to provide 
durable, scientifically manufactured, modern, standard aids and appliances to 
persons with disabilities. Surprisingly, as against the budgetary allocation of Rs.100 
crore during 2012 -13, The Department could spend only Rs.70.60 crore. The 
Committee are not enthused with the explanation of the Departme nt that RE was 
reduced as expenditure in two quarters 1 st and 2nd quarter of financial year could not 
be made as very few proposals of implementing agencies were received and that 
most of the proposals were incomplete and required correspondence with State  
Governments. The Committee are saddened to note that such delays have become 
the recurrent theme and refrain of the Department and apparently no tangible 
corrective measure have been taken to resolve the problem. The Committee desire 
that the Department w ork out a strategy with the implementing agencies, so that all 
proposals are received in the first quarter of the year itself and the funds allocated 
are utilized as intended. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.10 The Procedure for the year 2013 -14 has been circulated to all the States/UTs 
on 09.05.2013 for recommending proposals for release of funds latest by 15 th July, 
2013.  As mentioned in reply to para 2.27 of the observations of Hon’ble Committee, 

24 
 
regional conferences of State Secretaries of Welfare/Social Justice Department were 
held in May/June, 2013.  Regional Workshops are also being held to impress upon 
the States to send the proposals expeditiously. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8, Para No. 2.34) 
 
 
2.11 The Committee were apprised that the ADIP scheme is under revision, in 
regard to cost of the assistive device, income ceiling of the beneficiaries and 
streamlining the provision in the scheme. The Committee however feel that the 
income ceiling parameter which is proposed to be raised to Rs.15000/ - per month is 
still not adequate and needs to be further enhanced so that more people can avail 
the benefit of the scheme. The Committee further desire that a monito ring 
mechanism needs to be developed to ensure that only genuine beneficiaries receive 
the aids and appliances, which may include issue of individual cards to the 
beneficiaries with their names, addresses and the type of device issued to them 
along with th e date. The Committee therefore, recommend that, beside maintaining 
the computerized List of beneficiaries with necessary details, Identity card(Aadhaar 
based) be issued to the recipients of the aids with corresponding details matching 
the Government data and the Committee apprised. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.12 It is proposed to enhance the income ceiling for 100% concession from the 
existing Rs.6,500/- to Rs.15,000/- per month and for 50% concession from Rs.6501/ 
to Rs.10,000/- per month to Rs. 15,000/ - -Rs.20,000/- per month. Ministry has noted 
the observations of the Committee and the same will be implemented as soon as 
necessary infrastructure is ready in this regard. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 2.42) 
 
 
2.13 The Committee desire that the Department should issue advisory notices to 
all State Governments to provide barrier free environment for movement in all 

25 
 
Government buildings, State Universities Hospital, etc. so as to provide ramps, rails 
lifts, adaptation of toilets for wheel chair users, Braille signages and auditory signals 
etc. for disabled persons as per the International norms. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken in the behalf in due course. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.14 Under SIPDA, the Department Has been providing assistance for creation of 
barrier- free environment in Govt. buildings to States/UTs. The States/UT were 
inform of the positions while inviting proposal under SIPDA. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11, Para No. 2.48) 
 
 
2.15 The Committee are happy to note that the department of Disability Affairs is 
contemplating the laun ch of new schemes for educational empowerment of the 
PwDs on the lines of existing schemes for SCs/STs.  The Post -Matric scholarship 
shceme is under consideration of the Planning Commission and a budget of Rs.33 
crores has been kept for 2013 -14. The Commit tee hope that the scheme will be 
implemented during the current year. The schemes such as the National Overseas 
scheme and Top Class Education Schemes, for which only a token amount of Rs.1 
crore has been kept, are still at approval stage. As implementatio n of the education 
schemes would greatly help in empowering the persons with different abilities, the 
Committee recommend that the Department convey their anxiety and concern to the 
Planning Commission and pursue with them for early finalization of these s chemes 
so that the schemes could be implemented at the earliest. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.16 The concept note for the post -matric scholarship scheme has been submitted 
to the Planning Commission for in-principle approval.  
The EFC note under the Top Class Education Scheme is being finalized.  
On the basis of consultations with the Planning Commission the National 
Overseas Scheme is now being proposed as a Central Sector Scheme. The concept 
note under finalizations. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 

26 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see para 1.13 of Chapter I of the Report.)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12, Para No. 2.49) 
 
 
2.17 This Committee are unhappy with the fact the despite the Rajiv Gandhi 
Fellowship Scheme for PwDs, launched in 2012-13 and a budget of Rs.12 crore kept 
in 2012 -13, the scheme could not be implemented as it is dependent upon the 
preparedness of the UGC, which is the implementing agency. The Committee u rge 
the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Human Resources 
Development and UGC so as to ensure that the Scheme is implemented at the 
earliest in letter and sprit. They may also give wide publicity to the scheme to ensure 
that target grou ps become aware of the scheme and the Committee apprised.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.18 The advertisement inviting applications for award of Scholarship under RGNF 
has been issued by UGC on 28 th June, 2013, UGC has also been requested to give 
vide publicity to the Scheme. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13, Para No. 2.55) 
 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the seven National Institutes under the Department 
of Disability Affairs are engaged in Human Resource Development in the field of 
Disability providing rehabilitation services as well as making efforts n Research and 
Development. Against an allocation of Rs. 70 core  under plan head, the utilization of 
funds in 2012 -13 has been around Rs. 53.17 crore. The Committee are however 
concerned to note that the beneficiaries have come down from 726668 in  the 
year2011-12 to 527868 in the year 2012 -13. The Committee desire tha t the National 
Institutes should strive to utilize all resources available in empowering the target 
groups as also make sustained efforts in the filed or R&D. The Committee would like 
to know the reasons for fall in the number of beneficiaries and the corr ective 
measures being taking in this direction. 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.20 Against and allocation of Rs.70 crore under Plan Head for seven National 
Institutes (NIs) funds of Rs.55.88 crore were released in 2012 -13.  Department is 
seized of the is sue and is regularly holding monthly review meetings with National 
Institutes to increase plan activities and utilize allotted funds.  Some key posts in 
various National Institutes were lying vacant which led to the fall in the number of 
beneficiaries.   Posts have since been filled up to.  NIs have been asked to increase 
their R&D activities and to earmark at least 5% of the Plan funds for R&D activities. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15, Para No. 2.60) 
 
2.21 The Committee are distressed to note that the scheme of giving incentives to 
employers in the Private Sector for providing employment to persons with disabilities 
launched in d2008 has hardly taken off as a meager sum of Rs.1 crore in 2009 -10, 
nil in 2010 -11 and Rs.0.50 crore was released in 2011 -12. Since it is an important 
scheme for encouraging the Private Companies to give employment to disabled 
persons, the Committee recommend that the Department  should  make vigorous 
efforts by organizing meeting and symposiums with the Private Sector Companies so 
that they can avail the financial benefits under the scheme and help provide 
employment to the persons with disabilities .The  Committee hope that the 
Department will be able to appropriate Rs.5.00 crore which has been earmarked 
under the scheme for 2013-14. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.22 A meeting with the  NGOs as well as representatives of NASSCOM was held 
on 27th  May, 2013, to a certain the views of the st ate folders. Suggestions to make 
the scheme result oriented. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 

28 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16, Para No. 2.61) 
 
 
2.23 The Committee not that during the last three years as against reservation of 
three percent in Central Government jobs for the disabled persons, the reserved 
posts filled were 10, 399 as on 1.12.2010, 15,670 as  on 1.1.2011 and 12,610 as on 
1.1.2012. The Committee would like to know the precise number of va cancies and 
the posts reserved for the people with disabilities and the percentage it constitutes to 
the total vacancies in the Central Governments/State Government and UTs. The 
Committee have been informed that various orders/instruction on appointment of  
PwDs are issued to all Central Ministries/State Government by the Department of 
Personnel and Training from time to time to persuade them to fill up the 3% of 
vacancies by PwDs. The Committee feel that this is not enough and the Department 
being a nodal D epartment to oversee the welfare of PwDs need to strictly keep a 
strict watch  on filling up the quota for PwDs. The Committee hope the Department of 
Disability Affairs will also pursue with the various Ministries and States Government 
for implementation o f the reservation policy so as to fill up all existing vacancies for 
disabled person and keep the Committee apprise. 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.24 DOPT is the nodal Ministry for filling up of reserve vacancy in Govt. DOPT 
has already requested all Mini stries/ Departments to conduct special drive for filling 
of vacancies under OH category.   
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
  

29 
 
 
 CHAPTER III  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 - NIL -  
  

30 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND HAVE BEEN 
COMMENTED UPON BY THE COMMITTEE IN CHAPTER-I  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 2.27) 
 
 
The Committee note that under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation 
scheme, NGOs  are given assistance for providing a wide range of services to 
persons with disability. The Committee are distressed to note the r epeated 
underutilization of Budgetary allocations under the scheme. For the year 2010 -11 & 
2011-12 against BE of Rs. 120.00 crore for each year actual expenditure has been 
only Rs.82.27 &Rs.86.16 crore respectively. The position further deteriorated during  
2012-13, as the expenditure declined to Rs.46.59 crore i.e. only 35% of the 
allocation were spent. The Committee are unhappy to note the explanation of the 
Department that the proposals are generally received for release of grant -in-aid from 
State Governments in the third quarter of the financial year leading to consequent 
reduction of the budget at RE Stage. Taking note of the constant recurrence, the 
Committee deplore that no concrete action has been taken to address the problem. 
While expressing their u nhappiness at the sorry state of affairs, the Committee 
desire that the Department impress upon the State Government to send the 
proposals well in time in the first quarter -wise. The Committee would also like the 
Department to take up the matter with Minis try of Finance to relax the expenditure 
norms in such cases so that crucial funds for welfare of persons with different 
abilities do not lapse 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.2 The notional allocation under the Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation scheme 
has been conveyed to the state Govt. on 6 th May, 2013 requesting them to send the 
proposals of the NGOs latest by 31st July, 2013. 
The Department Organized regional conferences of state Secretaries of 
Welfare /Social Justice Department On 28 th May, 2013, 30 th May, 2013, 3 rd June, 
2013, 5th June 2013 and 7th June, 2013. A meeting of the State Secretaries of all the 
States was held on 11 th June, 2013 to address state specific issues.  The State was 
request to send the proposals expeditiously.  Besides regional works hops are also 
being held to impress upon the States to send the proposals expeditiously.    
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see para 1.10 of Chapter I of the Report.)  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14, Para No. 2.56) 
 
 
4.3 The Committee were apprised that in order to modernize the National 
Institutes, a Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri B.S. 
Baswan. The report of the  Committee is under examination in the Department. The 
Committee desire that the Department should give top priority to modernize the 
National Institues in this 12 th plan period itself. Efforts should be made to convert 
them into model institutes in the So uth East Asia region. The Committee would also 
like to know the detail of the work done by similar institutes the world over in the 
disability sector. The Committee also desire that an institute be set up for the PwDs 
whereby a complete research/academic s et up can be established to study various 
worldwide  developments, undertake comparative analysis of the measures being 
taken by various countries in the field of disability management and suggest 
innovative solutions considering the socio-economic milieu of the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.4 Department is making all out efforts to make the National Institutes as Centres 
of Excellence.  NIs have been  asked to constitute advisory council to guide and 
advice them on various activities to identify an d focus on the area of their core 
competence like corrective surgery for NIRTAR, Cuttack, rehabilitation of spinal 
injuries for NIOH, Kolkata, hearing handicapped for NIHH, Mumbai and Multiple 
Disabilities for NIEPMD, Chennai. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see para 1.16 of Chapter I of the Report.)   
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17, Para No. 2.65) 
 
 
4.5 The Committee note that many steps have been taken by the Department of 
Disability Affairs to monitor and evaluate the implementation of their programmes 
and schemes and in this connection a Monitoring Committee already exists. Also 
officers of the Departm ent have been appointed as nodal officer for States/UTs to 

32 
 
undertake field visits for on the spot study of implementation of schemes by 
implementing agencies including NGOs. However, the Committee express their 
displeasure at the low expenditure under all the schemes of the Department as also 
the implementation aspect of their performance. The Committee feel that there is a 
need to set up State and district level Monitoring Committee on the lines of the 
Committees set up by the Ministry of Rural Development  with representation of MPs, 
local MLAs as also Members of Panchayats for successful implementation of the 
various schemes of the Department of Disability Affairs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.6 The Department has nominated officers of the Department and i ts National 
Institutes as nodal officers for carrying out inspection and monitoring the 
implementation of the schemes.  Besides, regular State -wise meetings with the 
officers of the State Governments and the representatives of the NGOs are being 
organized to settle the pending issues and to expedite the process of receipt of 
proposals from the States and requisite documents from the NGOs. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see para 1.19 of Chapter I of the Report.)  
  

33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6, Para No. 2.28) 
 
 
The Department has informed that for the revision of cost norms under DDRS 
a Committee was set up under Additional Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment with representatives of related Ministries and NGOs and the report of 
the same has been  submitted. The Committee desire that expenditure action should  
be taken on the report and cost norms be reviewed taking into account the raising 
cost due to inflation and they be apprised.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.2 The report of the Committee set up to suggest revision in the cost norms 
under DDRS Scheme has been received and the same is being examined. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 2.41) 
 
 
5.3 The Committee note that under the scheme financial assistance is provided 
for implementation of Persons with Disabilities Act 1995 (SIPDA) for providing barrier 
free environment in universities, Public Buildings, State Government Secretariats, 
Office of the State as also assistance for setting up District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centres (DDRCs) and the Committee composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs). The 
Committee are constrained to note the declining trend of expenditure under the head 
having bottoming to one fifth of the amount allocated i.e. only Rs.20.00 crore against 
an allocation of Rs.105 crore in 2012 -13. The Committee outright reject the 
explanation of the Department that the funds could not be released under the 
scheme as concrete proposals could not b e received from the State Government 
well in time and those received were not complete in all respects. The Committee 
recommend that the officials of the Department should play a proactive role in 
helping the State Governments send complete and viable prop osals so that the 
allocated funds are well utilized. The Committee desire that the Department evolve a 
suitable mechanism as part of e -governance drive so as to ensure that all schemes 
become accessable to PwDs at State and district levels. Since the Perso ns with 
Disability Act is to give effect to the proclamation signed by India on the full 
participation and equality of the people with Disability in the Asia and Pacific Region, 

34 
 
the Committee recommended the Government to strictly monitor implementation of  
the Scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.4 The recommendation of the Committee was duly considered. Accordingly, the 
Department has been conducting special meeting with the Secretaries of the 
concerned Department At National level and also at Regional le vel. Moreover 
specific state -wise meetings have been held to impress upon the States to submit 
proposals under SIPDA and provide requisite documents and utilization certificate for 
past releases urgently. IN order to ensure full utilization of funds, two m ore 
components are being added to the SIPDA Scheme namely (a) one time grant 
towards infrastructure developments of the offices of State Commissioner for 
Persons with Disabilities, and (b) grant for  encouraging skill development 
programme for PwDs. 
[Department of Disability Affairs’ OM No. 3-25/2013-DDIV  
Govt. of India dt. 16.08.2013] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI        HEMANAND BISWAL 
17 December, 2013      Chairman 
26 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and 
Empowerment. 
  

35 
 
 Annexure-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON TUESDAY,                    
17th DECEMBER, 2013 
 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Main Committee 
Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI HEMANAND BISWAL   -  CHAIRMAN 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri Tarachand Bhagora 
4. Smt. Rama Devi 
5. Shri Mohan Jena 
6. Shri Lalit Mohan Suklabaidya 
 
 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
7. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
8. Shri Avtar Singh Karimpuri 
9. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
11. Shri Mohammad Shafi 
12. Shri Shankarbhai N. Vegad 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita Jain  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
  

36 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened for consideration 
and adoption of the draft Thirty -ninth Report on the subject "Implementation of 
schemes for welfare of S enior Citizens",  Fortieth Action Taken Report on Demands 
for Grants,  2013-14 of the Department of Disability Affairs (Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), Forty -first Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 2013 -
14 of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment (Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment) and Forty -second Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants, 
2013-14 of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the Thirty -ninth, Fortieth, 
Forty-first and Forty-second Report of the Committee without  any amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalize the draft Reports and 
present the same to Parliament. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
  
 
 
  

37 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  
 
 Total Percentage   
 
I.  Total number of Recommendations  
 
        17  
II.  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government (Paragraph Nos. 2.18, 
2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.33, 2.34, 2.42, 2.48, 2.49, 2.55, 
2.60, and 2.61.  
 
12 70.59 
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies - Nil  
 
0 0 
IV.  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.27, 2.56 and 2.65).  
 
3 17.65 
V.  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.28 and 2.41).  
2 11.76 
 