 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ((SEVENTEENTHMINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRSAction taken by the Government on the the Committee contained in their ThirtyCommittee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs.July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)
48 
i 
          STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)     SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)      MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS  Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and ation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs.   FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT           LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)   
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS Observations/Recommendations of Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and ation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs. 

FORTYSTANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND (SEVENTEENTHMINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their ThirtyCommittee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lokon ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs.Presented to Lok Sabha on                                        Laid in Rajya Sabha on   July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)      ii 
    FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT      STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)    SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)    MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS  Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lokon ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs.  Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.7.2023  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.7.2023      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)    
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs. 

iii 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
and which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Appendix-I Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 26.7.2023. 
  
 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the 
Functioning of the National Minorities Development 
and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of 
Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt.Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Nauriyal - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar      - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Haokip Kakai  - Executive Officer  
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Forty-Eighth Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the 
National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of 
Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 7.11.2022. The Ministry of Minority Affairs have furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
5.8.2022.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 26.7.2023. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference Observations/ Recommendations/ Comments 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 RAMA DEVI 
                                           Chairperson, 
26th  July, 2023                                                              Standing Committee on 
4     Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                              Social Justice and  
                              Empowerment 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Fifth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of the National Minorities Development 
and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 05.08.2022. It contained 15 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which 
have been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec.Para No. 3.25, 3.26, 3.27, 5.29, 
5.30, 6.7, 7.11, 7.12, 8.8 & 9.10. 
((Total: 10  ,  Chapter: II) 
  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.4.7, 3.28 & 5.31 
((Total: 3,  Chapter: III) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration: – 
Rec. Para No.2.10 & 5.28   
(Total: 2  ,  Chapter: IV) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature:- 
Rec. Para No.NIL 
(NIL, Chapter:V ) 
  
 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 

2 
 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.10) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee find that the equity structure of NMDFC has been revised six 
times since its inception in 1994 from ₹500.00 crore to ₹3,000.00 crore.  The 
last revision was made in February 2015.  However, the authorized Share 
Capital of the Central Government, as well as State Governments, have not 
reached the maximum level till date.  The Central Government has 
contributed 89.95%, whereas State Governments have contributed only 
49.71% up to 31.05.2022. The Committee are perturbed to note that some of 
the States/UTs viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya, 
Sikkim, Telangana and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have not contributed even 
a single penny towards the equity of NMDFC.  The Committee further note 
that the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have 
contributed very meager amounts.  They are surprised to note that all efforts 
made by NMDFC to maximize the equity from State Governments have 
remained futile. The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for 
such non-cooperative behavior of State Government, despite being regularly 
approached.  Presumably, States are well aware that the availability of funds 
would enable NMDFC to enhance their capacity to fund welfare schemes of 
the Government in the interest of the targeted sections residing in the States.  
Hence, they must contribute.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend 
that this issue needs to be placed at the highest level so that contribution 
from the defaulting States can be realized.  The Committee would also like 
the Ministry to take appropriate measures to increase awareness among the 
deprived sections of the Minority Community to avail benefits under various 
Schemes of NMDFC. 
The Committee note that NMDFC has approached the Ministry to increase the 
authorized share capital from ₹3,000 crore to ₹5,000 crore.  They desire that 
the Ministry may examine and decide on it without further loss of time so that 
the proposal for increase in the authorized capital of NMDFC is approved”. 
 
 

3 
 
6. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted 
as under:- 
“NMDFC on its part is regularly approaching the concerned State 
Governments/UT Administration to contribute their earmarked share in the 
equity of NMDFC. Further, letters from Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs 
(MoMA), Govt. of India & CMD, NMDFC are also written on regular intervals to 
Chief Secretaries of the respective State Govt./UT Administration to contribute 
in the equity of NMDFC.  Recently, Secretary, MOMA has written letters on 
10th October, 2022 & by CMD, NMDFC to Chief Secretaries in the months of 
July-August, 2022 for contribution of their earmarked share in the Equity of 
NMDFC.   
 
Ministry may like to take appropriate action w.r.t enhancing Authorised Share 
Capital of NMDFC from ₹3,000 crore to ₹6,000 crore. Request in this regard 
was also submitted to the Ministry vide NMDFC letter dated 26.9.2022.  
 
NMDFC is already providing grant to its State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) to 
organize Loan Mela cum Awareness Camps in Minority Concentrated 
Districts/Blocks. Grant of ₹50,000 per camp is being released by NMDFC to 
SCAs to organize at least 10 Awareness Camps annually. During the F.Y 2021-
22, the SCAs have organized 323 Loan Mela cum Awareness Camps in 
different parts of the country. Another 265 awareness camps have so far 
been organised during F.Y 2022-23. NMDFC has also taken up drive to 
generate awareness about its schemes on Social Media Platforms such as 
Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, Youtube with special focus in Minority Blocks. 
Success Stories of assisted beneficiaries are also being uploaded onto social 
media platforms to motivate target group to avail assistance under the 
schemes of NMDFC”.   
 
7. The Committee had inter-alia recommended to the Ministry to place 
the matter relating to non-contribution of authorized Share Capital by 
several State Governments/ UT Administrations at highest level.  Also, 
they had desired that the Ministry should examine and decide without 
further loss of time on the matter concerning increase in Authorized Share 
Capital of NMFDC from ₹3,000 crore to ₹6,000 crore. The Committee find 
from the Action Taken reply that letters from Secretary, Ministry of 
Minority Affairs and CMD, NMDFC are being written on regular intervals to 
the Chief Secretaries of the respective State/ UT Governments for 
contribution of their Authorized Share Capital. However, these efforts 
have not produced the desired results as the status continues to remain 

4 
 
the same. The Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation, 
recommend that the Ministry and NMDFC should explore ways and means 
so that the States/ UTs who have either not contributed or given a meager 
contribution, now start giving their share in the equity structure of NMDFC 
without further delay. The Committee would also like the Ministry to settle 
the matter of enhancing Authorised Share Capital of NMDFC from ₹3,000 
crore to ₹6,000 crore without  further delay since it is evident from the 
reply furnished to the Committee on this point that it is drafted by NMDFC 
and the Ministry has merely forwarded it without adding their input.  The 
Committee desire to be apprised of their stand on the NMFDC letter dated 
26.9.2022.  
Recommendation (Para No.3.28) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are concerned to find that the beneficiaries from 8 
States/UTs only have availed loans under the Micro-Finance Scheme since 
2015-16 and the rate of interest charged on the loan sanctioned under the 
Scheme is 7% in Credit Line-1 and 10% in Credit Line-2.  Maximum 
beneficiaries belong to West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Jammu & 
Kashmir.  The Committee are of the strong view that the 7% and 10% 
interest rate charged from the beneficiaries by the State Channelizing 
Agencies is rather on the high side as the scheme is conceived to cater to the 
requirement of the poor members of the Self Help Groups to meet their 
livelihood particularly when the interest charged by NMDFC is only 1% from 
SCAs. To popularize the Microfinance Scheme, the Committee opine that the 
interest rate charged is required to be re-examined and revised so that a 
large number of individuals get attracted to the Scheme. The committee 
would like to be informed of the measures taken to popularize the Scheme in 
all the States/UTs”. 
 
9. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted 
as under:- 
“The SCAs in the States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra & Sikkim are tying up with respective State Rural Livelihood 
Mission (SRLM) to utilize the SHGs formed and stabilized under SRLM 
program, for extending credit under the Micro-finance scheme of NMDFC. The 
detail of such SHGs & Federations have been shared with the SCAs to 

5 
 
facilitate in extending micro-credit. Further, Canara Bank has also provided 
micro-credit of ₹3.45 crore to 156 SHG members in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, Odisha & Telangana. Thus it 
may be seen that gradually micro-credit scheme are being implemented in 
other States/UTs as well, where in the recent past, this scheme was not being 
implemented.  
It may be further stated that NMDFC provides higher interest margin to the 
SCAs as they are required to deploy manpower to evaluate readiness of SHGs 
to avail credit, monitor fund utilization and loan recovery. All the funding 
under micro-finance scheme has been under Credit Line-1 as the members of 
the SHGs are very poor and fall under income eligibility criteria of below 
double the poverty line. It may also be stated here that the rate of interest 
charged under Micro-finance scheme of NMDFC is one of the lowest in the 
micro-finance sector. Reducing interest rates would adversely affect viability 
of the scheme”.      
 
10. The Committee had opined that the interest rates of 7% in Credit 
Line-1 and 10% in Credit Line-2 under the Micro-Finance Scheme of 
NMDFC are high particularly when NMDFC is charging only 1% interest 
from the SCAs and had desired that the interest rates be re-examined and 
revised in order to popularize the Scheme. The Ministry have, however, 
stated that the interest rate charged under Micro-Finance Scheme of 
NMDFC is one of the lowest in the Micro-Finance Sector and that reducing 
interest rates would adversely affect viability of the Scheme. The 
Committee had desired to reduce the interest rate keeping into 
consideration the fact that the Scheme is limited to very few States. As 
explained in the Action Taken Notes, the Scheme has picked up in some 
States after association of Canara Bank, hence the Committee would like 
to recommend to the Ministry to monitor the performance keenly and 
continuously explore ways and means to popularize the Scheme in all 
Minority concentrated areas/States. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.28) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the various Schemes of NMDFC are implemented 
by State Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) nominated by the State Governments/ 
UTs Administrations.  These SCAs are corporations registered under the 

6 
 
Companies Act and the funds to SCAs are released against Sovereign 
Guarantee issued by respective State Governments/UT Administrations.  
NMDFC has 45 SCAs in 27 States and 8 UTs.  Presently 39 SCAs are 
operational while 6 SCAs are non-operational mainly due to reasons like 
pending General Loan Agreement and furnishing of Sovereign Guarantee by 
the respective State Governments/UTs.  The Committee note that despite the 
best efforts of NMDFC, some SCAs could not be made operational in a large 
number of States/UTs i.e. Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Nagaland, 
Mizoram, Punjab, Puducherry, Tripura, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, 
as they did not settle the overdues.  The Committee find that NMDFC has tied 
up with Canara Bank for the implementation of their Schemes in August 2021.  
This experiment so far has helped to implement the Schemes.  However, the 
Committee are apprehensive that since the Banks also have to run their own 
business, it has to be ensured that the Schemes of NMDFC are given due 
attention and importance by the Bank.  The Committee further feel that 
NMDFC should explore further for tie ups with other regional Banks.  The 
Committee are also of the view that the role of State Governments/UT 
Administrations is more important in the implementation of the NMDFC 
Schemes as these schemes are welfare-oriented and the successful 
implementation of these schemes reflects the sensitivity of the Governments 
towards targeted sections of the Minority Communities. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the State Governments, which have shown the 
least interest/indifference should be convinced about the potential benefits of 
the Schemes and brought on board so that the issues, if any, are resolved 
and the schemes are implemented by them”.  
 
12. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted 
as under:- 
“NMDFC is continuously making sincere efforts for early resumption of NMDFC 
program in the States which are not functional.  The State Agencies which are 
unable to repay their long pending overdues are pursued to settle over-dues 
either under One Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme or re-scheduling of over-
dues, duly backed by the respective State Govt. Senior Officers of NMDFC are 
also undertaking visits personally to interact with senior State Govt. officials to 
convince them for early settlement of over-dues and start resumption of 
NMDFC program in the State. The team has already visited the States of 
Assam, Bihar, Punjab, Chhattisgarh & Uttar Pradesh. The visiting team is 
briefing the State Government about the benefit of concessional credit 
schemes of NMDFC and the availability of grant under Grant-in-Aid Scheme of 
Ministry to revive, improve the loan administration and recovery capability of 
the SCAs.  The issue for settlement of over-dues & resumption of NMDFC 
financing scheme is also being regularly taken up at the level of Secretary, 
MoMA, Government of India with the concerned State Government. Recently, 
Secretary, MOMA has written letters on 10th October, 2022 & by CMD, NMDFC 

7 
 
to Chief Secretaries in the months of July-August, 2022, for settlement of 
overdues so that implementation of NMDFC schemes can resume in these 
States.    
 
NMDFC is also in the process of finalizing tie-up with other Public Sector 
Banks for implementing its schemes. This shall help in coverage of 
beneficiaries under NMDFC schemes in States/UTs which are not functional 
presently”.  
 
13. The Committee were concerned as several SCAs could not be made 
functional in a large number of States owing to non-settlement of dues 
and hence they had recommended the Ministry to convince the State 
Governments about the potential of the Welfare Schemes so that they 
resolve the pending issues. The Ministry have informed about various 
steps taken in the matter, for example, through physical visits of their 
team to such States, meetings at Secretary level, reminder letters etc.  
While the Committee do hope that some progress will be made on the 
matter and would like to be apprised of the same at action taken stage, 
they recall that a system of Central Nodal Agency/State Nodal Agency has 
since been put in place for better financial management of CS or CSS 
Schemes.  They desire to be apprised by the Ministry on how NMFDC can 
be better equipped through such measures, if any, on this matter, so that 
settlement of State dues gets normalized. 
  
  

8 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.25) 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that the credit schemes of NMDFC namely 
Term Loan scheme, Educational loan scheme, Virasat scheme and Micro Financing 
Scheme, which are meant for providing concessional loans for self-employment and 
income generation activities have not benefitted the notified Minority population of 
over 23 crore in the Country, as per 2011 census.  The Committee are further 
perturbed that there are no beneficiaries  even in the States of Maharashtra, Bihar, 
Assam, Odisha and Telangana, where substantial minority population exists, under 
all the Credit Schemes of NMDFC.  As per the information provided to the 
Committee, the Term Loan Scheme has been able to make inroads in 17 States/UTs, 
Educational loan scheme in 14 States/UTs and Virasat Scheme in only 3 States/UTs.  
The Committee feel that perhaps the implementation of these Schemes is flawed 
since it cannot be assumed that there is no demand for these Schemes in all 
States/UTs, from the Minority communities.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs needs to re-examine their implementation strategy and 
identify factors which are becoming a hurdle in popularizing these Schemes in all the 
States/UTs and take requisite action to plug the flaws. The Committee also suggest 
that perhaps there are more successful similar schemes run by State Governments, 
hence the utility of the NMDFC schemes may be examined in the light of the similar 
schemes made available by the State Governments/UT Administrations and such 
Schemes may be discontinued/revamped if found to be not preferred over the 
schemes of State Governments.  The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of 
the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The schemes of NMDFC are well received by the target group which is evident from 
the increase in loan disbursed during the last 8 years, starting from 2014-15. Nearly 
65% of total loan has been disbursed by NMDFC during last 8 years. NMDFC is 
gradually increasing its loan coverage on a year to year basis, based on fund 
available at its disposal. The number of State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) 
implementing its schemes has come down because of accumulation of over dues. 
NMDFC has offered One Time Settlement (OTS) to the concerned SCAs/States 
including of Assam & Bihar to settle overdues. The State Govts are being pursued to 
settle over dues for resumption of financing through the SCAs. Letters in this regard 
have been written by Secretary, MOMA on 10th October, 2022 & by CMD, NMDFC in 
the months of July- August, 2022 to Chief Secretaries of the concerned States. 
Recently, officials from NMDFC have also visited States of Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, 

9 
 
Assam, Bihar, Chhatisgarh and held meetings with senior State Govt. officials for 
settlement of over dues.  In case of Telangana, the State Govt. has informed that it 
is unwilling to nominate an agency to implement NMDFC schemes. In Maharashtra, 
focus of the SCA is to primarily implement Education Loan.  
NMDFC is already providing concessional credit however, Interest Subsidy and/or 
Capital Subsidy as being provided by some States, is not a viable proposition and 
hence cannot be replicated by NMDFC. It may be mentioned here that NMDFC has 
tied-up with Canara Bank and through it provided loan to its target groups of ₹15.00 
crs during 2021-22. The Canara bank has extended credit under the Term Loan, 
Virasat Scheme & Micro Credit Scheme in States such as Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, UT of Lakshadweep where SCAs are not operational. Further, ₹80.00 crs 
has been allocated for Canara Bank during 2022-23 and it has already drawn ₹20.00 
crs. It is expected that more credit shall flow in States/UTs where SCAs are not yet 
functional. Tie-up with more scheduled commercial banks is also being explored for 
credit extension through them on the lines of Canara Bank. With activation of 
additional banking channels, the coverage of NMDFC schemes across the country is 
expected to considerably increase.  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.26 ) 
 The NMDFC extends Educational loans intending to facilitate job-oriented 
education for eligible persons belonging to minority communities. The Committee 
are astonished to find that only 16,011 beneficiaries have availed assistance under 
the Educational Loan Scheme of NMDFC in the last five years.  Besides, the Ministry 
has provided the information of the beneficiaries under Education Loan Scheme for 
14 States/UTs only. The Committee are quite perturbed to note that the States 
having a large population of minority Communities viz., Maharashtra, Bihar, Punjab 
and Assam do not have even a single beneficiary under the Educational Loan 
Scheme and wonder whether adequate awareness is missing about the Scheme.  
The Committee also find that some of the applications received for education loans 
were not considered due to the non-submission of required documents.  They feel 
that every effort should be made by NMDFC/SCAs to provide the necessary 
assistance to applicants so that their applications are not rejected for lack of 
documents, particularly when achievement under the Education Loan Scheme is 
quite dismal.  The Committee are also livid that the SCAs do not maintain the data of 
the candidates who are gainfully employed after they completed their education with 
the loan from NMDFC because such data only can ascertain the success of the 
scheme in not only fulfilling the objective but also to ensure that the loan sanctioned 
is paid back by the beneficiaries otherwise there are chances of the loan remaining 

10 
 
unpaid in case the beneficiaries stay unemployed for long.  The Committee are also 
of the strong opinion that the quantum of Education Loans needs to be periodically 
assessed in the light of the rising cost of education so that students availing of loans 
do not face financial crisis during their studies and drop out.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Within the fund available with NMDFC, focus of NMDFC scheme has been to provide 
concessional credit for income generation activities under the Term Loan & Micro-
finance scheme. Fund to the tune of 20% of the Term Loan are utilized under 
Education Loan. Recently, based on the field level demand, funding limit under 
Education Loan scheme are proposed to be  increased from 20% to 30% of the 
Total Loan Portfolio, for greater coverage under the scheme. In Maharashtra mainly 
Education Loan has been disbursed by the SCA of NMDFC in the State. Disbursement 
in Assam, Bihar & Punjab could not materialize due to pending settlement of over 
dues by the respective SCA/State Govt. NMDFC has offered One Time Settlement 
(OTS) to these States and regular follow-up is being carried out so that the overdue 
amount gets settled and implementation of NMDFC schemes including Education 
Loan scheme can start in these States. Meanwhile after tie-up with scheduled 
commercial banks, it is expected that concessional credit for all schemes including 
Education Loan scheme would start to flow in all the States. It may further be 
mentioned here that the SCAs do not reject Education Loan application but these are 
only deferred due to non submission of required documents by the applicant. The 
SCAs in fact guide and help such student to complete the loan documentation to 
enable access to Education Loan to pursue higher studies.  It is also gathered from 
the Impact Study got conducted by MDI that nearly 80% of the students financed 
under Education Loan scheme of NMDFC got gainfully employment with 77% 
employed in Govt/Pvt sector and 3% are self employed. Presently the quantum of 
loan available under Education Loan scheme of NMDFC is at par with those of 
scheduled commercial banks and if required, the same would be revised based on 
field level demand.    
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.27 ) 
 
The Committee noted that Virasat Scheme was started in 2018-19 to meet the credit 
requirements of the artisans in terms of working capital as a large number of 
artisans belonging to Minority Communities face a cash crunch to meet their working 
capital for the purchase of raw material.  It seem to the Committee that the Scheme 
did not pick up initially as only 8 persons from Jammu & Kashmir and 73 persons 
from Gujarat could get benefit from this Scheme in 2018-19 and 2019-20, 

11 
 
respectively.  However, later the Scheme picked up with the association of Canara 
Bank as they have reportedly assisted 298 artisans in 2021-22.  The Committee 
believe that since the Scheme is relatively new and the COVID Pandemic was 
prevalent during the major part of the period 2018-2021, it did not perform so well.  
However with the recent spurt in the number of beneficiaries, the Committee are 
hopeful that the Scheme will be successful as it has shown encouraging results with 
the association of Canara Bank.  The Committee would like to see more Public 
Sector Banks and Regional Rural Banks associated with the Scheme so that the 
benefits are availed by craftsmen and traditional artisans all over the Country.  The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to take effective measures to popularize the 
Scheme among artisans, particularly in rural and semi-urban areas so that many 
regional traditional crafts, which are on the verge of extinction, can be preserved. 
The Ministry should also collect feedback/suggestions from all the stakeholders to 
introduce changes that might be required to further promote the Scheme among 
artisans belonging to minority communities. 
Reply of the Government 
Initially, the Virasat scheme did not pick-up but with the association of Canara Bank, 
the scheme has picked up and 298 artisans were covered under the  scheme during 
F.Y. 2021-22 by Canara Bank.  Overall 498 artisans have been covered under the 
scheme during F.Y. 2021-22 and another 167 artisans have been financed so far till 
25.10.2022 during F.Y 2022-23. Thus it may be seen that the scheme is gradually 
picking up. With the association of more scheduled banks, the coverage of artisans 
under Virasat scheme is expected to increase further. Moreover, based on the 
ground level feedback, recently in February, 2022, artisans with higher annual 
income of upto ₹8.00 lacs have also been considered under the Credit Line-2.  
 
MoMA on its part is also taking initiative to popularize this scheme by placing one 
Stall exclusively to promote Virasat Scheme during the Hunar Haats in different parts 
of the country being organized by the Ministry.  Officials of Canara Bank/NMDFC/SCA 
are deputed during the Fair for providing information and Application Form to the 
Artisans. Further, the USTTAD scheme of the Ministry is specifically aimed at helping 
the artisans to preserve the traditional art which are on the verge of extinction.   
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.5.29 ) 
The Committee are constrained to note that SCAs of NMDFC take 30-35 days to 
sanction loans and other sister corporations of NMDFC have prescribed 120 days for 
sanction and disbursement of the loans. The period is rather long when Banks 
normally take 15-20 days to sanction loans.  The Committee are not convinced with 
the reason that the slow process for sanctioning loans is due to the non-availability 
of field infrastructure and manpower with SCAs and lack of automation as the 
Ministry has a provision for Grant-in-Aid to strengthen the Credit delivery system and 

12 
 
recovery infrastructure of SCAs.  Besides most of the States have now developed 
strong automated systems for financial work. The Committee are of the strong view 
that NMDFC need to suggest  suitable steps to the SCAs to streamline/expedite the 
loaning process as the time consumed in sanctioning the loan must be substantially 
reduced.  It may be too early for the Committee to comment on the recent advisory 
issued to SCAs to simplify the documents to be submitted with the application and 
automation of the loan process, decentralization of authority to sanction loans etc. 
unless the time currently consumed by SCAs/NMDFC in sanctioning is actually 
reduced to 15-20 days soon.  The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of 
the impact of this advisory at the action taken stage.  They recommend that NMDFC 
should not lose any time now to develop a mechanism to regularly monitor the 
loaning process, ensuring that steps suggested by them are followed by SCAs and 
the time consumed in sanctioning loans is brought down.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Most of the SCAs have started to implement NMDFC schemes by seeking minimum 
documents to simplify the loan sanction process.  This has helped to cut down the 
loan sanction time in most cases to 15-20 days.  Further the loan application apps 
developed by a number of SCAs in the States of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, 
Chandigarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka etc. has also helped to speed up the 
loan sanction process.  NMDFC regularly monitors the fund utilization at the level of 
SCAs by seeking monthly utilization reports from the SCAs.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.5.30 ) 
 
The Committee are deeply concerned to find that the Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) 
of NMDFC are to the tune of ₹18.16 crore in respect of SCAs/NGOs and that an 
amount of ₹223.85 crore is overdue on the State Governments/UT Administrations 
as on 31st March 2022.  The Committee are unable to understand the reasons why 
NPAs of NMDFC and the pending dues of States/UTs have accumulated to such a 
high level particularly when NMDFC has the option of One Time Settlement Scheme 
and re-scheduling of these pending dues to settle the account of SCAs.  The 
Committee at the same time believe that banning of defaulter SCAs should be used 
rarely by NMDFC since welfare schemes can be run by the State only. Instead, 
efforts should be focused on evolving a system that takes care of any lacunae which 
leads to defaulting in payment.  For speedy recovery of overdues, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should take up the matter of NPAs/pending dues of SCAs 
with State Governments and convince them to help their respective SCAs by 
providing soft loans/grants to settle the dues for resumption of implementation of 
the schemes of NMDFC in their States.  
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As explained, NMDFC is pursuing its SCAs to settle over-dues either under One Time 
Settlement (OTS) Scheme or re-scheduling of over-dues duly backed by the 
respective State Government. The State Government are also requested to help the 
SCAs to settle the overdues for resumption of financing. NMDFC has been following 
up with the concerned SCAs for settlement of overdues from the very beginning 
instance of default. However the SCAs with limited financial resources were unable 
to settle overdues. The overdues have gradually increased with the outstanding loan 
amount increasing with passage of time.  
 
The issue for settlement of over-dues & resumption of NMDFC financing scheme is 
also being regularly taken up at the level of Secretary, MoMA, Government of India 
with the concerned State Governments. Recently, Secretary, MOMA has written 
letters on 10th October, 2022 & by CMD, NMDFC to Chief Secretaries in the months 
of July-August, 2022, for settlement of overdues so that implementation of NMDFC 
schemes can resume in these States.    
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.6.7) 
 
The Committee noted that the Grant-in-Aid of ₹2.00 crore earmarked annually is 
provided by the Ministry to SCAs through NMDFC. However, the amount sanctioned 
under Grant-in-Aid during the year 2016-17, 2017-18, 2019-20 were ₹1.27 crore, 
₹0.30 crore and ₹1.925 crore respectively and that it was reduced at the RE stage to 
₹0.965 crore from ₹2.00 crore in the year 2020-21. The Committee strongly believe 
that as various Schemes of NMDFC are being implemented through SCAs, the 
infrastructure, adequate manpower, computerization and strong mechanism for 
capacity building of SCAs should be the utmost priority of the NMDFC/Ministry.  The 
Ministry has already admitted before the Committee that one of the reasons for the 
poor implementation of the Schemes of NMDFC is weak infrastructure of SCAs.  It is 
a matter of concern that despite the availability of funds, the same were not used. 
Since NMDFC is the nodal organization to disburse the funds, they should have 
examined the lacunae and plugged them in time so that the funds meant for 
building the infrastructure of SCAs are fully utilized. The Committee note that SCAs 
in 15 States have availed Grant-in-Aid during the last five years and the Grant-in-Aid 
provided to these SCAs was not fully utilized as out of ₹633.50 lakh granted to these 
SCAs only ₹404.50 lakh could be utilized. The Committee desire to know if NMDFC 
made any efforts to find out reasons for this huge gap between the funds released 
and utilized.  The Committee would like the Ministry/NMDFC to develop requisite 
oversight so that the funds meant for Grant-in-Aid are utilized fully. The Committee 
are also not convinced of an increase in budgetary allocation from ₹2.00 crore to 
₹5.00 crore particularly when the available funds of ₹2.00 crore could not be utilized 
in 2016-17, 2017-18, 2019-20. The Committee would therefore like the Ministry to 

14 
 
take appropriate steps so that the funds allocated are fully utilized for upgrading the 
infrastructure of SCAs.  
Reply of the Government 
The funds under GIA scheme are allocated to SCAs based on their past performance 
with a maximum amount of ₹25.00 Lakhs per SCA annually.  The funds are utilized 
by active SCAs in a timely manner; however some of the SCAs take long time in 
utilizing the GIA funds and as a result the Utilization Certificate (UC) from these 
SCAs are delayed.  Till such time the UCs are received from all SCAs, full utilization 
cannot be furnished by NMDFC to the Ministry of Minority Affairs for release of GIA 
funds for the next financial year.  The SCAs are regularly contacted for expediting 
submission of UCs.   
 
Further, NMDFC has made efforts to find out the main reasons for gap 
between the fund released and utilized. It was observed that since activities 
considered under GIA fund are ongoing in nature & utilization is spread over a 
financial year, so UCs are delayed. In order to obtain timely utilization of fund and 
improve the weak infrastructure of SCAs, the revised GIA scheme has since been 
approved by the Government.  The following changes have been incorporated:- 
a). Annual allocation under GIA scheme have been increased from ₹2.00 Crs. to            
₹5.00 Crs. 
b). Both active and potential SCAs which are expected to become active would be 
eligible for GIA funds.  
c). The SCAs in North Eastern states & hilly areas would be considered for higher 
allocations.  
d). Non-functional SCAs are to be provided allocation of Rs.25.00 Lacs on 
becoming operational as hand holding support. 
e). The maximum annual amount per SCA has been increased from Rs.25.00 
Lacs to 40.00 Lacs. 
f) Provision for engaging manpower for data entry, loan application processing, 
accounting work have also been incorporated.  
 
It is expected that with the above measures, the utilization of GIA funds 
would be expedited and the allocated funds would be fully utilized by the SCAs. 
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.7.11) 
The Committee note that the financial assistance under Credit Line-1 is provided to 
the persons of Minority Communities having an annual family income of ₹98,000/- in 
rural areas and ₹1.20 lakh is urban areas.  Under Credit Line-2, the benefits are 
available to persons with an annual family income of up to ₹8.00 lakh. The 
Committee are, however, surprised to find that the number of beneficiaries under 
Credit Line-2 is substantially less in comparison to Credit Line-1 as the number of 

15 
 
beneficiaries under Credit Line-1 and Credit Line-2 was 4,30,557 and 34,892 
respectively from 2017-18 to 2019-20.  As the number of beneficiaries under Credit 
Line-1 is substantially less in urban areas in comparison to rural areas, the 
Committee feel that the NMDFC should try to perform better in urban areas in Credit 
Line-1. The Committee also desire that the annual family income limit for the 
beneficiaries under Credit Line-1 for urban areas should be increased after 
considering the  increased average annual family income in urban areas so that 
more persons belonging to economically weaker minority communities could get the 
benefits under various schemes of NMDFC at a lower rate of interest.  The 
Committee also desire that the reasons why Credit Line-2 has not picked up should 
be examined since the annual income limit set in 2014-15 was increased in 2019-20 
for wider outreach.  
Reply of the Government 
The schemes of NMDFC are aimed at providing concessional credit for income 
generation activities to the poorest amongst the Minority Communities. The annual 
income eligibility criterion of double the poverty line under Credit line -1 is fixed by 
the Govt. to cater to the poorest within the target groups. The annual income under 
Credit line-1 is based on the poverty line estimates issued by the Niti Ayog, from 
time to time. As most of the poor persons from the target groups reside in the rural 
areas, thus the coverage under Credit Line-1 is more in the rural areas. Persons in 
the Urban areas have better income and capacity and it is for this purpose the Credit 
Line-2 was launched with annual family income of ₹8.00 lacs and comparatively 
higher quantum of loan & rate of interest. The rate of interest under Credit Line-2 
though higher as compared to Credit Line-1, is still substantially lower in comparison 
to the rate offered by the scheduled commercial banks & private banks. Further 
concession of upto 2% is available for the women beneficiaries under Credit Line-2 
and thus interest in their case becomes similar to that charged under the Credit 
Line-1. It may also be mentioned here that the respective State Governments  & 
SCAs prefer to extend credit to poorest of the poor and thus Credit Line-1 is more 
popular as compared to Credit Line-2.     
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE dated 05th August, 
2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.7.12) 
 
The Committee find that under the Kerala Model, a corpus has been created to 
provide insurance to the beneficiaries financed under NMDFC Schemes.  In line with 
the Kerala Model, SCAs have been advised to get insurance for the beneficiary and 
assets financed, to protect the beneficiary and his family from any untoward 
incident.  The Committee feel that if Kerala Model is replicated by all the States/UTs, 
it would save the SCAs who undertake the financing of a large number of 
beneficiaries from any default since in case of any untoward incident the claim can 
be realized by the SCAs.  In tune with the advisory, the SCAs have now started 
providing insurance along with the loan in the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Chandigarh, Mizoram, 

16 
 
Jammu & Kashmir and Delhi. The Committee recommends that the provision of 
insurance for beneficiaries and their assets should be adopted and implemented by 
all the States/UTs to safeguard the beneficiaries and SCAs. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
NMDFC has already issued advisory to all of its SCAs to do insurance of all the 
beneficiaries and their assets while disbursing funds under NMDFC Schemes.  The 
SCAs have since reported compliance. Further, Loan Distress Relief Fund (LDRF) 
Scheme being implemented by 3 SCAs in Kerala has been circulated to all the SCAs 
for developing similar scheme. The SCA in West Bengal has also finalized to set-up a 
corpus on similar lines and approached the State Govt. for approval.    
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE dated 05th August, 
2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.8.8) 
The Committee note that SCAs have been advised to organize awareness camps in 
areas with high minority concentration to disseminate information about the 
Schemes of NMDFC.  As per the norms fixed, each SCA is allocated 10 awareness 
camps @ ₹50,000/- per camp at the beginning of each year.  The Committee are 
constrained to observe that only 1077 camps could be organized between 2015-16 
and 2021-22 in the States of Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, J&K, 
and Uttrakhand. In 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2021-22 only 85, 92 and 76 camps could 
be organized, respectively. The Committee would like to understand the reasons for 
which awareness camps could not be organized as envisaged even when financial 
assistance of Rs.50,000 was provided for organizing each camp.  They recommend 
that the NMDFC/Ministry should identify the minority concentration districts in the 
country where the Schemes of NMDFC have not taken off well and more awareness 
camps should be organized particularly in those Districts/areas so that these 
schemes are able to attract the targeted population.   
Reply of the Government 
The details of the Awareness Camps organized by SCAs during the last 5 financial 
year’s is as given below:- 
 
Financial Year No. of Awareness Camps Organised 
2017-18 147 
2018-19 163 
2019-20 514 
2020-21 Awareness Camps are not organized due to Covid 
2021-22 323 (partially affected due to COVID)   
2022-23 265 
 
It may be seen from last 5 years’ achievement that SCAs are now showing interest 
in organizing Awareness Camps.  Further, the SCAs have been advised to organize 

17 
 
more awareness camps in areas with high minority concentration & backward areas 
to disseminate the information about the schemes of NMDFC. The SCAs are being 
regularly followed up to organize more awareness camps in the Minority 
Concentrated areas so that more demand for loan is generated. The SCAs have also 
been asked to invite local public representatives to participate in such awareness 
camps for greater publicity.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.9.10) 
The Committee find that NMDFC organizes periodic meetings with the SCAs for 
reviewing schemes implementation, carrying out beneficiaries verification and impact 
study through independent expert agencies and directs SCAs to place their 
beneficiary data on the respective websites for monitoring of the implementation of 
all the Schemes. They further note that NMDFC monitors the utilization of funds 
disbursed to SCAs as further fund disbursal is based on the submission of utilization 
certificates for funds drawn earlier. Simultaneously SCAs have been delegated 
powers, requisite freedom and flexibility in identification of beneficiaries, sanction 
and disbursement of loans and recoveries. The Committee are surprised to find that 
despite a stringent monitoring mechanism, there are several instances of default by 
SCAs and a very low number of beneficiaries to the extent that there are NPAs to the 
tune of ₹105.13 crore and an amount of ₹223.85 crore being overdue on 
beneficiaries. Several States/UTs such as Punjab, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Mizoram, Assam, Puducherry, etc have defaulted.  The Committee are of the strong 
view that a National level portal, which is proposed to be developed, can prove to be 
a milestone in making the information readily available and help taking quick 
decisions in case of any default.  In this context, however, the Committee are 
perturbed to note that the NMDFC had floated tenders inviting the bids for the 
development of software but the process could not materialize as its cost was 
considered high.  The Committee hope that the tenders will be floated again.  They 
would appreciate if the consultation with NIC/NICSI on the matter is expedited and 
the software is developed in a time-bound manner without any further delay.  The 
Committee would also like to suggest that once developed, all the SCAs must be 
asked to upload beneficiary data online onto the MIS portal of NMDFC so that the 
information is easily accessible for taking decisions and drawing future roadmap.  
The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of the measures taken in respect of 
the National Level Portal and uploading of beneficiary data on the MIS portal of the 
NMDFC in due course.  
Reply of the Government 
NMDFC has developed the web portal (mis.nmdfc.org) for uploading the beneficiary 
data by the SCAs in July, 2020. As on date, 28 SCAs are registered for making 
entries of beneficiary data on web portal.  Out of 28 SCAs, 24 SCAs have uploaded 
the data on the web portal. The data of 1.46 lacs beneficiaries under Term loan 

18 
 
Scheme and data of 47,124 SHGs under Micro Finance scheme and disbursement 
details of approximate 2581.32 crs (as on 02.11.22) is available on the MIS portal . 
NMDFC had earlier attempted to develop the software through NSDC, BSNL, Open 
Tender system, NIC & other sources.  However these attempts were not successful 
resulting in delay in computerization.  Now, NMDFC and ICICI Bank have signed an 
MoU on 23.08.2022 for development of financial accounting software and mobile 
app.  The MoU provides for development of financial accounting software for NMDFC 
and SCAs, loan accounting software for receiving and processing of loan applications 
and accounting of repayments from beneficiaries. The development of software is in 
progress. Once software is developed, the beneficiary detail in respect of all the 
lending partners will be uploaded on the MIS portal.  The existing software of the 
SCAs will be integrated with this software and SCAs not having the software will be 
given the access of this software. After commissioning of this software, the real time 
data of the beneficiaries, disbursement, and recovery of loans will be available with 
NMDFC & lending partners. With the commissioning of the software, close 
monitoring of the defaulting beneficiaries would be possible and this will ultimately 
help in improving grass root level recovery and bring down NPAs at the level of 
lending partners.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
 
 

19 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.7) 
The Promotional Schemes viz., Mahila Samridhi Yojana and Market Assistance 
Scheme are being run by NMDFC through the State Channelizing Agencies in the 
Country. Under Mahila Samridhi Yojana, training is given to a group of around 20 
women in any suitable women-friendly craft activity whereas, in Marketing 
Assistance Scheme, NMDFC assists the SCAs in organizing State/ District level 
exhibitions at selected locations.  The Committee are surprised to find that during 
the last five years, only 944 women from the States of Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Tripura, Uttrakhand, J&K and Uttar Pradesh have benefitted from the Scheme.  The 
Committee are further surprised with the frequency of the exhibitions organized as 
only 17 exhibitions were organized in Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Gujarat and 
Nagaland in the six years period from 2016-17 to 2021-22 under Market Assistance 
Scheme.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for the slow progress 
of these Schemes as well as the action envisaged by NMDFC to address any 
shortcomings leading to poor performance of the Schemes.  They feel that only SCAs 
should not be made responsible for the poor implementation of these Schemes as 
the Ministry is expected to take concrete and continuous efforts for making their 
Schemes successful. Since the onus of the overall Performance lies with the Ministry 
as well as NMDFC, the Committee would like them to act now so that the noble 
objectives to provide micro-credit assistance after adequate training to minority 
women and marketing assistance to the members of the Minority Communities are 
not defeated. 
Reply of the Government 
Mahila Samridhi Yojana (MSY) and Marketing Assistance Scheme are purely grant 
based schemes implemented by NMDFC through State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) 
nominated by respective State Govt/UT Administrations. The expenditure for 
conducting MSY and Marketing Assistance is met with surplus generated by NMDFC 
from its operations. With limited resources, NMDFC allocates 2 MSY program with 
grant of ₹6.00 lacs for 40 candidates and 1 exhibition (amount sanctioned based on 
the duration and number of stalls) to each functional SCAs during the beginning of 
every financial year.  It may be mentioned here that the Ministry vide its letter no. 
NMDFC-15014/2/2021-NMDFC-MOMA dated 27.10.2022 has advised NMDFC not to 
implement skilling or training schemes including MSY scheme. The skilling 
requirements of NMDFC’s beneficiaries would be met through PM Vikas scheme to be 
launched by the Ministry.  
 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 

20 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.28) 
 
The Committee are concerned to find that the beneficiaries from 8 States/UTs only 
have availed loans under the Micro-Finance Scheme since 2015-16 and the rate of 
interest charged on the loan sanctioned under the Scheme is 7% in Credit Line-1 
and 10% in Credit Line-2.  Maximum beneficiaries belong to West Bengal, Tamil 
Nadu, Kerala and Jammu & Kashmir.  The Committee are of the strong view that the 
7% and 10% interest rate charged from the beneficiaries by the State Channelizing 
Agencies is rather on the high side as the scheme is conceived to cater to the 
requirement of the poor members of the Self Help Groups to meet their livelihood 
particularly when the interest charged by NMDFC is only 1% from SCAs. To 
popularize the Microfinance Scheme, the Committee opines that the interest rate 
charged is required to be re-examined and revised so that a large number of 
individuals get attracted to the Scheme. The committee would like to be informed of 
the measures taken to popularize the Scheme in all the States/UTs. 
Reply of the Government 
The SCAs in the States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra & Sikkim are tying up with respective State Rural Livelihood Mission 
(SRLM) to utilize the SHGs formed and stabilized under SRLM program, for extending 
credit under the Micro-finance scheme of NMDFC. The detail of such SHGs & 
Federations have been shared with the SCAs to facilitate in extending micro-credit. 
Further, Canara Bank has also provided micro-credit of ₹3.45 crs to 156 SHG 
members in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Odisha & Telangana. Thus it may be seen that gradually micro-credit scheme are 
being implemented in other States/UTs as well, where in the recent past, this 
scheme was not being implemented. It may be further stated that NMDFC provides 
higher interest margin to the SCAs as they are required to deploy manpower to 
evaluate readiness of SHGs to avail credit, monitor fund utilization and loan 
recovery. All the funding under micro-finance scheme has been under Credit Line-1 
as the members of the SHGs are very poor and fall under income eligibility criteria of 
below double the poverty line. It may also be stated here that the rate of interest 
charged under Micro-finance scheme of NMDFC is one of the lowest in the micro-
finance sector. Reducing interest rates would adversely affect viability of the 
scheme.      
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
  

21 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.31) 
 
The Committee are surprised to find that the staff deployed at most of SCAs is 
inadequate even when there is a provision of Grant-in-Aid for SCAs. The Committee 
also find that the training of SCAs staff is not adequate as only 7 programs have 
been organized between 2016 to 2019.  No programme has been organized 
thereafter. The Committee, however, does not find any guideline prescribed by 
NMDFC for a minimum staff strength of SCAs or their training. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that NMDFC should fix a minimum number of staff strength for 
each SCA and should ensure that the staff strength and infrastructure of each SCA 
are in tune with the prescribed standard, before those are appointed as SCA. The 
Committee would also like the NMDFC to periodically hold training for SCA staff and 
also direct each SCA to hold training at a particular interval locally.   
Reply of the Government 
The channelizing agencies for implementing NMDFC schemes are nominated by the 
respective State Government/UTs. These SCAs are under the administrative control 
of concerned State Government/UTs. The staff strength of the SCA is decided by the 
respective State Government/UT.  NMDFC does not have any administrative control 
on it. However, NMDFC on its part has already taken up the matter with the State 
Government/UTs to strengthen the infrastructure of the SCAs, by deploying 
adequate number of staff in head office and at field level, for smooth 
implementation of NMDFC schemes.  
 
Further, NMDFC has advised the SCAs to strengthen their loan administration & 
recovery infrastructure by engaging outsource staff, undertake automation  and 
claim expenditure under revised Grant in Aid (GIA) Scheme, for effective 
implementation of NMDFC schemes.  
 
During the current financial year i.e. 2022-23, NMDFC has already planned training 
for Officials of SCAs.  The training is expected to commence from November, 2022. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.10) 
 
The Committee find that the equity structure of NMDFC has been revised six times 
since its inception in 1994 from ₹500.00 crore to ₹3,000.00 crore. The last revision 
was made in February 2015.  However, the authorized Share Capital of the Central 
Government, as well as State Governments, have not reached the maximum level till 
date. The Central Government has contributed 89.95%, whereas State Governments 
have contributed only 49.71% up to 31.05.2022. The Committee are perturbed to 
note that some of the States/UTs viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Lakshadweep, 
Meghalaya, Sikkim, Telangana and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have not contributed 
even a single penny towards the equity of NMDFC. The Committee further note that 
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have contributed very meager 
amounts.  They are surprised to note that all efforts made by NMDFC to maximize 
the equity from State Governments have remained futile.  The Committee are unable 
to comprehend the reasons for such non-cooperative behavior of State Government, 
despite being regularly approached.  Presumably, States are well aware that the 
availability of funds would enable NMDFC to enhance their capacity to fund welfare 
schemes of the Government in the interest of the targeted sections residing in the 
States. Hence, they must contribute. The Committee would, therefore, recommend 
that this issue needs to be placed at the highest level so that contribution from the 
defaulting States can be realized. The Committee would also like the Ministry to take 
appropriate measures to increase awareness among the deprived sections of the 
Minority Community to avail benefits under various Schemes of NMDFC. The 
Committee note that NMDFC has approached the Ministry to increase the authorized 
share capital from ₹3,000 crore to ₹5,000 crore.  They desire that the Ministry may 
examine and decide on it without further loss of time so that the proposal for 
increase in the authorized capital of NMDFC is approved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
NMDFC on its part is regularly approaching the concerned State Governments/UT 
Administration to contribute their earmarked share in the equity of NMDFC.  Further, 
letters from Secretary, Ministry of Minority Affairs (MoMA), Government of India & 
CMD, NMDFC are also written on regular intervals to Chief Secretaries of the 
respective State Government/UT Administration to contribute in the equity of 
NMDFC. Recently, Secretary, MOMA has written letters on 10th October, 2022 & by 
CMD, NMDFC to Chief Secretaries in the months of July-August, 2022 for 
contribution of their earmarked share in the Equity of NMDFC. Ministry may like to 
take appropriate action w.r.t enhancing Authorised Share Capital of NMDFC from 

23 
 
₹3,000 crs to ₹6,000 crs. Request in this regard was also submitted to the Ministry 
vide NMDFC letter dated 26.9.2022. NMDFC is already providing grant to its State 
Channelising Agencies (SCAs) to organize Loan Mela cum Awareness Camps in 
Minority Concentrated Districts/Blocks. Grant of ₹50,000 per camp is being released 
by NMDFC to SCAs to organize at least 10 Awareness Camps annually. During the 
F.Y 2021-22, the SCAs have organized 323 Loan Mela cum Awareness Camps in 
different parts of the country. Another 265 awareness camps have so far been 
organised during F.Y 2022-23. NMDFC has also taken up drive to generate 
awareness about its schemes on Social Media Platforms such as Facebook, 
Instagram, Twitter, Youtube with special focus in Minority Blocks. Success Stories of 
assisted beneficiaries are also being uploaded onto social media platforms to 
motivate target group to avail assistance under the schemes of NMDFC.   
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
 (Recommendation Para No.5.28) 
 
The Committee note that the various Schemes of NMDFC are implemented by State 
Channelizing Agencies (SCAs) nominated by the State Governments/ UTs 
Administrations.  These SCAs are corporations registered under the Companies Act 
and the funds to SCAs are released against Sovereign Guarantee issued by 
respective State Governments/UT Administrations. NMDFC has 45 SCAs in 27 States 
and 8 UTs.  Presently 39 SCAs are operational while 6 SCAs are non-operational 
mainly due to reasons like pending General Loan Agreement and furnishing of 
Sovereign Guarantee by the respective State Governments/UTs.  The Committee 
note that despite the best efforts of NMDFC, some SCAs could not be made 
operational in a large number of States/UTs i.e. Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Haryana, Nagaland, Mizoram, Punjab, Puducherry, Tripura, Gujarat, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh, as they did not settle the overdues.  The Committee find that NMDFC 
has tied up with Canara Bank for the implementation of their Schemes in August 
2021.  This experiment so far has helped to implement the Schemes.  However, the 
Committee are apprehensive that since the Banks also have to run their own 
business, it has to be ensured that the Schemes of NMDFC are given due attention 
and importance by the Bank.  The Committee further feel that NMDFC should 
explore further for tie ups with other regional Banks. The Committee are also of the 
view that the role of State Governments/UT Administrations is more important in the 
implementation of the NMDFC Schemes as these schemes are welfare-oriented and 
the successful implementation of these schemes reflects the sensitivity of the 
Governments towards targeted sections of the Minority Communities. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the State Governments, which have shown 
the least interest/indifference should be convinced about the potential benefits of 
the Schemes and brought on board so that the issues, if any, are resolved and the 
schemes are implemented by them.  
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
NMDFC is continuously making sincere efforts for early resumption of NMDFC 
program in the States which are not functional.  The State Agencies which are 
unable to repay their long pending overdues are pursued to settle over-dues either 
under One Time Settlement (OTS) Scheme or re-scheduling of over-dues, duly 
backed by the respective State Govt. Senior Officers of NMDFC are also undertaking 
visits personally to interact with senior State Govt. officials to convince them for 
early settlement of over-dues and start resumption of NMDFC program in the State. 
The team has already visited the States of Assam, Bihar, Punjab, Chhattisgarh & 
Uttar Pradesh. The visiting team is briefing the State Governments about the benefit 
of concessional credit schemes of NMDFC and the availability of grant under Grant-
in-Aid Scheme of Ministry to revive, improve the loan administration and recovery 
capability of the SCAs. The issue for settlement of over-dues & resumption of 
NMDFC financing scheme is also being regularly taken up at the level of Secretary, 
Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India with the concerned State 
Governments. Recently, Secretary, MOMA has written letters on 10th October, 2022 
& by CMD, NMDFC to Chief Secretaries in the months of July-August, 2022, for 
settlement of overdues so that implementation of NMDFC schemes can resume in 
these States.    
 
NMDFC is also in the process of finalizing tie-up with other Public Sector Banks for 
implementing its schemes. This shall help in coverage of beneficiaries under NMDFC 
schemes in States/UTs which are not functional presently.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment) O.M. No. LAFEAS-SJ&E014/34/2022-CSJE 
dated 05th August, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        RAMA DEVI 
                                           Chairperson, 
26th July, 2023                                                                Standing Committee on 
4     Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                               Social Justice and  
                                Empowerment 
  

26 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
26TH JULY, 2023. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room 
No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON  
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  4. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
  5. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  6. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
  7. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt.Sumtira Balmik 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
10. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
11. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
12. Smt Mamata Mohanta 
13. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 
 
 

27 
 
(i) Forty-Eighth Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
 Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
 Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of  the 
 National Minorities Development and Finance Corporation (NMDFC)’ of 
 Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report 
and to present the same to both the Houses on the ensuing session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT ON 
‘REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL MINORITIES DEVELOPMENT 
AND FINANCE CORPORATION (NMDFC)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY 
AFFAIRS. 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
15  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.3.25,3.26, 3.27, 5.29, 5.30, 6.7, 
7.11, 7.12, 8.8  & 9.10 
  
10 67% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.4.7,3.28, & 5.31 
 
 
03 20% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No.2.10 & 5.28  
 
02 13% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
00 00 
   100% 
 
 
 