 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants ( 2020-21)' of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and  Empowerment ( Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
 
SIXTEENTH  REPORT   
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
i 
 
16 

SIXTEENTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment) 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2020-21)' of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment ( Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
ii 


 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE iv 
 INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER -I Report 1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
16 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
52 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
53 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
55 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the second sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 10.11.2020.             
 
63 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons 
with Disabilities). 
  
66 
                                         
 
iii 
    

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras 
16. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  17. Shri Arjun Singh 
18. Smt. Supriya Sule 
19. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
#26. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
*28. Shri P. L. Punia 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31. Vacant 
 
__________ 
#   Shri Biswajit Daimary, MP (RS) resigned his seat in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.11.2020. 
*  Shri P.L. Punia, MP (RS) retired on 25.11.2020. 
 
  
iv 

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
2. Smt. Madhu Bhutani  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2020-21) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Sixteenth Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Seventh Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants ( 2020-21)' of the Ministry of Socia l Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
3rd March, 2020 . The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities  have 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in 
that Report on 11th September, 2020.  The Report was considered and adopted by the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
10.11.2020. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
  
     NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
10 November, 2020                                           Standing Committee on 
19 Kartika, 1942 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
Empowerment  
 
 
vi 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants (2020 -21)‟ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
1.2 The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
3rd March, 2020. It contained 21 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of a ll the observation s/recommendations have been received 
and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Para Nos.: 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.10, 3.11, 4.43, 4.44, 4.45, 4.47, 4.49, 
4.50, 4.51, 5.7, 6.5 and 7.10 
(Total: 15, Chapter - II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's reply: 
 Para No.: Nil  
             (Total: Nil, Chapter III) 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration:  
 Para No.: 4.46  
(Total: 1, Chapter - IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
 Para Nos.: 3.9, 4.48, 5.6, 5.8 and 6.6   
                                                    (Total: 5, Chapter - V) 
  

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken in 
respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report for which 
interim repl ies have been given by the Government , may be furnished at the 
earliest and, in any case, not later than three months after the presentation of this 
Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Ministry which 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO)  
(Recommendation Para No. 3.10) 
1.5 The Committee in their Seventh Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India 
(ALIMCO) is the sole implementing agency to supply aids and assistive devices 
for ADIP Camps. In order to maintain and improve the quality of aids and 
appliances manufactured by ALIMCO, the Committee strongly feel the need for 
healthy competition which must be infused by enlisting other agencies from this 
field. Even though, the Department is encouraging National Institutes (NIs) to 
produce aids and assistive devices but this is not likely to have desired results as 
each NI is catering to a specific category of disability and will manufacture 
equipment for that category only.   Moreover, as ALIMCO and NIs are under the 
administrative control of the Department of Empowerment of PwDs, healthy 
competition in real sense can‟t be expected. Besides while the Department have 
tried to argue that Government -produced devices are on no profit -no loss basis, 
the Committee feel that several social entrepreneurs can be present in the field 
to manufacture for Divyangjan under „Make in India‟  initiative with reasonable 
prices. The need is to identify those and extend them the opportunity to produce 
for general market too. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to 

3 
 
consider enlisting o ther agencies with proven caliber/efficiency in the 
manufacturing of aids and appliances to given competition to ALIMCO because, 
if taken with the right perspective, it will not only improve the quality of products 
but also bring in cost-effectiveness.” 
1.6  The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated 
as follows:- 
“It is submitted that ALIMCO is not the sole implementing agency for distribution 
of aids and assistive devices under the ADIP Scheme of the Department. Though 
ALIMCO is the major implementing agency, National Institutes, Composite 
Regional Centres  (CRCs), District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs), 
Indian Red Cross Societies (IRCS), State Govt. Corporations and NGOs  are 
also entrusted with the task of distribution of aids and assistive devices. These 
implementing agencies can buy aids and a ssistive devices from any 
manufacturer after following the provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR).  
Further, ALIMCO is not manufacturing all aids & assistive devices distributed by 
it under the ADIP Scheme, but buying some of these from Indian Manufac turers 
after following GFR provisions. In addition, ALIMCO also imports some aids and 
assistive devices such as Smart Cane, MSIED Kit, parts of Hearing Aid, Parts of 
Motorized Tricycle etc. Necessary action is being taken to change the 
Procurement Policy o f ALIMCO to promote the „Make in India‟ programme and 
indigenize these products, thereby promoting Indian Manufactures. Besides, 
National Institutes are also manufacturing aids and assistive devices relating to 
their respective field of disabilities.  
As r egards quality of aids and assistive devices manufactured by 
ALIMCO, the following is submitted:- 
(i) The quality control system in the Corporation has multilayer system of 
quality checks at each stage of production. 
(ii) 18 categories of fast moving produ cts of ALIMCO are having valid ISI 
licenses. Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) undertakes periodical inspections of 
quality in this regard. 

4 
 
(iii) In July, 2017 , ALIMCO was awarded ISO 9001:2015 for a period of three 
years. In addition, the Corporation is als o having a valid Environmental 
Management System Standard ISO 14001:2015 awarded in March, 2019 by BIS. 
(iv) In order to ensure third party inspection of the products of ALIMCO, the 
Quality Council of India (Govt. organization under the Ministry of Commerc e) has 
been engaged to assess the quality compliance of 13 fast moving products of the 
Corporation. In the last report covering the fourth quarter of the Financial Year 
2019-20, 13 products assessed by the Quality Council of India were found to be 
100% quality compliant. The only exception was tricycle which was reported to 
be 98% quality compliant.” 
  

5 
 
1.7  The Committee note from the reply of the Department that Artificial Limbs 
Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO)  is not the sole implementing 
agency for distribution of aids and assistive devices for distribution under 
Scheme of Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fitti ng of Aids and 
Appliances (ADIP ), and that  some other agencies viz. National Institutes, 
Composite Regional Centres, District Disability Rehabilitation Centres, Indian Red 
Cross Society, NGOs and State Government Corporations have also been 
entrusted with distribution of aids and appliances under the said Scheme. These 
implementing agencies are allowed to buy aids and assistive devices from any 
manufacturer after following the provisions of GFR.  The Committee have been 
further informed that in addition, ALIMCO is not manufacturing all the aids and 
assistive devices required to be distributed under ADIP Scheme, but also buying 
some from Indian manufacturers.  Besides, the ALIMCO reportedly imports some 
devices such as smart cane, MSIED kit, parts of hearing Aid and Motorised 
Tricycle, etc. The Committee , in their original Report , had desired that the 
Department should identify and enlist the Indian Manufacturers who are 
producing aids and devices for PwDs  under ‘Make in India ’ initiative. The 
Department have now submitted that the procurement policy of AL IMCO is being 
changed to encourage Indian manufacturers to produce these devi ces 
indigenously under the ‘Make in India ’ Progamme. However, the timeline for the 
same has not been furnished.  The Committee desire that the Department should 
finalize the revised procurement policy of ALIMCO to include Indian Manufactures 
under a set time frame .  To ensure quality of aids and assistive devices 
manufactured by the Corporation, the Ministry have intimated about a multilayer 
system of quality checks at each stage of production, periodical inspections by 

6 
 
BIS and  the Quality Council of India being engaged as a third party inspection 
agency.  From the information furnished about ISO ratification of ALIMCO 
products, the Committee find that ISO 9001:2015 certificate awarded to ALIMCO 
for three years in July, 2017 has since expired in July, 2020 and thus would urge 
upon the Department to get it renewed at the earliest to maintain the quality of 
their products.  The Committee also desire to be apprised of the action taken to 
bring down the dependence on imports at the earliest.  Since the quality of 
equipment distributed  in the camps organized in States sometimes are not upto 
the mark, and has been raised by  the members of the Committee during the 
meetings with the Departm ent, t he Committee , recommend that the Department 
should conduct surprise inspections of these camps and feedback of the 
beneficiaries may be obtained.  A technical person may be made available on -site 
in such camps to address any difficulties faced by Divyangs or to train them in 
using the devices properly.  As the Committee note that the quality compliance of 
the ALIMCO tricycle is 98 p er cent, the y desire that servicing of these tricycles 
including repairs and replacement of parts be made available free of cost to the 
beneficiaries under the ADIP Scheme.   
 
 
  

7 
 
B. Scheme for Implementation of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
(SIPDA) 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.43) 
1.8 The Committee in their Seventh Report had recommended as follows:- 
“BE for SIPDA for the years 2018 -19 and 2019-20 at ₹300 and ₹350 crore 
respectively was reduced at RE stage to ₹258.30 crore and ₹260 crore. The 
Committee note that AE incurred for 2018 -19 is slightly higher by ₹2.52 crore  
vis-à-vis RE. However, for the year 2019 -20, BE of ₹315 crore was reduced to 
₹260 crore at RE stage. Shockingly, the AE incurred till 31.01.2020 is ₹93.76  
i.e. a mere 36% of RE. The Department has now merged many small schemes 
under SIPDA after the recommendation of the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) in September, 2017. In this backdrop, the Committee are of the view that 
SIPDA, being an umbrella scheme and h aving merged many schemes in it, 
should have been allotted more funds instead of reduced allocation at RE stage 
in 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The Committee apprehend that such a reduced 
allocation indicates that several small schemes, even after merger with SIPD A, 
probably are not in a position to use the allocated amounts, thereby defeating the 
very purpose of the merger, for instance schemes like AG&P, establishment of 
colleges for deaf etc. have not been able to utilize funds completely and have 
performed poorly in 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. Hence, the Committee would like to 
be apprised of the reasons for reduced allocations for 2019 -20 as well as their 
failure to even spend a significant amount of reduced allocation till 31.01.2020. 
The Committee impress upon the D epartment to ensure that a scheme like 
SIPDA, having components of national importance i.e. Accessible India 
Campaign, Composite Regional Centres, Unique Disability ID project, National 
Action Plan (NAP) etc. should not suffer for want of funds and be capa ble of fully 
utilizing the allocated amount.” 
 
 

8 
 
1.9  The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated 
as follows:- 
“Under SIPDA scheme revised allocations were done after assessing the 
frequency of expenditure of major componen ts under SIPDA scheme during the 
month of October, 2019.  However the major reduction of ₹60.00 crore was made 
under National Action Plan for Skill Development Program where BE for 
F.Y.2019-20 was allocated ₹100 crore which was revised to ₹40.00 crore as t he 
reduction in the estimate corresponds to the current streamlining of the scheme 
wherein stress was emphasized on measures taken for identification of genuine 
training partners and conducting elaborate monitoring mechanisms. At the end of 
F.Y. 2019 -20, a n amount of ₹217.34 crore i.e. 83.59% could be utilized under 
SIPDA. The breakup of the expenditure done in the components of umbrella 
SIPDA scheme are given below: 
Funds released under the SIPDA Scheme during the 2019-20 (upto 31.03.2020) 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Sub Scheme/ Programmes BE  
2019-20 
RE  
2019-20 
Expenditure  
2019-20 
Percentage of Ex
penditure  
2019-20 of RE 
1 Creation of barrier free environment under the   
SIPDA Scheme, other than AIC 
13.00 19.60 15.55 79% 
2 Creation of barrier free environment under the Acce
ssible India Campaign (AIC) 
105.00 112.00 134.19 120% 
3 Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) 70.00 70.00 50.10 72% 
4 National Action Plan for Skill Development for  
PwDs 
100.00 40.00 4.33 11% 
5 District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRCs) 7.50 4.00 3.18 80% 
6 Unique Disability Identification (UDID) 13.00 10.00 7.87 79% 
7 Awareness Generation and Publicity (AGP) 3.00 2.00 2.12 106% 
8 Research on Disability Related Technology, 
Product and Issues Scheme 
1.00 0.40 0.0 0% 
9 In Service Training And Sensitization of functionarie
s of  State Govts, Local Bodies and other Service  
Providers. 
2.00 2.00 0.0 0% 
10 Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector for Pro-
viding Employment to Persons with Disabilities. 
0.50 0.00 0.0 0% 
  Total 315.00 260.00 217.34 83.59% 

9 
 
  
The expenditure of the individual components of SIPDA scheme was more 
than 100% under Accessible India Campaign (AIC) & Awareness Generation and 
Publicity (AGP). Expenditure between 70-90% was achieved under sub-schemes 
namely (i) Creation of barrier free environment under the   SIPDA Scheme, other 
than AIC (ii) Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) (iii) District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centre (DDRCs) (iv) Unique Disability Identification 
(UDID).   However, less expenditure was achieved under four components of the 
scheme viz.(a) National Action Plan for Skill Development for PwDs (b) Research 
on Disability Related Technology, Product and Issues Scheme (c) In Service 
Training And Sensitization of functionaries of   State Govts, Local Bodies and 
other Service Providers. (d) Ince ntive to Employers in the Private Sector for 
Providing Employment to Persons with Disabilities.  
The reasons for less/no expenditure are given as under:- 
a. The National  Action Plan for Skill Training (NAP), BE ₹ 100.00 crore and  
RE ₹40.00 crore has less rele ases due to drastic changes in the monitoring of 
the scheme. Therefore, the overall budget was also downsized initially at  
RE stage. NAP under SIPDA was undergoing a rigorous overhaul to enable 
streamlining of the process, to check financial irregularitie s by ETPs and to 
ensure a robust and secure fund flow mechanism. The scheme of NAP was 
reviewed so that the output reaches the correct beneficiaries as per laid down in 
the guidelines. Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled 
Bio-Metric Attendance System  (AEBAS), Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), 
Video Conferencing (VC) facility, trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory 
features at trained centres.   Training is imparted through Empanelled Training 
Partners (ETPs). Validity of most of the ETPs has been expired. The period from 
April, 2019 to Dec ember, 2019 was expended in effecting the above process of 
checks and balances. These initiatives slowed down the process of release of 
funds. Hence the expenditure of NAP could not meet upto  the level of RE 
allocated of ₹40.00 crore. 
 

10 
 
b. Due to non -receipt of any proposals as well as UCs of previous financial years 
under Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector for Providing Employment to 
Persons with Disabilities. 
c. Due to non -receipt of UCs of previous financial years under the  scheme of In 
Service Training a nd Sensitization of functionaries of  State Governments, Local 
Bodies and other Service Providers. 
d. Due to non -receipt of adequate and complete proposals from the implementing 
agencies under Research on Disability Related Technology, product and issues. 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
1.10 From the reply furnished by the Department, t he Committee note with 
concern that the scaling down of budget allocation during 2019-20 for SIPDA by  
₹ 60.00 crore at RE stage was due to low frequency of expenditure under one of 
its important component ‘National Action Plan for Skill Development Programme’, 
which was undergoing the process of streamlining and rigorous overhauling of 
the Scheme to check financial irregularities by empanelled Training Partners 
(ETPs) and to ensure a robust and secure fund flow mechanism .  As a result only 
11 percent of the allocation under National Action Plan (NAP) could be spent even 
though the overall expenditure under SIPDA was 83.59 percent during the year 
2019-20. The Committee cannot but wonder as to how the ETPs could commit 
financial irregul arities, despite existence of a vigilance and monitoring 
mechanism.  They feel that such ETPs should not be employed again and a fresh 
search be made to find genuine and committed ETPs who are working for the 
welfare of Divyangs.  The Committee desire to know whether this  process has 
since been completed and the new features introduced in this component .  The 
Committee hope that after streamlining the  NAP for Skill Development 
Programme, the number of beneficiaries would increase and allocation of funds  
for this programme be utlilised fully.  The Committee are of the firm  view that the 
success of such schemes can only be gauged from the number of beneficiaries , 
who either got employment or could earn if self employed , after undergoing 
training.  Hence, t he Committee desire  that the Department should furnish data 
pertaining to number of beneficiaries who got employment after completing the 
training since inception of the  Programme.  The Committee have also observed 
that since validity of most of the Empanelled Training Partn ers (ETPs) ha s 
expired, the Department need to be pro-active in identifying worthy ETPs , well in 

12 
 
time to maintain the continuity of the training programmes. The Committee also 
found that the sub -schemes viz. (i) Research on Disability Related Technology, 
product and Issues Scheme; (ii) In Service Training and Sensitization of 
functionaries of State Governments, Local Bodies and other Service Providers; 
(iii) Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector for providing Employment to 
PwDs have zero expenditure  due to lack of proposals and UCs . In Committee’s 
view, these sub-schemes were not performing well even before their merger with 
SIPDA and need to be reviewed thoroughly to see whether they are serving the 
desired purpose.  As research part can also be taken care of by RCI or ALIMCO, 
an assessment may be made if the sub -scheme on research need to continue or 
not.  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  

13 
 
C. Setting up of composite Regional Centres (CRCs) 
 
(Recommendation, Para 4.46) 
 
1.11 The Committee in their Seventh Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee find that the Department have set up 20 CRCs to provide 
rehabilitation services to Divyangjan, train persons, create awareness, etc. of 
which three are yet to start functioning. However, a scrutiny of the details given in 
the Department's latest Annual Report suggests that out of 18 CRCs, 5 CRCs 
have been given only 1 st installment of funds while some have got 3 each. The 
Department may apprise as to how these CRCs are functional with just one 
installment. Also out of seven NE states, only Assam and Tripura have CRCs, 
which would mean that a total of 1,74,389 Divyangjan of the rest five states (as 
per census 2011) have not been served by any CRC so far. The Committee 
hence recommends that th e Department may pay special attention to the 
remaining NE states i n the matter. They further note that of the remaining three 
CRCs, one in Andaman and Nicobar has been inaugurated recently and other at 
Sikkim is likely to start functioning soon. During t he evidence, the Department 
have informed that efforts are being make to have one CRC in each State. While 
it is a laudable target and ideally should be done, the Committee feel that a small 
State or UT with lesser population and State/UT with large popula tion cannot be 
on the same page because of vast difference in their requirements. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to aim realistically for 
establishing CRCs in consonance with the population of a State.” 
  
1.12  The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated 
as follows:- 
 
“The Department is working towards establishing CRCs in various States/UTs 
across the country subject to concerned States/UTs making available suitable 
land (free of cost) and built up spac e for temporary accommodation. So far the 
establishment of 21 CRCs across the country have been approved. In the State 

14 
 
of Uttar Pradesh, two CRCs have been set up at Lucknow and Gorakhpur as per 
the land and other facilities provided by the State Government. 
 
In respect of NE States, approval has already been granted to set up 
CRCs in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Sikkim. 
CRC in the State of Assam and Tripura is functional respectively at Guwahati 
and Agartala and efforts are on to expeditiously operationalise the CRCs 
sanctioned for other four States also. 
 
The Committee‟s advice to the Department to aim realistically for 
establishing CRCs in consonance with the population of a State rather than one -
State-one-CRC formula is accep ted and the Department will work on that.   But 
this is subject to the concerned States and UTs making available suitable land 
(free of cost) and built up space for temporary accommodation.”   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
1.13 The Committee , in their original recommendation, had sought reasons as 
to how five Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) , which were given just one 
installment of funds, could function without subsequent release of funds. The 
Committee are disappointed that the Department have not responded  on this  
issue. The Committee, therefore, assume that the said five CRCs are perhaps not 
functional as no organization can survive without funds. The Committee would, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to furnish precise information on t he 
functional status of all the CRCs, Statewise.  
With regard to Committee’s recommendation that the number of CRCs in a 
State/UT must be in consonance of the population of that particular State/UT, 
even though the Department have accepted the advice in pr inciple, they  have 
given an evasive reply that establishment of CRCs in a particular State/UT 
depends upon the availability of the land, free of cost, by that State/UT 
Government. It cannot be a pre -condition as in Committee’s view, t he 
Department, should first decide to establish a CRC in a particular State/UT  based 
on the population of P wDs , demography and the need of CRC in a specific area  
and then ask the concerned State/UT  Government to provide land or a 
constructed structure for setting up of the CRC . In case State/UT  Government is 
not willing or not in a position to provide land for the CRC, then the Department 
should approach any Central department like Railways having  land to spare in 
that area. In case even this is not possible, then the Departme nt must arrange 
funds for setting up of CRCs from their own resources in an underserved area 
because welfare of PwDs must not be compromised. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12) 
2.1 The Committee note that during the year 2019 -20, the Department was 
sanctioned a budget allocation of ₹1204.90 crore which was revised downward to  
₹1100.00 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure till 18.02.2020 is only ₹669.90 
crore which is around 60.90% of the RE and the remaining 39.10% of RE funds will be 
required to spent by the Department by 31.03.2020. The Committee find that the pace 
of expenditure in the first three quarters of the financial year had been very slow and 
around 40% o f the budget still remains unutilized, resulting in an uneven and in 
consistent expenditure pattern by the Department. The Department have attributed this 
uneven/inconsistent expenditure pattern to the imposition of Election code of conduct in 
the first quarter, non-requirement of funds by NHFDC in the Second quarter, overhaul of 
skill training under Nation Action Plan (NAP) and the off -repeated factors such as non -
receipt of utilization certificates (UCs), inadequate proposals from the State 
Governments and character of the Schemes being demand-driven. 
          The Committee feel that while the Department is seeking special permission to 
get the ceiling of 25% expenditure in the last quarter relaxed and are quite hopeful, it 
should not become a regular aff air. The Department have hardly taken any new 
initiatives for timely receipt of Utilization Certificates (UCs) and proposals and continued 
with the outdated practice of sending reminders, holding conferences/video conferences 
etc which have not yielded des ired results. The Committee are of the view that when a 
large chunk of the funds allocation remains unutilized till the fag end of the financial 
year, the focus automatically shifts towards spending the funds somehow to raise the 
expenditure figure and this in-turn may lead to hasty and faulty scrutiny of the proposals 
received. Considering these possibilities, the Committee would like the Department to 
ensure that every release of funds must clearly spell out the time -limit for submitting 
UCs. In case UCs are not received by that time, the Department must immediately start 
vigorously pursuing the issue with the State Governments.   Since receipt of proper 
proposals is still an issue, the Committee desire that the Department can do some out 

17 
 
of the box thinking and prepare a draft proposal/template for their major schemes to act 
as a guiding document for DMs/State officials. Also they should be proactive in seeking 
the help of local public representatives to identify areas which need their schemes most 
and to pursue the issue with all concerned state authorities as well. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 During the Financial year 2019 -20, Department was sanctioned a budget 
allocation of ₹1204.90 crore, which was revised downward to ₹1100.00 crore at RE 
stage. As against the RE of ₹1100.00 crore, the Department has released an amount of 
₹1016.18 crore which was 92.38% of the RE. The details of efforts made by the 
Department under its various schemes are given below: 
(a)      Under the scheme of Assistance to Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fittings of 
Aids and Appliances (ADIP), out of RE of ₹222.50 crore, an amount of ₹213.83 crore 
(96.10%) was released during 2019 -20. However, due to the impact of COVID -19 
pandemic, funds to the tune of  ₹8.67 crore ( ₹3.93 crore under Rest of Country (ROC) 
and ₹4.74 crore under NE) could not be released as holding of camps for distribution of 
aids and assistive devices was not possible in terms of Govt. orders relating to 
lockdown and maintaining social d istancing. Hence, to avoid parking of funds, grant -in-
aid against the proposals of NGOs was not released during the month of March, 2020 in 
consultation with the Integrated Finance Division of the Department. 
In order to ensure that utilization certificate s are received from the implementing 
agencies in time, the provisions of General Financial Rules are followed and suitable 
clauses are incorporated in the sanction orders for submission of the UC within the 
prescribed time.   Besides, follow up action is al so taken to impress upon all the 
implementing agencies to submit the Utilization Certificates in time.   Copies of the 
sanction orders are also invariably endorsed to local Member of Parliament/Member of 
Legislative Assembly for their kind information. 
Under the ADIP Scheme, detailed guidelines/procedures for timely release    are 
prepared with the approval of Hon‟ble Minister (SJ&E) at the beginning of the financial 
year itself. All the implementing agencies are taken on board and pursued vigorously for 
timely submission of   proposals along with furnishing of data relating to unspent 

18 
 
balances,  and proper action plan for urgent utilization of the unspent balances, if 
any,  available with them.   All State Governments are also addressed to recommend 
proposals o f suitable implementing agencies in time so that the same could be 
examined and processed for release of funds. 
(b)      Under Scholarships for Students with Disabilities, the Budget Estimate for 2019 -
20 was ₹125.00 crore which was reduced to ₹108.67 crore at Revised Estimate (RE) 
stage due to requirement of funds under other schemes of the Department.   Out of  
RE of ₹108.67 crore, an amount of ₹95.75 crore (88.11%) was released during  
2019-20.   ₹12.92 crore (unspent balance) could not be rel eased due to non receipt of 
payment files from the States due to impact of COVID-19 pandemic. 
           The Department, apart from other modes of communication, had pursued the 
matter of creating awareness about scholarship schemes with the State Nodal Of ficers 
by conducting video conferences, to encourage more students with disabilities to apply 
for scholarship.   In addition, advertisements were also released in English/Hindi and in 
regional languages to spread awareness about the scheme. All the State N odal Officers 
are timely reminded about the verification of applications and pursued vigorously for 
timely completion of verification process and submission of payment files. 
(c)      The Department is implementing a Scheme for providing financial 
assistance for undertaking activities in pursuance of the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, known as the “Scheme for Implementation of Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016  (SIPDA)”.  One of the components of the SIPDA scheme is for 
Creation of Barr ier Free Environment other than the area covered under Accessible 
India Campaign. The Department in the first month of financial year invariably writes to 
all the Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of States/UTs inviting fresh proposals for 
Creation of Barrier Free Environment for PwDs.    In this F.Y., the said letter was written 
on 20 th April, 2020. The State/UT Governments are advised to submit proposals in 
respect of construction work in public centric buildings to be accompanied by cost 
estimates d uly prepared/approved by an officer not below the rank of an Executive 
Engineer. 
Under SIPDA, for Creation of Barrier Free environment, funds are released to 
State/UTs Government/Universities/Autonomous bodies/Statutory bodies only after 

19 
 
examining the vali dity of their proposals -- whether they fulfill the condition of the easy 
access of persons with disabilities in existing Government buildings by construction of 
Lifts, Accessible Toilets, Ramps, Railings, etc. as well as receipt of previous utilization 
certificates. For this purpose, reminder letters are written to States/UTs and other 
Autonomous bodies/Universities to furnish Utilization Certificates in order to process the 
next releases. The utilization certificate becomes due after 12 months from the rel ease 
of sanction order date. This is a demand dependent scheme for which States/UTs have 
to send proposals. 
In the beginning of F.Y. 2019 -20, the SIPDA Budget was ₹315 crore and the 
budget was scaled down in RE ₹260 crore after anticipating that major comp onent of 
SIPDA schemes have not received adequate proposals to meet the expenditure upto 
the level of Budget Estimate(BE) of SIPDA scheme. Where the releases were initially 
slow as already mentioned however, at the end of F.Y. 2019 -20, an amount of ₹217.34 
crore as 83.59% of the RE could be utilized under SIPDA. Since overall Department‟s 
budget was revised by the Ministry of Finance by downsizing the RE by ₹104.90 crore, 
SIPDA being an umbrella scheme with ten components had to be downsized by  
₹55.00 crore. 
In order to reduce the delay in time for processing the proposals, a checklist is 
also being prepared for processing the proposals quickly so that checking the 
documents of the proposals could be done timely following the requirement of scheme 
guidelines and in pursuance of the general requirements from finance point of view. The 
suggestion to seek the help of local public representatives has been noted. 
(d) Under Accessible India Campaign (AIC), the total expenditure exceeded the 
proportionate BE of ₹105 crore under SIPDA and proportionate RE of ₹112 crore, since 
releases made were to the tune of ₹134.19 crore.   This indicates that under AIC, the 
Department was able to call for UCs and even exceed the proportionate allocation to 
AIC under the umbrella scheme of SIPDA.   Under AIC, proactive steps are being taken 
to ensure timely submission of Utilization Certificates and consistency in work progress 
was closely monitored by the following measures: 

20 
 
1. MIS Portal – Real time monitoring of progress is being do ne through the MIS 
portal which is required to be updated by States/UTs and concerned Central 
Departments on a monthly basis. 
2. Written Communication – Regular monitoring is also done through letters sent 
collectively with the barrier free component of SIPDA  and on case specific basis. 
The letters have been sent to States/UTs at the level of Secretary, Joint 
Secretary as well as Director on  the subjects of submission of UCs along with 
work progress report, submission of fresh and revised cost estimates as wel l as 
completion of retrofitting work within the stipulated timeframe. 
3. One-to-one meeting by Secretary DEPwD – As a new initiative, States/UTs 
were called to make presentations on the status of work in  the respective 
States/UTs to DEPwD which helped 
a. Clarify issues commonly found in the proposals related to the accessibility 
features being proposed; and 
b. Gave States/UTs an opportunity to seek clarifications to send proper 
proposals which eventually helped in getting cleared in the last FY. 
 These direct meetings with deputed officers of social welfare departments and 
engineering departments, helped seek clarifications and get the documents, 
proposals as well as UCs from States of Jammu & Kashmir, Arunachal Pradesh 
and Mizoram to be in a position to releas e grants in an efficient manner, within 
targeted time frame.   Details of fund released to these States are as follows: 
Sl.  
No. 
States/UTs No. of Buildings funded Total Amount 
Released (in `) 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
6 buildings in Itanagar 78927625 
2 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
11 buildings (10 Jammu & 
1 Srinagar) 
69199500 
3 Mizoram 10 buildings in Aizawal 41766809 
  
  

21 
 
4. To instill standardization in the proposals being submitted, AIC Division has: 
a. Circulated an Easy Reckoner – A summarized compilation of 10 key features of 
accessibility in built up environment with specifications and minimum 
requirements have been prepared and circulated to all Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs, along with reminder letters, the latest 
being sent in February 2020. 
b. Sharing sample Checklists and cost estimates for replication – The AIC 
Division, as and when requested, shares sample checklists and cost estimate 
formats with concerned agencies so that standard and correct documents are 
received. While it is understood that the format of proposal may differ from State 
to State, DEPwD emphasizes on provision of the 10 key accessibility features 
identified by the Department in the Easy Reckoner. 
In regard to the suggestion of seeking the help of local public representatives to 
identify areas which need their schemes most and to pursue the issue with all 
concerned State authorities as well, the point has been noted and it would be explored 
how to operationalize it. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13) 
2.3 The Committee appreciate that the Department have taken a decision to relax 
the mandatory requirement of State Government Recommendations (SGR) for 
providing funds to implementing NGO/agency now. According to the said decision, if the 
approval of State Government is not received within 60 days, it will be deemed   to have 
been given, if all other criteria have been met and the Centre is found well equipped and 
suitable. However, such a decision puts a huge responsibility on the Department as in 
such cases they have to finally decide on the fitness of proposals when State 
Government‟s recommendation is absent. The Committee hope that the Department 
officers are aware of this and are ready to shoulder the responsibility and be 

22 
 
accountable for it. They, therefore, expect that the Department in timely approval of 
Schemes/Programmes by the State Governments and also result in a balance and 
proper utilization of funds in all the four quarters of financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 There is a provision in Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) that 
Department may decide on the proposals which are not approved and sent by the 
State/UT administration within 60 days. As per the Scheme guidelines para 3.6.2.5, 
such proposals may  be decided based on the inspection report submitted by the 
Inspecting Officer who is district welfare officer of the State Government . 
NGOs/Agencies which have won National Awards in the institutional category of the 
schemes being run by this Department and the NGOs which have been getting grant 
regularly for the last three years are only considered for determination of the eligibility to 
receive advance for the ongoing financial years. This, however, is subject to condition 
that the grant for last year h as been cleared for full and final. It is agreed that Central 
Government has to bear huge responsibility in processing these cases for which 
reasons the State/UT Governments are also being impressed upon to send their 
recommendations timely.   
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14) 
2.5 The Committee recall that few years back, Parliamentary Constituency 
Monitoring Committe es on Road Safety were constituted at district level by the 
Government for better road safety under the chairmanship of MPs. As the local public 
representatives, MPs/MLAs, are well versed with the ground realities of their 
constituencies and as their feedb ack could be of immense use in effective 
implementation of various welfare schemes for Divyangjan, the Committee feel that the 
Department of PwDs can also explore setting up such Parliamentary Constituency 
Monitoring Committees to put to use the experience  of the public representatives in 
design, delivery, monitoring and implementation of welfare schemes for Divyangjan. 

23 
 
The Committee are also of the view that the experience of the local public 
representatives may come in handy in pursuing the issue of timel y  submission of UCs 
and proposals from State Governments, especially from North Eastern Region where 
this Department has not able to bring all Governments on board for their schemes, 
despite prioritizing it. Had the Department brought such issues to the n otice of the local 
public representatives from NE states, such issues could have been resolved obviating 
the need for surrendering of the funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department  to consider setting up such Parliamentary Constituency Moni toring 
Committees on Welfare of Divyangjan, to help them to design assess, monitor, 
effectively implement various programmes and thus, utilize the allocated resources fully 
for the welfare of Divyangjan. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Under ADIP Scheme, in or der to receive sufficient proposals from NE region, 
letters are sent to the concerned State Governments in the beginning of the financial 
year for forwarding the proposals of suitable implementing agencies. Further, in case of 
non-receipt of sufficient pro posals from States/ Union Territories, Artificial Limbs 
Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO), Kanpur and National Institutes 
functioning under the administrative control of the Department, the major implementing 
agencies, are involved in implementin g the ADIP Scheme across the country including 
the Northern Eastern Region.  
          Under Scholarship scheme, in order to receive sufficient proposals from NE 
region, during 2019 -20 advertisement was released by the Department in all national 
newspapers and regional newspapers. Besides, an advertisement was also released 
with special attention to NE States. 
In addition, apart from other modes of communication, the State Governments 
particularly of the NE region have been sensitized through video -conferencing to create 
awareness about the Scholarship schemes amongst institutions & students with 
disabilities so that slots could be fully utilized. 
Under the Scheme for implementation of Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 (SIPDA), funds are provided to the States/UTs across the country including North 

24 
 
East for creation of barrier free environment for persons with disabilities in existing 
Government buildings other than the area covered under AIC by construction of lifts, 
ramps, accessible toilets, etc . for the benefit of persons with disabilities. Accordingly, 
the monitoring is done through physical inspection by the Department officials during 
the processing of related proposals under Barrier Free Environment other than area 
covered under AIC. 
          Under SIPDA -Barrier Free component, the total fund of ₹12.09 crore was 
released to North East for State Government of Meghalaya in F.Y. 2019 -20 in order to 
make accessible existing Government buildings for persons with disabilities, the 
expenditure incurred under North East is 26.28% of the allocated RE of ₹46.00 crore for 
F.Y. 2019-20. The Department had made efforts in finalizing the proposals of 
Government of Meghalaya by organizing the Power Point Presentation for the proposed 
buildings in Shillong District of Meghalaya. 
Under AIC, State nodal officers are already nominated from either the Directorate 
of Social Welfare at the State/UT or the Office of SCPD. 
 However, the option of Parliamentary Constituency Monitoring Committees of 
Welfare of Divyang jan has been noted for more focused implementation of the 
Schemes for the Department.  The Department, with the approval of its Minister, would 
like to approach the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariat in sending out 
communications to this effect to the Ho n‟ble MPs and the State Assembly Secretariats 
to inform the Hon‟ble MLAs.  
 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10) 
2.7 The Committee note that Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India 
(ALIMCO) is the sole implementing agency to supply aids and assistive devices for 
ADIP Camps. In order to maintain and improve the quality of aids and appliances 
manufactured by ALIMCO, the Committee strongly feel the need for healthy competition 

25 
 
which must be infused by enlisting other agencies from this field. Even though, the 
Department is encouraging National Institutes (NIs) to produce aids and assistive 
devices but this is not  likely to have desired results as each NI is catering to a specific 
category of disability and will manufacture equipment for that category only.   Moreover, 
as ALIMCO and NIs are under the administrative control of the Department of 
Empowerment of PwDs, h ealthy competition in real sense can‟t be expected. Besides 
while the Department have tried to argue that Government -produced devices are on no 
profit-no loss basis, the Committee feel that Several Social entrepreneurs can be 
present in the field to manufa cture for Divyangjan under „Make in India‟   initiative  with 
reasonable prices. The need is to identify those and extend them the opportunity to 
produce for general market too. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to 
consider enlisting other agencies with proven caliber/efficiency in the manufacturing of 
aids and appliances to given competition to ALIMCO because, if taken with the right 
perspective, it will not only improve the quality of products but also bring in cost -
effectiveness. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 It is submitted that ALIMCO is not the sole implementing agency for distribution 
of aids and assistive devices under the ADIP Scheme of the Department. Though 
ALIMCO is the major implementing agency, National Institutes, Composite Regio nal 
Centres(CRCs), District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs), Indian Red Cross 
Societies (IRCS), State Govt. Corporations and NGOs  are also entrusted with the task 
of distribution of aids and assistive devices. These implementing agencies can buy  aids 
and assistive devices from any manufacturer after following the provisions of General 
Financial Rules (GFR).  Further, ALIMCO is not manufacturing all aids & assistive 
devices distributed by it under the ADIP Scheme, but buying some of these from Ind ian 
Manufacturers after following GFR provisions. In addition, ALIMCO also imports some 
aids and assistive devices such as Smart Cane, MSIED Kit, parts of Hearing Aid, Parts 
of Motorized Tricycle etc. Necessary action is being taken to change the Procureme nt 
Policy of ALIMCO to promote the „Make in India‟ programme and indigenize these 
products, thereby promoting Indian Manufactures. Besides, National Institutes are also 
manufacturing aids and assistive devices relating to  their respective field of disabilities.  

26 
 
As regards quality of aids and assistive devices manufactured by ALIMCO, the 
following is submitted:- 
(i) The quality control system in the Corporation has multilayer system of 
quality checks at each stage of production. 
(ii) 18 categories of fast moving products of ALIMCO are having valid ISI 
licenses. Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) undertakes periodical inspections of quality in 
this regard. 
(iii) In July, 2017,  ALIMCO was awarded ISO 9001:2015 for a period of three 
years. In addition, the Corpo ration is also having a valid Environmental Management 
System Standard ISO 14001:2015 awarded in March, 2019 by BIS. 
(iv) In order to ensure third party inspection of the products of ALIMCO, the 
Quality Council of India (Govt. organization under the Minist ry of Commerce) has been 
engaged to assess the quality compliance of 13 fast moving products of the 
Corporation. In the last report covering the fourth quarter of the Financial Year 2019 -20, 
13 products assessed by the Quality Council of India were found t o be 100% quality 
compliant. The only exception was tricycle which was reported to be 98% quality 
compliant.   
  
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11) 
2.9 The Committee appreciate that efforts are being made by Defence Research and 
Development Organization (DRDO) to develop indigenous and low cost Cochlear 
Implant which is presently on clinical trial stage. In Committee‟s   view, a successful 
launch of indige nous Cochlear Implant will not only bring down the present cost of  

27 
 
₹6.00 lakh to ₹1.00-1.50 lakh and eliminate the dependence on imported devices but 
also will be boost for “Make in India” apart from serving many more hearing impaired 
persons. The Committ ee hope that Department would be prompt in adopting the 
indigenous product as soon as it is proved to be better option than the imported device. 
The Committee would like to apprise about the progress of this project at action taken 
stage. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 With a view to reduce the cost of Cochlear Implant and promote „Make in India‟ 
programme, concerted efforts are being made by the Department, for production of 
indigenous Cochlear Implant (SRAVAN) by Defence Research and Development 
Organization (DRDO).   
 As regards status of production of Cochlear Implant by DRDO, it is informed by  
Smt. Manimozhi Theodore, CE, Society for Biomedical Technology (SBMT) and OS & 
Director, Defence Bioengineering & Electrometrical Laboratory (DEBEL) , that they have  
taken up Limited Series Production (LSP) for clinical trials in humans to evaluate safety 
and efficacy of the Cochlear Implant device. Ten implants were manufactured, sterilized 
and packaged and two implants each were handed over to five trial centres.  
 As per the latest information received  from Smt. Maninozhi Theodore, Limited 
Production & multi-centric ( 5 Centres) Clinical Trials have been initiated out of which 4  
have been completed, one in each trial centre.  This will be resumed once the COVID -
19 scenario improves. Trials are to be conducted in 50 persons and planned to be 
completed in 2021. Commercial production will be initiated in 2022. The Department 
has written to Smt. Manimozhi Theodore, Director, DEBL on 07.08.2020 to expedite the 
process.  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
  

28 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.43) 
2.11 BE for SIPDA for the years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 at ₹300 crore and ₹350 crore 
respectively was reduced at RE stage to ₹258.30 crore and 260 crore. The Committee 
note that AE incurred for 2018 -19 is slightly higher by ₹2.52 crore vis -à-vis RE. 
However, for the year 2019 -20, BE of ₹315 crore was reduced to ₹260 crore at RE 
stage. Shockingly, the AE incurred till 31.01.2020 is ₹93.76 i.e. a mere 36% of RE. The 
Department has now merged many small schemes under SIPDA after the 
recommendation of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in September, 2017. In 
this backdrop, the Co mmittee are of the view that SIPDA, being an umbrella scheme 
and having merged many schemes in it, should have been allotted more funds instead 
of reduced allocation at RE stage in 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The Committee apprehend 
that such a reduced allocation  indicates that several small schemes, even after merger 
with SIPDA, probably are not in a position to use the allocated amounts, thereby 
defeating the very purpose of the merger, for instance schemes like AG&P, 
establishment of colleges for deaf etc. have  not been able to utilize funds completely 
and have performed poorly in 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. Hence, the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the reasons for reduced allocations for 2019 -20 as well as their failure 
to even spend a significant amount of reduced allocation till 31.01.2020. The Committee 
impress upon the Department to ensure that a scheme like SIPDA, having components 
of national importance i.e. Accessible India Campaign, Composite Regional Centres, 
Unique Disability ID project, National Acti on Plan (NAP) etc. should not suffer for want 
of funds and be capable of fully utilizing the allocated amount. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Under SIPDA scheme revised allocations were done after assessing the 
frequency of expenditure of major components under SIPDA scheme during the month 
of October, 2019.  However the major reduction of ₹60.00 crore was made under 
National Action Plan for Ski ll Development Program where BE for F.Y.2019 -20 was 
allocated ₹100 crore which was revised to ₹40.00 crore as the reduction in the estimate 
corresponds to the current streamlining of the scheme wherein stress was emphasized 
on measures taken for identifica tion of genuine training partners and conducting 
elaborate monitoring mechanisms. At the end of F.Y. 2019 -20, an amount of ₹217.34 

29 
 
crore i.e. 83.59% could be utilized under SIPDA. The breakup of the expenditure done 
in the components of umbrella SIPDA scheme are given below: 
Funds released under the SIPDA Scheme during the 2019-20 
(upto 31.03.2020) 
 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. No. Sub Scheme/ Programmes BE  
2019-20 
RE  
2019-20 
Expenditure  
2019-20 
Percentage of
 Expenditure 
2019-20 of RE 
1 Creation of barrier free environment  
under the   SIPDA Scheme, other  
than AIC 
13.00 19.60 15.55 79% 
2 Creation of barrier free environment  
under the Accessible India Campaign 
(AIC) 
105.00 112.00 134.19 120% 
3 Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) 70.00 70.00 50.10 72% 
4 National Action Plan for Skill  
Development for PwDs 
100.00 40.00 4.33 11% 
5 District Disability Rehabilitation  
Centre (DDRCs) 
7.50 4.00 3.18 80% 
6 Unique Disability Identification (UDID) 13.00 10.00 7.87 79% 
7 Awareness Generation and Publicity  
(AGP) 
3.00 2.00 2.12 106% 
8 Research on Disability Related  
Technology, Product and Issues  
Scheme 
1.00 0.40 0.0 0% 
9 In Service Training And Sensitization 
of functionaries of  State Govts, Local
Bodies and other Service Providers. 
2.00 2.00 0.0 0% 
10 Incentive to Employers in the Private 
Sector for Providing Employment to  
Persons with Disabilities. 
0.50 0.00 0.0 0% 
  Total 315.00 260.00 217.34 83.59% 
  

30 
 
The  expenditure of the individual components of SIPDA scheme was more than 
100% under  Accessible India Campaign  (AIC) &  Awareness Generation and 
Publicity (AGP). Expenditure between 70 -90% was achieved under sub -schemes 
namely (i) Creation of barrier free  environment under the   SIPDA Scheme, other than 
AIC (ii) Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) (iii) District Disability Rehabilitation Centre 
(DDRCs) (iv) Unique Disability Identification (UDID).    However, less expenditure was 
achieved under four components  of the scheme viz.(a)  National Action Plan for Skill 
Development for PwDs (b) Research on Disability Related Technology, Product and 
Issues Scheme (c) In Service Training And Sensitization of functionaries of   State 
Govts, Local Bodies and other Service P roviders. (d) Incentive to Employers in the 
Private Sector for Providing Employment to Persons with Disabilities.  
The reasons for less/no expenditure are given as under: 
e. The National Action Plan for Skill Training”(NAP), BE -100.00 crore and RE-40.00 
crore has less releases due to drastic changes in the monitoring of the scheme. 
Therefore, the overall budget was also downsized initially at RE stage. NAP 
under SIPDA was unde rgoing a rigorous overhaul to enable streamlining of the 
process, to check financial irregularities by ETPs and to ensure a robust and 
secure fund flow mechanism. The scheme of NAP was reviewed so that the 
output reaches the correct beneficiaries as per la id down in the guidelines. 
Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled Bio -Metric 
Attendance System(AEBAS), Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), Video 
Conferencing (VC) facility, trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory 
features at tra ined centres.   Training is imparted through Empanelled Training 
Partners (ETPs). Validity of most of the ETPs has been expired. The period from 
April-2019 to Dec.2019 was expended in effecting the above process of checks 
and balances. These initiatives slo wed down the process of release of funds. 
Hence the expenditure of NAP could not meet upto the level of RE allocated of 
₹40.00 crore. 
 
f. Due to non -receipt of any proposals as well as UCs of previous financial years 
under Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector for Providing Employment to 
Persons with Disabilities. 

31 
 
 
g. Due to non receipt of UCs of previous financial years under the scheme of In 
Service Training And Sensitization of functionaries of   State Govts, Local Bodies 
and other Service Providers. 
h. Due to non receipt of adequate and complete proposals from the implementing 
agencies under Research on Disability Related Technology, product and issues. 
  
  (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.44) 
2.13 The committee appreciate the efforts being made by the Department for 
retrofitting of all Centr al as well as State Government  buildings under the Accessible 
India Campaign. The Committee have been informed that the Department is making 
every possible effort to persuade the States/UTs to accomplish the project by launching 
MIS portal for online monitoring of the p rogress made against each target of AIC, 
maintaining of all the functions on digital platform and capture all the data on real time 
basis. In spite of this, there is not even 50% achievement under this component as out 
of 1658 buildings, only 805 buildings  have been made accessible to Divyangjan. The 
Committee feel that sincere efforts by the Department are unfortunately not translating 
into real achievement, except for railway stations where the change is becoming visible. 
The acknowledge the fact shared b y the Department that retrofitting and construction 
work also depends on the proactiveness of the executing agencies and other 
challenges. Nonetheless they hope that new steps initiated by the Department for real 
time monitoring would be effective and the accessibility problem faced by divyangjan on 
day to day basis will be addressed expeditiously. The Committee desire to be informed 
about the progress and expect completion of all 1658 buildings by next Financial Year. 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 Under AIC of the 1662 buildings of State/UT Governments for which access 
audits were conducted,  till 31st March 2020 funds amounting to ₹436.44 crore have 
been released for retrofitting of 1151 buildings across 32 States/UTs.  Apart from these, 
998 buildings of the Central Government out of a total of 1100 have also been retrofitted 
by CPWD, MoHUA. Funds amounting to ₹127.99 crore were sanctioned for 177 
buildings in FY 2019 -20 itself, including 2 nd Installment for completing 134 buildings in 
State of Odisha, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh. The Actual Expenditure of Accessible India 
Campaign of ₹134.19 crore, for FY 2019 -20 had exceeded the proportionate BE which 
₹105 crore under the SIPDA scheme. Further, in FY 2019 -20, 7 States/UTs namely, 
Maharashtra, Chandiga rh, Haryana, Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand have reported to have completed retrofitting work in 263 buildings.  In 
2020-21 Chattisgarh has also reported completion of 12 buildings, thereby raising the 
tally to 275. 
           For FY 2020-21, completion of work and funding of buildings was anticipated but 
due to the current COVID -19 pandemic, construction work has been affected. Thus it is 
anticipated that  that there might be a slowdown in the reports of completion of work in 
buildings under AIC this year. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.45) 
2.15 The Committee are happy that as of now the Department have generated and 
issued 32.50 lakh Unique Disability Identity (UDID) cards in 682 districts and started a 
drive further to speed up the generation of UDID cards. The Committee also note that 
1.5 crore s legacy certificates have been taken on board in the Unique Identification 
Cards System, an online Portal. Now States are required to just upload the revalidated 
Certificate to generate a UDID card and medical examination will be require only for 
newer disabilities listed in new RPwD Act, 2016. Even for that, the procedure has been 

33 
 
streamlined and norms for constitution of medical teams have been relaxed. However 
performance of some States is still quite poor, for instance in Manipur, only 737 cards 
were issued as against grant of ₹28 lakh fund and in west Bengal, a total of 4 cards 
were issued as against grant of ₹23 lakh funds. Many States and UTs, like, Bihar, 
Assam, Telangana, Tripura, Andhra Pradesh etc. did not receive any funds till 2018 -19. 
In this connection, the Committee appreciate the Department initiation of a colour coded 
daily performance report with indicated level of performance of lagging the progress 
made by them. The Committee hope that Department will continue with their efforts to 
bring all the States and UTs on board and complete the project at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Department is implementing Unique Disability ID Project in all earnestness 
with a view to creating a National Database for Persons with Disabilities and also for the 
issuance for Unique Disability Identity Cards to each person with disability.   As on 
07.09.2020, all States/UTs have started implementing the project and  48.32 lakh e -
UDID cards have been generated in 707 of the 734 districts across India. 
State/UT wise details on e -UDID cards generate/issued to PwDs since inception 
of the project (year -wise) and the funds released is at Annexure -I and Annexure II, 
respectively. 
  As regards the slow implementation of the UDID project and for its proper 
implementation to see that the State/UT governments perform better and give focus to 
the UDID project meant for the persons with disabilities, the Department has been 
sending letters regularly, taking the issue up in the Central Advisory Board meeting as 
well as with all State Commissioners of disabilities.    Letters have also been sent letters 
to States/UTs at the level of Hon‟ble Minister of Social Justice & Empowerment again in 
this financial year on 18.06.2020 wherein State/UT governments have been reque sted 
and given suggestions on the steps to be taken for better and more efficient 
implementation of the UDID project by: 
I. Ensuring that all Districts the States/UTs are issuing UDID cards. (Now only 2 
States are remaining, namely Nagaland (5 districts) and West Bengal (22 
districts). 

34 
 
II. Digitization of manual certificates of disability is carried out in a time bound 
manner in .xml or excel format. It has been informed to the State/UT 
governments even earlier that the Ministry provides financial assistance for t his 
purpose for which proposals could be sent by those States/UTs which have not 
done so till now.   
III. Considering the fact that the medical authorities are also grappling with the 
COVID19 pandemic, State/UT governments have been requested to assess and 
provide the soft copies of electronic data (approved by the health department) of 
PwDs available with their State/UT. The data may be available with States/UTs 
for purposes like for pension, scholarships, medical records, or for any other 
PwDs schemes. The dat a has been requested to be provided in Excel format 
which would help expeditiously convert the data for generation of UDID cards in 
large numbers.   
IV. Taking prompt action on all the fresh applications already received by the 
States/UTs which are lying unactioned so far by the medical authorities. 
V. States/UTs may consider linking benefits/concessions meant for persons with 
Disabilities with UDID cards as has been done by some of States, for instance for 
the purpose of concessional travel in STU buses to speed up the process of 
implementation. 
2.      As regards, Manipur, the State has started generating UDID cards w.e.f. 
14.10.2019 only and till 07.09.2020, it has generated only 1442 e -UDID cards. 
Regarding West Bengal, Department has been writing letters and t aking the issue up 
with the State Government regularly.   Recently, on 18.06.2020, a letter was again 
written to the Hon'ble Chief Minister, at the level of Hon'ble Minister of Social Justice 
and Empowerment with a request to take up the UDID project for th e benefit of the 
persons with disabilities and mentioning that 22 of the 23 districts of West Bengal have 
still not started issuing UDID cards and that the progress of the project is at the bottom 
of the table across India with only 5 e-UDID cards having been generated so far.  
  

35 
 
3.      Regarding Bihar and Assam, the Department has released an amount of about 
₹1.5 crore in 2019-20 for Publicity and Awareness, IT infrastructure at Medical Offices 
and Remuneration of State Coordinator‟s salary.  Funds have b een released to 
Telangana in June 2020 related to publicity and awareness and IT infra structure at 
medical offices.  Similarly, funds have also been released to Andhra Pradesh for I.T. 
infrastructure in July 2020 and for publicity and awareness in August 2020.  In FY 
2016-17, the Department received proposals from 3 districts of Tripura regarding 
publicity and awareness for which funds were released. 
4.  The close monitoring of the UDID project is being done by the Department on 
daily basis through the col our-coded daily performance report that has been yielding 
results with continuous generation of cards which is reflecting through the increase in 
numbers of the cards generated. 
Annexure-I   
Year wise generated/issued UDID cards since inception ( as on 07.09.2020)   
Sl. No. States/UTs 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total   
  
1. 
ANDAMAN AND  
NICOBAR ISLANDS 
0 130 1,381 1,768 205 3,484 
  
2. ANDHRA PRADESH 
0 0 0 11,11,418 0 11,11,418   
3. 
ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 
0 3 94 686 202 985 
  
4. ASSAM 
0 0 0 14,168 7354 21,522   
5. BIHAR 
0 1 1,464 7,796 89,854 99,115   
6. CHANDIGARH 
0 140 1,713 2,742 110 4705   
7. CHHATTISGARH 
0 44,017 69,908 33,309 7192 1,54,426   
8. 
DADRA AND 
NAGAR HAVELI 
0 0 19 6 0 25 
  
9. DAMAN AND DIU 
0 0 330 438 15 783   
10. DELHI 
0 0 14 1,188 601 1,803   
11. GOA 
0 0 0 130 1 131   

36 
 
Annexure-I   
Year wise generated/issued UDID cards since inception ( as on 07.09.2020)   
Sl. No. States/UTs 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total   
  
12. GUJARAT 
1,735 37,930 78,363 82,446 11,508 2,11,982   
13. HARYANA 
0 7,392 22,211 6,565 1,138 37,306   
14. 
HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 
0 22 2,543 20,607 7,338 30,510 
  
15. 
JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR 
0 0 3,906 16,610 1,775 22,291 
  
16. JHARKHAND 
0 3,812 6,287 4,222 86 14,407   
17. KARNATAKA 
0 0 2 1,54,034 29,932 1,83,968   
18. KERALA 
0 984 3,159 1,10,764 18,773 1,33,680   
19. LAKSHADWEEP 
0 0 0 27 6 33   
20. MADHYA PRADESH 
19,696 2,26,457 60,341 61,661 88,104 4,56,259   
21. MAHARASHTRA 
17 17,422 58,673 1,96,294 16,184 288,590   
22. MANIPUR 
0 0 0 1,080 362 1,442   
23. MEGHALAYA 
0 762 3,066 5,364 10,233 19,425   
24. MIZORAM 
0 276 698 1,081 499 2,554   
25. NAGALAND 
0 0 0 466 72 538   
26. ODISHA 
437 85,012 1,17,406 1,19,781 20,530 3,43,166   
27. PUDUCHERRY 
0 0 0 3,536 6,968 10,504   
28. PUNJAB 
0 663 22,994 92,910 20,518 1,37,085   
29. RAJASTHAN 
0 2,52,280 42,555 55,812 2,759 353,406   
30. SIKKIM 
0 16 111 356 878 1,361   
31. TAMIL NADU 
0 22,001 15,733 1,21,508 83,431 2,42,673   

37 
 
Annexure-I   
Year wise generated/issued UDID cards since inception ( as on 07.09.2020)   
Sl. No. States/UTs 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 Total   
  
32. TELANGANA 
0 0 1 4,77,105 0 477,106   
33. TRIPURA 
0 461 701 1,591 415 3,168   
34. UTTAR PRADESH 
34 27,835 1,33,063 2,09,754 89,051 4,59,737   
35. UTTARAKHAND 
0 0 0 2,919 174 3,093   
36. WEST BENGAL 
0 0 4 1 0 5   
Total 21,919 7,27,616 6,46,740 29,20,143 5,16,268 48,32,686   
   
Annexure-II 
Year wise Fund released to States/UTs under UDID project as on 27.07.2020  
Sl. No. States/UT's 
 
 
 
Fund released  (₹ in Lakhs) 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
 ( As on 
27.07.20) 
Total 
1. 
ANDAMAN AND  
NICOBAR ISLANDS 0.00 3.00 6.00 13.00 
0.00 22.00 
2. ANDHRA PRADESH 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
13.00 29.25 
3. 
ARUNACHAL 
PRADESH 0.00 3.00 31.00 24.72 
0.00 58.72 
4. ASSAM 0.00 0.00 0.00 64.75 
3.00 67.75 
5. BIHAR 0.00 0.00 0.00 87.28 
0.00 87.28 
6. CHANDIGARH 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00 0.00 
7. CHHATTISGARH 0.00 0.00 35.50 24.25 
30.76 90.51 
8. 
DADRA AND NAGAR 
HAVELI 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 
0.00 3.00 
9. DAMAN AND DIU 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.50 
0.00 3.50 

38 
 
Annexure-II 
Year wise Fund released to States/UTs under UDID project as on 27.07.2020  
Sl. No. States/UT's 
 
 
 
Fund released  (₹ in Lakhs) 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
 ( As on 
27.07.20) 
Total 
10. DELHI 0.00 0.00 7.43 35.90 
0.00 43.33 
11. GOA 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.00 
1.50 3.50 
12. GUJARAT 3.75 6.00 38.50 41.10 
1.50 90.85 
13. HARYANA 13.00 0.00 22.00 0.75 
0.00 35.75 
14. HIMACHAL PRADESH 0.00 0.00 19.58 15.12 
3.00 37.69 
15. JAMMU AND KASHMIR 0.00 0.00 25.00 4.00 
0.00 29.00 
16. JHARKHAND 0.00 5.66 38.10 24.44 
0.00 68.20 
17. KARNATAKA 0.00 0.00 33.00 36.11 
0.00 72.11 
18. KERALA 3.50 3.00 24.00 14.50 
0.00 45.00 
19. LAKSHADWEEP 0.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 
0.75 7.75 
20. MADHYA PRADESH 19.25 3.75 51.00 1.00 
0.00 75.00 
21. MAHARASHTRA 14.00 6.00 43.50 11.07 
0.00 74.57 
22. MANIPUR 0.00 0.00 0.00 28.00 
0.00 28.00 
23. MEGHALAYA 0.00 14.00 6.00 14.75 
0.00 37.25 
24. MIZORAM 0.00 3.00 14.00 12.60 
8.42 38.02 
25. NAGALAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 22.25 
0.00 25.25 
26. ODISHA 23.00 35.00 3.05 0.00 
0.00 61.05 
27. PUDUCHERRY 0.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 
0.00 10.00 
28. PUNJAB 0.00 0.00 28.00 26.65 
6.47 61.12 

39 
 
Annexure-II 
Year wise Fund released to States/UTs under UDID project as on 27.07.2020  
Sl. No. States/UT's 
 
 
 
Fund released  (₹ in Lakhs) 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
 ( As on 
27.07.20) 
Total 
29. RAJASTHAN 3.25 12.00 26.60 6.00 
3.00 50.85 
30. SIKKIM 0.00 3.00 3.90 10.00 
5.00 21.90 
31. TAMIL NADU 15.50 54.75 4.65 6.82 
0.00 81.72 
32. TELANGANA 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.00 
61.75 64.75 
33. TRIPURA 2.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00 2.25 
34. UTTAR PRADESH 26.00 29.75 113.49 6.16 
0.00 175.39 
35. UTTARAKHAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 26.50 
0.00 26.50 
36. WEST BENGAL 0.00 0.00 23.00 0.00 
0.00 23.00 
Total 
123.50 181.91 597.29 583.21 138.15 1654.82 
 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.47) 
2.17 The Committee are dismayed to note that out of 325 districts identified for setting 
up of DDRCs, only 264 districts have DDRCs as of now and   out of these, only 92 
DDRCs are functioning regularly. Initially the Department was attributing the same to 
lack o f awareness of the scheme and shortage of qualified staff due to low rates of 
honorarium. But, even after revising the Scheme and increasing the cost norms by 2.5 
times, the performance of the scheme has not improved. The Committee are also 
surprised that the DDRCs of Tripura and Sikkim even do not have complete address 

40 
 
available in the Ministry‟s Annual Report (Annexure -7). Hence, the Committee desires 
the officials to personally visit the DDRCs to see their function and assess their 
competence. Overall, t he Committee are of the firm view that the Scheme needs to 
revisited and hence feel that the Department needs to recast the scheme to make 
workable. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 (i)  It is admitted that it is only in 264 districts that DDRCs have been set up 
so far, out of the 325 approved districts.    However, the scheme has been revised in 
terms of cost norms and is expected to perform better. Moreover, the Hon‟ble Minister 
(SJ&E) has also written a D.O. letter to all Chief Ministers in November 2019, for  
sending proposals for setting up of DDRCs, in response to which proposals are being 
received which are under active consideration of the Department. Since the DDRCs are 
run by the State Government/District Management Teams (DMTs) selected by State 
Government/UT administration, hence the role of the State /UT administration is more 
functional.   It is informed that the situation regarding the number of DDRCs is likely to 
improve since the DDRCs are being given focus in the current year. 
(ii) Committee‟s observation for personal visits of DDRCs in order to ascertain their 
functioning and assess their competence has been noted for   compliance as and when 
it is feasible to undertake the inspection in view of the COVID pandemic.  The 
Committee‟s concerns about the performance of DDRC scheme are humbly noted.  The 
Department would revisit and recast the scheme to make it workable.   The Scheme is 
being taken up under Third Party Evaluation in FY 2020-21. 
   
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
  

41 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.49) 
2.19 From the information submitted on the AG&PS, the Committee observe since 
2015-16 (barring 2016 -17), the Department could not fully spent allocation made 
available even at RE Stage. Even simplification and revision of the Scheme could not 
salvage the situation. Despite under utilization of 45% to 50% of the funds allocated 
during 2015-16, 2017-18 and 2018-19, far higher amounts were allocated in subsequent 
years and ultimately the scheme was merged with SIPDA owing to its poor 
performance. Such resources allocation and spending pattern over the years, the 
Committee believe, is due to lack of foresight as NGOs/agencies could not send proper 
proposals, fa ulty planning, failure to assess capability of   NGOs and not taking into 
consideration the ground realties at the time of allocation itself. 
          The Committee are of the view that the successful implementation of any welfare 
programme for the benefit  of marginalized sections of the society, creation of 
awareness of the Programmes/Schemes/Project among the intended beneficiaries is 
the first and foremost requirement. Such awareness in mass media -print, electronic and 
social media. The under utilization  of the funds for the last five/six years, however, 
shows that awareness generation has not been done through advertising & publicity of 
the requisite extent. 
          It has often come the notice of the Committee that many a time even the public 
representatives, MPs/MLAs leave alone the intended beneficiaries, are note made 
aware of the various programmes/projects/schemes meant for the benefit of 
Divyangjan. There is huge demand from Divyangjan for help and support, hence, the 
Committee are of the view th at since AG&PS is now part of umbrella scheme i.e. 
SIPDA, more publicity and awareness campaigns should be held at regular intervals in 
the relevant areas to make them aware of these schemes/projects/programmes etc. 
The Committee accordingly recommend that  suitable steps be taken including active 
support to concerned stakeholders for preparation of viable proposals to ensure full 
utilization of resources allocated for the purpose. The Committee hope that merging the 
AG&P Scheme will Scheme for Implementatio n of Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act (SIPDA) will give the desired boost to it. As a first step they recommend that all the 

42 
 
Members of the Committee as well as DMs should be regularly updated on the ongoing 
schemes for Divyangjan alongwith contact resources persons in the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 As per the recommendation of the committee for creating awareness of the 
Schemes, the Schemes are being arranged to be advertised on social media platform to 
get more proposals. As per scheme parameters, the following actions are taken 
regularly for seeking proposals:  
I. Letters are being written to Principal Secretary/Secretary of all States/UTs to 
submit more proposals under AGP scheme and requested to have a Video 
Conference with the AGP Secti on to increase the number of proposals in a 
financial year. In addition, University Grants Commission (UGC) and all Central 
Universities are also being  requested to submit their proposals under AGP 
scheme for the welfare of PwDs. 
II. States/UTs would also be r equested to give wide publicity in order to receive 
more and more proposals from NGOs/Government Institutes. 
III. During this pandemic period of Covid -19, they may also be requested to hold 
virtual events in accordance with  Covid-19 guidelines.   
          As per scheme guidelines, proposals from NGOs require the recommendation of 
concerned state government. Under this scheme, awareness programme is conducted 
by the organizations mainly through holding conferences and awareness camps. 
Normally, the events are h eld in one or two days and Grantee organizations are 
supposed to invite local representatives also. However, keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Committee, henceforth a copy of the sanction/approval letter 
will be endorsed to the DM of concerned dis trict where the event is to be held.   If any 
event is proposed to be held in the constituency of any member of the Committee, a 
copy of the letter will also be endorsed to the concerned member of the Committee. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 

43 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.50) 
2.21 The Committee observe that since 2015 -16 the Department could not utilize the 
resources allocated even at RE stage fully. The under utilization is pronounced in 2015-
16 and 2017 -18 during which utilization was 30% and 65% of respective REs: The 
allocation for 2019 -20 was almost double the actual expenditure incurred in 2018 -19 
which, however, was reduced by 1/4th at RE stage. Out of 7 crore RE, 54% only could 
be utilized till 31.01.2020 leaving the rest 46% for spending in the remaining two months 
of the financial year. Such large -scale spending of the resources in the last quarter of 
the financial year, the Committee observe, goes agai nst the relevant rules on 
expenditure issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure). 
The Ministry's reply is silent on the Committee's query as to why the increased 
amount of 28 crore, allocated for 2019 -20 for giving vide publicity even in  the rural 
areas, through different electronic and digital media tools, got reduced to 7 crore 
(1/4th of BE). The Committee desire to be apprised whether the Ministry actually 
assessed the availability of the resources in rural areas since they are of the view that 
the relevant factors were not taken into consideration while projecting the same for 
2019-20 resulting in reduction at RE stage and spending only 54% of the funds till 
31.01.2020. They, therefore, recommend that resource allocation may be made in  such 
a way that Department are able to spend the entire amount allocated at least compared 
to Revised Estimates in the same financial year. The Committee hope that the merger 
of this Head alongwith AG&PS -with -Scheme for Implementation of Rights -of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA) will in no way diminish the importance of the 
scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 Regarding the 46% spending in the last two months of the financial year 2019 -
20, it is clarified that there were two major events (Su rajkund and Ekam Fest) already 
approved by the Department under Media scheduled to be held in last quarter of 2019 -
20.  Suraj Kund is a yearly event which is held every year in the month of February and 
Ekam Fest which was scheduled to be held in the month  of December was postponed 
and held in the month of March due to the unrest arisen in Delhi. Since the fund is 
released after the event is held on receipt of bills and expenditure details, the amount 

44 
 
on account of these two major events could be released o nly in last month of the 
Financial year. The total expenditure in 2019 -20 under Media was ₹6.63 crore which 
was 94.71 % of RE. 
  Under Media Head, approval of proposals and release of funds depend upon 
various factors. Approval of PMO is required for all the display advertisements including 
in Print and Electronic Media. Though the Department had prepared an outdoor 
Campaign with a view to giving wide publicity across the country through different media 
tools yet PMO advised the Department to focus on Soci al Media for advertisements of 
the Schemes of the Department.  
Expenditure under Media also depends upon the number of proposals received 
from various agencies for participation in events and melas, proposals for sponsorship 
etc. However, considering the l ess number of proposals received and actual 
expenditure during first six months of the financial year 2019 -20, the budgetary 
requirement was reduced in RE stage so that allocated fund could be spent in the same 
financial year.  However, considering the past experience as well as observations of the 
Committee only an amount of Rs 8 Cr has been kept for Media in the Financial Year 
2020-21. 
As far as merger of Media with SIPDA is concerned the relevance of Media won‟t 
be affected adversely; rather it would provide the scope of fund flexibility. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.51) 
2.23 The Committee note that for want of sufficient/proper documentation from 
implementing agencies, the Department of Empowerment of PwDs had to surrender 
large amount of funds allocated even at RE stage in 2017 -18 and 2018 -19. It is clear 
that the Department could not address the issue with all the stakeholders when the 
underutilization of the funds first occurred in 2017 -18 due to insufficient documentation. 
As a result, funds had to be surrendered once again in the following year i.e. 2018 -2019 

45 
 
due to same reason. This shows the casual approach of the Department in resolving the 
basic and mundane procedural issues hampering the fund utilization year after year 
resulting in delay in establishing more Braille printing presses/ augmentation of the 
existing Braille presses, etc. The Committee accordingly recommend that suitable steps 
including regular communication with the stakeholders be taken to ensure full utilization 
of the allocated resources. The Committee also feel that the fund allocated was fully 
utilized in 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, probably the number of new Braille Presses would 
have gone up. The Committee hope that the merger of this Head with Scheme for 
Implementation of rights of Persons with Disabilities Act. (SIPDA) will in no way reduce 
its importance and change the given targets for establishing new Braille presses. Also 
the Committee would desire to be apprised of the total number of Braille text books 
produced by the Braille presses established so far as well as the State wise number of 
visually impaired school children who were given these books free of cost. 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 The target of the scheme and achievements so far are as under: 
  Category                 Target 
(No.)  
 
Achievement 
(No.)  
Remarks 
New Braille Press 18 11* *In addition to 11 new Braille 
presses, 2 more proposals were 
approved but for want of fulfillment 
of certain conditions relating to 
bank guarantee etc. the grants 
sanctioned for two organizations 
were refunded to the Department. 
Modernization of 
existing Braille Press  
 
 
12 12 Target Achieved 
Capacity Augmentation 3 3 Target Achieved 

46 
 
Small Scale Press for 
UTs 
3 0 This was aimed at setting up of 
small scale Braille Press in UTs; 
however, no proposal has  been 
received from any of the Union 
Territories. 
  
As per information provided by the nodal agency for implementation of the 
scheme; i.e. National Institute of Empowerment of Persons with Visual Disabilities 
(NIEPVD) Dehradun, during the last 4 years i.e. from 2016 -17 to 2019-20, 23,426 titles 
have been pr inted and distributed by the functional Braille presses to approximately 
1,22,716 individuals and 1,641 institutions/agencies who have further distributed these 
titles to visually disabled children. The details are given below:- 
 Total titles printed by the functional Braille presses 23,426 
Copies of the titles printed by the functional Braille presses 5,71,739 
Total individual beneficiaries served by the functional Braille 
presses 
1,22,716 
Total institutional beneficiaries served by the functional Braille 
presses 
1,641 
Total volume produced by the functional Braille presses 6,09,689 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. 5.7) 
  
2.25 The Committee note with deep concern that 75% of children with disabilities in 
the age group of 0 -5 years never attend any educational institution, owing to societal 
prejudice, lack of accessible infrastructure in schools especially in rural areas, lack o f 
trained teaching staff and above all delayed identification of disability. The Committee 
further note that concerted efforts are being made by the Department under „Accessible 
India Campaign (AIC)‟, opening of early intervention centres and in -service training of 

47 
 
existing teachers. They still feel that the Department should undertake a Social 
Awareness Campaign to bring the desired attitudinal shift towards disabled persons of 
society in general. The AG&P Scheme of the Department, which hitherto has not 
performed as expected and has now been part of SIPDA, must be revived with vigour to 
undertake this gigantic task. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.26 The recommendations of the Committee has been noted and the scheme is 
being arranged to advertise on Social Me dia Platform   for  its wide publicity, so 
that  more and more proposals may be received   from the NGOs/Govt. Institutions 
relating to upliftment of Persons with Disabilities (PwDs).  
  
        As per scheme parameters, the following actions are taken regul arly for seeking 
proposals: 
I. Letters are being written to Principal Secretary/Secretary of all States/UTs to 
submit more proposals under AGP scheme and requested to have a Video 
Conference with the AGP Section to increase the number of proposals in a 
financial year. In addition, University Grants Commission (UGC) and all Central 
Universities are also being written to submit their proposals under AGP scheme 
for the welfare of PwDs. 
II. States/UTs would also be requested to give wide publicity in order to receive 
more and more proposals from NGOs/Government Institutes. 
III. During this pandemic period of COVID – 19, they may also be requested to hold 
virtual events in accordance with  COVID -19 guidelines.  
   
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
  

48 
 
Recommendation (Para. 6.5) 
2.27 The committee note that Rehabilitation Council of India‟s (RCI) mandate includes 
regulation and monitoring the training of rehabilitation professionals and personnel, 
promotion of research and special education and maintenance of Central Rehabilitation 
Register. The grants in aid are released by the Department of Empowerment of PwDs 
for the purpose of meeting the expenditure for salary and other office expenses by RCI. 
The utilization pattern of the funds from 2015 -16 to 2018 -19 (except 2016 -17) reveals 
that funds have not been spent fully even compared to REs.   Despite lower actual vis a 
vis Res, higher allocations were made in subsequent years. While furnishing the 
reasons for under utilization, the Department informed the committee that the entire 
amount available for rest of India since been released and unutilisation of fund was on 
account of North -Eastern Head for the year 2015 -16, as there are fewer 
institutions/organizations in North Eastern region running RCI approved courses. The 
Department further submitted that the reasons for under utilization from 2017 -18 to 
2019-20 was due to non - receipt of appropriate demands from RCI. The committee 
would like to be apprised them as to whether the Department consulted RCI before 
formally allocating funds to them which, however, after allocation, were surrendered due 
to non - receipt of the proposals from RCI. The committee are of the view that 
surrendering of the funds allocated year after year reflects that due care was not taken 
while formulating the proposals for funds.   Non – receipt of proposals from North – 
Eastern region need to be specifically addressed in view of the substantial population of 
Divyangjan there. For this region, the committee recommend that public representatives 
may be involved to identify areas where RCI can work. The committee, therefore, 
recommend that those factor s which are likely to result in underutilization may, atleast 
be identified at RE stage to enable unutilisable funds under this head to be used for 
other purposes in RCI instead of surrendering. The Committee accordingly suggest to 
take suitable steps to ensure utilization of allocated funds. 
Reply of the Government 
2.28 Every year the Department consults RCI while preparing budget estimates. The 
Department reviews the expenditure status at RE stage based on net requirement for 
the year.   It may be noted t hat entire amount of 5.00 crore available for the year 2019 -

49 
 
20 has been fully utilized. The Department has drawn a quarterly plan for release of 
funds to RCI in 2020 -21 so as to ensure complete utilization. The 15% limit for the first 
quarter of 2020 -21 se t by Department of Expenditure has been met for RCI w.e.f 
30.06.20. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para. 7.10) 
2.29 The Committee note that National Trust could utilized the funds allocated under 
the General Head (meant for all the regions except North -Eastern Regions).  The funds 
meant for North -Eastern Regions could not be utilized due to non -availability of 
sufficient number of registe red organizations in North -Eastern Region.   However, the 
reply of the Department remained conspicuously silent on the efforts made/proposed to 
be made to encourage setting up of such institutions, if need be, in 
cooperation/consultation with the State Gove rnments concerned.   The repeated 
surrendering of funds for the purpose for the same reasons since 2016 -17 appears to 
suggest that the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities have not 
taken proactive measure to utilize the funds. 
  
The Committee are of the view that had the Department made concerted efforts 
in co -ordination will all the stakeholders including State Governments concerned, 
NGOs, community organizations of North -Eastern Regions, resulting in setting up of 
organization for the welfare of the disabled in North-Eastern Region, surrendering of the 
much needed funds could not have occurred.   The Committee accordingly recommend 
suitable steps be taken to create awareness programmes in consultations with the State 
Governments of North-Eastern Region and NGO/Community organizations of the North-
Eastern Region for the same. 
  

50 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 Suitable steps have been taken to create awareness programmes in consultation 
with the State Government of North Eastern Region & NGOs/ Community organizations 
of the North Eastern region for the same. 
  
          National Trust has been conducting workshops and seminars on Awareness 
Generation, Legal Capacity and Legal Guardianship, Programs and Schemes of the 
National Trust etc. in these  states in collaboration with the State Nodal Agency Centre 
(SNAC),  Registered Organisations (ROs), and State Governments, wherein a large 
number of stake holders of the NE states have been participating.  These workshops 
were very useful in spreading the information about the activities of the National Trust in 
the region.   Still, there is lot more to be done in order to cover the entire NE region. 
  
Earlier, the National Trust had planned to organize a “Regional Workshop on 
Digital Best Practices and NE Summit for Persons with Disabilities” in North East 
Region on 1st May 2020, as a lot of coordination with various stakeholders namely State 
Nodal Agency Centre (SNAC) and Registered Organizations (ROs) of the National 
Trust, State Government officials of 7  NE States, etc. are being done. The focus of 
regional workshop was mainstreaming Persons with Intellectual and Developmental 
Disabilities (PwIDDs) and popularizing the digital technologies for improving the quality 
of life of Persons with Disabilities; un fortunately it could not be held due to COVID19 
pandemic. 
  
          The Board of the National Trust in its 77th meeting held on 20.3.2018 decided that 
no new sanction under any scheme of the National Trust shall be made till further 
decision of the Board  or a sub -committee constituted especially for this took  a 
decision.   However, this will not be applicable for North Eastern States. 
  
          Apart from this, the Board of the National Trust in its 79 th meeting held on 
10.09.2018 agreed to waive the c ondition of 2 years experience after Registration from 
the National Trust for allocation of funds of any scheme in the North Eastern region, so 

51 
 
that more and more NGOs are motivated to Register with the National Trust schemes in 
the North East region and implement these schemes of the National Trust. 
   
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
  

52 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND  
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.46) 
4.1 The Committee  find that the Department have set up 20 CRCs to provide 
rehabilitation services to Divyangjan, train persons, create awareness, etc. of which 
three are yet to start functioning. However, a scrutiny of the details given in the 
Department's latest Annual Re port suggests that out of 18 CRCs, 5 CRCs have been 
given only 1st installment of funds while some have got 3 each. The Department may 
apprise as to how these CRCs are functional with just one installment. Also out of seven 
NE states, only Assam and Tripur a have CRCs, which would mean that a total of 
1,74,389 Divyangjan of the rest five states (as per census 2011) have not been served 
by any CRC so far. The Committee hence recommends that the Department may pay 
special attention to the remaining NE states i  n the matter. They further note that of the 
remaining three CRCs, one in Andaman and Nicobar has been inaugurated recently 
and other at Sikkim is likely to start functioning soon. During the evidence, the 
Department have informed that efforts are being ma ke to have one CRC in each State. 
While it is a laudable target and ideally should be done, the Committee feels that a 
small State or UT with lesser population and State/UT with large population cannot be 
on the same page because of vast difference in thei r requirements. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to aim realistically for establishing CRCs in 
consonance with the population of a State. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The Department is working towards establishing CRCs in various States/UTs 
across the country subject to concerned States/UTs making available suitable land (free 
of cost) and built up space for temporary accommodation. So far the establishment of 
21 CRCs a cross the country have been approved. In the State of Uttar Pradesh, two 

54 
 
CRCs have been set up at Lucknow and Gorakhpur as per the land and other facilities 
provided by the State Government. 
 
In respect of NE States, approval has already been granted to se t up CRCs in 
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Sikkim. CRC in the State 
of Assam and Tripura is functional respectively at Guwahati and Agartala and efforts are 
on to expeditiously operationalise the CRCs sanctioned for other four States also. 
 
 The Committee‟s advice to the Department to aim realistically for establishing 
CRCs in consonance with the population of a State rather than one -State-one-
CRC formula is accepted and the Department will work on that.   But this is subject to 
the concerned States and UTs making available suitable land (free of cost) and built up 
space for temporary accommodation.   
  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

55 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9) 
5.1 The Committee note that the Department is holding ADIP camps to distribute 
aids and assistive devices to Divyangjan through National Institutes/ Composite Region 
Centres/ALIMCO. These camps are organized on the recommendations of State 
Governments/UT administration and the Members of Parliament. The Committee have 
time and again emphasized that whenever an ADIP camp is organized on the 
recommendations of other than Members of Parliament, the MP of the concerned 
constituency must be involved in organizing the camp rather than just inviting them as a 
guest because they are more aware of the requirements and problems of the PwDs of 
their constituencies and can identify   and benefit the really deserving persons from 
those areas. As these camps directly benefit the Divyangjan,  the Committee are of the 
view that the camps must be held regularly and as frequently as possible. As per the 
Department, proposals from North -Eastern States are less forthcoming hence the 
Committee desire that the Department can take assistance of Member s of Parliament 
from North-Eastern States from this Committee and in general too apart from sending a 
model draft of proposals to DMs/State Officials, to desired number of proposals from 
North-Eastern States. The steps taken in this regard may be apprised to the Committee 
at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 Under the ADIP Scheme, camps for distribution of aids & assistive devices are 
organized on the demand of Members of Parliament/other dignitaries across the country 
including the North Eastern Re gion.  During the last six years, 577 such camps, 
including 28 Camps in North Eastern Region, have been organized for distribution of 
aids & appliances to 5.21 Lakh beneficiaries involving a total expenditure of ₹428.73 
crore.  In 130 cases, assessment has been carried out and distribution will be 
undertaken soon.  

56 
 
 In respect of camps other than those held on the recommendations of Hon‟ble 
Members of Parliament, every effort is made to involve them in the process.  While 
releasing the grant-in-aid to implementing agencies for distribution of aids and assistive 
devices the sanction order clearly states that "The organization should Notify the Local 
MLA/MP about the camp”. A copy of the sanction order is also endorsed  to the 
concerned Member of Parliament/MLA for their kind information.  The Hon‟ble Members 
of Parliament/Hon‟ble MLAs are not only invited during distribution camps but their 
valuable involvement and support is also sought for mobilization and assessment of 
beneficiaries before holding the distribution camps.   
 As regards, holding camps regularly and as frequently as possible, it is submitted 
that during the last three years 3876 Camps have been held across the country 
benefitting 8.29 Lakh Divyangjan. Un der the provisions of the ADIP Scheme, aids and 
assistive devices are provided to Divyangjan once in three years. However, it is the 
endeavor of the Department to hold camps before three years also, in order to cover left 
out Divyangjan of the area.  
 In o rder to receive sufficient proposals from NE Region, letters are sent to the 
concerned State Governments at the beginning of the financial year for forwarding 
proposals of implementing agencies. The observations of the Committee for taking 
assistance of  H on‟ble Members of Parliament from North -Eastern States from the 
Committee has been noted for compliance. Copies of letters to State Govts. to forward 
proposals from the Northern Eastern Region have also been endorsed to them for 
seeking their necessary sup port.  The Committee will be informed of the action 
taken in this regard. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
  

57 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.48) 
5.3 The committee  note that the National Action Plan for Skill Training to PwDs 
under SIPDA was launched by the Department in collaboration with the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship(MSDE) in 2015 with the objective of training PwDs 
to enable them to have gainful employment. However, to the Committee‟s dismay, even 
after reducing the beneficiary target from 50,000 to 20,000 beneficiaries in February 
2020 for the year 2019 -20, the Department could only provide skills to a minuscule 457 
beneficiaries in the first three and a half quarters as it probably was busy in overhauling 
the scheme and streamlining the process. The Department is confident of achieving the 
target in terms of number of trained beneficiaries in light of the MIS portal being 
developed by it,  in the remaining part of the financial year and even have set an 
ambitious target of 80,000 beneficiaries in the financial year 2020 -21. The Committee 
appreciate the efforts made by the Department to streamline the process and 
development of dedicated Man agement Information System (MIS). However, achieving 
the revised target this year appears to be difficult. Nonetheless, the Committee would 
like to urge the Department to strive for it and also strengthen the employability of the 
beneficiaries after they c omplete the skill training. The Committee would, further desire 
the Department to maintain the data of beneficiaries who got employed after getting skill 
training under the programme and use this data as input for future streamlining of the 
scheme, if need be” 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
5.4 As pointed out, NAP under SIPDA had been undergoing a rigorous overhaul last 
year to enable streamlining of the skill ecosystem of PwDs. The streamlining process 
that the Department exacted to make the delivery of Skill ing to Persons with Disabilities 
is as under: 
(a)  Fund Flow Mechanism changed from “release in advance to release after 
commencement” of training and from “project wise to batch wise mode” to avoid 
parking of funds with Training Partners; 
(b)  Introduction of centre guidelines including AEBAS, CCTV, VC facility, trained 
trainers and accessibility as mandatory features at training centres; 

58 
 
(c)  In order to ensure suitability of Centres, physical inspection/audit of Training 
Centres was made mandatory by 3rd party; 
 (d) Surprise inspection of ongoing training by the Department officials; 
 (e)  As part of monitoring mechanism, Department owned centralized AEBAS has 
already been introduced; and 
 (f)  MIS is also almost ready and will become operational shortly. 
Above mentioned initiatives slowed down the process of release of funds 
considering which the target was revised from 50,000 to 20,000 during last financial 
year. Though after effecting those changes/initiatives, a target of training around 30, 000 
was approved by the Department but the training that was expected to commence 
during the last quarter could not take off as planned by the ETPs because of the 
situation arising out of COVID 19 and subsequent lockdown.    Nevertheless, there is a 
target of training 5 lakh PwDs in 5 years from 2019 -20 to 2023 -24 and now efforts will 
be made to adjust the shortfall of 2019 -20 by increasing the targets gradually in next 4 
years. Various initiatives such as online training, associating good training partners and 
Sector Skill Councils with NAP etc. are underway to expedite the process of training 
without compromising on quality. The MIS Portal of the Department for skill is in the final 
stage of development and it is expected to be operational soon. 
  
As regard s placement data, it is submitted that 3rd instalment of the grant is 
linked with placement and it is released on the basis of documentary evidence as 
per guidelines, and  after ascertaining the genuineness of the data. The Department has 
not yet released the 3rd installment in any of the cases and the genuine data is being 
collected. The Department is in the process of conducting the Third Party Evaluation of 
its schemes, including Skill Training conducted under NAP, which will also help in 
ascertaining the genuineness of the claims of the training partners regarding training as 
well as placement after training. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 

59 
 
Recommendation (Para. 5.6) 
 
5.5 The Committee observe that the Department have merged their six scholarship 
schemes into an Umbrella Scheme viz. „Scholarship for Students with Disability‟ in 
2018-19 with a view to remove the demand -supply imbalance of budg et allocation, 
streamline the implementation process and allow use of surplus funds of one segment 
in the other one. The Committee welcome the flexibility in the use of funds within the 
segments of the scheme, but they would, at the same time, like to caut ion that the 
weaker segment of the Umbrella Scheme should not be left unattended and concerted 
efforts be made by the Department to strengthen those segments to obviate the 
recurrence of less demand and surplus funds in the following financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 From the year 2018-19, six scholarship schemes i.e. Pre-matric, Post-matric, Top 
Class Education, National Fellowship, National Overseas Scholarship, Free Coaching 
have been merged into an umbrella scheme titled - „Scholarships for Students with 
Disabilities‟. The merger/ unification of the schemes with effect from 2018 -19 has been 
done to remove the demand -supply imbalance of budget allocation and streamline the 
implementation process. In umbrella scheme, if there is surplus fund av ailable in one 
segment, that surplus can be utilized in the other one. However, in order to avoid the 
extreme situation where a major chunk of the budget allocation gets consumed by only 
one segment of the scheme leaving little fund for others, the amount that can be spent 
on a segment shall vary from a minimum of 5% to a maximum of 50% of the total 
budget allocation for the entire scheme. 
  Consequent upon merger of all the scholarship schemes, remarkable progress 
has been noticed.   During 2019 -20, 42972 b eneficiaries have been awarded 
scholarships as compared to 21206 beneficiaries during 2017 -18, registering an 
increase of 103%. 
As regards certain segments of the Scheme viz., Top Class Education, National 
Overseas Scholarship, and Free Coaching, the Depar tment has taken various 
measures to popularize them. Under the Top Class Education Scheme, Graduate level 
courses have been included as a result of which 239 students with disabilities were 

60 
 
awarded scholarships during 2019 -20 as compared to 37 Students wit h disabilities 
during 2017-18.  Besides, applications for National Overseas Scholarship can be made 
throughout the year. Further, the amount of solvency certificate, which was earlier equal 
to the total scholarship amount payable to the students, has now b een reduced to 
₹50,000/- only,  to encourage students with weak economic background to apply. The 
main hindrance in getting proposals from Coaching Institutes for imparting free coaching 
is the lack of accessible features in such institutes. To address the  issue, a letter is 
being issued to Coaching Institutes for making their premises accessible within three 
months.  As such, it is the endeavor of the Department to implement all segments of the 
Umbrella scheme effectively and use the available funds optima lly for the benefit of 
students with disabilities.    
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8) 
  
5.7 The Committee appreciate that since Divyang Children must not face any 
segregation in the school education, the Department, through one of its organization i.e. 
Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI), is developing a module for five day in -service 
training of existing teachers in all th e schools of the country to sensitize them about the 
needs in an inclusive set up. In Committee‟ view, this is an enormous task and will 
require complete convergence with the similar efforts/programmes run by the Ministry of 
Human Resource & Development an d other stake holders. There are around 42 lakh 
schools in the country and many of them are located in remote and difficult terrains. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to geo -tag and every school of the 
country to ensure that even a single  school   teacher is not left out of the ambit of in -
service and training and also that no child is left out of the inclusive school education 
due to any form of disability. The Committee have also commented on RCI further in the 
relevant section. 
  

61 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Department of School Education and Literacy is the Central nodal agency for 
implementing provisions of inclusive education. The Department of School Education 
and Literacy is implementing Samagra Siksha Abhiyan and inter -alia aims  at 
strengthening Teacher Education and training.  The Department is in touch with 
Department of School Education and Literacy in this regard. This Department is only 
supplementing the efforts through technical support by way of developing curriculum, 
accessibility issues, etc. The curriculum being developed by Rehabilitation Council of 
India (RCI) will be shared with Department of School Education and Literacy for in 
service training of teachers. 
The Department of School Education and Literacy has been requested to geo -
tag each and every school of country to ensure universal coverage of in- service training 
of all teachers vide O.M dated 02nd July 2020. 
  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
 O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.6) 
5.9 The committee in their previous Report on Demands for Grants 2019-20 had also 
urged the Department to continue the efforts to develop the curriculum in collaboration 
with Melbourne University to ward off the shortage of trained professionals to provide 
better rehabilitation services to PwDs. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department 
to apprise about the progress made so far in this regard along with  the year wise 
expenditure incurred under this activity.  
Reply of the Government 
5.10 The Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI) is developing a six -month course 
curriculum on Community Based Inclusive Development (CBID) to develop grass root 
level community workers for rehabilitation of Persons with disabilities. The course and 
lesson plans are ready.   Currently its study/ learning materials is under 
finalisation.   The programme is likely to be launched on pilot basis through National 

62 
 
Institutes during t his financial year. The year -wise expenditure incurred by RCI under 
this activity is as under: 
Sl. No. Financial year 
Expenditure 
incurred in ₹ (Lakhs) 
1. 2018-19 0.43 
2. 2019-20 13.44 
Total 13.87 
  
  
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan)  
O.M. No.1/4/2020-21/Budget/DEPwD dated 11th September, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
10 November, 2020                                           Standing Committee on 
19 Kartika, 1942 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
Empowerment  
  

63 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) HELD ON TUESDAY, 10TH NOVEMBER, 
2020 
 
 The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
 
    SMT.  RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
 
     LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
3. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
4. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
5. Smt. Geeta Kora 
6. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
7. Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras 
8. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
10. Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
11. Shri P. L. Punia 
12. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
 
*****   *****   *****   ***** 
 
*****   *****   *****   ***** 
 

64 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and congratulated Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras, MP  (LS) for his nomination 
to this Committee.  The Chairperson, then informed the Committee that the term of  Shri 
P.L. Punia, MP (RS)  was ending on 25 th November, 2020 and expressed appreciation 
for his support and valuable contribution to the functioning of the Committee to which 
Shri Punia reciprocated.  Thereafter, the Committee paid their humble tribute to Shri 
Durga Prasad Balli and Shri Ashok Gasti, Members during the previous term of the 
Committee (2019 -20) on their sad demise.  All the Members and o fficers of the 
Committee stood in silence for one minute in honour of the departed souls. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports of the 
Committee :-  
(i) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
(ii) 16th Report of the Committee on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 7 th Report of the 
Committee on “Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.” 
(iii) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
 (iv) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
4. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. Then the Reports were adopted without any modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairperson to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament in the next Session.   
5. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
 
6. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
7. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
8. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
9. *****   *****   *****   ***** 

65 
 
10. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
11. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
12. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
 (The Committee then adjourned.) 
______________________________ 
*** Matter not related to this Report. 
  

66 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT  OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21)’  
OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  Total Percentage 
 
Total number of Recommendations 21 
 
 
(I) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government :   
Paragraph Nos. – 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 3.10, 
3.11, 4.43, 4.44, 4.45, 4.47, 4.49, 4.50, 4.51, 
5.7, 6.5 and 7.10 
 
15 71.43 
(II) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government :  
Paragraph No.  – Nil 
 
0 0 
(III) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been 
 accepted and  which require reiteration:  
Paragraph No. – 4.46 
 
1 4.76 
(IV) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are of in  
nature: 
Paragraph Nos. – 3.9, 4.48, 5.6, 5.8 and 6.6 
  
 
5 23.81 
 
 
 
 