i 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023) 
 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Soc ial 
Justice and Empowerment ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana (B JRCY) for SC Boys and Girls” of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).   
 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
38 

ii 
 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT   
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2022-2023) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT)     
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) for SC Boys and Girls” of the Ministry of Social 
Justice a nd Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment).   
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2022 
 
                                       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted and which require 
reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 9 th 
December, 2022. 
 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action Taken by the government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of The Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and Empowerment on ‘Babu Jagjivan Ram  
Chhatrawas Yojana for SC Boys and Girls (BJRCY)' of the  
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
                                         
 
    
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Nauriyal  - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar        - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Haokip Kakai   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on  Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Thirty-Eighth Report  on the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-
Sixth Report  of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana  (BJRCY) for 
SC Boys and Girls”  relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 2nd November, 2021.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the observations/recommendations contained therein on  
20th July, 2022 .  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 9.12.2022. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference , observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of this Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
09 December, 2022                                              Standing Committee on 
18 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)    Social Justice and  
        Empowerment 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
  
REPORT 
   
          The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas 
Yojana for SC Boys and Girls (BJRCY)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 2.       The Twenty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 02.12.2021. It contained 12 observations/recommendations.  Replies 
of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No.5.19, 5.21 & 6.7 
  
  
 (Total:03, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No. 2.13, 3.21, 4.17, 4.18 & 5.20 
  
  
  
(Total: 05, Chapter: III)  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No.2.12, 3.19, 3.20 & 4.16  
  
  
(Total:04, Chapter:IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: – NIL 
(Total: NIL) 
 

2 
 
3.      The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be furnished 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
  
4.       The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the 
Government which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.12) 
5.       The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the 60 year old scheme of  
construction of hostels for SC students has been running  
under the name BJRCY since 2008. There have been major  
revisions in the scheme, the latest being that from the present  
Financial Year 2021 -22, the budgetary allocation for the  
Scheme has been merged with ‘Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit  
Jaati Abhyuday Yojana’ (PM -AJAY) along with two other  
Schemes namely Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana  
(PMAGY) and Special Centr al Assistance to Scheduled Castes  
Sub-Plan (SCA to SCSP). While the Ministry have tried to  
assure the Committee that this change would end any  
limitation of funds for construction of Hostels for SC boys and  
girls, the Committee are surprised to find from t he Ministry’s  
written information provided at the time of examination of  
Demands for Grants (2021 -22) that instead of increase, the  
budgetary allocation for 2021 -22 has been reduced by ₹160.00 
crore, as budgetary allocation for PMAGY and SCA to SCSP  
and actual expenditure under BJRCY added together was ₹1,960.00 in 
2020-21, whereas for 2021 -22 it is only ₹1,800.00 
Crore. Furthermore, the allocation made separately for Boys  
and Girls Hostels has been clubbed together and a single  
reduced allocation is being made from 2019 -20 onwards. The  
Committee are unable to accept the submission made by the  
Department that single allocation would result in better need  
assessment, planning and more efficient utilization of  
resources when the performance of Scheme has been very 
dismal as the Department could sanction 819 hostels only in  
13 year period between 2007 -08 to 2020 -21 in total. Out of  
this, only 110 hostels were sanctioned since 2016 -17 till date  
hence the Committee needs to be convinced with a speedier  
sanction an d actual construction of hostels under BJRCY to  
believe that it would now prosper with a single allocation. The  
Committee feel that specific allocation should have been  

3 
 
continued for this Scheme for its independent functioning  
without getting affected by o ther Schemes or vice -versa. Now  
that budgetary provision for three Schemes including BJRCY  
has been made under PM -AJAY in 2021 -22, the Committee  
expect that at least notional allocation has been made under  
each Scheme from the PM -AJAY allocation, including  separate 
allocation for Boys and Girls Hostel, so that each of the  
Scheme functions independently with the allocated funds and  
the success of each Scheme is assessed on the basis of their  
performance. The Committee now expect the Department to  
provide the m data, at the action taken stage, to support and  
justify the new fund arrangement being successful for BJRCY  
under PM -AJAY, in terms of speedier completion of long  
pending sanctioned hostels and sanction of more number of  
hostels in the requisite blocks/d istricts, as repeatedly  
expressed during their discussion on the subject.” 
  
  
6.       The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“In the context of the allocation of fund under the components of PMAGY, 
SCS to SCP and BJRCY was Rs 1960 crore during 2020 -21 and Rs 1800 
crore during 2021 -22, It is submitted that the said amount has been 
allocated for PM-AJAY of which BJRCY is one of the components and not 
specifically for BJRCY. During 2020 -21, th e actual expenditure under 
BJRCY was Rs 56.39 crore while during 2021 -22, it has been 42.54 
crore. Since the component of BJRCY for construction of hostels is a 
demand driven and assessment of need by the implementing agencies, 
the reduction in the expendi ture was attributed to the receipt of lesser 
number of complete proposals for construction/expansion and repair & 
maintenance of hostels from the implementing agencies. While 
recommending for continuation of the merged scheme of PM -AJAY, the 
Expenditure Co mmittee has recommended the year -wise allocation of 
funds earmarked for the scheme. Out of which 2% is earmarked for the 
hostels to be constructed/expanded/repaired and maintained by the 
Central Universities/Institutes. Besides, upto 30% of the funds 
earmarked for the “Grants in Aid” component can be utilized for 
infrastructure development including hostels, for which the 
implementing agencies are State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations. As per the guidelines of the scheme, the notional 
allocation of funds for the year 2022 -23 under the “Grant in Aid” 
component to the States/UT Governments has been communicated to 
the implementing State Governments/Union Territory Administrations 
enabling them to formulate their project proposals under their Annual  
Action Plan accordingly.” 
  

4 
 
7.      The Committee had expressed concern with regard to the merger of 
Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY) with ‘Pradhan Mantri 
Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojana’ (PM -AJAY) alongwith two other 
schemes namely Pradhan Mant ri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) and 
Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan in 2021-22 (SCA 
to SCSP) and felt that the success of any Scheme cannot be assessed in 
the absence of specific allocation of funds. Therefore, at least notional 
allocation should have been made under each Scheme from the PM -AJAY 
allocation. The Committee had, accordingly desired that the Department 
of Social Justice and Empowerment may provide data to support and 
justify the new system of fund arrangement being success ful for BJRCY 
under PM-AJAY. The Committee, however, have not been furnished with 
any supportive data/information to show that the pace of work of 
construction of hostels has improved and more hostels have been 
sanctioned after the introduction of the new fund arrangement. The 
Committee feel that the present methodology of earmarking 2% of the 
funds sanctioned under PM -AJAY for construction/expansion, repair and 
maintenance and earmarking of 30% of Grants -in-Aid for infrastructure 
development including host els is much in deviation with the established 
practice and the project of construction of hostels under the BJRCY 
Scheme for SC boys/girls, which, already, is in need of a focused 
approach, will lose its pace further.   Moreover schemes for social welfare 
need to be continued with vigor by the Government despite setbacks. 
Hence, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire 
that the Department may re -examine the issue of notional allocation for 
each scheme under PM -AJAY so that none of the Schemes including 
BJRCY are neglected.   The Committee further desire the Department to 
provide the details of notional allocation of funds for the year 2022 -23 
under the Grants -in-Aid Component which were shared with the 
implementing agencies/State and UT Governments.  The Committee 
would appreciate if the Department is able to provide data in justification 
of the current system. 

5 
 
          Recommendation (Para No.3.19) 
8.       The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Comm ittee are perturbed to note that the Department  
does not have the details of all SC hostels set up under the  
Scheme since the provision for construction of Hostels for SC  
girls was made way back in 1961 -66. In fact, the Department  
was able to provide the d etails of only such hostels to the  
Committee, which were sanctioned/completed after the  
Scheme was revised in 2007 -08. The justification of the  
Department for the same was the records not being readily  
available as the Ministry of Social justice and Empowe rment 
underwent restructuring during 2007 -08 and as a result  
Ministry of Minority Affairs and a part of the Ministry of  Women and 
Child development were carved out as separate  
Ministries from it. Nonetheless it is utterly surprising that the  
Department of Social justice and Empowerment has not been  
able to retrieve a record of just 46 years (1961 -2007) for this  
Scheme since then. The Department was not able to give  
convincing reply to the Committee when they appeared before  
the Committee twice. It was later  informed that an exercise  
has been undertaken for retrieving records after the  
Committee insisted, including asking the Project Monitoring  
Unit to collect the information. The Committee hope that the  
Department have now conducted an exhaustive exercise fo r 
compilation of details of all the SC hostels sanctioned till date  
and desire to be informed of the progress made/data collected  
in this regard at the Action Taken stage, as committed by the  
Secretary of the Department.” 
9.       The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“It is submitted that due to re -structuring and re -shaping of the 
Ministries several times in the past, due to repeated transfer of records 
with the help of limited staff strength and also due to frequent transfer of 
staff along with institutional memory, it had been very difficult to keep 
track of all the records. With great efforts, the existing staff of the 
Department, as it is in its present form, has been able to retrieve t he 
records regarding implementation of the erstwhile scheme of BJRCY 
since the year 2007 -08 to a large extent.   Efforts are being taken to 
compile the details of all the SC hostels sanctioned till date. All the 
States/UTs were written vide letter dated 19/ 05/2021 and 
13/01/2021  seeking comments on the completion status of the hostels 
and non utilization of funds sanctioned/released under the scheme of 
BJRCY. And also these States were intimated to submit those 
information during video conference held on 16 /11/2021 

6 
 
and 05/03/2021. On the basis of information received from the 
implementing agencies, the database comprising the details of hostels 
constructed is being updated from time to time.” 
10.    The Committee had expressed its displeasure over the inabil ity of 
the Department to provide or retrieve data of hostels constructed from 
1961 to 2007 under Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY). 
During their interaction with the Ministry at various occasions also, this 
issue was flagged.   The Committee had ac cordingly expected that the 
Department may have conducted an exhaustive exercise for compilation 
of details, as desired by them. To their utter dismay, they find that the 
Department, instead of providing the updated information, have 
intimated that all the States/ UTs were sent a  letter dated 19.5.2021 and 
have also asked for the information in this regard during video conference 
on 16.11.2021 and 25.03.2021.   It is incomprehensible as to how data of 
nearly 46 years is missing altogether. The Committee are  also surprised 
to note that hardly any action has been taken by the Department on the 
matter.  The Committee are quite unhappy with the casual approach of 
the Department and direct them to take concrete measures to update the 
records as a routine exercise of sending letters may prove to be futile. The 
Department should ensure that they are not only able to update records 
urgently but should also ensure that the records are kept digitally so that 
they do not suffer any such crisis in future. 
Recommendation (Para No.3.20) 
11.     The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are sad to note that the Department of Social  
Justice and Empowerment has been able to sanction only 819  
hostels i.e. 391 for girls and 271 for boys , since the revision of  
the Scheme in 2007 -08 against the objective of the Scheme to  
have Girls/Boys Hostel in every block headquarters of low  
literacy districts. Out of these, only 662 have been  
constructed so far, 144 are statedly under construction and 13 
have been cancelled by the States due to various reasons.  
After further revision of the Scheme in 2018 and 2020, where  
two major decisions were taken regarding discontinuation of  
Central assistance to Non -Governmental Organizations and  

7 
 
Private Instituti ons/ Deemed Universities for expansion of  
their hostels and reduction in criteria of SC population from 20  
percent or more to 15 percent or more, the Scheme seems to  
have hit a roadblock as the Department have been able to  
sanction only 62 Hostels since th en. On being enquired, the  
Department has statedly held States/UTs responsible for poor  
performance as sanction for construction of a hostel under  
the Scheme depends upon the receipt of complete proposals  
from them. The Committee are also disturbed to note  that the  
States/UTs having comparatively larger SC population like  
Punjab, Bihar, etc. have been sanctioned less hostels and  
even the sanctioned ones have not been made operational in  
many cases. Hence, the Committee strongly believe that the  
onus of maki ng the Scheme successful is on the Department  
as the Scheme was started by them for creating the hostel  
facility so that the SC girls/boys hailing from rural and  
educationally backward areas of the country are able to attain  
and complete quality education,  and thus, they are not  
justified in expressing their helplessness to improve the  
performance of BJRCY in the absence of proposals from  
States/UTs. As the number of hostels available is still much  
less in comparison to the existing SC population and the SC  
students do require hostels to continue their education, the  
Department has to think of innovative ideas beyond the usual  
measures routinely adopted by them. Since holding Meetings  
at various levels have not yielded desired results, it is urgently  
required that first of all, a reliable database is made for  
Hostels in various districts all over India, having real -time 
status updation and monitoring facility at the Central level.  
The Committee also wonders as to why Hostels cannot be  
planned in deficient dis tricts when 100% Central Assistance  
can be made for the same. However appropriate  
parameters/benchmarks are to be specified first so that a  
workable action plan is chalked out. This requires collection  
and analysis of data. They emphasize that a mechanism has 
to be evolved to make the Scheme effective as intended. The  
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the  
Department now on these lines so that the requisite number of  
hostels are sanctioned, constructed and operationalised in the  
given time frame of two years.” 
12.     The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “Erstwhile scheme of Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana has been a 
demand driven scheme in which the implementing agencies furnish the 
proposal for the construction of hostels. Under the scheme, while 
planning for new hostels/expansion of existing hostel s, a need based 

8 
 
assessment survey of targeted beneficiaries must be undertaken by the 
implementing agencies before considering any new construction of 
hostel. Further priority may be given to areas having concentration of SC 
population of 15 % and more and  without adequate facilities for SC 
students. To enhance the number of hostels, especially in the deficient 
areas, the implementing agencies are communicated frequently and 
advised to conduct need assessment survey and submit the proposal for 
the construct ion of the hostels accordingly. In order to maintain a 
database of the availability of operational hostels, the implementing 
agencies have also been requested to provide complete information 
regarding availability of hostels for SC beneficiary students, sa nction of 
hostels under the erstwhile scheme of BJRCY, their operational status 
and occupational status, etc. 
As per the new guidelines of PM -AJAY, the hostels shall be 
completed within a period of 27 (twenty seven) months including pre -
construction activi ties from the date of sanction of the project. While 
submitting the proposals for release of central assistance, the 
implementing agencies shall give a time frame about the completion of 
construction which shall be in any case, not more than the maximum 
prescribed period. The Department shall not bear the time and/or cost 
overruns of any infrastructure projects in any case and any delay in work 
will be dealt as per the GFR provision.” 
  
13.    The Committee were anguished to note that only 819 hostels have 
been sanctioned against the target to have a hostel for SC boys and girls 
in every Block Headquarters of low literary districts even after the 
revision of the scheme in 2007 -2008. The helplessness of the Department 
to improve the performance of BJRCY in th e absence of proposals from 
States/UTs is not convincing enough.   The Committee wonder as to why 
hostels cannot be planned by them in deficient districts to guide the 
stakeholders in preparing viable proposals when 100% Central Assistance 
is provided for t he same. The Committee had also desired that 
appropriate parameters/ benchmarks be specified first so that a workable 
action plan can be chalked out. In this connection, the reply of the 
Department is too general in nature. From this Scenario, the Committe e 
cannot but feel that the Department is trying to wash its hands off by 
stating that the implementing agencies are communicated to conduct 
need assessment survey and submit the proposal for construction of 

9 
 
hostels. The Committee strongly believe that the nodal Department 
should shoulder more responsibility in the implementation and 
monitoring of progress of the Scheme to achieve the targets. The 
Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and expect 
that necessary action would be taken by t he Department in a time bound 
manner so that more   proposals are received from States/UTs and the 
noble objective of having hostels for SC boys and girls in every block 
headquarters of low literary districts is achieved. 
Recommendation (Para No.4.16) 
14.     The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
           “The Committee are surprised to find that the construction  
work of 144 hostels is yet to be completed and that 13 hostels  
has been cancelled, out of total 819 hostels sanct ioned for SC  
girls and boys. They find that construction work of many  
hostels has been inordinately delayed since many of these  
hostels were sanctioned as early as 2008 -09. In addition, the  
work of 8 private hostels is also incomplete. The Committee  
find t hat despite the scheme being in existence for  
6 decades, the Department has not developed any mechanism  
which could ensure that the sanctioned hostels are timely  
constructed. However, now several initiatives are being taken,  
after the revision of the Schem e in 2018 and 2020, by the  
Department including assigning Project monitoring Units the  
responsibility to keep a check on the progress of work as well  
as incorporating a stipulation that land on which hostel is to  
be built should be either owned by the Stat e Government or  
by the Institute and the title of land should be free from any  
dispute, which should yield positive results. The Committee  
were also informed during evidence that the Department  
would be preferring institutions having large land area of the ir 
own to construct such hostels. The Committee hope that  
with these systems in place now, above said 144 hostels  
would be constructed within the prescribed time limit of two  
years. The Committee suggest Department to examine  
incorporating suitable penal p rovisions in the guidelines for  
the projects getting delayed beyond the specified time period.  
They recommend that the Department must take suitable  
measures so that the hostels so far sanctioned to Private  
Institutes are completed. For the cancelled hoste ls, 
concerned State/UT Governments should be encouraged to  
submit fresh and complete proposals. The Committee would  

10 
 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard by the  
Department in their Action Taken Notes.” 
  
15.     The Department of Social Ju stice and Empowerment, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
           “Under the guidelines of the merged scheme fo PM -AJAY, the 
hostels shall be completed within a period of 27 months including pre -
construction activities from the date of sanction of the project. While 
submitting proposals for release of central assistance, the implementing 
agencies shall give a time frame about the completion of construction 
which shall be in any case, not more than the maximum prescribed 
period. The Ministry shall not bear the time and/or cost overruns of any 
infrastructure projects in any case and any delay in work will be dealt 
as per the GFR provisions. However, it has been felt that incorporating a 
penal provision for the implementing agencies is likely to discourage the 
implementing agencies for implementing the scheme spontaneously. It 
has already been mentioned in the guidelines for implementation of the 
merged scheme of PM -AJAY that the Department will not bear the time 
and cost overrun of the in frastructure projects in any case and any 
delay in work attracting the provisions of the General financial Rules. 
The Department is in the process of ascertaining the position of 
completion, operationalisation of the hostels sanctioned to the 
implementing agencies so far.” 
 16.    The Committee had found that the construction work of 144 
hostels is yet to be completed, 13 hostels have been cancelled and the 
work of 8 private hostels is incomplete. Accordingly, the Committee had 
hoped that after the revision  of the Scheme, work of the 144 hostels 
would be completed with the prescribed time limit and had also desired 
that the suitable measures may be taken so that the hostels so far 
sanctioned to private institutes are completed and the States/ UTs where 
the h ostels have been cancelled should be encouraged to submit fresh 
proposals. The Committee are however, surprised to find that no steps 
have been taken by the Department with regard to the suggestions made 
by them. The Committee are dismayed to note that the  Department is 
still in the process of ascertaining the position of completion, 

11 
 
operationalisation of the hostels sanctioned by the implementing 
agencies so far. They fail to understand the reasons for this. The 
Committee feel that the Department should have an inbuilt mechanism so 
that all the pertinent information is readily available with them to timely 
address the bottlenecks. The Committee, therefore, reiterates their earlier 
recommendation and expect that  concrete action would be taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
 
  

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (Recommendation Para No.5.19) 
The Committee note that the  Implementing Agencies are  exclusively 
responsible for the operation of hostels and their  maintenance. As per the 
guidelines, facilities like in house  coaching, medical care, periodical health 
camps, IT education,  sports coaching, lady warden and night wat chmen in 
Girls Hostels including grievance redressal mechanism are to be  made 
available for the inmates of the hostels. Implementing  Agencies are also 
responsible for publicity about admissions  in hostels. The Committee are 
unhappy to find that the  facilities available in the hostels are found to be not  
satisfactory by the department and are therefore required to  be scrupulously 
monitored regularly. Submission of reports  by the implementing agencies has 
probably become a routine  exercise and hence may not s erve the desired 
objective. The  inmates of the hostels cannot be left at the mercy of the  
implementing agencies, more so because they belong to  those factions of 
society which may not come forth about  their problems due to fear/lack of 
confidence. The Committee would therefore like the Department to extend their 
role beyond funding. The Department needs to keep track of the  hostel 
functioning through Hostel Management Committees, as recommended by NITI 
Aayog, and evolve suitable digitized  mechanisms so that  all the relevant 
information is readily  available with the Department instead of relying on the 
age old  system of Reports submitted by implementing agencies. As  
has already been emphasized by the Committee, the  Department should 
develop a software to keep  real time  information about the occupancy status 
and ensure that  sufficient publicity is given so that hostels have 100%  
occupancy. The Committee also desire that directions should  be issued to all 
the implementing agencies to develop a  grievance redressal mechanism for 
hostel inmates, apart from  
surprise inspections/social audit so that every complaint/  grievance can be 
addressed properly without any delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the guidelines of the scheme, for effective implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme, a centralized MIS portal has been developed and 
launched to capture the data on real time basis of each of the component, 
including the component of hostel, of the scheme. The portal has been made 
operational. The implementing  agencies shall closely supervise the hostel 
construction work regularly and submit progress reports through the online 
portal. The implementing agencies shall submit reports regarding percentage of 
occupancy, facilities available in the hostels including availability of lady 
wardens and watchmen in girls’ hostel, outcomes like academic performances, 
etc to the Ministry periodically. They will also develop grievance redressal 

13 
 
mechanism for hostel inmates under intimation to Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
 (Recommendation Para No.5.21) 
 
On the overall assessment of the Scheme, the Committee  observe that the 
Centrally sponsored Scheme of construction  of Hostels for SC girls and boys 
has been in place from 1961 -66 and 1989 -90 respectively followed by Babu 
Jagjivan Ram  Chhatrawas Yojana in 2007 -2008, which was revised twice in  
2018 and 2020. Despite bringing out  changes to improve its  performance the 
Scheme has not taken off though it  
underwent repeated changes in the Scheme. Only 819 hostels  have been 
sanctioned till date and 662 have been constructed  so far. What is most 
disheartening is that out of these,  actually functioning hostels number a mere 
366 i.e. 344 for SC girls and 22 for SC boys. This is quite insufficient for such a 
large SC poor population in the country. The Committee  cannot but conclude 
that the Scheme has not been operated  by the successive no dal Departments 
with the requisite zeal and enthusiasm. Most surprising is that the Scheme has 
not done well even after the creation of an exclusive Ministry for  
ensuring Social Justice and Empowerment to the deprived  sections from 2004 
onwards. The fact t hat the Department of  Social Justice and Empowerment 
has not been able to retrieve  the record of the Hostels set up prior to the 
revision of the  Scheme in 2007 -08 even after a span of 15 years is ample  
proof of the same. While the Committee have been convi nced that a Project 
monitoring Unit, recently set up to monitor the  functioning and progress of 
construction of hostels, will boost  the pending projects, the Committee are 
skeptical as it  appears from the response of the Department that full  
responsibility has been entrusted over a Unit, wherein young  professionals 
have been engaged with the hope to rectify a Scheme that has been floundering 
for decades. While the  Committee trust the best intentions of the Department 
yet they  are of the view that if the Scheme is to achieve its enshrined  
objectives then the Department needs to revisit their own  mechanisms and 
think of out -of-the-box solutions to address  the flaws and plug the leakages 
under the new initiative of  
Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhudaya Yojana (PM- AJAY). The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the  Ministry to consider constitution of a 
dedicated body for operation of the Scheme on the lines of Kendriya Vidyalayas, 
Navodaya Vidyalayas, Eklavya Model residential Schools, etc.  
particularly as the Scheme is now proposed to be Centrally funded in toto. 
 
 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
The guidelines of the merged scheme of PM -AJAY provides for constitution of 
Advisory Committees at the Central and State level to be headed by 
Union/State Minister f or Social Justice and Empowerment and having a 
suitable number of public representatives, besides representatives of concerned 
Ministries/Departments and bodies, for overall guidance and monitoring of the 
scheme. 
 Further, a proposal for setting up Project Implementation Union (PIUs) at 
the State level as well as District level to assist the officials at every stages of 
implementation of the scheme, has been under active consideration. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.6.7) 
 
The Committee are unhappy to find that despite the provision  of Steering 
Committee to monitor and review the progress of  construction/completion of 
hostels and also monitor the  functioning and occupancy, neither the work of 
construction nor the functioning of the hostels is satisfactory. They wonder  
whether such a Committee is in existence, and, if existing,  whether it meet s 
regularly at all to address various issues.  Had the work been taken seriously 
and field visits conducted  to inspect the lingering projects, the Scheme would 
not have  underperformed. Since the work has now been entrusted to  Project 
Monitoring Units, the Committee would like to believe  that the situation can 
improve. The Committee needs the  findings of PMU and future action plan 
based on the inputs to  know the actual progress. The Committee are also of 
strong opinion that a dedicated Hostel Monitoring Comm ittee may be  
constituted to monitor the progress and functioning of the  hostels for the 
proper implementation of Scheme and appropriate penal provisions may be put 
in place for the  violation of established norms. The Committee feel that the  
recommendations of Niti Aayog with regard to robust monitoring mechanism to 
improve the efficiency in monitoring  must be suitably incorporated in the 
guidelines of the Scheme  
for its better implementation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
For overall guidance and monitoring of t he scheme, it has been prescribed in 
the guidelines for its implementation that Advisory Committees be constituted 
at the Central and State level to be headed by the Union/State Minister, as the 
case may be, for Social Justice and Empowerment and having a number of 

15 
 
public representatives, besides representatives of concerned 
Ministries/Departments and bodies. 
 However, it has been felt that incorporating a penal provision for the 
implementing agencies is likely to discourage the implementing agencies for 
implementing the scheme spontaneously. It has already been mentioned in the 
guidelines for implementation of the merged scheme of PM -AJAY that the 
Department will not bear the time and cost overrun of the infrastructure 
projects in any case and any delay in work attracting the provisions of the 
General financial Rules. 
 Furthering the monitoring mechanism to improve the efficiency in 
monitoring the implementation of the scheme, it has been in its guidelines that 
Project Implementation Units would be set up at  State as well as District level 
to assist the officials in every stages of implementation of the scheme. Along 
with this, a centralized MIS portal would be in place to capture the data on real 
time basis of each of the component of the scheme. Besides, in dependent 
evaluations of the scheme will be undertaken through reputed institutions 
working in the area of Rural Development or Social Sciences or Management 
etc. or the other designated agency of the Central of State Government such as 
NSSO may also under take the independent survey/evaluation of the scheme 
implementation. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.13) 
 
 The Committee are aghast to find that a proposal to set up residential schools 
for SC girls under Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhattrawas Yojana processed  by the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment was not approved by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee despite the provision for additional funds 
already existing under the Scheme during the years 2017 -18 and 2018 -19. 
The Committee feel that setting up  such residential schools would 
undoubtedly give an opportunity to SC girls to enhance their educational level 
because it is often seen that due to the increasing cost of education, SC girls 
do not get preference over their male siblings for schooling. The representative 
of the Ministry also echoed this view by stating that parents of girl students 
are not likely to send their wards for studies if proper hostel facilities are not 
available. In this connection, the Committee also feel that the education 
standard of existing Govt. Schools in many States is still not very encouraging 
hence it is premature for the Central Government to stop setting up of 
residential Schools for SC girls in the country. The Committee would therefore 
like the Department of Social justice and Empowerment to re -submit their 
earlier proposal for setting up residential Schools for SC girls in the Country 
for consideration of the Expenditure Finance Committee while conveying the 
sentiments of this Parliamentary Committee, under intimati on to them at the 
appropriate stage. 
Reply of the Government 
As per the guidelines of PM -AJAY, Districts/States/Central Ministry may 
propose to set up residential schools through the Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya 
Society/Eklavya Model Residential Schools Society and similar 
Government/autonomous bodies. Projects for ex pansion of the existing 

17 
 
residential schools in SC concentrated districts will be given preference to 
accommodate more SC students in these Schools by expanding the existing 
infrastructure of JNV, EMRS or the like. The expanded capacity will be utilized 
to enroll more SC students to the extent of the capacity increase. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.21) 
The Committee find from the  recently conducted comprehensive assessment of 
need/demand among National Institute Ranking Framework(NIRF) ranked  
Institutes and Aspirational Districts for such hostels that some of the NIRF 
ranked Institutes and a few Aspirational districts have shown the requirement 
of Hostels. The Committee also note that a Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) has 
been setup under the National Institute of Social Defence (NISD) to collect 
information on availability and requirement of hostels for SC students in 
various distr icts and Blocks. The Committee feel that the assessment of 
required hostels must be conducted in a time bound manner without any 
further delay, with engagements of persons having requisite experience in the 
field so that work is done meticulously and relia ble data is collected to decide 
upon a definite course of action. The Committee would like to be informed of 
the assessment of number of hostels and the parameters fixed for making the 
assessment at the Action Taken stage. The Committee are surprised to no te 
that even today there is no online portal for submission of proposals by the 
implementing Agencies under the Scheme and feel that the creation of an 
online portal will help in accelerating the process of sanction and construction 
of hostels in a time bo und manner. The Committee hence recommend that the 
Department should create an online portal without any further delay, under 
intimation to them. 
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
The erstwhile scheme of BJRCY  had been a centrally sponsored scheme which 
is implemented by various agencies like State Governments/Union Territory 
administrations etc. On merging of the scheme of BJRCY into the scheme of 
PM-AJAY, the guidelines for implementation of the scheme of PM -AJAY 
envisage for planning for new hostels/expan sion of existing hostels, a need 
based assessment survey of targeted beneficiaries must be undertaken by the 
implementing agencies before considering any new construction of hostel. The 
modalities for the assessment survey is decided by the concerned implementing 
agencies 
An online portal for effective implementation of the merged scheme of 
PM-AJAY scheme has been launched and made functional. Implementing 
agencies are in the process of submitting their Annual Action Plans and other 
information through this portal.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.4.17) 
The Committee find that under the scheme, 144 hostels  sanctioned long back 
have not been completed, out of which 8  hostels are under Private Institutions. 
In order to complete  the projects, the Department sent reminders four times 
and held a video conference too albeit with hardly any result. The  Committee 
appreciates the initiative t aken by the Department  now to send a team of 20 
personnel to the 14 States, where  incomplete hostels are reported, to take 
stock of the ground  situation. As committed by the Department before the  
Committee, a consolidated report on the same along with  photographs would 
be submitted to them following the  completion of this exercise. The Committee 
expect it at the action taken stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The implementing agencies are frequently contacted and advised to complete 
the hostels within the stipulated time. An attempt to fetch the report from the 
team as cited above to take stock of the ground situation is under process. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated  
20.7.2022) 
 

19 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4.18) 
The Committee note that the Central assistance to Non -Governmental 
Organizations, Private Institutions and Deemed  Universities for expansion of 
hostels has been discontinued  after the revision of guidelines of BJRCY in 
2018. Prior to this 62 hostels were sanctioned for such institutions. While the  
Committee feel that the issue must have been deliberated  extensively before 
discontinuation of this provision, it is worth  mentioning that some of the 
private Institut ions/Deemed Universities are doing outstanding work in the 
education field  in the country however studying at such Institutions can be  
very expensive beyond the means of SC students, who can, at  least, get the 
benefit of free hostel, if constructed under  BJRCY. The Committee strongly feel 
that the provision with  regard to Central assistance to private 
Institutions/Deemed Universities for expansion of hostels, barring Non - 
Governmental Organisations, after detailed scrutiny of their  credentials, may 
be re-examined if there is a scope for the same under PM-AJAY. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the guidelines of PM -AJAY, Higher Educational Institutions which 
are top-ranked as per the National Institutional Ranking Framework(NIRF) of 
Government of India and fully or partially funded by the Centre/State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations, shall be eligible for funding 
under this component. Similarly, schools which are fully or partially funded by 
the Centre/State Governments/Union Territory Administra tions and 
recommended by the Ministry of Education shall also be eligible. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.5.20) 
 
The Committee fi nd that the Department has fixed separate  Cost Norms for 
construction of hostels in North Eastern  Region, Northern Himalayan Regions 
and Gangetic plains  and lower Himalayan Region and for the repair and  
maintenance of the hostels. The Committee are surpris ed to note that the cost 
norms have been recently revised on the recommendation of School of Planning 
and Architecture. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons due to 
which the cost norms were not revised timely to absorb the inflation  
effect. They strongly believe that had the Department revised  
cost norms in time, they may have received more proposals  
from the States/UTs for construction of hostels which could  
have benefitted many needy SC students . The Committee  
hence recommend that the const ruction cost as well as repair  

20 
 
and maintenance cost should be revised in regular periodicity  
to absorb inflation effect so that realistic cost norms are  
framed which would result in a better performance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Several implementing agencies have so far been managed to complete the 
construction and repair/maintenance works of the hostels sanctioned under 
the erstwhile scheme of BJRCU with the central assistance as per the 
prevailing cost norms prescribed under the scheme guidelines fr om time to 
time basis. However, the cost norms under the scheme would be reviewed and 
an exercise on the revision of the cost norms would be undertaken shortly. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M N o.16014/01/2020-SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
 
  

21 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.12) 
 
The Committee note that the 60 year old scheme of construction of hostels for 
SC students has been running  under the name BJRCY since 2008. There have 
been major  revisions in the scheme, the latest being that from the present  
Financial Year 2021 -22, the budgetary allocation for the  Scheme has be en 
merged with ‘Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit  Jaati Abhyuday Yojana’ (PM -AJAY) 
along with two other  
Schemes namely Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana  (PMAGY) and Special 
Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes  Sub-Plan (SCA to SCSP). While the 
Ministry have tried  to assure the Committee that this change would end any  
limitation of funds for construction of Hostels for SC boys and  
girls, the Committee are surprised to find from the Ministry’s  written 
information provided at the time of examination of  Demands for Grants (2021-
22) that instead of increase, the  budgetary allocation for 2021 -22 has been 
reduced by ₹160.00 crore, as budgetary allocation for PMAGY and SCA to SCSP 
and actual expenditure under BJRCY added together was ₹1960.00 in 2020 -
21, whereas for 2021-22 it is only ₹1800.00 Crore. Furthermore, the allocation 
made separately for Boys  and Girls Hostels has been clubbed together and a 
singlereduced allocation is being made from 2019 -20 onwards. The Committee 
are unable to accept the submission made by the  Department that single 
allocation would result in better need  assessment, planning and more efficient 
utilization of resources when the performance of Scheme has been very  dismal 
as the Department could sanction 819 hostels only in  13 year period between 
2007-08 to 2020 -21 in total. Out of  this, only 110 hostels were sanctioned 
since 2016 -17 till date  hence the Committee needs to be convinced with a 
speedier sanction and actual construction of hostels under BJRCY to  believe 
that it would now prosper with a  single allocation. The  Committee feel that 
specific allocation should have been  continued for this Scheme for its 
independent functioning  without getting affected by other Schemes or vice -
versa. Now that budgetary provision for three Schemes including BJR CY has 
been made under PM -AJAY in 2021 -22, the Committee  expect that at least 
notional allocation has been made under  each Scheme from the PM -AJAY 
allocation, including separate allocation for Boys and Girls Hostel, so that each 

22 
 
of the  Scheme functions ind ependently with the allocated funds and  the 
success of each Scheme is assessed on the basis of their  performance. The 
Committee now expect the Department to  provide them data, at the action 
taken stage, to support and  justify the new fund arrangement being  successful 
for BJRCY  under PM -AJAY, in terms of speedier completion of long  pending 
sanctioned hostels and sanction of more number of  hostels in the requisite 
blocks/districts, as repeatedly  expressed during their discussion on the 
subject. 
Reply of the Government 
In the context of the allocation of fund under the components of PMAGY, SCS 
to SCP and BJRCY was Rs 1960 crore during 2020 -21 and Rs . 1800 crore 
during 2021 -22, It is submitted that the said amount has been allocated for 
PMAJAY of which BJRCY is one of the components and not specifically for 
BJRCY. During 2020 -21, the actual expenditure under BJRCY was Rs 56.39 
crore while during 2021 -22, it has been 42.54 crore. Since the component of 
BJRCY for construction of hostels is a demand driven and assessment of need 
by the implementing agencies, the reduction in the expenditure was attributed 
to the receipt of lesser number of complete proposa ls for 
construction/expansion and repair & maintenance of hostels from the 
implementing agencies.While recommending for continuation of the merged 
scheme of PM -AJAY, the Expenditure Committee has recommended the year -
wise allocation of funds earmarked for the scheme. Out of which 2% is 
earmarked for the hostels to be constructed/expanded/repaired and 
maintained by the Centrl Universities/Institutes. Besides, upto 30% of the 
funds earmarked for the “Grants in Aid” component can be utilized for 
infrastructure development including hostels, for which the implementing 
agencies are State Governments/Union Territory Administrations. As per the 
guidelines of the scheme, the notional allocation of funds for the year 2022 -23 
under the “Grant in Aid” component to the States/UT Governments has been 
communicated to the implementing State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations enabling them to formulate their project proposals under their 
Annual Action Plan accordingly. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.3.19) 
 
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Department  does not have the 
details of all SC hostels set up under the  Scheme since the provision for 
construction of Hostels for SC girls was made way back in 1961-66. In fact, the 
Department was able to provide the details of only such hostels to the  
Committee, which were sanctioned/ completed after the Scheme was revised in 
2007-08. The ju stification of the  

23 
 
Department for the same was the records not being readily  available as the 
Ministry of Social justice and Empowerment  underwent restructuring during 
2007-08 and as a result  Ministry of Minority Affairs and a part of the Ministry 
of Women and Child development were carved out as separate  Ministries from 
it. Nonetheless it is utterly surprising that the Department of Social justice and 
Empowerment has not been  able to retrieve a record of just 46 years (1961 -
2007) for this  Scheme since then . The Department was not able to give  
convincing reply to the Committee when they appeared before  the Committee 
twice. It was later informed that an exercise  has been undertaken for retrieving 
records after the  
Committee insisted, including asking the Proj ect Monitoring Unit to collect the 
information. The Committee hope that the  Department have now conducted an 
exhaustive exercise for  compilation of details of all the SC hostels sanctioned 
till date and desire to be informed of the progress made/data colle cted in this 
regard at the Action Taken stage, as committed by the  Secretary of the 
Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is submitted that due to re -structuring and re -shaping of the Ministries 
several times in the past, due to repeated transfer of records with the help of 
limited staff strength and also due to frequent transfer of staff along with 
institutional memory, it had been very difficult to keep track of all the records. 
With great efforts, the existing staff of the Department, as it is in its present 
form, has been able to retrieve the records regarding implementation of the 
erstwhile scheme of BJRCY since the ye ar 2007-08 to a large extent.  Efforts 
are being taken to compile the details of all the SC hostels sanctioned till date. 
All the States/UTs were written vide letter dated 19/05/2021  and 
13/01/2021  seeking comments on the completion status of the hostels and 
non utilization of funds sanctioned/released under the scheme of BJRCY. And 
also these states were intimated to submit those information during video 
conference held on 16/11/2021 and  05/03/2021. On the basis of information 
received from the implementing agencies, the database comprising the details 
of hostels constructed is being updated from time to time. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16 014/01/2020-SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.3.20) 
The Committee are sad to note that the Department of Social  Justice and 
Empowerment has been able to sanction only 819  hostels i.e. 391 for girls and 
271 for boys, since the revision of  the Scheme in 2007-08 against the objective 
of the Scheme to  have Girls/Boys Hostel in every block headquarters of low  
literacy districts. Out of these, only 662 have been  constructed so far, 144 are 
statedly under construction and 13  have been cancelled by th e States due to 

24 
 
various reasons. After further revision of the Scheme in 2018 and 2020, where  
two major decisions were taken regarding discontinuation of  
Central assistance to Non -Governmental Organizations and  Private 
Institutions/ Deemed Universities for  expansion of their hostels and reduction 
in criteria of SC population from 20  percent or more to 15 percent or more, the 
Scheme seems to  have hit a roadblock as the Department have been able to  
sanction only 62 Hostels since then. On being enquired, the  Department has 
statedly held States/UTs responsible for poor  performance as sanction for 
construction of a hostel under  the Scheme depends upon the receipt of 
complete proposals from them. The Committee are also disturbed to note that 
the States/UTs having comparatively larger SC population like  Punjab, Bihar, 
etc. have been sanctioned less hostels and  even the sanctioned ones have not 
been made operational in  many cases. Hence, the Committee strongly believe 
that the  onus of making the Scheme successful is on the Department  
as the Scheme was started by them for creating the hostel  facility so that the 
SC girls/boys hailing from rural and  educationally backward areas of the 
country are able to attain  and complete quality education, and thus, they are 
not justified in expressing their helplessness to improve the  performance of 
BJRCY in the absence of proposals from  States/UTs. As the number of hostels 
available is still much less in comparison to the existing SC population and the 
SC students do require hostels  to continue their education, the  Department 
has to think of innovative ideas beyond the usual  measures routinely adopted 
by them. Since holding Meetings  at various levels have not yielded desired 
results, it is urgently  required that first of all, a reliable database is made for  
Hostels in various districts all over India, having real -time status updation and 
monitoring facility at the Central level.  The Committee also wonder as to why 
Hostels cannot be planned in deficient districts when 100% Central  Assistance 
can be made for the same. However appropriate  parameters/benchmarks are 
to be specified first so that a workable action plan is chalked out. This requires 
collection and analysis of data. They emphasize that a mechanism has  to be 
evolved to make the Scheme effective as intended. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken by the  Department now on these lines so that 
the requisite number of  hostels are sanctioned, constructed and 
operationalised in the given time frame of two years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Erstwhile scheme of Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana has been a 
demand driven scheme in which the implementing agencies furnish the 
proposal for the construction of hostels. Under the scheme, while planning for 
new hostels/expansion of existing hostels, a need based assessment survey of 
targeted beneficiaries must be undertaken by the implementing agencies before 
considering any new construction of hostel. Further priority may be given to 
areas having concentration of SC popul ation of 15 % and more and without 
adequate facilities for SC students. To enhance the number of hostels, 

25 
 
especially in the deficient areas, the implementing agencies are communicated 
frequently and advised to conduct need assessment survey and submit the 
proposal for the construction of the hostels accordingly.In order to maintain a 
database of the availability of operational hostels, the implementing agencies 
have also been requested to provide complete information regarding availability 
of hostels for SC  beneficiary students, sanction of hostels under the erstwhile 
scheme of BJRCY, their operational status and occupational status, etc. 
As per the new guidelines of PM -AJAY, the hostels shall be completed 
within a period of 27 (twenty seven) months includin g pre -construction 
activities from the date of sanction of the project. While submitting the 
proposals for release of central assistance, the implementing agencies shall give 
a time frame about the completion of construction which shall be in any case, 
not more than the maximum prescribed period. The Department shall not bear 
the time and/or cost overruns of any infrastructure projects in any case and 
any delay in work will be dealt as per the GFR provision. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Depa rtment of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
(Recommendation Para No.4.16) 
The Committee are surprised to find that the construction  work of 144 hostels 
is yet to be completed and that 13 hostels  has been cancelled, out of total 819 
hostels sanctioned for SC  girls and boys. They find that construction work of 
many hostels has been inordinately delayed since many of these  
hostels were sanctioned as early as 2008 -09. In addition, the work of 8 private 
hostels is also in complete. The Committee  cannot but feel that despite the 
scheme being in existence for  6 decades, the  Department has not developed 
any mechanism  which could ensure that the sanctioned hostels are timely  
constructed. However, now several initiatives are being taken, after the revision 
of the Scheme in 2018 and 2020, by the  Department including assigning 
Project monitoring Units the  responsibility to keep a check on the progress of 
work as well  as incorporating a stipulation that land on which hostel is to  be 
built should be either owned by the State Government or by the Institute and 
the title of land should be free from any  dispute, which should yield positive 
results. The Committee  were also informed during evidence that the 
Department would be preferrin g institutions having large land area of their  
own to construct such hostels. The Committee hope that  with these systems in 
place now, above said 144 hostels  would be constructed within the prescribed 
time limit of two  years. The Committee suggest Departme nt to examine  
incorporating suitable penal provisions in the guidelines for the projects getting 
delayed beyond the specified time period.  They recommend that the 

26 
 
Department must take  suitable 
measures so that the hostels so far sanctioned to Private  Institutes are 
completed. For the cancelled hostels,  concerned State/  UT Governments 
should be encouraged to  submit fresh and complete proposals. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard by the  Department 
in their Action Taken Notes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the guidelines of the merged scheme fo PM -AJAY, the hostels shall be 
completed within a period of 27 months including pre -construction activities 
from the date of sanction of the project. While submitting proposals for release 
of central assistance, the implementing agencies shall give a time frame about 
the completion of construction which shall be in any case, not more than the 
maximum prescribed period. The Ministry shall not bear the time and/or cost 
overruns of any infrastructure projects in any case and any delay in work will 
be dealt as per the GFR provisions. 
 However, it has been felt that incorporating a penal provision for the 
implementing agencies is likely to discourage the implementing agencies for 
implementing the scheme spontaneously. It has already been mentioned in the 
guidelines for implementation of the merged scheme of PM -AJAY that the 
Department will not bear the time and cost overrun of the infrastructure 
projects in any case and any delay in work attracting the provisions of the 
General financial Rules. 
 The Department is in the process of ascertaining the position of 
completion, operationalisation of the hostels sanctioned to the implementing 
agencies so far. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment O.M No.16014/01/2020 -SCD-1 dated 
20.7.2022) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
09   December, 2022                                                 Standing Committee on 
18  Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
         Empowerment 
  

28 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) HELD ON FRIDAY, 9th DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s 
Chamber, Room No. 113, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, 
New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath ‘B.P. Saroj 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
  7. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  8. Smt. Supriya Sule 
9. Smt. Rekha Verma 
10. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
14. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
15. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.P Nauriyal  - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

29 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened  to 
consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) 38th Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Sixth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) for SC Boys and Girls” of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment).   
 
(ii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iv) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without 
any modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft 
Report and to present the same to both the Houses on 12.12.2022. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY -SIXTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON ‘BABU JAGJIVAN RAM CHHATRAWAS 
YOJANA FOR SC BOYS AND GIRLS (BJRCY) ' OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
  Total      Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No.5.19, 5.21 & 6.7 
 
03 25% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:-  
Rec. Para No. 2.13,3.21,4.17,4.18 & 5.20 
 
05 42% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No. 2.12, 3.19, 3.20 & 4.16 
 
04 33% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:– NIL 
 
 
00 00% 
   100% 
 