 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (
(SEVENTEENTH
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
Action T aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).
 
December
52 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2023-24) 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
 
aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Saka) 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
(
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
Action T aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
(2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
                                      Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 
December
ii 
 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT   
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2023-24) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
 
aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2023  
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2023 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
aken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Saka) 

iii 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on     
30th October, 2023. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
 

iv 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2023-24) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
3. Dr. Vatsala Joshi  - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar      - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Satyakaam Yadav - Executive Officer 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Fifty-Second Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).  
 
2. The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 23.03.2023. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) have furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 
22.06.2023.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee 
on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 30.10.2023. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Sixth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference, observations/ recommendations/ comments of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        RAMA DEVI 
                                   Chairperson, 
20th December, 2023                                                              Standing Committee on 
29 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                     Social Justice and  
                         Empowerment 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2. The Forty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
23.03.2023. It contained 12 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No. 2.18, 2.19, 4.8, 5.20,7.7 & 8.16 
(Total: 6 , Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. 3.13, 9.8, 10.13   
(Total:  3 , Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No., 6.14, 8.15  
(Total: 2, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: –   
Rec. Para No. 10.14 
(Total: 1, Chapter: V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 

2 
 
A.  PRADHAN MANTRI ANUSUCHIT JAATI ABHYUDAY YOJANA (PM-AJAY) 
Recommendation (Para No.6.14) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are happy to find that the Actual Expenditure after merger of 
three Schemes namely, Adarsh Gram, Special Central Assistance to Scheduled 
Castes Sub-Plan (SCA to SCSP) and Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana, into 
Pradhan Mantri Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojna (PMAJAY) has substantially 
increased to ₹1820.32 crore in 2021-22 in comparison to the Actual Expenditure 
of ₹659.92 crore incurred in 2020-21, when these three Schemes were operated 
independently. However, in 2022-23, the Actual Expenditure of ₹29.34 crore was 
incurred out of the total expenditure of ₹1,950.00 crore due to delay in adoption 
of Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system by the State/Union Territories. The 
Committee feel that all the three components of the unified Scheme are important 
to empower the SC Community, hence there is an urgent need to set up SNAs in 
each State so that the funds are released to the States on time. With advanced IT 
tools available, the procedural formalities/changes should be implemented fast. 
Hence, the Committee, desire that the Department should develop a sound 
system to overcome the shortcomings, such as delay in submission of Utilisation 
Certificates by the States, unspent balance lying with the State Governments, etc. 
and alert them well in time because now the funds will not be released under the 
new provision unless the unutilised funds are surrendered by the States or 
Utilisation Certificates are provided by them for the release of next instalment out 
of the grant. The Committee also feel that the Department need to formulate an 
action plan and lay down the time bound targets under PMAJAY to achieve the 
objective of the Scheme. The Committee would also like the Department to take 
suitable steps so that the budgetary allocation made for 2022-23 and 2023-24 are 
fruitfully utilised by the implementing agencies and the new provisions are 
successfully implemented. In order to cover larger number of SC villages under 
the Scheme, the Committee recommend that the population criteria fixed for 
selection of village under ‘Adarsh Gram’ should also be periodically reviewed as 
has been done by reducing 50% SC population criteria to 40%. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken by the Department in this regard.” 

3 
 
6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“During FY 2022-23 an amount of ₹164.01 crore has been utilized against the 
total allocation of ₹1,950.00 crore at the end of the Financial Year. The reason 
behind the less expenditure during 2022-23 is solely attributed to huge unspent 
lying with the SNA account of the State as well as non-furnishing of Utilization 
Certificates by some of the State in time. Out of the 30 State/Union territories 
implementing the scheme of PM-AJAY, a total of 28 State/Union Territories have 
already mapped the single nodal account of their respective Single Nodal Agency 
(SNA) in respect of the scheme and 01 Union Territory not required to map. In 
order to have an effective implementation and monitoring of the scheme, a 
centralized MIS portal for this scheme has already been put in place. Based on 
the issues encountered during the course of implementation of the scheme, a 
broad action plan for entire period of implementation of the scheme with short-
term physical and financial targets to be achieved by the respective State 
Governments/ Union Territory Administrations is under consideration. With regard 
to reviewing the Scheduled Caste (SC) population criteria for selection of more 
villages, it would be done at the appropriate time keeping in view the status of 
implementation of the scheme in already selected villages”.  
 
7.  While noting the less expenditure incurred during 2022-23 due to non 
finalization of SNAs and delay in furnishing of utilization certificates by the 
State Governments, the Committee had recommended to set up SNAs in each 
State so that the funds are released to the States on time. The Committee are 
satisfied to note from the reply of the Ministry that out of 30 State/Union 
Territories implementing the Scheme of PM-AJAY, total of 28 States/ Union 
Territories have mapped the Single Nodal Account of the respective Single 
Nodal agency. Further, MIS portal has also been put in place for effective 
implementation and monitoring of the Scheme. The Committee would, 
however, like to impress upon the Ministry to sensitize the States with regard 
to the contours of the scheme and educate them with regard to the 
procedural requirements/ mechanism of release of funds so that the funds 
allocated for 2023-24 would be utilised fully.  As regards to formulate an 
action plan and lay down the time bound targets under PM-AJAY, the Ministry 
has submitted that on the basis of the issues encountered during the course 
of implementation of the Scheme, a broad action plan for entire period of 
implementation of the scheme with short term physical and financial targets 
to be achieved by the respective State Government/Union Territory is under 

4 
 
consideration.  The Committee are of the view that a pro-active approach and 
key time lines should be defined at the planning stage and then they can be 
considered for revision in view of the experience gained in implementing the 
Scheme. This would ensure  a clear road-map to follow by all the stakeholders 
and the Ministry would be able to identify gaps between planning and 
implementation of the scheme. The Committee strongly believe that the 
disbursement should be targeted and time bound and desire that the 
Department should ensure the annual allocation of funds is non-lapsable and 
also ensure that funds allocated for the year of any particular scheme are not 
diverted. The Committee would like the Ministry to review the Scheduled 
Caste population criteria for selection of village under ‘Adarsh Gram’ at a 
certain interval so that a large number of beneficiaries are covered under the 
Scheme.  
B.  NATIONAL ACTION FOR MECHANISED SANITATION ECO SYSTEM 
 (NAMASTE)  
Recommendation (Para No.8.15) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that a Scheme “National Action for Mechanised Sanitisation 
Ecosystem (NAMASTE)” has been formulated by the Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment to provide dignity to sewer and septic tanks workers. It is to 
be implemented jointly with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in 4800+ ULBs 
with the budgetary outlay of ₹350.00 crore during next three years upto 2025-26. 
In this regard, the Committee find that the Scheme has been formulated for 
implementation from 2023-24 after it is planned to collect basic data of number of 
Sewer and Septic Tank workers in the Country from ULBs and their profiling done. 
Also as per the norms under NAMASTE Responsible Sanitary Authencity and 
Emergency Response Sanitation Units are to be established in each district for the 
effective implementation of the Scheme. The Committee would therefore, like the 
Department to take necessary steps to obtain data of sewer and septic tank 
workers from States/ UTs ULBs and also pursue with the States/UTs continuously 
for establishing Response Sanitation Unit and Emergency Response Sanitation 
Units at the earliest so that the target fixed is achieved in the given time. The 

5 
 
Committee also desire that a time limit needs to be fixed for completing the work 
of collection of data by each ULB as well as purchase of machines for sewer 
cleaning by these bodies. The Committee would like to be informed with regard to 
the measures taken in this regard”. 
9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The proposed “National Action for Mechanised Sanitisation Ecosystem 
(NAMASTE)”, inter alia, envisages collection of basic data of sewer and septic tank 
workers in the ULBs of the country and their profiling. After approval of the 
Scheme, this exercise would be undertaken on war footing.  Pending approval of 
the scheme, the concerned States have been requested to collect and provide the 
data of sewer and septic tank workers. Exercise of profiling of sewer and septic 
tank workers would be undertaken after approval of the Scheme.  As regards, 
pursuing the matter of appointment of Responsible Sanitary Authority and setting 
up of the Emergency Sanitation Response Units, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs has been pursuing the matter with the concerned State 
Governments for taking action in a time bound manner.  The data of sewer and 
septic tank workers would be collected in the first year of implementation of 
NAMASTE and will be subsequently updated on regular basis. As regards, 
purchase of machines for sewer cleaning by ULBs, it is stated the NAMASTE 
proposes to provide assistance to the sanitation workers and their dependants in 
the form of capital subsidy and interest subsidy.  This component is proposed to 
be implemented during three years of implementation of NAMASTE.  In addition, 
under the Swachhta Udyami Yojana of the National Safai Karamcharis Finance 
and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) concessional loans are provided to the 
ULBs and the contractors associated with ULBs for sanitation related contracts.  
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, under Swachh Bharat Mission also provides 
assistance to the ULBs for purchase of machines/equipments for cleaning of 
sewers and septic tanks”. 
 
10. The Committee note from the action taken reply of the Ministry that the 
proposed “National Action for Mechanised Sanitisation Ecosystem 
(NAMASTE)”, meant to provide dignity to sewer and septic tank workers and 
implemented from 2023-24, is still pending for approval. The Committee are 
dismayed with this tardy progress of the Scheme as the data of Sewer and 
Septic tank workers is still being collected from States. Since, the process as 
explained by the Ministry in their reply would take time, the Committee are 
unable to understand, how the Scheme can be implemented from 2023-24 
when the basic information is yet to be collected. The Committee suggest the 
Ministry to get all States/local bodies on board for speedy data collection and 

6 
 
make time bound plan for this. The Committee are worried, the way this 
scheme is still in its nascent stages and much more needs to be done for 
NAMASTE to become a reality to provide dignity to sewer and septic tank 
workers. With regard to setting up of Responsible Sanitary Authority and the 
Emergency Sanitation Response Units with the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has not given  any 
specifics as to how many States have done so far. Hence, the Committee 
exhort the Ministry to take suitable action for the approval of the Scheme so 
that the Scheme is implemented as projected. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10.14) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that as per surveys the number of elderly people is steadily 
increasing in our country, so, there is an urgent need to ensure that the elders 
remain happy, healthy, financially sound and physically active. In this connection, 
the Committee recall that they had examined the “Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens” Bill 2019 and presented a report thereon. The official 
amendment of the Bill is stated to be under preparation in the Ministry. The 
Committee hope that the same will be prepared soon and brought for legislation 
so that the maintenance of parents and senior citizens and their welfare gets a 
solid legal support. The Ministry is statedly taking several initiatives also, apart 
from implementing the Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana, AVYAY, Senior Citizens Welfare 
Fund, etc., one of which is SAGE, which is a portal based ‘Senior Care Ageing 
Growth Engine’ as a one-stop access of elderly care products and services by 
credible Start Ups. This portal, opened on 5th June, 2021, will invite Start Ups to 
be selected on the basis of innovative products and services across the sectors 
such as health, housing, care centres, food and wealth management, legal 
guidance as well as technological access linked to finances for elderly care. ₹1 
crore is to be provided to such Start Ups. Appreciating this new initiative, the 
Committee have been informed that 12 Start Ups have been/are being supported 
through SAGE Portal, and desire to be apprised about the products and services 
developed/being developed by these Start Ups in the last two years. The 
Committee are happy to note that ‘Elderline’ i.e. National Helpline for senior 
citizens was launched on 1st October, 2021 to provide free information, guidance, 
emotional support, field intervention in cases of abuse and rescues in order to 
improve quality of life of senior citizens. They further note that 31 States/ UTs 
have kept the Elderline operational. The Committee acknowledge the intention of 
the Ministry to make programmes for elderly care a National movement involving 
youth and innovators and providing business opportunities to social enterprises, 
technological Start Ups, legal and financial services, infrastructure and managed-
care systems as well as research and data driven organizations for the same. The 

7 
 
Committee feel a more robust elder care ecosystem can be created in India if 
such efforts gain momentum”. 
12.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
“ Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill 2019: 
 
i. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (MWPSC) 
 (Amendment) Bill 2019 has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 11-12-
 2019. 
ii. On the basis of the Lok Sabha Standing Committee’s Recommendations, 
 the MWPSC (Amendment) Bill is being modified. 
 
 Scheme of Senior-care Aging Growth Engine (SAGE): 
 
i. During the FY 2021-22 and FY 2022-23, a total of 13 Start-ups have been 
 selected. 
ii. These Start-ups are engaged in developing automated devices for home 
 dialysis that cuts the cost substantially, clinical tests at home at a very 
 reasonable rate, elder-friendly electric cycles, lechal smart insoles that 
 prevent fall of elderly by early warning systems, subscription based home 
 visits by trained health personnel, medical travel and stay of the elderly 
 etc. 
 
 Elderline- National Helpline for Senior Citizens: 
 
i. The Elderline with Toll free number 14567 is operational from 8 AM to 8 
 PM, all 7days of a week. 
ii. National Institute for Social Defence (NISD) has been nominated as a 
 Central Nodal Agency for Elder Line. 
iii. ₹ 82.68 crore has been released under the scheme up to 2022-23. 
iv. So far, a total of 14,77,488 calls have been received under the scheme. 
 
  

8 
 
13. The Committee in their original Report had inter-alia drawn attention of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment) on the “Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Bill 2019” which was examined by the Committee and 
presented a Report thereon. The Committee had expected that the Bill would 
be reintroduced soon and brought for legislation so that more welfare 
measures/ provisions for parents and senior citizens could be added in the 
existing Act. The Committee, however, find from the action taken Reply of the 
Ministry that the Bill is still being modified.  The Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and desire that the Ministry should expedite the 
process of modification of the Bill and its passing so that large number of 
senior citizens would get more benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.18) 
 
The mandate of the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment is vital for the 
empowerment of socially, educationally and economically marginalized sections of the 
Society including Scheduled Castes, Other Backward Classes, Senior Citizens, Victims of 
Alcoholism and Substance Abuse, Transgender Persons, Beggars, Denotified and 
Nomadic Tribes (DNTs), Economically Backward Classes (EBCs) and Economically 
Weaker Sections (EWS) to enable them to lead productive, safe and dignified lives, with 
all their basic needs being fulfilled, and where equal opportunities are ensured for their 
growth and development. These objectives are fulfilled through various 
Programmes/Schemes of the Department for (i) Educational, economic and social 
empowerment of Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Other Backward Classes (OBCs); (ii) 
Support to Senior Citizens by way of their Maintenance, Welfare, Security, Health Care 
and Productive and independent living and; (iii) Rehabilitation, through ‘whole person 
recovery’ approach, of victims of substance abuse, for which the Department gets 
allocations each year, after due consideration by EFC/SFC. The Committee, during 
evidence, was apprised that under ‘Mission Karmayogi’, the Department of Social Justice 
& Empowerment is in the forefront of the capacity building programme, as compared to 
other Government of India Departments. As the Officers/staff of the Department of 
Social Justice & Empowerment are well trained with better capacity, it would, the 
Committee hope, result in further rise in their overall performance. Coming to the 
budgetary performance of previous years, the Committee note that the Budgetary 
Estimate of ₹10,103.57 crore in 2020-21 and ₹10,517.62 crore in 2021-22 were revised 
as ₹8,207.56 crore for 2020-21 and ₹10,180.00 crore for 2021-22, out of which, the 
Department was able to spend ₹8,236.84 crore and ₹7,459.99 crore in 2020-21 and 
2021-22 respectively. The Department has furnished the reasons for low utilisation of 
funds to the Committee, which, inter-alia, include cancellation of GIA to Centre found 
non-functional, late receipt of approval for continuation of DDAC Scheme and delay in 
furnishing of Utilisation Certificates and proposals by States/UTs. The Committee have 
no doubt that the Department is taking suitable steps to resolve these issues and 
constraints while preparing their Annual demand/proposal and taking necessary steps to 
utilise the funds, as any under utilisation of funds adversely affects the Schemes. The 
Committee also find that certain initiatives/measures taken for effective implementation 
of various schemes have been taken such as Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system for 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, first release of State share in Scholarship Schemes, 
Inspection of NGOs before release of GIA, etc. will prove to be helpful in further effective 
implementation of various schemes in future. The Committee, at the same time, feel that 
the new system of States releasing their share first may slow the pace in those cases 
where there are States/UTs, which may not be in a position to release their share timely 
due to a variety of reasons. Nonetheless, the Committee, while awaiting the positive 
outcomes of some of the initiatives, would also like to urge the Department to fully 
utilise the Budgetary Allocation for 2022-23 and 2023-24 so that the targeted sections of 
the society are not deprived of the benefits of the Schemes. 
 

10 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A. During FY 2022-23, total BE of ₹11,922.51 Crore was allocated to the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for the FY 2022-23. Out of the total 
allocation to the Department, 89.25 % fund of the total Budget accounted for the 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes and under Centrally Sponsored Schemes funds are to be 
released as per revised flow of fund system through Single Nodal Agency (SNA) which 
was introduced during the FY 2021-22 by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance. As per SNA instructions issued by DoE, MoF the unspent amount transferred to 
SNA need to be refunded back to CFI. Due to non-compliance by States, fresh release 
is not possible. Further, there has been delay in submission of UCs and proposals from 
States.  
Further, both Pre and Post Matric Scholarship for SCs are implemented in DBT mode 
where Central share can be released after release of State share. This is the first year 
for DBT mode in Pre Matric and first year for Post Matric when State share is to be 
released before release of Central share, delay in release of state share by the States 
resulted in delay in release of Centre Share.   
Also, some of the schemes are demand driven scheme. The stringent measures 
mentioned above, introduced for better implementation and idle parking of Central 
Government funds, has resulted into less expenditure, as compared to BE and as such 
Out of total BE of ₹11,922.51 Crore,  only ₹3,088.57 crore could have been spent till 
31.12.2022. However, the Department made all efforts to pace up the expenditure in 
the last Quarter of FY 2022-23 as a result of which  the Department was able to make a 
total expenditure of ₹7507.74 crore by 31st March, 2023, out of the Revised Estimate of 
₹10,709.94 crore during the year which was 70.10 % of Revised Estimate (RE).  
The fund position of the Department during the FY 2022-23 was as follows: 
    Budget Estimate (BE) Revised Estimate (RE) Actual Expenditure (AE) 
11922.51 Crore 10709.94 Crore 7507.74 Crore 
      B. Further for the F.Y 2023-24 following prior measures/steps have been taken so 
that the Budgetary allocation is fully utilised: 
 
i. Monthly and Quarterly expenditure Plan has been prepared and regular review of 
the same is done so that the expenditure under each scheme is monitored. 
ii. Single Nodal Agencies have been appointed by most of the State/UTs after 
repeated consultations and meetings with the States/UTs andit is expected that the 
releases to States/UTs may be done in timely manner. 
 
In the view of above mentioned measures the Department is hopeful that the 
Budgetary allocation for 2023-24 will be fully utilized. Also, the suggestions of the 
Committee to fully utilize BE for FY 2023-24 is noted for compliance. 
 

11 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 2.19) 
 
The Committee note the successive increase in the Budgetary Estimate of the 
Department during the last few years. However, the percentage increase of 7.75% in 
Budgetary Estimate for present Financial Year 2023-24 is rather less in comparison to 
13.36% increase last year i.e. in 2022-23. The merger of some schemes and 
modifications in certain Schemes could be one of the reasons as 37 Schemes operational 
in 2021-22 have been reduced to 19 Schemes in 2023-24 resulting in reduction in the 
budgetary estimates. The Committee are of the opinion that with a wider range of 
potential beneficiaries, the percentage increase in Budgetary Estimate need to increase 
and that it should be independent of actual expenditure incurred in previous year as the 
mandate of this department is completely different from other departments and is 
absolutely vital for accelerating the overall progress of the society. The Committee hope 
that the initiatives taken by the Department such as setting up of more ATFS, selection 
of more NGOs for DDAC, expansion of Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyan, etc. would be 
implemented effectively so that Budgetary Estimate for 2023-24 are utilised fully and 
lead to higher percentage increase in Budgetary Estimate in the future. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
It is submitted that the budgetary allocation for the schemes of the Department is done 
as per the annual allocation mentioned in EFC/SFC of schemes which has already been 
approved by Ministry of Finance. District De-Addiction Centres (DDACs) are being set up 
in GAP districts i.e., districts where there is no Ministry supported De-addiction facility. 
10 such DDACs have already been set up and functional. 70 more DDACs are at various 
stages of setting up and will be functional in FY 2023-24. It is also informed that 100 
additional districts were added to the list of vulnerable districts under Nasha Mukt Bharat 
Abhiyaan (NMBA) in year 2022. Now the total number of districts covered under NMBA is 
372. Additionally, the number of ATFs is also increasing. Also, the suggestions of the 
Committee to fully utilize BE for FY 2023-24 is noted for compliance. 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 4.8) 
 
The Committee note that under Post-Matric Scholarship for SC students the Department 
have been able to spend ₹2,500.22 crore up to 31st December, 2022 out of the 
Budgetary Allocation of ₹5,660.00 crore in 2022-23, as several States have not been 
releasing their share first in compliance of the revised procedure that the Central share 
of 60% will be released only after 40% State share is released. The Committee feel that 
many of the State Governments are not forthcoming in bearing the expenditure. While 
there is no doubt about the intentions of the Department to be financially prudent in 
administering the scheme, the Committee are worried about the students from the 
community, as their studies may suffer for want of financial assistance. The Committee 
are, therefore, of the view that the Department should take up this issue at appropriate 
level. The Committee would appreciate if Budgetary Estimates for 2023-24 are utilized 
fully. 
 
 
 

12 
 
Reply of Government 
 
Out of the budgetary Allocation of ₹5,660.00 Cr. in 2022-23 under Post Matric 
Scholarships for SC students, this Department has been able to spend ₹4,392.50 Cr. Up 
to 31st March, 2023 for the purpose of Scholarships under Post Matric Scholarships for 
SC students.  
             Regarding State’s/UT’s inability of bearing the expenditure and releasing its 
share first as per the revised procedure i.e. the Central share will be released after State 
share is released, it is informed that the States/UTs which are implementing the scheme, 
have already agreed/approved the funding pattern of the revised scheme guidelines and 
no such concerns have been raised by the State/UT Governments till date. The 
suggestions of the Committee to fully utilize BE for FY 2023-24 is noted for compliance. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.20) 
 
The Committee note that the Department have introduced an umbrella Scheme, 
Scholarships for the Higher Education for Young Achievers (SHREYAS) for SCs 
comprising of four Scholarships viz National Fellowship, Free Coaching for SC, Top Class 
Education Scheme and National Overseas Scheme with the objective that the shortfall 
under one Scheme can be met from other Scheme. The Committee also are happy that 
the number of seats has been increased from 100 to 125 from 2021-22 under scheme of 
National Overseas Scholarship (NOS) for Scheduled Caste and the total family income for 
availing the benefits of the scheme has also been increased from ₹6 lakh to ₹8 lakh per 
annum. With regard to performance of the Scheme, it is seen that the actual expenditure 
under the Scheme was ₹216.93 crore against budgetary Estimate of ₹390.00 crore in 
2020-21, ₹271.21 crore against budgetary Estimate of ₹450.00 crore in 2021-22 and 
₹129.14 crore against budgetary Estimate of ₹364.00 crore in 2022-23. The Committee 
find that the expenditure and budgetary provisions in sub-schemes have remained fairly 
good except for National Fellowship for SCs, where the BE has been reduced at RE 
stage, during the last three years. All the sub-schemes are equally important for the 
educational empowerment of SC students pursuing higher education. Hence, in the 
opinion of the Committee, curtailment in the Budgetary Estimate at RE stage should not 
occur. The Committee are informed that the funds allocated under the Coaching 
Schemes could not be spent due to delay in verification, submission of fee deposition 
proof, etc. Similarly, the expenditure under Top Class education was less as there have 
been lot of delays in admissions and in conducting exams by the Institutions. While 
acknowledging that certain reasons are beyond the control of the Department, the 
Committee are of the opinion that periodic evaluation study, awareness campaign, etc. 
will bring out improvements for the effective implementation of the Scheme. The 
Committee firmly believe that sincere steps taken for the implementation of the Scheme 
would be fruitful and the students will not face problem in getting their dues. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the review of the implementation of Scheme should be 
held at regular intervals to assess the shortcomings and take necessary measures to 
overcome the shortcomings. The Committee also desire that there is a need of extensive 
publicity of the Schemes for giving wide coverage so that large number of students 
participate and get benefits of the Scheme. The Committee would look forward and hope 
that the Budgetary Estimates for 2023-24 would be spent fully and none of the 

13 
 
difficulties faced by the Department would become a major hurdle in implementing the 
Schemes to the best extent possible. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
A. With regard to National Overseas Scheme for SCs (NOS) an evaluation study 
report of NOS was carried out by the Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi 
which submitted its report to this Department in March 2020. Impact evaluation of the 
NOS Scheme is also done by way of Google survey. From time to time the division 
conducts Google survey wherein responses from the students regarding various aspects 
of the scheme are sought and incorporated as required.  
  
To generate awareness regarding the NOS scheme the department has taken various 
progressive steps which are as follows: 
 
i. Twitter Campaigns 
ii. Newspaper Advertisements 
iii. Letters to Principal Secretaries to disseminate information regarding NOS 
scheme in their states. 
B. With regard to National Fellowship for SCs (NFSC) :- Monitoring mechanism 
adopted by the Ministry for monitoring of the scheme are :  
 
i. Disbursal of the fellowship by the implementing agency is monitored every 
month in the Ministry. Further, for release of funds provisional/audited UC 
is being provided by the implementing agency.  
ii. A portal for National Fellowship Management and a Grievance redressal 
portal were launched by the Hon’ble MSJ&E on 6th Dec 2021, which will 
allow a student-centric administration of the fellowship and would 
substantially reduce the vexation paper work for timely release of the 
fellowship. 
iii. The Ministry is making due efforts to create awareness of the Scheme 
throughout the country. The NFSC guidelines are widely publicized and are 
also readily available on the Ministry's website and students can easily go 
through the guidelines and apply accordingly.  
  
The funds sanctioned for 2022-23 and 2023-24 under National Fellowship for SCs have 
been reduced as the funds allocated in 2021-22 and 2020-21 could not be spent. In this 
regard it is stated that NFSC is a demand-driven scheme. The payments are released to 
the implementing agency (NSFDC is the implementing agency from 01.10.2022) as and 
when the requirement arises. The suggestions of the Committee to fully utilize BE for FY 
2023-24 is noted for compliance. 

14 
 
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 7.7) 
 
The new Scheme for Residential Education for students in High School in targeted 
area (SRESHTHA) for SC has replaced the earlier scheme of ‘Assistance to VOs for SC’ 
from 2022-23 onwards. As revised, the Scheme is being implemented in two modes. In 
Mode-I, a specified number of meritorious students in the Country will be selected for 
quality residential education in top class residential schools through a nationwide 
entrance test conducted by National Testing Agency. Under Mode-II, the financial 
support to VOs/ NGOs would continue for ongoing Projects of Residential / Non-
Residential Schools. The Committee feel that the Budgetary Allocation of ₹104.65 crore 
made for 2023-24 Budgetary Allocation should increase in comparison to previous 
years as a new component to provide quality residential education in top class 
residential schools to specified number of students has been added in SRESTHA from 
2022-23. The Committee note that the school fees and residential charges fixed at 
present are quite less, in comparison to actual fees and residential charges of top 
residential High Schools. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to 
revise the charges proportionately and make them compatible with the prevailing fee 
structure of the top residential High Schools. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
Under SHRESHTA scheme, in F.Y. 2022-23, ₹89.00 crore was allocated and same could 
not be fully utilized as the targeted number of beneficiaries i.e., 3000 were not found in 
mode-1 (as per scheme) and as per revised scheme, GIA to VOs/NGOs for their 
school/hostel projects, are being considered only SC beneficiaries. However, Budget 
Allocation has been increased in F.Y. 2023-24 as 104.65 crore under the scheme. 
  
During 2021-22, ₹75,000/- (per student for 9th & 10th class ) and ₹1,25,000 ( per 
student for 11th & 12th class) were reimbursed to schools for school fees and residential  
charges, same were increased for  F.Y. 2022-23 as ₹1 Lakh for 9th, 1.1 Lakh for 10th, 
1.25 for 11th  and 1.35 Lakh for 12th class and released to CBSE schools. The rates are 
approved by EFC up to FY 2025-26. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 8.16) 
 
Total number of 1035 sanitation workers have died while cleaning the sewer and 
septic tanks out of which 74 are yet to be paid compensation despite Supreme Court 
Judgement dated 27th March 2014 which directed that the State Governments /UTs 
must ensure payment of compensation of ₹10.00 lakh to the family of a victim in case 
of death of a worker while cleaning sewer/septic tank. The Committee are happy to 
note that for identification of such workers, the Department have launched a new 
mobile app called ‘Swachhata App’ to verify the information about the existence of 
manual scavenging in the States/UTs. The Committee desire that the Department 
should ensure from all the State/UT Governments that their States/UTs are manual 
scavenging free. The Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the 

15 
 
rules framed under Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013 are strictly implemented by all the States/UTs. They would 
also urge the Department to take suitable measures so that the compensation to the 
victims’ families of 74 deaths is paid immediately. The Committee feel that these 
norms with regard to penalty and conviction for engaging sewer and septic workers by 
the Contractors are strictly implemented so that the Contractors are immediately held 
and convicted for any violation of norms. The Committee would like to be informed of 
the action taken in this regard. They urge for a country wide mechanization of sewer 
cleaning work as early as possible. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
1.  National Commission for Safai Karamcharis (NCSK) 
 
A. As per the information available with this Commission, total 1081 sewer deaths 
have been reported in various States/UTs in the country from 1993 till 31.03.2023 
and compensation in 925 cases has been paid and 115 are yet to be 
compensated. Rest of 41 cases have been temporarily closed by various 
State/UTs Governments due to non-traceability of legal heirs. However, it may be 
noted that this data is based only on the information received by this Commission 
from States/UTs/ Print and electronic media reports etc. and actual data may 
vary. Further, this is a dynamic data which keeps changing/update upon receipt of 
information by the Commission. 
B. To ensure all the States/UTs be manual scavenging free and the rules framed 
under Prohibition of Employment as Manual scavengers and their Rehabilitation 
Act, 2013 are strictly implemented by all the states/UTs, the Commission has 
circulated a 20 points check list for collecting information from States/UTs relating 
to implementation of the Act. The 20 points checklist includes the information on 
survey conducted by states/UTs regarding total number of manual scavengers in 
rural/urban areas and the date of last survey. In response to the said check-list 
some of the States and UTs have furnished desired information about Manual 
Scavengers and implementation of Rules. To ensure the timely payment of 
compensation to the legal heirs of deceased in sewer death cases, the 
Commission conducts regular monthly VC meetings with state officials and also 
writes D.O letters at various levels in the State including the Chief Secretaries of 
the states for expeditious payment of compensation, implementation of various 
provisions of M.S. Act, 2013 and for disposal of grievance petitions of Safai 
Karamcharis. As far as payment of compensation is concerned, legal heirs of the 
deceased has been paid 10 lacs as compensation in total number of 159 sewer 
death cases during last financial year 2022-23. Through such meetings and D.O 
letters the Commission presses on following check points for implementation. 
These are:  

16 
 
i. Relevant provisions of M. S. Act, 2013 be invoked in FIRs registered in 
sewer/septic tank death cases, investigation & trial should be fast 
tracked. 
ii. Most of the states have no separate budget head and no allocation of 
funds for payment of compensation under the Supreme Court judgment 
dated 27.03.2014. Accordingly, they were advised to open appropriate 
budget heads and allocate funds for the purpose. 
iii. Mechanization of sewer/septic tank cleaning be made on war footing in 
order to stop loss of valuable human life during such cleaning. 
iv. Quick compensation be paid in the light of the Supreme Court judgment 
dated 27-03-2014. 
v. Compensation be paid in terms of the Supreme Court judgment over and 
above any payment made in pursuance of any other act/rule/guideline. 
vi. Cases where legal heirs are not traceable, advertisement be made at 
least four times in one local and one national newspaper. Where partial 
payment had already been made, the details of the legal heirs might be 
ascertained from the bank account or payment voucher of the legal 
heirs. 
vii. State Level Monitoring Committee meetings as well as District Vigilance 
Committee meetings need to be convened in the States in terms of M. S. 
Act, 2013 regularly. 
viii. State Level Commission be constituted or any agency designated in 
terms of M. S. Act, 2013 on priority to look after the issues of Safai 
Karamcharis in the States. 
ix. States were also requested to regularly monitor the implementation of 
M.S. Act 2013 in true letter & sprit.    
 
C. The Commission has also recommended that a direction should be issued to all 
the State governments/Municipalities/Corporations to incorporate a clause in the 
agreement with the contractor or the agencies that the provision of the MS Act, 
2013 shall be applicable and also the directions given by the Supreme Court 
judgment dated 27.3.2014 with regard to sewer death cases will be complied with 
by the Contractor/Agency engaging the Safai Karamcharis.   
D. Further the Hon’ble Chairperson, Hon’ble Vice-Chairperson and Hon’ble Member(s) 
make extensive tours to make on the spot assessment of various problems of 
Safai Karamcharis and make recommendation to the Government of India on 
various measures to be taken for effective implementation of M.S. Act, 2013, for 
socio-economic development of Safai Karamcharis. During the tour they hold 
meetings with local bodies, Port Trust, Railway Authorities. Regional National 
Conferences are also organised by the Commission to discuss various problems of 
Safai Karamcharis and to increase awareness about the rights and requirements 
of Safai Karamcharis. Two such conferences were organised during 2021-22.  

17 
 
E. So far as registration of FIRs under M.S. Act, 2013 in sewer death cases is 
concerned, the Commission impresses upon State Authorities/Police/Local Bodies 
through various meetings/conferences /communications to register FIRs under 
M.S. Act, 2013 and fast-track legal proceeding in order to punish who-so-ever is 
found responsible. Consequently states have started taking proactive action in this 
regard.  
F. As regards mechanization through 20 points check-list the States/UTs have 
intimated various measures taken in this regard.. 
2. National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSKFDC)- 
 
After enactment of the “Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their 
Rehabilitation Act, 2013” (MS Act, 2013) and the issue of orders dated 27.3.2014 by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
initiated action for collection of data of deaths of workers while cleaning sewer/septic 
tanks, since the year 2013 and status of payment of compensation to them. The Ministry 
is regularly following up with the State Governments and District Administrations for 
payment of full compensation of ₹10.00 lakh in each case. However, many cases of 
deaths compiled in the process of collection of data, are very old.  Therefore, despite 
regular follow up and sincere efforts due to the following reasons, in some cases the 
payment of compensation could not be made or partial compensation has been made:- 
(i) The case is very old and the dependant family members are not traceable due 
to migration etc. therefore, no compensation has been paid to the family of 
victim. 
(ii) In pre Supreme Court direction cases, partial compensation was paid to the 
family of victim under the applicable rules at the time of death and efforts are 
being made for payment of remaining part of compensation. 
Ministry also follows up with the concerned States, District Administrations etc. for 
ensuring that case is registered against the violators of the provisions of the MS Act, 
2013 regarding hazardous cleaning of sewers and septic tanks. 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is also collecting the information from all 
districts whether they are manual scavenging free.  So far, 510 districts have confirmed 
their status as manual scavenging free. 
For mechanization of sewers and septic tank cleaning operations, NAMASTE proposes to 
provide assistance to the sanitation workers and their dependants in the form of capital 
subsidy and interest subsidy for purchase of sanitation related machines and 
equipments.  This component is proposed to be implemented during three years of 
implementation of NAMASTE.  In addition, under the Swachhta Udyami Yojana of the 
National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) 
concessional loans are provided to the ULBs and the contractors associated with ULBs for 
sanitation related contracts.  Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, under Swachh 
Bharat Mission also provides assistance to the ULBs for purchase of 
machines/equipments for cleaning of sewers and septic tanks. 

18 
 
With a view to sensitise and make aware the officers, engineers, sanitation inspectors, 
supervisors, sanitation workers, contractors etc. about the provisions of the MS Act, 
2013,  particularly about the hazardous cleaning of sewers and septic tanks, National 
Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation (NSKFDC) also organises 
workshops with the ULBs etc. So far, 1177 such workshops have been held since 2017-
18. 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.13) 
 
The Committee find that the Budgetary Allocation under Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
for SC & Others has been reduced to ₹500.00 crore for 2022-23 and 2023-24, whereas it 
was ₹725.00 crore in 2021-22 i.e. in the year of merger of two Schemes namely Pre-
Matric Scholarship Schemes for SC and Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for the Children 
of parents/ guardians engaged in unclean and hazardous occupation. However, it is still 
18 crore more than the amount of ₹482 crore proposed by the Department for 2023-24. 
As regards the utilization of funds during 2020-21, the Committee note from the 
deposition of the Department that it was the first year of implementation of merged 
Scheme and the Scholarship Portals of many States/UTs were not ready. The Committee 
hope that with States/UTs making special efforts to identify the poorest eligible 
households from various sources and enrolling students under the scheme in Mission 
mode, there would be higher demand under the Scheme. The Committee also urge that 
the findings of an Evaluation Study on the Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme for children or 
parents/guardians engaged in unclean and hazardous occupation, on matters, such as 
processing of applications, definition of terms, etc. inter-alia noted by the Plan Division of 
the Department, would be addressed urgently. The Committee desire that concerted 
efforts should be made by the Department with the Ministry of Finance for revision of 
the academic allowance in the interest of the beneficiaries. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. In so far as publicizing 
these scholarship schemes are concerned, the Committee note efforts with regard to the 
Portal and through print media. In this connection, the Committee further suggest that 
for better coverage of beneficiaries, the publicity should be undertaken in unaided-
private schools too since some percentage of students from marginalized sections study 
there, as mandated by the Right to Education Act. The Committee recommend measures 
like setting up of help desks in schools, reaching out to Management Committees of 
schools, announcement of scholarship schemes during Morning Assemblies etc., which, 
they are sanguine, will result in better response from the potential beneficiaries of the 
scheme. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
It is submitted that the allocation under the scheme has been made as per the 
annual allocation mentioned in EFC/SFC of schemes which has already been approved by 
Ministry of Finance. However, it is mentioned that in the case of higher demand of 
Budgetary Allocation than the allocated budget under the Scheme, request for additional 
grants will be made under the Scheme. 
 
The Pre Matric Scholarship scheme for the children of parents/guardians engaged 
in unclean and hazardous occupation (Pre-Matric Scholarships Scheme for SCs and 
Others, Comp-II as of now) was evaluated by third party during 2020. Thereafter, the 

20 
 
scheme guidelines of Pre-Matric Scholarships Scheme for SCs and Others (Comp-II: Pre-
Matric scholarship for children of parents/guardians engaged in Unclean and hazardous 
Occupation) was revised on 14.03.2022. 
 
           As regards revision of Academic Allowance, it is informed that the scheme was 
recently revised, with the approval of the Cabinet, after considering all the facets of the 
scheme. However, the recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
           Department of Social Justice and Empowerment/Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment is taking various steps to spread awareness among the people.  Regular 
advertisements have been published in print media and Electronic media. Information 
about the scheme is spread through various social media platforms like twitter, facebook 
etc. In addition, the scheme guidelines envisages awareness generation/identification 
programme through State Governments/UTs, which are as under:- 
 
I. States/UTs are required to adopt methodology suitable to the local conditions for 
identification of poorest SC students e.g. SC majority districts/blocks/villages may 
be taken first for identification of poorest students or students leaving class 10th 
or 12th class may be tracked in association with the education department or data 
emanating from other Central/State schemes indicating the dropouts rates or 
other sources as deemed fit. 
II. Every State Government is required to undertake a campaign every year in 
March/April to identify SC students and mentor them to enroll and avail 
scholarships. Such students will be helped for identification of courses also as per 
their skills.  
III. Awareness drive is required to be undertaken by the State Governments/UTs 
about the scheme through the Gram Panchayats Notice Boards, School 
committees and discussions in the parent-teacher association meetings and other 
public awareness measures, in order to extend its coverage and also minimize any 
misuse by unscrupulous elements. 
IV. The States are required to take up identification of the students for fresh 
enrolment by taking up systematic drive covering all the higher secondary schools 
and encouraging the students who have dropped out after Class 12th to come 
back to higher education. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.9.8) 
 
The Pradhan Mantri Dakshta Aur Kushalta Sampann Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) Yojana is a 
National Action Plan for skilling of marginalized persons covering SCs, OBCs, EBCs, 
DNTs, Sanitation Workers and waste pickers. The Scheme is implemented through three 
Corporations namely NSFDC, NBCFDC and NSKFDC. The Committee find that NSFDC has 
submitted Utilisation Certificates of ₹38.63 crore against ₹50.82 crore released during 

21 
 
2020-21 and 2021-22 and has requested to release ₹16.00 crore for the Financial Year 
2022-23. Similarly, NBCFDC has requested release of ₹14.13 crore for the Financial Year 
2022-23 as they have submitted Utilisation Certificates for ₹36.81 crore against ₹48.70 
crore released in 2020-21 and 2021-22. In order to optimally utilise the Budgetary 
Allocation during 2023-24, the Committee would like the Department to develop a digital 
system where Utilisation Certificates for usage of 75% of the allocation of funds are 
received timely and the remaining grant is automatically transferred to the Implementing 
Agencies. The Committee would also urge that the SNA system under PFMS established 
by the Ministry of Finance for better monitoring of funds should be implemented without 
any further delay by all the States/UTs to avoid under utilisation of allocated funds. The 
Committee would also urge the Department that the funds requested for release by 
NSFDC and NBCFDC against the Utilisation Certificates submitted are released 
immediately so that the work of skilling SCs, OBCs, EBCs, DNTs, Sanitation workers are 
continued. The Committee would like to be informed of the status of initiatives taken by 
the Department. 
Reply of Government 
I. Department of Social Justice and Empowerment is implementing Pradhan Mantri 
Dakshta Aur Kushalta Sampann Hitgrahi (PM-DAKSH) Yojana with the objective to 
provide skilling training for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Other 
Backward Classes (OBCs), Economically Backward Classes (EBCs), De-notified, 
Nomadic and Semi-nomadic Tribes (DNTs), Safai Karmacharis including Waste pickers 
through three Corporations namely NSFDC, NBCFDC and NSKFDC. 
II. Payments are being made through PFMS, PFMS portal contains the information 
pertaining to funds released by Corporations.  
III. Central Nodal Agency Accounts (CNA) of NSFDC, NBCFDC & NSKFDC has been 
opened as per guidelines issued by Ministry of Finance, Government of India.  
IV. ₹8.9 crore was released to National Scheduled Castes Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSFDC) under PM-DAKSH Yojana during FY-2022-23.  
 (Recommendation Para No.10.13) 
 
The Committee note that the population of 60 plus years in the country is likely to rise to 
17.32 crore in 2026 from 10.38 crore in 2011 as per National Commission on Population. 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department proposes to cover each district of 
the country with at least one senior citizen home under State Action for Senior citizens 
and aims to cover each district of the country under the Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana. The 
Committee find that 296 districts have been covered under Integrated Programme for 
Senior Citizens (IPSrC). The Committee also find that the Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana 
launched on 1st April 2017 to provide assistive devices free of cost to eligible Senior 
citizens belonging to the BPL category or senior citizen with monthly income less than 
₹15,000 have been able to cover 264 districts of the country. However, since no time 
lines have been drawn in this regard, they desire that phase-wise time line should be 
fixed to cover all the districts in the country. The Committee also find that the Budgetary 
Estimate of ₹300.00 crore for IPSrC in 2021- 22 was reduced to ₹150.00 crore in 2022-
23 and the Department could only spend ₹33.14 crore as the Department did not get 

22 
 
complete proposals from the States/UTs. Hence they recommend that suitable measures 
should be taken by the Department so that the Bugetary allocation are utilized fruitfully 
and the number of Beneficiaries are enhanced. The Committee hope that the 
recommendations made by Indian Institute of Public Administration in their Evaluation 
Study of IPSrC conducted in 2019 must have been implemented and would have brought 
some improvement in implementation of Scheme and expect that the third Party 
evaluation study proposed during 2023-24 would also bring out good suggestion to lay 
the roadmap for implementation of the Scheme in future. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
1. With regard to Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC): 
A. Reasons for reduced utilization of Budgetary Estimate have been identified as 
given under: 
i. During the FY 2022-23, under Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC), 
an amount of ₹72.31 crore has been released through two instalments to Implementing 
Agencies, covering 296 districts. 
ii. As per internal policy adopted by the Department, the third and the last 
instalment (i.e., 25% of GIA) for the FY 2022-23 would be released to the Implementing 
Agencies in the first Quarter of FY 2023-24. 
iii. GIA is released to the projects on the basis of the number of beneficiaries found 
during inspection. 
iv. About 139 projects have been closed in the FY 2022-23 due to sub-standard 
services found during inspection conducted by Project Monitoring Unit (PMU). 
B. In an effort to utilise Budgetary allocation fruitfully and thus enhancing the 
number of beneficiaries under Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens, following 
measures will be taken during the FY 2023-24: 
i. Adding more number of projects in gap/uncovered districts.Video Conferences 
and Regional Conferences will be arranged with all stakeholders for awareness 
generation clearance of doubts  in seeking grant under IPSrC and SAPSrC. 
ii. The 139 projects closed during 2022-23 may be processed for re-consideration in 
FY 2023-24, if the Implementing Agencies improve their services at the Old Age Homes 
as per the Standard Norms laid down in the Scheme. 
2. With regard to Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana (RVY): 
i. Under RVY, a total of 12,24,458 assisted living devices have been distributed free 
of cost in camp mode to 3,02,176 senior citizens. 
ii. Detailed Plan of Action will be made so as to cover more districts and more 
beneficiaries in the Financial Year 2023-24. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
Recommendation (Para 6.14) 
The Committee are happy to find that the Actual Expenditure after merger of three 
Schemes namely, Adarsh Gram, Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub 
Plan (SCA to SCSP) and Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana, into Pradhan Mantri 
Anusuchit Jaati Abhyuday Yojna (PM-AJAY) has substantially increased to ₹1820.32 
crore in 2021-22 in comparison to the Actual Expenditure of ₹659.92 crore incurred in 
2020-21, when these three Schemes were operated independently. However, in 2022- 
23, the Actual Expenditure of ₹29.34 crore was incurred out of the total expenditure of 
₹1950.00 crore due to delay in adoption of Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system by the 
State/Union Territories. The Committee feel that all the three components of the 
unified Scheme are important to empower the SC Community, hence there is an 
urgent need to set up SNAs in each State so that the funds are released to the States 
on time. With advanced IT tools available, the procedural formalities/changes should 
be implemented fast. Hence, the Committee, desire that the Department should 
develop a sound system to overcome the shortcomings, such as delay in submission of 
Utilisation Certificates by the States, unspent balance lying with the State 
Governments, etc. and alert them well in time because now the funds will not be 
released under the new provision unless the unutilised funds are surrendered by the 
States or Utilisation Certificates are provided by them for the release of next 
instalment out of the grant. The Committee also feel that the Department need to 
formulate an action plan and lay down the time bound targets under PM-AJAY to 
achieve the objective of the Scheme. The Committee would also like the Department 
to take suitable steps so that the budgetary allocation made for 2022-23 and 2023-24 
are fruitfully utilised by the implementing agencies and the new provisions are 
successfully implemented. In order to cover larger number of SC villages under the 
Scheme, the Committee recommend that the population criteria fixed for selection of 
village under ‘Adarsh Gram’ should also be periodically reviewed as has been done by 
reducing 50% SC population criteria to 40%. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
During FY 2022-23 an amount of ₹164.01 crore has been utilized against the total 
allocation of ₹1,950.00 crore at the end of the Financial Year. The reason behind the 
less expenditure during 2022-23 is solely attributed to huge unspent lying with the SNA 

24 
 
account of the State as well as non-furnishing of Utilization Certificates by some of the 
State in time. Out of the 30 State/Union territories implementing the scheme of PM-
AJAY, a total of 28 State/Union Territories have already mapped the single nodal 
account of their respective Single Nodal Agency (SNA) in respect of the scheme and 01 
Union Territory not required to map. In order to have an effective implementation and 
monitoring of the scheme, a centralized MIS portal for this scheme has already been 
put in place. Based on the issues encountered during the course of implementation of 
the scheme, a broad action plan for entire period of implementation of the scheme with 
short-term physical and financial targets to be achieved by the respective State 
Governments/ Union Territory Administrations is under consideration. With regard to 
reviewing the Scheduled Caste (SC) population criteria for selection of more villages, it 
would be done at the appropriate time keeping in view the status of implementation of 
the scheme in already selected villages. 
 
Recommendation (Para 8.15) 
The Committee note that a Scheme “National Action for Mechanised Sanitisation 
Ecosystem (NAMASTE)” has been formulated by the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment to provide dignity to sewer and septic tanks workers. It is to be 
implemented jointly with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in 4800+ ULBs with the 
budgetary outlay of ₹350.00 crore during next three years up to 2025-26. In this 
regard, the Committee find that the Scheme has been formulated for implementation 
from 2023- 24 after it is planned to collect basic data of number of Sewer and Septic 
Tank workers in the Country from ULBs and their profiling done. Also as per the norms 
under NAMASTE Responsible Sanitary Authenticity and Emergency Response 
Sanitation Units are to be established in each district for the effective implementation 
of the Scheme. The Committee would therefore, like the Department to take necessary 
steps to obtain data of sewer and septic tank workers from States/ UTs ULBs and also 
pursue with the States/UTs continuously for establishing Response Sanitation Unit and 
Emergency Response Sanitation Units at the earliest so that the target fixed is 
achieved in the given time. The Committee also desire that a time limit needs to be 
fixed for completing the work of collection of data by each ULB as well as purchase of 
machines for sewer cleaning by these bodies. The Committee would like to be 
informed with regard to the measures taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
The proposed “National Action for Mechanised Sanitisation Ecosystem 
(NAMASTE)”, inter alia, envisages collection of basic data of sewer and septic tank 
workers in the ULBs of the country and their profiling. After approval of the Scheme, 
this exercise would be undertaken on war footing.  Pending approval of the scheme, 

25 
 
the concerned States have been requested to collect and provide the data of sewer and 
septic tank workers. Exercise of profiling of sewer and septic tank workers would be 
undertaken after approval of the Scheme. As regards, pursuing the matter of 
appointment of Responsible Sanitary Authority and setting up of the Emergency 
Sanitation Response Units, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has been pursuing 
the matter with the concerned State Governments for taking action in a time bound 
manner.  The data of sewer and septic tank workers would be collected in the first year 
of implementation of NAMASTE and will be subsequently updated on regular basis. As 
regards, purchase of machines for sewer cleaning by ULBs, it is stated the NAMASTE 
proposes to provide assistance to the sanitation workers and their dependants in the 
form of capital subsidy and interest subsidy. This component is proposed to be 
implemented during three years of implementation of NAMASTE.  In addition, under the 
Swachhta Udyami Yojana of the National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSKFDC) concessional loans are provided to the ULBs and the contractors 
associated with ULBs for sanitation related contracts.  Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, under Swachh Bharat Mission also provides assistance to the ULBs for purchase 
of machines/equipments for cleaning of sewers and septic tanks. 
 

26 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 (Recommendation Para No.10.14) 
 
The Committee note that as per surveys the number of elderly people is steadily 
increasing in our country, so, there is an urgent need to ensure that the elders remain 
happy, healthy, financially sound and physically active. In this connection, the 
Committee recall that they had examined the “Maintenance and Welfare of Parents 
and Senior Citizens” Bill 2019 and presented a report thereon. The official amendment 
of the Bill is stated to be under preparation in the Ministry. The Committee hope that 
the same will be prepared soon and brought for legislation so that the maintenance of 
parents and senior citizens and their welfare gets a solid legal support. The Ministry is 
statedly taking several initiatives also, apart from implementing the Rashtriya Vayoshri 
Yojana, AVYAY, Senior Citizens Welfare Fund, etc., one of which is SAGE, which is a 
portal based ‘Senior Care Ageing Growth Engine’ as a one-stop access of elderly care 
products and services by credible Start Ups. This portal, opened on 5th June, 2021, 
will invite Start Ups to be selected on the basis of innovative products and services 
across the sectors such as health, housing, care centres, food and wealth 
management, legal guidance as well as technological access linked to finances for 
elderly care. ₹1 crore is to be provided to such Start Ups. Appreciating this new 
initiative, the Committee have been informed that 12 Start Ups have been/are being 
supported through SAGE Portal, and desire to be apprised about the products and 
services developed/being developed by these Start Ups in the last two years. The 
Committee are happy to note that ‘Elderline’ i.e. National Helpline for senior citizens 
was launched on 1st October, 2021 to provide free information, guidance, emotional 
support, field intervention in cases of abuse and rescues in order to improve quality of 
life of senior citizens. They further note that 31 States/ UTs have kept the Elderline 
operational. The Committee acknowledge the intention of the Ministry to make 
programmes for elderly care a National movement involving youth and innovators and 
providing business opportunities to social enterprises, technological Start Ups, legal 
and financial services, infrastructure and managed-care systems as well as research 
and data driven organizations for the same. The Committee feel a more robust elder 
care ecosystem can be created in India if such efforts gain momentum. 
 
Reply of Government 
 
 Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill 2019: 
 
i. The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (MWPSC) 
(Amendment) Bill 2019 has been introduced in the Lok Sabha on 11-12-2019. 
ii. On the basis of the Lok Sabha Standing Committee’s Recommendations, the 
MWPSC(Amendment) Bill is being modified. 
 
 

27 
 
 
 Scheme of  Senior-care Aging Growth Engine (SAGE): 
 
i. During the FY 2021-22 and FY 2022-23, a total of 13 Start-ups have been 
selected. 
ii. These Start-ups are engaged in developing automated devices for home dialysis 
that cuts the cost substantially, clinical tests at home at a very reasonable rate, 
elder-friendly electric cycles, lechal smart insoles that prevent fall of elderly by 
early warning systems, subscription based home visits by trained health 
personnel, medical travel and stay of the elderly etc. 
 
 Elderline- National Helpline for Senior Citizens: 
 
i. The Elderline with Toll free number 14567 is operational from 8 AM to 8 PM, all 
7days of a week. 
ii. National Institute for Social Defence (NISD) has been nominated as a Central 
Nodal Agency for Elder Line. 
iii. Rs. 82.68 crore has been released under the scheme up to 2022-23. 
iv. So far, a total of 14,77,488 calls have been received under the scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        RAMA DEVI 
                                   Chairperson, 
20th  December, 2023                                                              Standing Committee on 
29 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                     Social Justice and  
                         Empowerment 
 

28 
 
Annexure-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2023-24) HELD ON MONDAY, 30TH 
OCTOBER, 2023 
 
The Committee met from 1130 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 
No.1, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
  MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
   2. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
3.  Shri Abdul Khaleque 
4.  Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
5.  Shri Y. Devendrappa 
 
  Rajya Sabha  
6.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
7.  Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
8.  Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
9.  Shri Narayan Koragappa 
10. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi   - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Chairperson informed the Members that 26 subjects have been selected by 
the Committee for detailed examination during the year 2023-2024. She also mentioned 
that the committee has already held two meetings with the Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities on “Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation 
Scheme” during the previous term of the Committee i.e 2022-2023. The report on the 
subject is being drafted and will be presented before the Committee for consideration 
and adoption in due course. 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration of the draft Report on Action 
Taken Report on Forty-Sixth Report on 'Demands for Grants for the year 2023-24' 
pertaining to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment).  
 
4. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on 
the draft Report. The Committee suggested that recommendation contained in Para No.7 
of the draft Report may be suitably amended to incorporate that the annual allocation of 
funds is non-lapsable and also the funds allocated for the year are not diverted to any 
other Scheme. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft 
Report and present the same to both houses of Parliament. 
5. The Report was adopted by the Committee with the suggested change.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT). 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
12  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government:- 
 
Rec. Para No.2.18, 2.19, 4.8, 5.20, 7.7 & 8.16 
 
06 50% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
 
Rec. Para No. 3.13, 9.8 & 10.13  
 
03 25% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:- 
 
Rec. Para No. 6.14 & 8.15  
 
02 17% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec Para No.10.14 
 
 
01 8% 
   100% 
 
 
 
 