 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2021-22)   
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)    
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS   
 
[Action taken by the Government on the bservations/recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22)]      
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT                
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)  
i 
27 

 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2021-22)    
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS      
[Action taken by the Government on the bservations/recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2021 
 
   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2021             
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
ii 

 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
                                         
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted and which require 
reiteration.  
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the 3rd sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on15th December, 
2021 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha). 
 
 
    
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii  

 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
   
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  9. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
10. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
11. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
12. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
13. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
14. Smt. Geeta Kora 
15. Shri Vijay Kumar 
16. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  18. Shri Arjun Singh 
19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
20. Smt. Rekha Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
25. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
27. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
29. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
30. Smt. Chhaya Verma 
31. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
 
 
iv 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar        - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kamal Khurana   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2021-22) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Twenty-seventh Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2021-22)” relating to the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 9th March, 2021.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the observations/recommendations contained therein on 9th June, 
2021.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 15th December, 2021. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference, observations/ recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of this Report.  
 
 
 
 
    
NEW DELHI;     RAMA DEVI 
     Chairperson, 
15th _December ,  2021                                    Standing Committee on 
24  Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
     Empowerment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v  

 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment  
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2021-22) pertaining to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
1.2 The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
9th  March, 2021. It contained 13 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Replies 
of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Paragraphs No. 2.14, 2.15, 3.16 and 3.18 
(Total: 4, Chapter-II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
 Paragraphs No. 2.13, 6.9 and 7.10 
 (Total: 3, Chapter-III) 
(iii) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the Government 
has not been accepted and hence require reiteration:  
 Paragraphs Nos. 3.17 
(Total: 1, Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are interim in nature: 
 Paragraphs No. 3.19, 3.20, 4.13, 5.17 and 5.18  
                                                      (Total: 5, Chapter-V)   
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
notes in respect of the Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report 
for which interim replies have been given by the Government may be furnished at 
the earliest and in any case not later than three months after the presentation of 
this Report. 
 
 
 

 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with some of the replies received from the Ministry 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. EKLAVYA MODEL RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17) 
1.5 The Committee, in their Nineteenth Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that there is no EMRSs functional in the States of 
Bihar and Meghalaya and UTs of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and 
Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee also find that in the State of Jharkhand, out of 
79 sanctioned EMRSs only 13 EMRSs are functional. Similarly, in Odisha only 19 
EMRSs are functional out of 70 sanctioned EMRSs as on 16.2.2021. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry, first of all, must ensure that all States enter 
into MOUs with NESTS so as to give requisite boost to their efforts with regard to 
construction of sanctioned schools well in time. They should particularly consult 
with all the State Governments where construction work of EMRSs is pending for 
more than two years for completing all the formalities like allotment of land, etc. 
and convince them to make sincere efforts for early completion of EMRSs for the 
educational upliftment of the tribal population.” 
  
1.6 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as under:- 
 
“The matter of operationalization of non-functional schools has been of 
utmost importance. This is being regularly reviewed with the concerned State 
Governments to ensure that all the non-functional schools are made operational 
from alternate buildings till the construction of the school is complete. However, 
given the remoteness of the location of the schools, many State Governments 
have expressed difficulties in locating alternative buildings. However this is being 
pursued regularly. 
 The National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS), an 
autonomous body under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has already entered into an 
MoU with 24 out of 28 States/UTs with EMRS. The matter of sorting out of land 
related issued is also being reviewed regularly  with  the  State  Governments to  

 
ensure early resolving of various issues. However the crisis posed by COVID-19 
has resulted in certain delays since the district administrations have been at the  
forefront of fighting the pandemic. However, the same is being reviewed at the 
highest order.” 
  
1. 7 The Committee had observed in their earlier recommendation that none of 
the Eklavya Model Residential Schools(EMRSs) sanctioned in the States of Bihar, 
Meghalaya and UTs of Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Jammu & Kashmir 
has been made functional. The Committee had further observed that for the States 
of Jharkhand and Odisha out of sanctioned 79 and 70 EMRSs respectively only 13 
and 19 EMRSs were made functional. The Committee had therefore recommended 
that the States should enter into MoUs with the National Education Society for 
Tribal Students (NESTS) to boost their efforts with regard to construction of 
schools well in time. The reply of the Ministry on this matter lacks clarity.  On one 
hand, it is mentioned that the matter of operationalization of non-functional 
schools is being regularly reviewed with the concerned State Governments to 
ensure that all the non-functional schools are made operational from alternate 
buildings till the construction of the school is complete.  On the other hand the 
Ministry also states that given the remoteness of the location of the schools, many 
State Governments have expressed difficulties in locating alternative buildings. 
The Committee are not at all satisfied with the response of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs as the plea of the Ministry with regard to difficulties in locating alternate 
buildings due to remoteness of the location of  schools is far from convincing 
because most of the tribal areas are generally in far off /remote areas.  Hence this 
reason cannot be a justified one.  Moreover, now after creation of NESTS, the 

 
Committee feel that any further delay in making the sanctioned schools functional 
should not happen. The Committee, therefore, recommend that sincere efforts  
should be made by the Ministry to identify suitable alternate buildings in 
coordination with State Governments even if they are slightly away from the 
location of the sanctioned schools and ensure that such Schools are made 
functional without further wastage of time so that the tribal children are not 
deprived from getting the education and the purpose of the Government to 
establish EMRS is not defeated.  The Committee also find from the Action Taken 
reply that the NESTS has entered into an MoU with 24 out of 28 States/UTs so far. 
The Committee would like NESTS to expedite the matter without any further delay. 
The Committee would appreciate if the goals set by the Ministry are achieved now 
that NESTS and EMRS Society exist in States to manage the affairs of EMRS. 
 Recommendation (Para No. 3.19) 
 
1.8  The Committee, in their Nineteenth Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that for the purpose of effective monitoring and data 
driven decision making on the EMRSs, a dedicated MIS is being planned to be 
developed by the Ministry. The MIS will have school wise information relating to 
release of funds, utilization, progress of construction, and other activities. The 
Committee feel that once the MIS is developed by the Ministry, it will be very 
useful for effective monitoring of all the activities of each EMRS. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should fix a timeline and make sincere efforts to 
develop a dedicated MIS for monitoring of EMRSs without any delay.” 
 
1.9 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“The MIS has already been made live with the School Module and the Staff 
Module. The work on the remaining modules are underway and shall be made 
live.” 

 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended the Ministry to develop a dedicated MIS 
for effective monitoring of all the activities of each EMRS in a fix timeline. As per 
the reply of the Ministry, MIS has been made live with the School and Staff 
Modules and the remaining modules are underway.  The Committee are not 
satisfied with the pace of work as much time is apparently still required to develop  
a full fledged MIS for EMRS, which will display information like funds utilization 
and the progress of actual construction of each school. The Committee strongly 
believe that unless a full-fledged MIS is developed, the progress of EMRS Scheme 
cannot be monitored effectively.  The Committee feel that the work may not 
progress as envisaged in the absence of proper monitoring. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a dedicated MIS with all the requisite features needs to 
be developed in a fixed time frame, say within three months, without further delay.  
  
B. CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES  
 
Grant-in-aid to voluntary organizations looking for the welfare of STs  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13) 
1.11  The Committee, in their Nineteenth Report, had recommended as follows:- 
  “The Ministry is providing Grant-in-Aid to Voluntary Organisations working 
for the welfare of STs to cater to comparatively service deficient tribal dominated 
areas, where direct outreach of the Government through its institutional 
mechanism was not adequate. The Committee note that in 2020-21, BE of ₹ 110 
crore has been downsized to ₹ 60 crore at the RE stage under the scheme and 
the Ministry have utilized only ₹ 13.14 crore upto 31.01.2021. For low utilization of 
funds under the Scheme, the reason given is that schools and hostels run by 
NGOs were closed in 2020 due to Covid-19 pandemic. The Committee 
acknowledge that the reason has led to under-utilization to some extent but feel 
that since the NGOs are working not only in schools but also in other fields 

 
including health and livelihood such an underutilization shows that virtually no 
activity was undertaken by the NGOs in the field of tribal welfare. Moreover the 
COVID-19 pandemic did not spread to remote tribal areas as fast as in other 
areas. The Committee feel that a better coordination mechanism established by 
the Ministry with the NGOs working in the field of health and sanitation, could 
have ensured that at least a reasonable amount is utilized by these NGOs at the 
time of pandemic to provide health facilities and create awareness about the 
situation. The Committee desire that Ministry should collect data from all the State  
 Governments to know the actual expenditure in the health sector by these NGOs 
in the year 2020-21. The Committee recommend that Ministry should take sincere 
and effective steps for full utilization of funds under the Scheme by the end of the 
current financial year. Since the majority of the schemes are implemented through 
various NGOs and VOs working in the field of welfare and development of 
Scheduled Tribes, the Committee desire that when any change/modifications is 
made in the procedure for grants to NGOs/VOs, the Ministry should play pro-
active role for capacity building of these organizations in advance so that no 
organization faces any problem in getting the grants due to procedural infirmities. 
At the same time, the Committee recommend that since misuse of funds by some 
NGOs is a bitter reality hence the inspection mechanism needs to be 
strengthened and better transparency achieved through effective use of digital 
devices and live data feed.” 
1.12 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
  “Under the scheme of ‘Grant-in-aid to Voluntary Organizations (VOs) 
working for the welfare of Scheduled Tribes’ and ‘Strengthening Education among 
ST Girls in Low Literacy Districts’, more than 99.17% of revised budget allocation 
was utilized. ₹ 59.50 crore against the revised allocation of ₹ 60.00 crore for 2020-
21 was released. 
  Due to Covid-19 pandemic, online Video Conferencing was held on 
23.01.2021 and 09.01.2021 with all the NGOs/VOs which applied for Grants-in- 
Aid from Ministry of Tribal Affairs. Ministry addressed the concern of the 
NGOs/VOs and briefed them about the digitalized process of NGO Grant, 
changes in guidelines, requirement of documents in new format etc. Also, 

 
NGOs/VOs were given opportunity to brief their working and requirement of 
Grants through a presentation meeting.  
  The Ministry has developed online Grant system (https://ngo.tribal.gov.in) 
for NGO Grants from conception to completion. It enables the District 
administration as well as State and Central Government to process and 
recommend proposals received from NGOs/VOs. Also NGOs/VOs can see 
sanctions generated and status of their application. 
  The implementation of NGO portal by the Ministry has helped in achieving 
transparency in funding and monitoring of NGOs/VOs this also enables 
NGOs/VOs in fulfilling the requisite application procedures, tracking the status of 
their applications, submitting completion certificates as well as registering 
grievance, if any. The other observations/recommendations of the committee have 
been noted for compliance. 
 
1.13 The Committee had inter-alia observed that NGO and VOs play an important 
role to implement the Schemes meant for welfare and development of Scheduled 
Tribes and had recommended that the Ministry should play proactive role for 
capacity building of these organizations in case of change/modifications in the 
procedure for grant of funds so that NGOs and VOs do not face any problem in 
getting the grants due to procedural infirmities. The Committee had further 
impressed upon strengthening the inspection aspect to avoid misuse of funds. 
The Committee note certain steps taken for the same such as Video Conferencing 
with NGOs/VOs, implementation of NGO portal by the Ministry etc. and are of the 
view that these may not address their concern as huge amount of exchequer 
money is invested in these Organizations for the welfare of STs but the outcome 
does not seem to commensurate with the same.  The Committee would, therefore, 
like the Ministry to take substantial steps so that the Organizations involved in 
implementing schemes for welfare of STs do not lose sight of their entrusted 
responsibility towards STs, as well as, to ensure to make their work quantifiable  

 
while adhering to a stringent inspection mechanism to stop any misuse of public 
funds. 
  
C. DEVELOPMENT OF PARTICULARLY VULNERABLE TRIBAL GROUPS 
(PVTGs)  
Recommendation (Para No. 5.18) 
 
1.14  The Committee, in their Nineteenth Report, had recommended as follows:- 
  “The Committee note that the Scheme has already been evaluated by an 
independent body and several important recommendations made. Some of the 
important recommendations relate to (i) Poor awareness about FRA-2006 among 
PVTGs,   Government   Schemes   and   programmes   and   other   basic social  
 entitlements (ii) Tuberculosis, typhoid, jaundice, malaria and sickle cell anemia 
have cost many lives of PVTGs. Poor access to public health care facilities makes 
the situation worse to check the spread of these diseases (iii) Poor literacy rate 
among the PVTGs due to poor access to primary and secondary schools nearby 
(iv) Availability of drinking water is a major concern among the PVTGs (v) No all-
weather road connectivity to most of the PVTGs habitations (vi) As the villages fall 
under reserve forest, National Park and wildlife sanctuary, there is restriction from 
forest department for construction of concrete road in these areas (vii) Some of 
the PVTGs still do not have Caste Certificates, thus they are being deprived of the 
benefits offered by Central and State Governments (viii) Most of the States do not 
have Micro-Plan Projects for PVTGs except Odisha and Madhya Pradesh. The 
Committee find that the State specific recommendations are proposed to be 
shared with the State Governments to obtain their feedback. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should formulate fresh guidelines based on the feedback 
from the States/UTs covering all the above crucial issues and direct the State 
Governments to follow guidelines in letter and spirit. The Committee are 
particularly shocked to know that some PVTGs do not have caste certificates, 
which is the basic document required for availing benefits under various welfare 
schemes meant for tribal people. The Committee recommend that the Ministry  
 should issue directions to all the State Governments/UTs for starting a special 
drive to issue caste certificates to all the PVTGs without further delay.” 
 

 
1.15 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken reply, have stated as follows:- 
  “Comments of State Governments on State specific observations of Impact 
Evaluation Report submitted by the IIPA have been sought and the same being 
awaited. 
  To ensure effective implementation of the Scheme for Development of 
PVTGs few States like Madhya Pradesh and Odisha have constituted micro-plan 
projects agencies while the other States with PVTGs population have their own 
administrative set up and have special project office for PVTGs, functioning under 
aegis of ITDA/ITDP. However, MoTA has requested all the PVTG concentrated 
States to constitute Micro-plan Project to ensure special focus to PVTGs 
population. 
  Formulation of fresh Scheme guidelines as recommended by the 
Committee is being contemplated. 
  Further, Ministry has taken note to examine the issue related to issuance of 
caste certificates to all PVTGs in consultation with concerned State Governments 
and a communication to this effect shall be addressed.” 
  
1.16 The Committee, while taking note of the recommendations of an 
independent body on Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs), had desired 
that the Ministry should formulate fresh guidelines based on the feedback from the 
States/UTs covering all the above crucial issues and direct the State Governments 
to follow those guidelines in letter and spirit. Further, the Committee had 
recommended Ministry to issue directions to all the State Governments/UTs for 
starting a special drive to issue caste certificates to all the PVTGs without further 
delay. The Committee inter-alia find from reply of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs that  
they have sought comments of State Governments on State specific 
observations/recommendations and the response is awaited. Further, the Ministry 
has taken note of examining the issue related to issuance of caste certificates to 
all PVTGs in consultation with concerned State Governments and a 
communication to this effect shall reportedly be addressed by them. The 

 
Committee are disappointed to find a somewhat laidback approach with which the 
Ministry has responded to their recommendation let alone the findings of the 
impact evaluation report referred in their recommendation, which deserve a 
detailed and specific reply. The Committee therefore reiterate that the Ministry 
should expeditiously examine the matter and suitably implement the 
observations/recommendations of the said Impact Evaluation Study to mitigate the 
hardships of PVTGs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.14) 
 
2.1 The Ministry has reportedly taken digital initiatives for 5 Schemes including 
their NGOs Scheme, PVTGs Scheme etc. To address educational & health infrastructure 
needs of Tribals in geographically remote areas, mapping of such areas is the pre-
requisite to identify and prioritize such tribal areas, which are in the dire need of such 
infrastructure and financial support. In the recent past, the Bharat Rural livelihood 
Mission had also recommended to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to collaborate with 
Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for the mapping for a 
better coordinated effort between the line Ministries for tribal welfare. The Committee feel 
that such efforts would prove to be very effective not only in identifying most deserving 
potential beneficiaries but would make it much more easier to have a well-rounded plan 
of action with clearly spelt-out role of each Ministry and monitor the progress of work 
undertaken at actual locations and assess their efficacy without wasting time, manpower 
and funds. Hence, they recommend that the matter may be included in the agenda of the 
next Board meeting of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and discussed between all the 
concerned Ministries, since all the Government schemes are stated being reviewed now, 
following the report of the 15th Finance Commission, for ensuring their optimal 
performance in the next five years. The Committee may be apprised of the progress on 
the matter at action taken stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Ministry recognizes the fact that to address educational & health infrastructure 
needs of Tribals in geographically remote areas, mapping of such areas is the pre-
requisite. In pursuance of this, during the year 2019-20, MoTA conducted a gap 
analysis based on Census 2011 data and Mission Antyodaya data maintained by the 
Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). Through the analysis it was found that there 
are about 1,45,000 tribal villages with ST population ≥ 25% where gaps exist in 

 
various sectors of development including Health and Education. The gap analysis 
summary for Health and Education is as under: 
 
 
 
S. 
No 
 
Village-wise Infrastructure Details 
No.  of villages out 
of 117064 Tribal 
Dominated Villages 
Gap 
1 Availability of school Primary 61230   
Middle 
School 
26155  
High 
School 
10642  
>Senior 
Secondary 
school 
5519  
 No. of villages not having school  13501 
2 Availability of Vocational Educational 
centre/ITI/RSETI/DDU-GKY 
9366  
3 Availability of Sub centre PHC 3453   
CHC 7114  
S. 
No 
 
Village-wise Infrastructure Details 
No. of villages out of 
117064 Tribal 
Dominated Villages 
Gap 
  Sub 
Centre 
18185  
None 88295   
If Sub Centre >not available in 
the village, 
Distance of the nearest 
place where facility 
Is available 
<1km 2164  
1-2km 7110   
2-5km 23365  
5-10Km 25144   
>10Km 28031  
 No. of villages not having health facility 
Within the distance of 10Km 
 28031 
 
 Through a revamped scheme of ‘Special Central Assistance for Tribal 
Development (SCA for TD)’ Ministry envisages for integrated development of tribal 
dominated villages as model village (Adarsh Gram) in a phased manner wherein ST 
people would have access to basic services and infrastructure facilities to enable 
them lead a dignified living and utilize their inherent potential to the fullest. The 
scheme is intended to be implemented through appropriate convergence of resources 
with State Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP), Schedule Tribe Component (STC) with Central Line 
Ministries, Corporate Social Responsibility funds, District Mineral Funds etc. Further, 

 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are striving to 
converge efforts of various Government agencies and organisations to enhance 
health and nutrition status of the tribal communities of India. 
 The Ministry releases grant-in-aid to the NGOs/VOs working mainly in the field 
of school education and health on the recommendations of the State Level Committee  
 
 
of the concerned State Governments / UT Administrations and concerned 
DistrictCollector / Deputy Commissioner. The scheme is designed to fill the critical 
gaps in the areas of education and health in the regions where these services are 
deficient and need to be supplemented with the efforts of NGOs/VOs.  However, 
overall responsibility for the development in the areas of education and health rests 
with the line Ministry only. The Ministry has taken initiatives to implement its schemes 
in convergence with the schemes and programmes of other line Ministries and state 
governments for better outcome. 
 The scheme of 'Development of PVTG' is essentially in the nature of gap filling 
intervention. A1l the 75 PVTG communities are expected to be covered under the 
Central and state STC components besides the major schemes of Tribal Affairs 
Ministry like Grants under Article 275(l) and SCA to TSS. Hence, the objective of the 
scheme during the period 2021-22 to 2025-26 shall be directed towards identification 
of gaps and advising the states to propose projects accordingly. 
 EFC Memo for continuation and revision of the scheme of EMRS has already 
been shared with the concerned line Ministries/Departments and their observations 
has been taken into consideration while finalising the EFC Memo for appraisal of the 
scheme of EMRS by the Competent Authority.  
 Meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for continuation of 
schemes/programmes under Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes of the Ministry has already been held.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2.15) 
 
2.3 During the examination of the material available on various Schemes run by the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs for tribal welfare, the Committee have come across various evaluation studies 
which show that the tribal population has not benefitted optimally from the various Government 
Sector Schemes due to several constraints that require synchronized efforts between various 
Central and State Ministries / Departments dealing with tribal welfare, health and family welfare, 
roads and highways, fishery, livestock, solar energy, rain water harvesting, mines, environment 
& forests, education etc. to address several practical problems concerning tribal areas.   Some 
of these problems are lack of road connectivity between tribal villages, far off locations of 
primary health centers from the tribal areas, lack of irrigation facilities for agricultural activities of 
 
 
 tribals, particularly in view of the depletion of forest produce owing to restrictions in entering 
wildlife sanctuaries, limited access to vaccination, contaminated drinking water in ponds and 
wells, alternate livelihood generation by rearing livestock and fishery, need for solar lighting 
arrangements for tribal homes as well as tribal schools, prevalence of alcohol and tobacco use 
among tribals, migration of tribals to other areas in search of employment, etc. During the oral 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on the current year’s Demands 
for Grants before this Committee, the Ministry informed about sector-wise funds sanctioned 
under three important Schemes i.e., Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub-Scheme (SCA to 
TSS), Grants under first Proviso to Article 275(1) of the Constitution and Development of 
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs). According to them, the Ministry has been 
providing funds for 16 sectors namely education, livelihood, skill development, health, nutrition, 
animal husbandry, infrastructural development, irrigation and water shed management, road 
connectivity, sports and games, drinking water, ecotourism, art and culture, market and value 
chain development etc., which has nearly doubled from Rs. 2697 crore in 2017-18 to Rs. 
4515.63 crore in 2019-20. The Committee appreciate the Government’s commitment for tribal 
welfare as is evident from the information given above.   However, they are of the opinion that 
there are several Schemes run by various Central Ministries too having implications for tribals, 
which can be synchronized with the Central Sector Schemes run by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
for a much better impact. Hence,  the Committee recommend that in the meetings to be held in 
future to review the Government Schemes for the next five years, the Ministry should 
encourage participation of as many other Ministries as possible to bring the mon board and 

 
seek their cooperation, apart from continuing their monitoring and hand holding efforts with all 
the concerned State Governments. The Ministry should also be proactive in consulting people’s  
representatives from the tribal dominated constituencies and involve them actively in order to be 
better informed about the problems faced by the tribals and their possible solutions. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Ministry of Tribal Affairs agrees with the recommendation of the Committee that in 
the meetings to be held in future to review the Government Schemes for the next five 
years, the Ministry should encourage participation of as many other Ministries as 
possible to bring them on board and seek their cooperation, apart from continuing their 
monitoring and handholding efforts with all the concerned State Governments. MoTA has 
already held consultation with all the concerned line Ministries / Departments during 
formulation of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum for the Umbrella 
Programme for Development of Scheduled Tribes – Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
 As regards the recommendation of the Committee regarding synchronization of 
the schemes of the MoTA with the schemes run by various Central Ministries, The 
Ministry envisages to transform the nature of the Scheme of Special Central Assistance 
to Tribal Sub-Scheme (SCA to TSS) for holistic development of tribal dominated villages 
along with changed nomenclature to ‘Special Central Assistance for Tribal Development 
(SCA for TD)’. The SCA for TD scheme will aim towards integrated development of tribal 
dominated villages as model village (Adarsh Gram) in a phased manner wherein ST 
people would have access to basic services and infrastructure facilities to enable them 
lead a dignified living and utilize their inherent potential to the fullest. Through the 
scheme, it would be the endeavour of the Ministry to mitigate existing gaps in various 
sectors of development, including education and health services; quality of life; basic 
amenities; housing; employment; productive assets; income-generating opportunities 
and infrastructure incidental thereto etc. through appropriate convergence of resources 
at State Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP), Schedule Tribe Component (STC) with Central Line 
Ministries, Corporate Social Responsibility funds, District Mineral Funds etc. All States 
and Union Territories having notified ST population will be covered under the scheme. 
The Scheme will cover all the tribal dominated villages decided by MoTA based on the 
criteria approved by the Project Appraisal Committee from time to time. In the first phase 
of five years, 36428 tribal dominated villages with at least 50% tribal population and 500 
STs will be taken up under the scheme. 

 
 Under the scheme 'Support to TRIs', TRI Division has been providing funds to 
State Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) for carrying out activities for capacity building of 
PRIs. Further, under the scheme 'Tribal Festival, Research, Information and Mass 
Education', Ministry has sanctioned projects for capacity building of PRIs at gram 
panchayat level in State(s) of Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.  
EFC Memo for continuation and revision of the scheme of EMRS has already 
been shared with the concerned line Ministries/Departments and their observations have 
been taken into consideration while finalising the EFC Memo for appraisal of the scheme 
of EMRS by the Competent Authority. This Ministry has already requested all the Nodal 
Officers that whenever they visit their specific States, the details of these Officers can be 
shared with MPs/MLAs belonging to those States so as to take their feedback and help. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3.16) 
 
2.5 The construction of desired number of sanctioned EMRSs has remained rather 
slow with the result that in the last 23 years, only 285 EMRSs could be made functional. 
The Committee are happy to note now that a dedicated construction wing of NESTS 
(National Education Society for Tribal Students) consisting of retired officers in the rank 
of Chief Engineer (Civil), Executive Engineer (Civil), Assistant Engineer (Electrical) and 
Assistant engineer (Civil) has been set up for effective supervision and monitoring of pre-
construction and post-construction activities of EMRSs since out of 588 sanctioned 
EMRSs only 285 are functional as on 31.01.2021. The Committee also note the 
Ministry’s statement that total targeted 740 EMRSs will be constructed and made 
functional by the August 2023 and that the unit cost of each EMRS has been increased 
from Rs. 20 crore to Rs.  38 crore, and for hilly and difficult areas it will be Rs. 48 crore. 
The Committee hope that the personnel of construction wing of NESTS would be given 
charge of overseeing construction work progress of all remaining 303 schools soon 
which have been sanctioned indifferent States and make a detailed report on the 
reasons for delays in the completion of each EMRS and with the consultations of the 
States authorities, ensure that targets are set for completion of each EMRS.As the 
construction cost has been increased from Rs. 20 crore to Rs. 38 crore /Rs.  48 crore for 
hilly areas, the Committee feel that this would help in creating robust infrastructure 

 
facilities for tribal students. The Committee also recommend that all the sanctioned posts 
in the Dedicated Construction Wing should be filled on urgent basis so that NESTS is 
able to work effectively and promptly for the purpose it was set up. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Construction Wing of NESTS has already been setup with Chief Engineer 
(Civil), Executive Engineer (Civil)- 2 Nos, Assistant Engineer (Electrical) and Assistant 
engineer (Civil) – 2 Nos. The Construction Wing of NESTS has already taken up the task 
of overseeing the construction work of schools in coordination with the Construction 
Agencies assigned. The proposal for further strengthening of the construction wing with 
creation of post for an Executive Engineer, Junior Engineer (civil) and Junior Engineer 
(electrical) has been included in the EFC Note for Continuation of the EMRS scheme for 
the period 2021-22 to 2025-26. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
 
Recommendation No.3.18 
 
 
2.7 The Committee find that the Ministry have now set the target of completion of 
construction of 740 EMRSs by August, 2023. For this, the Committee desire that the 
Ministry should chalk out an annual action plan in which the priority to the tribal 
dominated States is given with target dates for each essential activity, that is, sanctioning 
of schools, allocation of land, completion of construction work, appointment of staff etc. 
so that the target of completion of all the EMRSs is achieved by August, 2023. The 
Committee are happy to note that the recruitment rules for teaching and non-teaching 
staff for 52 posts in each school have been since finalized and notified to the States/UTs. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry should direct all the State Governments to furnish 
a status report on the recruitment of teaching and non-teaching staff as per the 
guidelines. In addition, as the Ministry has also proposed Eklavya Day Boarding Schools, 
a status report on the same may be submitted to the Committee. 
 
 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 A detailed annual plan has been worked out for timely completion of construction 
of schools. The same has been communicated to the construction agencies through an 
agreement signed between NESTS and the construction agencies. 
  Since the process of recruitment of staff by the State Governments was slow, the 
NESTSs worked out the current clear vacancies in all the EMRSs (excluding State of 
Assam, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Kerala where elections were underway) and a 
centralised test is being conducted through the National Testing Agency to fill the 
vacancies. 
 Eklavya Model Day Boarding Schools were introduced on a pilot basis to 
introduce day boarding schools in the tribal areas. Initially 5 schools were sanctioned 
across the country. However the 2 such day boarding schools had to be converted into 
residential schools on specific requests of the State Government since residential 
schools were more favoured in tribal areas. Therefore currently there are 3 sanctioned 
Day Boarding Schools and all are reported to be functional. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY. 
 
 
Recommendation No.  2.13 
 
3.1 The Committee note that the Ministry had utilized nearly 99 percent of 
allocated funds during the last four years. For the financial year 2020-21, the Committee 
find that the Budget allocation for Rs. 7411 crore had been reduced at the time of RE i.e. 
Rs. 5508 crore and the actual expenditure of the Ministry was Rs. 4530.40 crore as on 
18.02.2021, and the less utilization of funds was stated due to the fact that the 
implementing agencies of various schemes, both Governmental or non-Governmental, 
were not able to carry out field level activities due to ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, thus 
leading to slow down in implementation of schemes. The Committee understand the 
problems faced by the Ministry in implementation of various schemes due to COVID-19 
pandemic, but now as the pandemic is under control, they desire that extra efforts should 
be made by the Ministry to fill the gap due to non-implementation of Schemes since the 
tribal population is most vulnerable and would be pushed deeper into poverty and 
isolation otherwise. The Committee would like to urge upon the Ministry to pursue with 
State Governments and NGOs/VOs for completing all the formalities of furnishing UCs 
and PPRs in time now so that unspent amount of the Budget for the current financial 
year is utilized by 31 March, 2021. The Committee note that for Financial Year 2021-22, 
the Ministry of Finance have allocated Rs. 7524.87 crore to Ministry of Tribal Affairs vis-
à-vis the projected requirement of Rs. 12050.06 crore for various schemes of the 
Ministry. The Committee desire that the Ministry should chalk out a plan to fill the gaps in 
low performing schemes during first three to four months of financial year 2021-22, and 
utilize maximum amount of the allocated Budget so that the Ministry are in a position to 
justify their demand for enhanced allocation at the RE stage in 2021-22. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 Earlier during the initial quarters of financial year 2020-21, due to Covid-19 
pandemic situation, State Governments were not able to submit Utilization Certificate 
(UC) / Physical Progress Report (PPR) of previous years releases. Further, as per  

 
 
 
 
Ministry of Finance’s earlier instructions funds had to be released to the State 
Governments on need basis and depending upon State’s capacity to actually spend 
the balance from the previous year and releases made during 2020-21. In pursuance 
with the above directions of the Ministry of Finance, the Division was releasing only 
50% of the approved funds to the State Governments after taking account of pending 
UCs/ PPRs of the previous years’ releases. However, when Ministry of Finance 
provided relaxation to this clause vide O.M. dated 08.12.2020, MoTA was able to 
release funds as per normal criteria and release of funds to the State Governments 
was expedited. With the continuous efforts and follow ups with the State 
Governments, MoTA was able to utilize Rs.799.93 crore out of Rs. 800 crore 
allocated at RE stage under the scheme of Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub-
Scheme during 2020-21. As regards planning for release of funds during 2021-22 is 
concerned, presently, Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Memorandum for the 
Umbrella Programme for Development of Scheduled Tribes – Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes is pending for appraisal by Ministry of Finance. As and when the scheme of 
SCA to TSS gets approved or any other instruction received from Ministry of Finance, 
release of funds to the State Governments will be expedited. EFC meeting already 
held and minutes are awaited. 
 
 Concerned State Treasurery has been requested for timely transfer of funds 
released by this Ministry to the concerned State for expeditious utilization of funds and 
submissions of UCs / PPRs under the Scheme of “Support to Tribal Research 
Institute”. 
 
 Under the scheme of “Grants-in-aid to Voluntary Organisations (VOs) working 
for the welfare of Scheduled Tribes” and “Strengthening Education among ST Girls in 
Low Literacy Districts” more than 95% of the budget allocation during 2018-19 and 
2019-20 was utilized. Similarly, an amount of Rs 59.50 Crore (99.17%) against the 
revised allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore for 2020-21 was released. The outlay for 2021-

 
22 has been projected as Rs. 110.00 crore that could be released in accordance with 
the allocation plan. 
Under the scheme of Development of PVTG, the allocation of RS 250.00 crore 
during 2018-19 and 2019-20 was fully utilized. Similarly, the revised allocation of Rs 
140.00 crore for 2020-21 was released, The outlay for 2021' 22 has been projected as 
Rs 250.00 crore that could be released in accordance with the allocation plan. 
 The Budget Allocation under the scheme of Grants under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution and EMRS is Rs. 1350.00 Crore and Rs. 1313.23 Crore respectively 
which was reduced to Rs. 800.00 Crore and Rs. 1200.00 Crore respectively at the RE 
Stage. The entire allocation of the RE stage has been utilized for the scheme of 
Grants and EMRS within stipulated time and funds could not be released to only 
those States which have not submitted the required documents i.e. Utilization 
Certificate (UC) and Physical Progress Report (PPR) of the previous year releases. 
However, States were being continuously reminded to submit the required documents 
to this Ministry within the stipulated time so that funds could have been released to 
those States in the financial year 2020-21. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 6.9 
 
3.3 The Committee find that the National Scheduled Tribe Finance and Development 
Corporation (NSTFDC) provides financial assistance for income generation activities and 
marketing support assistance for economic upliftment of Scheduled Tribes. No allocation 
was made at RE stage to NSTFDC in the year 2020-21 and only a token amount of Rs. 
0.01 crore has been allocated in the year 2021-22 to the Corporation. In this connection, 
the Committee were informed that the entire authorized share capital of Rs. 750 crore 
has been exhausted by NSTFDC in the financial year 2019-20 and that the draft EFC 
note for enhancement of authorized share capital from Rs. 750 crore to Rs. 1500 crore 
was submitted to the Department of Expenditure, who declined the request citing the 
present economic situation. Hence, no allocation of funds was made to NSTFDC in 
2020-21. The Committee find that the NSTFDC has been consistently utilizing entire 
budget allocations during the year 2018-19 and 2019-20 and implementing various 

 
Schemes for Scheduled Tribes, and feel that in the absence of proper authorized share 
capital, their income from repaid loans etc. will hardly be sufficient to provide assistance  
to tribals for their economic upliftment. Hence, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
should again pursue the matter with the Department of Expenditure for reconsideration of  
the proposal for enhancing the authorized share capital with requisite justification so that 
fund allocation could be obtained at the RE stage by NSTFD. 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 The Ministry approached the Ministry of Finance for enhancing the Authorised 
Share Capital of NSTFDC, however, the Finance Ministry has advised for a new model 
of functioning of NSTFDC to make it self-sufficient and less dependent on equity 
infusions. Moreover, the Ministry has proposed a new scheme ‘Venture Capital Fund for 
Scheduled Tribes’ (VCF-ST) for promoting Entrepreneurship among the STs. The VCF-
ST scheme would be a social sector initiative to promote ST entrepreneurship and to 
support and incubate the start-up ideas by ST youth. The proposed scheme would be 
managed by the agency having expertise and sufficient experience. Venture Capital 
Fund for SC and Backward Classes have already been set up by the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment. Initially it is proposed to set up VCF-ST with a corpus of Rs. 
50.00 crore for a period of five years commencing from 2021-22. It is also proposed to 
adopt the guidelines similar to Venture Capital for Scheduled Castes and Backward 
Classes. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 7.10 
 
3.5 From the statement of claims and distribution of Title Deeds under the Scheduled 
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, 
the Committee find that in the States of Goa, Himachal Pradesh and Assam, the 
percentage of claims disposed off with respect to claims received was very minor, i.e. 
0.71, 7.27, 37.93 per cent, respectively. The Ministry have also stated that the number of 
cases of rejection in the Assam are quite high and that the State Government has 
undertaken a review of rejected claims to ensure that no wrongful rejection takes place 
and the updated status of the review of rejection is still awaited. In Goa and Himachal 

 
Pradesh, local level authorities are stated to be working to improve the recognition 
claims. Since the role of Panchayats, Gram Sabhas and village level Forest Rights 
Committees and local authorities is very crucial for claiming of Title Deeds under FRA 
Act, 2006, the Committee desire that the Ministry should start consultation process with 
all the State Governments/ UT Administrations and other stakeholders to ensure that no  
wrongful rejection of any claim under the Act takes place, so that the very identity of tribal 
community remains unharmed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.6   As per FRA, 2006, State Governments are responsible for implementation of 
various provisions of the Act. 
 
 Goa:  
 
 Reasons for low disposal of claims, as communicated by the State Government of 
Goa, are as under: - 
 
i. Issue of Quorum at Gram Sabha - The mandatory quorum of 50% is not fulfilled 
at the Gram Sabha which is held revenue village wise. The issue referred by the 
State Government of Goa is under examination in consultation with the State 
Government. 
 
ii. Spot Verification- Government of Goa has constituted a Special Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Jt. Mamlatdars of each Taluka to carry out the Spot 
Verification of claims filed under FRA, 2006. The area claimed by the claimants is 
very huge on a hilly terrain due to which spot verification of only 02 claimed areas 
is possible. Also, the monsoon in Goa lasts from June to November due to which 
the claimed area is inaccessible for spot verification. 
 
iii. In order to expedite the disposal of claims, the District Level Committee headed 
by the District Collector being the Chairman takes timely review of work of spot 
verification and survey. Also, Chief Secretary and the Chairman of the State Level 
Monitoring Committee (SLMC) takes a review of the progress made under FRA, 
2006 and gives directions to all the concerned for speedy disposal. Seating fees 
and allowances are given to the Private members of various committees as an 
incentive so that they are present during the meeting while deciding the cases. 
Directorate of Tribal Welfare coordinates with the Chairman of the District Level 
Committee so that the work of implementation of the FRA, 2006 is not hampered. 
  
 

 
iv. Hon’ble Chief Minster and Hon’ble Minster for Tribal Welfare take meetings with 
all the concerned officials so that the work of implementation of FRA, 2006 is 
carried out on a war footing and to adhere to the timeline submitted before the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. 
 
Himachal Pradesh: 
  
i. The State of Himachal Pradesh has been stating that the traditional rights 
of the Tribes are already settled in the State. 
 
ii. After having communicated a number of times by Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
to the State Government of Himachal Pradesh that even those rights which 
are recognised under any State law or laws of any Autonomous District 
Council or Autonomous Regional Council or which are accepted as rights 
of tribal under any traditional or customary law of the concerned tribes of 
any State needs to be re-recognized under Section 3 (1)(j) of FRA, 2006. 
 
iii. During the review meeting held on 06.03.2019 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the State reported to have initiated the 
process of bringing the already recorded traditional rights of the tribal 
communities under the ambit of FRA as per its Section 3 (1)(j). 
  
Assam: 
  
As per the updated status communicated by the State of Assam during the 
review meeting held on 18.06.2019 under the chairmanship of Secretary, 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the State has admitted that the no of cases of 
rejection in the State are quite high. Therefore, they have undertaken 
review of rejected claims to ensure that no wrongful rejection is taking 
place. The status update regarding review of rejection is still awaited. 
  
Communication of Ministry of Tribal Affairs with State Governments / UTs: 
  
On 19.9.2019, Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs, Govt. of India wrote letters 
to Chief Ministers of all State Governments including the above mentioned States 
communicating / reminding them, inter alia, that Ministry of Tribal Affairs, which 
has been designated the nodal Ministry for administration of FRA, 2006, has been 
issuing directions and Guidelines from time to time on various aspects of 
implementations of FRA to ensure its proper and effective  implementation in the 
country and it has been conveying the need for capacity building of the frontline 
functionaries, who are responsible for implementation of the provisions of the Act / 
Rules through training programmes on a regular basis.  
 
Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs further communicated that however, it has 
been observed that the procedure being followed at the Gram Sabha / FRC level 
for scrutiny / examination of forest rights claims submitted by forest dwelling 
Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers has not been fully correct 

 
and as per the Act / Rules provisions in large number of cases which is indicative 
of lack of awareness among functionaries about the Rules and procedures there  
under and hence, the Hon’ble Minister stressed the need for more awareness 
generation and capacity building. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs also held meetings with all State Governments 
/UTs    including    with    the    above    States    from  time to time to review the 
 implementation of FRA, 2006 and Rules made there under and advising them for 
proper implementation of the act so that the objective of the act for undoing 
historical injustice done to the forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other 
traditional forest dwellers is not defeated. Since 2019, five such meetings have 
been held so far on 06.03.2019, 18.06.2019, 24.02.2020, 02.09.2020 and 
12.01.2021. In the last such meetings held on 12.01.2021, for instance, 
following major points were raised / communicated by Ministry of Tribal Affairs to 
the States :- 
  
i. Attention was drawn that while considering the claims under FRA, 
2006, Sub Divisional Level Committee (SDLC) and District Level 
Committee (DLC) shall ensure that the compliance of process of 
recognition of rights provided under FR Rule 12 A. especially under 
sub-rule (6) that provides, “in case of incomplete application, or 
application that requires additional examination, such claim shall be 
remanded to the Gram Sabha or reconsideration instead of 
modifying or rejecting the claims. Further, the non-recommendation 
of claim by Gram Sabha and SDLC shall not be treated as rejection. 
It needs to be acknowledged that while recognizing the claims under 
FRA, the Right under Section 3(1)(i) has been recognized 
adequately, and the rights and duties of the forest right holders 
needs to be recognized one along another. 
 
ii. It must be noted that the rejection is not illegal once we are assured 
that the rejection has followed due course of procedure including 
having provided the scope of appeal and rejection carrying adequate 
documentation of the rejection. Any case otherwise would term the 
rejection illegal. In case if the person found non occupant of the land 
while the government’s historical record shows otherwise, the 
concerned authorities must ensure that such record and evidences 
must be appreciated while considering the claims of such occupant 
and accordingly reviewed and resolved. Following Action points 
were desired to be fulfilled by the State Governments in the said 
meeting: 
 
i. To organize a meeting at the level of Chief Minister and Chief 
Secretaries. 
ii. To ensure that all claimants have been informed regarding 
the status of their claim under Forest Rights Act, including 

 
claims having rejected and any case which is finally rejected 
by the States, must have reason for rejection. 
 
iii. To conduct State Level Monitoring Committee Meetings on 
regular basis, as required under the Act. 
 
For Action Taken Reports on the Action points, States have been 
reminded. The same are awaited from the States including the above three 
States. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation No. 3.17 
 
 
Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
 
 
4.1 The Committee note that there is no EMRSs functional in the States of Bihar and 
Meghalaya and UTs of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Jammu & Kashmir. 
The Committee also find that in the State of Jharkhand, out of 79 sanctioned EMRSs 
only 13 EMRSs are functional. Similarly, in Odisha only 19 EMRSs are functional out of 
70 sanctioned EMRSs as on 16.2.2021. The Committee desire that the Ministry, first of 
all, must ensure that all States enter into MOUs with NESTS so as to give requisite boost 
to their efforts with regard to construction of sanctioned schools well in time. They should 
particularly consult with all the State Governments where construction work of EMRSs is 
pending for more than two years for completing all the formalities like allotment of land, 
etc. and convince them to make sincere efforts for early completion of EMRSs for the 
educational upliftment of the tribal population. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The matter of operationalisation of non-functional schools has been of utmost 
importance. This is being regularly reviewed with the concerned State Governments to 
ensure that all the non-functional schools are made operational from alternate buildings 
till the construction of the school is complete. However, given the remoteness of the 
location of the schools, many State Governments have expressed difficulties in locating 
alternative buildings. However this is being pursued regularly. 
 
  The National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS), an autonomous 
body under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs has already entered into an MoU with 24 out of 
28 States/UT with EMRS. The matter of sorting out of land related issues is also being 
reviewed regularly with the State Governments to ensure early resolving of various 
issues. However the crisis posed by Covid 19 has resulted in certain delays since the 
district administrations have been at the fore-front of fighting the pandemic. However, the 
same is being reviewed at the highest order. 

 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
Recommendation No.  3.19 
 
5.1 The Committee note that for the purpose of effective monitoring and data 
driven decision making on the EMRSs, a dedicated MIS is being planned to be 
developed by the Ministry. The MIS will have school wise information relating to release 
of funds, utilization, progress of construction, and other activities. The Committee feel 
that once the MIS is developed by the Ministry, it will be very useful for effective 
monitoring of all the activities of each EMRS. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should fix a timeline and make sincere efforts to develop a dedicated MIS for 
monitoring of EMRSs without any delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The MIS has already been made live with the School Module and the Staff 
Module. The work on the remaining modules are underway and shall be made live soon. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.  3.20 
5.3 As the Committee has come across some evaluation studies suggesting 
relaxation in admission criteria, particularly entrance exam, for PVTG children, they 
desire the Ministry to examine the same and submit their views and action on the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4  As per the approval of the competent authority, it has been decided to reserve 5 
% of the seats in EMRS for children belonging to PVTG communities. The necessary 
guidelines is being worked out.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 

 
 
 
Recommendation No.  4.13 
 
Grant-in-aid to voluntary organizations looking for the welfare of STs 
 
5.5 The Ministry is providing Grant-in-Aid to Voluntary Organisations working for the 
welfare of STs to cater to comparatively service deficient tribal dominated areas, where 
direct outreach of the Government through its institutional mechanism was not adequate. 
The Committee note that in 2020-21, BE of Rs. 110 crore has been downsized to Rs. 60 
crore at the RE stage under the scheme and the Ministry have utilized only Rs. 13.14 
crore upto 31.01.2021. For low utilization of funds under the Scheme, the reason given is 
that schools and hostels run by NGOs were closed in 2020 due to Covid-19 pandemic. 
The Committee acknowledge that the reason has led to under-utilization to some extent 
but feel that since the NGOs are working not only in schools but also in other fields 
including health and livelihood such an underutilization shows that virtually no activity 
was undertaken by the NGOs in the field of tribal welfare. Moreover the COVID-19 
pandemic did not spread to remote tribal areas as fast as in other areas. The Committee 
feel that a better coordination mechanism established by the Ministry with the NGOs 
working in the field of health and sanitation, could have ensured that at least a 
reasonable amount is utilized by these NGOs at the time of pandemic to provide health 
facilities and create awareness about the situation. The Committee desire that Ministry 
should collect data from all the State Governments to know the actual expenditure in the 
health sector by these NGOs in the year 2020-21. The Committee recommend that 
Ministry should take sincere and effective steps for full utilization of funds under the 
Scheme by the end of the current financial year. Since the majority of the schemes are 
implemented through various NGOs and VOs working in the field of welfare and 
development of Scheduled Tribes, the Committee desire that when any 
change/modifications is made in the procedure for grants to NGOs/VOs, the Ministry 
should play pro-active role for capacity building of these organizations in advance so that 
no organization faces any problem in getting the grants due to procedural infirmities. At 
the same time, the Committee recommend that since misuse of funds by some NGOs is 
a bitter reality hence the inspection mechanism needs to be strengthened and better 
transparency achieved through effective use of digital devices and live data feed. 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 Under the scheme of “Grants-in-aid to Voluntary Organisations (VOs) working for 
the welfare of Scheduled Tribes” and “Strengthening Education Among ST Girls in Low 
Literacy Districts”, more than 99.17% of revised budget allocation was utilized. Rs. 59.50 
crores against the revised allocation of Rs. 60.00 crore for 2020- 21 was released. 
Due to Covid-19 pandemic, online Video Conferencing was held on 23.01.2021 & 
09.01.2021 with all the NGOs/ VOs which applied for Grants in Aid from Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. Ministry addressed the concern of the NGOs/ VOs and briefed them about the 
digitalised process of NGO Grant, changes in guidelines, requirement of documents in 
new format etc. Also, NGOs/VOs were given opportunity to brief their working and 
requirement of Grants through a presentation meeting. 
The Ministry has developed online Grant  system (https://ngo.tribal.gov.in) for NGO 
Grants from conception to completion. It enables the District administration as well as 
State and Central Government to process and recommend proposals received from 
NGOs/ VOs. Also, NGOs/VOs can see Sanctions generated and status of their 
application. 
The implementation of NGO portal by the Ministry has helped in achieving 
transparency in funding and monitoring of NGOs/VOs. This also enables NGOs/VOs in 
fulfilling the requisite application procedures, tracking the status of their applications, 
submitting completion certificates as well as registering grievance, if any. The other 
observations / recommendations of the committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5.17 
 
5.7 The Scheme of development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) is 
very significant for the protection and development of PVTGs. The Committee find from  

 
the details of State wise funds released and utilized under the Scheme that no funds 
were released in the year 2018-19 and 2019-20 for Bihar, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh and UT 
of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. The   Ministry   attributed it to pendency of Utilization  
Certificates and Project Progress Reports against the earlier releases of funds under the 
Scheme. The utilization status was missing for 2020-21 for all States/UTs except the 
State of Telangana, which has utilized entire amount during the last three years. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry should extend assistance to the State Governments 
and NGOs/VOs working under the Scheme for timely and proper submission of utilization 
certificates and physical progress report so that proper utilization of funds could be 
ensured. 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs regularly follows up with the States concerned on 
furnishing of pending UCs and PPRs against release of funds in previous years by 
sending communications and during the course of Project Appraisal Committee and 
review meetings that are held periodically.  
With the launch of ADIGRAMS portal, the process of monitoring of such issues is 
expected to become more objective as the nodal agencies are now expected to upload 
UC/PPR online. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
 
Recommendation No. 5.18 
 
Development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs) 
 
5.9 The Committee note that the Scheme has already been evaluated by an 
independent body and several important recommendations made. Some of the important 
recommendations relate to (i) Poor awareness about FRA-2006 among PVTGs, 
Government Schemes and programmes and other basic social entitlements (ii) 
Tuberculosis, typhoid, jaundice, malaria and sickle cell anemia have cost many lives of 
PVTGs. Poor access to public health care facilities makes the situation worse to check 
the spread of these diseases (iii) Poor literacy rate among the PVTGs due to poor 
access to primary and secondary schools nearby (iv) Availability of drinking water is a  

 
major concern among the PVTGs (v) No all-weather road connectivity to most of the 
PVTGs habitations. (vi) As the villages fall under reserve forest, National Park and 
wildlife sanctuary, there is restriction from forest department for construction of concrete 
road in these areas (vii) Some of the PVTGs still do not have    Caste Certificates, thus  
they are being deprived of the benefits offered by Central and State Governments  
(viii) Most of the States do not have Micro-Plan Projects for PVTGs except Odisha and 
Madhya Pradesh. 
The Committee find that the State specific recommendations are proposed to be 
shared with the State Governments to obtain their feedback. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry should formulate fresh guidelines based on the feedback from the 
States/UTs covering all the above crucial issues and direct the State Governments to 
follow guidelines in letter and spirit. The Committee are particularly shocked to know that 
some PVTGs do not have caste certificates, which is the basic document required for 
availing benefits under various welfare schemes meant for tribal people. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry should issue directions to all the State Governments/UTs 
for starting a special drive to issue of caste certificates to all the PVTGs without further 
delay. 
Reply of the Government 
5.10 Comments of State Governments on State specific observations of Impact 
Evaluation Report submitted by the IIPA have been sought and the same are being 
awaited.   
To ensure effective implementation of the Scheme for Development of PVTGs few 
States like Madhya Pradesh and Odisha have constituted micro-plan projects agencies 
while the other States with PVTGs population have their own administrative set up and 
have special project office for PVTGs, functioning under the aegis of ITDA/ITDP. 
However, MoTA has requested all the PVTG concentrated States to constitute Micro-
plan Project to ensure special focus to PVTGs population.    
Formulation of fresh Scheme guidelines as recommended by the Committee is 
being contemplated.   
 
Further, Ministry has taken note to examine the issue related to issuance of caste 
certificates to all PVTGs in consultation with concerned State Governments and a 
communication to this effect shall be addressed. 

 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/03/2021-PC dated 9th June, 2021] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAMA DEVI 
   Chairperson, 
_15th December ,  2021                               Standing Committee on 
24 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)   Social Justice and  Empowerment  
  

 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON  “DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2021-22)” OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
 
         Total         Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 13  
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have 
been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.14, 2.15, 3.16 and 3.18) 
4 31 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government (Paragraph  
Nos 2.13, 6.9 and 7.10) 
3 23 
IV. Observations/Recommendations, in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which require reiteration 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.17 ) 
 
1 8 
V. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature (Paragraph Nos 3.19, 3.20, 
4.13, 5.17 and 5.18) 
 
 
5 38 