 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
[Action taken by the Government on the 
contained in the Twenty
Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
Grants (2021-22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empow
TWENTY
December
 
 29 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2021 - 22) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
 
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-NINETH REPORT   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/Agrahaya, 1943 (Saka) 
 
i 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) observations/recommendations first Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment erment of Persons with Disabilities)]   

 
TWENTY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
(
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty
Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
Grants (2021-22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
                                 Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 
 
December
 
ii 
 
 
 
TWENTY-NINETH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2021-22) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Soc
Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 
22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2021/Agrahaya, 1943 (Saka) 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations first Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for 22)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)]   

iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
(iv)  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 (vi) 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
14  
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government. 
 
17  
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
and which require reiteration. 
 
19 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
27 
ANNEXURE  
 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on 15.12.2021. 
 
32  
APPENDIX 
 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
34  
 
  

iv 
 
   
   
                                          
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  9. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
10. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
11. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
12. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
13. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
14. Smt. Geeta Kora 
15. Shri Vijay Kumar 
16. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  18. Shri Arjun Singh 
19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
20. Smt. Rekha Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
25. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
27. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
29. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
30. Smt. Chhaya Verma 
31. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretariat 
4. Smt. Shashi Bisht  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I,  the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2021-22) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Twenty-Ninth Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-First Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2021-22)' of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
2. The Twenty-first  Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16th March, 2021. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities have furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 26th July, 2021.  The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 15.12.2021. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations/comments of 
the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of this Report. 
  
 
NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
  15    December,  2021                                     Standing Committee on 
  24  Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)       Social Justice and  
Empowerment  

1 
 
  CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-first Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22)’ of the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
1.2 The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
16th March, 2021. It contained 8 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been received 
and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Paragraph Nos.: 5.6 and 8.11,  
(Total: 2, Chapter - II) 
(ii) Observation/Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's reply: 
 Paragraph No.: 4.23             (Total: 1, Chapter III) 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration:  
 Paragraph Nos.: 2.12, 3.7 and 7.7 
(Total: 3, Chapter - IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
 Paragraph Nos.:  4.13 and 6.6   
               (Total: 2, Chapter - V)  
  

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken in 
respect of the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report for which interim replies have been given by the Government, may be 
furnished at the earliest and, in any case, not later than three months after the 
presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Ministry which 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Budgetary  Provisions and Utilization  
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12) 
1.5 The Committee in their Twenty-first Report had recommended as follows:-  
“The Committee note that the Department of Empowerment of PwDs utilized 
92.38% of their allocation in 2019-20, still the Budgetary allocation at RE stage in 
2020-21 was reduced from ₹ 1325.39 crore to ₹ 900 crore only, which was quite 
drastic in comparison to the previous two year. The Committee further note the 
Department’s stand that they could utilize only 73% of the allocated funds meant 
to cater to requirements of the PwDs in 2020-21, as on 19.02.2021 due to review 
of NAP and skill training, non-receipt of adequate number of State proposals etc. 
It was also stated by the Department that they have to ensure the monitoring and 
utilization of funds due to the nature of schemes run by them, all of which are 
Central Sector and not Centrally sponsored. The Department is statedly still 
working on strengthening the mechanism by developing robust and secure fund 
flow mechanism, empanelling of Training Partners, the validity of most of whom is 
expired, receipt of UCs from State Government etc. so that the outgo reaches the 
genuine beneficiaries. The Committee acknowledge constraints in the 
implementation of schemes for which accessibility features are mandatory, still 
they are surprised to note that several proposals such as transfer of vocational 
rehabilitation centres from Ministry of Labour and Employment, Swavlamban 
Kendras, MIS Portal and E-Skill platform for PwDs remain at a conceptual stage, 
till now, despite the existence of the separate Department for PwDs since 2014. 
This obviously has negative impact on the overall performance, be it financial or 
physical, of the Department. The Committee also feel that perhaps the 
performance of the Department has a bearing on the reduction in budgetary 
allocation at RE stage not only in 2019-20 but also in 2020-21. The Committee 
however compensate for the fact that due to COVID-19 pandemic, funds under 
various schemes could not be utilized fully in 2020-21, which must have a 

3 
 
profound impact on the welfare of PwDs. As the pandemic situation has 
somewhat eased now with advent of vaccines and offices are working in full 
capacity, the Committee urge that the Department should make all out efforts for 
streamlining the skill training overhaul, expediting the inspections and transfer of 
centresfrom Ministry of Labour and Employment at least this year, as well as for 
effective implementation of Schemes like ADIP and other low performing ones, in 
first three to four months of the year 2021-22 so that the Department is able to 
justify their demand for more funds at RE stage for various schemes”. 
1.6 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs, in their action taken reply, have 
stated as follows:-  
“It is imperative to note that the major reforms/initiatives for strengthening the 
Skill Delivery mechanism under NAP which slowed down the release of fund in 
2019-20 were change in fund flow done with a view to check parking of fund with 
ETPs and introduction of centre guidelines and validation process.  Centre 
validation process through a 3rd party agency (SCPwD) started in November, 
2019 is though a dynamic and ongoing process, it was affected severely after 
outbreak of Covid-19 Pandemic in February/March, 2020. However, the process 
was resumed and fast tracked after pandemic situation was eased and as on 
17.06.2021 many training partners have got their 72 centres located in different 
states validated. These centres have annual capacity of training to around 33426 
PwDs. Validation of many centres of various training partners are under process 
and will be completed shortly. In addition, training is allowed at centres accredited 
through SMART portal also and in so far as MIS Portal of NAP is concerned, this 
is now fully functional. Transfer of National Career Service Centres (NCSCs) for 
Differently Abled (erstwhile Vocational Rehabilitation Centres) from M/o Labour 
and Employment is in advance stage. 10 NSKs (NHFDCs Swavlamban Kendras) 
have also been made functional so far. An Online Portal for e-Skilling of PwDs is 
also under development process.During the year 2019-20, the Department was 
heavily engrossed in streamlining the process of skill delivery and introduced 
several initiatives with a view to give the scheme a firm grounding, in order to 
provide quality skill training to PwDs in a greater number. However, due to the 
unforeseen outbreak of the pandemic, training commenced by some ETPs of the 
Department in March 2020 could not be completed, whereas some other ETPs 
which had planned to commence the training could not even start it. This 
contributed to the reduction in PwDs trained during FY 2019-20 and the 
corresponding fund release. 
Furthermore, in FY2020-21, Training activities were not allowed till 
September 21, 2020. Thereafter, though training activities have been allowed, it 
is permitted in non-containment zones only and that also as per Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP) requiring maintenance of proper social and physical 
distancing. This has reduced the overall capacity of training centres by almost 
half of the normal capacity. This had a significant bearing on the number of PwDs 
being trained in these circumstances despite the Department’s strenuous efforts 
to deal with the challenges arisen out of the pandemic which are as under: 

4 
 
i. The ETPs are being allowed to conduct training in blended mode under which 
training is imparted online to the extent possible as per the course curricula and 
practical is conducted in offline/ physical mode. 
ii. Skill Council of Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD) has also been advised to 
conduct online assessment of PwDs on completion of training. 
iii. SCPwD has developed an exclusive online application for Centre inspection 
under NAP and also a Learning Management System (LMS) to facilitate the 
online trainings for the Trainers and Assessors (ToT and ToA). 
iv. Training partners whose validity of empanelment with the Department has 
expired are also being considered for extension of validity for one year with 
certain conditions. 
v. Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) having good industry connect in their sectors and 
empanelled training partners are being associated as PIA of the Department for 
conducting skill training”.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
1.7 The Committee, expressing their displeasure on the delay in 
implementation of several proposals such as Validation of training partners, 
transfer of Vocational Rehabilitation Centres from Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, Swavlamban Kendras, MIS portal and E-skill platform for PwDs, had, 
inter-alia, urged the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities to 
expeditiously implement these proposals.  The Committee however, find from the 
Action Taken reply of the Department that since the validation of various training 
partners is still under process, the transfer of vocational rehabilitation centres 
from Ministry of Labour and Employment is yet to be transferred.  Further, the 
Department has been able to make only 10 NHFDC Swavlamban Kendras 
functional till date and online portal for skilling of PwDs is under process of 
development.  The Committee are dismayed with the tardy progress in this 
context.  They had expected that the Department would make all out efforts in 
execution of the proposals which would enhance the functioning of the 
Department for the welfare of the PwDs.  In the light of reply of the Department, 
the Committee find that the validation process needs to be very efficient at the 
department’s end.  This is particularly required now as COVID 19 has already 
impacted all activities badly.  They further recommend that the transfer of 
Vocational Rehabilitation Centres from Ministry of Labour and Employment 
should be completed urgently now and in any case not later than the next three 
months. The Committee feel that in order to make PwDs self reliant, skill training 
must be accelerated with wider coverage of PwDs.  For this purpose, various skill 
training partners should be validated immediately as delay would continue to 
hamper skill training of PwDs.  The Committee would appreciate if more NHFDCs 
Swavlamban Kendras (NSKs) are made functional in a time bound manner under 
a targeted action plan.  The Committee would also desire that the work on an 
online portal for e-skilling of PwDs is expedited.  The Committee feel that the 
Department has an onerous responsibility towards PwDs in the country and a  
lackadaisical approach would deprive PwDs from the benefits of the various 
Schemes meant for their welfare and make them lead a self-sufficient and 
dignified life. 
 

6 
 
B.  Setting up/running of  the District Disability Rehabilitation Centres 
(DDRCs) 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.7) 
1.8 The Committee in their Twenty-first Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) are to be set up by the 
Programme Implementing Agencies with the financial assistance under the 
Deendayal Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme on the recommendation of the 
respective State Governments for the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities in 
each District of the Country. The Committee are surprised to note that out of 268 
DDRCs envisaged in April, 2018, only 55 to 60 have become functional. From the 
foregoing, the Committee cannot fathom as to why and how DDRCs are being 
envisaged to be set up in every district of the Country, as this seems to be  
unrealistic target. The Committee also strongly feel that any Scheme of the 
Government, without fixing actionable and time-bound targets, is likely to be 
delayed. They, therefore, desire that based on the practical situation so far, a 
realistic timeline needs to be specified for making the DDRCs function and that 
such timelines must be adhered to, once fixed. The Committee recommend that 
the Department now needs to re-examine the constraints that have been delaying 
the setting up of DDRCs and address those suitably so that the objective of the 
Government to set up DDRCs is achieved at the earliest, the DDRCs start 
functioning properly and their intended purpose is served.” 
 
1.9  The Department of Empowerment of PwDs, in their action taken reply, have 
stated as follows:- 
“The objective of the DDRC scheme is to provide various types of rehabilitative 
support to Persons with Disabilities at the district level .Earlier, 325 DDRCs were 
approved to be setup but 269  only have been set up till date, of which only 55 to 
60 are functional. During FY 2020-21, grants for setting up five new DDRCs has 
been given.  
 2.  As per the scheme guidelines, once the District has been approved for 
setting up of DDRC,  District Management Team (DMT) has to be formed by 
District Magistrate/Deputy Collector and building space has to be provided for 
running the DDRC. Along with this, the Implementing Agency (IA) needs to be 
selected for running the DDRC, in case the DMT does not intend to run  it 
directly. Thereafter, the proposal needs to be sent to DEPwD for release of funds 
for setting up of DDRCs. If the proposal is found to be in order as per the scheme 
guidelines, the grant is released to the IA. 
3.  In continuing cases, DDRCs need to send proposals each year along with 
all necessary documents required as per scheme norms. The documents are 

7 
 
verified and if found to be in order, the grant is released. It is observed that these 
proposals are not being regularly sent and only 86 DDRCs  have at least once 
sent proposal during last three years. Hon’ble Minister MSJE has sent letter 
dated 9th December,2020 (copy enclosed) to CM of States/UTs to send regular 
proposal every year for timely disbursal of grants. Further it has been  advised to 
deploy all Rehabilitation professional as per scheme guidelines for effective 
services and regular monitoring by DMT for efficient running of DDRCs. Also 
States has been allowed to setup DDRCs in all districts for which DM/DC has to 
allot Building space to DDRC, DMT to be formed and proposal to be sent for 
release of grants.  
4.  To overcome the constraints found in setting up/running of DDRCs, the 
scheme is under revision for making it more effective.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
1.10 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had noted that the District 
Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs)  are to be setup by the Programme 
Implementing Agencies with the financial assistance under the Deen Dayal 
Rehabilitation Scheme, on the recommendation of the respective State 
Governments for the rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities in each district of 
the Country from 2020-21. They, however, had expressed concern that out of 268 
District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) set up in the country, only 55-60 
could be made functional.  In this regard, the Committee had felt that setting up of 
DDRC in each district is a unrealistic target and desired that the realistic timelines 
needs to be specified for making the DDRC functional and that the Department 
needs to re- examine the constraints that have been delaying the setting up of 
DDRCs. Now, the Committee have been informed that the Scheme is under 
revision to overcome the constraints found in setting up/running of DDRCs.  The 
Committee find it quite apparent that even after the revision of the Scheme in 
2018, it still could not take off in the absence of proposals from State 
Governments, which is disappointing. A letter from Minister to the State Chief 
Ministers in December 2020 also has not resulted in desired improvement in the 
number of proposals received from State Governments for setting up DDRCs and 
also for annual grant for running of DDRCs.  Since the Scheme is reportedly being 
revised again, the Committee expect that all the issues would be addressed after 
exhaustive examination of each and every aspect and consultation with the State 
Governments & other stakeholders so that there is no difficulty/flaws in its 
implementation and the objectives of the Scheme are achieved.  The Committee 
also desire to be furnished with a list of all DDRCs currently functional alongwith 
complete addresses and telephone numbers thereof. 

9 
 
C.  Modernization of ALIMCO 
 
Recommendation (Para. 7.7) 
1.11 The Committee in their Twenty-first Report had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the project of modernization of ALIMCO, a 
public sector enterprise set up way back in 1976, was initiated with a view to 
benefit higher number of PwDs, in the year 2018, with the initial budget allocation 
of ₹ 286 crore out of which ₹200 Crore was to be provided by the Department. 
However, on re-evaluation of the project in 2018, the cost escalated to ₹338.04 
crore with the contribution from Government remaining static at ₹200 crore and 
rest to be accrued from internal resources. The Committee are saddened to note 
that even afterwards, the project of modernization of ALIMCO turned out to be 
never-ending. Initially, the project was to be completed in 37 months from date of 
release of 1st installment of grant-in-aid in 2015 but after re-evaluation, the 
deadline was extended to 2020-21, unfortunately, which was the COVID-19 
pandemic year. Subsequently, the Department has extended the deadline to 
March, 2022 and there is every possibility of a revision in the cost of the same 
again, which the Committee fear, is again to be borne by internal resources, as 
the expected Government contribution has not changed since 2018 and perhaps 
the ALIMCO will ultimately have to bear a very large sum from their internal 
accruals, which would definitely impact their financial position adversely. The 
Committee find the delay to be unjustified as the pandemic struck in 2019-20 
only. Hence, the Committee are of the view that the Department need to fix 
specific responsibility on their officers to expedite the modernization of ALIMCO 
to avoid any further delay. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should do continuous monitoring also of the established timelines for 
various steps so that work of the modernization of ALIMCO project progresses 
within the revised time frame.” 
1.12 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs, in their action taken reply, have 
stated as follows:- 
“Status of  activities carried out by ALIMCO under the project of Modernization of 
ALIMCO  as on 31.03.2021is as under:- 
Activities Approved 
Estimate(s)          
Actual Expenditure as 
on Date 
%age 
For Civil Infrastructure Rs. 122.99 Cr Rs. 118.5 Cr 96.35% 
For Plant & Machinery Rs. 173.52 Cr Rs. 27.14Cr.         15.64% 
  
For ARFCs, JVs & 
TOTs, IT etc 
Rs. 41.53 Cr         Rs. 15.67 Cr. 37.73% 
Total Project Cost Rs. 338.04 Cr       Rs. 161.31 Cr 47.72% 
 

10 
 
As per the table above, 96% of the Civil Infrastructure works have been 
completed. 
Delay in the completion of Civil Infrastructure Works which consequently 
affected the procurement of machinery is  on account of the following reasons :- 
1. The Civil Plant & Machinery Consultants engaged in April, 2016 worked 
out the details of the project. The revised estimate of the proposed modernization 
project was approved by the Board of Directors of ALIMCO on 19th January, 
2017. The process of getting no objection certificate (NOCs)  from various 
Government Departments  viz., Kanpur Development  Authority (KDA), Forest, 
Jalkal Nigam, Railways, Pollution Control, Fire etc. was initiated so as to begin   
the construction activity.   
2. KDA gave approval to start the construction, subject to getting NoCs from 
all other State Govt.  Departments as stated above.   After a lot of persuasion and 
follow up, NoCs were obtained from various State Govt. Departments and the last 
NoC was received from IIT Kanpur on 01.11.2017.   Consequently, construction 
work could  be started only after 01.11.2017. 
3.  Central Building Research Institute (CBRI) was engaged on 28.05.2018 
for third party inspection of construction work to ensure  quality of construction. 
4. Prolonged Pandemic conditions due to Covid-19 and the resultant 
intermittent lock down  since March, 2020 has been a contributing factor to the 
delay caused in the execution of the project. 
Notwithstanding the above, all out efforts are being made to complete the 
modernization project by March, 2022. 
ACTION PLAN FOR COMPLETION OF MODERNIZATION PROJECT 
For Completion of Civil Infrastructure Works- 
The civil infrastructure work is nearing completion.  Balance work will be 
completed within 2 months after 33KV line charging by KESA, which is being 
followed regularly.  
For Completion of Procurement of Plant & Machinery 
Total approved budget for procurement of Plant and Machinery is  
Rs.173.52crores. 
  Status of Procurement of Plant & Machinery is as under: – 
SNo. Description(s) Estimated Value 
 (Rs. in crores) 
1. Purchase Order Placed 44.25 
1.1. Plant/Machinery Commissioned (25.27)  

11 
 
1.2. Plant/Machinery Under 
Commissioning 
(1.87) 
1.3. Plant/Machinery for which 
Purchase Orders are placed 
(17.11) 
2. Tenders published 71.15 
3. Tender under Finalization 31.73 
4. Technical Specifications for 
plant and machinery under 
preparation 
32.00 
 
For Completion of Works under ARFCs, JVs & TOTs, IT etc 
The tender regarding study and implementation of ERP (Enterprise 
Resource Planning) Solution has been floated for an estimated value of Rs.12.30 
crores.  
As regards the revision of cost, it is submitted that the civil work of the 
project has almost been completed within the allocated amount of Rs.122.99 
crores and  there is no cost overrun. Similarly, the machines/equipment expected 
to be procured/installed is also within allocated funds  of Rs.173.52 crores.From 
these facts, it is clear that there would not be any need for the Corporation to 
bear any extra sum out of its internal accruals to complete the project. 
As far as monitoring of the Project is concerned, the senior management 
of the Corporation is periodically reviewing the progress of the project with the 
Project Management consultants  and other stakeholders.  Constant follow up is 
being done with vendors for the orders placed for procurement and 
commissioning of Plant and Machinery. Since the project needs to be completed 
in a time bound manner, the status of the project is also being apprised and 
reviewed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation in all its meetings since 
September, 2017.   Hence, every effort is being made  to meet the current project 
deadline of 31.3.2022.  . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
1.13 The Committee had observed that the project of modernization of ALIMCO 
was to be completed in 37 months from date of release of 1st installment of grant-
in- aid in 2015 but after re-evaluation of the project in 2018, the deadline was 
extended to 2020-21.  The Committee, had accordingly, recommended that the 
Department needs to fix specific responsibility on their officers to expedite the 
modernization of ALIMCO to avoid any further delay.  The Committee had also 
recommended that the Department should do continuous monitoring of the 
established timelines for various steps so that work of the modernization of 
ALIMCO project progresses within the revised time frame.  In their action taken 
reply, the Department has now furnished detailed action plan for completion of 
modernization project of ALIMCO from which the Committee note the satisfactory 
progress of construction work of the project as 96% of the civil infrastructure 
have been completed.  All out efforts are also statedly being made to complete 
the modernization of project by March, 2022.  However, the Committee find that 
the work relating to procurement of plants and machinery is lagging far behind as 
out of the total budget of ₹ 173.52 crore, tenders to the tune of ₹ 71.15 crore only 
have so far been published, tenders of ₹ 31.73 crore are under finalization and 
technical specifications for plant  and machinery for ₹ 32.00 crore are under 
preparation.  Only plant/machinery of ₹ 25.27 crore value has so far been 
commissioned and purchase orders worth ₹ 17.11 crore been placed. In this 
backdrop the Committee strongly feel that if tendering, finalizing technical 
specifications of machinery etc. are not expedited, modernization work of 
ALIMCO may not be completed by the extended date i.e. March, 2022 and in all 
probability said date would have to be extended once again.  The Committee 
would therefore reiterate that all out efforts should be made to ensure that the 

13 
 
Machineries/Plants/Equipments are procured on time and the modernization work 
is executed by the extended date so that the purpose of modernization and target 
of serving higher number of beneficiaries with better and technologically 
advanced assistive devices could be achieved at least on time now.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

14 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.6) 
2.1 The Committee note that the National Action Plan (NAP) is meant for imparting 
Skill Training to PwDs under SIPDA, which as launched by the Department in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) in 
2015, with an objective to empower PwDs with skills to earn their livelihood 
independently. The Committee appreciate that Department have so far trained approx. 
1.5 lakh Divyangjan. But to their utter dismay, in the financial year 2019-20, the NAP 
has not been able to meet the set physical target of 20,000 beneficiaries as it served 
only 1434 beneficiaries which meant that there was a huge shortfall of 92.83 percent. 
The Department acknowledging the shortfall, attributed it to rigorous overhauling in 
monitoring mechanisms and fund process. The Committee note that many ETPs were 
found to indulge in financial irregularities and it is now thought to have those assessed 
again by a Third Party agency namely Skill Council for Persons with Disabilities. The 
Committee hope that this year atleast there won’t be a shortfall on these accounts. They 
further are of the view that Department should not only aim at training PwDs in various 
skills but should also take steps to assure job warranty on completion of their training. 
This will give a sense of financial and social security to Divyangjan. In this regard, the 
Committee applaud the Government’s efforts to encourage private sector employers to 
give employment to Divyangjan by giving them concessions/relaxation this Scheme with 
private sector employers more. The Committee find that the Department have issued a 
notification on 04.01.2021 in which 3,566 different types of categories of posts suitable 
for PwDs have been notified. The Committee desire that above posts should be widely 
publicized so that the eligible PwDs are made aware of available job opportunities and 
at the same time probable employers also get to know about the types of jobs which 
PwDs are found to be capable of. The Committee urge the Department to strive harder 
to achieve targets set under NAP and to strengthen the employability of the 
beneficiaries on completion of their skill training. The Committee, would further urge the 
Department to meticulously maintain data of beneficiaries who get employed after 
getting skill training under the programme. The Committee, at the same time, 
reiteratethat no ETP should be allowed to indulge in any financial irregularity and all 
suggestions received, post their assessment by Third Party, must be implemented. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 As explained in response to observation 2.12, various initiatives taken towards 
streamlining the skill echo system to provide quality training to PwDs under NAP and 
ensure better utilization of fund, release under scheme was slowed down during FY 
2019-20 and it was further affected severely in subsequent year (2020-21) due to 
outbreak of Covid 19 pandemic due to which training was not allowed till September, 
2020 and it was resumed thereafter with various restrictions resulting in reduced 
capacity of training partners. Under these circumstances, target could not be achieved 

15 
 
in 2019-20 and 2020-21. However, now situation is getting improved gradually and 
various initiatives/steps have been taken to achieve the target in future. 
 To avoid parking of fund situation, fund flow has already been changed and now 1st 
instalment is released on commencement of training in batch wise mode and to ensure 
suitability of centres, 3rd party assessment has been put in place. So far, 72 centres of 
various ETPs with annual capacity of training to around 33000 PwDshas been validated 
as per centre guidelines. Though training is being conducted at many such centres with 
reduced capacity due to Covid related restrictions. Validation of centres is an ongoing 
process and SCPwD is now conducting it in online mode also so that it could continue 
even in Covid caused situations. 
Various other initiatives such as implementation of RPL, transfer of NCSC for DA 
(VRCs), development of Online Portal, associating SSCs as PIA etc. will definitely help 
the Department in achieving its target in future. 
In order to promote employment opportunities for PwDs under NAP, the Department has 
proposed the merger of the scheme – “Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector” with 
NAP. The objective of the Incentive to Employers in the Private Sector Scheme is to 
encourage private sector to employ persons with disabilities. Some of the features of the 
Incentive Scheme are: 
• payment of employer’s contribution for 10 years to the EPF and ESI by the 
Government (with no salary ceiling) is being made 
• Also, the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (DEPwD) will 
bear one-third of the gratuity amount due and admissible to PwD employees. 
• The administrative charges applicable on EPF/ESI contribution (at the extant 
rates) presently being deposited by the employers shall be borne by DEPwD 
• Payment of stipend during the apprenticeship period 
In addition, the Media Cell of the Department shall be involved and coordinated actively 
with the task of popularizing the scheme for wider publicity and awareness of the same, 
wherever necessary. 
 
Also, the suggestions of the Committee have been noted for compliance in order to 
ensure a seamless and streamlined skill delivery process; with more number of PwDs 
receiving quality skill training whilst keeping records for the employment of PwDs under 
the Incentive Scheme (post-merger) and/or otherwise under NAP.  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.11) 
2.3 The Committee note that while the year 2020-21 did witness severe constraints in 
utilization of funds, there is a trend of persistent underutilization of funds in the four 
scholarship Schemes run by the Department for students with disabilities viz. National 
Fellowship Scholarship, Pre-Matric Scholarship, Post-Matric Scholarship and Top-class 
Scholarship during the last three years. The submission of the Department that the 
funds remained unutilized mainly due to non-receipt of sufficient number of scholarship 
applications from students belonging to SC/ST categories and North-East region is very 
disheartening as this must have led to many Divyang students missing out on 
opportunity for educational upliftment. The Committee are of the strong view that in such 
circumstances, the Department needs to focus on these categories and the North 
Eastern States for creating awareness among students. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry, instead of justifying paucity of applications, should publicize 
their scholarship Schemes among various State Departments as the financial package 
under those schemes are much better. Moreover, as this is a vast Country with huge 
population of students with disabilities, the Committee desire them to avail such benefits 
and become a self-reliant community. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 In order to sensitize the State Governments about the Scholarship Schemes of 
the Department, various communications are sent to all the Principal Secretaries of 
Social Welfare Department dealing with disability related matters. They have also been 
requested to spread awareness among all the stake holders through advertisements 
and also through their websites. Apart from issuing advertisements by the Department in 
leading newspapers, the Department also sensitizes the State Government Nodal 
Officers for proper implementation of the scheme by way of Video Conferencing . 
However, the observations of the Committee for creating awareness about the 
Scholarship Schemes among various State Departments is noted for compliance and 
the Department is committed to make all out efforts for popularizing the scheme.  
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No IV Para No 4.23) 
3.1 The Committee note that the UDID project is envisaged to be the national 
database for the PwDs, for issuance of UDID Cards/Disability Certificates in order to 
enable PwDs to avail various concessions under schemes meant for their welfare. The 
Department have issued 51,32,493 UDID cards against the 1,65,99,752 disability 
certificates across the country. The Committee feel that the progress of issuing UDID 
cards is slow as a large numbers of disabled persons have not been able to get the 
disability certificates. Such delay in the attainment of the objective of UDID due to 
reasons like lack of online system till recently or absence of a guideline to allow private 
medical doctors to certify disability in case unavailability of Government doctors, is 
unjustified. The Committee is further surprised that the State of West Bengal is yet to 
come on board and Nagaland has shown very tardy progress in this regard and they 
have no information on whether any efforts have been made by the Department to 
ensure that the said State Governments complete this task in a time bound manner. The 
Committee feel that the sooner all States/UTs come on board, the better for the 
Divyangjan. The ultimate objective of the Scheme for tracking of physical and financial 
progress of delivery of benefits/services to the Divyangjan can only be achieved 
thereafter. Hence, the Committee desire that the Department should pursue whit all the 
State Governments/UTs, particularly those States who ar lagging, and fix State wise 
annual targets for issuing of UDID cards so that more and more PwDs get their due. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 As on 11.07.2021, 58.66 lakhs UDID cards have been generated. The guidelines 
for assessment of disability was notified on 4th January 2018, which inter-alia provide 
for composition of a Medical Board for assessment of each category of disability. 
Disability is a State subject. Issuance of certificates of disability is the primary 
responsibility of the States/UTs. The State Governments are empowered to notify the 
medical authorities for certification of disability. Therefore, it is for the States/UTs to 

18 
 
ensure availability of specialized medical experts as required. They have been asked to 
mobilise specialists from adjacent Districts/States/institution, if specialized doctors are 
not available in their district. For this purpose, the Department has issued instruction 
vide letters dated 8th July 2019 dated 8th July 2019 (Copy Enclosed) & 13th August 
2019 (Copy Enclosed). 
2.       Department is monitoring the status of UDID project with all States/UTs regularly 
through video conferences, letters and daily through whatsapp as well. The latest Video 
Conference meeting was held with States/UTs on 8th to 12th March 2021 wherein West 
Bengal also participated. They were asked to submit their plans to come on board for all 
districts and start issuing cards. Continuous reminder letters have been sent to 
Government of West Bengal for implementation of UDID project in all districts, latest 
being on 31st May, 2021. All districts of Nagaland have started generating UDID and 
progress has also been noticed since out of 1752 Disability Certificates as per the data 
of the office of Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities (CCPD), 769 (43.89 ) 
have been issued by Nagaland. 
  
3.        As per target set under New India @75, 55 lakh UDID cards were to be 
generated by the 31st March 2021, which was achieved with 55.80 Lakhs UDID cards 
being generated. 65 lakhs UDID cards are to be generated by December 2021 and 80 
lakh UDID cards to be generated by August 2022. In the Video Conference meeting 
held with all States/UTs on 8th March 2021- 12th March 2021, they have been asked to 
submit their plans to achieve the targets for issuance of UDID cards to all Persons with 
Disabilities. As per the responses received from States/UTs, the targets set under New 
India @75, are likely to be achieved if the COVID pandemic is under control since 
Medical Authorities are involved in the issuance of UDID cards also. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND  
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No II Para No 2.12 ) 
4.1 The Committee note that the Department of Empowerment of PwDs utilized 
92.38% of their allocation in 2019-20, still the Budgetary allocation at RE stage in 2020-
21 was reduced from ₹ 1325.39 crore to ₹ 900 crore only, which was quite drastic in 
comparison to the previous two year. The Committee further note the Department’s 
stand that they could utilize only 73% of the allocated funds meant to cater to 
requirements of the PwDs in 2020-21, as on 19.02.2021 due to review of NAP and skill 
training, non-receipt of adequate number of State proposals etc. It was also stated by 
the Department that they have to ensure the monitoring and utilization of funds due to 
the nature of schemes run by them, all of which are Central Sector and not Centrally 
sponsored. The Department is statedly still working on strengthening the mechanism by 
developing robust and secure fund flow mechanism, empanelling of Training Partners, 
the validity of most of whom is expired, receipt of UCs from State Government etc. so 
that the outgo reaches the genuine beneficiaries. The Committee acknowledge 
constraints in the implementation of schemes for which accessibility features are 
mandatory, still they are surprised to note that several proposals such as transfer of 
vocational rehabilitation centres from Ministry of Labour and Employment, Swavlamban 
Kendras, MIS Portal and E-Skill platform for PwDs are remain at a conceptual stage, till 
now, despite the existence of the separate Department for PwDs since 2014. This 
obviously has negative impact on the overall performance, be it financial or physical, of 
the Department. The Committee also feel that perhaps the performance of the 
Department has a bearing on the reduction in budgetary allocation at RE stage not only 
in 2019-20 but also in 2020-21. The Committee however compensate for the fact that 
due to COVID-19 pandemic, funds under various schemes could not be utilized fully in 
2020-21, which must have a profound impact on the welfare of PwDs. As the pandemic 
situation has somewhat eased now with advent of vaccines and offices are working in 
full capacity, the Committee urge that the Department should make all out efforts for 
streamlining the skill training overhaul, expediting the inspections and transfer of centres 

20 
 
from Ministry of Labour and Employment at least this year, as well as for effective 
implementation of Schemes like ADIP and other low performing once in first three to 
four months of the year 2021-22 so that the Department is able to justify their demand 
for more funds at RE stage for various schemes. 
Reply of the Government: 
4.2 It is imperative to note that the major reforms/initiatives for strengthening the Skill 
Delivery mechanism under NAP which slowed down the release of fund in 2019-20 were 
change in fund flow done with a view to check parking of fund with ETPs and 
introduction of centre guidelines and validation process.  Centre validation process 
through a 3rd party agency (SCPwD) started in November, 2019 is though a dynamic 
and ongoing process, it was affected severely after outbreak of Covid-19 Pandemic in 
February/March, 2020. However, the process was resumed and fast tracked after 
pandemic situation was eased and as on 17.06.2021 many training partners have got 
their 72 centres located in different states validated. These centres have annual 
capacity of training to around 33426PwDs. Validation of many centres of various training 
partners are under process and will be completed shortly. In addition, training is allowed 
at centres accredited through SMART portal also and in so far as MIS Portal of NAP is 
concerned, this is now fully functional. Transfer of National Career Service Centres 
(NCSCs) for Differently Abled (erstwhile Vocational Rehabilitation Centres) from M/o 
Labour and Employment is in advance stage. 10 NSKs (NHFDCs Swavlamban 
Kendras) have also been made functional so far. An Online Portal for e-Skilling of PwDs 
is also under development process. 
During the year 2019-20, the Department was heavily engrossed in streamlining the 
process of skill delivery and introduced several initiatives with a view to give the scheme 
a firm grounding, in order to provide quality skill training to PwDs in a greater number. 
However, due to the unforeseen outbreak of the pandemic, training commenced by 
some ETPs of the Department in March 2020 could not be completed, whereas some 
other ETPs which had planned to commence the training could not even start it. This 
contributed to the reduction in PwDs trained during FY 2019-20 and the corresponding 
fund release. 
Furthermore, in FY2020-21, Training activities were not allowed till September 21, 2020. 
Thereafter, though training activities have been allowed, it is permitted in non-

21 
 
containment zones only and that also as per Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
requiring maintenance of proper social and physical distancing. This has reduced the 
overall capacity of training centres by almost half of the normal capacity. This had a 
significant bearing on the number of PwDs being trained in these circumstances despite 
the Department’s strenuous efforts to deal with the challenges arisen out of the 
pandemic which are as under: 
i. The ETPs are being allowed to conduct training in blended mode under which 
training is imparted online to the extent possible as per the course curricula and 
practical is conducted in offline/ physical mode. 
ii. Skill Council of Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD) has also been advised to 
conduct online assessment of PwDs on completion of training. 
iii. SCPwD has developed an exclusive online application for Centre inspection 
under NAP and also a Learning Management System (LMS) to facilitate the 
online trainings for the Trainers and Assessors (ToT and ToA). 
iv. Training partners whose validity of empanelment with the Department has 
expired are also being considered for extension of validity for one year with 
certain conditions. 
v. Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) having good industry connect in their sectors and 
empanelled training partners are being associated as PIA of the Department for 
conducting skill training. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.7) 
4.3 The District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) are to be set up by the 
Programme Implementing Agencies with the financial assistance under the Deendayal 
Disabled Rehabilitation Scheme on the recommendation of the respective State 
Governments for the rehabilitation of persons with disabilities in each District of the 
Country. The Committee are surprised to note that out of 268 DDRCs envisaged in 

22 
 
April, 2018, only 55 to 60 have become functional. From the foregoing, the Committee 
cannot fathom as to why and how DDRCs are being envisaged to be set up in every 
district of the Country, as this seems to be and unrealistic target. The Committee also 
strongly feel that any Scheme of the Government, without fixing actionable and time-
bound targets, is likely to be delayed. They, therefore, desire that based on the practical 
situation so far, a realistic timeline needs to specified for making the DDRCs function 
and that such timelines must be adhered to, once fixed. The Committee recommend 
that the Department now needs to re-examine the constraints that have been delaying 
the setting up of DDRCs and address those suitably so that the objective of the 
Government to set up DDRCs is achieved at the earliest, the DDRCs start functioning 
properly and their intended purpose is served. 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 The objective of the DDRC scheme is to provide various types of rehabilitative 
support to Persons with Disabilities at the district level .Earlier, 325 DDRCs were 
approved to be setup but 269  only have been set up till date, of which only 55 to 60 are 
functional. During FY 2020-21, grants for setting up five new DDRCs has been given.  
 2.  As per the scheme guidelines, once the District has been approved for setting up 
of DDRC,  District Management Team (DMT) has to be formed by District 
Magistrate/Deputy Collector and building space has to be provided for running the 
DDRC. Along with this, the Implementing Agency (IA) needs to be selected for running 
the DDRC, in case the DMT does not intend to run  it directly. Thereafter, the proposal 
needs to be sent to DEPwD for release of funds for setting up of DDRCs. If the proposal 
is found to be in order as per the scheme guidelines, the grant is released to the IA. 
3.  In continuing cases, DDRCs need to send proposals each year along with all 
necessary documents required as per scheme norms. The documents are verified and if 
found to be in order, the grant is released. It is observed that these proposals are not 
being regularly sent and only 86 DDRCs  have at least once sent proposal during last 
three years. Hon’ble Minister MSJE has sent letter dated 9th December,2020 (copy 
enclosed) to CM of States/UTs to send regular proposal every year for timely disbursal 
of grants. Further it has been  advised to deploy all Rehabilitation professional as per 
scheme guidelines for effective services and regular monitoring by DMT for efficient 
running of DDRCs. Also States has been allowed to setup DDRCs in all districts for 
which DM/DC has to allot Building space to DDRC, DMT to be formed and proposal to 
be sent for release of grants.  
 4.  To overcome the constraints found in setting up/running of DDRCs, the scheme is 
under revision for making it more effective. 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

23 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No VII Para No 7.7) 
4.5 The Committee note that the project of modernization of ALIMCO, a public sector 
enterprise set up way back in 1976, was initiated with a view to benefit higher number of 
PwDs, in the year 2018, with the initial budget allocation of ₹ 286 crore out of 
which ₹200 Crore was to be provided by the Department. However, on re-evaluation of 
the project in 2018, the cost escalated to ₹338.04 crore with the contribution from 
Government remaining static at ₹200 crore and rest to be accrued from internal 
resources. The Committee is saddened to note that even afterwards the project of 
modernization of ALIMCO turned out to be never-ending. Initially, the project was to be 
completed in 37 months from date of release of 1st installment of grant-in-aid in 2015 but 
after re-evaluation, the deadline was extended to 2020-21, unfortunately, which as 
COVID-19 pandemic year. Subsequently, the Department has extended the deadline to 
March, 2022 and there is every possibility of a revision in the cost of the same again, 
which the Committee fear, is again to be borne by internal resources, as the expected 
Government contribution has not changed since 2018 and perhaps the ALIMCO will 
ultimately have to bear a very large sum from their internal accruals, which would 
definitely impact their financial position adversely. The Committee find the delay to be 
unjustified as the pandemic struck in 2019-20 only. Hence, the Committee are of the 
view that the Department need to fix specific responsibility on their officers to expedite 
the modernization of ALIMCO to avoid and further delay. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department should do continuous monitoring also of the 
established timelines for various steps so that work of the modernization of ALIMCO 
project progresses within the revised time frame. 
Reply of the Government 
4.6 Status of  activities carried out by ALIMCO under the project of Modernization of 
ALIMCO  as on 31.03.2021is as under:- 
Activities Approved 
Estimate(s)          
Actual Expenditure as 
on Date 
 
%age 
For Civil Infrastructure Rs. 122.99 Cr Rs. 118.5 Cr 96.35% 
 
For Plant & Machinery Rs. 173.52 Cr Rs. 27.14Cr.         15.64% 
  

24 
 
For ARFCs, JVs & 
TOTs, IT etc 
Rs. 41.53 Cr         Rs. 15.67 Cr. 37.73% 
Total Project Cost Rs. 338.04 Cr       Rs. 161.31 Cr 47.72% 
  
As per the table  above, 96% of the Civil Infrastructure works have been completed. 
Delay in the completion of Civil Infrastructure Works which consequently affected the 
procurement of machinery is  on account of the following reasons :- 
1. The Civil Plant & Machinery Consultants engaged in April, 2016 worked out the 
details of the project. The revised estimate of the proposed modernization project 
was approved by the Board of Directors of ALIMCO on 19th January, 2017. The 
process of getting no objection certificate (NOCs)  from various Government 
Departments  viz., Kanpur Development  Authority (KDA), Forest, Jalkal Nigam, 
Railways, Pollution Control, Fire etc. was initiated so as to begin   the 
construction activity.   
2. KDA gave approval to start the construction, subject to getting NoCs from all 
other State Govt.  Departments as stated above.   After a lot of persuasion and 
follow up, NoCs were obtained from various State Govt. Departments and the last 
NoC was received from IIT Kanpur on 01.11.2017.   Consequently, construction 
work could  be started only after 01.11.2017. 
3.  Central Building Research Institute (CBRI) was engaged on 28.05.2018 for third 
party inspection of construction work to ensure  quality of construction. 
4. Prolonged Pandemic conditions due to Covid-19 and the resultant intermittent 
lock down  since March, 2020 has been a contributing factor to the delay caused 
in the execution of the project.Notwithstanding the above, all out efforts are being 
made to complete the modernization project by March, 2022. 
 ACTION PLAN FOR COMPLETION OF MODERNIZATION PROJECT 
For Completion of Civil Infrastructure Works- 
The civil infrastructure work is nearing completion.  Balance work will be completed 
within 2 months after 33KV line charging by KESA, which is being followed regularly.  

25 
 
For Completion of Procurement of Plant & Machinery 
Total approved budget for procurement of Plant and Machinery is  Rs.173.52crores. 
 Status of Procurement of Plant & Machinery is as under – 
SNo. Description(s) Estimated Value 
 (Rs. in crores) 
1. Purchase Order Placed 44.25 
1.1. Plant/Machinery Commissioned (25.27) 
1.2. Plant/Machinery Under 
Commissioning 
(1.87) 
1.3. Plant/Machinery for which 
Purchase Orders are placed 
(17.11) 
2. Tenders published 71.15 
3. Tender under Finalization 31.73 
4. Technical Specifications for 
plant and machinery under 
preparation 
32.00 
  
For Completion of Works under ARFCs, JVs & TOTs, IT etc 
The tender regarding study and implementation of ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) 
Solution has been floated for an estimated value of Rs.12.30 crores.  
As regards the revision of cost, it is submitted that the civil work of the project has 
almost been completed within the allocated amount of Rs.122.99 crores and  there is no 
cost overrun. Similarly, the machines/equipment expected to be procured/installed is 
also within allocated funds  of Rs.173.52 crores.From these facts, it is clear that there 
would not be any need for the Corporation to bear any extra sum out of its internal 
accruals to complete the project. 
As far as monitoring of the Project is concerned, the senior management of the 
Corporation is periodically reviewing the progress of the project with the Project 
Management consultants  and other stakeholders.  Constant follow up is being done 

26 
 
with vendors for the orders placed for procurement and commissioning of Plant and 
Machinery. Since the project needs to be completed in a time bound manner, the status 
of the project is also being apprised and reviewed by the Board of Directors of the 
Corporation in all its meetings since September, 2017.   Hence, every effort is being 
made  to meet the current project deadline of 31.3.2022.   
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF  
THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para. 4.13) 
5.1 The Committee note that the Scheme for implementation of Rights of Persons 
with Disability Act, 2016 (SIPDA), one of the most prominent schemes enacted to 
provide financial assistance to undertake the activities outlined in the Rights of Persons 
with Disability Act, 2016, has subsumed various stand-alone Schemes in 2019-20 
onwards, yet the allocation has been reduced from ₹ 300 crore in 2018-19 to ₹ 209.77 
crore in 2021-22. The Committee further find that out of the much reduced RE allocation 
of ₹ 122.89 crore in 2020-21, the Department could only spend ₹ 37.54 crore. While 
acknowledging the reasons stated by the Department for less utilization in 2020-21, the 
Committee notice that even in 2019-20, the AE was nearly ₹ 43 crore less than the RE 
under SIPDA. The Committee now hope that at least the remaining amount of unspent 
balance out of the allocation for 2020-21 should be utilized by the end of that financial 
year. The Committee cannot comprehend reduction in the Budgetary allocation 
particularly when several other stand-alone Schemes have been incorporated under 
SIPDA. They further feel that the justification for slow progress given by the Department 
due to paucity of proposals does not hold good as it is the responsibility of the 
Department to make the Scheme perform once all financial and other planning is done 
after detailed deliberations. They feel that the Department should have sensitized all the 
Implementing Agencies towards completing the necessary formalities under the Scheme 
on time. Also, the Department cannot absolve themselves from their responsibility of 
making the buildings, railway stations, etc. accessible by simply stating that they fall 
under the purview of State Government, other Central Ministries/Departments, etc. The 
Committee are aware that there has been a verification audit of the 70 railway stations 
selected for being disabled friendly, which has not projected a very positive picture too 
and desire to be apprised as to whether Railways have submitted action taken report on 
the same, and further action taken on the same by the Department of PwDs. Overall, 
the Department is required to take suitable steps to so that the objectives of the 
Schemes are timely achieved. The Committee desire that in case of non-cooperation 
from other concerned Ministries/Departments or State Governments, the matter may be 
taken up at the next higher level so that the delay as reported in case of Ministry of 
Railways as well as others is avoided. The Committee are of the view that the merger of 
several Schemes under SIPDA may defeat the very purpose of the Act, if those are not 
monitored/followed up effectively. 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 For Accessible India Campaign, a sub-scheme of SIPDA, there has been no 
shortfall in the utilization of funds for FY 2018-19 and 2019-20, as has been tabulated 
below: 
 
  BE(Notional) RE(Notional) Actual Expenditure 
2018-19 93 100 112.40 
2019-20 105 112 134.19 
2020-21 105        56.37*    54.02* 
  
In fact for both FY 2018-19 and 2019-20, the RE was more that the BE and 
Actual Expenditure further exceeded RE. However, for FY 2020-21, owing to the 
pandemic situation, a slowdown was caused in the construction sector, affecting the 
response from States/UTs in submission of UCs for earlier grants and fresh proposals. 
Consequently, reducing release of funds to States/UTs. In FY 2020-21, in view of the 
overall cut in the budget of the department due to the pandemic, against the BE 
allocation of Rs. 105.00 crore  revised allocation of RE was Rs. 56.37 crore. Rs.54.02 
crore (95.8%) was released in FY 2020-21 through concerted efforts of the Department 
by constant monitoring, follow up, and providing pro-active assistance. 
 
With regards to sensitizing the Implementing Authorities and Stakeholders for 
ensuring time bound completion of the targets of the Campaign, the Department has 
taken the following initiatives: 
 
i. Video Conferences – Sensitization workshops through VCs are regularly 
conducted under AIC with the latest being conducted with States/UTs in December 
2020-January 2021 and with Nodal Central Ministries/Departments in March 2021. 
During the VCs all stakeholders including representatives of implementing agencies 
were informed about the targets and timelines of the Campaign, accessibility standards 
and SoPs as well as formats of submission of documents/proposals. 
 
ii. Sugamya Bharat App – On 2nd March 2021, as per the directions of Hon’ble 
Prime Minister, the Sugamya Bharat APP - a Crowd sourcing Mobile Application was 
launched by HMSJE. This user-friendly and accessible App would enable anyone, 
anywhere, anytime to bring to notice accessibility related issues being faced by them 
while using public- centric infrastructure, facilities and services which require redressal. 
To ensure accountability and resolution of complaints, all Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs at State and District level have been requested 
to nominate Nodal Officers responsible for management of the complaints being 
registered on the App. Trainings and sensitization workshops in regards to applicability 
and implications of the App have been given to all nodal officers. 
 
iii. Literacy Material for professionals – The Department had already published an 
easy reckoner, a summary of the requirements and specifications of 10 key features of 
accessibility to be provided in public centric buildings as derived from the Harmonized 

29 
 
Guidelines. Following this, the Department also launched on 2nd March 2021, the first 
volume of the handbook series titled ACCESS- The Photo Digest which is an easy to 
comprehend compilation for professionals to understand the concept and requirements 
of accessibility in public- centric buildings. The booklet provides illustrative explanations 
of the specifications of the key accessibility features of buildings, special accessibility 
provisions, the good-bad practices and examples of on-ground implemented 
retrofittment works. The second volume of this series on the Civil Aviation sector is 
under finalisation. 
 
iv. Internal Audit of data uploaded on MIS Portal – The Department undertook 
internal audit of the data uploaded on the MIS to check for correctness of the 
information provided as well as the viability of the work being executed on ground. The 
exercise was conducted for the data pertaining to buildings uploaded by all States/UTs 
and CPWD. The gaps observed were communicated for corrective measures.  
 
v. Standard formats – Observing the repetitive shortcomings in the documents, UCs 
and Proposals being submitted by States/UTs and delay caused in taking corrective 
measures, a need was felt to standardize the process of submission of various 
documents under the Campaign, which would help process proposals of AIC in a time 
bound manner. The Department has prepared and circulated standard formats for 
submission of UCs, proposals, drawings and other documents required to process 
various instalments of funds. 
 
vi. Regular Communication – For the purpose of sensitization and to ensure 
continuous follow up and monitoring of work being executed on ground, the Department 
regularly communicates through letters at the levels of Secretary, Joint Secretary and 
Director, telephonic discussions, VCs and one to one meetings. The latest letters 
reminding of actions that are to be taken by States/UTs were sent out in December 
2020 and again in Mar 2021. 
 
As regards to the verification audit of 70 selected Railway Stations, the action 
taken report is still awaited from Railways. In this regard, DEPwD has sent several 
reminders, latest letters being sent on 12.03.2021, 19.02.2021 and 03.12.2020 and 
meetings has been done at various levels, including at the level of Hon'ble Minister held 
on 19.12.2019. 
 
Under the Accessible India Campaign, regular status updates from Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs are taken through meetings, letters and video 
conferences. Letters have been written to Ministers of respective Central 
Ministries/Departments, including at the level of Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice & 
Empowerment. The status of the Accessible India Campaign is also discussed in the 
Central Advisory Board meeting chaired by Hon'ble Minister of Social Justice & 
Empowerment, last held on 26.11.2020. Further, reminder letters for pending actions 
are also sent to Secretaries at the level of Secretary DEPwD. For States/UTs, letters 
and VCs are held at the level of Chief Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of Social 
Welfare Departments. 
 
The Accessible India Campaign and performance of all stakeholders is being monitored 
from Hon’ble Prime Minister’s Office through PRAGATI, Central Advisory Board headed 

30 
 
by Hon’ble MSJE and Cabinet Secretariat through Committee of Secretaries. Hon’ble 
MSJE, Hon’ble MoS MSJE and Secretary, DEPwD have also reviewed the progress of 
AIC regularly at their level. The key review meetings are as follows: 
 
i. Pragati: AIC is regularly being monitored by the Hon’ble Prime Minister’s Office 
through Pragati. The last meeting was held on 31.07.2019. The key directions given 
included expedited retrofitting of all identified Central & State Govt. buildings; 
development of an App through which Divyangjan facing problems can upload picture 
with details and making offices, transport systems, Central/State Governments websites 
etc. accessible for Divyangjan. 
 
ii. Central Advisory Board Meeting: The Campaign was thoroughly reviewed with all 
States/UTs and Central Government Ministries/Departments during the last meeting of 
the Central Advisory Board held on 26.11.2020 at the level of Hon’ble Minister. During 
this meeting, the targets and timelines of the Campaign were reviewed and readjusted. 
 
iii. Meeting of Committee of Secretaries: The Cabinet Secretary chaired the 
Committee of Secretaries meeting to review AIC, the last being held on 27.11.2020 
wherein directions were given for ensuring all government buildings are made 
accessible within stipulated timeframe, strict monitoring of the progress of the Campaign 
and development of accessibility standards in a time bound manner. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
  
Recommendation (Para. 6.6) 
5.3 The Committee are happy that the Department, taking cognizance of Divyangjan 
sportspersons, have decided to establish Sports Canters with international level of 
facilities in different zones of the Country. Surprisingly, the two CDS proposed by the 
Department in Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya are yet to see the light of the day. The 
Committee find no reasons for the delay in laying of foundation stone for Centre at 
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh in September, 2020 after a gap of 16 months, when the 
project was approved in February 2019. The Committee can only hope that the work of 
the Centre will be completed by the target date of June, 2022. They also recommend 
that the decision with regard to setting up of the Centre at Shillong, Meghalaya may be 
followed up and timelines may be drawn so that the work of the Centre is not delayed 
and there is no cost overrun either. In view of the above, the Committee recommended 
that the Department should make sincere efforts in accomplishing the tasks undertaken 
by them and must draw the timelines for completion of the work. The Committee also 
recommend that suitable action may also be initiated for setting up more Centres across 
the Country after due assessment as conceived, once the two Centres start functioning 
satisfactorily. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The Department is making all efforts to complete the ongoing work in respect of 
the Centre for Disability Sports at Gwalior and in this regard weekly progress report is 

31 
 
called for from CPWD, the executing agency of the project. The Centre is likely to be 
completed by June, 2022. 
A Project Monitoring Committee for monitoring and overall supervision of the 
project/Centre has been constituted with Secretary, DEPwD as the chairperson. 
Recently, its meeting was held on 17th May 2021 when it was emphasized by the 
Secretary, DEPwD that the project must be completed within scheduled timelines with 
proper synchronization of completion of all aspect of the project including procurement 
of furniture equipment, fitting, fixtures etc. 
A separate proposal for setting up of another Center for Disability Sports, at Shillong is 
being appraised in consultation with Department of expenditure for a suitable decision. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2021-22/Budget/DEPwD dated 26th July, 2021) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;      RAMA DEVI  
       Chairperson,  
    December, 2021     Standing Committee on  
    Agrahayan, 1943 (Saka)   Social Justice and Empowerment  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-FIRST REPORT  OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22)’  
OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  Total Percentage 
 
Total number of Recommendations 8 
 
 
(I) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government :   
Paragraph Nos. –  5.6 and 8.11 
 
2 25%   
(II) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government :  
Paragraph No.  – 4.23 
 
1       12.5% 
(III) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and  which require reiteration: 
Paragraph No. – 2.12, 3.7 and 7.7 
 
3 37.5%  
(IV) Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are of in 
nature: 
Paragraph Nos. – 4.13 and 6.6   
 
2         25%  
 