 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (
(SEVENTEENTH
MINISTRY OF 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT)
Action taken by the Government on the 
contained in the 
Justice and Empowerment (Six
working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub
Plan (SCA to SCSP)” of the Ministry of 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment)
24 
i 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2020-2021
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT)
 
 
 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Soc
Justice and Empowerment (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub
Plan (SCA to SCSP)” of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).   
 
 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 21) LOK SABHA) SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) observations/recommendations Report of the Standing Committee on Social on “Assessment of the working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub-Social Justice and Empowerment  

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixty
Justice and Empowerment (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub
Plan (SCA to SCSP)” of the 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
                                      
 
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY- FOURTH REPORT  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2020-2021) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of the 
working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub
Plan (SCA to SCSP)” of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment).     
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 August, 2021
 
  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 August, 2021
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2021/ Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
REPORT   STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND  MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT)     Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social on “Assessment of the working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub-Social Justice and Empowerment 2021 06 August, 2021  

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iii) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government. 
 
11 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply. 
 
18 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted and which require 
reiteration. 
  
20 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
24 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 Minutes of the 13th sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment held on 5 th  
August, 2021          
 
27 
  
APPENDIX 
 
 
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Sixty-Fourth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha). 
  
29 
                                         
 
    
   
 
 
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  16. Shri Arjun Singh 
17. Smt. Supriya Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
21. Vacant #
 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha* 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa* 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31.    Shri Ramji* 
__________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020 
# Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 07.07.2021 consequent upon his 
appointment  as Union Minister. 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar        - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Kamal Khurana   - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2020-21) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Twenty-fourth Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Sixty-
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Assessment of the working of Scheme of Special 
Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCA to SCSP)” relating to the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment). 
2. The Sixty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 3rd January, 2019.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the observations/recommendations contained therein on  
10th December, 2020.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 5th August, 
2021. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of this Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
05 August, 2021                                                 Standing Committee on 
14 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
        Empowerment 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixty-Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Assessment 
of the working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan  
[New Renamed as DAPSC (Development Action Plan for Scheduled Castes)] (SCA to 
SCSP)” of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.   
 
1.2 The Sixty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
3rd January, 2019.  It contained 15 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under:  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government :   
Paragraph Nos. 1.11, 2.7, 4.8, 4.25, 5.3, 5.7 and 5.11.  
       (Total 7; Chapter – II) 
         (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government: 
  
Paragraph Nos. 2.8 and 3.9 
(Total 2; Chapter- III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration: 
Paragraph Nos. 3.18, 4.11 and 5.13.       
                         (Total 3; Chapter-IV) 
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
 
Paragraph Nos. 3.14, 4.21 and 4.35  
 (Total 3; Chapter- V) 
 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Ministry which 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Non-Lapsable Central Pool of SCSP Funds. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.14) 
1.5 In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that one of the 
recommendations of the 'Task Force to Review Guidelines on Scheduled Castes Sub-
Plan and Tribal Sub-Plan', inter-alia, suggested that SCSP funds remaining unutilized at 
the end of a financial year may be transferred to “Non-lapsable Central Pool of SCSP 
Funds (NLCPSF)”, a Head to be created in the Public Account. The Committee had 
further noted that the erstwhile Planning Commission had not accepted this 
recommendation of the Task Force. However, NITI Aayog had considered this 
recommendation and suggested to the Department of Expenditure and Department of 
Economic Affairs to pool such under-utilised and unutilised funds of some 
Ministries/Departments and allocate to nodal Ministries i.e. Ministry of Tribal Affairs and 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. The Committee believed that the 
formation of a non lapsable pool is imperative to curb the diversion of funds and to 
ensure proper utilization of funds under this Scheme. The Committee, therefore, were of 
the considered view that the Department should take initiative to pursue Department of 
Expenditure and Department of Economic Affairs to consider this proposal and 
implement it at the earliest. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
1.6 The Department, in their action taken reply, have submitted as under:- 
 "NITI Aayog sent a proposal for creation of pool for unutilized/underutilized funds 
allocated for welfare of SCs& STs and re-allocating such funds to the Nodal 
Departments i.e. Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in respect of 
Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan to meet their budgetary requirements under 
scholarship/fellowship schemes and other beneficiary oriented schemes to 
Ministry of Finance. The Department has also requested the Ministry of Finance 

3 
 
to take a view on the proposal for creation of pool for utilized funds allocated for 
the Welfare of Scheduled Castes.  
  In response, Ministry of Finance has informed that nodal Ministries and 
obligated Ministry/Department’s in consultation with NITI Aayog are required to 
identify specific schemes which provide benefits to SCs/STs and also come up 
with innovative responses in terms of new schemes etc. in case there is difficulty 
in providing benefits to SCs/STs under the existing schemes.  
  As desired by the Committee, Department of Expenditure will be pursued 
further for creation of pool for unutilized funds allocated for the Welfare of 
Scheduled Castes. 
  In addition to above a robust mechanism to monitor the allocation and 
expenditure under DAPSC (earlier known as SCSP or AWSC) has been 
developed. The portal developed by the Department (http://e-utthaan.gov.in/) 
provides real time status of utilization of funds allocated for the welfare of the 
Scheduled Castes. For regular monitoring of the DAPSC the inter-ministerial 
meetings are held periodically.” 
  
1.7 The Committee, in their original recommendation, had desired that in 
accordance with the recommendation of NITI Aayog for the formation of a non 
lapsable pool for under-utilized/unutilized SCSP Funds, the matter should be 
pursued by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment with the 
Department of Expenditure and Department of Economic Affairs to consider the 
same and be implemented.  The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
in their reply, have now informed them about a somewhat lukewarm response of 
the Ministry of Finance to the said recommendation asking the Ministry to identify 
specific Schemes which provide benefits to SCs/STs and come up with 
innovative responses in terms of new schemes etc. in case there is difficulty in 
providing benefits to SCs/STs under the existing Schemes. The Department has 
neither informed the Committee if they responded to this suggestion, nor 
intimated whether their request was rejected or put on hold by the Ministry of 

4 
 
Finance, subject to fulfilling the condition.  In its stead, the Department has 
merely stated about pursuing further of the matter with the Department of 
Expenditure.  The Committee observe that more than two years have passed 
since they made this recommendation keeping in view the overall welfare of 
Scheduled Castes and for ensuring optimal utilization of funds under the 
Scheme.  But no final decision has been taken so far.  The Committee are of the 
view that further delay in formation of non-lapsable pool may deprive the target 
section of the society from the benefits of the Scheme and, therefore, recommend 
that sincere efforts should be made by the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, in consultation with NITI Aayog, to convince the Ministry of 
Finance on the formation of a non-lapsable pool of SCSP funds. 
B. Online Portal Under the Scheme of SCA to SCSP  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.18) 
1.8 In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that for fair selection 
of eligible candidates under the scheme of SCA to SCSP, there was a proposal to have 
an end to end processing of bank linked loans wherein the applicant/beneficiary can 
submit the application with the minimal documents through the online portal. Wondering 
as to why this Scheme had not been linked electronically till now while all the other 
major Schemes run by the Department had already been linked to the online portals or 
were in the process of doing so, the Committee, therefore, had desired that the 
Department should take extra measures to develop an online portal for this Scheme at 
the earliest and implement it without any delay. The Committee were concerned to note 
that the approval for online portal under the Scheme of the SCA to SCSP was still under 
process and awaits approval of the Cabinet and desired that the Department should 
make efforts for getting the approval of Cabinet for the proposal of applying through 
online portal under this Scheme. 
1.9 The Department, in their action taken reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “The Ministry, in association with National Scheduled Castes Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSFDC), CPSU under the Ministry of Social Justice & 

5 
 
Empowerment in collaboration and National E-Governance Division (NEGD) has 
developed an online portal for end-to-end process of various income generation 
projects implemented under the Scheme. The portal was launched by the 
Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment on 27.02.2019 in the 
Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries conference held in New Delhi. 
  It is informed that in order to assist the State Governments/UT 
Administrations in processing the proposals under the Scheme, the Ministry is 
developing an online portal for proposal submission, its approval, implementation 
and monitoring and enabling the process to become paper free. This will also 
help better targeting, monitoring & smooth implementation of the scheme. 
  Under infrastructure development programmes, funds under SCA to 
SCSP is also being used in convergence with Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram 
Yojana (PMAGY) of the Department. An Online Software has been developed 
and launched under PMAGY also for monitoring the progress and capturing 
information from the States/UTs for the smooth implementation of the scheme.” 
 
1.10 The Committee, while expressing their concern for fair selection of eligible 
candidates under the scheme of SCA to SCSP, had recommended development 
of an online portal so that the applicant/beneficiary can easily submit their 
application with minimal documents through the same.  In their action taken 
reply, the Department has informed that the National Scheduled Castes Finance 
and Development Corporation(NSFDC) has developed an online portal for end-to-
end process of various income generating projects, and the same was launched 
in February, 2019.  Further, for infrastructure development programmes for which 
funds under SCA to SCSP are also being used in convergence with Pradhan 
Mantri Aadarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY), an online software has been developed 
for monitoring the progress and capturing information from States/UTs under 
PMAGY. These initiatives are appreciable.  However, the on-line portal desired by 
the Committee for facilitating ease of filing applications by the intended 

6 
 
beneficiaries remains yet to be developed as the Ministry in December 2020 has 
replied that they are in the process of developing an online portal for submission 
of proposals, approval, implementation and monitoring and enabling the process 
to become paper free, despite the Committee’s recommendation to this effect in 
January 2019. The Committee are therefore not satisfied with the slow progress 
on this matter.  The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, desire that for effective implementation of the scheme to the 
deserving candidates, development of online-portal for proposal submissions 
with minimum documents and an end-to-end processing of bank-linked loans 
should be done in a time bound manner.    They desire to be informed about the 
progress. 
C. Poor Implementation of the Scheme of SCA to SCSP 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4 Para No. 4.11) 
1.11 The Committee had noted in their original recommendation that weak Scheduled 
Caste Corporations in the States were one of the major reasons for poor 
implementation of the Scheme of SCA to SCSP. Taking note of the fact that the State 
SC Corporations play a major role in disbursing the funds to the beneficiaries and 
consequently effective implementation of the Scheme, the Committee had mpressed 
upon the Department to pursue the matter more seriously and directed the States/UTs 
to strengthen the Scheduled Castes Corporations by identifying the reasons for their 
shortcomings and take remedial action for their improvements and create a webpage or 
online portal which would display the details of the beneficiaries in the Welfare 
Departments of every State in order to strengthen the SC Corporations and improvise 
the implementation of the Scheme. 
1.12 The Department, in their action taken reply, have submitted as under:- 
  “The Department regularly pursues with the State Social Welfare 
Departments to strengthen the State Scheduled Caste Corporation. The National 
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) under the 
Ministry also implement various Income Generating Schemes/Educational 
schemes through State Scheduled Caste Corporations. 

7 
 
  Besides above, under the scheme of State Scheduled Caste Corporation 
(SCDC) run by the Department, grant is given to the State Corporations for the 
economic development of Scheduled Castes.” 
 
1.13 In view of the importance of State Scheduled Caste Corporations in  
implementation of the Scheme of SCA to SCSP, the Committee had 
recommended the Department to direct the States/UTs to strengthen the 
Scheduled Castes Corporations by identifying their shortcomings and taking 
corrective steps and also creating a web page/online portal showing the State- 
wise details of beneficiaries of the Scheme.   The Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment has informed about regularly pursuing with the State Social 
Welfare Departments to strengthen the State Scheduled Caste Corporations. The 
reply is not specific about any new steps taken as desired by the Committee and 
thus they feel that mere persuasion would not yield desired results unless it is 
coupled with active and positive push by the Department. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the experience so far in the Ministry must enable them 
to identify the reasons for the dismal performance of some of the State 
Scheduled Caste Corporations and the same must be analysed to find a way-
forward for supporting them with innovative suggestions for attaining their 
desired objectives.  As some of the State Governments do have their 
webpages/portals for various Scheduled Caste Corporations, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should undertake an evaluative study of all State SC 
corporations websites and based on it, come up with concrete suggestions to 
strengthen those.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives 
taken as suggested. 

8 
 
D. Welfare of Safai Karamcharis/Manual Scavengers 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.13) 
1.14 In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed that the Safai 
Karamcharis/Manual Scavengers belong to the section of society which need immediate 
welfare measures. This stratum of society is extremely imperative for the survival of any 
civil society. The Committee were sad to note that there are very few Schemes run by 
the Department for the welfare of Safai Karamcharis and Manual Scavengers in 
particular. The Committee had further noted that under SCA to SCSP, the proposal to 
provide subsidy to the Safai Karamcharis was under process, and, therefore, had 
desired that the Department should take action to introduce more Schemes related to 
the welfare of Safai Karamcharis and Manual Scavengers, expedite the procedure to 
finalise the proposals and implement the Schemes to provide subsidy to the Schedule 
Caste Safai Karamcharis at the earliest. 
 
1.15 The Department, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under: 
 “The Department implements schemes like Self Employment Scheme for 
 Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS). Besides this, the National Safai 
 Karamcharis Finance & Development Corporation is mandated with all round 
 socio- economic up-liftment of the Safai Karamcharis, Manual Scavengers and 
 their  dependents throughout India, through various loan and non-loan-based 
 schemes. For the benefit of the target group, various skill development 
 programmes are also implemented by the Corporation. 
  The SRMS and the Schemes of NSKFDC are modified from time to time 
to address the needs of the target group. During revision of SRMS, the following 
major components have been introduced for the benefit of the target group:- 
Revision of Scheme in year 2017-18 
i. Organising Health Camps for manual scavengers, safai karamcharis and 
their families. 
ii. Organising Workshops on ‘Prevention of Hazardous Cleaning of Sewers 
and  Septic Tanks’. 
ii. Short duration behavioral  training of working sanitation workers. 
 
 
 

9 
 
Revision of Scheme in year 2020-21 
i   Provide capital subsidy to identified manual scavengers, sanitation 
workers and  their dependants for procurement of mechanised cleaning 
equipments/vehicles to promote mechanised cleaning and entrepreneurial 
activity amongst them.  
ii Health Insurance coverage of identified manual scavengers  under 
Ayushman Bharat (Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana). 
  Similarly the Schemes of NSKFDC are also revised from time to 
time. Recently, the Swachhta Udyami Yojana (SUY) has been revised to 
finance sanitation equipments/vehicles costing upto  50.00 lakh for 
sanitation related projects.  With a view to minimise the incidents of 
manual hazardous cleaning and to promote mechanised cleaning, 
financial assistance is also being provided to Urban Local Bodies for 
procurement of sanitation related equipment’s under  SUY.  
  Department of Social Justice and Empowerment also implements 
Scheme of Pre-Matric Scholarships for the Children of those Engaged in 
Occupations  Involving Cleaning and Prone to Health Hazardous.  
  In addition to the above, Safai Karamcharis belonging to Scheduled 
Castes can also avail benefits under various schemes being implemented 
for Scheduled Castes.” 
 
 
1.16 In view of very few schemes for the welfare of Safai Karamcharis and 
Manual Scavengers, the Committee had recommended that the Department 
should take action to introduce more Schemes and expedite the procedure to 
finalise the proposal to provide subsidy to Safai Karamcharis  from SCA to SCSP. 
From the response of the Department, the Committee find that the Self 
Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS) and 
Schemes of National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation 
(NSKFDC) were revised in the year 2017-18 and again in the year 2020-21.  Also, 
the Swachhta Udyami Yojana (SUY) was revised to finance the sanitation 
equipment/vehicles costing upto ₹ 50 lakh for sanitation related projects.  

10 
 
However, the Committee do not find any action to provide subsidy to Safai 
Karamcharis from the Scheme of SCA to SCSP.  The Committee would like to 
highlight the fact that the Safai Karamcharis and Manual Scavengers need 
support for enhancing their quality of life and for social inclusion.  Hence, the 
Committee desire that the Department should actively implement the proposal to 
provide subsidy to Safai Karamcharis from the Scheme of SCA to SCSP.  In 
Committee’s view, it is also imperative that these schemes are sufficiently 
popularized among the target population and implemented across the length and 
breadth of the country within a stipulated time frame.  For this purpose, a specific 
time-bound action plan should be devised and implemented by the Department. 
As the previous schemes have been under implementation since long, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the quantum of funds disbursed and the 
number of persons benefitted under those schemes during each of the last five 
years and recommend a comparative/analytical study to arrive at the visible and 
substantial impact, if any, of the revision of the Schemes on the lives of the 
targeted beneficiaries.      
  

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDTIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No. 1.11) 
Scheme of SCA to SCSP 
2.1 The Committee note that the Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCA to SCSP) is a Central Sector Scheme under which 
100 per cent grant is given to the States/UTs as an additive to their Scheduled Castes 
Sub Plan (SCSP) for the Welfare of Scheduled Caste persons living below the poverty 
line through Income Generating Schemes and Schemes of Skill Development. As the 
overall development of Scheduled Castes persons, who are economically, educationally 
and socially backward in our society, is the main prerogative of the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, the Committee desire that the Department's role 
should not be limited only to release funds to the States but also to ensure proper and 
effective implementation and monitoring of the Schemes so that economic development 
could reach the intended beneficiaries. This can be only be done by regular assessment 
of the Schemes by sending the officials to the fields and places in States/UTs where the 
funds have been released and spent. The Committee may also be informed the 
mechanism, the Department has devised/evolved to carry out the assessment apart 
from believing the data sent by State Governments/UT Administrations. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Department has constituted a Project Appraisal Committee under the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary, SJE along with other stakeholders 
Departments/Ministries to appraise and approve the activities under the scheme of SCA 
to SCSP from the financial year 2019-20 and onwards. In order to further strengthen the 
monitoring mechanism, it is also proposed that the Committee will inter-alia review the 
utilization of State SCSP and Allocation for Welfare of Scheduled Castes Funds. State 
Government/UT Administration are required to submit the Annual Action Plan in order to 
get the funds under the scheme. Based on the viable income generating schemes in the 
Annual Action Plan, the Department sanctions the activities to be under taken under the 
scheme. During 2019-21 and 2010-21 the PAC held five meetings each to appraise and 
approved the Annual Action Plans submitted by the States. During 2020-21 out of 28 
States implementing the Scheme till date 26 have submitted the AAP out of which 25 
have been already approved by the PAC. 
The Department also conducts regular meetings/interactions with the State 
Government/ UTs Administration to assess the progress of the scheme and its 

12 
 
implementation as per the extant guidelines. Field visits are also undertaken by the 
Ministry officials from time to time to assess the quality of implementation, share best 
practices and guide the State officials further.  
In addition to above Department is also working on the development of online 
system for proposal submission, approval and tracking system so that progress of each 
approved works/project can be monitored online. This will also help better monitoring 
&smooth implementation of the scheme. 
Under infrastructure development programmes, funds under SCA to SCSP are 
also being utilized in convergence with Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) 
of the Department. Under PMAGY online Software has been developed for Need 
assessment, Project formulation, its implementation and monitoring. 
Besides the above, in order to assist the State Governments/UT Administrations 
in processing the proposals under the Scheme, the Ministry, in association with National 
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC), CPSU under the 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment in collaboration and National E-Governance 
Division (NEGD) has got developed an online portal for end-to-end processing of 
various schemes implemented for the welfare of Scheduled Caste, Backward Class and 
Safari Karamcharis.  The portal was launched by the Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice 
and Empowerment on 27.02.2019 in the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal 
Secretaries conference held in New Delhi. Training of the concerned functionaries of the 
State Governments/UT Administration on the use of the Software has also been 
organized by NSFDC. This will also help better monitoring & smooth implementation of 
the scheme. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2 ,Para No. 2.7) 
Furnishing of Annual Action Plan 
2.3 The Committee note that there are some States like Bihar, Gujarat, Goa, Punjab 
and Maharashtra, where there was no allocation of funds in 2017-18. The Committee 
also note that no funds had been released from the year 2014-15 to 2017-18 to 
Uttarakhand and Delhi. The reason given to the Committee was that these States did 
not forward Utilization Certificates and/or Annual Action Plan in prescribed time limit due 
to which no funds were released to them from the Centre. The Committee wonder that 
when the States like Punjab, where there is highest percentage of Scheduled Caste 
population and Bihar which has fifth largest absolute Scheduled Caste population in the 

13 
 
country, are not getting assistance from Centre to run this Scheme, what is the purpose 
of running this Scheme. Taking note of the fact that the Schemes running under SCSP 
in the States having higher number of Scheduled Caste population would be hampered 
if these States do not receive adequate funds from the Centre, the Committee 
recommend the Department not to stop the release of funds totally for the entire year 
but release a proportion of the notional allocation to the States having remarkable 
number of Scheduled Caste population. More so, in the meanwhile, the States should 
be prescribed a time limit and pursued vigorously to submit Utilisation Certificates and 
Annual Action Plans as required. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The Grants under the scheme are released to the State Government/UT 
Administration as per the extant guidelines. As per the Ministry of Finance guidelines, if 
the Utilization Certificate is pending beyond a prescribed period, further grants cannot 
be released to the States/UTs. 
In order to obtain all the pending statements like Annual Action Plan, Utilization 
Certificate etc., all the State Government/UT Administration are vigorously pursued for 
submission of these documents on time. 
In addition, regular Video-Conferencing is also held on monthly basis to discuss 
the pending issues with the State Governments/UTs Administrations. 
However as desired by the Committee, the Notional Allocation has been made 
from the financial year 2018-19 and onward in respect of the States namely Bihar, 
Gujarat, Goa, Punjab and Maharashtra. The Government of Bihar, Gujarat, Punjab and 
Maharashtra have submitted their Annual Action Plan during 2020-21 and the same 
have also been appraised by the PAC. Rs. 9.0487cr. have been released to Gujarat. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4,  Para No. 4.8) 
Project Appraisal Committee  
2.5 The Committee note that the Department has proposed to form a Project 
Appraisal Committee to appraise and approve the activities to be funded under SCA to 
SCSP based on the Annual Action Plans submitted by the State Governments. As 
Project Appraisal Committee is a commendable step taken by the Department to ensure 
more stringent and effective mechanism, the Committee are of the view that the 
Department should expedite finalization of the proposal and form Project Appraisal 

14 
 
Committee as soon as possible. The Committee observed that there are some State 
Governments which are not submitting Annual Action Plans to the Department and 
therefore, are unable to avail Central Assistance. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Department should first pursue all the States which are availing Central Assistance 
for SCSP to submit Annual Action Plan diligently every year so that this Project 
Appraisal Committee could function unhampered. 
Reply of the Government  
2.6 The Department has already constituted a Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) 
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, SJE along with other stakeholders 
Departments/Ministries to appraise and approve the activities under the scheme of SCA 
to SCSP from the financial year 2019-20 and onwards.  
Besides this, all the States/UTs are pursued on regular basis to submit the 
Annual Action Plan and other necessary documents on priority in order to get the grants 
under the scheme. Of the 28 States/UTs which are implementing the Scheme 26 have 
already submitted the Annual Action Plan (AAP) for 2020-21 and these AAPs have 
been appraised during the five meetings of the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) 
which were held virtually due to COVID-19 pandemic.  Further, regular video 
conferencing is also being held with the States/UTs for submitting the complete 
information. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.25) 
Digitization of Schemes of Government of India 
2.7 The Committee note that in pursuance to the recommendation of the Evaluation 
Report digitization of the Income Generating Schemes under the SCSP an end to end 
processing of Income Generating Schemes have been proposed by the Department. 
The Committee wonder that in the present scenario when every other Scheme of the 
Departments/Ministries of the Government of India has been digitized or is in the 
process of getting digitized, why the Department has taken this initiative so late. The 
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to initiate digitization as well end to 
end processing under SCA to SCSP at the earliest and apprise the Committee of the 
same. The Committee further note that the recommendations of the Evaluation Study of 
2013 like increase in the allocation under infrastructure development, etc. have not 
been considered and left as it is. The Committee would like to be apprised of their 
current status in this regard. 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 It is submitted that in order to assist the State Governments/UT Administrations 
in processing the proposals under the Scheme, the Ministry, in association with National 
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC), CPSU under the 
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment in collaboration and National E-Governance 
Division (NeGD) has got developed an online portal for end-to-end processing of 
various Income Generation projects implemented under the Scheme. The portal was 
launched by the Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment on 27.02.2019 in 
the Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries conference held in New Delhi. 
It is informed that in order to assist the State Governments/UT Administrations in 
processing the proposals under the Scheme, the Ministry is developing an online portal 
for proposal submission, its approval, implementation and monitoring and enabling the 
process paper free. This will also help better targeting, monitoring & smooth 
implementation of the scheme. 
Regarding increase in infrastructure component, it is submitted that under 
infrastructure component the allocation has been increased from 10% to 30%.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.3) 
Diversion of Funds 
2.9 The Committee observe that the issue of diversion of funds under the Scheme of 
SCA to SCSP has been brought in the notice of the Committee by some Members of 
the Committee. Though till now diversion of funds to other schemes of the Department 
or for other purposes, has not taken place as is reported by the Department, still the 
Committee are of the considered opinion that there is a possibility of diversion of funds 
under this Scheme as this Scheme covers an array of Schemes under it. The 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, being the nodal Department, should 
play a pro-active role in preventing any occurrence of diversion of funds that may take 
place in the future. 
Reply of the Government  
2.10 Under the scheme of Special Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub Plan 
(SCA to SCSP) all the States/UTs Administration are required to submit the Annual 
Action Plans.  Based on the Annual Action Plan submitted, the viable income generating 
activities, skill development programme etc. are sanctioned.  

16 
 
In order to further strengthen the monitoring mechanism, the Department has 
constituted a Project Appraisal Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, SJE 
along with other stakeholders Departments/Ministries to appraise and approve the 
activities under the scheme of SCA to SCSP from the financial year 2019-20 and 
onwards. Besides this, the committee will inter-alia review the utilization of State SCSP 
and Allocation for Welfare of Scheduled Castes Funds. The committee is also required 
to review that the funds allocated are utilized for the intended purpose only and there is 
no diversion. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.7) 
Funds Utilization by North-Eastern States 
2.11 The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment in pursuing some of the North Eastern States to fully utilize the allocated 
funds and also provided additional funds to the North Eastern States during the year 
2017-18. The Committee note that the performance of the actual release of funds to the 
North Eastern States has improved during the last three years but number of 
beneficiaries in the States of Assam, Sikkim and Tripura have been decreased in 2016-
17 and not reported in Manipur in 2016-17. As the actual release under Central 
Assistance to the North Eastern States is more than the double amount allocated for 
North Eastern States in 2017-18 as compared to 2016-17, the Committee desire the 
Department to issue directions to the North Eastern States to not only utilize the 
allocated funds in full but to also cover maximum number of beneficiaries under this 
Scheme. 
Reply of the Government  
2.12 As desired by the Committee, directions have been issued to all the North 
Eastern States implementing Scheduled Caste Sub Plan to cover maximum number of 
beneficiaries. During 2020-21 the all the four States of North Eastern namely Assam, 
Sikkim, Tripura and Manipur have submitted their AAPs.  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.11) 
Skill Development Programme for Scheduled Caste Beneficiaries  
2.13 The Committee note that Skill Development Programme for Scheduled Caste 
beneficiaries is one of the major activities which is run by the Department with the help 
of Central Assistant to the States for the Welfare of SCs. The Committee are 
disappointed to note that some of the States are not submitting Annual Action Plan due 
to which funds are not released to them and hence no beneficiaries covered under the 
Scheme. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the reply of the Department. Taking 
note of the fact that Annual Action Plan is imperative for providing Central Assistant to 
the States, the Committee urge the Department to take this Scheme with utmost 
seriousness and pursue the States/UTs at the highest level and direct them to submit 
Annual Action Plan in time so that the Central Assistance is released every year to 
those States/UTs which are running Schemes under SCA to SCSP and benefits of 
schemes should reach the beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 Skill Development Programmes now constitute an integral part of the AAPs. All 
the States/UTs have been advised to implement their Skill Development Programmes 
as approved by Project Appraisal Committee.   
Regular video conferencing is also being held with the States/UTs for proper 
implementation. 
The Department has also devised several proformas for monitoring the progress 
of the scheme which inter-alia includes formats for Annual Action Plan. It is expected 
that this will help the State Governments for furnishing the Annual Action Plan on time 
and get the funds under the Scheme. 
The Department has already constituted a Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) 
under the scheme for the smooth implementation of the scheme. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 

18 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT: 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 2.8) 
Submission of Utilization Certificates 
3.1 The Committee note that late/non submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) is a 
recurring feature of some of the States/UTs which is evident in other Schemes too. This 
Scheme intends to perform welfare activities for socially-economically backward and 
downtrodden section of Society. The Committee are dismayed to note that due to 
non/late submission of Utilisation Certificates, development programmes/Schemes are 
inversely affected in these States. The Committee, therefore, desire that on the lines of 
the action taken by the Department to achieve UCs from Uttar Pradesh, Assam and 
Chhattisgarh, it should take extra measures to pursue other defaulter States too, to 
submit pending UCs at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
3.2 In order to obtain all the pending statements like Annual Action Plan, Utilization 
Certificate etc., all the State Government/UT Administration are vigorously pursued for 
submission of these documents on time. 
In addition, regular Video-Conferencing is also held on monthly basis to discuss 
the pending issues with the State Governments/UTs Administrations. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 Para 3.9) 
Revision of guidelines for the Scheme of SCSP 
3.3 The Committee are distressed to find that the Guidelines for the Scheme of 
SCSP have been revised in 2018 and the Committee were kept unaware of it. The 
Committee observe that the Department was aware of the fact that the scheme of SCA 
to SCSP is under active examination of the Committee, still the Department did not feel 
the need of informing the Committee that revised Guidelines for the Scheme of SCSP 
have come into existence and the concerned Ministries/Departments have been issued 
directions to comply with it according to the revised Guidelines. The Committee expect 

19 
 
the Department not to repeat such kind of behavior and take the Committee so lightly in 
future. The Committee also direct the Department to keep them informed of the latest 
developments on the subjects under examination by the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
3.4 It is submitted that as per the Ministry of Finance guidelines to appraise all the 
schemes beyond the 12th Plan period, the EFC memorandum for the scheme of SCA to 
SCSP was prepared. Further, a meeting to recommend the continuation and changes 
under the scheme was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance on 19.09.2018.  
Based on the recommendations of the EFC meeting, a Cabinet Note was 
circulated to all the concerned Ministries/Departments. As the Cabinet Note is still under 
process, the Scheme has not yet been revised. It is further submitted that under the 
scheme SCA to SCSP funds are released to States/UTs only.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.18) 
Revision of guidelines for the Scheme of SCSP 
4.1 The Committee note that for fair selection of eligible candidates under the 
scheme of SCA to SCSP, there is a proposal to have an end to end processing of bank 
linked loans wherein the applicant/beneficiary can submit the application with the 
minimal documents through the online portal. The Committee wonder why this Scheme 
has not been linked electronically till now while all the other major Schemes run by the 
Department have already been linked to the online portals or are in the process of doing 
so. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should take extra measures 
to develop an online portal for this Scheme at the earliest and implement it without any 
delay. The Committee are concerned to note that the approval for online portal under 
the Scheme of the SCA to SCSP is still under process and awaits approval of the 
Cabinet. The Committee are not satisfied with this reply of the Department and desire 
that the Department should make efforts for getting the approval of Cabinet for the 
proposal of applying through online portal under this Scheme. 
Reply of the Government  
4.2 The Ministry, in association with National Scheduled Castes Finance and 
Development Corporation (NSFDC), CPSU under the Ministry of Social Justice & 
Empowerment in collaboration and National E-Governance Division (NEGD) has 
developed an online portal for end-to-end process of various income generation projects 
implemented under the Scheme. The portal was launched by the Hon’ble Minister of 
Social Justice and Empowerment on 27.02.2019 in the Additional Chief 
Secretaries/Principal Secretaries conference held in New Delhi. 
It is informed that in order to assist the State Governments/UT Administrations in 
processing the proposals under the Scheme, the Ministry is developing an online portal 
for proposal submission, its approval, implementation and monitoring and enabling the 
process to become paper free. This will also help better targeting, monitoring & smooth 
implementation of the scheme. 
Under infrastructure development programmes, funds under SCA to SCSP is 
also being used in convergence with Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) of 

21 
 
the Department. An Online Software has been developed and launched under PMAGY 
also for monitoring the progress and capturing information from the States/UTs for the 
smooth implementation of the scheme.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para 1.10   of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4 Para 4.11) 
Poor Implementation of the Scheme of SCA to SCSP 
4.3 The Committee note that weak Scheduled Caste Corporations in the States are 
one of the major reasons for poor implementation of the Scheme of SCA to SCSP. 
Taking note of the fact that the State SC Corporations play a major role in disbursing 
the funds to the beneficiaries and consequently effective implementation of the Scheme, 
the Committee impress upon the Department to pursue the matter more seriously and 
direct the States/UTs to strengthen the Scheduled Castes Corporations by identifying 
the reasons for their shortcomings and take remedial action for their improvements and 
create a webpage or online portal which would display the details of the beneficiaries in 
the Welfare Departments of every State in order to strengthen the SC Corporations and 
improvise the implementation of the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government  
4.4 The Department regularly pursues with the State Social Welfare Departments to   
strengthen the State Scheduled Caste Corporation. The National Scheduled Castes 
Finance and Development Corporation (NSFDC) under the Ministry also implement 
various Income Generating Schemes/Educational schemes through State Scheduled 
Caste Corporations. 
Besides above, under the scheme of State Scheduled Caste Corporation 
(SCDC) run by the Department, grant is given to the State Corporations for the 
economic development of Scheduled Castes. 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para 1.13   of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

22 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 5.13) 
Welfare of Safai Karamcharis/Manual Scavengers 
4.5 The Committee believe that the Safai Karamcharis/Manual Scavengers belong to 
the section of society which need immediate welfare measures. This stratum of society 
is extremely imperative for the survival of any civil society. The Committee are sad to 
note that there are very few Schemes run by the Department for the welfare of Safai 
Karamcharis and Manual Scavengers in particulars. The Committee further note that 
under SCA to SCSP, the proposal to provide subsidy to the Safai Karamcharis is under 
process. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should take action to 
introduce more Schemes related to the welfare of Safai Karamcharis and Manual 
Scavengers, expedite the procedure to finalise the proposals and implement the 
Schemes to provide subsidy to the Schedule Caste Safai Karamcharis at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The Department implements schemes like Self Employment Scheme for 
Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers (SRMS). Besides this, the National Safai 
Karamcharis Finance& Development Corporation is mandated with all round socio-
economic up-liftment of the Safai Karamcharis, Manual Scavengers and their 
dependents throughout India, through various loan and non-loan-based schemes. For 
the benefit of the target group, various skill development programmes are also 
implemented by the Corporation. 
The SRMS and the Schemes of NSKFDC are modified from time to time to 
address the needs of the target group. During revision of SRMS, the following major 
components have been introduced for the benefit of the target group:- 
Revision of Scheme in year 2017-18 
(i)       Organising Health Camps for manual scavengers, safai karamcharis and 
their families. 
(ii)        Organising Workshops on ‘Prevention of Hazardous Cleaning of Sewers 
and  Septic Tanks’. 
(iii) Short duration behavioral  training of working sanitation workers. 
Revision of Scheme in year 2020-21 
(i)        Provide capital subsidy to identified manual scavengers, sanitation 
workers and their dependants for procurement of mechanised cleaning 
equipments/vehicles to promote mechanised cleaning and entrepreneurial 
activity amongst them.  

23 
 
(ii) Health Insurance coverage of identified manual scavengers  under     
Ayushman Bharat (Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana). 
Similarly the Schemes of NSKFDC are also revised from time to time.  Recently, the 
Swachhta Udyami Yojana (SUY) has been revised to finance sanitation 
equipments/vehicles costing upto Rs. 50.00 lakh for sanitation related projects. With a 
view to minimise the incidents of manual hazardous cleaning and to promote 
mechanised cleaning, financial assistance is also being provided to Urban Local Bodies 
for procurement of sanitation related equipment’s under SUY.  
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment also implements Scheme of Pre-
Matric Scholarships for the Children of those Engaged in Occupations Involving 
Cleaning and Prone to Health Hazardous.  
In addition to the above, Safai Karamcharis belonging to Scheduled Castes can 
also avail benefits under various schemes being implemented for Scheduled Castes. 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para 1.16   of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER  V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 3.14) 
Non Lapsable Central Pool of SCSP Funds. 
5.1 The Committee note that one of the recommendations of the 'Task Force to 
Review Guidelines on Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan and Tribal Sub-Plan', inter-alia, 
suggested that SCSP funds remaining unutilized at the end of a financial year may be 
transferred to "Non-lapsable Central Pool of SCSP Funds (NLCPSF)", a Head to be 
created in the Public Account. The Committee note that the erstwhile Planning 
Commission had not accepted this recommendation of the Task Force. However, NITI 
Aayog has considered this recommendation and suggested to the Department of 
Expenditure and Department of Economic Affairs to pool such under-utilised and 
unutilised funds of some Ministries/Departments and allocate to nodal Ministries i.e. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. The 
Committee believes that the formation of a non-lapsable pool is imperative to curb the 
diversion of funds and to ensure proper utilization of funds under this Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should take 
initiative to pursue Department of Expenditure and Department of Economic Affairs to 
consider this proposal and implement it at the earliest. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
5.2 NITI Aayog sent a proposal for creation of pool for unutilized/underutilized funds 
allocated for welfare of SCs& STs and re-allocating such funds to the Nodal 
Departments i.e. Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in respect of 
Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan to meet their budgetary requirements under 
scholarship/fellowship schemes and other beneficiary oriented schemes to Ministry of 
Finance. The Department has also requested the Ministry of Finance to take a view on 
the proposal for creation of pool for unitized funds allocated for the Welfare of 
Scheduled Castes.  
In response, Ministry of Finance has informed that nodal Ministries and obligated 
Ministry/Department’s in consultation with NITI Aayog are required to identify specific 
schemes which provide benefits to SCs/STs and also come up with innovative 
responses in terms of new schemes etc. in case there is difficulty in providing benefits 
to SCs/STs under the existing schemes.  

25 
 
As desired by the Committee, Department of Expenditure will be pursued further 
for creation of pool for unutilized funds allocated for the Welfare of Scheduled Castes. 
In addition to above a robust mechanism to monitor the allocation and 
expenditure under DAPSC (earlier known as SCSP or AWSC) has been developed. 
The portal developed by the Department (http://e-utthaan.gov.in/) provides real time 
status of utilization of funds allocated for the welfare of the Scheduled Castes. For 
regular monitoring of the DAPSC the inter-ministerial meetings are held periodically.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para 1.7   of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.21) 
Recommendations of Report of National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj 
5.3 The Committee observe that "based on the recommendations/findings of the 
evaluation report submitted by the National Institute of Rural Development and 
Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR), the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memorandum 
has been prepared to revise the extant guidelines. The Committee further observe that 
this EFC memorandum has been recommended by the Department of Expenditure and 
accordingly the Cabinet Note has been proposed and circulated for inter Ministerial 
consultation. The Committee believe that the extant guidelines for the Scheme would be 
revised periodically but its process should not be time taking. The Committee, therefore, 
exhort the Department to pursue the matter more seriously and expedite the procedure 
to finalize the guidelines for better and effective implementation and stringent monitoring 
of the Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 A Cabinet Note, based on the recommendations given by the EFC in its meeting 
held on 19.09.2019, was submitted to Cabinet Secretariat in February, 2019 for 
approval. A Supplementary Cabinet Note under the Scheme for continuation & revision 
was also re-submitted to Cabinet Secretariat on 30th July, 2019 for approval. Approval 
of the Cabinet Secretariat is awaited.  

26 
 
The Scheme Guidelines were consolidated during 2018-19 and formats for 
submission of Annual Action Plan and periodic reporting were devised and circulated to 
States/UTs during 2018-19. 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 4.35) 
Evaluation Study by the Expenditure Finance Commission  
5.5 The Committee observe that after the Evaluation Study of 2013 on Special 
Central Assistance to Scheduled Castes Sub Plan (SCA to SCSP) and Special Central 
Assistance to Tribal Sub-plan, the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has 
conducted another evaluation of the Scheme in 2018 and has submitted the report in 
August, 2018. The Committee find that several important aspects have been covered 
for effective/proper implementation of scheme in the recommendations of evaluation 
study 2018 and most of the recommendations have been included in the Cabinet notes 
which are under process. The Committee desire to take early action on the 
recommendations made by the evaluation study. 
Reply of the Government  
5.6 Based on the evaluation study conducted in 2018 and recommendations given 
by the Expenditure Finance Committee, the Cabinet Note was submitted for approval of 
the Cabinet in October, 2018.  Approval is awaited.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) O.M. No.17012/01/2017-SCD-II dated 10th December, 2020) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
05 August, 2021                                                 Standing Committee on 
14 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
        Empowerment  
 
 

27 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) HELD ON THURSDAY,  
5TH AUGUST, 2021 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1055 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 
113, PHA Extension Building,  New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad  
3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
6. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
7. Smt. Geeta Kora 
8. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
9. Smt. Supriya Sule  
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya  
12. Smt. Ramilaben Bara  
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
15. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
16. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  Deputy Secretary 
 
 

28 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt the 
following draft Reports of the Committee:  
(i)  Twenty-third Report on the subject of ‘Assessment of Scheme for 
Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’ 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities);  
(ii)  Twenty-fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 64th Report of the Committee 
on ‘Assessment of the working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCA to SCSP)’  of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and Empowerment); and  
(iii)  Twenty-fifth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 22nd Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants 2021-22)’ of the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs. 
 
3. Thereupon, the Chairperson requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports.  The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
in the light of consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the draft 
Reports and to present the same to both the Houses.  
 
(The Committee then adjourned) 
 
 
 

29 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTY- FOURTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON  “ASSESSMENT OF THE 
WORKING OF SCHEME OF SPECIAL CENTRAL ASSISTANCE TO SCHEDULED CASTES SUB-
PLAN (SCA TO SCSP)” OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
         Total         Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 15  
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have 
been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 1.11, 2.7, 4.8, 4.25, 5.3, 5.7 
and 5.11) 
7 46.66 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government (Paragraph  
Nos 2.8, and 3.9) 
2 13.34 
IV. Observations/Recommendations, in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which require reiteration 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.18,  4.11 and 5.13) 
 
3 20 
V. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature (Paragraph Nos 3.14, 4.21 
and 4.35) 
 
 
3 20 
 
 
 
 