 
 
 
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT
(SEVEN
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Social Justice and Emp
“The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens 
FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
January
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
Social Justice and Empowerment
 
 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019” 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
  
   
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
January, 2021/ Magha 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
werment) 
The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 

 
FOURTEEN
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT
(SEVEN
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
(Department of Social Justice and Emp
"THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND 
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019"
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
January
  
ii 
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
Social Justice and Empowerment
 
 
 
"THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND 
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019"
 
            
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 January, 2021
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 January, 2021 
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
January, 2021/ Magha 1942 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
werment) 
"THE MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE OF PARENTS AND 
SENIOR CITIZENS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019" 
29 January, 2021 
 

iii 
 
C.O.SJ&E No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
@2021 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
Published under  Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha ( Fifteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government 
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002  

iv 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20)…………………………………       vi 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)…………………………………       vii 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………………         ix 
 REPORT  
CHAPTER -I Introductory…………………………………………….. 1-14 
CHAPTER -II Amendment of Definitions…………………………… 15-20 
CHAPTER -III Amendment Provisions Related to Maintenance of 
Parents and Senior Citizens………………………….. 
21-43 
CHAPTER -IV Institutional Care Homes, Multi Service Day Care 
Centres and Health Care for Senior Citizens……… 
44-58 
CHAPTER -V Amendment Provisions Pertaining to Awareness 
Generation, Age-Friendly Initiatives, Helpline, 
Standards, Penalty and Other Miscellaneous 
Issues……………………………………………………… 
59-74 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I State-Wise Population of Senior Citizens ………….. 75-76 
ANNEXURE-II National Policy on Older Persons……………………. 77-92 
ANNEXURE-III The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019…………… 
93-113 
ANNEXURE-IV Details of the Senior Citizen Care Homes/Old Age 
Homes, as collected by the Ministry from State 
Governments during 2019…………………………….. 
114-
124 
ANNEXURE-V Details of State -Wise Expenditure and 
Beneficiaries under the Integrated Programme for 
Senior Citizens…………………………………………... 
125-
126 
ANNEXURE-VI Measures Taken by Various State Government 
under Section 21 of MWPSC Act, 2007 for 
Awareness Generation in their respective 
States…………………………………………………….. 
127-
131 
ANNEXURE-VII Progress Report of Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007…….. 
132-
133 
 APPENDICES  
APPENDIX-I Minutes of the Eighth sitting of the Committee held on  6th February, 2020…………………………………. 
134-
136 

v 
 
APPENDIX -II Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 6th August, 2020…………………. 
137-
139 
 
APPENDIX -III Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee held on 19th August, 2020………………………………….. 
140-
142 
APPENDIX -IV Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Committee held on  3rd September, 2020……………………………… 
143-
146 
APPENDIX -V Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on  19th January, 2021………………………………. 
147-
148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20) 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
                                                             Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Durga Prasad Rao Balli 
  4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
  5. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar 
14. Shri Vijay Kumar 
15. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
16. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad   #18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Arjun Singh 
20. Smt. Supriya Sule 
21. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
 
                 Rajya Sabha  
 
 22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya   *23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
 24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
 25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan   *26. Shri Biswajit Daimary   *27. Shri Ashok Gasti   *28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri P. L. Punia                         *30.  Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 31. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
_________________ # Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 09.12.2019. 
*    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020.  

vii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras 
16. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  17. Shri Arjun Singh 
18. Smt. Supriya Sule 
19. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha* 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa* 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31. Shri Ram Ji* 
 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 
 
 
 

viii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
3. Shri. Janmesh Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
4. Shri Salil Saroj  - Committee Officer 
 
 
  

ix 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2020-21) having been authorized by the Committee, do present this 
Fourteenth Report on ‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019’.  
2.  The said Amendment Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2019 
and was referred to the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on 23 
December, 2019 for examination and Report.  
3.  During the course of examination of the Amendment Bill, the Committee were 
briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) on 6 February, 2020.  The 
Committee also took oral evidence of the Ministry on 6 August, 2020 and 3 September, 
2020 and heard the views of various organizations/ stakeholders working in the field of 
elderly care on 19 August, 2020 and 3 September, 2020. The Committee were also 
furnished with written information on various aspects relating to the Bill from the Ministry 
of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
4. The Committee issued a Press Release inviting memoranda/views from 
members of general public and other stakeholders on the Amendment Bill and the 
views/suggestions so received were suitably considered by the Committee. 
5.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 19 
January, 2021. The Minutes of the sittings of the Committee are appended to the 
Report. 
6. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) for appearing before the Committee and also for furnishing background 
information and written replies to the points raised by the Committee in connection with 
the examination of the Amendment Bill. The Committee also wish to thank the 
representatives of various organizations/ stakeholders working in the field of elderly 
care, who deposed before them. 
7.  The Committee place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  

x 
 
8.  For facilitation of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the 
body of the Report. 
 
                                                 
New Delhi;  
21 January, 2021 
1 Magha 1942 (Saka) 
 
RAMA DEVI 
CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE  
                       AND EMPOWERMENT 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
As per 2011 Census, total population of Senior Citizens (people aged 60 years 
and above) in the country is 10.38 crore of which the population of male and female 
Senior Citizens is 5.11 crore and 5.27 crore, respectively. Out of the total 10.38 crore 
population of senior citizens in the country, approximately 7.32 crore stay in rural and 
3.05 crore stay in urban areas. State-wise population of Senior Citizens is given in 
Annexure- I.  
 
1.2  Continuous increase in life expectancy means that more people are now living 
longer. General improvement in the health care facilities over the years is one of the 
main reasons for continuing increase in proportion of population of senior citizens. 
Ensuring that they not merely live longer, but lead a secure, dignified and productive 
life, is a major challenge. Increase in population of senior citizens as per Census Report 
is as follows:  
 
Census Total 
Population 
(Crore) 
Population of 
Senior Citizens 
(Crore) 
Percentage 
1991 83.85 5.7 6.8% 
2001 102.86 7.7 7.5% 
2011 121.06 10.38 8.57% 
 
1.3 The projected population aged 60+ and their percentage share in the total 
projected population of the country, for the year 2016 to 2026 (as on 1st March) as per 
the May 2006 Report of the Technical Group on Population Projections constituted by  
 

2 
 
the National Commission on Population is as under: 
 
(Per thousand productive population) 
 
Year 
Projected Senior Citizens 
Population (Crore) 
As % of total population 
Persons Male Female Persons Male Female 
2016 11.81 5.81 5.99 9.3 8.8 9.8 
2021 14.32 7.06 7.26 10.7 10.2 11.3 
2026 17.32 8.46 8.86 12.4 11.7 13.1 
 
 Hence in the next five years, the country will have an addition of more than 5 
crore senior citizens i.e. 17.32 crore from around 12 crore presently. 
 
 1.4 Old Age Dependency Ratio has also been steadily rising during the past three 
decades.  The old age dependency Ratio was 122 in 1991 and it rose to 131 in 2001. 
As on 2011, the Old Age Dependency Ration in India stood at 142.  
 
1.5 In view of the rising share of Senior Citizens in total population and other socio-
economic changes, it is imperative that that there is a suitable policy for senior citizens 
in the country.  The Government had therefore, enunciated National Policy for Older 
Persons, 1999 for delivering a broader policy perspective for their overall welfare. Same 
is placed at Annexure-II. 
 
1.6  Article 41 of the Constitution under the ‘Directive Principles of State Policy’ 
provides inter alia that the State shall make effective provisions for public assistance 
including old age. India is also a signatory to the Madrid International Plan of Action on 
Ageing (MIPAA) adopted in 2002, which covers the priority areas of older persons and 
development, health and wellbeing in older age and ensuring enabling and supportive 
environment for the elderly. Keeping in view the United Nation’s principles for older 
persons, the Government of India had announced a National Policy on Older Persons, 
which inter alia envisaged legislative measures for securing welfare of senior citizens.   

3 
 
1.7 Pursuant to the policy, the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007 (hereafter referred to as ‘The Principal Act’) was enacted as a 
Central Act to ensure need based maintenance for parents and senior citizens and for 
their welfare. The Principal Act provides for maintenance of parents/senior citizens by 
children/relatives as obligatory and justiciable through a Tribunal constituted for the 
purpose. The Principal Act also provides for revocation of conditional transfer of 
property by senior citizens in case of non maintenance. The Principal Act envisages 
punishment for intentional abandonment of senior citizens by children/relatives. The 
State Governments are required to construct and maintain old age homes for indigent 
senior citizens.  The Principal Act also envisages that the State will provide adequate 
medical facilities and protection of life and property of senior citizens.  
1.8 The Statement of Objects and Reasons given at the time of introduction of the 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Bill, 2007 is as follows:- 
“Traditional norms and values of the Indian society laid stress on providing care for the elderly. However, due to withering of the joint family system, a large number of elderly are not being looked after by their family. Consequently, many older persons, particularly widowed women are now forced to spend their twilight years all alone and are exposed to emotional neglect and to lack of physical and financial support.  This clearly reveals that ageing has become a major social challenge and there is a need to give more attention to the care and protection for the older persons. Though the parents can claim maintenance under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the procedure is both time-consuming as well as expensive. Hence, there is need to have simple, inexpensive and speedy provisions to claim maintenance for parents.” 
 
1.9 The Principal Act has been under implementation for more than one decade. 
According to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, based on the experience 
of implementation of the Principal Act including the feedback received from the 
stakeholders, the Government has found it expedient to suitably amend the provisions 
of the Principal Act in order to make it more contemporary and effective.  
1.10  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment had statedly received a large 
number of representations from individuals and institutions stating problems relating to 
implementation of various provisions of the Principal Act at the grassroots level. Some 
of these were as under: in the definition of ‘children’, adopted/step children and son-in-
law/daughter-in-law were not included; the maximum amount of maintenance was 

4 
 
grossly inadequate; provision for appeal against the order of the Maintenance Tribunal 
for the children/relative were not available, the revocation of transfer of property needed 
to also be made applicable to parents etc. Hon’ble High Court of Haryana & Punjab and 
High Court of Madras had also directed for a re-look on certain provisions of the 
Principal Act.  In addition, as per the recommendations of the Group of Secretaries, 
provisions for uniform adoption of age criteria for benefits to the senior citizens, rating of 
organisations providing Home Care Services to the senior citizens and increase in the 
maintenance amount to senior citizens from the existing ₹10,000/- per month, also 
needed to be made in the Principal Act.  
1.11 The Committee were informed that on the basis of the representations received 
from various fora, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment constituted a Review 
Committee in January 2016, comprising representatives from Bar Council of India, 
National Institute of Social Defence, Non-Governmental Organisations, and Experts in 
the field of Ageing, to review the provisions of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents 
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007. Pursuant to the suggestions of the Review Committee, a 
National level Consultation meeting was held in August 2016 with representatives of 
related Central Ministries, States Governments/UT Administrations, Regional Resource 
and Training Centres (RRTCs) of the Senior Citizen Division of the Department, Law 
Commission, Bar Council of India, Non-Governmental Organisations, Experts in the 
field of ageing and members of Review Committee. Thereafter, a series of meetings 
were held under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Ministry of Social & Empowerment 
with the members of the Review Committee, which recommended a comprehensive re-
drafting of the existing provisions of MWPSC Act, 2007.   
1.12 The State of Himachal Pradesh had enacted a similar legislation named “The 
Himachal Pradesh Maintenance of Parents and Dependents Act, 2001” which provides 
for maintenance of parents, wives, children and for matters connected therewith.  The 
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 has been highly 
inspired by “The Himachal Pradesh Maintenance of Parents and Dependents Act, 
2001” and suitably incorporated the provisions such as maintenance of parents or 
senior citizens by children or relatives obligatory and justiciable through Tribunals, and 

5 
 
revocation of transfer of property by senior citizens in case of neglect by relatives.  
 
1.13 One more significant aspect highlighted by the Committee was regarding State of 
Jammu & Kashmir, which having special status, was excluded from the Principal Act, 
2007.  It was informed that now with removal of special status of J&K consequent upon 
the J&K Reorganization Act, 2019, the Principal Act of 2007 became applicable in J&K 
too. 
1.14 As per the Ministry, an Evaluation Study has been done on the functioning and 
effectiveness of the MWPSC Act, 2007 at the grassroot level by National Productivity 
Council, New Delhi. 
 
1.15  The Government now proposes to amend relevant provisions of the Act of 2007 
along with new insertions in the Bill, namely ‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents 
and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019’ (hereafter referred to as ‘The 
(Amendment) Bill’ .  The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill inter alia reads 
as under:-. 
“The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 was 
enacted on 29th December, 2007 to ensure need based maintenance for 
parents and senior citizens and their welfare. It's been more than a decade now 
that the Principal Act is in place, serving the needy parents and senior citizens, 
with the active co-operation of the State Governments and Union territory 
Administrations.  
2. However, with the gradual breakdown of joint family system in the society, 
number of cases of neglect, crime, exploitation and abandonment of parents 
and senior citizens are in the rise. Various High Courts have also issued orders 
directing the Government to review provisions of the Principal Act.  
3. After examining various provisions of the Principal Act, the Group of 
Secretaries have made recommendations to extend all the benefits to senior 
citizens of uniform age, to enhance maintenance amount for senior citizens and 
standardisation of homecare services. Besides, petitions and representations 
have been received from individuals and institutions requesting to make certain 
modifications in the Principal Act, including to bring daughter-in-law and son-in-
law within the ambit of the definition of 'children', to provide punishment for 
abuse of parents and senior citizens. It is, therefore, decided to revise various 

6 
 
provisions of the said Act and to incorporate new provisions therein to make the 
Principal Act more comprehensive and helpful to the greying population.” 
1.16 As per the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, the (Amendment) Bill, 
has the following improved features: 
a) The long line of the Amendment Bill has been expanded to provide for not only 
maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens, for ensuring their overall 
physical and mental wellbeing; but also for the establishment, management and 
regulation of institutions for senior citizens and services; and to give effect to the 
provisions for the welfare of parents and senior citizens as guaranteed and 
recognized under the Constitution. 
b) The definition of "children" in Section 2(a) has been expanded to include 
adoptive or step children, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandson, grand-daughter 
and legal guardian of minor children so that the parent/senior citizen could seek 
maintenance from them, in the absence of biological children. Legal Guardian of 
minor children is also proposed to be included to cover the cases in which the 
property is inherited by minor children.  
c) The definition of ‘maintenance’ under Section 2 (b) has been expanded to include 
provisions of housing, safety and security, medical attendance, healthcare   and 
treatment necessary for parents and senior citizens to lead a life of dignity.  
d) The definition of ‘welfare’ under section 2(k) has also been expanded to include 
physical and mental wellbeing of parents and senior citizens. 
e) Time limit for disposal of applications by the Tribunal, as given in section 5(4) of 
the Principal Act, is proposed to be counted from the date of receipt of 
application, as against the existing provision of counting from the date of service 
of notice to the respondents.  
f) The maximum ceiling of ₹10, 000/- as maintenance, given in section 9(2) of the 
Principal Act, has been proposed to be removed and substituted as “while 
determining the maintenance, the Tribunal may take into consideration the 
standard of living of the parent or senior citizen and the earnings of such parent 
or senior citizen and of the children or relative.” 

7 
 
g) The right to appeal, as given in section 16(1) of the Principal Act, against the 
order of the Tribunal has been extended to the children/relatives also in the 
Amendment Bill, in order to ensure fair and equitable treatment to both the 
parties. 
h) In section 23(1) of the existing Act, the benefit of revocation of transfer of 
property is available to the senior citizen only. It is proposed to extend the benefit 
to the parent also.  
1.17  Further, as per the Ministry, the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019 has the following new major provisions:  
 The provision for establishment of “Multi Service Day Care Centre for Senior 
Citizens” has been made under clause (ca), in Section 2 of the Principal Act 
which would be established or maintained by the Government or a Local Body or 
an organisation for providing day care facilities to senior citizens. 
 The institutions providing residential facilities for senior citizens namely, “Senior 
Citizen Care Home” has been defined under clause (ha), in Section 2 of the 
Principal Act of the Bill, and provision has been made for their registration under 
section 19(3) of the Bill.  
 Mode of submission of application for maintenance, as given in section 5(1) of 
the Principal Act, is proposed to be enlarged to include postal and online modes, 
in order to facilitate easier mode of communication to the senior citizens.  
 Registration of Senior Citizens Care Homes: In section 19(2) of the Amendment 
Bill, suitable provision for registration of Senior Citizens Care Homes, Multi 
Service Day Care Centres, have been proposed to be inserted, in the interest of 
bringing regulatory framework in the functioning of Senior Citizens Care Homes. 
 Minimum standards for the Senior Citizens Care Homes : Minimum standards for 
senior citizen care homes has been provided in section 19(5) of the Bill, which 
would include minimum standards for food, infrastructure, medical facilities, 
recreation, proper staff, safety and security etc. 

8 
 
 Provisions for Regulatory Authority to monitor the functioning of the institutions 
registered under section 19(3) have been incorporated under section 19(6) in the 
Amendment bill.   
 A designated officer in police station not below the rank of Assistant Sub 
Inspector in every police station as a Nodal Officer for ‘Senior Citizens and 
Parents’ has been envisaged under section 22(2). Similarly, provisions for 
constituting of “Special Police Units for senior citizens” in each district by the 
State Governments, to coordinate all functions of the Police related matter of 
parent/senior citizens, which would be headed by a police officer not below the 
rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, have also been incorporated under 
section of 22(3) of the Amendment Bill. 
 Other Welfare Measures: Chapter V has been expanded to include other welfare 
measures for senior citizens apart from protection of life and property. In section 
23(A) of the Amendment Bill, it has been provided that the benefits being 
extended by the Government and semi-Government/private organization for the 
elderly shall be available to senior citizens who are 60 years and above. 
 Under section 23(A), it has also been inserted that Government shall take 
suitable measures to create more accessible and age-friendly environment, 
transportation, information and communications and other public facilities 
including separate queues for senior citizens. Provision has also been made for 
Helpline for safety and security for senior citizens under section 23(A) in the 
Amendment Bill. 
 In section 32, enabling provision would be inserted in the Bill for the Central 
Government  to make Model Rules under the Principal Act. 
 
1.18 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has further informed the 
Committee that the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019, if enacted, will affect the population of Senior Citizens in the 
following ways: 
(1) The expansion of the existing definition of “children”(to include son-in-law, 
daughter-in-law, biological/adoptive/step son and daughter, minors through 

9 
 
legal guardian), “parent” (to include father-in-law, mother-in-law and 
grandparents, whether or not a senior citizen) and “relatives” (to include 
minor through legal guardian) will enable parents/senior citizens to claim 
maintenance allowance from all admissible relatives. 
(2) The expansion of the existing definition of ‘maintenance’(to include housing, 
safety and security, healthcare) and “welfare” (to include clothing, housing, 
safety and security, medical attendance, treatment, physical and mental 
wellbeing) will enable parents and senior citizens to lead a life of dignity.  
(3) Means of submission of application for claiming maintenance has been 
expanded to ease the process of filling application on the part of parents or 
senior citizens.  
(4) The provision for disposal of maintenance application in the existing Act i.e.  
‘within ninety days from date of service of notice of the application’ has been  
changed to ‘within ninety days from date of receipt of application’ to expedite 
the process of disposing of the cases filed in the Tribunals  and for providing 
early relief to the needy applicants.   
(5) Further, time period for disposal of application of applicants above 80 years 
has been reduced. The time period has been fixed for disposal of such 
applications within 60 days in order to provide speedy relief to the ‘oldest old’.    
(6) In order to reduce the burden on Tribunals to hear and settle down cases, 
role of Conciliation Officer has been strengthened/expanded in the 
Amendment Bill. Further, to hasten the settlement of cases, the time period 
of submission of report by the Conciliation Officer has been reduced.  
(7) Removal of ceiling of ₹10,000 as maximum maintenance amount to be 
awarded to parents/senior citizens will ensure that it is fixed according to the 
needs of parent/senior citizens and capability of children/legal heirs to pay 
the maintenance allowance based on their earnings/income. This will help 
parent/senior citizens to lead a life of dignity which is commensurate with 
their normal standard of living. 
(8) By extending the provision of Appeal to children/relatives, the Amended Act 
will provide an equal ground to children/relatives who are aggrieved by the 

10 
 
order of Maintenance Tribunal. However, as per the principle of natural 
justice, children/relatives have to continue to pay to parent or senior citizen, 
the maintenance allowance as ordered by the Maintenance Tribunal.This 
provision has been extended to children/relatives, especially in view of 
various Court directions in this regard.   
(9)    Expansion of the role of Maintenance Officer will simplify the whole process, 
from filling of application for maintenance to implementation of the order of 
the Tribunal, for parents/senior citizens as they will get single-point guidance 
on the issue.  
(10) Central Government to prescribe Minimum Standards required for 
establishment, running and maintenance of Senior Citizens Care Homes. 
This will enable senior citizens to avail quality facilities in such Homes across 
the country.  
(11)  Provision for registration of Senior Citizens Care Homes (erstwhile Old Age 
Home) and Multi-service Day Care Centres will help in having a database of 
all such Homes, whether run by Government or private organizations. It will 
also help in compliance of the minimum quality standards laid down by the 
Government.  
(12) The State Government, by designating Regulatory Authority to monitor the 
functioning of the institutions registered, under the new Act, will ensure that 
the Minimum Quality Standards are adhered to. 
(13) By introducing the provision for Homecare Services to senior citizens, the 
new Act will facilitate those ailing senior citizens who need continuous 
physical and medical attention at home.   
(14) Registration and Accreditation of agencies providing Homecare Services to 
senior citizens will enable senior citizens and their families to choose the best 
homecare service providing agency for their near and dear ones.   This 
addresses the need for having quality homecare services for ailing senior 
citizens.   

11 
 
(15) The introduction of the provision for every Police Station to have a ‘Nodal 
Officer for Senior Citizens’ in the Bill is to curb the growing number of crimes 
being done on senior citizens, whether living alone or with their families.   
(16) The existing provision of ‘Transfer of property to be void in certain 
circumstances’ has been extended to ‘parents’, in addition to senior citizens 
(as given in MWPSC  Act’07) so as to enable them also to maintain their right 
over their property, even after transferring the same to their children/relatives. 
(17) The new Act will provide a similar ground for all those who are aged 60 years 
and/ or above to avail benefits and concessions, being extended by the 
Central/State Govt./Semi-Govt./Pvt. to senior citizens, while not adversely 
affecting the already existing benefits being extended to ‘senior citizens’ 
below 60 years of age.  
(18) As per the Amendment Bill, the State Government shall establish and 
maintain Helpline for safety and security of senior citizens having one 
common number across the nation, which shall be linked to healthcare 
facilities, police department and other related agencies. 
(19) The Amendment Bill contains provision to deter the growing cases of 
abandonment and abuse of senior citizens/parents by their children/relatives. 
(20) Inclusion of more Government Departments to ensure better service delivery 
through effective coordination and convergence is envisaged in the 
Amendment Bill. 
 
1.19   The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 
2019 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 11 December, 2019 and it was referred to the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment on 23 December, 2019 for 
detailed examination and report. The Bill as introduced in Lok Sabha is given at 
Annexure-III. 
1.20 The Committee had detailed discussions on the clauses of the Bill with 
representatives of the Ministry as well as several stakeholders, heard their views and 
sought information on various issues concerning the Amendment Bill as well as on the 

12 
 
implementation of the Act of 2007, during their four meetings held on 6.2.2020, 
6.8.2020, 19.8.2020 and 3.9.2020 as well as undertook a study visit to a home run for 
elders in Puducherry.  Their report follows hereinafter. 
 
  

13 
 
1.21 The Committee note that the fast growing population of senior citizens has 
necessitated critical policy interventions on the part of the Government. Pursuant 
to this, ‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007’ 
was enacted as a Central Act to ensure need based maintenance for parents and 
senior citizens and for their welfare.  Based on the experience of implementation 
of the MWPSC Act, 2007, large number of representations received from the 
individuals and institutions relating to implementation of this Act and directions 
of the High Court of Haryana & Punjab and High Court of Madras, the Government 
decided to review the Principal Act.  The Committee note that following the 
recommendations of the Review Committee comprising representatives from Bar 
Council of India, National Institute of Social Defence, Non-governmental 
Organizations and Experts in the field of ageing, the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment has introduced ‘The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens (Amendment)Bill, 2019’  seeking to amend the relevant provisions 
of the Maintenance and Welfare of Senior Citizens Act, 2007 alongwith insertions 
of new provisions.  The Committee note that the intention of the Government 
behind the Amendment Bill is that it will significantly augment the quality of life of 
parents and senior citizens through improved provisions which include wider 
definitions of ‘children’, ‘parent’, ‘maintenance’ and ‘welfare’,  removal of the 
maximum ceiling of ₹ 10,000 as maintenance, establishment of ‘Multi Service Day 
Care Centre for Senior Citizens’ and ‘Senior Citizens Care Home’, etc.  
Accordingly, after due examination, the Committee commend ‘The Maintenance 
and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019’ for 

14 
 
consideration and enactment by the Parliament with certain 
Observations/Suggestions/Recommendations as given in the succeeding 
Chapters of the Report.  
 
 
 
  

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENT OF DEFINITIONS 
 
The Ministry have stated that the long line of the Principal Act has been 
expanded to provide for not only maintenance and welfare of parents and senior 
citizens, for ensuring their overall physical and mental wellbeing; but also for the 
establishment, management and regulation of institutions for senior citizens and 
services; and to give effect to the provisions for the welfare of parents and senior 
citizens as guaranteed and recognized under the Constitution. 
 
2.2   Thus, in the Principal Act, for the long line, the following long line shall be 
substituted, namely:—  
"An Act to give effect to the provisions for the welfare of parents and senior 
citizens as guaranteed and recognised under the Constitution by providing 
for the maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens, ensuring 
their overall physical and mental well-being, establishment, management 
and regulation of institutions for senior citizens and services therefor and for 
other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.” 
 
Definition of ‘Children’ 
2.3   The definition of Children under the Principal Act is very important because the 
Principal Act empowers the parents and Senior Citizens to claim maintenance from the 
set of relations which are enumerated as ‘children’ under the Principal Act. As per the 
existing provisions of MWPSC Act, 2007, “children” includes son, daughter, grandson 
and grand-daughter but does not include a minor. 
2.4  Now as per the Amendment Bill, 2019, “children”, in relation to a parent or a 
senior citizen, means his son or daughter, whether biological, adoptive or step-child and 
includes his son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandson, grand-daughter and the legal 
guardian of minor children, if any. 

16 
 
2.5 Hence, the existing definition of ‘children’ has been expanded so that 
maintenance may be claimed from all admissible relatives/ legal heirs of parents and 
senior citizens. 
2.6  Responding to a query of the Committee about provisions for care of such senior 
citizens and parents, who have outlived their children on whom they were dependent, 
especially when they may not be having even distant relatives to care for them, the 
Ministry, through a written reply, inter alia submitted as under:-   
“......In the worst situation, where the senior citizen or the parent has no one 
to look after financially, they may receive Old Age Pension under 
IGNOAPS/State Government, and if not able to look after themselves 
physically, then they may stay in Senior Citizen Care Homes/Old Age 
Homes, run by Government, NGOs or Trusts or Charities. 
 
The Principal Act can only lay down the broad policy framework and the 
finer details may be included in the Rules or Schemes to be framed by the 
respective Governments. “The appropriate government may frame such 
Schemes in the manner to be prescribed as may be necessary to make 
provision for those senior citizens who do not any children or relatives to 
take care of their needs.”The Scheme could then include clauses to the 
effect that where the senior citizens do not have anyone to take care of 
them, they would receive enhanced old age pension.” 
 
Definition of ‘Maintenance’ 
2.7   The definition of ‘Maintenance’ under the amended Principal Act has been 
expanded holistically so as to make the Principal Act more responsive to the needs and 
concerns of the parents and senior citizens. As per the existing provisions of MWPSC 
Act, 2007, “maintenance” includes provision for food, clothing, residence and medical 
attendance and treatment. 
2.8 As per the Ministry, the existing definition of the term ‘maintenance’ has been 
expanded to increase the purview of ‘care and maintenance’ under the Amendment Bill.  
Now it includes provision for food, clothing, housing, safety and security, medical 
attendance, healthcare and treatment necessary to lead a life of dignity. 
2.9  The Ministry was asked by the Committee to explain the scope of ‘life of dignity’ 
in the Amendment Bill. In a written reply their inter alia submitted as under:- 

17 
 
“The United Nations Principles of Older Persons in respect of dignity states 
that Senior citizens should be able to live in dignity and security and be free 
of exploitation and physical or mental abuse. They should be treated fairly 
regardless of age, gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other 
status and be valued independently of their economic contribution. Privacy, 
independence, social and family relationships, pain management, integrity, 
participation in self-care and social participation are indicative of dignity.  
In terms of this Act, it means a life of physical and mental well being. 
Accordingly, it is defined as Welfare i.e. ‘provision for food, clothing, 
housing, safety and security, medical attendance, healthcare and treatment, 
recreation and other amenities necessary for the physical and mental 
wellbeing of parents and senior citizens’.” 
 
Definition of ‘Parent’ 
2.10  As per the existing provisions of the Principal Act, 2007, “parent” means father or 
mother whether biological, adoptive or step father or step mother, as the case may be, 
whether or not the father or the mother is a senior citizen. 
2.11 Now, as per the amendments proposed, “parent” would mean father or mother, 
whether biological, adoptive or step-parent and includes father-in-law, mother-in-law 
and grandparents, whether or not a senior citizen. 
2.12  The explanation furnished by the Ministry on the same is as follows:- 
 “The existing definition of ‘parent’ has been expanded to extend the sense 
of responsibility of children/relatives towards not just their biological 
parents.” 
 
Definition of ‘Relative’ 
2.13 As per the existing provisions of the Principal Act, 2007, “relative” means any 
legal heir of the childless senior citizen who is not a minor and is in possession of or 
would inherit his property after his death. 
2.14  Now, as per the amendments proposed, “relative” would mean any legal heir of 
the childless senior citizen, including a minor, through his legal guardian, who is in 
possession of or would inherit, his property after his death. 

18 
 
2.15  The explanation for expanding the definition is as follows:- 
“Inclusion of ‘minors though legal guardians’ will enable the senior citizen to 
claim maintenance from them as well.” 
 
Definition of ‘Welfare’ 
2.16 As per the existing provisions of MWPSC Act, 2007, “welfare” means provision 
for food, healthcare, recreation centre and other amenities necessary for the senior 
citizens. 
2.17  Now, as per the amendments proposed in the Principal Act, “welfare” would 
mean provision for food, clothing, housing, safety and security, medical attendance, 
healthcare and treatment, recreation and other amenities necessary for the physical and 
mental wellbeing of parents and senior citizens.’ 
2.18  The explanation furnished by the Ministry for expanding the definition of ‘welfare’ 
is as follows:- 
“The existing definition of ‘welfare’ has been expanded to include both 
maintenance and wellbeing (recreation, peer interaction, entertainment etc.) 
of parents/senior citizens.” 
  

19 
 
2.19 The Committee note that the long line of the Principal Act has been 
expanded in the Amendment Bill to highlight establishment, management and 
regulation of institutions for senior citizens and services therefor.  Towards this, 
while some provisions of the Principal Act have been amended, new provisions 
have also been proposed in the Amendment Bill for establishment of Senior 
Citizens’ Care Homes, their registration and fixing minimum standards besides 
provisions for a regulatory authority to monitor their functioning.  The Committee 
further note and appreciate the efforts of the Ministry for incorporating suitable 
modifications in the definition of widely used terms like ‘children’, ‘maintenance’, 
‘parent’, ‘relative’ and ‘welfare’, thus enhancing the scope and ambit of the 
Principal Act and making it more relevant in the current realities of our society.   
The Committee note that the Amendment Bill has broadened the definition 
of ‘children’ so that senior citizens and parents may be maintained by their son, 
daughter (whether biological, adoptive or step), son-in-law, daughter-in-law, 
grandson, grand-daughter and legal guardian of minor children.  The Committee 
deem it to be a significant measure as maintenance may now be claimed from all 
admissible relatives/legal heirs of parents and senior citizens.   Further, the above 
change in the definition of ‘children’ has also been concomitantly reflected in the 
definition of ‘parent’ in the Amendment Bill.  They also note that with the revised 
definition of ‘relative’ in the Bill, wherein minors have been included in the 
category of ‘relative’, senior citizens would now be able to claim maintenance 
from minors too through their legal guardians.    

20 
 
The Committee further note that the definition of ‘welfare’ in the 
Amendment Bill has been expanded to include provision for food, clothing, 
housing, safety and security, medical attendance, healthcare, treatment, 
recreation and other amenities necessary for physical and mental well being of 
parents and senior citizens which has given welfare oriented impetus to it in 
actual sense.  It will further add heft to the Government’s efforts in broad-basing 
welfare measures for parents and older persons while also indirectly drawing 
attention of the society to acknowledge and address these requirements of the 
elderly.  It is further noteworthy that mental well-being of parents and senior 
citizens has been included in the definition of welfare, which was long overdue 
and would ensure now that the issues of mental illness among the elderly will be 
addressed in a better way.   
Overall the Committee opine that the modified definitions in the 
Amendment Bill will impart a practical, holistic and broader orientation to the 
MWPSC Act, 2007, thus leaving no scope for any legal ambiguity.  
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-III 
AMENDMENT PROVISIONS RELATED TO MAINTENANCE  
OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS 
 
Maintenance 
Though the parents can claim maintenance under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, the procedure is both time-consuming as well as expensive. Hence, 
the need to have simple, inexpensive and speedy provisions to claim maintenance for 
parents was felt. Accordingly, major thrust area of the MWPSC Act, 2007 has been to 
cast an obligation on the persons who inherit the property of their aged relatives to 
maintain such aged relatives and also contains provisions for setting of old-age homes 
for providing maintenance to the indigent older persons. 
3.2  As per the existing provisions of MWPSC Act, 2007, ‘maintenance’ includes 
provision for food, clothing, residence and medical attendance and treatment. However, 
as per the new definition proposed in the MWPSC Amendment Bill, 2019, ‘maintenance’ 
includes provision for food, clothing, housing, safety and security, medical attendance, 
healthcare and treatment necessary to lead a life of dignity. Thus, the existing definition 
of the term ‘maintenance’ has been expanded to increase the purview of care and 
maintenance provided to parents and senior citizens under the Bill.  
3.3 Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new section for section 4 which provides 
for maintenance of parents and senior citizens and obligation of children and relatives to 
maintain them. As per this Clause, for section 4 of the principal Act, the following 
section has been substituted:— 
"4.(1) A parent or a senior citizen who is unable to maintain himself to lead a life 
of dignity from his own earning, including earning from any property owned by 
him, and is either not maintained by his children or relatives or is neglected by 
them, shall be entitled to make an application for maintenance under section 5.  
(2) The obligation of the children to maintain a parent extends to such needs of 
the parent as are necessary for him to lead a life of dignity.  
(3) The obligation of a relative to maintain a childless senior citizen extends to 
such needs of the senior citizen as are necessary for him to lead a life of dignity 

22 
 
provided such relative has sufficient means to do so and is either in possession 
of, or shall inherit, the property of such senior citizen after his death:  
Provided that where more than one relative is in possession of, or shall inherit, 
the property of a childless senior citizen, the obligation of such relatives shall be 
in proportion in which they are in possession of, or shall inherit, the property.’’ 
3.4 The Ministry has provided the following justifications for bringing these 
amendments:- 
i)  Provisions contained in Section 4 (1) (i) and (ii) of the existing Act have been 
clubbed together to provide clarity to the section.  
ii)  Provisions contained in Section 4 (2)and (3) of the existing Act have been 
clubbed together to avoid repetition and focus on obligation of children to 
maintain their parent (whether senior citizen or not).  
iii)  The focus here is primarily upon the obligation of relatives to maintain 
‘childless’ senior citizens to lead a life of dignity.  
3.5 It is clearly important for the relative to have sufficient means in order to maintain 
a childless senior citizen. On being asked about the definition and criteria of ‘sufficient 
means’, the Ministry through a written reply submitted as under:- 
“The definition of ‘sufficient means’ and the criteria to arrive at the definition of 
‘sufficient means’ should not be under  scope of the Act and such matters are 
best left to be determined by the Tribunals or  Courts as per their discretion in 
given situation and on case to case basis. If it has to be defined it could be 
worded as “Income sufficient to cover food, shelter and healthcare.” 
 
3.6  The Committee further enquired whether the definition of "sufficient means" has 
been linked with the cost of living.  The Ministry submitted the following in their written 
reply:- 
“Again this cannot be stipulated in the Act. Moreover, it cannot be linked to the 
cost of living as many people in this country, who live below poverty line and yet 
provide food and shelter to their parents." 
  
3.7  The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act gave adult 
children the responsibility to take care of their parents. In light of India being a Welfare 
State, the Ministry was asked to comment on the responsibility of the Government to 
support/maintain such senior citizens, whose children are not earning well and are not 

23 
 
able to take care of the needs of their parents. The Ministry furnished the following 
reply:- 
  
i. “Both the National Policy on Older Persons, 1999 and draft National Policy for 
Senior Citizens 2020, promote the concept of ‘Ageing in Place’ or ‘Ageing in own 
Home’ wherein ‘Family’ has been considered as the most important supporting 
institution for the senior citizens.  
 
ii. Even though we have a Welfare State, the families also owe responsibility 
towards their family members and if the parents took care of their children, there 
is no question of increasing the burden on children if they are not earning well 
and it has to be their primary responsibility for maintaining their parents.  
 
iii. However, the State can/does  chip in providing welfare measures some of which 
are already in existence such as Old Age Pension or medical facilities or Senior 
Citizen Care Homes for residential facility or Multi-Service Day Care Centre for 
day care facilities for senior citizens, etc. 
 
iv. There appears no reason to absolve the children of their responsibility or to treat 
taking care of their parents as a burden, on the plea of not earning well and then 
the question would arise ‘what is earning well’." 
     
Application Process and Procedure for Maintenance 
3.8  As per existing provisions of the MWPSC Act, 2007, an application for 
maintenance under Section 4, may be made-  
(a)  by a senior citizen or a parent, as the case may be; or 
(b)  if he is incapable, by any other person or organization authorized by him; 
or 
(c)   the Tribunal may take cognizance suo motu. 
Explanation-For the purposes of this section “organization” means any voluntary 
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or any other 
law for the time being in force. 
3.9 Now, Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 to expand the mode of filing 
application before the Tribunal for maintenance. In section 5 of the principal Act, for 
sub-sections (1) to (5), the following sub-sections have been  substituted:— 

24 
 
 "(1)  An application for maintenance under section 4 may be made to the 
Tribunal in person or by registered post or online or by any other means, by— 
 (a) a parent or senior citizen, as the case may be, against one or more 
children as defined in clause (a) of section 2; or 
 (b) a childless senior citizen, against one or more relatives as defined in 
clause (g) of section 2, and if such parent or senior citizen is incapable so to 
do, he may authorise any other person or organisation to make such 
application on his behalf or the Tribunal may also take suo motu cognizance 
of such matter.  
(2) On receipt of an application for maintenance under sub-section (1), the 
Tribunal may, after giving notice of the application to the children or relative, as the 
case may be, and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, hold an 
inquiry for determining the maintenance in accordance with the provisions of section 
6.  
(3) During the pendency of the proceeding for maintenance, the Tribunal may, 
by order, direct the children or relative to pay such monthly allowance towards the 
interim maintenance of such parent or senior citizen, as may be determined by it 
from time to time.  
(4) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of by the 
Tribunal within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of such application:  
Provided that in case of senior citizens who are eighty years or above, such 
application shall be disposed of within a period of sixty days:  
Provided further that in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, the Tribunal may extend such period only once for a maximum period of 
thirty days.  
(5)  Where an application under sub-section (1) is filed against one or more 
children or relatives, such children or relative may implead any other person who is 
liable to maintain the parent or senior citizen, as the case may be." 
3.10 The Ministry submitted the following explanation for amending the provision 
related to filing of application for maintenance by the senior citizens or parents:- 
 “Means of submission of application for maintenance has been expanded to ease 
the process of filing application on the part of parents or senior citizens.” 
3.11 The Ministry has also submitted that amendments in the relevant clause have 
been carried out to consider maintenance of childless senior citizens by relatives. 

25 
 
3.12 When asked whether the word ‘online’ should be defined unambiguously and 
online applications may also include applications received by email /website of the 
Department concerned and through Whatsapp of the Maintenance Tribunal, the Ministry 
in their written reply submitted as under:- 
“Online submission’ of application means submission of application on the 
concerned State Social Justice/Welfare Department’s official website/portal for 
this purpose. This does not include whatsapp or similar social networking forums. 
Definition of ‘online submission’ would be provided in the Model Rules, to be 
framed after the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill becomes an Act.” 
3.13 Further the Committee desired to know whether the term ‘any other means’ 
include any other person or organisation authorised by the applicant, the Ministry 
replied as under:- 
 “Any other means’ includes any person or a Non-Governmental Organisation, 
whom the needy parent or senior citizens authorises. The detailing would be 
provided in the Model Rules, to be framed after the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill becomes an Act.” 
 
3.14  Maintenance Tribunals are the main adjudicating authority in maintenance 
matters of parents and senior citizens under the MWPSC Act, 2007. As per Clause 7 of 
the Amendment Bill, Section 7 now stipulates that:- 
“The State Government shall within a period of six months from the date of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification in Official Gazette, constitute for 
each Sub-division one or more Tribunals as may be specified in the notification, 
for the purpose of adjudicating and deciding upon the application filed under 
section 5.” 
3.15 Elaborating on the existing system of working of Maintenance Tribunals, the 
representative of the Ministry during the course of evidence had submitted that: 
“Tribunal does not mean that it is Court.  It is the Sub-Collector or Sub-Divisional 
Magistrate who is a tribunal, and he can hear and dispose of all the cases.  
Similarly, the appeal tribunals are at the level of Joint Collector.  This is the 
system” 
3.16  When asked about the State-wise details of Tribunals set-up under the Act, the 
Ministry furnished the following information:- 

26 
 
 “As reported by State Governments/UTs, Tribunals under the Maintenance and 
Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 have been set up in each sub-
Division and District. Details are given below:- 
 
 
S.No. 
 
Name of State/UT 
 
Date of 
Notification of 
Maintenance 
Tribunal 
1. Andhra Pradesh 19.08.2008 
2. Bihar 09.11.2011 
3. Chhattisgarh 24.01.2009 
4. Goa 24.09.2009 
5. Gujarat 19.05.2009 
6. Haryana 23-11-2010 
7. Himachal Pradesh The State has its 
own   Act 
8. Jammu & Kashmir Act not applicable 
9. Jharkhand 14.02.2009 
10. Karnataka 19.02.2009 
11. Kerala 17.08.2009 
12. Madhya Pradesh 02.07.2009 
13. Maharashtra 04.05.2010 
14. Odisha 01.10.2009 
15. Punjab 27.08.2008 
16. Rajasthan 19.09.2008 
17. Tamil Nadu 31.12.2009 
18. Telangana 19.08.2008 
19. Uttar Pradesh 20-10-2014 
20. Uttarakhand 07.08.2012 
21. West Bengal 20.01.2009 
22. Meghalaya 08.05.2014 
23. Sikkim 18-12-2011 
24 Tripura 15.08.2008 
25. Assam 02.08.2008 
26. Manipur 06.07.2012 
27. Mizoram 01.12.2014 
28. Nagaland 07.02.2014 
29. Arunachal Pradesh 19.06.2012 
30. Andaman & Nicobar Island 04.03.2010 
31. Chandigarh 22.12.2008 
32. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 07.04.2010 
33. Daman & Diu 07.04.2010 
34. Delhi 01.10.2009 

27 
 
35. Lakshadweep 16.03.2015 
36. Puducherry 27.10.2011 
 
3.17  As per the Ministry, an Evaluation Study has been done on the functioning and 
effectiveness of the MWPSC Act, 2007 at the grassroot level by National Productivity 
Council, New Delhi. As per the Report submitted by the Council, out of the total settled 
cases, which comes around 44.28%, 35.48% petitioners were getting allowances on 
time as per the Order of the Tribunals. There were few cases where children/relatives 
approached the High Court, which has put a stay on the allowance.   
 
3.18 When asked to furnish State-wise data on the number of cases filed by senior 
citizens or parents for maintenance since inception of the Act, the Ministry submitted as 
under:- 
(As on 31.12.2019):  
Sl. No State / UT 
No. of cases 
brought 
forward 
No. of 
Cases filed 
No. of Cases 
Disposed 
No. of 
cases 
Pending  
1. Andhra Pradesh 317  1104 1089 463 
2. Karnataka 113  1119 972 260 
3. Kerala 6537  2912 3625 
4. Odisha 88  168 117 139 
5. Punjab 976  455 414 1017 
6 Sikkim -Nil- 
7. Tamil Nadu 2865  2096 769 
8. West Bengal 361  406 408 359 
UNION   TERRITORIES: 
9. Chandigarh 262  50 150 163 
10. Daman &   Diu -Nil- 
11. Delhi (N-East) 12  32 34 10 
12. Puducherry 0  77 57 20 
  
Number of cases filed, disposed off and pending at the Appellate Tribunals:  
Sl. No State / UT 
No. of cases 
brought 
forward 
No. of 
Cases filed 
No. of Cases 
Disposed 
No. of cases 
Pending  
1. Andhra Pradesh 16  24 18 17 
2. Karnataka 0  89 60 29 
3. Punjab 299  212 196 315 
4. Sikkim -Nil- 
5. West Bengal 20  38 26 32 
UNION   TERRITORIES: 
6. Chandigarh 24  31 12 43 

28 
 
7. Daman &   Diu -Nil-  
8. Delhi 0  02 01 01 
9. Puducherry 0  05 02 03 
  
3.19 When asked to consider setting up of exclusive Tribunals to deal with the cases 
filled under the Act, the Ministry submitted that it may not be feasible for the following 
reasons: 
i) “It would require additional establishment cost to the State Governments. 
ii) It would create extra financial burden on the exchequer of the States for 
manpower, infrastructure and maintenance etc, 
iii) It would be against the policy of the Government of India, where Tribunals 
are being merged to lessen the burden on the exchequer and to reduce 
the burden of the Tribunals, 
iv) Tribunals under the Act will have to deal with the Societal problem related 
cases instead of judicial in nature, 
v) Having regard to low number of cases in each Tribunal under the Act, 
exclusive Tribunals may not be required.” 
3.20  Timely disposition of the application for maintenance by parents and senior 
citizens is of paramount importance as they do not have alternative sources of livelihood 
in most of the situations. As per existing provisions of the MWPSC Act, 2007, an 
application filed under section 5(2) for the monthly allowance for the maintenance and 
expenses for proceeding shall be disposed of within ninety days from the date of the 
service of notice of the application to such person. It has also been provided that the 
Tribunal may extend the said period, once for a maximum period of thirty days in 
exceptional circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing. 
3.21  Now, the Amendment Bill has stipulated that:- 
“Every application under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of by the Tribunal 
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of such application. 
        Provided that in case of senior citizens who are eighty years or above, such 
application shall be disposed of within  a period of sixty days: 
        Provided further that in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, the Tribunal may extend such period only once for a 
maximum period of thirty days.” 
 

29 
 
3.22  The Ministry has adduced the following justification for introducing changes in 
the disposal process:- 
“The provision for disposal of maintenance application in the existing Act i.e.  
‘within ninety days from date of service of notice of the application’ has been  
changed to ‘within ninety days from date of receipt of application’ to expedite 
the process of disposing of the cases filed in the Tribunals and for providing 
early relief to the needy applicants. Further, time period for disposal of 
application of applicants above 80 years has been reduced. The time period 
has been fixed for disposal of such applications within 60 days in order to 
provide speedy relief to the ‘oldest old’.”    
 
3.23 On the suggestion that the Tribunals need to fix particular days in a week based 
on the cases received under MWPSC Act to ensure speedy disposal of maintenance 
applications, the Ministry through a written reply submitted that:-  
“In the Model Rules, it may be mentioned that every State Government/UT 
Administration needs to specify specific days of the week for hearing cases 
relating to this Act.” 
 
3.24  The MWPSC Act, 2007 provides that the Tribunal before hearing an application 
under section 5, may refer the same to a Conciliation Officer and such Conciliation 
Officer shall submit his findings within one month and if amicable settlement has been 
arrived at, the Tribunal shall pass an order to that effect. It has been explained that - 
For the purposes of this sub-section “Conciliation Officer” means any person or 
representative of an organization referred to in Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 
5 or the Maintenance Officers designated by the State Government under sub-section 
(1) of section 18 or any other person nominated by the Tribunal for this purpose. 
3.25  The role of the Conciliation Officer has been further streamlined in Section 6(6) 
as per Clause 6 of the Amendment Bill:- 
“The Tribunal may, for assisting and persuading the parties to arrive at amicable 
settlement, refer the proceedings under section 5 to a Conciliation Officer, 
nominated by the Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed, and such 
Conciliation Officer shall submit his findings within fifteen days from the date of his 
nomination and in case of any amicable settlement, the Tribunal shall pass an 
order to that effect.” 

30 
 
 
3.26  On this issue the Ministry has made the following submission:- 
“In order to reduce the burden on Tribunals to hear and settle down cases, role of 
Conciliation Officer has been strengthened/ expanded. Further, to hasten the 
settlement of cases, the time period of submission of report by the Conciliation 
Officer has been reduced.” 
 
3.27 On the suggestion that there should be a panel of conciliation officers for 
empanelment in Tribunal and there should be multi-member Tribunals including either a 
retired Session Judge or a member of the District Legal Service Authority for better 
understanding of the problems of aged people, both legally and socially, the Ministry 
submitted as under:- 
 “The District Social Welfare Officer is already designated as Conciliation Officer.  
The mandate of Constitution of Tribunal lies with the State Government as per 
the respective Rules framed by them.”   
 
Order for Maintenance including Appeal and Maintenance Officer 
3.28  The provisions related to Order for maintenance under the existing Act as 
enumerated in Section 9 are as follows:- 
(1) If children or relatives, as the case may be, neglect or refuse to maintain a 
senior citizen being unable to maintain himself, the Tribunal may, on being 
satisfied of such neglect or refusal, order such children or relatives to make 
a monthly allowance at such monthly rate for the maintenance of such 
senior citizen, as the Tribunal may deem fit and to pay the same to such 
senior citizen as the Tribunal may, from time to time, direct. 
(2) The maximum maintenance allowance which may be ordered by such 
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government 
which shall not exceed ten thousand rupees per month. 
3.29  As per Clause 9 of the Amendment Bill, for section 9 of the principal Act, the 
following section has been substituted:—  
"9. (1)  The Tribunal may, on being satisfied of the neglect or refusal on part of the 
children or the relative, as the case may be, to maintain a parent or senior citizen who 
is unable to maintain himself to lead a life of dignity, pass an order for maintenance 
directing such children or relative to provide such monthly allowance, other resources 
and care for the maintenance of the parent or senior citizen, as it may, from time to 

31 
 
time, determine.  
 
(2) While determining the maintenance, the Tribunal may take into consideration the 
standard of living of the parent or senior citizen and the earnings of such parent or 
senior citizen and of the children or relative. 
 
(3) The order for maintenance shall be enforceable from the date of such order or, 
if so ordered by the Tribunal, from the date of the application.  
 
(4)    A copy of the order for maintenance shall be—  
(i) made available free of cost to the parent or senior citizen, as the case may be; 
(ii) posted on the Notice Board of the Tribunal;  
(iii) made available online on the website of the concerned Department of the 
State; and (iv) provided to the Maintenance Officer.  
 
(5)  Where an order for maintenance is made against more than one person, the 
death of one of them shall not affect the liability of the others to continue 
providing the maintenance." 
 
3.30 As per the Ministry, the removal of ceiling of ₹ 10,000 as maximum 
maintenance amount to be awarded to parents/senior citizens will ensure that it is 
fixed according to the needs of parent/senior citizens and capability of children/legal 
heirs to pay the maintenance allowance based on their earnings/income.  This will help 
parent/senior citizens to lead a life of dignity which is commensurate with their normal 
standard of living. 
 
3.31 When asked to consider revising the maintenance allowance after 3 or 5 
years or specific intervals instead of determining from time to time in proposed 
Clause 9, which is open ended, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 “The intention behind not specifying a fixed interval of time to review the 
Maintenance Order for monthly allowances is, that a Maintenance Order may 
be revised only on receiving request from either of the parties involved in a 
case. For instance this review could be to cater to the possibility that 
parents/senior citizen may need more allowance to meet their medical or other 
expenses that have come up over the years or in case of demise of one of the 
parent, children/relative may like to reduce the allowance amount paid so far 
as per the Order of the Tribunal etc. 
 
3.32  As per the Ministry, Section 9(4) pertaining to the copy of the order for 
maintenance has been added so that the society will know about the power of the 
Tribunal and to create a social pressure on children/relatives/legal heirs to look after 

32 
 
their parents/senior citizens and also for awareness generation of the provisions of the 
Act. 
3.33  On being asked as to why a copy of the Maintenance Order given by the Tribunal 
cannot be furnished free of cost to the Children or relative of the parent or senior citizen also, 
the Ministry through a written reply submitted that:- 
 “At Section 16(7) of the Amendment Bill, it is clearly mentioned that the copy 
of the Order of the Appellate Tribunal shall be provided free of cost to both 
the parties. However, the same is not mentioned in case of Maintenance 
Order because the objective is to let the children/relative receive the Order of 
the Maintenance Tribunals through the Maintenance Officer, who would 
ensure the execution of the Order. A copy of the Maintenance Order shall be 
provided free of cost to the children/relative, by the Maintenance Officer who 
is the one single contact point (as per Section 18 of the Amendment Bill) for 
the parents and the children/relative. This position would be indicated clearly 
in the Model Rules.” 
 
3.34 When asked to elaborate on the jurisdiction of the Courts on matters concerning 
maintenance of senior citizens and parents, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted 
as follows:- 
“Section 10(2) of the Amendment Bill has been retained, without any 
modification, from the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007. This provision indicates that decision of Tribunal shall 
consider judgments given by other Courts on the same issue, before 
pronouncing its own judgment on a matter. The Civil Courts have jurisdiction 
in the maintenance matters of the senior citizens and parents as per 
Constitutional provisions.” 
 
3.35 Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 11 to provide for the enforcement of 
order of maintenance. As per the Ministry, this sub-section has been incorporated 
to make sure that maintenance amount is paid to parent/senior citizens, failing 
which children/relative may face punitive action. The following new sub-sections 
related to enforcement of maintenance order have been incorporated in the 
Amendment Bill:- 
11(3): “If the children or relative against whom an order for maintenance is 
passed under section 9 fails to comply with such order without sufficient 

33 
 
cause, the Tribunal may, for every breach of the order, issue a warrant 
for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines:  
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount 
due under this section unless application is made by the parent or the 
senior citizen to the Tribunal to levy such amount. 
11(4) :  If the children or relatives, as the case may be, fails to pay the fine levied 
under sub-section (3), the Tribunal may sentence him to imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one month or until the payment is made, 
whichever is earlier.” 
 
3.36 The children/relatives aggrieved against the orders of Maintenance Tribunals 
approach the High Courts under the writ jurisdiction and get either a stay or the matter 
keeps on pending for years. By the time the final judgement is delivered, no parent/ 
senior citizen are likely to be alive.  Hence the Maintenance Tribunal orders, which are 
the main tools for helping the parents/senior citizens are not able to serve the purpose.  
In this connection, the Committee had received a suggestion that a new Section may be 
incorporated in the Bill to fast track disposal of cases under the Act by the High Courts. 
When asked to furnish their comments on the above suggestion, the Ministry submitted 
as under:- 
“In section 16 of the MWPSC (A) Bill, 2019, the provision of appeal has been 
extended to children or relatives, aggrieved with the order of the Maintenance 
Tribunal, provided that on appeal, the children or relative continue to pay the 
maintenance allowance as directed in the Maintenance Order. This new provision 
will not only provide an equal ground to children or relative but will also help 
parents/senior citizens get their monthly maintenance allowance for a dignified 
living.”   
 
3.37 The Committee observe that while the MWPSC Act, 2007applies to citizens of 
India outside India, the Amendment Bill does not specifically mention the procedure 
and enforcement of maintenance orders when either the parent or the child resides 
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the country. The Ministry has furnished the 
following clarification on the above issue:- 
“ ”  Section 6(5) of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
Act, 2007 provides for serving of summons to respondents ie., children or 
relatives, staying abroad through an authority notified by the Central 
Government. It is through a Gazette Notification [No. Part II-Section 3-Sub-
section (ii), Extraordinary, Dated 22.06.2011] that the Central Government 
appointed Director (Social Defence) in the Ministry of Social Justice and 

34 
 
Empowerment, New Delhi, to act as a nodal authority through whom summons 
shall be served by the Tribunals to the children or relative of parents or senior 
citizens who are residing outside India. However, there remained some official 
hassles with Ministry of Law and Justice in this regard which gradually got 
sorted out.” 
 
3.38 In this context, the Committee desired to know the details of such maintenance 
cases, wherein either the children or the parents resided abroad.  In their reply the 
Ministry submitted as under:-    
  
The Tribunals, constituted under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens Act, 2007, issue summons directly to children/relatives staying 
abroad to deal with cases of monthly maintenance allowance claimed by their 
parents/senior citizens and no such data is maintained in this 
Department.  However, in a few cases, the Tribunals send such summons to this 
Department for serving abroad for selected countries, which are then forwarded 
to the respondents through Ministry of Law and Justice. Details of such cases 
during 2015 -2020, is given below:  
 
 States 
  
Years 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Kerala 0 03 11 05 08 
UP 0 0 01 0 0 
Punjab 0 0 01 0 0 
Gujarat 0 0 0 01 0 
Total 0 03 13 06 08 
 
3.39  Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 to enable the children or 
relatives of parent or senior citizens to file appeal against the order of the Tribunal, as 
follows:- 
“Any senior citizen or a parent or any of the children or relative, as the case 
may be, aggrieved by an order of a Tribunal may, within sixty days from the 
date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided that on appeal, the children or relative who is required to pay any 
amount in terms of such maintenance Order shall continue to pay to such 
parent or senior citizen the amount so ordered, in the manner directed by the 
Appellate Tribunal: 
Provided further that the Appellate Tribunal may, entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time.” 
 

35 
 
3.40  The Ministry has furnished the following justification for extending the right of 
appeal to the children/ relative of the senior citizens:- 
By extending the provision of Appeal to children/relatives, the Amended Act will 
provide an equal ground to children/relatives who are aggrieved by the order of 
Maintenance Tribunal. However, as per the principle of natural justice, 
children/relatives have to continue to pay to parent or senior citizen, the 
maintenance allowance as ordered by the Maintenance Tribunal. This provision 
has been extended to children/relatives, especially in view of various Court 
directions in this regard.  
3.41 Maintenance Officer is an important functionary for effective implementation of 
the maintenance orders passed under Section 9 of the Act. Clause 15 of the 
Amendment Bill has further streamlined the role and functioning of the Maintenance 
Officer by inter-alia adding sub-sections (3) and (4). Section 8 now reads as:- 
(1) “The State Government shall designate an officer in the rank of District 
Social Welfare Officer or an officer of equivalent rank from any related 
Department of the State or the Block level Officer or the Tehsildar as 
Maintenance Officer for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) The Maintenance Officer referred to in sub-section (1) may represent a 
parent or a senior citizen, if he so desires, during the proceedings of the 
Tribunal, as the case may be.   
(3) It shall be the duty of the Maintenance Officer to ensure that the order for 
maintenance passed under section 9 is complied with, and in case of its 
non-compliance, he may take such steps as may be necessary for the 
compliance of such order. 
(4) The Maintenance Officer shall be a point of contact for the parent or senior 
citizen to liaison and coordinate with them.” 
 
3.42 As per the Ministry, expansion of the role of Maintenance Officer will simplify the 
whole process, from filling of application for maintenance to implementation of the order 
of the Tribunal, for parents/senior citizens as they will get single-point guidance on the 
issue.  
  

36 
 
3.43 As per the nomenclature of the MWPSC act, 2007, maintenance of parents 
and senior citizens is the major objective of this legislation.  The Act has defined 
‘maintenance’ to include provision for food, clothing, residence, medical 
attendance and treatment while the Amendment Bill seeks to augment this 
definition to include safety and security, healthcare and life of dignity.  By doing 
so, the Ministry has arrived at a holistic interpretation of maintenance as the 
words ‘necessary to lead a life of dignity’ have added the requisite meaning to the 
definition.  ‘Life of dignity’ encapsulates everything that is vital for the elderly to 
live a secure, vibrant and steady life. Otherwise, maintenance cannot be 
quantified because it varies from case to case basis. Every maintenance case 
shall now have to ensure a life of dignity, which is of paramount importance for 
any senior citizen.  Similar provisions related to the inability of a parent or a 
senior citizen to maintain himself to lead a life of dignity and commensurate 
obligation of the children or a relative to maintain them so as to enable them to 
live a life of dignity have been incorporated in Section 4 by the Amendment Bill.  
The Committee would like to commend the Ministry for this amendment to 
enlarge the scope of the overall welfare of parents and senior citizens upon 
enactment.  
3.44 The Committee appreciate that the Amendment Bill has amended Section 5 
for providing the filing of application for maintenance by registered post or online 
or by any other means, thereby enlarging the avenues for parents and senior 
citizens desirous of seeking maintenance.  Previously, the only mode available 
for them to file application was either in person or through any other 

37 
 
person/organization.  Senior citizens are often incapable of filing physical 
applications and due to problems of mobility, are not in a position to approach 
the concerned organizations working in the field for filing their applications.  
Many of them thus, are forced to lead lives of indignity, abuse and want due to 
the above limitations in filing application.  Therefore, the Committee are hopeful 
that more parents and senior citizens will now take legal recourse once the 
process of filing application gets considerably simplified by the Amendment Bill.  
Besides, filing of ‘online’ applications is more in tune with the current times.  The 
Committee feel that it is now, imperative that the Rules of the Act should clearly 
and unambiguously define the word ‘online’ so that the parents and senior 
citizens have clarity about the methods of filing their maintenance applications in 
future.  Also in order to ensure uniformity of format of applications as well as the 
future needs to track their progress, the Committee recommend that under 
proposed Subsection 1 of Section 5 , after (a) and (b), another Clause (c) may be 
added as under: 
“For the purpose of filing on-line application complete in all details, a uniform 
format and checklist may be developed in a dedicated common portal, alongwith 
a facility to track the progress of the application.  Uniform guidelines for the same 
shall be provided by the Central Government.”  In view of the Committee, since 
legal practitioners are not to be hired by the claimants, it is imperative that the 
process of filing application as well as tracking its progress is made easier and 
transparent for the aged persons.  Also they should be able to apply without any 
physical and mental strain and with just a single-point guidance. 

38 
 
3.45 The Committee note that the Maintenance Tribunals are the main 
adjudicating authority in maintenance matters of parents and senior citizens 
under the MWPSC Act, 2007.  The responsibility of constituting such Tribunals for 
each Sub-Division within a period of six months from the date of commencement 
of the Act was cast upon the State Governments.  However, the Committee are 
perturbed to note that States like Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Nagaland have notified the Maintenance Tribunals in 2014 i.e., seven years after 
the commencement of this Act.  Hence, it is obvious that Maintenance Tribunals 
were not accorded due priority by some of the State Governments despite the 
fact that these Tribunals have not been constituted as separate Courts, but only 
with the officers like Sub-Collector or Sub-Divisional Magistrate.  While the 
Ministry has again taken the stand that it may not be feasible to consider setting 
up of exclusive Tribunals for maintenance, the Committee are of the considered 
opinion that there is a crying need to augment  infrastructure of these Tribunals 
for improving their efficacy for addressing the distress of parents and senior 
citizens.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that provision of sufficient 
manpower, training and infrastructure by the State Governments for setting up 
these Tribunals for time-bound disposal of maintenance applications needs to be 
ensured. The Committee also recommend that in the Rules of the Act, at least two 
days in a week should be earmarked exclusively for disposal of maintenance 
cases by the officers concerned.  The Committee further recommend that 
Tribunals need to work now in a digital environment to keep pace with the future, 

39 
 
hence those need to be fully computerized to deal with on-line applications and 
track those for follow-up action.    
 The Committee are glad to note that maintenance procedure in the Bill has 
been further streamlined for the disposal of maintenance application ‘within 
ninety days of the receipt’ of such application, as against the earlier provision for 
its disposal within ‘ninety days of the date of service of notice’.  Now, it can be 
expected that the applications would be disposed-off at a faster rate, saving the 
time used to be taken up in serving the notice and cutting the delay.  The 
Committee are relieved that this noteworthy amendment will expedite the 
maintenance process to provide an early relief to the needy senior citizens and 
parents which is of paramount importance, if this legislation is to achieve its 
objectives.   
 Similarly, the Committee welcome the special provision in the Amendment 
Bill for expeditious disposal within sixty days, in case of those senior citizens, 
who are aged eighty years or above, as such a provision was long awaited.  The 
Committee further opine that the proviso related to extension of such period by a 
maximum period of thirty days in exceptional circumstances should not apply in 
case of the applications of senior citizens, who are eighty years or above, as they 
belong to the most vulnerable group whose requirement of maintenance could be 
extremely urgent and pressing and it would be inhuman to subject them to the 
vagaries of administrative/legal delays.   

40 
 
3.46 The Committee note that the MWPSC Act, 2007 provides for a ‘Conciliation 
Officer’ to whom an application may be referred by the Tribunal before hearing it 
and such Conciliation Officer has to submit the findings within one month.  The 
explanation to this Section further provides for the persons who can function as 
the Conciliation Officer.  Now, the Amendment Bill clearly delineates the role of 
Conciliation Officer to assist and persuade the parties to arrive at an amicable 
solution.  Further, the findings of the Conciliation Officer shall have to be 
submitted within fifteen days as against provision of thirty days in the Principal 
Act.  The Committee welcome these amendments as they opine that the role and 
purpose of the Conciliation Officer had lacked clarity in the Principal Act.  The 
Committee further desire that the explanation to this sub-section as given in the 
Principal Act should be retained to maintain sufficient clarity on the class of 
people who can act as Conciliation Officer.  The Committee can perceive that with 
the ability to act as a mediator, the role of Conciliation Officer is likely to become 
more significant for timely settlement of maintenance cases in future because 
maintenance matters, unlike other long- standing civil disputes, are amenable to 
honest mediation.  Therefore, it is important to sufficiently empower the 
Conciliation Officer and to properly delineate upon their role and functioning in 
the Rules of the Act.  At the same time, there is a need to create a willingness 
among eligible officers to motivate them for such a task hence the Committee 
recommend that in the revised Section 6, Subsection 6, instead of ‘shall’, ‘may’ 
should be added in the first line, and after the word ‘effect’, the following line is 

41 
 
added: “The Conciliation Officer shall be paid honorarium for his services, as per 
the guidelines prescribed by the State Government.” 
3.47 The Committee note that Section 9 of the MWPSC Act, 2009 has been 
substituted to inter-alia provide that the Tribunal on being satisfied of the neglect 
or refusal on part of the children or the relative to maintain a parent or senior 
citizen, who is unable to maintain himself to lead a life of dignity, pass an order 
for maintenance directing such children or relative to provide such monthly 
allowance, other resources and care for their maintenance, thereby removing the 
maximum restricted limit of ₹ 10,000 per month for maintenance as prescribed in 
the Principal Act.  Further, ‘maintenance’ as per the definition in the Amendment 
Bill now includes ‘life of dignity’ and this has been explicitly mentioned in the 
enabling provision itself.  The Principal Act had restricted the maintenance relief 
per month to an amount not exceeding ₹ 10,000.  Now, the order for maintenance 
may also direct to provide other resources and care for the maintenance, besides 
the monthly allowance. The Committee are happy that the Government has finally 
acknowledged that maintenance includes more than a mere sum of money.  The 
concept of maintenance has been rendered complete and holistic now, by the 
above amendment.  Another noteworthy aspect of the amendment is that the 
Tribunal may now take into consideration the standard of living and earning of 
the parent/senior citizens or of the children or relative, while determining the 
maintenance. 
 The Committee also welcome the substitution of another important sub-
section in Section 9 pertaining to the publicity of the Maintenance Order.  The 

42 
 
Committee are convinced that the pasting of this order on the Notice Board of the 
Tribunal and its availability on the website of the concerned Department will 
encourage other harassed parents/senior citizens to seek legal redress of their 
grievances. Fearing social disgrace, it could also act as a deterrent for children 
and relatives to properly attend to the needs of the older persons in their 
respective families.     
3.48 The Committee are happy to note that two sub-sections in Section 11 
pertaining to strict enforcement of the maintenance order have been added.  Prior 
to this, the Tribunals had no real teeth to ensure due compliance of orders issued 
by them.  Now, the Tribunal may first issue a warrant for levying the amount due 
and if the children or relatives fail to pay the fine levied, the Tribunal may 
sentence them to imprisonment for a term, which may extend to one month or 
until the payment is made.  The Committee are of the considered view that these 
punitive measures will act as deterrent to the potential defaulters as well as 
elevate the status of Maintenance Tribunals.  The Committee desire that suitable 
details pertaining to the actual implementation of above provisions should be 
incorporated in the Rules of the Act. 
3.49 The Committee note that the Amendment Bill now provides for Right to 
Appeal also against the order of the Tribunal for the children/relatives of the 
senior citizens.  Accordingly, amendments have been made in Section 16 of the 
principal Act.  The Committee understand that by extending the provision of 
appeal to children/relatives who are aggrieved by the order of Maintenance 
Tribunal, an equal opportunity has been provided to them.  The Committee deem 

43 
 
it to be a measure long overdue which finally brings parity to the two parties in 
terms of Right to Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal and satisfies the law of natural 
justice.  
3.50 The Committee note that the role and functioning of the Maintenance 
Officer has been further streamlined and enlarged in the Amendment Bill, thus 
making him an important functionary.  The pool of officers who can be 
designated as Maintenance Officer has been widened to include equivalent 
officers from any related Department of the State or the Block Level Officer or the 
Tehsildar. The Committee are hopeful that it will ensure wider pool of suitable and 
motivated officers to be designated as Maintenance Officer.  Now, the role of the 
Maintenance Officer is no more confined to merely representing the senior 
citizens during the proceedings of the Tribunal but also adding the task of 
ensuring that the maintenance order is complied with.  Hence he will also act as a 
point of contact for parents to liaison and coordinate with their wards/relatives.  
In order to ensure that the designated Maintenance Officers are competent and 
sensitive to the needs of the elderly, the Committee desire that suitable 
provisions pertaining to training and sensitization of the Maintenance Officers are 
made in the Rules.  It also needs to be ensured that they pay regular visits to the 
homes of the senior citizens to ensure due compliance of the maintenance order.  
The Committee recommend that after sub-section 4 of Section 18, the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, “The Maintenance Officer shall submit an annual 
compliance report pertaining to the maintenance order to the Tribunal.” 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
INSTITUTIONAL CARE HOMES, MULTI SERVICE DAY CARE CENTRES 
AND HEALTH CARE FOR SENIOR CITIZENS  
 
  Specialized institutions for the care of senior citizens play a very important role 
for healthy ageing in modern society. In our country’s traditional set-up, the family was 
primarily responsible for taking care of the elderly and it had been reinforced by the 
prevailing social mores. Economic development and modernization has ushered social 
changes where family as a unit is no more sufficiently responsive   towards the special 
needs for taking care of the elderly. World over, the need for having dedicated care 
givers and specialized institutions for the elderly have been acknowledged. Keeping 
these facts in mind, the MWPSC Act, 2007 made provisions for setting up of old age 
homes in every district for providing maintenance to the indigent older persons. Section 
19 of   the principal Act states:- 
 
(1) The State Government may establish and maintain such number of old age 
homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, 
beginning with at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a 
minimum of one hundred fifty senior citizens who are indigent. 
 
(2)  The State Government may, prescribe a scheme for management of old 
age homes, including the standards and various types of services to be 
provided by them which are necessary for medical care and means of 
entertainment to the inhabitants of such homes. 
Explanation-For the purposes of this section, ”indigent” means any senior 
citizen who is not having sufficient means, as determined by the State 
Government, from time to time, to maintain himself. 
 
4.2 The Committee desired to be furnished with the State-wise data on the districts in 
which such old age homes have been established, which the Ministry in their written 
reply, submitted as under:- 
 
“Number of Senior Citizens Homes and Continuous Care Homes and Home for 
Senior Citizen afflicted with Dementia, supported under Integrated Programme 
for Senior Citizens (GOI) during the FY 2018-19 is given below (State-wise): 
 

45 
 
 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
Name of States 
Senior Citizen Homes 
Senior Citizen Homes(Sr.CHs) Sr.CH for 50 
elderly women 
Continuous care homes 
and home for Sr.Citizen 
afflicted with Dementia 
1. Andhra Pradesh 75 01 - 
2. Assam 30 05 01 
3. Bihar 02 - - 
4. Chhattisgarh 01 - - 
5. Delhi 02 - - 
6. Gujarat 13 - - 
7. Haryana 17 - - 
8. Himachal Pradesh 02 - - 
9. Karnataka 36 05 01 
10. Kerala 05 - - 
11. Madhya Pradesh 15 01 - 
12. Manipur 34 01 - 
13. Maharashtra 43 14 09 
14. Nagaland 02 - - 
15. Odisha 70 10 - 
16. Punjab 03 - - 
17. Puducherry 02 - - 
18. Rajasthan 09 01 - 
19. Tamil Nadu 59 03 01 
20. Telangana 19 - - 
21. Tripura 04 - - 
22. Uttar Pradesh 15 - 01 
23. Uttarakhand 03 01 - 
24. West Bengal 21 - - 
25. Arunachal Pradsh 01 01 - 
Total 482 43 13 
 
 

46 
 
4.3 On being asked by the Committee about the details of the States which have 
not established even a single old age home and the remedial steps taken by the 
Ministry for the same, the Ministry stated that as per its records, Old Age 
Homes/Senior Citizen Homes are being functional in every State and Union Territory, 
excepting Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep, which are very small UTs with 
very less population. Further, as informed by appropriate authority, Lakshadweep 
follows matriarchal Joint Family System whereby both males and females are equally 
responsible in taking care of their parents/senior citizens. 
4.4 The representative of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment made 
the following submission while apprising the Committee about the status of old age 
homes in the country: 
“मैडम अभी तक ५०० वृȠाŵम खुले है।  इनकी िडİː Ō ƃ वाइज िलː  है। कई िडİː Ō ƛ मे  २-३ 
वृȠाŵमों से भी Ǜ ादा है। कई िडİː Ō ƛ ऐसे भी है, जहाँ वृȠाŵम नहीं है।“ 
4.5 Details of the Senior Citizen Care Homes/Old Age Homes as collected by the 
Ministry from State Governments during 2019 are given in Annexure-IV.  
4.6 On being asked whether any guidelines/directions have been issued to the 
State Governments for the establishment of old age homes as per the provisions of 
the Act, the Ministry through a written reply submitted that :- 
 
a) “As per Section 19(1) of the MWPSC Act, 2007, State Governments shall 
establish Old Age Homes at accessible places as it may deem necessary, 
beginning with at least one in each district. 
b) Recently, Hon’ble Supreme Court in the matter of Dr.Ashwini Kumar vs UOI and 
Others has directed the State Governments to set up Old Age Homes in each 
district, as per with the provisions of MWPSC Act. 
c) The Government of India also extends financial assistance for running and 
maintenance of OAHs in 446 districts at present under its scheme and should be 
able to cover all districts by 2022-23 under its Scheme with the cooperation of the 
State Governments. 
d) The State Governments are expected to implement the Act and require no 
separate directions for this.” 
 

47 
 
4.7 Further elaborating on the efforts made by the Ministry for establishment of old 
age homes, the representative of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment during 
the course of evidence informed the Committee that: 
 
“हमारा लƙ  है की हर एक िजले मे कम से कम एक ओʒ  ऐज होम रहना  चािहए। कोटŊ की 
तरफ से भी ऐसा आडŊर है।  िजन िजलों मे यह नहीं है, हम वहां ओʒ  ऐज होम सेट अप करŐगे। 
कोटŊ ने कहा है िक एक ओʒ  ऐज होम मे १५० लोगो क े रहने की ʩ व̾थां  रहनी चािहए। लेिकन 
हम काम से काम ५० लोगो से ही शुŜ करेगŐ।“ 
  
4.8   The long line of the Act has been expanded in the Amendment Bill to provide for 
not only maintenance and welfare of parents and senior citizens but also for the 
establishment, management and regulation of institutions for senior citizens and 
services.  
4.9 Further, Clause 17 of the Amendment Bill seeks to substitute Section 19 with a 
new Section inter-alia to provide that the Government or an organization may establish 
or maintain Senior Citizens’ Care Homes for providing residential facilities for the care 
of Senior Citizens or Multi-Service Day Care Centre for senior citizens for providing 
day care facilities for senior citizens. It may be seen that the Principal Act in Section 
19(1) states that the State Government may establish and maintain such number old 
age homes at accessible places, as it may deem necessary, in a phased manner, 
beginning with at least one in each district to accommodate in such homes a minimum 
of one hundred fifty senior citizen who are indigent.  
4.10 The Ministry has submitted the following justification for introducing changes in 
Section 19(1):- 
 “Unlike only State Governments (as given in the MWPSC Act, 2007), this new 
provision expands to include Central Government, Private bodies Trusts, 
Voluntary Organizations etc.  to establish or maintain Senior Citizens Care 
Homes/Multi-service Day Care Centres for benefit of senior citizens.” 
 
4.11 When asked about the differences in the model, structure, working and 
framework of ‘Old Age Homes’ and ‘Senior Citizens Care Homes’, other than the 
nomenclature, the Ministry in its written reply submitted as under:-  

48 
 
“With an intention to attach dignity to people above the age of 60 years, the 
hitherto used nomenclatures such as “older persons” and “old age homes” were 
changed to “senior citizens” and “senior citizens care homes” respectively. There 
is no other difference.” 
4.12 When asked to clarify whether the reference in the Amendment Bill is for Central 
Government or the State Government, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
 “The proposed Bill places onus of establishment and maintenance of Senior 
Citizens‟ Care Homes on both Central and State Governments and any other 
organizations like Private bodies, Voluntary organizations, Trusts etc. for benefit 
of senior citizens.” 
4.13  As per the Ministry, the number of senior citizens per Senior Citizens Care 
Homes shall depend upon many factors like location, demand in that location, resources 
of the implementing agencies, etc. The Minimum standards for establishment and 
maintenance of such Homes, along with other necessary matters such as food, medical 
facilities, staff, safety and security etc. shall be prescribed by the Central Government. 
4.14 On the modalities for establishing these Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi-
Service Care Centres, the Ministry, through a written reply, submitted as under:- 
1. “Homes for Senior Citizens Care are evolving. Plenty of them have been 
coming up across the country. They consist of paid or charitable or 
Government funded. 
 
2. Multi Service Care Centres shall be set up under State Action Plan for Senior 
Citizens (SAPSrC). Government of India will provide funds to the States for 
running  Multi Service Care Centres under National Action Plan for Senior 
Citizens (NAPSrC). 
 
3. As per the provisions of Amended Act, there will be in place “well defined 
minimum standards” which will have to be adhered to by all Old age homes 
in the country. They will form the benchmark of standards which can rise but 
not go lower. There will be in place a regulatory body for registration, 
regulation and accreditation of paid and non-paid homes. Sections 19 (2), 
9(3), 19(4), 19(5), 19(5), 28.A and 28.B of the proposed Bill refers. 
 
4. All this be well defined in the Model Rules under the new Act (once the Bill is 
passed by both the Houses) which will be prepared by the Central 
Government.” 
 

49 
 
4.15 The Committee desired to know whether the services provided by these 
institutions will be free of cost or chargeable and the manner in which they will cater to 
the needs of the differently-abled senior citizens. The Ministry, in their reply, submitted 
as under:-  
  
a) “Services provided by Senior Citizen Care Homes and Multi Service Day 
Care Centres, are supported by Government at present, and are fully free of 
cost. These homes are for the indigent or the destitute senior citizens. 
 
b) However there could be various models adopted by the State Governments 
which would be specified in the Rules/Schemes framed by them to take 
care of low income/middle income group of people who can pay a small 
contribution. 
 
c) The Rules shall mention that services in Senior Citizens’ Care Homes would 
be free of cost or chargeable as may be prescribed.” 
 
4.16 Clause 17 of the Bill further seeks to substitute section 19 with incorporation of 
the following sub-sections for setting up and management of Senior Citizens’ Care 
Homes and Multi Service day Care Centres for Senior Citizens’:- 
19(2)  “Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, all such institutions established and maintained as Senior Citizens' 
Care Homes or as Multi-Service Day Care Centre for Senior Citizens shall 
be registered with the Registration Authority referred to in sub-section (3).  
(3)  The State Government shall designate a Registration Authority for 
registration of institutions under this Act in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(4)  Every institution registered under this Act shall provide necessary 
amenities specified under sub-section (5) and if it fails to do so, the State 
Government may cancel or withhold registration of such institution, after 
following such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Central Government shall prescribe minimum standards for 
establishment and maintenance of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi-
Service Day Care Centres and for the food, infrastructure, medical 
facilities, recreation, staff, safety and security and such other matters as 
may be necessary. 
(6)  The State Government shall designate such authority, as it deems fit, as 
the Regulatory Authority to monitor the functioning of the institutions 
registered under this Act through regular inspections or social audit to 
ensure that the Minimum Standards are adhered to." 

50 
 
4.17  As per the Ministry, the justifications for inserting these new sub-sections are as 
follows:- 
(i) “Provision for registration of Senior Citizens Care Homes (erstwhile Old 
Age Home) and Multi-service Day Care Centres will help in having a 
database of all such Homes, whether run by Government or private 
organizations. It will also help in compliance of the minimum quality 
standards laid down by the Government.  
(ii)  In order to ensure availability of quality and standard care in all Senior 
Citizens Care Homes for its residents. 
(iii) Central Government to prescribe Minimum Standards required for 
establishment, running and maintenance of Senior Citizens Care Homes. 
This will enable senior citizens to avail quality facilities in such Homes 
across the country. 
(iv) The State Government, by designating Regulatory Authority to monitor the 
functioning of the institutions registered, under the new Act, will ensure 
that the Minimum Quality Standards are adhered to.” 
 
4.18 As per the Ministry, the grants for running Old Age Homes are given directly to 
the NGOs by the Ministry on an average of ₹ one lakh per inmate. Details of State-wise 
expenditure and beneficiaries under the Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens are 
placed at Annexure-V. 
4.19 Further, the Committee were informed that the Ministry conducts periodic 
inspections of Old Age Homes and subsequently reports on the findings are also 
prepared. The provision for installing CCTV cameras at Old Age Homes has also been 
made for real-time monitoring through their websites. The second installment of the 
grant is released to the NGOs only after carrying out the inspection. 
4.20  On the functioning of old age homes, the representative of the Ministry during 
the course of evidence submitted that:- 
“मैडम, अभी तक हम लोगों ने Ǜ ादा नहीं िकए हœ। जाँच Šई है, सभी जगह İ̾थित ठीक पाई गई है।  मœ 
आपसे यह नहीं कšँगी हर चीज शत -Ůितशत होती है। हम लोग िजतनी Ťांट देते हœ , कई बार यह हो 
सकता है िक क ु छ चीजŐ  शत -Ůितशत न हों, मगर ऐसा नहीं पाया गया है िक ऐनजीओ, ओʒ  ऐज होम या 
लोग है ही नहीं।  मान लीिजए एक समय हम २५ के  िलए फं ड कर रहे हœ, हो सकता है की एक समय पर 
पूरे 25 न हों , 15 या 10 हो सकते हœ  या उससे Ǜ ादा भी हो सकते हœ।  साउथनŊ ː ेटस मŐ 25 की जगह 40 
भी हो जाते हœ। मगर, ऐसा नहीं है की वे नहीं हœ, वे चल रहे हœ।“    

51 
 
4.21 On being asked whether inspection and audit of the facilities provided by the 
NGOs/Voluntary Organizations by the State Governments can be made mandatory, the 
Ministry in its written submission stated as under:- 
“Factors such as support to voluntary organisations, assessment, inspection and 
audit cannot be made mandatory as these vary from project to project and time to 
time.”  
  
4.22  On being asked about the benchmarks to be followed by Old Age Homes, the 
Ministry informed that as per the provisions of the Amendment Bill there will be in place 
“well defined minimum standards” which will have to be adhered to by all Old age 
homes in the country. They will form the benchmark of standards which can rise but not 
go lower.  
 
4.23 It was suggested by some stakeholders that there should be a provision for short 
stay homes for those Senior Citizens and Parents who are victims of elder abuse or for 
the duration of the cases filed for getting maintenance allowance. When asked to 
furnish comments on the above suggestion, the Ministry submitted as under: 
a) “Provision for designated Nodal Officer for Senior Citizens at every Police 
Station and Special Police Unit for senior citizens in each District have been 
included under section 22(2) and 22(3) of the Bill for quick hearing of cases 
of elder abuse.  
  
b) Old age homes supported by GOI and/or State Governments are in almost 
each district of the Country. Such persons could be accommodated there 
for the duration in question. Government can make such stipulation in our 
schemes. 
  
c) However, even in cases of elder abuse, institutionalization should be the 
last resort, more so as it would be very traumatic for senior citizens to be 
removed from their homes. Moreover, if an elder has been subjected to 
abuse, a provision can be considered  to be made such as in Section 19 of 
the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 as per which 
the abuser may be directed to be removed from the residence while the 
senior citizen may continue residing there.  
 
d) Even otherwise, the women senior citizens would always be able to avail of 
the provisions of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 
2005.” 
 

52 
 
Provisions for Healthcare of Senior Citizens  
4.24 Healthcare of senior citizens is a vital issue pertaining to the elderly. Adverse 
health conditions become more common among persons with advanced age.  Old 
persons have to cope with health and associated problems some of which may be 
chronic, terminal, of a multiple nature, requiring constant attention or carrying the risk of 
disability. Some health problems, especially when accompanied by impaired functional 
capacity, require long term management of illness at home and of nursing care. As per 
the MWPSC Act 2007, the State Government shall ensure that- 
(i) “the Government hospitals or hospitals funded or partially by the 
Government shall provide beds for all senior citizens as far as possible; 
(ii) separate queues be arranged for senior citizens; 
(iii) facility for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases is 
expanded for senior citizens; 
(iv) research activities for chronic elderly diseases and ageing expanded; 
(v) there are earmarked facilities for geriatric patients in every district hospital 
duly headed by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care.” 
 4.25 Now, Clause 19 of the Amendment Bill seeks to substitute section 20 with a new 
Section and also add Section 20A to provide for the healthcare of senior citizens and 
further to make provision of homecare services for senior citizens. 
4.26 Substituted Section 20 in the Amendment Bill provides that:- 
“The Government shall ensure that,—  
(i)  all hospitals, whether fully or partially funded by the Government or private 
healthcare institutions, provide beds for senior citizens as far as possible;  
(ii)  separate queues are earmarked for senior citizens in all healthcare and 
allied institutions; 
(iii)  facilities for treatment of chronic, terminal and degenerative diseases are 
expanded for senior citizens;  
(iv)  research and development in geriatric sciences is undertaken; 
(v)  facilities are earmarked for geriatric patients in every district hospital duly 
headed by a medical officer with experience in geriatric care and other 
objectives and outcomes of National and State level programmes for 
geriatric healthcare are monitored and achieved;  
(vi)  necessary measures are taken to provide barrier-free access for senior 
citizens in all healthcare and allied institutions. 
 
 

53 
 
4.27 As per the Ministry the justification for substituting Section 20 are as under:- 
(i)  “This will ensure some number of reserved beds for ailing senior citizens in 
hospitals, whether run fully or partially by the Government.  
(ii)  This will help senior citizens for a hassle-free entry in healthcare 
institutions, including medical diagnosis/test centres. 
(iii) This is to ensure quality healthcare services and treatment being available 
to senior citizens. 
(iv) This will ensure easy and independent movement of senior citizens within 
healthcare institutions.” 
 4.28 Section 20A of the Amendment Bill states that: 
(1)   “The Government or an organisation may provide homecare services for 
such senior citizens who suffer from difficulties in performing activities of 
daily life due to any physical or mental impairment. 
(2)  The institutions providing such homecare services shall engage trained and 
certified attendants or caregivers for the senior citizens as per their needs.  
(3)  Institutions providing training, certification and homecare services shall be 
registered as service provider with the Registration Authority referred to in 
section (3) of section 19." 
 
4.29  As per the Ministry, the reasons for inserting a new Section 20A  for Homecare 
services of senior citizens are as follows:- 
(i)  “This new provision has been introduced to facilitate those ailing senior 
citizens who need continuous physical and medical attention at home.   
(ii)  Registration and Accreditation of agencies providing Homecare Services to 
senior citizens will enable senior citizens and their families to choose the best 
homecare service providing agency for their near and dear ones.   This 
addresses the need for having quality homecare services for ailing senior 
citizens.” 
4.30  When enquired about the types of services to be provided by homecare service 
providers, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Homecare services have been introduced in the MWPSC (Amendment) Bill, 
2019 to cater to such senior citizens who suffer from difficulties in performing 
their daily activities or are mentally impaired. Home care services can  have a 
very large scope – Home healthcare aides diagnostics, doctor visits, 
physiotherapy services, food and nutrition and food supply, Dialysis, Terminal 
(end of life) care, counseling  and emotional support to such senior citizens.” 
 

54 
 
4.31  The Committee further desired to know whether these services would be 
provided free of cost or some charge would be taken by the Home Care Service 
providers. While replying to the query of the Committee, the Ministry in their written 
reply submitted that:- 
 “Homecare services to senior citizens would be provided by trained and certified 
attendants from registered institutions at a cost. There will be various grades of 
Home Care givers and accordingly rates will be varied from State to State and 
from grade to grade.” 
4.32 As per the Ministry, details regarding Registration of Homes and agencies 
providing Home Care Services, cancellation/withholding of registration, Registration 
Authority and Regulatory bodies for monitoring the functions of such institutions and 
agencies, as mentioned under Section 19 and Section 20A of the Bill would be 
provided in the Model Rules. 
4.33 On being asked about the Bill not having the provisions to deal with the issues of 
depression, dementia and Alzheimer disease among older adults, the Ministry in its 
written reply submitted that:- 
“The issue of dementia and Alzheimer’s among senior citizens has been suitably 
addressed in the draft National Policy for Senior Citizens 2020.  
There is a separate Act on the Mental Health, namely “The Mental Healthcare 
Act, 2017” of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which defines Mental 
Illness as “a substantial disorder of thinking, mood, perception, orientation or 
memory that grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to recognise reality or 
ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, mental conditions associated with the 
abuse of alcohol and drugs, but does not include mental retardation which is a 
condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a person, specially 
characterised by subnormality of intelligence. This Department also supports 
projects of Continuous Care Homes and Homes for senior citizens afflicted with 
Alzheimer’s / Dementia, under the Scheme of Integrated Programme for Senior 
Citizens.” 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

55 
 
4.34 The Committee note that the MWPSC Act, 2007 has prescribed 
establishment of old age homes in a phased manner, beginning with at least one 
in each district of the country.  However, it is a matter of concern for the 
Committee that out of more than 700 districts in the country, in only 482 districts 
Senior Citizens Homes have been established so far under the Integrated 
Programme for Senior Citizens and there are still many districts without 
functional old age homes despite the thirteen years, this Act has been in 
existence.  For thousands of childless and propertyless parents and senior 
citizens, Old Age Homes are the only ray of hope providing a semblance of old 
age security and care. The Committee sadly feel that a situation where even the 
bare minimum infrastructure of one old age home per district as mandated by the 
Act, has not been provided to the most vulnerably section of society even after 
thirteen years of the coming into force of this Act, is certainly uncalled for and 
presents a telling commentary on general lack of empathy for care and welfare of 
the elderly in our society.  
The Committee observe that in the Amendment Bill , the nomenclature of 
‘Old Age Homes’ has been changed to ‘Senior Citizens’ Care Homes’ to give it a 
more dignified feel and that provisions for establishment of Multi-Service Day 
Care Centre for senior citizens for providing day care facilities have also been 
made now.  The Ministry has clarified that the onus of establishing and 
maintaining such institutions now lies with both the Central and State 
Governments alongwith other organizations like private bodies, voluntary 
organizations, trusts etc.  It is a cause of concern for the Committee to note that 

56 
 
the Bill does not stipulate establishment of Old Age Homes in every district of the 
country, as given in the Parent Act. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in 
sub-section 19(1) ‘shall’ should replace ‘may’ and following sub-section 19(2) 
may be inserted after 19(1) - “Such number of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and 
Multi-Service Day Care Centres, as are necessary to meet the requirements of the 
senior citizens, shall be established in a time bound manner, beginning with at 
least one Senior Citizens’ Care Home and one Multi-Service Day Care Centre in 
each district of the country.  In case of a Government Home/care centre, the 
allotment of suitable land shall be made within six months from the date of such 
decision.”  The Committee feel that since allotment of suitable land needs to be 
accorded priority, such an addition would give the necessary impetus to this 
issue.  Also, for better clarity, the Committee desire that in sub-section 19(5), the 
word ‘operational’ may be added before ‘matters’ in the last line. 
4.35 The Amendment Bill stipulates that the State Government shall designate 
the Registration Authority for registration of institutions under this Act and also 
the Regulatory Authority to monitor the functioning of these institutions.  
However, no time frame has been provided for the State Governments to 
establish these Authorities.  It has come to the notice of the Committee that some 
States had taken inordinately long time of upto seven years in constituting the 
Maintenance Tribunals.  A number of Old Age Homes are already functional in 
various districts of the country and many are statedly in the pipeline.  For their 
registration under the amended Act, the Committee deem it imperative that the 
Registration/Regulatory Authority in each State is established immediately.  

57 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that suitable modifications in Section 19(3) 
and (6) should be incorporated to provide for designation of 
Registration/Regulatory Authority within six months of the coming into force of 
this Act.     
4.36 Clause 19 of the Amendment Bill seeks to substitute Section 20 with a new 
Section to provide for the healthcare of senior citizens and for their homecare 
services.  The Amendment Bill has retained all the healthcare provisions 
enumerated in the parent Act, such as provision of beds, separate queues, 
research in geriatric science, facilities for treatment of chronic, terminal and 
degenerative diseases and separate facilities for geriatric patients in every 
district hospital by rephrasing the Clause without augmenting any other 
significant facility.  The Committee realize that counseling of senior citizens is a 
very important issue pertaining to their overall mental, physical and emotional 
disposition.  Regular counseling for senior citizens contribute significantly 
towards better physical and mental health and ably guides them to lead a life of 
dignity during old age.  Unfortunately, the Bill does not carry any separate 
provision for counseling of the elderly.  Therefore, the Committee recommend 
that after point no. (iv) of Section 20, the following may be added- “(v) Adequate 
facilities for counseling are provided for senior citizens and such facilities are 
available on demand in District Hospitals.”   
 Though the Act and the Bill makes provision for beds, separate queues, 
facilities for geriatric care in district hospital, such facilities in the face of the 
burgeoning population of senior citizens in the country appear inadequate to the 

58 
 
Committee.   Senior citizens already constitute 8.6 per cent of the total population 
of the country and as it is bound to rise substantially in the coming three 
decades, the Committee find it imperative that adequate infrastructure and 
dedicated facilities for the healthcare of senior citizens is established throughout 
the country and all such medical facilities are available under one roof for them.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that after point no. (vi) in Section 20, the 
following point  may also be added - “(vii) separate geriatric health facilities, 
hospitals and research centres dedicated to the healthcare of senior citizens are 
established by the Government in every State in a time bound manner.”  
  

59 
 
CHAPTER V 
AMENDMENT PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO AWARENESS GENERATION, AGE-
FRIENDLY INITIATIVES, HELPLINE, STANDARDS, PENALTY AND OTHER 
MISCELLANEOUS ISSUES 
 
Wide publicity of any welfare-oriented legislative measure is indispensable for 
reaching the target population with the desired policy intervention. Senior citizen 
population is a vulnerable group, which, unfortunately, is no more considered to be 
productive and contributing members of the family and society and, hence, perhaps, 
face neglect and abuse also. Often, in the case of senior citizens, justice delayed is 
justice denied. Hence, it is imperative that the Bill ensures that no senior citizen remains 
without the knowledge of various protective and welfare measures intended to 
guarantee them a life of dignity. Then only this legislation will emerge as a major tool for 
the empowerment of senior citizens. 
 
5.2 As regards awareness efforts, it has been informed to the Committee that a 
weekly radio programme namely, ‘Sawarti Jaye Jeevan ki rahe’, is broadcast to 
spread awareness on the provisions of the MWPSC Act. Awareness through social 
media namely Facebook, Twitter, Youtube & new media like SMS burst & WhatsApp 
messages, is also done. Moreover, the Ministry statedly funds voluntary 
organizations to conduct seminars/conferences for awareness generation at local 
level. It also organizes from time-to-time sensitization/awareness programmes for 
school/college students as well as representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions and 
Police functionaries etc. 
 
5.3  The measures taken by the various State Governments under Section 21 of 
the MWPSC Act, 2007 for awareness generation in their respective States as 
furnished to the Committee are given at Annexure- VI. 
 
5.4 However, the Committee noticed that as per the Report of the National 
Productivity Council on the actual implementation of MWPSC Act, 2007, there is poor 

60 
 
awareness and publicity about the Act in the country. The Report in its findings stated 
that there is lack of awareness about the Act across the Country and hence, there is 
serious and urgent need to address this issue. Even the key stakeholders were not 
found to be trained on the Act. As per the Act, the States have been given responsibility 
to give adequate publicity to the provisions of the Act. However, none of the States were 
found to have dedicated funds under this head. 
 
5.5  On being asked about the corrective measures/action taken by the Ministry on the 
above observations, they submitted through a written reply, as under: 
“Section 21 of the MWPSC Act, 2007 on measures for publicity, awareness etc. 
has been expanded for achieving better implementation of the provisions of the 
Act. Further, National Action Plan for Senior Citizens (NAPSrC), effective since 
01.04.2020, covers issues relating to media, advocacy, capacity building etc. The 
Awareness Generation and Sensitization Programme inter alia includes 
conducting awareness campaigns on all aspects such as provisions of MWPSC 
Act., IEC material on self care, nutritional needs and information on Government 
schemes etc.” 
 
 5.6 Now, Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 to provide for giving wide 
publicity to the provisions of the Act and measures for the well-being of the senior 
citizens and also to sensitise the officers of the Central Government and the State 
Government. As per Clause 21, in section 21 of the principal Act, for clauses (i), (ii) and 
(iii), the following clauses have been substituted:— 
 "(i)  the provisions of the Act and measures for the well-being of senior citizens 
are given wide publicity through various means;  
 
(ii)  the officers of the Central Government and of the State Government, 
including the members of Civil Defence Corps and Home Guards, police 
officers and members of judicial service are given periodic sensitisation and 
awareness training on the provisions of this Act and the issues relating 
thereto."  
 
5.7  The Ministry has given the following justification for the Amendments:- 
i. “This provision will ensure that larger number of senior citizens avail the 
provisions of this Act. 
 
ii. This aims to achieve a better implementation of the Act at the grassroot 
level.” 
 

61 
 
5.8  On being asked about the monitoring mechanism put in place for ensuring 
effective implementation of the various provisions of the Act by the State Governments, 
the Ministry stated that:- 
 “As per Section 31 of the MWPSC Act, 2007, the Central Government may make 
periodic review and monitor the progress of the implementation of the Act at the State 
level. Under this Section, the Central Government has adopted the following 
monitoring mechanisms:   
1. Meetings of National Council of Senior Citizens, under the Chairmanship of 
Hon’ble Minister (SJ&E), have been organized every year to discuss on the 
issues relating to senior citizens, including implementation of the Act at the 
grassroot level. The Council consists of representatives from Central 
Government, State Governments, Senior Citizen Associations, Pensioners 
Associations, Non-Governmental Organisations working for senior citizens etc.  
2. Annual Progress Report has been sought from all State Governments and UT 
Administrations on the implementation of each provision of the Act. 
3. Implementation of the Act has also been discussed through Video Conferences, 
organized by the Hon’ble Minister (SJ&E) with the State Ministers for Social 
Welfare or Social Justice and Empowerment and with concerned Ministries/ 
Departments. 
4.  An Evaluation study has also been done on the functioning and effectiveness of 
the Act at the grassroot level by an External Agency.” 
 
5.9 A statement detailing the progress of implementation of the MWPSC Act, 2007 
by various State/UT Governments is given at Annexure – VII. 
 
5.10  On the suggestion of an NGO that the Department should organize inter-
generation meetings/conclaves to minimize the generation gap and that the participation 
of children may be made compulsory in such meetings, the Ministry through a written 
reply submitted that:- 
 
“The aspect of intergenerational bonding cannot be a part of the Act but can be an 
integral component of the Policy, Schemes and Programmes for senior citizens. In 
this Department‟s Scheme of National Action Programme for Senior Citizen, one of 
the ten objectives is to promote intergenerational bonding. Under this component, 
State Governments, NGOs, community at large can take action to organise and 
conduct sensitisation programmes on building intergenerational solidarity. On the 
occasion of International Day of Older Persons, many sensitisation 

62 
 
programmes/walkathon/meetings/conclaves on intergenerational bonding are 
organised each year across the country where large number of students, youth, 
NGOs participate together with civil society organisations, Resident Welfare 
Organisations, Pensioners and Senior Citizen Associations.” 
 
 
5.11  On the suggestion about inclusion of suitable course content in school curricula 
to inculcate the ethos and culture of respect and family bonding among school-going 
children by the Ministry of Human Resource Development, the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment, in their written submission, stated as below:- 
 
“Ministry of Human Resource Development is one of the official members of the 
National Council of Senior Citizens, an apex body to advise the Government on 
issues relating to senior citizens. The Council, headed by Hon‟ble Minister of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, meets annually. In one of such meetings, 
MHRD informed that books prescribed by NCERT for primary school already has 
contents relating to strengthening of family values. Issues relating to 
intergenerational bonding and other socially relevant issues will be apprised to the 
M/o Education, D/o School Education & Literacy for inclusion in the curriculum.” 
 
 
Action plan for Senior Citizens  
 
5.12 Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 21A to provide for Action Plan 
for Senior Citizens. As per this Clause:- 
 “(1) The State Government shall prepare and implement a comprehensive action 
plan for the welfare of senior citizens including for protection of their life and 
property. 
 
 (2) The State Government shall take all measure to ensure effective co-ordination 
between the services provided by the concerned Ministries or Departments, non-
Governmental organisations and other stakeholders to address the issues relating 
to the welfare of the senior citizens and that periodical review of the same is 
conducted.” 
 
5.13  As per the Ministry, more Government Departments have been included in the 
Amendment Bill to ensure better service delivery through effective coordination and 
convergence. 
 
5.14 The provision related to Action Plan by the State Government for providing 
protection of life and property of senior citizens has also been provided under Section 

63 
 
22(2) of the MWPSC Act, 2007.  When asked about any State Government having 
formulated the comprehensive action plan, the Ministry submitted as under:- 
“The issue relating to protection of life and property of senior citizens is under the 
purview of Ministry of Home Affairs and respective State Governments being in 
the concurrent list. Accordingly, Ministry of Home Affairs vide letter dated 
30.8.2013 has issued detailed guidelines to the State Government for protection 
of life and property of senior citizens for their safety and security alongwith 
monitoring action plan, which includes suggested measures and monitoring 
indicators. Data regarding comprehensive action plan by State Governments in 
this regard is not maintained in this Department.” 
 
 
Nodal Officer 
 
5.15  Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 to provide for designation of 
Nodal Officer for senior citizens to deal with issues relating to parents and senior 
citizens in every police station and to constitute a Special Police Unit for senior citizens 
in each district to coordinate the functions of police in respect of parents and senior 
citizens. As per this Clause, in section 22 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
 "(2) In every police station, at least one officer, not below the rank of Assistant 
Sub-Inspector possessing aptitude, appropriate training and orientation 
shall be designated as the Nodal Officer for senior citizens to deal with 
issues relating to parents and senior citizens.  
 
(3)  The State Government shall constitute a Special Police Unit for senior 
citizens in each district to co-ordinate the functions of police in respect of 
parents and senior citizens and such Unit shall be headed by a police 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police and consist of 
the Nodal Officers for senior citizens designated under sub-section (2) and 
two social workers having experience of working in the field of senior 
citizens, of whom one shall preferably be a woman." 
 
5.16 The Ministry has furnished the following reason for inserting this new clause:- 
 
“The introduction of the provision for every Police Station to have a ‘Nodal Officer 
for Senior Citizens’ in the Bill is to curb the growing number of crimes being done 
on senior citizens, whether living alone or with their families.” 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
Emphasis on age-friendly environment and Senior Citizen’s Helpline 
 
5.17  Clause 25 of the Amendment Bill seeks to insert a new section 23A to provide 
for other welfare measures for senior citizens. As per this Clause, after Section 23 of the 
principal Act, the following section has been inserted:— 
 "23A. (1) The Central Government and the State Government shall take suitable 
measures to create more accessible and age-friendly environment, 
transportation, information and communications and other public facilities 
including separate queues for senior citizens.  
(2) The State Government shall establish and maintain helpline for safety and 
security of senior citizens having one common number across the nation and it 
shall be linked to healthcare facilities, police department and other related 
agencies. 
 (3) The Government may undertake welfare measures for the benefit of senior 
citizens and any benefit for elderly persons made available by the Government or 
semi-Government or organisation shall also be available to senior citizens who 
are sixty years and above:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not have any effect on any 
benefits extended by the Government or semi-Government or organisations to 
any person below sixty years." 
 
 5.18 The Ministry has submitted the following justification for making these 
amendments:- 
(1) It will ensure a life with independent movement, awareness and dignity to 
senior citizens. 
(2) It has been introduced to ensure a secured and healthy wellbeing of senior 
citizens.   
(3) This will provide a similar ground for all those who are aged 60 years and/or 
above to avail benefits and concessions, being extended by the Central/State 
Govt./Semi-Govt./Pvt. to senior citizens, while not adversely affecting the 
already existing benefits being extended to ‘senior citizens’ below 60 years of 
age.  
 

65 
 
5.19  The Committee were informed by the Ministry that a National Helpline Service 
for the destitute is under preparation which will be functional round the clock. It was also 
informed that the Ministry have been running a Helpline for the destitute in Telangana 
for the last one year on experimental basis.  
5.20  On the query for ensuring community participation in parental and elderly care 
through Panchayats, Local Bodies, Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs), Youth 
Clubs etc., the Ministry submitted that:-  
“Various mechanisms of community participation have been detailed in the 
National Action Plan for the welfare of Senior Citizens of this Department and 
similar schemes can be formulated by other Central Ministries/Departments 
dealing with the matters relating to senior citizens as well as by the State 
Governments for implementation. This matter need not be elaborated in the 
proposed Bill.”  
 
Penal Provisions for willful abandonment of parents 
 
5.21  Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 24 with a new section to provide 
punishment for the abuse or abandonment of the senior citizen. As per this clause, for 
section 24 of the principal Act, the following section has been substituted:—  
 
“24. Whoever, having the care or protection of a parent or senior citizen, 
intentionally abuses or abandons such parent or senior citizen, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three 
months, but which may extend to six months or with fine up to ten thousand 
rupees or with both.  
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term "abuse" includes 
physical abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse, neglect and 
abandonment causing assault, injury, physical or mental suffering." 
 
5.22  As per the Ministry, the new provision would deter the growing cases of 
abandonment and abuse of senior citizens/parents by their children/relatives. 
 

66 
 
5.23  On the suggestion whether before giving punishment to the children guilty of 
abusing or abandoning their parents, their counselling should be done, the Ministry 
submitted as under:- 
 
“The Conciliation Officer at Section 6(6) of the MWPSC (A) Bill, 2019 shall 
provide counselling to both the Parties and arrive at an amicable settlement.” 
 
Power of State Government to make Rules 
 
5.24  Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 32 to empower the Central 
Government to frame model rules and to empower the State Government to make rules 
in respect of certain matters. As per this clause, in section 32 of the principal Act,—  
 
(a)  in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
 "Provided that the Central Government may frame model rules in respect of all 
or any of the matters with respect to which the State Government is required to 
make rules and where any such model rules have been framed in respect of any 
such matter, they shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis until the rules in 
respect of that matter are made by the State Government and while making any 
such rules, they conform to such model rules."; 
  
(b) in sub-section (2),—  
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(a) the manner of nominating Conciliation Officer under sub-section (6)  of 
section 6; 
(aa) the manner of holding inquiry under section 5 subject to such rules   as 
may be prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 8;";  
 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
 "(da) the manner of designating Registration Authority under sub-section (3) of 
section 19;  
(db) the procedure for cancellation or withholding of registration of institutions 
under sub-section (4) of section 19;  
 (dc) the minimum standards for the establishment and maintenance of Senior 
Citizens' Care Homes and Multi-Service Day Care Centres and for the food, 
infrastructure, medical facilities, recreation, staff, safety and security and other 
matters under sub-section (5) of section 19;".  
  

67 
 
5.25 The Committee are deeply concerned over present situation of inadequate 
awareness of the MWPSC Act, 2007, in the light of the adverse findings on 
awareness by the National Productivity Council in their Report.  Even the best 
legislative measures fail to serve their intended purpose without adequate 
dissemination and awareness among the stakeholders.  Though the stipulation 
for giving wide publicity to the provisions of the Act through public media was 
clearly spelt out in the Principal Act, its implementation was not up to the desired 
level leading to glaring gaps in awareness.  Many NGOs also highlighted the fact 
that in most of the States, senior citizens, parents as well as general public 
remain in dark about availability of legal remedies under the Act. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should formulate a time bound plan for 
carrying out extensive awareness campaign throughout the country using all 
viable means including electronic, print and social media for the purpose, 
particularly the vernacular media, for increasing the outreach of the campaign.  
This should also be shared with all the State Governments to guide and pursue 
them for the desired outcome. Simultaneously, adequate measures towards 
proper sensitization of the stakeholders to various senior citizens’ issues should 
also be taken by the Ministry by suitably modifying the school curricula to 
inculcate the ethos and culture of respect and proper care for elderly parents and 
senior citizens among children right from a young age.  This will be instrumental 
in setting the social, ethical and moral foundation of elderly care in the young 
minds and build inter-generational and familial relationships in a much stronger 

68 
 
fashion.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that in Section 21 of 
the Principal Act, clause (i) may be revised as: 
(a)  “The provisions of the Act and measures for the well-being of senior 
citizens are given wide publicity and awareness in local language 
through various means including social media and a dedicated and 
earmarked fund is set for the purpose.” 
(b)  “To inculcate a value system which respects the elderly, the school 
curriculum is revised and suitable additions made therein, and efforts 
are taken to improve familial relationships and inter-generational 
issues, as prescribed in the National Action Plan for Senior Citizens.”   
 The Committee, while noting that the Amendment Bill seeks to insert 
Clause 21A, feel that in most of the States, the District Social Welfare Offices 
suffer from lack of requisite manpower, hence they recommend to revise the 
same as under: 
 “21A(1) The State Government shall prepare and implement a 
comprehensive action plan for the welfare of senior citizens including 
protection of their life and property and shall provide adequate manpower 
to the District Social Welfare Offices to implement the same and attend to 
the grievances received by them.” 
 
Further, the Committee recommend that in Clause 21A (2) of the 
Amendment Bill, after the words “Ministries or Departments”, the words “and 
local bodies dealing with social security, welfare, health, law, home affairs, land & 
revenue, personnel & training” are added . 
5.26 The Committee are pleased to note that with the objective to deter the 
growing cases of abandonment and abuse of senior citizens/parents by their 
children/relatives, penal provisions for their abuse have been introduced and 
those for wilful abandonment of parents have been further strengthened in the 

69 
 
Amendment Bill by stipulating the imprisonment term upto six months and the 
fine amount upto ten thousand rupees.  It is also noteworthy that the explanation 
provided with the Section has broadened the ambit of the term ‘abuse’ by clearly 
including physical abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse, 
neglect and abandonment causing assault, injury physical or mental suffering, 
thus providing much needed legal clarity for proving abuse during legal 
proceedings in these cases.   The Committee believe that abuse of senior citizens 
is a hidden but rampant social problem and these penal provisions will 
sufficiently empower senior citizens to fight this evil.  In this regard, the 
Committee desire that enabling provisions should be included in the rules to 
ensure its effective implementation on the ground. 
5.27 The Committee note that as per Section 31 of the MWPSC Act, 2007, the 
Central Government may make periodic review and monitor the progress of the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act by the State Governments.  Though 
the Ministry has taken certain steps towards monitoring the implementation of 
the Act, a lot of issues pertaining to it, specially Centre-State coordination, still 
remain as is evident from the fact that the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment does not maintain data regarding comprehensive action plan on 
senior citizens by the State Governments and it has failed to hold the State 
Governments accountable to fully implement the major mandate of the Act 
establishing Old Age Homes in every district of the country.  Further, the 
notification regarding Maintenance Tribunals in certain States was issued very 
late thus depriving the senior citizens in those States of the welfare measures.  

70 
 
The Committee have reasons to infer from above that effective coordination with 
the State Governments on variety of issues is sorely missing in the present 
situation and monitoring and oversight mechanism needs to be further spruced 
up for ensuring better delivery and implementation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Section 31 of MWPSC Act, 2007 should be implemented in letter 
and spirit for achieving the objectives of the legislation. 
5.28 The Committee appreciate the stipulations providing for the designation of 
a Nodal Officer for senior citizens to deal with issues relating to parents and 
senior citizens in every police station and to constitute a Special Police Unit for 
them in each district to coordinate the functions of police in respect of parents 
and senior citizens.  The Committee view it as a landmark change to ensure that 
senior citizens can easily approach the police in abuse/abandonment cases, 
provided this clause is implemented by all States promptly. They feel that the 
Police should be the first point of contact for grievance redressal in such cases, 
much before the Courts or Tribunals come into picture. Nonetheless, it is a fact 
that senior citizens are often dissuaded from filing complaints due to the existing 
police apathy or lack of information on whom to contact. Thus, for effective 
implementation of this initiative, it needs to be ensured that contact details of the 
Nodal officers are properly disseminated in residential areas to make it easier for 
the aggrieved parents and senior citizens to file their police complaint promptly.  
Such a measure will also go a long way in curbing the growing number of crimes 
against senior citizens.  Besides, provisions for training and sensitization of the 

71 
 
Nodal Officers and Special Police Unit should also be made in the Rules to be 
framed after the enactment of this Bill.  
5.29 The Committee are pleased to note that a new Section 23A.(1) has been 
inserted in the Amendment Bill to provide for suitable measures to create more 
accessible and age-friendly environment, transportation and a Senior Citizens’ 
Helpline.   Though the Committee appreciate the intent of the Government behind 
introducing these old age-friendly facilities in public places, they are 
apprehensive that without proper measures for implementation on the ground, 
these provisions will remain superfluous just like the one for old age home in 
every district of the country being provided in the Principal Act. These measures 
are of immense value to the elderly and upon proper implementation, they will 
ensure seamless and age-friendly movement to the senior citizens facing mobility 
issues. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that a detailed analysis of the 
gaps in old age-friendly access should be carried out by the Ministry.  Thereafter, 
specific points to augment accessible and age-friendly environment should be 
provided in the Rules for implementation.  Further, it is important that 
Maintenance Tribunals and Special Police Units should compulsorily have offices 
on the ground floor and other facilities such as access ramps and toilets for 
senior citizens are adequately provided for. 
At the same time, with a spurt in digitization in all spheres of life along with 
a rise in cases of on-line fraud, it would definitely be better to include provisions 
for digital and financial literacy under the welfare measures for Senior Citizens. It 
is also important that suitable skill training is provided for those aged persons, 

72 
 
who have the capacity and the will to learn new and useful skills and be 
independent.  Hence, the Committee recommend that in Section 23A, the 
following new sub-section is added:- 
 
“23A. (2)  The Central Government and the State Government shall take all 
necessary measures to suitably empower and inform Senior Citizens through 
skill training, digital and financial literacy.” 
 
The Committee further, opine that those Government servants, who are 
single child of their parents, need some relaxation under extant leave Rules to 
attend to their needs during dire circumstances. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that in Section 23A, the following new sub-section is added:- 
 
“23A. (3) For those Government servants, who are single child of their 
parents, appropriate relaxation may be made under Leave Rules to attend to the 
needs of parents, if they are above 80 years of age or are completely 
disabled/bedridden/terminally ill.” 
 
5.30 The Committee note that the Ministry is in the process of preparing a 
National Helpline service for destitutes while one such Helpline in Telengana is 
already operational for the last one year on experimental basis.  The much 
awaited provision for establishing a Helpline for safety and security of senior 
citizens having one common number across the nation has been finally made in 
the Bill.  The Committee deem it imperative that this Helpline is established within 

73 
 
a time bound manner by sufficiently incorporating the feedback from the 
Telengana experiment and a National Portal for senior citizens is urgently 
created.  In future, this Helpline along with the National Portal can emerge as a 
lifeline for parents and senior citizens, providing all necessary information under 
a common platform for ensuring hassle-free grievance redressal. 
 
5.31 The Committee note that Section 32 of the MWPSC Act, 2007 has been 
amended to include the proviso that Central Government may frame rules in 
respect of all or any of the matters with respect to which the State Government is 
required to make rules. The rule making power of the State Governments has also 
been augmented to include nomination of the Conciliation Officer, manner of 
designation of Registration Authority, procedure for cancellation or withholding 
of registration of institutions and minimum standards for the establishment and 
maintenance of Senior Citizens’ Care Homes and Multi-Service Day Care Centres.  
The Committee understand that while the proviso has been added to cover a 
situation where a State Government fails to notify the rules, it is also imperative 
keeping the Federal principles in mind that such powers be resorted to as a last 
resort by the Central Government. In view of the past experience of some States 
inordinately delaying the notification of MWPSC Act, it is indispensable that it 
becomes legally binding on them to notify the Rules in a time bound manner for 
effectively carrying out the purposes of this Act.  Therefore, the Committee 
 
 

74 
 
recommend that in Section 32(1) of the principal Act after the words “purposes of 
this Act”, the words “within six months of the notification of this Act mandatorily” 
should be inserted. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 
 21 January, 2021          RAMA DEVI,  
  1 Magha 1942 (Saka)              CHAIRPERSON, 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
  
  

75 
 
Annexure-I 
State-wise population of Senior Citizens                     
 
 
S.No. STATE/UT Total Population (approx.) 
     
  
Persons Males Females 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. ANDHRA PRADESH 8278241 3906328 4371913 
2. A & N ISLANDS 25424 14189 11235 
3. ARUNACHAL PRADESH 63639 33189 30450 
4. ASSAM 2078544 1054817 1023727 
5. BIHAR 7707145 4106593 3600552 
6. CHANDIGARH 67078 34833 32245 
7. CHHATTISGARH 2003909 928159 1075750 
8. D & N HAVELI 13892 6359 7533 
9. DAMAN & DIU 11361 4873 6488 
10. NCT OF DELHI 1147445 576755 570690 
11. GOA 163495 74315 89180 
12. GUJARAT 4786559 2245601 2540958 
13. HARYANA 2193755 1088621 1105134 
14. HIMAHAL PRADESH 703009 340875 362134 
15. JAMMU & KASHMIR 922656 482580 440076 
16. JHARKHAND 2356678 1181745 1174933 
17. KARNATAKA 5791032 2747072 3043960 

76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. KERALA 4193393 1883595 2309798 
19. LAKSHADWEEP 5270 2674 2596 
20. MADHYA PRADESH 5713316 2769556 2943760 
21. MAHARASHTRA 11106935 5253709 5853226 
22. MANIPUR 187694 93137 94557 
23. MEGHALAYA 138902 66939 71963 
24. MIZORAM 68628 34345 34283 
25. NAGALAND 102726 54779 47947 
26. ODISHA 3984448 1994270 1990178 
27. PUDUCHERRY 120436 53419 67017 
28. PUNJAB 2865817 1443662 1422155 
29. RAJASTHAN 5112138 2432263 2679875 
30. SIKKIM 40752 22472 18280 
31. TAMIL NADU 7509758 3661226 3848532 
32. TRIPURA 289544 141920 147624 
33. UTTAR PRADESH 15439904 8037133 7402771 
34. UTTARAKHAND 900809 441897 458912 
35. WEST BENGAL 7742382 3851314 3891068 
TOTAL 103836714 51065214 52771500 
Source: Census 2011    

77 
 
ANNEXURE-II  
National Policy on Older Persons 
 


78 
 
1. THE BACKGROUND 
Demographic Trends 
1. Demographic ageing, a global phenomenon has hit Indian shores as well. People are living longer. 
Expectation of life at birth for males has shown a steady rise from 42 years in 1951-60 to 58 years in 1986-
90, it is projected to be 67 years in 2011-16, an increase of about 9 years in a twenty five year period 
(1986-90 to 2011-16). In the case of females, the increase in expectation of life has been higher-about 11 
years during the same period, from 58 years in 1986-90 to 69 year in 2011-16. At age 60 too, the 
expectation of life shows a steady rise and is a little higher for women. In 1989-93, it was 15 years for 
males and 16 years for females. 
2. Improved life expectancy has contributed to an increase in the number of persons 60+ from only 12 
million persons 60+ in India in 1901, the number crossed 20 million in 1951 and 57 million in 1991. 
Population projections for 1996-2016 made by the Technical Group on Population Projections (1996) indicate 
that the 100 million mark is expected to be reached in 2013. Projections beyond 2016 made by the United 
Nations (1996 Revision) has indicated that India will have 198 million persons 60+ in 2030 and 326 million 
in 2050. The percentage of persons 60+ in the total population has seen a steady rise from 5.1 percent in 
1901 to 6.8 percent in 1991. It is expected to reach 8.9 percent in 2016. Projections beyond 2016 made by 
United Nations (1996 Revision) has indicated that 21 percent of the Indian population will be 60+ by 2050. 
3. Growth rate on a large demographic base implies a much larger increase in numbers. This will be the case 
in the coming years. The decade 2001-11 is expected to witness an increase of 25 million persons 60+ 
which is equivalent to the total population of persons 60+ in 1961. The twenty five years period 1991 to 
2016 will witness an increase of 55.4 million persons 60+ which is nearly the same as the population of 
persons 60+ in 1991. In other words, in a twenty five years period starting 1991 the population 60+ will 
nearly double itself. 
4. Sixty three percent of the population in 1991 (36 million) is in the age group 60-69 years, often referred 
to as 'young old' or 'not so old' while 11 percent (6 million) is in the age group 80 years and over i.e., in the 
'older old' or 'very old' category. In 2016, the percentage in these age groups will be almost the same, but 
the numbers are expected to be 69 million and 11 million respectively. In other words, close to six tenths of 
population 60-69 years can be expected to be in reasonably good physical and mental health, free of serious 
disability and capable leading an active life. About one third of the population 70-79 years can also be 
expected to be fit for a reasonably active life. This is indicative of the huge reserve of human resource. 
5. Men outnumber women in India even after age 60 (29 million males, 27 million females 60+ in 1991). 
This will continue to be the situation in 2016 when there will be an estimated 57 million males and 56 million 
females 60+. 
6. Incidence of widowhood is much higher among females 60+ than among males of the same age group 
because it is customary for women to get married to men older by several years; also, they do not remarry 
and live longer. There were in 1991, 14.8 million widowed females 60+ compared to 4.5 million widowed 
males. In other words, there were four times as many widowed females as widowed males. 

79 
 
Implications 
7. The demographic ageing of population has implications at the macro and also at household level. The 
sheer magnitude of numbers is indicative both of the huge human reserve and also of the scale of 
endeavours necessary to provide social services and other benefits. 
8. Demographic transition has been accompanied by changes in society and economy. These are of a 
positive nature in some areas and a cause of concern in others. 
9. A growing number of persons 60+ in the coming decades will belong to the middle and upper income 
groups, be economically better off with some degree of financial security, have higher professional and 
education qualifications, lead an active life in their 60s and even first half of the 70s, the have a positive 
frame of mind looking for opportunities for a more active, creative and satisfying life. 
10. Some areas of concern in the situation of older persons will also emerge, signs of which are already 
evident, resulting in pressures and fissures in living arrangements of older persons. It is true that family ties 
in India are very strong and an overwhelming majority live with their sons or are supported by them. Also, 
working couples find the presence of old parents emotionally bonding and of great help in managing the 
household and caring for children. However, due to the operation of several forces, the position of a large 
number of older persons has become vulnerable due to which they cannot take for granted that their 
children will be able to look after them when they need care in old age, specially in view of the longer life 
span implying an extended period of dependency and higher costs to meet health and other needs. 
11. Industrialisation, urbanization, education and exposure to life styles in developed countries are bringing 
changes in values and life styles. Much higher costs of bringing up and educating children and pressures for 
gratification of their desires affects transfer of share of income for the care of parents. Due to shortage of 
space in dwellings in urban areas and high rents, migrants prefer to leave their parents in their native place. 
Changing roles and expectations of women, their concepts of privacy and space, desire not to be 
encumbered by caring responsibilities of old people for long periods, career ambitions, and employment 
outside the home implies considerably reduced time for care giving. Also, adoption of small family norms by 
a growing number of people implies availability of fewer care givers specially since in a growing number of 
families, daughters, too, are fully occupied, pursuing their educational or work career. The position of single 
persons, particularly females, is more vulnerable in old age as few persons are willing to take care of non-
lineal relatives. So also is the situation of widows an overwhelming majority of whom have no independent 
source of income, do not own assets and are totally dependent. 
The Mandate 
12. Well-being of older persons has been mandated in the Constitution of India. Article 41, a Directive 
Principle of State Policy, has directed that the State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and 
development, make effective provision for securing the right of public assistance in cases of old age. There 
are other provisions, too, which direct the State to improve the quality of life of its citizens. Right to equality 
has been guaranteed by the Constitution as a Fundamental Right. These provisions apply equally to older 
persons. Social security has been made the concurrent responsibility of the Central and State Governments. 

80 
 
13. The last two decades have witnessed considerable discussion and debate on the impact of demographic 
transition and of changes in society and economy on the situation of older persons. The United Nations 
Principles for Older Persons adopted by the United Nations General Assembly in 1991, the Proclamation of 
Ageing and the Global Targets on Ageing for the year 2001 adopted by the General Assembly in 1992, and 
various other Resolutions adopted from time to time, are intended to encourage governments to design their 
own policies and programmes in this regard. 
14. There has for several years been a demand for a Policy Statement by the State towards its senior 
citizens so that they do not face an identity crisis and know where they stand in the overall national 
perspective. The need has been expressed at different forums where ageing issues have been deliberated. 
The Statement, by indicating the principles underlying the policy, the directions, the needs that will be 
addressed and the relative roles of governmental and nongovernmental institutions, is expected to facilitate 
carving out of respective areas of operation and action in the direction of a human age integrated society. 
II. National Policy Statement 
15. The National Policy seeks to assure older persons that their concerns are national concerns and they will 
not live unprotected, ignored or marginalized. The goal of the National Policy is the well-being of older 
persons. It aims to strengthen their legitimate place in society and help older persons to live the last phase 
of their life with purpose, dignity and peace. 
16. The Policy visualizes that the State will extend support for financial security, health care, shelter, welfare 
and other needs of older persons, provide protection against abuse and exploitation, make available 
opportunities for development of the potential of older persons, seek their participation, and provide services 
so that they can improve the quality of their lives. The Policy is based on some broad principles. 
17. The Policy recognizes the need for affirmative action in favour of elderly. It has to be ensured that the 
rights of older persons are not violated and they get opportunities and equitable share in development 
benefits, different sectors of development, programmes and administrative actions will reflect sensitivity in 
older persons living in rural areas. Special attention will be necessary to older females so that they do not 
become victims of triple neglect and discrimination on account of gender, widowhood and age. 
18. The Policy views the life cycle as a continuum, of which post 60 phase of life is an integral part. It does 
not view age 60 as the cut off point for beginning a life of dependency. It considers 60+ as a phase when 
the individual should have the choices and the opportunities to led an active, creative, productive and 
satisfying life. An important thrust is therefore, on active and productive involvement of older persons and 
not just their care. 
19. The Policy values an age-integrated society. It will endeavour to strengthen integration between 
generations, facilitate two way flows and interactions, and strengthen bonds between the young and the old. 
It believes in the development of a social support system, informal as well as formal, so that the capacity of 
families to take care of older persons is strengthened and they can continue to live in their family. 
20. The Policy recognizes that older persons, too, are a resource. They render useful services in the family 
and outside. They are not just consumers of goods and services but also their producers. Opportunities and 

81 
 
facilities need to be provided so that they can continue to contribute more effectively to the family, the 
community and society. 
21. The Policy firmly believes in the empowerment of older persons so that they can acquire better control 
over their lives and participate in decision making on matters which affect them as well as on other issues as 
equal partners in the development process. The decision making process will seek to involve them to a much 
larger extent specially since they constitute 12 percent of the electorate, a proportion which will rise in the 
coming years. 
22. The Policy recognizes that larger budgetary allocations from the State will be needed and the rural and 
urban poor will be given special attention. However, it is neither feasible nor desirable for the State alone to 
attain the objectives of the National Policy. Individuals, families, communities and institutions of civil society 
have to join hands as partners. 
23. The Policy emphasizes the need for expansion of social and community services for older persons, 
particularly women, and enhance their accessibility and use by removing socio-cultural, economic and 
physical barriers and making the services client oriented and user friendly. Special efforts will be made to 
ensure that rural areas, where more than three-fourths of the older population lives, are adequately 
covered. 
Principal Areas of Intervention And Action Strategies 
Financial Security 
24. A great anxiety in old age relates to financial insecurity. When the issue is seen in the context of fact 
that one-third of the population (1993-94) is below the poverty line and about one-third are above it but 
belong to the lower income group, the financial situation of two-thirds of the population 60+ can be said to 
fragile. Some level of income security in old age is a goal which will be given very high priority. Policy 
instruments to cover different income segments will be developed. 
25. For elderly persons below the poverty line, old age pensions provide some succour. Coverage under the 
old age pension scheme for poor persons will be significantly expanded from the January 1997 level of 2.76 
million with the ultimate objective of covering all older persons below the poverty line. Simultaneously, it 
will be necessary to prevent delays and check abuses in the matter of selection and disbursement. Rate of 
monthly pension will need to be revised at intervals so that inflation does not deflate its real purchasing 
power. Simultaneously, the public distribution system will reach out to cover all persons 60+ living below 
the poverty line. 
26. Employees of government and quasi government bodies and industrial workers desire better returns 
from accumulations in provident funds through prudent and safe investment of the funds. Issues involved 
will be given careful consideration. It will be ensured that settlement of pension, provident fund, gratuity 
and other retirement benefits is made promptly and superannuated persons are not put to hardship due to 
administrative lapses. Accountability for delays will be fixed. Redressal mechanisms for superannuated 
persons will ensure prompt, fair and humane treatment. Widows will be given special consideration in the 
matter of settlement of benefits accruing to them on the demise of husband. 

82 
 
27. Pension is a much, sought after income security scheme. The base of pension coverage needs to be 
considerably expanded. It would be necessary to facilitate the establishment of pension schemes both in the 
private as well as in the public sector for self-employed and salaried persons in non-governmental 
employment, with provision for employers also to contribute. Paramount considerations in regard to pension 
schemes are total security, flexibility, liquidity and maximisation of returns. Pension Funds will function 
under the watchful eye of a strong regulatory authority which lays down the investment norms and provide 
strong safeguards. 
28. Taxation policies will reflect sensitivity to the financial problems of older persons which accelerate due to 
very high costs of medical and nursing care, transportations and support services needed at home. 
Organisations of senior citizens have been demanding a much higher standard deduction for them and a 
standard annual rebate for medical treatment, whether domiciliary or hospital based, in cases where 
superannuated persons do not get medical coverage from their erstwhile employers. There are also 
demands that some tax relief must be given to son or daughter when old parents co-reside and also allow 
some tax rebate for medical expenses. These and other proposals of tax relief will be considered. 
29. Long term savings instruments will be promoted to reach both rural and urban areas. It will be 
necessary for the contributors to feel assured that the payments at the end of the stipulated period are 
attractive enough to take care of the likely erosion in purchasing power due to erosion. Earners will be 
motivated to save in their active working years for financial security in old age. Pre-retirement counselling 
programmes will be promoted and assisted. 
30. Pre-retirement counselling programmes will be promoted and assisted.  
31. Employment in income generating activities after superannuation should be the choice of the individual. 
Organisations which provide career guidance, training and orientation, and support services will be assisted. 
Programmes of non-governmental organizations for generating incomes of old persons will be encouraged. 
Age related discrimination in the matter of entitlement to credit, marketing and other facilities will be 
removed. Structural adjustment policies may affect the older workers in some sectors more adversely, 
specially those in household or small scale industry. Measures will be taken to protect their interests. 
32. The right of parents without any means to be supported by their children having sufficient means has 
been recognised by Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 
1956, too secures this right to parents. To simplify the procedure, provide speedy relief, lay down the 
machinery for processing cases, and define the rights and circumstances in a comprehensive manner, the 
Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly passed the Himachal Pradesh Maintenance of Parents and 
Dependents Bill, 1996. The Government of Maharashtra has prepared a Bill on similar lines. Other States will 
be encouraged to pass similar legislation so that old parents unable to maintain themselves do not face 
abandonment and acute neglect. 
Health Care and Nutrition 
33. With advancing age, old persons have to cope with health and associated problems some of which may 
be chronic, of a multiple nature, require constant attention and carry the risk of disability and consequent 

83 
 
loss of autonomy. Some health problems, specially when accompanied by impaired functional capacity, 
require long term management of illness at time, and of nursing care. 
34. Health care needs of older persons will be given high priority. The goal should be good affordable health 
services, very heavily subsidised for the poor and a graded system of user charges for others. It will be 
necessary to have a judicious mix of public health services, health insurance, health services provided by 
not for profit organizations including trusts and charities, and private medical care. While the first of these 
will require greater State participation, the second category will need to be promoted by the State, the third 
category given some assistance, concessions and relief, and the fourth encouraged by subjected to some 
degree of regulation, preferably by an association of providers of private care. 
35. The primary health care system will be the basic structure of public health care. It will be strengthened 
and oriented to be able to meet the health care needs of older persons as well public health services, 
preventive, curative, restorative and rehabilitative, will be considerably expanded and strengthened and 
geriatric care facilities provided at secondary and tertiary levels. This will imply much larger public sector 
outlays, proper distribution of services in rural and urban areas, and much better health administration and 
delivery systems. 
36. The development of health insurance will be given high priority to cater to the needs of different income 
segments of the population and have provision for varying contributions and benefits. Packages catering to 
the lower income groups will be entitled to state subsidy. Various reliefs and concessions will be given to 
health insurance to enlarge the base of coverage and make them affordable. 
37. Trusts, charitable societies and voluntary agencies will be promoted, encouraged and assisted by way of 
grants, tax relief and land at subsidized rates to provide free beds, medicines and treatment to the very 
poor elder citizens and reasonable user charges for the rest of the population. 
38. Private medical care has expanded in recent years offering the latest medical treatment facilities to 
those who can afford it. Where land and other facilities are provided at less than market rates, bodies 
representing private hospitals and nursing homes will be requested to direct their members to offer a 
discount to older patients. Private general practitioners will be extended opportunities for orientation in 
geriatric care. 
39. Public hospitals will be directed to ensure that elderly patients are not subjected to long waits and visits 
to different counters for medical tests and treatment. They will endeavour to provide separate counters and 
convenient timings on specified days. Geriatric wards will be set up. 
40. Medical and para-medical personnel in primary, secondary and tertiary health care facilities will be given 
training and orientation in health care of the elderly. Facilities for specialization in geriatric medicine will be 
provided in the medical colleges. Training in nursing care will include geriatric care. Problems of accessibility 
and use of health services by the elderly arise due to distance, absence of escort and transportation. 
Difficulties in reaching a public health care facility will be addressed through mobile health services, special 
camps and ambulance services by charitable institutions and not for profit health care organizations. 
Hospitals will be encouraged to have a separate Welfare Fund which will receive donations and grants for 
providing free treatment and medicines to poor elderly patients. 

84 
 
41. For the old who are chronically ill and are deprived of family support, hospices supported or assisted by 
the State, public charity, and voluntary organizations will be necessary. These are also needed to cater to 
cases of abandonment of chronically ill aged patients admitted to public hospitals. 
42. Assistance will be given to geriatric care societies for the production and distribution of instruction 
material on self care by older persons. Preparation and distribution of easy to follow guidance material on 
health and nursing care of older persons for the use of family care givers will also be supported. 
43. Older persons and their families will be given access to educational material on nutritional needs in old 
age. Information will be made available on the foods to avoid and the right foods to eat. Diet recipes suiting 
tastes of different regions which are nutritious, tasty, fit into the dietary pattern of the family and the 
community, are affordable and can be prepared from locally available vegetables, cereals and fruits, will be 
disseminated. 
44. The concept of healthy ageing will be promoted. It is necessary to educate older persons and their 
families that diseases are not a corollary of advancing age nor is a particular chronological age the starting 
point for decline in health status. On the contrary, preventive health care and early diagnosis can keep a 
person in reasonable good health and prevent disability. 
45. Health education programmes will be strengthened by making use of mass media, folk media and other 
communication channels which reach out to different segments of the population. The capacity to cope with 
illness and manage domiciliary care will be strengthened. Programmes will also be developed targeting the 
younger and middle age groups to inform them how life styles during early years affect health status in later 
years. Messages on how to stay healthy for the entire life span will be given. The importance of balanced 
diets, physical exercise, regular habits, reduction of stress, regular medical check up, allocation of time for 
leisure and recreation, and pursuit of hobbies will be conveyed. Programmes on yoga, meditation and 
methods of relaxation will be developed and transmitted through different channels of communication to 
reach diverse audiences. 
46. Mental health services will be expanded and strengthened. Families will be provided counselling facilities 
and information on the care and treatment of older persons having mental health problems. 
47. Non-governmental organizations will be encouraged and assisted through grants, training and 
orientation of their personnel and various concessions and relief to provide ambulatory services, day care 
and health care to complement the efforts of the State. 
Shelter 
48. Shelter is a basic human need. The stock of housing for different income segments will be increased. 
Housing schemes for urban and rural lower income segments will be earmark 10 per cent of the 
houses/house sites for allotment to older persons. This will include Indira Awas Yojana and other schemes of 
government. Earning persons will be motivated to invest in their housing in their earning days so that they 
have no problems of shelter when they grow old. This will require speedy urban land development for 
housing, time bound provision of civic services and communication links, availability of loans at reasonable 
rates, easy repayment installments, time bound construction schedules and tax reliefs. Development of 

85 
 
housing has to be a joint endeavour of public and private sectors and require participation of Housing 
Development Boards, civic authorities, housing finance institutions and private developers and builders. 
Older persons will be given easy access to loans for purchase of housing and for major repairs, with easy 
repayment schedules. 
49. Layouts of housing colonies will have to respond to the life styles of the elderly. It will have to be 
ensured that there are no physical barriers to mobility, and accessibility to shopping complexes, community 
centres, parks and other services is safe and easy. A multi-purpose centre for older persons is a necessity 
for social interaction and to meet other needs. It will therefore, be necessary to earmark sites for such 
centres in all housing colonies. Segregation of older persons in housing colonies has to be avoided as it 
prevents interaction with the rest of the community. Three or four storied houses without lifts are unfriendly 
to older persons, tend to isolate them, restraints their movement outside the home, and are a serious 
barrier to access to services. Preferences will be given to older persons in the allotment of flats on the 
ground floor. 
50. Group housing of older persons comprising flat lets with common service facilities for meals, laundry, 
common room and rest rooms will be encouraged. These would have easy access to community services, 
medicare, parks, recreation and cultural centres. 
51. Education, training and orientation of town planners, architects and housing administrators will include 
modules on needs of older persons for safe and comfortable living. 
52. Older persons and their families will be provided access to information on prevention of accidents and on 
measures which enhance safety, taking cognizance of reduced physical capacity and infirmities. 
53. Noise and other forms of pollution affect children, the sick and older persons more adversely. Norms will 
be laid down and strictly enforced. 
54. Civic authorities and bodies providing public utilities will be required to give top priority to attending 
complaints of older persons. Payment of civic dues will be facilitated. Older persons will be given special 
consideration in promptly dealing with matters relating to transfer of property, mutation, property tax and 
other matters. Harassment and abuses in such cases will be checked. 
Education 
55. Education, training and information needs of older persons will be met. These have received virtually no 
attention in the past. Information and educational material specially relevant to the lives of older people will 
be developed and widely disseminated using mass media and non-formal communication channels. 
56. Discriminations, if any, against older persons for availing opportunities for education, training and 
orientation will be removed. Continuing education programmes will be encouraged and supported. These 
would cover a wide spectrum ranging from career development to creative use of leisure, appreciation of 
art, culture and social heritage and imparting skills in community work and welfare activities. Assistance of 
open universities will be sought to develop packages using distance learning techniques. Access of older 
persons to libraries of universities, research institutions and cultural centres will be facilitated. 

86 
 
57. Educational curriculum at all stages of formal education as also non-formal education programmes will 
incorporate material to strengthen intergenerational bonds and mutually supporting relationships. 
Interactions with educational institutions will be facilitated whereby older persons with professional 
qualifications and knowledge in science, arts, environment, socio-cultural heritage, sports and other areas 
could interact with children and young persons. Schools will be encouraged and assisted to develop out-
reach programmes for interacting with older persons on a regular basis, participate in the running of senior 
citizens centres and develop activities in them.  
58. Individuals of all ages, families and communities will be provided with information about the ageing 
process and the changing roles, responsibilities and relationships at different stages of the life cycle. The 
contributions of older persons inside the household and outside will be highlighted through the media and 
other forums and negative images, myths and stereotypes dispelled. 
Welfare 
59. The main thrust of welfare will be to identify the move vulnerable among the older persons such as the 
poor, the disabled, the infirm, the chronically sick and those without family support, and provide welfare 
services to them on a priority basis. The policy will be to consider institutional care as the last resort when 
personal circumstances are such that stay in old age homes becomes absolutely necessary. 
60. Non-institutional services by voluntary organizations will be promoted and assisted to strengthen the 
coping capacity of older persons and their families. This has become necessary since families, as they 
become smaller and women work outside the home, have to cope with scarcity of full time care givers. 
Support services will provide some relief through sharing of the family's caring responsibilities. 
61. Assistance will be provided to voluntary organizations by way of grants-in-aid for construction and 
maintenance of old age homes. Those for the poor will be heavily subsidized. It is important that such 
institutions become lively places of stay and provide opportunities to residents to interact with the outside 
world. Non-governmental organizations will be encouraged to seek professional expertise in the designing of 
old age homes, keeping in view needs of group living at this stage of the life cycle and the class of clients 
they serve. Minimum standards of services in such homes will be developed and facilities provided for 
training and orientation of persons employed in these homes. 
62. Voluntary organizations will be encouraged and assisted to organize services such as day care, multi-
service citizen's centres, reach-out services, supply of disability related aids and appliances, assistance to 
old persons to learn to use them, short term stay services and friendly home visits by social workers. For old 
couples of persons living on their own, helpline, telephone assurance services, help in maintaining contacts 
with friends, relatives and neighbours and escorting older persons to hospitals, shopping complexes and 
other places will be promoted for which assistance will be given to voluntary organizations. Older persons 
will be encouraged to form informal groups of their own in the neighbourhood which satisfy the needs for 
social interaction, recreation and other activities. For a group of neighbourhoods/ villages, the formation of 
senior citizen's forums will be encouraged. 

87 
 
63. A Welfare Fund for older persons will be set up. It will obtain funding support from government, 
corporate sector, trusts, charities, individual donors and others. Contributions to the Fund will be given tax 
relief. States will be expected to establish similar Funds. 
64. The need for plurality of arrangements for welfare services is recognised. Government, voluntary 
organizations and private sector agencies all have a place, the latter catering to those who have the means 
and desire better standards of care. 
Protection of Life and Property 
65. Old persons have become soft targets for criminal elements. They also become victims of fraudulent 
dealings and of physical and emotional abuse within the household by family members to force them to part 
with their ownership rights. Widow's rights of inheritance, occupancy and disposal are at times violated by 
their own children and relatives. It is important that protection is available to older persons. The introduction 
of special provisions in IPC to protect older persons from domestic violence will be considered and 
machinery provided to attend all such cases promptly. Tenancy legislation will be reviewed so that the rights 
of occupancy of older persons are restored speedily. 
66. Voluntary organizations and associations of older persons will be assisted to provide protective services 
and help to senior citizens through helpline services, legal aid and other measures. 
67. Police will be directed to keep a friendly vigil on older couples or old single persons living alone and 
promote mechanisms of interaction with neighbourhood associations. Information and advice will be made 
available to older persons on the importance of keeping contacts on phone with relatives, friends and 
neighbours and on precautions to be taken on matters such as prevention of unauthorized entry, hiring of 
domestic help, visits of repair and maintenance persons, vendors and others, and the handling of cash and 
valuables. 
Other Areas of Action 
68. There are various other areas which would need affirmative action of the State to ensure that policies 
and programmes reflect sensitivity to older persons. Among these are issue of identity cards by the 
administration; fare concessions in all modes of travel; preference in reservation of seats and earmarking of 
seats in local public transport; modifications in designs of public transport vehicles for easy entry and exit; 
strict enforcement of traffic discipline at zebra crossings to facilitate older persons to cross streets; priority 
in gas and telephone connections and in fault repairs; removal of physical barriers to facilitate easy 
movement, concessions in entrance fees in leisure and entertainment facilities : art and cultural centres and 
places of tourist interest. 
69. Speedy disposal of complaints of older persons relating to fraudulent dealings, cheating and other 
matters will go a long way in providing relief to them. Machinery for achieving this objective will be put in 
place. 

88 
 
70. Issues pertaining to older persons will be highlighted every year on the National Older Persons' Day. The 
year 2000 will be declared as the National Year for Older Persons. Activities during the year will be planned 
and executed with the participation of different organizations. 
71. Facilities, concessions and relief given to older persons by the Central and State governments and the 
agencies will be complied, updated at regular intervals and made available to associations of older persons 
for wide dissemination. 
Non-Governmental Organizations 
72. The State alone cannot provide all the services needed by older persons. Private sector agencies cater to 
a rather small paying segment of the population. The National Policy recognizes the NGO sector as a very 
important institutional mechanism to provide user friendly affordable services to complement the 
endeavours of the State in this direction. 
73. Voluntary effort will be promoted and supported in a big way and efforts made to remedy the current 
uneven spread both within a state and between states. There will be continuous dialogue and 
communication with NGOs on ageing issues and on services to be provided. Networking, exchange of 
information and interactions among NGOs will be facilitated. Opportunities will be provided for orientation 
and training of manpower. Transparency, accountability, simplification of procedures and timely release of 
grants to voluntary organizations will ensure better services. The grant-in-aid policy will provide incentives 
to encourage organization to raise their own resources and not become dependent only on government 
funding for providing services on a sustainable basis. 
74. Trusts, charities, religious and other endowments will be encouraged to expand their areas of concern to 
provide services to the elderly by involving them on ageing issues. 
75. Older persons will be encouraged to organize themselves to provide services to fellow senior citizens 
thereby making use of their professional knowledge, expertise and contacts. Initiatives taken by them in 
advocacy, mobilization of public opinion raising of resources and community work will be supported. 
76. Support will be provided for setting up volunteer programmes which will mobilize the participation of 
older persons and others in community affairs, interact with the elders and help them with their problems. 
Volunteers will be provided opportunities for training and orientation on handling problems of the elderly and 
kept abreast of developments in the field to promote active ageing. Volunteers will be encouraged to assist 
the home bound elderly, particularly frail and elderly women and help them to overcome loneliness. 
77. Trade unions, employers organizations and professional bodies will be approached to organize sensitivity 
programmes for their members on ageing issues, and promote and organize services for superannuated 
workers. 
Realizing the Potential 
78. The National Policy recognizes that 60+ phase of life is a huge untapped resource. Facilities will be made 
available so that this potential is realized and individuals are enabled to make the appropriate choices. 

89 
 
79. Older persons, particularly women, perform useful but unsung rules in the household. Efforts will be 
made to make family members appreciate and respect the contribution of older persons in the running of 
the household specially when women, too, are working outside the home. Special programmes will be 
designed and disseminated through the media targeted at older persons so that they can enrich and update 
their knowledge, integrate tradition with contemporary needs and transmit more effectively socio-cultural 
heritage to the grandchildren. 
Family 
80. Family is the most cherished social institution in India and the most vital non-formal social security for 
the old. Most older persons stay with one or more of their children, particularly when independent living is 
no longer feasible. It is for them the most preferred living arrangement and also the most emotionally 
satisfying. It is important that the familial support system continues to be functional and the ability of the 
family to discharge its caring responsibilities is strengthened through support services. 
81. Programmes will be developed to promote family values, sensitise the young on the necessity and 
desirability of inter-generational bonding and continuity and the desirability of meeting filial obligations. 
Values of caring and sharing need to be reinforced. Society will need to be sensitized to accept the role of 
married daughters in sharing the responsibility of supporting older parents in the light of changing context 
where parents have only one or two children, in some situations only daughter. This would require some 
adjustment and changes in perceptions of in-laws in regard to sharing of caring responsibilities by sons and 
daughters as a corollary to equal rights of inheritance and the greater emotional attachment that daughters 
have with their parents. 
82. State policies will encourage children to co-reside with their parents by providing tax relief, allowing 
rebates for medical expenses and giving preference in the allotment of houses, persons will be encouraged 
to go in for long term savings instruments and health insurance during their earning days so that financial 
load on families can be eased. NGOs will be encouraged and assisted to provide services which reach out to 
older persons in the home or in the community. Short term stay-in facilities for older persons will be 
supported so that families can get some relief when they go out. Counselling services will be strengthened 
to resolve inter-familial stresses. 
Research 
83. The importance of a good data base on older persons is recognised. Research activity on ageing will 
require to be strengthened. Universities, medical colleges and research institutions will be assisted to set up 
centres for gerontological studies and geriatrics. Corporate bodies, Banks, Trusts and Endowments will be 
requested to institute Chairs in Universities and medical colleges in gerontology and geriatrics. Funding 
support will be provided to academic bodies for research projects on ageing. Superannuated scientists will 
be assisted so that their professional knowledge can be utilized. 
84. An interdisciplinary coordinating body on research will be set up. Data collecting agencies will be 
requested to have a separate age category 60 years and above. Professional associations of gerontologists 
will be assisted to strengthen research activity, disseminate research findings and provide a platform for 
dialogue, discussion, debate and exchange of information. 

90 
 
85. The necessity of a national institute of research, training and documentation is recognised. Assistance 
will be given for setting up resource centres in different part of the country. 
Training of Manpower 
86. The policy recognizes the importance of trained manpower. Medical colleges will be assisted to offer 
specialization in geriatrics. Training institutions for nurses and for the paramedical personnel need to 
introduce specific courses on geriatric care in their educational and training curriculum. In service training 
centres will be strengthened to take up orientation courses on geriatric care. Assistance will be provided for 
development of curriculum and course material. Schools of Social Work and University Departments need to 
give more attention in their organization of services for them. Facilities will be provided and assistance given 
for training and orientation of personnel of non-governmental organizations providing services to older 
persons. Exchange of training personnel will be facilitated. 
87. Assistance will be given for development and organization of sensitization programmes on ageing for 
legislative, judicial and executive wings at different levels. 
Media 
88. The National Policy recognizes that media have a very important role to play in highlighting the changing 
situation of older persons and in identifying emerging issues and areas of action. Creative use of media can 
promote the concept of active ageing and help dispel stereotypes and negative images about this stage of 
the life cycle. Media can also help to strengthen inter-generation bonds and provide individuals, families and 
groups with information and educational material which will give better understanding of the ageing process 
and of ways to handle problems as they arise. 
89. The Policy aims to involve mass media as well as informal and traditional communication channels on 
ageing issues. It will be necessary to provide opportunities to media personnel to have access to information 
apart from their own independent sources of information and reporting of field situations. Their participation 
in orientation programmes on ageing will be facilitated. Opportunities will be extended for greater interaction 
between media personnel and persons active in the field of ageing. 
III. IMPLEMENTATION 
90. The National Policy on Older Persons will be very widely disseminated for which an action plan will be 
prepared so that its features remain in constant public focus. 
91. The Policy will make a change in the lives of senior citizens only if it is implemented. While the 
government and its principal organs have some basic responsibilities in the matter, other institutions as well 
as individuals with need to consider how they can play their respective roles for the well-being of older 
persons. Collaborative action will go a long way in achieving a more humane society which gives older 
persons their legitimate place. Apex level organisations of older persons have special responsibilities in this 
regard so that they can function as a watchdog, energies continuing action, mobilize public opinion and 
generate pressure for implementation of the Policy. 

91 
 
92. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment will be the nodal Ministry to coordinate all matters 
relating to the implementation of the Policy. A separate bureau of older persons will be set up. An Inter-
Ministerial Committee will coordinate matters relating to implementation of the National Policy and monitor 
its progress. States will be encouraged to set up separate Directorates of Older Persons and set up 
machinery for coordination and monitoring. 
93. Five year and Annual Action Plans will be prepared by each Ministry to implement aspects which concern 
them. These will indicate steps to be taken to ensure flow of benefits to older persons from general 
programmes and from schemes specially formulated for their well-being. Targets will be set within the 
framework of a time schedule. Responsibility for implementation of action points will be specified. The 
Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry will facilitate budgetary provisions required for 
implementation. The Annual Report of each Ministry will indicate progress achieved during the year. 
94. Every three years a detailed review will be prepared by the nodal Ministry on the implementation of the 
National Policy. There will be non-official participation in the preparation of the document. The review will be 
a public document. It will be discussed in a National Convention. State Governments and Union Territory 
Administrations will be urged to take similar action. 
95. An autonomous National Council for Older Persons headed by the Minister for Social Justice and 
Empowerment will be set up to promote and co-ordinate the concerns of older persons. The Council will 
include representatives of relevant Central Ministries and the Planning Commission. Five States will be 
represented on the Council by rotation. Adequate representation will be given to non-official members 
representing Non-Government Organisations, Academic Bodies, Media and Experts on Ageing issues from 
different fields. 
96. An autonomous registered National Association of Older Persons (NAOPS) will be established to mobilize 
senior citizens, articulate their interests, promote and undertake programmes and activities for their well 
being and to advise the Government on all matters relating to the Older Persons. The Association will have 
National, State and District level offices and will choose its own bearers. The Government will provide 
financial support to establish the National and State level offices while the District level offices will be 
established by the Association from its own resources which may be raised through Membership, 
subscriptions, donations and other admissible means. The Government will also provide financial assistance 
to the National and State level offices to cover both recurring as well as non-recurring administrative costs 
for a period of 15 years and thereafter the Association is to be expected to be financially self-sufficient. 
97. Panchayati Raj institutions will be encouraged to participate in the implementation of the National Policy, 
address local level issues and needs of the ageing and implement programmes for them. They will provide 
Forums for discussing concerns of older persons and activities that need to be taken. Such forums will be 
encouraged at Panchayat, block and district level. They will have adequate representation of older women. 
Panchayats will mobilize the talents and skills of older persons and draw up plans for utilizing these at the 
local level. Amongst others, the help of the Social Justice Committees of the village panchayats will be taken 
to advocate different measures for giving effect to the Policy. 

92 
 
98. In order to ensure effective implementation of the Policy at different levels, from time to time the help of 
experts of public administrations shall be taken to prepare the details of the organizational set up for the 
implementation, coordination and monitoring of the Policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
  


93 
 
 


94 
 
 


95 
 
 


96 
 
 


97 
 
 


98 
 
 


99 
 
 


100 
 
 


101 
 
 


102 
 
 


103 
 
 


104 
 
 


105 
 
 


106 
 
 


107 
 
 


108 
 
 


109 
 
 


110 
 
 


111 
 
 


112 
 
 


113 
 
 


114 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
Details of the Senior Citizen Care Homes/Old Age Homes, as collected by the 
Ministry from State Governments during 2019 
 
S.NO
. 
STATES OLD AGE HOMES/SENIOR CITIZEN CARE 
HOMES 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
01 Home for the Aged and Disabled is functioning in Krishna District 
under Department of Welfare of Differently abled, with strength of 65 
inmates. 
Government of Andhra Pradesh has ordered to establish 03 more Homes 
at Vishakhapattanam, Guntur and Ananthapuram for 100 inmates in 
each Home, on PPP mode. 
2. Bihar Running old age homes ‘Sahara’ in 7 Districts namely Purnia, Patna, 
Gaya, Bhagalpur, Rohtas, West Champaran and Begusarai. 
In addition to these seven, approval has been obtained for running old 
Age Homes in 11 more Districts i.e. Banka, Shivhar, Supol, Khagadiya, 
Gopalganj, Sivan, Bhojpur, Baxur, Kaimur, Navada and Jehanabad. 
3. Chhattisgarh A total of 19 Old Age Homes through Central/ State grants and 7 OAH 
through their own resources. 
4. Goa 10 OAHs (5 each in North and South Goa) run by Institute of Public 
Assistance (Provedoria), an autonomous body of Government of Goa 
which has capacity of accommodating 405 inmates. 
In addition to the above, 32 OAHs are run by NGOs. 
5. Gujarat A total of 28 OAHs are being given funds for running of Old Age homes 
in 23 districts and proposal has already been submitted for establishment 
of old Age Home in remaining Districts. 
6. Haryana A total of 26 Old Age Homes run by NGOs. Only 01 OAH (Home for 
Old and Destitute Persons, Rewari) is being run by the State 
Government. 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
At present, 06 OAHs are being run in the State under ‘Integrated 
Scheme for Older Persons’ of State Government of Himachal 

115 
 
  Pradesh. 
Location Districts served by 
the Old Age Home 
Capacity Present 
occupancy  
Basantpur, Shimla Shimla, Solan 50 42 
Dari, Dharmashala Kangra, Chamba 25 25 
Bhanghrotu, Mandi Mandi, 
Bilaspur, 
Una 
25 25 
Suket Senior Citizens 
Home International 
Trust, Sundernagar, 
Mandi 
25 25 
Kalath, Manali, Kullu Kullu, Mandi 25 21 
Kachen  Dukgyal 
Memorial OAH, Kee, 
Spiti 
Sirmour, 
Kinnaur, 
Lahaul & Spiti 
25 39 
 
8. Jammu and 
Kashmir 
No Government run Old Age Home in Jammu and Kashmir. 
One OAH each for Jammu and Kashmir Division being established after 
enactment of J&K Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2014 and Rules, 2017. 
Government of Jammu and Kashmir provides grant in aid to 05 
OAHs run by NGOs. 
There are 12 Nari-Niketans, housing Old Age Women at following 
places: 
State Government of Jammu and Kashmir has further stated that due to 
social bonding between the families in the State and consciousness of 
the people, there is very less number of persons who opt to stay in the 
Old Age Homes, as such, there appears no need to establish Old Age 
Homes in all the Districts at this Stage. 
9. Jharkhand The State has 11 Old Age Homes, running in 10 Districts, as follows: 
District No. of OAH(s)  
Dhandbad 01 
Giridih 01 
Hazaribagh 01 
Deoghar 01 
East Singhbhum 01 
 
District No. of Centre(s) Intake Capacity 
Jammu 1 55 
Kathua 1 30 
Udhampur 1 30 
Rajouri 1 30 
Poonchh 2 80 
Doda 1 25 
Srinagar 1 25 
Budgam 1 25 
Anantnag 1 25 
Baramulla 1 25 
Kupwara 1 50 

116 
 
  Ranchi 02  
Garhwa 01 
Bokaro 01 
Khunti 01 
Sahebganj 01 
TOTAL 11 
 
10. Karnataka Run by
 NGOs 
under State Grant 
Run by NGOs under 
Central Grant 
Run by Individual and 
NGOs(Private) 
Total 
29 41 110 180 
 
 
In December 2018, the State Government has accorded approval for the 
establishment of OAHs at each sub-division and the process for 
selection of suitable NGOs for the same is on. 
Number of Old Age Homes in Karnataka, running with grant of State 
Government: 
List of Non-Grant OAH in Karnataka:- 
District No. of NGOs  No. of 
Beneficiaries 
 

117 
 
Bangalore 23 627 
 
District Number of OAHs under 
State Government Grant 
Bangalore 02 
Bellary 01 
Belgaum 01 
Bidar 01 
Bagalkote 01 
Vijapura 01 
Chikkaballaur 01 
Chikkamagalur 01 
Davanagere 01 
Dharwad 01 
Gadag 01 
Gulbarga 01 
Hassan 01 
Haveri 01 
Kolara 01 
Koppal 01 
Mandya 01 
Ramanagar 01 
Shimoga 01 
Tumkur 01 
Yadagiri 01 
Chamarajanagar 01 
Dakshina Kannada 01 
Mysore 01 

118 
 
  Belagavi 04 100  
Bellary 01 25 
Vijaypura 01 25 
Bagalkote 05 129 
Chithradurga 03 75 
Chamarajnagar 01 40 
Dharawad 05 187 
Dakshina Kannada 20 1842 
Davangere 06 92 
Gadag 02 09 
Hassan 02 43 
Kodagu 02 35 
Koppala 02 50 
Mysore 11 479 
Mandya 03 75 
Tumkur 02 45 
Udupi 17 225 
Total 110 4103 
 
11. Kerala A total of 16 Government Old Age Homes under Social Justice 
Department of Government of Kerala and 630 OAHs run by NGOs 
registered with Orphanage Control Board. District-wise details as 
below:- 
District No. of OAH under 
Social Justice 
Department  of 
Kerala 
No. of OAH run by 
NGOs 
 
Thiruvananthapuram 2 58 
Kollam 1 23 
Pathanamthitta 1 37 
Alappuzha 1 35 
Kottayam 1 83 
Idukki 1 30 
Ernakulam 2 126 
Thrissur 1 98 
Palakkad 1 34 
Malappuram 1 8 
Kozhikode 1 23 
Wayand 1 22 
Kannur 1 40 
Kasargod 1 13 
TOTAL 16 630 
 
12. Madhya 
Pradesh 
OAHs run by the State Government through NGOs – 78 
13. Maharashtra Apart from the OAHs run with aid of Government of India, there are 23 
Matoshree Old Age Homes, each with capacity of 100 senior 
citizens and run by NGOs. 

119 
 
There are 60 OAHs run by Voluntary Organisations without aid of the 
Government. 

120 
 
14. Odisha There are 49 nos. of OAHs running by the NGOs with the 
Government of India 
3 of OAHs running by the NGOs with State funding in the State. 
15. Punjab There is total number of 47 OAHs established in the State of Punjab, 46 
of them are managed by NGOs and 01 is under the control of 
State Government. 
The State Government has prepared a grant in aid scheme to adopt the 
NGO run OAHs. 
16. Rajasthan The State of Rajasthan has established and is running 47 OAHs in 22 
districts, at an average of 02 OAHs per district. 
Expressions of Interest have been invited for remaining 11 districts. 
Details of OAHs run by Social Justice & Empowerment Department 
of Rajasthan are given below: 
Type of OAHs Number  
Govt. OAH 06 (operational) 
OAH run by NGO 38 
OAH run by NGO 03 Under IPSrC 
 
01 OAH by Rajasthan Government is under process. 
17. Tamil Nadu A total of 53 OAHs of capacity of 25 each are being run by NGOs 
receiving grants under IPSrC Scheme. 
20 OAHs of capacity of 40 each are being run by NGOs receiving State 
Grant (2018-19). 
The State of Tamil Nadu also provides grant to NGOs for running 
‘Integrated Complexes’ (51 in number). Each such Integrated Complex 
has the capacity to host 25 senior citizens and 25 destitute children. 
18. Telangana There are 74 registered OAHs in the State. The District-wise 
information is as follows: 
 District No. of OAHs  
Adilabad 02 
Kothagudem 03 
Hyderabad 03 
Jagtial 02 
Jangaon 01 
Karimnagar 09 
Khammam 01 
Kamareddy 01 
Mahaboobnagar 02 
Mancherial 03 
Medak 04 
Medchal 04 
Nagarkurool 04 

121 
 
Nalgonda 02 
Nirmal 01 

122 
 
   
19. Uttar Pradesh In all the 75 districts, at least One OAHs has been opened under the 
UPMWPSC Rule 2014 with the minimum capacity of 150 beds in 
collaboration with designated and reputed NGOs. 
20. Uttrakhand Presently, the Government of Uttarkhand runs 01 OAH each in 
Chamoli and Bageshwar, with capacity of 50 inmates each. 
  Haridwar and Dehradun have 01 OAH each, run by NGOs. 
21. West Bengal 01 OAH at South 24 Parganas run by the State Government. 
  15 OAHs maintained under Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens. 
NORTH-EAST STATES: 
22.  
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
08 Old Age Homes in the State. The details: 
- 04 in Papumpare district, 
- 01 in Lohit district, 
- 01 in East Siang District, and 
- 01 in Kurung Kumey district. 
23. Assam A total of 19 OAHs in the State are getting aid under Integrated 
Programme for Senior Citizens. 
The Social Welfare Department of Assam provides grant to OAHs run 
by NGOs. District-wise numbers of such OAHs is as follows:- 
Apart from this, a Government Destitute Home for Homeless Women 
(Old Age Home) is running at Kamrup district, Assam. 
Construction of an OAH is in progress at Guwahati and an OAH is 
proposed at Kokrajhar. 
 
Nizamabad 04 
Rangareddy 08 
Rajanna-Sircilla 03 
Sangareddy 01 
Siddipet 02 
Warangal (Urban) 11 
Yadadri 03 
TOTA 74 
District No. of OAH(s) 
Guwahati 3 
Barpeta 3 
Bongaigaon 1 
Dhubri 1 
Hailakandi 3 
Jorhat 2 
Kamrup (M) 7 
Kamrup (R) 3 
Dubrugarh 1 
Morigaon 1 
Nalbari 24 
TOTAL 49 

123 
 
24. Manipur A total of 19 OAHs are assisted under the Integrated Programme for 
Senior Citizens Scheme of Government of India. 
25. Meghalaya There are 02 OAHs (01 in Shillong, East Khasi Hills District and another 
in Tura, West Gario Hills District) being run through NGOs with 
financial aid from the State Government. 
The District Social Welfare Officers have been entrusted to mobilize 
setting up of OAHs in other districts of Meghalaya. 
26. Mizoram Only 1 State Government run old age home with a capacity of 10 
inmates at Lungmual, Aizawl District. 
01 OAH run by NGO at Chhiahtlang, Serchhip District. 
27. Nagaland State of Nagaland provides grant in aid to 09 OAHs in the following 
districts:- 
28. Sikkim There are 2 old age homes (both in East Sikkim) in the state of 
Sikkim being run by the NGOs. 
State Government has proposed to construct 4 Old Age Homes 
(Jyeshtha Nagarik Samman Kendra) in all 4 districts of Sikkim. 
29. Tripura State Government runs 1 OAH (capacity = 50 inmates) at 
Narsingarh, West Tripura. 
The State Government has set up 104 seated pensioners awaas namely 
Ashray at Kunjaban Agartala since 14.3.2016. 
04 NGOs run OAHs in districts namely West Tripura (2), Sepahijala(1) 
and North Tripura (1). 
Further, steps have been taken to establish one OAH each in the 
uncovered districts (5 out of 8). 
UNION TERRITORIES: 
30. Andaman and 
Nicobar islands 
The Union Territory has 1 OAH in South Andaman District and 
proposes to establish one old age home in North and Middle Andaman 
District. 
The UT Administration has stated that it has been felt that there is no 
need for establishment of an OAH in the third district of Nicobar 
because it is home to the Nicobari tribes since the community takes care 
of the aged and destitute people and traditional values do not favour 
establishment of OAH. As and when the need arises, necessary action 
will be taken. 
 
District No. of OAH (s) 
Sakshi, Longleng 1 
Mokokchung 3 
Dimapur 3 
Kohima 2 
Total 9 

124 
 
31. Chandigarh The Chandigarh Administration runs 1 OAH at Sector 15 on Free 
basis 
The Administration runs 1 OAH at Sector 43 on payment basis. 
Sri Sathya Sai Old Home, Sector-30, Chandigarh is run by Sri Sathya 
Sai Trust. 
32. Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
At present, no OAH exists in the UT. 
However land has been allotted for construction of OAH at village  
Dapada. The construction work is under progress. 
33. Daman and 
Diu 
01 OAH is functional in Daman district 
34. NCT of Delhi Government of NCT of Delhi runs 2 OAHs- 01 at Bindapur with 72 
inmates and 01 at Lampur with 14 inmates 
  The UT Government has taken possession of land at Chitranjan Park, 
Rohini, Kanti Nagar, Pashchim Vihar, Geeta Colony, Wazirpur, 
Chattarpur, Janakpuri, Sarita Vihar and Vasant Kunj towards making 
efforts for establishing at least 01 OAH in each district, in pursuance 
with Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (MWPSC) 
Act, 2007. 
35. Lakshadweep Lakshadweep Administration has informed that Lakshadweep is a small 
UT (with No Old Age Homes) where the citizens follow matriarchal 
Joint Family System. Therefore, both males and females are equally 
responsible in taking care of their parents/ senior citizens. So far no 
cases have been reported for want of OAHs. Therefore, the UT 
Administration has no proposal for OAH at present. 
36. Puducherry Department of Social Welfare of Puducherry runs 03 OAHs, each in 
Puducherry, Karaikal and Mahe region. 
UT Administration has also licensed 07 OAHs are run by NGOs under 
the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens (MWPSC) 
Act, 2007 to take care of senior citizens. 
Total No. of OAHs in Puducherry are as follows: 
Region Govt. run OAHs NGO run OAHs No. of beneficiaries on 
date  
Puduchery 01 04 208 
Karaikal 01 02 70 
Mahe 01 00 06 
Yanam 00 01 41 
 

125 
 
 
    ANNEXURE-V 
Details of state-wise expenditure and beneficiaries under the Integrated Programme for Senior Cirtizens. 
 
(Rs. In Lakh) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
Name of 
State/UT 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Funds 
released 
Beneficiaries Funds 
released 
Beneficiaries Funds 
released 
Beneficiaries Funds 
released 
Beneficiaries Funds released Beneficiaries 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
389.02 
 
4800 647.71  
5900 728.35  
7790 
 
1176.81 
 
6295 
1728.39 2075 
2 Bihar 4.43 75 16.07 100 13.37 75 22.92 150 0.00 0 
3 Chhattisgarh 13.85 25 0.00 0 17.95 75 9.13 25 18.26 50 
4 Goa 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
5 Gujarat 0.00 0 10.51 75 21.03 200 30.74 250 94.15 375 
6 Haryana 45.86 550 55.28 650 110.33 900 109.60 600 249.15 625 
7 Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
11.99 
 
450 29.18  
975 26.25  
600 
 
8.31 
 
400 
46.12 450 
8 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
 
0.00 
 
0 0.00  
0 0.00  
0 
 
0.00 
 
0 
0.00 0 
9 Jharkhand 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
10 Karnataka 386.18 1565 280.62 1315 382.63 3045 410.29 1495 1281.76 3635 
11 Kerala 16.62 100 24.94 200 23.01 100 54.53 200 101.64 225 
12 Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
29.20 
 
150 12.43  
150 28.29  
175 
 
107.39 
 
450 
105.45 275 
13 Maharashtra 291.38 1760 239.32 2120 434.63 3170 833.75 3005 1304.05 3920 
14 Odisha 324.40 1475 774.04 9395 730.96 5100 848.88 5120 2137.67 6375 
15 Punjab 18.26 250 12.51 325 14.58 300 31.27 295 12.46 75 
16 Rajasthan 16.44 75 2.24 25 22.59 75 16.28 50 53.24 250 
17 Tamil Nadu 469.98 3895 639.69 6820 707.16 5155 997.41 3075 1292.64 5955 
18 Telangana 47.24 275 112.93 550 133.95 1095 245.38 1000 375.18 2050 
19 Uttar Pradesh 40.08 425 107.29 950 119.11 800 105.89 395 308.85 620 
20 Uttarakhand 12.12 125 54.69 175 20.58 175 67.25 175 32.19 125 
21 West Bengal 120.00 1875 206.55 3650 256.36 3700 267.42 2750 495.05 2600 
22 A& N Island 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
23 Chandigarh 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
24 Dadra & 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 

126 
 
 Nagar Haveli           
25 Daman and Diu 0.00  
0 0.00  
0 0.00  
0 
 
0.00 
 
0 
0.00 0 
26 Lakshadweep 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
27 Delhi 60.91 6 90.62 75 154.38 100 52.78 0 36.16 75 
28 Puducherry 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 1.80 25 37.11 75 
29 Arunachal 
Pradesh 1.13  
1 0.00  
0 0.00  
0 
 
0.00 
 
0 
0.00 0 
30 Assam 186.41 2825 180.50 5350 192.03 4045 498.22 6295 298.92 3850 
31 Manipur 252.02 2025 186.94 1275 260.22 3550 566.80 2770 523.29 2200 
32 Meghalaya 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
33 Mizoram 3.77 100 0.54 50 5.89 50 0.00 0 0.00 0 
34 Nagaland 8.10 25 0.00 0 17.43 75 18.90 25 55.25 100 
35 Sikkim 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 
36 Tripura 8.67 75 14.07 75 25.58 100 25.65 75 21.72 75 
Total 2758.06 23095 3698.67 40200 4446.66* 40450 6507.40 34920 10729.6(including  
IDOP 120.99) 
41655 
 
 
* 1.53 Cr. given to NISD for NISD Building. 
 

127 
 
ANNEXURE-VI 
THE MEASURES TAKEN BY VARIOUS STATE GOVERNMENT UNDER SECTION 21 OF 
MWPSC ACT, 2007 FOR AWARENESS GENERATION IN THEIR RESPECTIVE STATES: 
S.No. States Action Taken (Till 2019) 
 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
 MWPSC Act and State Rules have been uploaded in the 
Department’s website. 
2. Assam  MWPSC Act and State Rules have been uploaded in the 
Department’s website. 
 Details of State Council of Senior Citizens given in the Portal. 
                                                                                       
3. Bihar  
 
 Awareness programmes are being conducted for the publicity 
of the Maintenance Act. 
 Information regarding the Act given in the website. 
4. Chhattisgarh 
 
 
 
 Kalapathak Dal, a Publicizing Team in the State, includes the 
MWPSC Act also.  
 Regular Training Programmes/Workshops are being 
conducted to create awareness of the Act. 
 Every year, on the occasion of International Day of Older 
Persons (IDOP) on 1st October, Samman Samaroh for Senior 
Citizen is being organised. 
 
5. Goa 
 
 Copy of MWPSC Act and State Rules uploaded. 
 Awareness about the Act is given in local channel & 
Newspapers on the IDOP day. 
 Awareness programme on the Act are held in Doordarshan.  
 Phone-in-Phone programme has been launched to create 
publicity on schemes and programmes of Senior Citizens.  
 The content of the Act has been uploaded in official YouTube 
channel. 
 Taluk level awareness programmes on the Act are held. 
 Awareness through Press conference also done. 
6. Gujarat 
 
 Yearly awareness programme in coordination with Senior 
Citizens Forums held on IDOP day. 
 District &Rural level awareness programmes through Sub-
Divisional Offices are held. 
 
7. Haryana 
 
 Advertisements are given in leading Newspapers on the 
occasion of IDOP. 
 MIS for monitoring the progress of the Act has been formed. 
8. Jharkhand  Directions have been issued to Dy. Commissioner of all Districts 

128 
 
 for Advertisement of the Act. 
9. Kerala 
 
 Copy of MWPSC Act and State Rules uploaded on Department’s 
website. 
 Awareness classes are being arranged in Maintenance Tribunal 
in association with Media personnel. 
 Camps and Adalaths for resolving petitions of senior citizens 
are being organised. 
 State-wise campaigns including Road shows, Mimes, Theme 
shows, Street plays are carried out by District Old Age Council. 
 Awareness classes in school/colleges are organised. 
 Publicity through booklets, banners, magazines, notice and 
short films are done. 
 Community education by counselors of Jagratha Samiti & SHGs 
under Kudumbashree Mission are being carried out. 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
 
 Awareness generation through State level Training 
Programmes carried out. 
 Organize workshops, District level Camps, Organising IDOP in 
the month of October. 
11. Maharashtra 
 
 State Rules has been uploaded in the website. 
 List of presiding Officers, Maintenance Officers, Appellate 
Authority are displayed in the website. 
 Separate website for the MWPSC Act has been created 
(www.sjsa.maharashtra.go.vin). Details of all Old Age Homes 
has been uploaded. 
 Hoardings are displayed at various Govt. Offices and at Public 
spot across the State. 
 Advertisement is given in Newspaper & electronic media at 
Railway Station, Bus stand, Government Offices, Courts, 
Hospitals, Schools, Colleges, Police Stations, Banks and Cinema 
theatres. 
 Letter has been issued to publish the Act and Senior citizen 
policies on every three months. 
 
12. Manipur 
 
 Copies of MWPSC Act have been given to District Collectors and 
District Social Welfare Departments for wider circulation & for 
periodical review. 
 
13. Meghalaya 
 
 Copy of State Rules uploaded in public interest and for 
awareness. 
 Awareness programme on the Act on the occasion of IDOP is 
organized every year. 
 Wide publicity is given in local media annually. 
 
14. Mizoram  Copy of State Rules uploaded in Portal. Rules have been 
translated in local dialect too. 

129 
 
  Publicity through sensitization meetings/electronic media, 
TV/Radio Talks & discussion were held. 
 Publicity of the Act is given through Mizoram Upa Pawl, an 
Association for the elderly persons of Mizoram.  
 Plan of Action to implement the MWPSC Act was prepared. 
 
15. Nagaland 
 
 Organises legal awareness programmes in collaboration with 
Nagaland State Legal Authorities. 
 Advertisement in leading Newspapers on the occasion of IDOP 
by Department of Social Welfare, Nagaland. 
 Publicity of the Act through putting up Hoardings, Banner, 
Billboards, Wall writing across the State were carried out. 
 Radio Talks, TV shows, etc. organized.  
 DISHA Committee under Ministry of Rural Development is 
monitoring the progress of implementation of the Act. 
 
16. Odisha 
 
 Awareness & publicity of the Act is done in the State through 
IDOP in all Districts.  
 District level Senior Citizen Committee is monitoring the 
implementation of the Act. 
 
17. Punjab 
 
 Awareness Campaigns on TV/radio, distribution of 
Pamphlets/Booklets and installation of Board with Key 
provisions of the Act are being done regularly. 
 
19. Rajasthan 
 
 Publicity through regular sensitization programmes IEC 
material distribution. 
 The State Government runs a Helpline No. 1800180 1253. 
 The State observes IDOP celebrated every year. 
 
20. Sikkim 
 
 State Rule uploaded in the website. 
 State Council and District Committee have been notified.  
 State Welfare Commission was formed especially for welfare of 
Senior Citizens. 
 Sikkim State Legal Service Authority organizes awareness 
programmes. 
 One NGO is also involved for creating awareness generation 
and publicity upto grassroot level. 
 
21. Tamil Nadu 
 
 District Committee for Senior Citizen has been constituted in 
each District to advise the Government in matters related to 
implementation of the Act. 
 A Notice Board with all information of the Act is placed in all 
District level Offices for wider publicity. 
 Pamphlets are being distributed in Collector’s Mass Conduct 
Programme, grievance day and in local special event. 
 Hording is displaced in District & State level exhibitions and in 

130 
 
IDOP & Elderly Abuse Awareness Day Programmes. 
 
22. Telangana 
 
 State Council for Senior Citizens has been set up to review 
MWPSC Act. 
 Awareness Programme is organised in District Social Welfare 
Office. 
 Awareness programmes by District Legal Service Authority & 
State Legal Services Authority are conducted. 
 Radio, TV, Hoardings are placed at religious places & festivals. 
 
23. Tripura 
 
 Publicity of the provisions of the Act is done during Police-
Public interface programme like PRAYAAS, a scheme of 
community policing in the State. 
 Instructions issued for sensitization of Police personnel of all 
ranks regarding provisions of the Act.  
 Legal Aid Clinics were set up in 22 Tribunals and in 8 Appellate 
Tribunals in association with NALSA through DLSA & SDLSCs. 
 46 Panel Lawyers have been designated as Legal Service 
Officers for Senior Citizen Schemes. 
 101 Awareness programmes were organized during 2017-18. 
24. Uttar Pradesh 
 
 State Rule uploaded in the website. 
 U.P. State Senior Citizens Welfare Policy has been issued in 
2016, which includes proper focus on the purpose of periodic 
sensitization/awareness/training on issues relating to Act and 
for effective coordination between services being provided by 
the concerned Ministries/Departments. 
 Publicity of the Act was done in all Districts, Tehsils/Thana 
Diwas through pamphlets & banner. 
 State level workshops for NGO functionaries are organised. 
 Publicity/Media Plan has been planned with the help of 
Medical & Health Departments. 
 
25. Uttarakhand 
 
 Monthly awareness camps on MWPSC Act  
 Instructions by Social Welfare Officers 
 Senior Citizens and Police interface and interacts. 
 Release and printing of Maintenance Application format in 
newspapers 
 Formation of Senior Citizen Welfare Council. 
 
26. West Bengal 
 
 Awareness of the Act was done in World Elder Abuse 
Awareness Day and IDOP through seminars & Symposiums. 
 Audio visual & IEC for Mass awareness was done. 
 
Union Territories: 
27. Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
 Awareness camps are held 
 
 

131 
 
28. Chandigarh 
 
 Publicity in Newspapers 
 Awareness generation camps on the Act and Welfare schemes 
of senior citizens were organized. 
 Publicity through Public Notice appears in 3 Newspapers in 
English, Hindi & Punjabi. 
 Police officials of Chandigarh Police are trained on issues 
relating to the Act from time-to-time.  
 
29. Daman & Diu  MWPSC State Rules uploaded in the Portal. 
 Regular monitoring of the Act is done by the UT Admin. 
 Regular Awareness activities are conducted  
 Awareness is generated through hoarding at various public 
places. 
 
30. Delhi 
 
 Rules available in website. 
 Awareness of the Act is done through Hoardings/Notice board 
in District Offices of Social Welfare Department and in 11 ADM 
& DM are in process  
 Newspaper advertisement of the Act 
 Pamphlets distribution at various conference/workshops. 
31. Lakshadweep  Act has been published in Lakshadweep Official Gazette for 
awareness of all concerned as well as local public. 
 Trainings are undertaken from time-to-time. 
 
*********** 
  

132 
 
ANNEXURE-VII PROGRESS REPORT OF MAINTENANCE AND WELFARE  OF PARENTS AND SENIOR CITIZENS ACT, 2007 
 
S. N. Name of State/UT Date of 
Notification of 
Act 
Appointed date 
of enforcement 
of Act in 
State/UT 
Date of 
Notification of 
Rules 
Date of 
Notification of 
Maintenance 
Officer 
Date of 
Notification of 
Maintenance 
Tribunal 
Date of 
Notification of 
Appellate 
Tribunal 
1 Andhra Pradesh 22.04.2008  28.04.2008 28.12.2011 Action taken 19.08.2008 19.08.2008 
2 Bihar 28.09.2011 19.10.2011 07.09.2012 09.11.2011 09.11.2011 09.11.2011 
3 Chhattisgarh 26.09.2008 26.09.2008 07.05.2010 24.01.2009 24.01.2009 24.01.2009 
4 Goa 23.09.2008 01.10.2008 01.10. 2009 24.09.2009 24.09.2009 24.09.2009 
5 Gujarat 07.10.2008 07.10.2008 19.05.2009 19.05.2009 19.05.2009 19.05.2009 
6 Haryana 22.10.2008 22,10.2008 19.06.2009 28-8-2009 23-11-2010 23-11-2010 
7 Himachal P. The State has its own Act 
8 J& Kashmir Act not applicable 
9 Jharkhand 12.04.2008 01.04.2008 2014 14.02.2009 14.02.2009 14.02.2009 
10 Karnataka 27.03.2008 01.04.2008 19.11.2009 13.09.2010 19.02.2009 19.02.2009 
11 Kerala 24.09.2008 24.09.2008 28.08.2009 17.08.2009 17.08.2009 17.08.2009 
12 Madhya Pradesh 23.08.2008 23.08.2008 02.07.2009 02.07.2009 02.07.2009 02.07.2009 
13 Maharashtra 27.02.2009 01.03.2009 23.06.2010 04.05.2010 04.05.2010 28-9-2010 
14 Odisha 20.09.2008  01.10.2008 24.09.2009 01.10.2009 01.10.2009 01.10.2009 
15 Punjab 15.07.2008 15.07.2008 17.10.2012 27.08.2008 27.08.2008 27.08.2008 
16 Rajasthan 31.07.2008 01.08.2008 18.06.2010 19.09.2008 19.09.2008 19.09.2008 
17 Tamil Nadu 29.09.2008 29.09.2008 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 31.12.2009 
18 Telangana 22.04.2008  28.04.2008 28.12.2011 Action taken 19.08.2008 19.08.2008 
19 Uttar Pradesh 25.09.2012 25.09.2012 24-2-2014 31-10-2014 20-10-2014 20.10.2014 
20 Uttarakhand 11.11.2008 01.11.2008 19.12.2011 07.08.2014 07.08.2012 07.08.2012 
21 West Bengal 05.12.2008 05.12.2008 12.01.2009 20.01.2009 20.01.2009 20.01.2009 
North-eastern States : 
22 Meghalaya 22.06.2012 22.06.2012 2012 25.09.2012 8-5-2014 8-5-2014 
23 Sikkim 03.05.2012 01.02.2012 2014 27.06.2012 18-12-2011 18-12-2011 
24 Tripura 14.08.2008 15.08.2008 22.08.2008 15.12.2008 15.08.2008 15.08.2008 
25 Assam 04.10.2008 04.10.2008 27.09.2012 02.08.2008 02.08.2008 02.08.2008 
26 Manipur 29.10.2009 30.10.2009 02.12.2011 06.07.2012 06.07.2012 14-9-2012 
27 Mizoram 29.12.2008 01.01.2009 9-7-2014 1-12-2014 1-12-2014 1-12-2014 

133 
 
28 Nagaland 22.04.2008 22.04.2008  * 7-2-2014 7-2-2014 7-2-2014 
29 Arunachal P. 08.08.2008 06.08.2008  * 19.06.2012 19.06.2012 19.06.2012 
Union Territories : 
30 Andaman & Nicobar Island 
21.05.2008 21.05.2008 29-2-2012 04.03.2010 04.03.2010 04.03.2010 
31 Chandigarh 21.10.2008 22.10.2008 12.8.2009 17.04.2012 22.12.2008 22.12.2008 
32 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
17.09.2008 17.09.2008 6-5-2010 07.04.2010 07.04.2010 07.04.2010 
33 Daman & Diu 17.09.2008 17.09.2008 04.05.2010 07.04.2010 07.04.2010 07.04.2010 
34 Delhi 08.09.2008 01.09.2008 30.06.2009 01.10.2009 01.10.2009 11.02.2011 
35 Lakshadweep 25.10.2008 22.09.2008 16.03.2015 16.03.2015 16.03.2015 16.03.2015 
36 Puducherry 31.10.2008 01.11.2008 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 27.10.2011 
* Action pending 
  

134 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20) HELD ON THURSDAY,  
6TH FEBRUARY, 2020 
 
The Committee met from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Durga Prasad Rao Balli 
3. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
4. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
5. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
6. Shri Prince Raj 
7. Smt. Supriya Sule 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt. Jharna Das Vaidya  
9. Shri N. Chandrasegharan  
10. Smt. Sarojini Hembram  
11. Shri P. L. Punia  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri Srinivasulu Gunda - Director 
2. Smt. Madhu Bhutani - Deputy Secretary 
  

135 
 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri R. Subrahmanyam Secretary 
2.  Smt. Radhika Chakravarthy Joint Secretary 
3.  Shri Shambhu Sharan Kumar Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee 
and the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department 
of Social Justice and Empowerment) to the sitting of the Committee convened to have 
briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) on "the Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019" referred to the Committee on 
23.12.2019 for examination and Report.   
3. The Chairperson, thereafter, referring to Direction 55(1) of Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha to keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential', till a 
Report on the subject is presented to the House, asked the Secretary, Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) to 
introduce his team and give an overview of the subject matter. 
4. The Secretary, accordingly briefed the Committee on the Bill highlighting 
background, broad features of the “Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens Act, 2007”, the need to amend certain clauses of the aforementioned Act and 
the following salient features of the Bill through Power Point Presentation. 
(i) Amendment in the definitions of ‘parents’, ‘children’, ‘maintenance’ etc. 
(ii) No upper ceiling for the amount of maintenance provided to the parents 
and Senior Citizens. 
(iii) Amendment in the implementation part of the Act in which provision of 
appeal is provided to the ‘children’ also in addition to the senior citizens. 
(iv) Provision for establishment of Old Age Homes. 
(v) Establishment of Tribunals and details of its functions. 
(vi) Provision for Help Line for Senior Citizens. 

136 
 
(vii) Provision for penalty for abandonment of Parents/Senior Citizens. 
 
 
(viii) Role of NGOs for providing assistance to the welfare schemes of Senior 
Citizens.  
 
5. The Secretary also responded to the queries raised by the Members.  The 
Chairperson then directed the Department to furnish written replies to all the queries 
raised by Members to the Secretariat at the earliest.  
6. The Chairperson then thanked the Secretary and other officials of the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for giving valuable information to the 
Committee on the Bill and expressing their views on various issues raised by the 
Members. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

137 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20) HELD ON THURSDAY,  
6TH AUGUST, 2020 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Main Committee Room  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
12. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
13. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal  
15. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Smt. Ramilaben Bara  
17. Shri Ashok Gasti  
18. Shri P.L. Punia  
19. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
20. Shri Ramkumar Verma  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
  

138 
 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
4.  Shri R. Subrahmanyam Secretary 
5.  Smt. Upma Srivastava Additional Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to 
the sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of four Draft 
Action Taken Reports of the Committee on “Demands for Grants 2019-20” and taking 
evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) on “The Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019".  
 
3. 
(i) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
(ii) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
(iii)      xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
(iv) xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
4. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx   
 
5.  The Chairperson, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) to 
the sitting and drew their attention to Direction 55(1) of 'Directions by the Speaker' to 
keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential' till a Report on the subject is 
presented to the House. 
 
6. The Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment accordingly 
briefed the Committee on various provisions of the Bill. The broad issues discussed at 
the sitting are as follows:- 

139 
 
(i) Expansion of definitions of 'children', 'parent', 'relatives' 'maintenance' and  
'welfare'.   
(ii) Role of 'Conciliation Officer' and 'Maintenance Officer'.  
(iii) Establishment of 'Special Police Unit' in every district to address the grievances 
of senior citizens. 
(iv) Provision of 'National Help Line' for senior citizens. 
 (v) Establishment and management of 'Senior Citizens' Care Homes' and 'Multi 
Service Day Care Centre' for senior citizens. 
(vi) Provision for 'Home Care Services' for such senior citizens who are not able to 
perform activities of daily life due to any physical or mental impairment.  
(vii) Minimum standards to be maintained by the private agencies while opening and 
running old age homes. 
(viii) Need for comprehensive awareness campaign for the effective implementation of 
"The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007" . 
(ix) Provision in Service Conduct Rules to motivate children in the Government 
service to take care of their old parents. 
(x) Formation of 'Old Age Groups' to provide certain jobs like giving tuitions to 
children, maintenance of parks etc. to those senior citizens, who are capable 
physically and mentally, to engage them in social causes.  
(xi) Need for sensitization of children from young age to give respect, care and 
support to senior citizens. 
 
7. The Secretary also responded to the queries raised by the Members.  The 
Chairperson then directed the Department to furnish written replies to all the queries 
raised by Members to the Secretariat at the earliest.  
8. The Chairperson then thanked the Secretary and other officials of the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for giving valuable information to the 
Committee on the subject and expressing their views on various issues raised by the 
Members. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
 

140 
 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 19TH AUGUST, 
2020. 
 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1350 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SHRI RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
  
2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad   
3. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
4. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
5. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
6. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
7. Shri Prince Raj 
8. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  9. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
10. Shri Chandrasegharan 
11. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
12. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
13. Shri Ramkumar Verma  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
 
  

141 
 
 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
Sl. No.            Name Organization 
 
1. Shri Rohit Prasad  Help Age India 
2. Dr. Aabha Chaudhary Anugraha India 
3. Shri Asheesh Gupta Samarth 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members and representatives 
of the organizations/stakeholders appearing before the Committee convened to hear the 
views of the organizations working in the field of elderly care in connection with 
examination of "The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019".  Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of 
the Committee 'confidential' till a report on the Bill is presented, the Chairperson 
requested the stakeholders to brief the Committee on issues related with the welfare of 
parents and senior citizens and give concrete advice/suggestions regarding various 
Clauses of the Bill.  
 
3. The representatives of the organizations/stakeholders then put forth their 
views/suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill before the Committee based on 
their work experience in elderly care.  The stakeholders suggested the following 
changes/amendments in the new proposed legislation: 
 
(i) Recognising and formulating ways for economic independence of elderly 
population. 
(ii) Sensitization and social connection for Senior Citizens. 
(iii) Provisions for Mobile Health Vans in every nook and corner of the country 
for Senior Citizens and elderly people. 
(iv) Increasing the number of Toll Free helpline numbers for old age persons 
with trained counsellors and need for setting up of a National Helpline 
Number for old age persons. 
(v) Maintenance of widows living at various religious institutions in the 
country. 
 
 

142 
 
 
(vi) Easing the process for elders to access justice or to approach an 
authority. 
(vii) Strengthening the role of the Maintenance Officer in the Bill. 
(viii) Need for sensitization of official of Banks, Maintenance Tribunals, Social 
Welfare Departments and other offices who are dealing with the matters of 
senior citizens. 
(ix) Devising more offline ways of connecting with elderly people. 
(x) Training for Geriatrics Beside Assistants, caregivers and other personnel 
in the field. 
(xi) Evaluation of Maintenance Tribunals. 
(xii) Protection Order from the Maintenance Tribunal till the final verdict. 
(xiii) Provision of Short Stay Homes/Transit Homes/Temporary Shelters where 
the Senior Citizens in distress can stay for a period till the maintenance is 
finalized. 
(xiv) Need to organize inter-generational meetings to bring young and old 
together. 
(xv) Developing avenues to enable comparatively young and healthier Senior 
Citizens to take care of other Senior Citizens. 
(xvi) Enhancing the quality and availability of Elder Care institutions. 
(xvii) Multiple avenues for resource generation for the welfare of Senior 
Citizens. 
(xviii) Incentivisation at the work places to engage Senior Citizens. 
(xix) Transparency in donations made to NGOs. 
(xx) Needs for sensitization of children to give respect, care and support to 
elders including parents and relatives, through educational content. 
 
4. The stakeholders also responded to the queries raised by the Members.   
 
5. The Chairperson thanked the stakeholders for their views expressed before the 
Committee and also appreciated the work being done by them. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

143 
 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT HELD ON THURSDAY, 3rd SEPTEMBER, 
2020. 
 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
  
9. Shri Bholanath ‘B.P. Saroj’   
10. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
11. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
12. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
  8. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
9. Shri P.L. Punia 
 10. Shri Ramkumar Verma  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
1. Shri Himanshu Rath  Agewell Foundation 
 
2. Dr. Manorama Bakshi Senior Adviser, Policy 
and Advocacy, Tata 
Trusts 
   

144 
 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT) 
 
1. Shri R. Subrahmanyam  Secretary 
 
2. Smt. Upma Srivastava Additional Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the organizations/stakeholders appearing before the Committee, 
convened to hear their views on "The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior 
Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019". Impressing upon the witnesses to keep the 
proceedings of the Committee 'confidential' till a report on the Bill is presented, the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/ suggestions on the various Clauses of 
the Bill.  
 
3. The representatives of the organizations then put-forth their views/suggestions 
on the various provisions of the Bill before the Committee and suggested the following 
changes/amendments in the new proposed legislation:- 
 
(i) Self Help Groups of older people and young generation to redress 
problems of Senior Citizens at local level. 
(ii) Provision of employment to those Senior Citizens who are physically and 
mentally fit in the outlets of Big Companies under Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR). 
(iii) Inclusion of chapters on the importance of Senior Citizens in curriculum of 
Schools and Colleges for inter-generational bond between old and young 
generation. 
(iv) Need to sensitize neighbourhood of Senior Citizens for their safety and 
security. 
(v) Need to establish more number of Old Age Homes. 
(vi) Provision for basic minimum facilities and living standards for Senior 
Citizens. 
(vii) Recreation Centres for Senior Citizens for inter-generational bond. 
 
 

145 
 
 
(viii) Fast Track disposal of cases related to 'The Maintenance and Welfare of 
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007' in High Courts. 
(ix) Need to create more awareness about the provisions of 'The Maintenance 
and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007', particularly in rural 
areas. 
 
4. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee and 
for sharing valuable information on the Bill and responding to the queries of the 
Members. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
 
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) were called in for oral 
evidence on "The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019" and the Chairperson welcomed them to the sitting of the 
Committee. Drawing the attention of the representatives to Direction 58 of the 
‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding the evidence tendered before the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked the Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to 
clarify their views on the various provisions of Bill and the issues raised by the Members 
at the Sitting of the Committee held on 06.08.2019 on the Bill. The broad issues 
discussed at the sitting are as follows:- 
 
(i) Need to define the term ‘Life of dignity’. 
(ii) Regular inspection of NGOs’ running old age homes with Government 
grant-in-aid. 
(iii) Setting up of Project Management Unit (PMU) under National Institute of 
Social Defence to evaluate the performance of NGOs. 
(iv) Need to maintain details of NGOs funded and run by the State 
Governments. 
(v)  Installation of CCTV cameras in Old Aged Homes and their proper 
monitoring. 

146 
 
 
(vi) Expression of Interest portal for registration of new NGOs. 
(vii) Required mandatory permission of parents in writing if their children wish 
to sell the parental transferred property. 
 
6. The Chairperson then thanked the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment) for their views expressed before the Committee. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew.) 
 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

147 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-V 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21)  HELD ON  
19 JANUARY, 2021 IN COMMITTEE ROOM ‘D’, PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE, 
NEW DELHI 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1315 hrs.  
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Rama Devi         - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  4. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  5. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  6. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
  7. Shri Vijay Kumar 
  8. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
                              Rajya Sabha  
 
 9. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
10. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
11. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
12. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
13. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
14. Shri Ram Ji 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
3. Shri Janmesh Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
 

148 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to consider the draft Report on ‘The Maintenance and Welfare 
of Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019’.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any on the draft Report.  The Report was unanimously adopted by the Committee.  The 
Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report in the light of 
consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the Report and to 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on 29th January, 2021. 
 
4. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
5. xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
 
6.  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings pertaining to the briefing has been 
kept. 
 
 
 