 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ((SEVENTEENTHMinistry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Action taken by the Government on the contained in the FortyJustice and Empowerment (functioning of National Institutes established for different types of disabilities’. July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)
49 
i 
          STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)     SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)      Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)   taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations Forty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on SocJustice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on National Institutes established for different types of   FORTY-NINTH REPORT           LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)   
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Persons with observations/recommendations Report of the Standing Committee on Social on ‘Review of the National Institutes established for different types of 

FORTYSTANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND (SEVENTEENTHMinistry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the FortyJustice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘functioning of National Institutes established for different types of disabilities’. Presented to Lok Sabha on                                        Laid in Rajya Sabha on   July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)      ii 
   FORTY-NINTH REPORT      STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)    SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)    Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)  Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘functioning of National Institutes established for different types of    Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.7.2023  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.7.2023      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)    
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of National Institutes established for different types of 

iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
and which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 26.7.2023. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of National 
Institutes established for different types of 
disabilities’. 
 
 
 
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt.Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Nauriyal - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar      - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Forty-Ninth Report on the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Forty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of 
National Institutes established for different types of disabilities’. 
 
2. The Forty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16.12.2022. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) have furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that 
Report on 27.3.2023.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
26.7.2023. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference Observations/ Recommendations/ Comments 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          RAMA DEVI 
                                     Chairperson, 
26th July, 2023                                                                   Standing Committee on 
4        Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                            Social Justice and  
                                      Empowerment 
 

1 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Second 
Report on ‘Review of the functioning of National Institutes established for different 
types of disabilities’. 
 
2. The Forty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 16.12.2022. It contained 14 observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No. 1.10, 2.15, 2.16, 3.12, 
5.7, 5.8 and 6.10. 
(Total: 7,  Chapter: II) 
  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.5.6, 6.8 and 7.10 
(Total:3,  Chapter: III) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: – 
Rec. Para No.1.11, 4.5, 6.9 and 7.9 
(Total:4,  Chapter: IV) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total:NIL,Chapter: V) 
  
 

2 
 
  3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No.1.11) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
 “The Committee find that the figure of total Divyangjan population of 2.68 
crore is based on the 2011 census and express their concern whether it is 
actually reflective of current status of disabled population. The Committee feel 
that the actual number of disabled persons could be much higher, as the 
available figure is more than 10 years old. Therefore, they believe that the 
Department is aware of the estimated number of PwDs in the country today 
in order to project a realistic assessment of resources required, allocation of 
funds and set reasonable targets. This will also hold true for the requirement 
of trained professional such as physiotherapist, counselors, doctors, 
paramedics, etc. where actual numbers, in all probability, is not 
commensurate to the requirement. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Department to take into cognizance their observation while setting further 
outcomes, and strive to make all NIs optimally functional for the Divyang 
population”. 
 
6. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “To extend the coverage of providing rehabilitation services to all categories 
of Persons with Disabilities under one roof with limited use of infrastructure 
and manpower, Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) were set up in different 
States from the year 2000 onward as outreach/ extension centres of 
respective NIs to extend the coverage of providing rehabilitation services to 
all categories of Persons with Disabilities under one roof with limited use of 
infrastructure and manpower. The Department has also set up two new 
National level Institutes i.e. Indian Sign Language Research and Training 
Centre (ISLRTC) and National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation 
(NIMHR), Sehore in the last 10 years. Further, to increase it's reach, the 
Department envisage that every State/Union Territory, irrespective of area 
and/or population, should have atleast 01 (One) CRC. Bigger states (area 

3 
 
and/or population wise) may have more than 01 (one) CRC, subject to a 
maximum of 05 CRC, depending upon number of Persons with Disabilities 
(PwDs) and willingness of State Government to provide land and temporary 
accommodation and other requirements”. 
 
7. The Committee had observed that the projections of the Department 
with regard to allocation of resources, determination of targets and 
assessment for trained professionals may fall short as the Department 
does not have the current status of Divyangjan population, since their 
projections still quote the figure of 2.68 crore PwDs, as per the Census of 
2011. A decade has passed since then.  The Committee had, at the same 
time, expressed hope that the Department is aware of the estimated 
number of PwDs now and makes their projections accordingly.  In their 
action taken reply, the Department have informed about increasing their 
outreach by establishing two new Institutes and several Composite 
Regional Centres for providing rehabilitation services to all categories of 
persons with disabilities.  The Department also envisages to establish at 
least one CRC in each State irrespective of the size of population. The 
Committee note the affirmative steps taken by the Department for the 
welfare of the disabled which are much more today, but they are of the 
view that unless these Institutes and CRCs are actually functional, the 
needs of the Divyangjan population will continue to face challenges.  
Hence, it is imperative that the Central Ministry as well as the State 
Governments have a missionary zeal to serve the PwDs like several 
prominent NGOs and private organisations, some of which the Committee 
had a good fortune to meet during their study visits, and strive to 
functionalise all the intended Institutes and CRCs.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised of the status of these Institutes and State-
wise CRCs at the action taken stage. 
Recommendation (Para No.4.5) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are disappointed to note that the faculty members in most of 
the Institutes are much less in comparison to their sanctioned strength. 
Insufficient faculty even in those institutes which were established decades 

4 
 
back is an alarming revelation. The situation at CRCs is also not good. To give 
an instance, the sanctioned strength for all the CRCs of National Institute for 
Locomotar Disabilities is 26, out of which 20 posts are vacant. Similarly, out of 
the sanctioned strength of regular posts of 20 and contractual posts of 106 at 
CRCs of Swami Vivekanand National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and 
Research, 8 regular posts and 58 contractual posts are vacant. Since the 
situation at other Institutes/CRCs is equally bad, the Committee would 
suggest that the Department needs to thoroughly examine the reasons, 
address the same early and get the vacancies filled so that the students and 
beneficiaries do not suffer. It must also be ensured that recruitment is done in 
a fixed time frame in future and is not left to linger for years together. The 
Committee have further observed that the information with regard to the 
sanctioned/actual strength is not available in the Annual Report of the 
Institutes, and are of the strong opinion that such information should be 
made available in Annual Reports of the Institutes. In this context, the 
Committee notice that an assessment study of teaching/non teaching staff of 
5 National Institutes was conducted by Staff Inspection Unit, Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure way back in 2016 which had 
recommended for creation of some new posts and abolition of a number of 
posts in these Institutes. The Committee are surprised that while several 
posts were abolished on the basis of recommendations of SIU, the proposal 
for creation of new posts was not approved. The Committee reiterate that for 
the smooth functioning of the Institutes, it is imperative that number of staff 
and faculty should be in consonance with the actual requirement so that the 
functioning of these Institutes is not hampered due to shortage of staff. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should once again pursue 
the matter of creation of posts in these Institutes with the Ministry of Finance 
because the establishment of the Institutes has no meaning if those are not 
able to perform/function due to lack of requisite personnel’. 
 
 
9. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilites, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “National Institute for Locomotor Disabilities (NILD), Kolkata is also making 
efforts for filled up vacant posts in its CRCs. SVNIRTAR has intimated that 
recruitment for various vacant posts in SVNIRTAR and its CRCs is going on. 
During last six months 47 numbers of posts have been filled up and 125 
numbers of posts will be filled up by next four months. As regard mentioning 
of the sanction/actual strength in the Annual Report of National Institutes, all 
National Institutes have been directed to include information sanction/actual 
strength of posts in the Annual Report of the National Institutes.  

5 
 
 The department is also pursuing the matter with the Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for the revival of vacant posts of the 
Institutes so that their services are not hampered and they achieve the 
desired objectives”.   
10. The Committee had inter-alia cautioned the Department about the 
impact of large number of vacancies among the faculty of the National 
Institutes established to serve the Divyangjan and had accordingly 
recommended to fill the vacancies at the earliest and establish a system 
so that the faculty posts are not left vacant for years together. The 
Committee now find steps taken in the matter which include filling up of 
47 posts in last 6 months as well as an assurance from the department 
that 125 posts would be filled up within the next four months.  The 
Committee desire that the Department should conduct an exhaustive 
exercise to identify total vacant posts across the Institutes and CRCs and 
ensure that those are filled up at the earliest. The equally important 
aspect of capacity building and capacity enhancement of every incumbent 
of a post in terms of domain knowledge and core competencies, should 
also be monitored continuously so that beneficiaries of the Institutes get 
the best possible support from these establishments. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.9) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of construction work of 
the building of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation established at 
Sehore. The Institute established in 2019 is yet to be shifted in their own 
building, which, the Committee cannot but attribute to lack of serious efforts 
on the part of the executing agency. They are unable to understand as to 
how the entrusted responsibility will be shouldered by the Institute if it does 
not have its own campus with requisite infrastructure. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the work must be completed in a time bound manner so that 
the Institute is fully able to undertake the responsibility entrusted to it. The 
Committee would also like to recommend that instead of employing faculty 
member on contractual basis, it should be ensured that the required faculty is 
recruited permanently so that the Institute is able to give quality and 
continuous service to the needy persons”. 
 
 

6 
 
 
12. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilites, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “The Construction of the building of the Institute is under progress through 
CPWD, which is likely to be completed by Mid-2023. It's progress is monitored 
through a Project Monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary, DEPwD. At 
present, the post of Deputy Registrar, Administrative Officer, Assistant 
Professor (Clinical Psychology), Account Officer, Store and Purchase Officer, 
Administrative Assistant, Personal Assistant and Accountant have been filed 
up on regular basis.  The process of filling up of other vacant posts is under 
progress”.  
13. In their earlier recommendation, the Committee had expressed the 
urgent need to complete the construction work of the campus of the 
National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation established in 2019. 
They were of the opinion that the functioning of the Institute would suffer 
without the requisite infrastructure and thus had recommended for the 
time bound completion of construction of building of the Institute. 
Further, the Committee had also recommended the recruitment of faculty 
on permanent basis to ensure quality and continuous service to PWDs. In 
their action taken reply, the Department have stated that the construction 
of the National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation (NIMHR) is to be 
completed by Mid 2023 and was being monitored by the Project 
Monitoring Committee headed by the Secretary (DePWD). By now, the 
Committee believe that the construction must have been completed.  
Regarding the recruitment of permanent faculty, the Committee have 
been informed that several posts have been filled on regular basis and 
recruitment was underway for filling up the other posts. While taking 
cognizance of the actions initiated by the Department, the Committee 
wish to be apprised of the status of recruitment and the functioning of the 
Institute at the action taken stage. 
Recommendation (Para No.7.9) 
14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee find that the National Institutes are headed by Director level 
Officer except for NIMHR and ISLRTC where a Joint Secretary level Officer is 

7 
 
appointed as the Director. These Institutes have a two tier governing 
structure i.e. General Council and Executive Council to oversee the functioning 
of National Institutes. The General Council and Executive Council of Institutes 
are headed by Secretary and Joint Secretary, Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities respectively whereas General Council and Executive 
Council of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation are headed by an 
academician and Director NIMHR respectively. The Committee are not able to 
understand the reasons for not maintaining uniformity in appointment of 
heads of these Institutions as well as heads of General Council and Executive 
Council of National Institutes and would like to be apprised of the same. The 
Committee would rather prefer that Academicians/Experts in the field of 
various disabilities should be appointed as heads so that they are able to 
effectively contribute in the growth of the National Institutes. The Committee 
would therefore like to recommend that a High powered Committee should be 
set-up to look into this issue and take a considered view in this direction”. 
 
15. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilites, in their Action 
Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 “To maintain the uniformity for the post of Director level in National Institute, 
the post of Director NIMHR and Director, ISLRTC has recently been 
downgraded from Level 14 (JS equivalent) to Level 13 (Director equivalent) in 
the Pay Matrix and now the Recruitment Rules (RRs)  for the post of Director 
of all the 9 NIs are same”. 
16. The Committee note that uniformity has since been brought, albeit 
to the disadvantage of NIMHR and ISLRTC, in all the 9 NIs for the post of 
Directors.  The Committee had also desired that Academicians/ Experts in 
the field of various disabilities should be appointed as head of a National 
Institute and thus had accordingly recommended formation of High 
powered Committee to examine this premise. They find no action in this 
regard by the Department.  The Committee hope that all NIs only have 
domain experts as Directors heading them.  If not, they reiterate their 
earlier recommendation that the National Institutes should invariably be 
headed by academicians/ experts who would benefit such Institutes by 
drawing on their experiences of having practical expertise in such areas.  
 
 

8 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.10) 
 
The Committee note that three Legislations viz. The Rehabilitation Council of India 
Act, 1992; The National Trust for the Welfare of Persons with Autism, Celebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multi Disabilities Act, 1999 and the Rights of Persons with 
disabilities Act, 2016 for the Welfare and Empowerment of persons with various 
disabilities have been enacted. The Committee further note that nine autonomous 
National Institutes have been established since 1975 under the administrative 
control of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) to develop human resources in the field 
of disability, provide rehabilitation services to the persons with disabilities, conduct 
research, etc., for the identified 21 disabilities. The Committee strongly feel that 
these efforts of Government of India are commendable as their aim is to enable the 
divyangjan live their lives in a better way through rehabilitation facilities available 
under the various Acts/Schemes/Orgnisations meant for the welfare of disabled 
persons. In this connection the Committee observed from some reports that few 
National Institutes are likely to be merged/closed. However, later they were assured 
by the Secretary, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities during 
the evidence before the Committee, that no National Institute is going to be closed 
down. The Committee were, however, informed that the process of clustering of 
Institutes have been started and due to this process, the activities of the Institutes 
will further progress and the autonomy, individuality and specialty of any Institute 
will not be adversely affected except for the alteration in the administrative 
structure. In view of the assurance given by the Secretary, the Committee believe 
that no action would be taken by the Department which is detrimental for the 
Institutes as well as for the welfare of disabled persons. They would like to be 
apprised of the status of the said clustering exercise at action taken stage. 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Expenditure reviewed the Autonomous Bodies under this 
Department and sent a report in September, 2020 suggesting rationalization of these 
bodies with a view to synergizing functions, ensuring concerted outcomes, 
economizing on resources and staffing. After inter-departmental consultation, a draft 
‘Note for the Cabinet’ was finalized and sent to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO in July 
2022. Subsequently, DEPwD received a direction from PMO to withdraw the Cabinet 

9 
 
Note which was followed by a formal communication dated 11/07/2022 from PMO 
giving the following directions:- 
  
(a) The proposal may be examined in consultation with the Ministries 
concerned as to how the coordination mechanism can be improved amongst 
various National Institutions working in the disability sector so as to bring in 
greater synergy and better outcomes. 
  
(b) Matter should be discussed with the State Governments concerned as well 
as other stakeholders. 
  
PMO directions, as mentioned in the preceding paras, are being pursued with 
by the Department and the department has done consultation with State 
Governments and other Ministries.  
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.15 ) 
 The Committee note that 11 Regional centres of 5 National Institutes have 
been established across the country to provide specialized services in the field of 
various disabilities. The Committee also note that 21 Composite Regional Centres 
have been approved to be set up under various National Institutes as Outreach and 
Extension Centres. Out of these 13 Composite Rehabilitation Centres have been 
approved since 2014-15. The Committee are surprised to find that the infrastructure 
of various Regional Centres and Composite Rehabilitation Centres (CRCs) is not 
sufficient as many of these Centres are running in rental/temporary buildings and 
buildings of several CRCs are under construction as well. The Committee have been 
informed that the cost of establishment and running of the CRC is fully borne by the 
Department. At the same time, one provision stipulates that CRCs will be established 
in States/UTs, if required land and temporary accommodation is provided free of cost 
by the concerned States/UTs. The Committee feel that such a condition may delay 
the setting up of CRCs. Hence, it is advised that Department may evolve a 
mechanism so that the approved CRCs are established in a time bound manner. 
Since augmentation of infrastructure of CRCs is time consuming, the Department, 
may, as a temporary measure, utilize the premises of Government-run-Senior 
Citizen Homes/Bal Vatikas/CGHS Dispensaries or charitable institutions such as 
Rotary Club, Helpage India etc. In order to increase the outreach of NIs. The 
Committee are confident that some, if not all, organizations would respond in a 
positive manner and be amenable to provide space for such an initiative. It will also 
be pertinent to mention that the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment, during their study visit to the National Institute for Empowerment of 
Persons with Multiple Disabilities (NIEPMD), Chennai, had given certain directions 
on the facilities provided to beneficiaries of the Institute such as implementation of 

10 
 
mid-day meal scheme, construction of waiting hall for parents and setting up of 
Hydro Therapy Unit at the Institute. The Committee are happy to note that the action 
has been taken by the department/Institute on all the observations made by them 
and hope that the NIs would take feedback from beneficiaries to augment their 
facilities as per their requirement regularly. 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for establishment of a new CRC is examined on the basis of: 
a. Request received by the State Government (as in the case of proposed CRC at 
Nagaland) 
b. Request received by Hon’ble MPs (as in the case of proposed CRC at Madurai) 
c. Initiative taken by the Department based on internal assessment (as in the case 
of proposed CRC at Varanasi) 
d. Initiative taken by the Department based on request received from concerned 
stakeholders (as in the case of proposed CRC at Chhatarpur) 
In most of the cases, State Governments are willing to provide land for the benefit 
of PwDs.  
Further, the Department has also revised its policy for establishment of CRCs. Now, 
an advanced projection for setting up of CRCs will be made and before finalization of 
budgetary requirement for a financial year, in-principle approval of Department of 
Expenditure will be sought to set up decided number of CRCs in that particular year. 
On getting land as well as temporary accommodation from the concerned State 
Government/UT, complete proposal, including posts required, for setting up of a new 
CRC will be submitted for approval and concurrence of Department of Expenditure. 
It is envisaged that the process for opening and operationalising will now get easier 
and less time consuming.  
Further, at grass root level, the Department has support from District Disability 
Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs). 
  
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 
(Recommendation Para No.2.16) 
 
The Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) have been merged with National Institutes 
from 2020-21. The Committee desire to know if the intended objectives behind this 
measure has been fulfilled. They also desire that the proposals received for opening 
of Composite Regional Centres from States/UTs should be considered and decided 
upon at the earliest and in case any issue arises in approving any proposal, those 
should be settled in coordination with concerned State Governments/UTs so that the 
purpose of establishing CRCs is not defeated. 
 
 

11 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To deal with the issues relating to governing structure, status, fund flow mechanism, 
monitoring and control, CRCs, from May, 2020 onwards, were made integral part of 
respective NI. Since  then, Grant-in aid is being released to any CRC through 
respective NIs. With this change, there is a consolidation of physical assets, financial 
and other resources of CRCs and respective NI which will give the benefit of 
economy of scale in terms of manpower and other resources in the long run. 
Department has considered the proposal for opening of CRCs as and when it is 
received from any States/UTs for their States/UTs. If any issue comes up with the 
States/UTs, the same is taken up with them on a priority basis. Besides, approval of 
Department of Expenditure is also required for setting up of new CRCs.  
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 
(Recommendation Para No.3.12) 
 
The Committee note with dismay the gap in complete utilization of budgetary 
allocations. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities failed to 
spend the Grant-in-Aid under “Support to National Institutes” from 2018-19 to 2021-
22 in respect of National Institutes and Composite Regional Centres as from the 
budgetary allocation of Rs.1281.72 crore, Rs. 1218.29 crore could be spent. The 
Committee also note that the Grant-in-Aid released to most of the National Institutes 
has almost remained static during 2017-18 to 2021-22, rather it has gone down in 
respect of National Institute for Locomotor Disabilities in 2020-21 and 2021-2022. 
The Committee are sad to find that the situation is similar for Composite Regional 
Centres as expenditure of Composite Regional Centre, Guwahati came down from 
Rs. 233.75 lakh in 2018-19 to Rs 184.00 lakh in 2021-22. The expenditure at 
Composite Regional Centres at Lucknow, Patna, Kozhikode, Nellore, Nagpur, Sikkim, 
Sundernagar, Rajnandgaon, Tripura, Gorakhpur and Balangir also came down in 
2020-21. The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons due to which the 
grant-in-aid released could not be spent particularly when these Institutions have 
been vested with the responsibility of development of human resources, render 
rehabilitation services, conduct research, etc., in the field of disability, which is a 
vast area to undertake several activities. Not only the Department performed poorly 
in utilization of funds, the situation in terms of beneficiaries was also found to be 
discouraging. The total number of beneficiaries in 2017-18 were 19.24 lakh which 
came down to 18.97 lakh in 2021-22 even after establishment of two new Institutes 
viz., Indian Sign Language Research and training Centre, Delhi and the National 
Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation, Sehore. The Committee are also not 
impressed with the number of beneficiaries at CRCs as number of beneficiaries has 

12 
 
gone down at various Composite Regional Centres. The Committee are of the strong 
view that had these Institutions/CRCs performed well the allocation of funds would 
have increased as the cost of assistive devices has been rising and the ambit of 
disabilities has substantially increased after the enactment of RPwD Act, 2016. Quite 
clearly, the NIs and CRCs are not performing optimally. Perhaps, the newly 
established NIs have also not started their proper functioning. Hence, the Committee 
feel that there is an urgent need to take effective measures to utilize budgetary 
allocation/grant-in-aid fully by all the National Institutes/RCs/CRCs so that more and 
more disabled persons are benefitted by the facilities provided by the Government to 
them. The Committee would also like the Department to concentrate on North-
Eastern Status and ensure that Department spend 10% of the total expenditure in 
North-Eastern States and take suitable measures to establish CRCs in the region 
including small cities in other parts of the country so that the needs of the 
Divyangjan are met universally. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has made all of the efforts to utilize the allocated funds under 
Support to National Institutes. The details of funds released under Support to 
National Institutes during last three years are as under:- 
Rs. in crore  
2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 
BE RE released BE RE Released BE RE released 
215.00 235.55 233.24 360.00 260.75 256.81 319.00 332.50 329.49 
  
It is evident that from the above table overall the utilization of funds under Support 
to National Institute has subsequently increased during the last three years.   
As far as decline in number of beneficiaries of National Institutes, it may be 
attributed to the fact that the services of National Institutes/Composite Regional 
Centre were affected during COVID period. However, NIs/CRCs have made efforts to 
reach rehabilitation services to PwDs across the country so that more and more 
PwDs benefit from the services of NIs/CRCs.   Department has already established 
six CRCs in North-Eastern States. Whenever any proposal will be received from the 
NE States for the opening of new CRC that will be considered on top priority.   
Further, this Department has allocated 10% of funds, allocated under North East 
Head, to various schemes of the Department, as per guidelines of the Department of 
North Eastern Region and all efforts are being made to utilize the allocated funds 
under NE.  
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 

13 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.7) 
 
The Committee noted that one of the objectives of the National Institutes is to 
conduct research in various types of disabilities. Several major researches have been 
conducted by various National Institutes in the field of assistive devices, 
rehabilitation and other crucial aspects related to various disabilities. However, the 
Committee are unhappy to find that three Research projects at National Institute for 
the Empowerment of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities are yet to start as funds 
are not received. The Committee are of the strong opinion that the field of research 
in the disability sector is lacking behind and hence due care has to be taken so that 
more research projects are under taken for indigenous development of technology, 
which would make the lives of Divyangjan comfortable and self-reliant. The 
Committee would therefore like the Department to focus more on the research 
activities of the Institutes and allocate adequate dedicated funds for this purpose so 
that research does not suffer for want of funds. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities had launched a new 
Central sector scheme on ‘Research on disability related technology, products and 
issues’ in January, 2015. The main objectives of this scheme are to promote 
research in prevention and prevalence of disability and the application of science & 
technology for the development of indigenous, appropriate aids and appliances. Until 
2017-18 the scheme was implemented as a standalone scheme of the Department. 
From the year 2019-20, it has become a part of the “Scheme for Implementation of 
Rights of Persons’ with Disabilities Act (SIPDA)”. 
Under the Scheme R&D Scheme following Organisations / Institutions are eligible for 
Financial Support:-  
i. Institution or a Group of Institutions for carrying out a specific research project 
with one or more scholars directing it; will include Universities, Research Institutes, 
and Voluntary Organizations, Professional associations in the field of Disability and 
similar organizations/agencies which have the capacity to do research in the 
disabilities mentioned in the RPwD Act 2016.  
ii. Institutions/autonomous bodies/R&D laboratories set up and fully funded by 
Central Government/State Governments/Public Sector Undertakings.  
iii. Organizations registered under any statute in India e.g. Societies Act, Trust Act, 
Co-operatives Act, Companies Act etc. normally with three years experience after 
registration would be eligible for assistance, besides all UGC approved academic 
institutions engaged in research activities and scholars, under individual research 
category.  
iv. Industry Associations like FICCI, ASSOCHAM and CII for productionisation of 
prototypes. 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 

14 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.8) 
 
The Committee, during the course of their deliberation with an NGO working for 
welfare of Leprosy Cured Persons (LPCs), have found that Leprosy cured but 
deformed persons also constitute a category of disabled persons. But unlike others 
the nature and extent of deformity in such persons cannot be fixed since Leprosy is 
a progressive disease. The Committee feel that the expertise and wide outreach of 
National Institutes can be effectively utilized to provide services, treatment and 
rehabilitation of LPCs. The National Institute for Locomotor Disabilities and Swami 
Vivekanand National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research are at the 
forefront of treatment and rehabilitation of persons with Locomotor disabilities and 
their funds can be effectively utilized to provide the customized aids and appliances 
required by such LPCs, who otherwise lead a miserable life with extreme poverty 
and social stigma. Further, research for betterment of quality of life of LPCs can also 
be undertaken by these Institutes. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
Department’s plan of action on their particular matter. 
Reply of the Government 
NILD is providing services, aids and appliances to Leprosy patient coming to the 
Institute. Interns of the NLD also visit at Leprosy mission Centre, Kolkata and 
provide their services. Institute will further take initiative and research for the 
betterment of quality of life of leprosy cured persons. 
Under the ADIP Scheme, Assistive Daily Living Kits (ADL) for Leprosy cured persons 
and any suitable device as advised by Expert Committee from time to time are 
distributed to Leprosy cured persons.  
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 (Recommendation Para No.6.10) 
 
The Committee note that the cases of autism in children have been found to be 
widely prevalent in the country. However, not much progress has been made to deal 
with such a complex disability. The Committee are happy as they have been 
informed that autism is now being considered a disability which was not the case 
prior to enactment of RPwD Act, 2016 and that a tool to assess autism has also been 
developed in India. The Committee further note that with the help of National 
Institute for the Empowerment of persons with Intellectual disabilities and National 
Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation the problems associated with autism will be 
taken care of. At the same time, the Committee also hope that necessary action will 
be taken including research by the Institutes for early detection of symptoms of 
autism in children so that treatment can start at the initial stage itself. As such 
children may have below or above average IQ level, the Committee feel that self 
help skills, communication skills, occupational therapy, speech therapy, counselling 

15 
 
facility for family members and vocational training will be quite useful for 
development of such children. The Committee therefore feel that these two 
Institutions can play a major role to assess the needs of such children and also take 
necessary measures to provide counselling and proper guidance to their parents so 
that they can understand specific requirement of their child. 
 
Reply of the Government 
National Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities 
(NIEPID), Seunderabad has undertaken collaborative projects titled “DISAAA: 
Development of an Integrated Solution for Automatic Assessment of Autism)” in 
collaboration with C-DAC, Kolkata to address the early screening and identification of 
children with autism. Apart from this, regular guidance is provided to the parents 
attending the services addressing the social development, communication skills, 
sensory integration therapy, behavioural modification and educational guidance. 
NIEPID is in the process of developing new Indian Test of Intelligence with standard 
norms which will be available very soon. This will help in identifying not only children 
with ID but also other developmental disabilities. 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.6) 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that the National Institutes including 
Composite Regional Centres mandated to conduct courses to train in various fields 
for the rehabilitation of disabled persons are not able to get the requisite number of 
candidates for the same. This holds true in almost all the Institutes/Composite 
Regional Centres. It is a cause of great concern particularly for courses run in the 
Institutes, which came into existence long time back. Besides such courses need 
specialized softwares and equipments with considerable cost, which must be utilized 
fully. The Committee have been informed about a recent initiative, wherein the 
Department has requested the Rehabilitation Council of India to evolve courses, 
which are popular and are more inclusive so that the cases of multiple disabilities are 
taken care of. The Committee feel that such corrective measures should have been 
taken earlier. Lack of candidates for courses has a direct impact on availability of 
good trainers for the rehabilitation of Divyangjan. The Committee therefore, desire 
that the Department should vigorously pursue with the Rehabilitation Council of 
India and take advice from experts as well to urgently design courses, which are 
attractive to potential students and meet the current requirement of 
trainers/counselors for divyangjan. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should direct all the Institutes to take suitable measures to publicize the 
courses well so that no seats in the courses are left vacant in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rehabilitation Council of India has taken action on the training programmes in the 
field of Special Education to make more comprehensive and inclusive. The Council 
has converged its existing 8 diploma level programmes in specific disability to 4 
diploma level programmes as per the specifications in RPwD Act, 2016 as under:  
Specification as per 
RPWD Act 
Diploma level 
Earlier RCI 
programmes 
Programmes after convergence as 
per RPwD Act 
A. Physical 
Disability (VI, LV)  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(VI)  D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(Visual Impairment)  
Covering Blindness, Low Vision 
B.  Physical Disability 
(HI)  
New component – 
Speech Disorder  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(HI)  D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(Hearing Impairment)  
Covering Hearing Impairment and 
Speech Disorder 
 
 
C.  Developmental D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(ID) D.Ed.Spl.Ed. (Intellectual and 

17 
 
Disability  
  
New component – 
Specific Learning 
Disability (SLD)  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(ASD)  Developmental Disabilities)  
  
Covering Intellectual Disability, 
Autism Spectrum Disorder, Specific 
Learning Disability  
D.  Multiple Disability 
(MD, CP, Db)  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(Db), 
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(MD)  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed.(CP)  
D.Ed.Spl.Ed. (Multiple Disabilities) 
  
Covering Multiple Disability, 
Deafblind, Cerebral Palsy 
  
Department has directed all the National Institutes to take suitable measures to 
publicize the courses well so that no seats in the courses are left vacant in future. 
 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023 
 
(Recommendation Para No.6.8) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Department in tackling the issues 
relating to mental health as two National Institutes viz National Institute for the 
Empowerment of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities at Secunderabad and National 
Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation at Sehore were established in 1984 and in 
2019 respectively to address the Mental Health issues. The Committee find that the 
National Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities set up to build 
capacities for empowerment of persons with Intellectual disabilities have taken 
several initiatives such as development of Teaching learning material kits, conducted 
conferences/training programmes, research etc. However, the progress made by the 
Institute is perhaps not keeping pace with the number of persons suffering from 
intellectual disabilities. The Committee feel that the National Institute for the 
Empowerment of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities could have done much more 
and developed expertise in the field as it came into existence way back in 1984. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Institute should gear up their research 
activities to tackle the growing cases of intellectual disability in the country. They 
also desire that the Institute should increase the number of workshops organized by 
them across the country so that adequate awareness about the intellectual 
disabilities/mental illness would be generated in the society. 
Reply of the Government 
National Institute for the Empowerment of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities 
(NIEPID) has continuously work on designing new curriculum and training modules 
for different stake holders such as parents, teachers, caregivers and student trainees 
to meet the needs of people with intellectual disabilities. The courses designed are 
replicated by many other NGO’s.  

18 
 
The number of Short-term and awareness programmes conducted by NIEPID in past 
5 years has increased from 71 to 381 reaching about more than 1.5 lakh 
professionals and parents.  
NIEPID is continuously making effort to conduct research to address major issues 
and challenges. In the past 5 years NIEPID has completed 7 research projects, 4 
research projects are ongoing and 3 new research projects are proposed for the 
current academic year. 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No.7.10) 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that in most of the Institutes, no evaluation 
study has been conducted in the recent past. It is also evident from the information 
provided to the committee that the Institutes do not have any standard mechanism 
to evaluate their day-to-day functioning. In the absence of evaluation system, the 
Committee are not able to understand the basis of assessment of the performance 
of the Institutes to identify any shortcomings in the functioning of the Institutes and 
suggest improvements. The Committee strongly advocate that the performance of 
the Institutes and Composite Regional Centers should be periodically reviewed. The 
Department needs to take a view on periodic evaluation of the Institutes and CRCs 
and establish an in-house monitoring mechanism for day to day functioning of the 
Institutes/ Composite Regional Centres to bring out their best. The Committee are 
happy to note that steps taken to develop portal with regard to distribution of 
assistive devices and equipments to the beneficiaries is one of the steps in the 
direction of monitoring but are not aware of the timeline by which this Portal is likely 
to be developed. The Committee would appreciate if this Portal is developed in a 
time bound manner so that the beneficiaries get benefit from it. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government reviews the functioning of the NIs and CRCs regularly by taking Review 
Meetings. Other than that, performances of the NIs/CRCs are also monitored by the 
Executive Council (chaired by Joint Secretary, DEPwD except in case of NIMHR 
which is chaired by Director, NIMHR) and General Council (chaired by Secretary, 
DEPwD, except NIMHR, Sehore which is chaired by an Academician) of the 
respective National Institute. As a result, services and infrastructure of NIs/CRCs 
have increased significantly. 
ARJUN Portal (ADIP MIS Portal) has been prepared and launched for proper 
implementation and monitoring of the scheme. The portal was made in live Nov, 
2021 for the use of development and implementing agencies for uploading legacy 
data of ADIP beneficiaries since 2014 which is completed and the Portal was formally 

19 
 
launched on 15th September, 2022 for the public for online application of aids and 
assistive devices by the beneficiaries.  
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.11) 
 
The Committee find that the figure of total Divyangjan population of 2.68 crore is 
based on the 2011 census and express their concern whether it is actually reflective 
of current status of disabled population. The Committee feel that the actual number 
of disabled persons could be much higher, as the available figure is more than 10 
years old. Therefore, they believe that the Department is aware of the estimated 
number of PwDs in the country today in order to project a realistic assessment of 
resources required, allocation of funds and set reasonable targets. This will also hold 
true for the requirement of trained professional such as physiotherapist, counselors, 
doctors, paramedics, etc. where action numbers, in all probability, is not 
commensurate to the requirement. The Committee, therefore, urge the Department 
to take into cognizance their observation while setting further outcomes, and strive 
to make all NIs optimally functional for the Divyang population. 
Reply of the Government 
To extend the coverage of providing rehabilitation services to all categories of 
Persons with Disabilities under one roof with limited use of infrastructure and 
manpower, Composite Regional Centres (CRCs) were set up in different States from 
the year 2000 onward as outreach/ extension centres of respective NIs to extend the 
coverage of providing rehabilitation services to all categories of Persons with 
Disabilities under one roof with limited use of infrastructure and manpower. The 
Department has also set up two new National level Institutes i.e. Indian Sign 
Language Research and Training Centre (ISLRTC), Sehore and National Institute of 
Mental Health Rehabilitation (NIMHR), Sehore in the last 10 years. Further, to 
increase it's reach, the Department envisage that every State/Union Territory, 
irrespective of area and/or population, should have atleast 01 (One) CRC. Bigger 
states (area and/or population wise) may have more than 01 (one) CRC, subject to a 
maximum of 05 CRC, depending upon number of Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) 
and willingness of State Government to provide land and temporary accommodation 
and other requirements. Rehabilitation Council of India (RCI), a statutory body under 
this Department, regulates and monitors services given to persons with disability, 
standardise syllabi and maintains a Central Rehabilitation Register of all qualified 
professionals and personnel working in the field of Rehabilitation and Special 
Education.  
Further, the Recruitment rules of various posts at NIs/CRCs are reviewed regularly to 
meet the current requirement. 
 

21 
 
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.5) 
 
The Committee are disappointed to note that the faculty members in most of the 
Institutes are much less in comparison to their sanctioned strength. Insufficient 
faculty even in those institutes which were established decades back is an alarming 
revelation. The situation at CRCs is also not good. To give an instance, the 
sanctioned strength for all the CRCs of National Institute for Locomotar Disabilities is 
26, out of which 20 posts are vacant. Similarly, out of the sanctioned strength of 
regular posts of 20 and contractual posts of 106 at CRCs of Swami Vivekanand 
National Institute of Rehabilitation Training and Research, 8 regular posts and 58 
contractual posts are vacant. Since the situation at other Institutes/CRCs is equally 
bad, the Committee would suggest that the Department needs to thoroughly 
examine the reasons, address the same early and get the vacancies filled so that the 
students and beneficiaries do not suffer. It must also be ensured that recruitment is 
done in a fixed time frame in future and is not left to linger for years together. The 
Committee have further observed that the information with regard to the 
sanctioned/actual strength is not available in the Annual Report of the Institutes, 
and are of the strong opinion that such information should be made available in 
Annual Reports of the Institutes. In this context, the Committee notice that an 
assessment study of teaching/non teaching staff of 5 National Institutes was 
conducted by Staff Inspection Unit, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure 
way back in 2016 which had recommended for creation of some new posts and 
abolition of a number of posts in these Institutes. The Committee are surprised that 
while several posts were abolished on the basis of recommendations of SIU, the 
proposal for creation of new posts was not approved. The Committee reiterate that 
for the smooth functioning of the Institutes, it is imperative that number of staff and 
faculty should be in consonance with the actual requirement so that the functioning 
of these Institutes is not hampered due to shortage of staff. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should once again pursue the matter of 
creation of posts in these Institutes with the Ministry of Finance because the 
establishment of the Institutes has no meaning if those are not able to 
perform/function due to lack of requisite personnel. 
  
Reply of the Government 
National Institute for Locomotor Disabilities (NILD), Kolkata is also making efforts for 
filled up vacant posts in its CRCs. SVNIRTAR has intimated that recruitment for 
various vacant posts in SVNIRTAR and its CRCs is going on. During last six months 
47 numbers of posts have been filled up and 125 numbers of posts will be filled up 
by next four months. As regard mentioning of the sanction/actual strength in the 
Annual Report of National Institutes, all National Institutes have been directed to 

22 
 
include information sanction/actual strength of posts in the Annual Report of the 
National Institutes.  
The department is also pursuing the matter with the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance for the revival of vacant posts of the Institutes so that their 
services are not hampered and they achieve the desired objectives.   
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.6.9) 
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of construction work of the 
building of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation established at Sehore. 
The Institute established in 2019 is yet to be shifted in their own building, which, the 
Committee cannot but attribute to lack of serious efforts on the part of the executing 
agency. They are unable to understand as to how the entrusted responsibility will be 
shouldered by the Institute if it does not have its own campus with requisite 
infrastructure. Hence, the Committee recommend that the work must be completed 
in a time bound manner so that the Institute is fully able to undertake the 
responsibility entrusted to it. The Committee would also like to recommend that 
instead of employing faculty member on contractual basis, it should be ensured that 
the required faculty is recruited permanently so that the Institute is able to give 
quality and continuous service to the needy persons. 
Reply of the Government 
The Construction of the building of the Institute is under progress through CPWD, 
which is likely to be completed by Mid-2023. It's progress is monitored through a 
Project Monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary, DEPwD. At present, the post of 
Deputy Registrar, Administrative Officer, Assistant Professor (Clinical Psychology), 
Account Officer, Store and Purchase Officer, Administrative Assistant, Personal 
Assistant and Accountant have been filed up on regular basis.  The process of filling 
up of other vacant posts is under progress.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.7.9) 
The Committee find that the National Institutes are headed by Director level Officer 
except for NIMHR and ISLRTC where a Joint Secretary level Officer is appointed as 
the Director. These Institutes have a two tier governing structure i.e. General 
Council and Executive Council to oversee the functioning of National Institutes. The 
General Council and Executive Council of Institutes are headed by Secretary and 
Joint Secretary, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
respectively whereas General Council and Executive Council of National Institute of 
Mental Health Rehabilitation are headed by an academician and Director NIMHR 

23 
 
respectively. The Committee are not able to understand the reasons for not 
maintaining uniformity in appointment of heads of these Institutions as well as 
heads of General Council and Executive Council of National Institutes and would like 
to be apprised of the same. The Committee would rather prefer that 
Academicians/Experts in the field of various disabilities should be appointed as heads 
so that they are able to effectively contribute in the growth of the National 
Institutes. The Committee would therefore like to recommend that a High powered 
Committee should be set-up to look into this issue and take a considered view in this 
direction. 
Reply of the Government 
To maintain the uniformity for the post of Director level in National Institute, the 
post of Director NIMHR and Director, ISLRTC has recently been downgraded from 
Level 14 (JS equivalent) to Level 13 (Director equivalent) in the Pay Matrix and now 
the Recruitment Rules (RRs)  for the post of Director of all the 9 NIs are same.  
(Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities) O.M.No.2206/70/2021 NI dated 27.03.2023) 
 
  

24 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 RAMA DEVI 
                                           Chairperson, 
26th  July, 2023                                                              Standing Committee on 
4     Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                              Social Justice and  
                              Empowerment 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 26TH JULY, 2023. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON  
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  4. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
  5. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  6. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
  7. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt.Sumtira Balmik 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
10.   Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
11. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
12. Smt Mamata Mohanta 
13. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 
 

26 
 
 
 
 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii)  Forty-Ninth Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
 observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-Second Report 
of  the  Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
 (Seventeenth Lok  Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of National 
 Institutes established for  different types of disabilities’. 
 
(iii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report 
and to present the same to both the Houses on the ensuing session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SECOND REPORT ON 
‘REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES ESTABLISHED 
FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF DISABILITIES’ 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
14  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.1.10, 2.15, 2.16, 3.12, 5.7, 5.8 & 
6.10     
  
07 50% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.5.6, 6.8 & 7.10 
 
 
03 21.43% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No.1.11, 4.5, 6.9 & 7.9  
 
04 28.57% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
00 00 
   100% 
 
 
 