 
 
 
  
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(2020 - 21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs] 
 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2021/Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
i 
 25 

ii 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2020-21) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Second Report of the Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands 
for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Minority Affairs] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2021 
                                    Laid in Rajya Sabha on  06.08.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2021/Sravana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 
AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
(iv)  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 (vi) 
CHAPTER -I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
12  
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies of the Government. 
 
16  
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted  
and which require reiteration. 
 
 20 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 21 
ANNEXURE  
 
Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment held on 05.08.2021. 
 
28 
APPENDIX 
 
 
Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment  
(Seventeenth Lok Sab ha) on 'Demands for Grants (202 1-22)' of the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
30 
 
  

iv 
 
   
   
                                          
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  16. Shri Arjun Singh 
17. Smt. Supriya Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
21. Vacant # 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha* 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa* 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31.    Shri Ramji* 
 
 
 
 
__________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020 
#   Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 
07.07.2021 consequent upon his appointment  as Union Minister. 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretariat 
4. Smt. Shashi Bisht  - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2020-21) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twenty-fifth Report on the action taken by the Government 
on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on 'Demands for Grants (2021-22)' of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16th March, 2021. The Ministry of Minority Affairs   furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the  observations/recommendations contained therein that 
Report on 1st June, 2021.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 05 August, 
2021. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference , observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of this Report. 
  
     NEW DELHI;      RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
05 August,  2021                                      Standing Committee on 
13 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)        Social Justice and  
Empowerment  

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2021 -22 
pertaining to the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  
 
1.2 The Twenty -second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16.03.2021.   It contained 5  observations/recommendations.  Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Paragraph Nos. 5.7 and 6.12. 
       (Total :2-Chapter-II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government : 
 Paragraph No. - 4.11 
(Total :1 -Chapter-III) 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration: 
 Paragraph No.  -Nil        
               (Total: Nil -Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which repli es of the 
Government are of interim in nature: 
Paragraph No. -  2.10 and 3.11. 
      (Total : 2 - Chapter- V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 

2 
 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which merit comments. 
A. Budgetary Provisions and Utilization under Scholarship component 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para 2.10) 
1.5   The Committee, in their Twenty-second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry was not able to spend 
their Budgetary allocation fully during 2020 -21 despite it being reduced by more 
than ₹1000 crore at the RE stage from Rs 5029.00 to Rs 4005.00, due to slow 
pace of expenditure in  scholarship component. It reportedly happened as 
States/UTs could not complete re -verification process. The Committee, 
although, were informed that the said reduction was not for the Scholarship 
Schemes but for other Schemes of the Ministry, nonetheless f eel that as 
compared to other Ministries implementing similar Scholarship Schemes, the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs has stood way behind in utilizing the allotted funds. 
This surely calls for some introspection. While the Ministry have convinced that 
they would be able to utilize their allocation fully during the remaining period of 
the Financial Year 2020 -21, the Committee are skeptical about the same since 
the trend of previous years indicates that except under the pre -matric 
Scholarship Scheme, the Minis try always had funds remaining underutilized at 
the end of the year for the other two Schemes. The Committee are unable to 
comprehend as to how the Ministry would accomplish objectives of these 
Schemes unless all States/UTs complete their processes of re -verification in a 
very short time, which, in all probability, is not likely to happen. While the 
Ministry have furnished information on the actual number of beneficiaries 
exceeding the targets in previous years there is nil information for 2020 -21. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the position in 2020 -21 at the 
action taken stage. As per the 15th Finance Commission Report, all the 
Schemes are likely to be reviewed for the next 5 years, hence, the Committee 
recommend that the monthly/qua rterly expenditure plan of the Ministry for the 
year 2021-22 must also be executed strictly so that they are able to justify their 
Schemes and project the correct requirement of funds at RE stage too.” 
1.6 The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their action taken reply, have stated as 
follows:- 
 
“Budget Estimate 2020 -21 was reduced from ₹5029 crore to ₹4005 crore at 
Revised Estimate 2020 -21 stage. With the concerted efforts and constant 
monitoring at highest level an amount of ₹3998.57 crore  i.e 99.84 % of R E of 
₹4005  crore  was  booked  under  various schemes of the Ministry during 
2020-21. 
 

3 
 
Against the allocation of ₹ 2265 crore in 2020-21 for the 3 scholarship schemes 
viz., Pre -Matric, Post -Matric and Merit -cum-Means based Scholarship 
Schemes the Ministry has booked a total expenditure of ₹ 2234.70crore i.e. 
98.66% of the allocated budget.  The Scheme-wise expenditure d etails for FY 
2020-21 are as under: 
 
 
 
It is further stated that the number of scholarships under the fresh category in 
each of the three schemes’ is fixed as per the State/UT wise and community 
wise quota. However there is no quota for renewal scholarships and all eligible 
beneficiaries are en titled for renewal scholarship subject to verification of their 
applications. As far as the physical target is concerned, despite disruptions 
arising out of the COVID pandemic the targets under the ‘fresh’ category have 
largely been achieved and maximum nu mbers of eligible and genuine 
applicants have also covered under the ‘renewal’ category of these Schemes. 
The remaining applicants whose applications have been verified and who have 
made it to the merit list under the ‘fresh’ category but could not be paid  due to 
technical reasons like payment failure, delay in bank validation or delay by the 
Sates in digitally signing of the payment files will be paid within   the first quarter 
of the succeeding academic year i.e. 2021 -22 after rectification/ signing of 
payment files by the States. The Scheme -wise details of the number of 
beneficiaries covered in FY 2020-21 are as under: 
 
Scheme Target 
(Fresh) 
*Total Scholarships Sanctioned 
(As on 31.03.2021) 
Pre-Matric 3000004 5046292 
Post Matric 499999 648133 
MCM 60000 117614 
Total 3560000 5812039 
    *includes renewals” 
 
  
Scheme B.E. 
(In ₹ Cr.) 
R.E. 
(In ₹ Cr.) 
Expenditure 
(In ₹ Cr.) 
 
Pre-Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
1330.00 1330.00 1325.55 
Post Matric Scholarship 
Scheme 
535.00 535.00 512.81 
Merit-cum-Means based 
Scholarship Scheme 
400.00 400.00 396.34 
Total 2265.00 2265.00 2234.70 

4 
 
1.7 Keeping in view the slow pace of expenditure and resultant 
underutilisation of Budgetary allocation in the Post -Matric and Merit-cum-Means 
Scholarship Schemes component, and that too, despite a reduction of ₹1000 
crore at RE stage, during the previous year , the Committee had desired to be 
informed of the position of the number of actual beneficiaries for 2020 -21 as 
there was nil information during the examination of Demands for Grants.  The 
Committee are now happy to note from the action taken reply that th e Ministry 
has reportedly achieved the targets as it has been informed that against the 
target of fresh 3560000 scholarships in 2020 -21, the number of scholarships 
sanctioned, under ‘fresh’ and ‘renewal’ categories, as on 31.3.2021, is 5812039.  
At the sam e time, the Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted that 
under ‘Fresh’ category some scholarships could not be paid due to technical 
reasons like payment failure, delay in bank validation or delay by the States in 
digitally signing of payment  files.  The Ministry have committed that these 
scholarships would be paid within the first quarter of the academic year i.e., 
2021-22 after rectification/ signing of payment files by the States.  As the first 
quarter has passed, the Committee hope that th e payments for these ‘fresh’ 
applications has since been completed, and renewal applications timely 
processed so that the scholarship amount is timely disbursed and education of 
beneficiaries is not disrupted due to non-payment.     
  

5 
 
B. Scholarship Schemes  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2, Para 3.11) 
  
1.8 The Committee in their Twenty-second Report had recommended as under:- 
“Three Central Sector Scholarship Schemes namely Pre-matric, Post-matric and 
Merit-cum-Means are being implemented by the Ministry of Minority Affairs for 
six centrally notified minority communities. The Committee are quite disturbed 
by cases reported abou t the alleged misappropriation of funds/funds going to 
fake students under these scholarship schemes for children belonging to 
underprivileged minorities in six States, which are under investigation/enquiry. In 
one State, after enquiry, the fraud is stated  to have happened due to passwords 
leak by certain vested interests as well as other loopholes. Taking advantage of 
illiteracy/lack of awareness among parents and children of minorities is also 
exploited by such elements. While the Ministry representatives  have always 
been claiming that the system is fail -safe due to all transactions/verifications 
done online, a dedicated Portal, cash transfer through DBT and similar 
measures, which are definitely the need of the hour, it is disconcerting for the 
Committee to observe that such instances of corruption happened. However 
minuscule, this must have deprived the genuine beneficiaries of Government 
Scholarship Schemes and may have lead to some children dropping out too 
being unable to afford the school fee/other ex penses. During their evidence, the 
Ministry representatives informed the Committee about further safety measures 
under their consideration, for instance, preserving the files of scholarship -holder 
students for a period of 5 years, creation of an Aadhaar va ult in coordination 
with MeITY, requirement of signatures of School Principals in verification report 
filed by teacher, at least 2%  physical verification, creation of student data bank 
with the help of Department of School education etc. While the Committ ee 
desire the Ministry to plug all identified loopholes in the system, strengthening 
privacy of data and passwords and reduce all manual interventions, be it school 
personnel, banking intermediaries, NGOs or unauthorised persons, they are of 
the strong opinion that the Ministry should also counsel the State Governments 
to try to reach out to a sample size of beneficiary minority students directly to 
ascertain that they are not being duped in the pretext of Government 
scholarships, and that they are actually  in receipt, through DBT, of the full 
amount of the entitled scholarship money for the term, as approved against their 
names in the Portal. Also the banks should ensure that the accounts of students 
do not get closed due to non -activity since minority chil dren cannot do regular 
transactions, because some evaluation studies have shown that the scholarship 
money gets reverted also due to accounts being inactive/closed. The Committee 
are convinced that such measures can lead to a major improvement and hence 
recommend that action should be taken on this aspect. Now, as the COVID -19 
vaccination is gaining speed, the Committee opine that the reopening of schools 
in full capacity and the resultant formalities and verifications etc. for disbursal of 
scholarships wil l pick up in the later part of the current Financial year. The 
Committee reiterate that fraudulent activity by unscrupulous elements in 
schools, banks, NGOs, VOs, etc., who find ways to circumvent the processes 

6 
 
for their personal gains, must be stopped. In  fact, the Committee learn that 
recently around 8000 NGOs have been delisted by the Government for various 
shortcomings in their functioning. Hence, the Committee reiterate that the 
Ministry should ensure that the online portal for scholarships should have  
enough security features/tools to detect any tampering/fraud in the 
passwords/codes, in consultation with NIC and persons/ organizations found 
guilty of malpractices should be removed with immediate effect. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the progr ess in the Ministry’s efforts as well as the 
outcome of the enquiries currently underway in some States on the matter.” 
1.9   The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their action taken replies, have  stated as 
under: 
“The Ministry has taken various actions/in itiatives during FY 2020 -21 to 
strengthen the implementation of the Scholarship Schemes through National 
Scholarship Portal and issued various preventive measures to be taken by 
National Scholarship Portal (NSP)-NIC as well as Institute Nodal Officers/District 
Nodal Officers/State Nodal Officers. As desired by the Committee, the present 
status of various actions taken by the Ministry on the matter is as under: 
(a) The matter was referred to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) by 
the Ministry and a Preliminary Enquiry has been registered by them 
on the subject on 11thNovember 2020. The investigation report is 
awaited in this Ministry. 
 
(b) The present status of the actions taken by the NSP -NIC as well as 
States/UTs are as under, which refers to the succe ssful 
implementation of some of the directives issued by the Ministry: 
 
• All verified applications till 12.01.2021 were reverted for re -
verification and all such applications have been successfully re -
verified within the stipulated timeline. 
 
• NSP has provid ed previous year’s information and data from U -
DISE/ AISHE to serve as reference materials for verification by 
Institute Nodal Officers (INO) and District/State/UT Nodal Officers 
(DNO/SNO). 
 
• Validation of date of birth and gender in addition to name of 
applicants through Aadhaar demographic authentication has been 
done. 
 
• All DNOs and more than 90% INOs have been re-verified. 
 
• Doubtful applications were identified with red flags by NSP to ensure 
and facilitate re-verification. 
 
• The Ministry is also exploring  to engage the services of Common 
Service Centre (CSC) to facilitate Aadhaar authenticated 

7 
 
applications under Pre -Matric Scholarship Scheme and Centre of 
Excellence for Data Analytics (CEDA) for data analytics in FY 2020 -
21. 
 
(c) The following instructions have been issued by the Ministry to 
States/UTs to tighten   the verification process: 
 
• INO will maintain a hard file  of applications and supporting 
documents, class -wise and academic year -wise, for inspection by 
district level and other authorities at any time. 
• INO has to be an employee of the School/Institution. 
 
• SNOs/DNOs to undertake mandatory physical verification of 
institutions and applicants as well as 2% of verified applications and 
furnish a report. 
 
• Head of Institution t o certify the list of applications verified by INO 
and send it to DNO/SNO for L 2 verification. NSP has created a 
separate login for Head of the Institution.  
 
• Schools/Institutions will have to display the list of beneficiaries on 
the notice board and also to present the list of beneficiaries with final 
amount before the School Management Committee and obtain  the 
signature of the student. 
 
(d)  Present status of the reports, sent by the five States where the 
investigation is under way, is as under:  
 
• Report of Chhattisgarh State: The report says that it has been found 
that all alleged beneficiaries are genuine and assures no fraudulent 
incident. 
 
• Report of Assam State: The investigation is under process with CID. 
Additional data required by them has been provided by MoMA. 
Interim/Final report in this matter is awaited. 
 
• Report of Punjab State: The matter is under examination by S.S.P. 
Hoshiarpur. 
 
• Report of Bihar State: The State has instructed District Magistrates 
of 9 concerned districts to enquire and investigate alleged cases. 
FIR has been lodged in Gaya and Saharsa Districts.  
 
• Report of Jharkhand State: Matter has been handed over to 
Anticorruption Bureau (ACB) of State. Interim/Final report in this 
matter is awaited. 
 

8 
 
Besides, DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat and Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) have also been apprised of these 
recommendations and the necessary directions have been issued by DBT 
Mission to NSP -NIC for rigorous implementation of these measures. DBT 
Mission, Cabinet Secretariat has also issued some common 
instructions/guidelines to be followed by all Ministries/Departments 
implementing their Schemes through NSP Portal. 
It is further submitted that since NIC maintains the Portal and it is under the 
administrative control of DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat – the 
recommendations of the Committee will be forwarded to Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology (MeitY) as well as the DBT Mission Cabinet 
Secretariat for appropriate action.” 
  

9 
 
1.10 The Committee , in their earlier recommendation, had expressed concern 
over the cases of fake beneficiaries of scholarships being reported from many 
States and had, accordingly, given concrete suggestions so that the present 
system is strengthened further to avoid recurrence of such instances.  The 
Committee feel that various actions/initiatives  taken/envisaged by the Ministry 
during Financial Yea r 2020 -21 to strengthen the implementation of the 
Scholarship Schemes through National Scholarship Portal and various 
preventive measures issued for National Scholarship Portal - NIC, data agencies 
as well as Institute Nodal Officers/District Nodal Officers/State Nodal Officers , 
are steps in the right direction and once completed, should address loopholes in 
the system.  However, the Committee is unhappy with the slow pace of progress 
in the inquiry  being conducted in the cases reported about the alleged 
misappropriation of funds/funds going to fake beneficiaries under scholarship 
schemes in some States  i.e. Assam, Punjab, Bihar, and Jharkhand where the  
investigations/enquiries are under  way and  Interim/Final r eports are still 
awaited.  The Committee, therefore, u rge the Ministry to vigorously pursue with 
these States so that the genuine students do not suffer.   The Committee are also 
disappointed to note the Ministry’s silence on the issue of de activation of Bank 
accounts of some of the beneficiary students. They, therefore, reiterate that the 
Ministry should resolve the issue so that the Bank accounts of scholarship 
beneficiaries are not closed in the absence of regular transaction and the 
scholarship money do not get reverted due to accounts being inactive/closed.  
  

10 
 
C. NAI MANZIL  
Recommendation (Sl. No.4, Para 5.7) 
 
1.11 The Committee, in their Twenty-second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee find that the Nai Manzil Scheme aims to benefit the minority 
youths including girl students in the age group of 17 to 35 years who do not 
have a formal school leaving certificate i.e., those in the category of school 
dropouts or educated in the community education initiatives incl uding 
Madarsas, who are not only education and skill certified but also placed in 
jobs. The Committee are disappointed to note that despite aid from the World 
Bank, the Scheme has been lagging mainly due to non -availability of job 
opportunities in the vicinity of the beneficiaries particularly for girls who are not 
willing to take up jobs outside. It is disappointing that out of 98311 persons 
enrolled, only 26312 persons have got job placement. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the skill training progra mme may include on -line work, 
which can be done right from the home itself, particularly for girls from minority 
communities. The efforts to popularize Nai Manzil Scheme may be made 
through local bodies and local public representatives in order to convince  the 
communities about benefits of sending their youth for education/skill training. 
Effective monitoring and audit would instill confidence further.” 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their action taken reply, have submitted as 
under: 
“i. Ministry has tied up with two employment promoting startups APNA & 
CSR Box,  these have been on boarded   to capacity build the Project 
Implementing Agencies to improve the placements. 
 
ii. The directives  have  also been issued  to PIAs in pursuance of  the  
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee in popularizing the scheme by 
highlighting events such as  convocation/awarding of certificate to the trainees by 
inviting the Hon’ble Members of Parliament, Legislators, Local Authorities, Media 
and Influencers. 
 
iii.  A mentorship model  has been  devised  involving the PMU members to 
engage minutely and handhold the PIAs to increase the efficiency of outputs and 
outcomes of the interventions reach.” 
 
  

11 
 
1.13   The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the y have tied up 
with two employment promoting startups APNA & CSR Box  to capacity build the 
Project Implementing Agencies to improve the placements .  They, further note, 
that a mentorship model  has been  devised  involvi ng the PMU members to 
engage minutely and handhold the PIAs to increase the efficiency of outputs and 
outcomes of the interventions reach. The Committee however, find that the reply 
does not mention anything about inclusion of on -line work in the skill tra ining 
programme with PIAs for improving the placement .  The Committee  would, 
therefore,  like to re -emphasize the need to include on -line work in the skill 
training programme so  that beneficiaries particularly  girls who are not willing to 
take up jobs o utside can get job opportunities within their vicinity under the 
scheme.  It is most relevant under the prevailing situation of COVID -19 pandemic 
which necessitates social distancing.   The Committee  would also like the 
Ministry to develop a mechanism to monitor the role of APNA and CSR BOX and 
provide the Committee  with the number of jobs provided after APNA and CSR 
Box have been associated in Nai Manzil Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
CHAPTER – II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Recommendation (Para 5.7) 
  
2.1  The Committee find that the Nai Manzil Scheme aims to benefit the minority 
youths including girl students in the age group of 17 to 35 years who do not have a 
formal school leaving certificate i.e., those in the category of school dropouts or 
educated in the community education initiatives including Madarsas, who are not only 
education and skill certified but also placed in jobs. The Committee are disappointed 
to note that despite aid from the World Bank, the Scheme has been lagging mainly 
due to non-availability of job opportunities in the vicinity of the beneficiaries particularly 
for girls who are not willing to take up jobs outside. It is disappointing that out of 98311 
persons enrolled, only 26312 persons have got job placement. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the skill training programme may include on-line work, which can 
be done right from the home itself, particularly for girls from minority communities. The 
efforts to popularize Nai Manzil Scheme may be made through local bodies and local 
public representatives in order to convince the communities about benefits of sending 
their youth for education/skill training. Effective monitoring and audit woul d instill 
confidence further. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 i. Ministry has tied up with two employment promoting startups APNA & CSR         
Box, these have been onboarded   to capacity build the Project Implementing 
Agencies to improve the placements. 
 
ii.    The directives  have  also been issued  to PIAs in pur suance of  the 
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee in popularizing the scheme by 
highlighting events such as   convocation/awarding of certificate to the trainees 

13 
 
by inviting the Hon’ble Members of Parliament, Legislators, Local Authorities, 
Media and Influencers. 
 
iii.      A mentorship model  has been  devised  involving the PMU members to engage 
minutely and handhold the PIAs to increase the efficiency of outputs and 
outcomes of the interventions reach. 
 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No.G-20014/2/2021-Budget dated 01st June, 2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 Recommendation (Para 6.12) 
2.3 The Committee note that the actual expenditure on ‘Seekho aur Kamao Scheme’ 
was substantially less in comparison to the allocation during last three years. Further 
the Ministry do not have the data of number of placements after training on SAK portal 
of the same period, as according to them, three years are required to complete the 
whole process. The Committee feel that the time period of three years is too long for 
training and giving employment to the minority youthin the modern times where 
market trends are very dynamic. Hence, the Ministry should consider restructuring skill 
programmes in consultation of PIAs to curtail the training period and to get the youth 
jobs as early as possible even in the private sector/local entrepreneurs etc. so that the 
objectives of the Scheme for minority youth is achieved. The Committee find that 
changing modalities from MES to NSQF has proved to be a setback for several PIAs 
who found the procedures cumbersome hence the Committee feel that the Ministry 
should, therefore, consider the larger interest of the beneficiaries of the Scheme 
before making any drastic changes in the modalities as it disrupts the entire skill 
training ecosystem. The Committee strongly feel that the Scheme needs to be 

14 
 
streamlined by synchronizing it at different levels. The Committee would, therefore, 
like to recommend an evaluation study/social audit to assess the impact and 
effectiveness of the Scheme to identify the flaws of the Scheme and to ensure that the 
Budgetary allocation is fully utilized. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4  i.  The pendency in payments were due to covid pandemic situation since March,      
2020 and   systemic issues, which  have been taken cognizance of and a 
mechanism has been devised  of getting the centers inspected, random 
sampling of the trainees and then clearing of the dues on the basis of merit of 
cases. Apart from this training were not held and assessments were not done 
since March 2020 due to Covid situation. 
 
 ii.   The Ministry  has already been working on the same an d has written to MSDE in  
May 2021 to allow online assessments for pending cases with over 3 lakh 
trainees including 1 lakh in medical job roles that can be immediately deployed 
as covid warriors. 
 
iii. The Ministry is committed in creating employable human resource to best utilize 
the demographic dividend of India, NSQF being the agreed & recommended 
standard of skilling – The Ministry will take extra caution in empanelling, 
monitoring and handholding during the implementation of the scheme. 
 
iv. Moreover shifting from MES to NSQF is a policy decision taken by Govt of India 
and all skilling schemes of Govt of India have to comply with the standards 
prescribed by Common norms and be NSQF compliant. However,  
Committee's observations are being communicated to  Ministry of Skill 
Development for appropriate action. 
 
v. The Ministry is deploying a PMU with experts in the field of M&E, Livlihoods, 
Social Behavioral Change Communications, MIS, Finance and IT to be placed 
within the Ministry and handhold the PIAs to improve the quality of 
implementation of the Scheme. 

15 
 
 
vi. The Third party evaluation of the scheme  has been done by MDI, Gurgaon. The 
process of reformulating the  Scheme has already been initiated  based on 
recommendations of  the impact and evaluation study. F urther complying to the 
recommendation of the committee,  a mobile app has been developed to capture 
feedback directly from the beneficiaries. Stakeholder consultations are also 
being carried out to identify problem areas and corrective  measures to improve  
the placements. 
 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No.G-20014/2/2021-Budget dated 01st June, 2021) 
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – III 
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
Recommendation (Para 4.11) 
 
3.1  PMJVK is a significant Scheme, being under the National Development 
Agenda, where projects to provide basic infrastructure/amenities for minority areas 
like toilets, AWCs, Drinking water/ handpumps, classrooms, etc. are received from 
States/UTs and then sa nctioned by an Empowered Committee in the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs after obtaining comments from respective line Ministries. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry may not be able to consider several 
proposals received from States/UTs du ring the year 2021 -22 under PMJVK as the 
budgetary allocation has been reduced from Rs 1600 crore to Rs 971.38 crore in the 
year 2020 -21 at RE stage. Further, several proposals, having Central share 
component of Rs 1113 crore, are yet to be considered by t he  Empowered Committee 
of the Ministry. The Committee are also disturbed with the fact that Utilization 
Certificates for a staggering amount of Rs 3610.82 crore released upto March, 2019 
are pending and some States have proposed to surrender projects invo lving share of 
Rs 275.77 crore. The Committee cannot but conclude that the Ministry have not been 
able to shoulder the huge responsibility of this ambitious Scheme. While the Ministry 
would be requesting for more funds at RE stage to be released to fill th e gap in the 
next Financial Year i.e. 2021 -22, they are also statedly seeking an outlay of Rs 2185 
crore for the year 2021 -22. The Committee feel that apart from changed format for 
UCs, the Ministry should find ways to speed up the procedural aspects, part icularly 
seeking comments from line Ministries on the project proposals as this could be quite 
a time-consuming process. Overall, an appropriate mechanism needs to be developed 

17 
 
to keep a track of the proposals so that there is no delay either in getting Ut ilization 
Certificates but also in timely consideration and sanction of the projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Ministry of Minority Affairs, during the year 2020 -21, has under the 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK) considered proposals rec eived from 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand   and sanctioned projects to the tune of Rs. 1698.40 
crore having Central Share of Rs. 1231.92 crore.    Rs. 1091.93 crore was released in 
2020-21 as Central Share for the projects sanctioned in 2020 -21 and also towards 
second and third installments for the earlier sanctioned projects.    Further, Rs. 125.15 
crore is  due to be released in 2021 -22 as first installment of Central Share for the 
projects sanctioned in 2020 -21.  All the proposals received from the States under 
PMJVK were considered by the Ministry except for the proposals received in the 
month of Feb - March 2021 from the States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and West Bengal 
where Assembly elections were declared and Model Code of Conduct had come into 
play.   Proposals received from these three States will be considered in the current FY 
2021-22.   
With regard to pending UCs, it is submitted that the PMJVK is an infrastructure 
development programme wherein the type of projects sanctioned include civil 
construction like School Buildings, College Buildings, ITIs, Polytechnics, Common 
Service Centres, H ospitals, Health Centres, Sports Stadiums etc. The time taken for 
construction/completion of these projects vary from project to project depending upon 
a number of factors like size of the building, clearances of other concerned State 
departments, topograp hy of land, release of state share of funds, tendering/bidding 

18 
 
process etc. Generally,  the projects take about 2 -3 years time for completion of 
construction.   The Central Share of funds for the projects are released in two/three 
installments.  The second installment is released only after 100% utilisation of the first 
installment.  Similarly, third installment is released only after 100% utilisation of the 
second installment.  Therefore, keeping in view the construction period, at any given 
point of time, there would be funds in the process of utilisation and will be shown as 
UC pending.   However, it is submitted that the Ministry constantly pursues with the 
States/UTs for liquidation of UCs.   Such follow up is done through review meetings 
conducted by the Empowered Committee/Screening Committee with the State 
authorities, through correspondences, discussions, visit by officers of the Ministry etc. 
With a view to streamline and reduce pendency of UCs, it was decided in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finan ce to request the States with large UC pendency to identify 
the projects which have become un -viable due to cost escalation or for other reasons 
like land litigation etc and propose dropping of such projects.   The States were also 
requested to propose alternate projects against the dropped projects for consideration 
of the Ministry.    The submission of projects for dropping by the States of UP, Bihar 
and Rajasthan is a result of such an effort by the Ministry.    This will help in liquidating 
pending UCs an d at the same time utilise the blocked funds for construction of new 
projects.   
 
The revision of UC format, as observed by the Committee, is only a step 
towards better monitoring of funds particularly the release and utilisation of State 
share.  With a vi ew to streamline receiving of comments from the line Ministries, the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs pursue the matter on a regular basis  with the concerned 
officers and also invite the line Ministry to give their comments during the Empowered 

19 
 
Committee meetings.  There is no delay in consideration of projects due to comments 
from the line Ministries.        
As regards development of an appropriate mechanism to keep a track of the 
projects, there does exist a robust mechanism under the PMJVK scheme.    Besides 
the normal chain of monitoring through the Block Level Committee, District Level 
Committee and State Level Committee, the Ministry continuously reviews the progress 
of construction and commissioning of sanctioned projects.    The monitoring 
mechanism is further been strengthened by inclusion of Online Monitoring Module and 
Geo-tagging of all sanctioned projects. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No.G-20014/2/2021-Budget dated 01st June, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted and which require reiteration  
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government are interim in nature 
Recommendation (Para 2.10) 
5.1   The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry was not able to spend 
their Budgetary allocation fully during 2020 -21 despite it being reduced by more than 
Rs.1000 crore at the RE stage from Rs 5029.00 to Rs 4005.00, due to slow pace of 
expenditure i n scholarship component. It reportedly happened as States/UTs could 
not complete re-verification process. The Committee, although, were informed that the 
said reduction was not for the Scholarship Schemes but for other Schemes of the 
Ministry, nonetheless feel that as compared to other Ministries implementing similar 
Scholarship Schemes, the Ministry of Minority Affairs has stood way behind in utilizing 
the allotted funds. This surely calls for some introspection. While the Ministry have 
convinced that they  would be able to utilize their allocation fully during the remaining 
period of the Financial Year 2020 -21, the Committee are skeptical about the same 
since the trend of previous years indicates that except under the pre -matric 
Scholarship Scheme, the Ministry always had funds remaining underutilized at the end 
of the year for the other two Schemes. The Committee are unable to comprehend as 
to how the Ministry would accomplish objectives of these Schemes unless all 
States/UTs complete their processes of re-verification in a very short time, which, in all 
probability, is not likely to happen. While the Ministry have furnished information on 
the actual number of beneficiaries  exceeding  the  targets  in  previous years there is 
nil information for 2020-21.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the 
position in 2020 -21 at the action taken stage.  As per the 15th Finance Commission 
Report, all the Schemes are likely to be reviewed for the next 5 years, hence, the 
Committee recommend that the mon thly/quarterly expenditure plan of the Ministry for 

22 
 
the year 2021 -22 must also be executed strictly so that they are able to justify their 
Schemes and project the correct requirement of funds at RE stage too. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 Budget Estimate 2020-21 was reduced from Rs 5029 crore to Rs 4005 crore at 
Revised Estimate 2020 -21 stage. With the concerted efforts and constant monitoring 
at highest level an amount of Rs 3998.57 crore  i.e 99.84 % of RE of Rs 4005 crore 
was booked under various schemes of the Ministry during 2020-21. 
 Against the allocation of Rs. 2265 crore in 2020 -21 for the 3 scholarship 
schemes viz., Pre -Matric, Post -Matric and Merit -cum-Means based Scholarship 
Schemes the Ministry has booked a total expenditure of Rs.2234 .70crorei.e. 98.66% 
of the allocated budget.  The Scheme-wise expenditure details for FY 2020 -21 are as 
under: 
 
Scheme B.E. 
(In Rs. Cr.) 
R.E. 
(In Rs. Cr.) 
Expenditure  
(In Rs. Cr.) 
Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme 1330.00 1330.00 1325.55 
Post Matric Scholarship Scheme 535.00 535.00 512.81 
Merit-cum-Means based 
Scholarship Scheme 
400.00 400.00 396.34 
Total 2265.00 2265.00 2234.70 
 
It is further stated that the number of scholarships under the fresh category in each of 
the three schemes’ is fixed as per the State/UT wise and community wise quota. 
However there is no quota for renewal scholarships and all eligible beneficiaries are 
entitled for renewal scholarship subject to verification of their applications. As far as 
the physical target is concerned, despite disruptions arising out of the COVID 
pandemic the targets under the ‘fresh’ category have largely been achieved and 
maximum nu mbers of eligible and genuine applicants have also covered under the 

23 
 
‘renewal’ category of these Schemes. The remaining applicants whose applications 
have been verified and who have made it to the merit list under the ‘fresh’ category 
but could not be paid  due to technical reasons like payment failure, delay in bank 
validation or delay by the Sates in digitally signing of the payment files will be paid 
within the first quarter of the succeeding academic year i.e. 2021 -22 after rectification/ 
signing of paym ent files by the States. The Scheme -wise details of the number of 
beneficiaries covered in FY 2020-21 are as under: 
 
Scheme Target 
(Fresh) 
*Total Scholarships 
Sanctioned 
(As on 31.03.2021) 
Pre-Matric 3000004 5046292 
Post Matric 499999 648133 
MCM 60000 117614 
Total 3560000 5812039 
    *includes renewals 
 
  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No.G-20014/2/2021-Budget dated 01st June, 2021) 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 2.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para 3.11) 
5.3  Three Central Sector Scholarship Schemes namely Pre-matric, Post-matric and 
Merit-cum-Means are being implemented by the Ministry of Minority Affairs for six 
centrally notified minority communities. The Committee are quite disturbed by cases 
reported about the alleged misappropriation of funds/funds going to fake students 
under these scholarship schemes for children belonging to underprivileged minorities 
in six States, which are under investigation/enquiry. In one State, after enquiry, the 
fraud is stated to have happened due to passwords leak by certain vested interests as 

24 
 
well as other loopholes. Taking advantage of illiteracy/lack of awareness among 
parents and children of minorities is also exploited by such elements. While the 
Ministry representatives have always been claiming that the system is fail -safe due to 
all transactions/verifications done online, a dedicated Portal, cash transfer through 
DBT and similar measures, which are definitely the need of the hour, it is 
disconcerting for the Commit tee to observe that such instances of corruption 
happened. However minuscule, this must have deprived the genuine beneficiaries of 
Government Scholarship Schemes and may have lead to some children dropping out 
too being unable to afford the school fee/othe r expenses. During their evidence, the 
Ministry representatives informed the Committee about further safety measures under 
their consideration, for instance, preserving the files of scholarship -holder students for 
a period of 5 years, creation of an Aadhaa r vault in coordination with MeITY, 
requirement of signatures of School Principals in verification report filed by teacher, at 
least 2%  physical verification, creation of student data bank with the help of 
Department of School education etc. While the Com mittee desire the Ministry to plug 
all identified loopholes in the system, strengthening privacy of data and passwords 
and reduce all manual interventions, be it school personnel, banking intermediaries, 
NGOs or unauthorised persons, they are of the strong  opinion that the Ministry should 
also counsel the State Governments to try to reach out to a sample size of beneficiary 
minority students directly to ascertain that they are not being duped in the pretext of 
Government scholarships, and that they are actu ally in receipt, through DBT, of the 
full amount of the entitled scholarship money for the term, as approved against their 
names in the Portal. Also the banks should ensure that the accounts of students do 
not get closed due to non -activity since minority children cannot do regular 
transactions, because some evaluation studies have shown that the scholarship 
money gets reverted also due to accounts being inactive/closed. The Committee are 

25 
 
convinced that such measures can lead to a major improvement and henc e 
recommend that action should be taken on this aspect. Now, as the COVID -19 
vaccination is gaining speed, the Committee opine that the reopening of schools in full 
capacity and the resultant formalities and verifications etc. for disbursal of 
scholarships will pick up in the later part of the current Financial year. The Committee 
reiterate that fraudulent activity by unscrupulous elements in schools, banks, NGOs, 
VOs, etc., who find ways to circumvent the processes for their personal gains, must 
be stopped. In fact, the Committee learn that recently around 8000 NGOs have been 
delisted by the Government for various shortcomings in their functioning. Hence, the 
Committee reiterate that the Ministry should ensure that the online portal for 
scholarships should have enough security features/tools to detect any tampering/fraud 
in the passwords/codes, in consultation with NIC and persons/ organizations found 
guilty of malpractices should be removed with immediate effect. The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the p rogress in the Ministry’s efforts as well as the outcome of the 
enquiries currently underway in some States on the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 The Ministry has taken various actions/initiatives during FY 2020 -21 to 
strengthen the implementation of the Scholarship Schemes through National 
Scholarship Portal and issued various preventive measures to be taken by National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP) -NIC as well as Institute Nodal Officers/District Nodal 
Officers/State Nodal Officers. As desired by the Committee, the present status of 
various actions taken by the Ministry on the matter is as under: 
(a) The matter was referred to Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) by the Ministry 
and a Preliminary Enquiry has been registered by them on the subject on 11 th 
November 2020. The investigation report is awaited in this Ministry. 

26 
 
(b) The present status of the actions taken by the NSP -NIC as well as States/UTs 
are as under, which refers to the successful implementation of some of the directives 
issued by the Ministry: 
• All verified applications till 12.01.2021 were reverted for re -verification and all 
such applications have been successfully re -verified within the stipulated 
timeline. 
 
• NSP has provided previous year’s information and data from U -DISE/ AISHE to 
serve as reference materials for verification by Institute Nodal Officers (INO) and 
District/State/UT Nodal Officers (DNO/SNO). 
 
• Validation of da te of birth and gender in addition to name of applicants through 
Aadhaar demographic authentication has been done. 
 
• All DNOs and more than 90% INOs have been re-verified. 
 
• Doubtful applications were identified with red flags by NSP to ensure and 
facilitate re-verification. 
 
• The Ministry is also exploring to engage the services of Common Service Centre 
(CSC) to facilitate Aadhaar authenticated applications under Pre -Matric 
Scholarship Scheme and Centre of Excellence for Data Analytics (CEDA) for 
data analytics in FY 2020-21. 
 
(c) The following instructions have been issued by the Ministry to States/UTs to tighten 
the verification process: 
• INO will maintain a hard file  of applications and supporting documents, class -
wise and academic year-wise, for inspection by district level and other authorities 
at any time. 
• INO has to be an employee of the School/Institution. 
 
• SNOs/DNOs to undertake mandatory physical verification of institutions and 
applicants as well as 2% of verified applications and furnish a report. 
 
• Head of Institution to certify the list of applications verified by INO and send it to 
DNO/SNO for L 2 verification. NSP has created a separate login for Head of the 
Institution.  
 
• Schools/Institutions will have to display the list  of beneficiaries on the notice 
board and also to present the list of beneficiaries with final amount before the 
School Management Committee and obtain the signature of the student. 
 
(d) Present status of the reports, sent by the five States where the investigation is 
under way, is as under:  
• Report of Chhattisgarh State: The report says that it has been found that all 
alleged beneficiaries are genuine and assures no fraudulent incident. 

27 
 
 
• Report of Assam State: The investigation is under process with CID. Additional 
data required by them has been provided by MoMA. Interim/Final report in this 
matter is awaited. 
 
• Report of Punjab State: The matter is under examination by S.S.P. Hoshiarpur. 
 
• Report of Bihar State: The State has instructed District Magistrates of 9 
concerned districts to enquire and investigate alleged cases. FIR has been 
lodged in Gaya and Saharsa Districts.  
 
• Report of Jharkhand State: Matter has been handed over t o Anticorruption 
Bureau (ACB) of State. Interim/Final report in this matter is awaited. 
 
Besides, DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat and Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) have also been apprised of these recommendations and the 
necessary directions have been issued by DBT Mission to NSP -NIC for rigorous 
implementation of these measures.DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat has also issued 
some common instructions/guidelines to be followed by all Ministries/Departments 
implementing their Schemes through NSP Portal. 
 
It is further submitted that since NIC maintains the Portal and it is under the 
administrative control of DBT Mission, Cabinet Secretariat – the recommendations of 
the Committee will be forwarded to Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) as well as the DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat for appropriate action. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No.G-20014/2/2021-Budget dated 01st June, 2021) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 3.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;            RAMA DEVI 
     Chairperson, 
05 August, 2021                            Standing Committee on 
13 Sravana, 1943 (Saka)         Social  Justice  and  
    Empowerment 

28 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) HELD ON THURSDAY,  
5TH AUGUST, 2021 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1055 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, PHA Extension Building,  New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
Smt. Rama Devi   - CHAIRPERSON 
 
   MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA  
  
2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad  
3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
6. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
7. Smt. Geeta Kora 
8. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
9. Smt. Supriya Sule  
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
 
   RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya  
12. Smt. Ramilaben Bara  
13. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
14. Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
15. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
16. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and 
adopt the following draft Reports of the Committee:  
 
(i)  Twenty-third Report on the subject of ‘Assessment of Scheme for 
Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’ of 
the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities);  
(ii)  Twenty-fourth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 64 th Report of the Committee 
on ‘Assessment of the working of Scheme of Special Central Assistance to 
Scheduled Castes Sub -Plan (SCA to SCSP)’  of t he Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of  Social Justice and Empowerment); and  
(iii)  Twenty-fifth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 22 nd Report of the Committee 
on ‘Demands for Grants 2021-22)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
3. Thereupon, the Chairperson requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports.  The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  The Committee then  authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft 
Reports in the light of consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification 
of the draft Reports and to present the same to both the Houses.  
 
(The Committee then adjourned) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
APPENDIX 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON 
'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22)' OF THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
      Total            
Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations        5   
II. Observations/Recommendations, which have 
been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 5.7 and 6.12)   
       2     40% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government (Paragraph 
No. – 4.11)   
  1    20% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations, in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which require reiteration 
(Paragraph No. -  NIL)   
 
      0    0% 
V. 
 
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature (Paragraph No. - 2)   
      2    40% 
 
 
 
 
 