 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (
(SEVENTEENTH
MINISTRY OF 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (
the Ministry of Minority
December
54 
i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2023-24) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (
the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
 
AFFAIRS 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of 
(Saka) 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (
the Ministry of Minority
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on
                                          
 
December
ii 
 
 
 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2023-24) 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (
of Minority Affairs 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2023 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2023 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
AFFAIRS 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of 
(Saka) 

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
*Appendix-I  Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on     
19.12.2023. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
*   Not appended with this cyclostyled copy 
 

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2023-24) 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Vatsala Joshi  - Director 
3. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi      - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Kakai Haokip  - Executive Officer 
 
 

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Fifty-Fourth Report on the Action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Forty-Seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-
24)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
2. The Forty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 23.03.2023. The Ministry of Minority Affairs have furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report 
on 25.09.2023. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
19.12.2023. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference, observations/ recommendations/ comments of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        RAMA DEVI 
                                   Chairperson, 
20th December, 2023                                                              Standing Committee on 
29 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                     Social Justice and  
                         Empowerment 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs. 
2. The Forty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23.03.2023. It contained 7 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No. 2.11, 3.17, 4.10, 6.8, 7.10 and 
8.12. 
(Total: 06, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 5.17. 
(Total: 01, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature: – 
Rec. Para No.NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: V) 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of 
this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 

2 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.11) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs had spent ₹3,998.57 
crore in 2020-21 and ₹4,325.24 in 2021-22, however, they have been able to 
spend just ₹668.42 crore in 2022-23 by 13th February, 2023. The Committee 
understand that the reason for low expenditure in 2022-23 is an unspent balance 
of ₹2,700 crore with several States/UT Governments in the Scheme ‘Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK)’. Since the funds could not further be 
released to these States/UTs under the newly adopted Single Nodal Agency(SNA) 
system in PFMS unless the unspent balance lying with the State/UT Governments 
is spent and reconciled by them, it resulted in overall low expenditure for PMJVK. 
The Committee also find that due to intensive scrutiny of Project Implementing 
Agencies, the budgetary allocation made under Skilling Scheme has been 
reduced to ₹100.00 crore from ₹235.00 crore. Another reason given by the 
Ministry was that 100% expenditure could not be incurred in the Scholarship 
Scheme since a major part of such funds are spent in the last quarter of an year. 
The Ministry have, however, committed to spend 90% of the Revised Estimate, 
by the end of Financial Year 2022-23, which, the Committee are hopeful of. As 
regards the Budgetary Estimate for 2023-24, the Committee observe that it has 
been reduced to ₹3,097.00 crore in comparison to the Budgetary Estimate of 
₹5,029.00 crore in 2020-21, ₹4,810.77 crore in 2021-22 and ₹5,020.50 crore in 
2022-23. They have been informed that in case of expenditure more than 
allocation, the Ministry of Minority Affairs will seek higher funds in 2023-24 at RE 
stage. The Committee hope that the Ministry will be able to effectively utilize the 
funds allocated under various Schemes with the adoption of the new mechanism 
of SNA system, once the teething troubles are over, as it will increase 
accountability of States/UTs Governments and ensure financial propriety as well 
as prudence. They, therefore, recommend that necessary action and guidance 
may be continued by the Ministry so that SNAs are established by the States/UTs 
Governments at the earliest and the aims and objectives of the Schemes for 
empowerment of minority communities are achieved. The Committee trust that 
the Ministry will not leave any stone unturned to fulfill their commitment given 
before them to spend 90% of the Revised Estimate in 2022-23. They would also 
like the Ministry to take adequate steps timely in implementing all the Schemes 
so that the funds allocated for 2023-24 too are prudently utilized”. 
6. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 

3 
 
“After introduction of SNA model under Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram (PMJVK) as per the revised guidelines of D/o Expenditure for release 
of funds to the States under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, all the States/ UTs 
implementing the PMJVK scheme have designated State Nodal Agencies (SNA) 
and opened dedicated bank accounts of the SNAs. Funds under PMJVK are being 
released strictly as per the guidelines of Deptt. of Expenditure.  
  
The data regarding physical and financial progress of the scheme have been 
reconciled with the State/ UT Governments. As per the expenditure reported by 
the States/UTs from time to time and the data updated as on 20.08.2023, a total 
of ₹4,687 crore is lying unspent under PMJVK with the various States/ UTs. 
  
Due to the large unspent balance with the States, during the FY 2022-23, the BE 
of ₹1,650 crore for the scheme was reduced to ₹500 crore at R.E. stage. The 
final expenditure was around ₹222 Cr.  However, due to the concerted efforts of 
the Ministry, the States have released an amount of around ₹2,113 crore 
(Central+State share) from the treasury to the SNA account of PMJVK during 
2022-23 and the implementing agencies of the States have also deposited the 
unspent funds in the SNA account. During 2022-23 the States incurred an 
expenditure of ₹1,722 crore from the SNA account on the ongoing projects under 
PMJVK and the balance available as on 31.03.2023 was around ₹2,272 crore 
(Source: SNA01 report dated 22.08.2023 from PFMS). Taking into consideration 
the unspent balance available with the State Governments, the B.E. for the 
scheme for the FY 2023-24 has been kept at ₹600 crore only.  
  
For effective implementation of PMJVK and to ensure optimum utilisation of 
funds, the States/ UTs have been given flexibility to use the funds released 
under PMJVK. As per the revised procedure of Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, now the release of funds under PMJVK are not tied to the 
individual projects. The amount available in the bank account of State Nodal 
Agency (SNA) of PMJVK forms a common pool, which can be utilised by the 
States to complete the ongoing projects. Detailed guidelines have been issued to 
the States regarding utilisation of unspent balance available in the SNA accounts 
of the scheme”.  
 
7.    The Committee had acknowledged in their original Report that the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs faced challenges in utilizing their budget 
allocation for 2022-23. These included the implementation of the 
Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system in PFMS, rigorous scrutiny of 
Project Implementing Agencies, unspent balances in the Scholarship 

4 
 
Schemes, among other factors. The Committee had therefore 
recommended that the Ministry should persist in providing essential 
guidance and taking action to ensure that the State/UT Governments 
establish SNAs expeditiously as it was crucial for implementation and 
achieving the objectives of the schemes aimed at empowerment of 
Minority Communities. The Committee note from the action taken 
replies of the Ministry that all the State/UTs have designated SNAs and 
dedicated bank accounts of the SNAs have also been opened and made 
operative under Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram(PMJVK). The 
Committee have been informed that after reconciliation of the physical 
and financial progress of the scheme with the State/ UT Governments 
a total of ₹4,687 crore was lying unspent under PMJVK Scheme with 
various States/UTs. Consequently, this led to a significant reduction in 
the Revised Estimate for 2022-23 to ₹500 crore from the initially 
Budgeted Estimate of ₹1,650 crore.  This also notably impacted the 
allocation for FY 2023-24, which has been restricted to ₹600 crore. The 
Committee have further been informed that for effective 
implementation of the scheme the existing procedure has been revised 
and actions initiated by the Ministry to ensure optimum utilisation of 
funds under  PMJVK viz. granting flexibility to State/UTs to use the 
funds released under PMJVK,  formation of a financial common pool for 
completing the ongoing projects and guidelines regarding utilisation of 
unspent balance available in the SNA accounts have also been issued to 
the States. The Committee hope that after making several changes in 
the procedure for effective implementation of the scheme , all the 
State/UTs would be able to complete all the pending projects under 
PMJVK and ensure optimum utilisation of funds available with them in 
their SNA accounts for 2023-24. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of State-wise utilisation of funds for the year 2023-24 under 
PMJVK. 
 

5 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.17) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are happy to note that three Scholarship Schemes viz. Pre-
Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme and Merit-cum-
Means Scholarship Scheme implemented by the Ministry are proposed to be 
continued up to 2025-26 and that the number of students benefitted from these 
schemes in 2020-21 and 2021-22 were 60.23 lakh and 65.63 lakh respectively. 
The Committee believe that education is the most effective way to empower and 
develop any community, and all efforts should, therefore, be made by the 
Government in this direction. They trust that the steps taken/proposed to be 
taken by the Ministry of Minority Affairs with regard to scholarship schemes i.e. 
revision in annual parental income, rationalization of rates of scholarships, 
revision in annual State/UT/Community wise allocation of targets and 
enhancement of earmarking of girl students from 30% to 50% for overall 
scholarship allocation, would be an important contribution in educating the 
poorest of the poor students belonging to Minority communities. In order to 
further enhance the coverage of the beneficiaries, the Committee suggest an 
intensive awareness exercise and provision of all necessary assistance to the 
students, in case they face any difficulty in filling of the applications, to minimize 
the rejection of applications. The Committee would also urge the Ministry to 
finalise the pending issues, particularly with regard to revision in annual parental 
income, rationalization of scholarship rate, etc. at the earliest. They would also 
recommend the Ministry to examine, if the process of filling scholarship 
application by beneficiaries can be started a little early so that the beneficiaries 
are able to get scholarship amount well in time. 
  
9. The Ministry ofMinority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“Awareness: 
Every year, at the time of opening of National Scholarship Portal (NSP), MoMA 
issues advertisement in National and regional Newspapers. Besides, the 
SMS/messages are sent through Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Sarpanches and 
to all District Collectors through NIC messaging services. SMS/ messages are also 
sent through NSP to all District Nodal Officers and Renewal Applicants about 
opening of NSP Portal.  
  

6 
 
All States/UTs are also advised to give wide publicity about the scholarship 
schemes through advertisements in the leading local/regional newspapers and 
local dailies and by using other suitable publicity media well in time to enable the 
minority students to avail the maximum benefits of scholarship schemes. 
States/UTs also facilitate filing of applications under 3 Scholarship Schemes 
through camps at local levels. 
  
Various scheme related information are also displayed on NSP to facilitate 
applicants e.g. ‘check your eligibility’, ‘student FAQs (English and Hindi)’, etc and 
institutes/schools e.g. ‘Institute Operational Manual’, ‘How To Fill registration 
Form’, ‘AISHE/UDISE details’, ‘FAQs’, etc. Operational manual on functionalities 
of NSP are also displayed prominently on NSP for awareness of all stakeholders.  
MoMA has also suggested NIC to create an online training module in INO login to 
increase awareness about the verification of application, etc. 
  
 MoMA has also formed a PMU with 5 Technical consultants which will provide 
hand holding along with the training of stake holders. 
  
Revision of Annual Parental Income: 
It is observed that the rates of scholarships under the three scholarship schemes 
have not been revised since inception. As such, this suggestion has been 
received from beneficiaries with whom IIT, Delhi interacted, while conducting the 
evaluation studies of the scholarship schemes. The views of the applicants have 
been considered and the revision in income criteria has been proposed in the 
EFC and CCEA Notes of Pradhan Mantri Educational Empowerment Scheme 
(PMEES). The proposal is under consideration.  
  
Rationalization of Scholarship Rate: 
  
Rationalization of rates of scholarships has been proposed in the EFC 
Memorandum of PMEES. The rationalization has been proposed by merging 
various components into a single scholarship amount. Apart from making it 
simpler for the students and avoid false claims, the rationalization will also help 
in effective monitoring of the scholarship disbursement. 
  
The timeline for opening of National Scholarship Portal (NSP) for submitting of 
scholarship applications by the applicants is uniform for all the 
Ministries/Departments whose Scholarship Schemes are on-boarded on the 
portal. In general, the portal is opened from July/August for each Academic Year 
and remains open till October/November for applicants and hence sufficient time 
is given for submission of applications by the applicants.  

7 
 
 
10. The Committee in their original Report had urged the Ministry to  
address the pending issues pertaining to three Scholarship schemes for 
Minority students such as revision of annual parental income and 
rationalization of scholarship rates promptly The Committee had also 
encouraged the Ministry to explore the possibility of initiating the 
scholarship application process earlier to ensure beneficiaries receive their 
scholarship amounts in a timely manner.  The Committee note from the 
Action Taken Replies received from the Ministry, that the proposal for 
revising annual parental income and rationalization of scholarship rates have 
been incorporated in the EFC and CCEA Notes of the Pradhan Mantri 
Educational Empowerment Scheme (PMEEs), and are currently under 
consideration. Since these issues are long pending and crucial for educational 
empowerment of Minority students, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to give serious attention to this 
matter and expedite the process by establishing clear timelines for 
implementing these proposals. Furthermore, the Committee suggest that 
during the period when the Scholarship Portal is active, the Department 
should extensively promote the Scholarship Schemes through electronic and 
social media to raise awareness among a larger number of students.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.17) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are happy to note that the PMJVK i.e. Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram, erstwhile called the Multi Sectoral Development Programme, has 
been approved for continuation up to 2025-26. It is implemented in all the 
minority-dominated districts of the Country to develop community infrastructure 
and basic amenities. With regard to allocation for PMJVK, the Committee note 
that due to unspent balance of ₹2,531.93 crore lying with several State/ UT 
Governments in their SNA account, the budgetary allocation for 2023-24 has 
been reduced to ₹600 crore. The Committee have been informed that with the 

8 
 
revised stipulation of appointing SNAs, the State/UT Governments are expected 
to utilize the funds allocated earlier and furnish the Utilization Certificate of these 
funds before further allocation of funds is made to them. Since the Committee 
learn that several States/UTs have defaulted in utilizing the funds allocated under 
the Scheme, they would like the Ministry to guide the States/ UTs in complying 
to the revised norms so that the Scheme is not made to suffer. The Committee 
note that the execution of large number of projects, for example, 70525 projects 
under Education Sector, 5850 projects under Health Sector, 431 Projects under 
Skill Sector and 48512 other Projects sanctioned to different States since 
inception of scheme in 2008-09 is commendable. But, at the same time, 58465 
Projects in various States/UTs had to be cancelled/dropped as those could not be 
started by implementing agencies or became unviable. The Committee hope that 
the Ministry would now be able to identify such unviable and incomplete projects 
with the Geo-tagging App, which has been developed, and take appropriate 
action to ensure completion thereof so that the funds are not left idle. The 
Committee also hope that the Ministry would take adequate measures to see 
that all the identified districts are covered under the revised scheme within the 
stipulated period. The Committee would therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
may consider laying down indicative timelines for the completion of specific 
Projects without any delay”. 
  
12. The Ministry of Minority Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“As per the revised guidelines of Ministry of Finance, GoI regarding release of 
funds to the States, SNA model has been implemented with the objective of 
adopting "just in time" release of funds to States for implementing various 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes including Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram 
(PMJVK). Accordingly, release of funds and approval of new projects under 
PMJVK has been linked to the progress of implementation of projects already 
approved in the States, pace of expenditure, pending UCs and unspent balance 
available with the State Governments. All the States/ UTs implementing the 
PMJVK scheme have designated State Nodal Agencies (SNA) and opened 
dedicated bank accounts of the SNAs. Funds under PMJVK are being released 
strictly as per the guidelines of Deptt. of Expenditure.  
  
The data regarding physical and financial progress of the scheme have been 
reconciled with the State/ UT Governments. As per the expenditure reported by 
the States/UTs from time to time and the data updated as on 20.08.2023, a total 
of ₹4,687 crore is lying unspent under PMJVK with the various States/ UTs. 
  

9 
 
Due to the large unspent balance with the States, during the FY 2022-23, the BE 
of ₹1,650 crore for the scheme was reduced to ₹500 crore at R.E. stage. The 
final expenditure was around ₹222 Cr.  However, due to the concerted efforts of 
the Ministry, the States have released an amount of around ₹2,113 crore 
(Central+State share) from the treasury to the SNA account of PMJVK during 
2022-23 and the implementing agencies of the States have also deposited the 
unspent funds in the SNA account. During 2022-23 the States incurred an 
expenditure of ₹1,722 crore from the SNA account on the ongoing projects under 
PMJVK and the balance available as on 31.03.2023 was around ₹2,272 crore 
(Source: SNA01 report dated 22.08.2023 from PFMS). Taking into consideration 
the unspent balance available with the State Governments, the B.E. for the 
scheme for the FY 2023-24 has been kept at ₹600 crore only.  
  
For effective implementation of PMJVK and to ensure optimum utilisation of 
funds, the States/ UTs have been given flexibility to use the funds released 
under PMJVK. As per the revised procedure of Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance, now the release of funds under PMJVK are not tied to the 
individual projects. The amount available in the bank account of State Nodal 
Agency (SNA) of PMJVK forms a common pool, which can be utilised by the 
States to complete the ongoing projects. Detailed guidelines have been issued to 
the States regarding utilisation of unspent balance available in the SNA accounts 
of the scheme.  
 
With regard to the unviable projects, Ministry is constantly monitoring the 
progress of the projects approved and has directed the States to drop/ cancel 
the projects which have not started and become unviable. The States/UTs have 
also been asked to update the progress on the PMJVK Portal and to expedite 
geo-tagging of PMJVK assets through the Bhuvan-PMJVK mobile app. Out of 
4,83,462 assets to be geo-tagged under PMJVK, a total of 46849 assets have 
been geo-tagged as on 22.08.2023.  
 
States are being supported to resolve the issues related to geo-tagging and they 
have been regularly reminded to expedite geotagging. The State of Nagaland 
and UT of Jammu & Kashmir have geo-tagged all the assets, However, States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Himachal, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha 
and Tripura have not yet started geo-tagging. The status of geo-tagging by the 
States is given in Annexure.   
 
The proposals under PMJVK are sent by the States/ UTs with the approval of the 
State Level Committees. States have been sensitised on the revised guidelines 
and coverage of all the districts under the scheme. Ministry consider the 
proposals received from the States/UTs as per the revised PMJVK guidelines. The 

10 
 
revised guidelinesgives emphasis on the timely completion of the projects. 
States/UTs are now required to fix the timelines in advance while submitting the 
project. The States/UTs are required to ensure that the projects approved by the 
Ministry under PMJVK are started and completed within the prescribed timelines. 
Late starting/late implementation of PMJVK projects will make the project liable 
for cancellation by MoMA. The States/ UTs would update the progress of the 
projects on the PMJVK Portal, and the project would be monitored as per the 
timeline given by States/ UTs. Sanctioned projects may be cancelled due to non-
compliance by States/ UTs, and the funds released for such projects will be 
adjusted on other ongoing projects in the States/ Uts”. 
13. With regard to the execution of projects under PMJVK erstwhile called 
the Multi Sectoral Development Programme, the Committee had noted the 
commendable action of the Ministry in execution of large number of projects 
under various sectors but at the same time had expressed their 
concernregarding  cancellation of about 58464 projects in various States as 
those could not be started by the implementing agencies or became unviable.  
The Committee had also hoped that the Ministry would now be able to 
identify such unviable and incomplete projects with the Geo-tagging App and 
take appropriate action to ensure theircompletion  so that the funds are not 
left idle.  The Committee are disappointed to note from action taken reply of 
the Ministry that only 46,849 assets out of a total of 4,83,462 have been geo-
tagged as on 22.8.2023. Furthermore, it is observed that certain States have 
yet to commence the geo-tagging process for their assets. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that in order to enable efficient tracking of 
Projects under PMJVK, the Ministry should find the  causes of delay in geo 
tagging by different States and ensure that geo tagging is mandatorily done 
for all the projects expeditiously. The Committee would therefore like to 
reiterate their  earlier recommendation for fixing indicative timelines for the 
completion of specific projects including that of geo-tagging PMJVK assets as 
they strongly feel that geo-tagging would enhance transparency and 
accountability on the part of the States/UTs and its nodal agencies.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of geo-tagging of PMJVK 
assets in the final action taken stage.   

11 
 
  
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.11) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs had spent ₹3,998.57 crore 
in 2020-21 and ₹4,325.24 in 2021-22, however, they have been able to spend just 
₹668.42 crore in 2022-23 by 13th February, 2023. The Committee understand that 
the reason for low expenditure in 2022-23 is an unspent balance of ₹2,700 crore 
with several States/UT Governments in the Scheme ‘Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram (PMJVK)’. Since the funds could not further be released to these 
States/UTs under the newly adopted Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system in PFMS 
unless the unspent balance lying with the State/UT Governments is spent and 
reconciled by them, it resulted in overall low expenditure for PMJVK. The 
Committee also find that due to intensive scrutiny of Project Implementing 
Agencies, the budgetary allocation made under Skilling Scheme has been 
reduced to ₹100.00 crore from ₹235.00 crore. Another reason given by the 
Ministry was that 100% expenditure could not be incurred in the Scholarship 
Scheme since a major part of such funds are spent in the last quarter of an year. 
The Ministry have, however, committed to spend 90% of the Revised Estimate, by 
the end of Financial Year 2022-23, which, the Committee are hopeful of. As 
regards the Budgetary Estimate for 2023-24, the Committee observe that it has 
been reduced to ₹3,097.00 crore in comparison to the Budgetary Estimate of 
₹5,029.00 crore in 2020-21, ₹4,810.77 crore in 2021-22 and ₹5,020.50 crore in 2022-
23. They have been informed that in case of expenditure more than allocation, the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs will seek higher funds in 2023-24 at RE stage. The 
Committee hope that the Ministry will be able to effectively utilize the funds 
allocated under various Schemes with the adoption of the new mechanism of 
SNA system, once the teething troubles are over, as it will increase accountability 
of States/UTs Governments and ensure financial propriety as well as prudence. 
They, therefore, recommend that necessary action and guidance may be 
continued by the Ministry so that SNAs are established by the States/UTs 
Governments at the earliest and the aims and objectives of the Schemes for 
empowerment of minority communities are achieved. The Committee trust that 
the Ministry will not leave any stone unturned to fulfill their commitment given 
before them to spend 90% of the Revised Estimate in 2022-23. They would also 
like the Ministry to take adequate steps timely in implementing all the Schemes 
so that the funds allocated for 2023-24 too are prudently utilized. 

12 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
         After introduction of SNA model under Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram (PMJVK) as per the revised guidelines of D/o Expenditure for release of 
funds to the States under Centrally Sponsored Schemes, all the States/ UTs 
implementing the PMJVK scheme have designated State Nodal Agencies (SNA) and 
opened dedicated bank accounts of the SNAs. Funds under PMJVK are being released 
strictly as per the guidelines of Deptt. of Expenditure.  The data regarding physical and 
financial progress of the scheme have been reconciled with the State/ UT Governments. 
As per the expenditure reported by the States/UTs from time to time and the data 
updated as on 20.08.2023, a total of ₹4687 crore is lying unspent under PMJVK with the 
various States/ UTs. Due to the large unspent balance with the States, during the FY 
2022-23, the BE of ₹1650 crore for the scheme was reduced to ₹500 crore at R.E. 
stage. The final expenditure was around ₹222 Cr.  However, due to the concerted 
efforts of the Ministry, the States have released an amount of around ₹2113 crore 
(Central+State share) from the treasury to the SNA account of PMJVK during 2022-23 
and the implementing agencies of the States have also deposited the unspent funds in 
the SNA account. During 2022-23 the States incurred an expenditure of ₹1722 crore 
from the SNA account on the ongoing projects under PMJVK and the balance available 
as on 31.03.2023 was around ₹2272 crore (Source: SNA01 report dated 22.08.2023 
from PFMS). Taking into consideration the unspent balance available with the State 
Governments, the B.E. for the scheme for the FY 2023-24 has been kept at Rs.600 
crore only. For effective implementation of PMJVK and to ensure optimum utilisation of 
funds, the States/ UTs have been given flexibility to use the funds released under 
PMJVK. As per the revised procedure of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance, now the release of funds under PMJVK are not tied to the individual projects. 
The amount available in the bank account of State Nodal Agency (SNA) of PMJVK 
forms a common pool, which can be utilised by the States to complete the ongoing 
projects. Detailed guidelines have been issued to the States regarding utilisation of 
unspent balance available in the SNA accounts of the scheme.  
  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 
25.09.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.17) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that three Scholarship Schemes viz. Pre-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme and Merit-cum-Means 
Scholarship Scheme implemented by the Ministry are proposed to be continued up to 
2025-26 and that the number of students benefitted from these schemes in 2020-21 and 
2021-22 were 60.23 lakh and 65.63 lakh respectively. The Committee believe that 
education is the most effective way to empower and develop any community, and all 
efforts should, therefore, be made by the Government in this direction. They trust that 

13 
 
the steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Minority Affairs with regard to 
scholarship schemes i.e. revision in annual parental income, rationalization of rates of 
scholarships, revision in annual State/UT/Community wise allocation of targets and 
enhancement of earmarking of girl students from 30% to 50% for overall scholarship 
allocation, would be an important contribution in educating the poorest of the poor 
students belonging to Minority communities. In order to further enhance the coverage of 
the beneficiaries, the Committee suggest an intensive awareness exercise and 
provision of all necessary assistance to the students, in case they face any difficulty in 
filling of the applications, to minimize the rejection of applications. The Committee would 
also urge the Ministry to finalise the pending issues, particularly with regard to revision 
in annual parental income, rationalization of scholarship rate, etc. at the earliest. They 
would also recommend the Ministry to examine, if the process of filling scholarship 
application by beneficiaries can be started a little early so that the beneficiaries are able 
to get scholarship amount well in time. 
  
  
Reply of the Government 
  
Awareness: 
Every year, at the time of opening of National Scholarship Portal (NSP), MoMA issues 
advertisement in National and regional Newspapers. Besides, the SMS/messages are 
sent through Ministry of Panchayati Raj to all Sarpanches and to all District Collectors 
through NIC messaging services. SMS/ messages are also sent through NSP to all 
District Nodal Officers and Renewal Applicants about opening of  NSP Portal. All 
States/UTs are also advised to give wide publicity about the scholarship schemes 
through advertisements in the leading local/regional newspapers and local dailies and 
by using other suitable publicity media well in time to enable the minority students to 
avail the maximum benefits of scholarship schemes. States/UTs also facilitate filing of 
applications under 3 Scholarship Schemes through camps at local levels. 
  
Various scheme related information are also displayed on NSP to facilitate applicants 
e.g. ‘check your eligibility’, ‘student FAQs (English and Hindi)’, etc and institutes/schools 
e.g. ‘Institute Operational Manual’, ‘How To Fill registration Form’, ‘AISHE/UDISE 
details’, ‘FAQs’, etc. Operational manual on functionalities of NSP are also displayed 
prominently on NSP for awareness of all stakeholders.  
MoMA has also suggested NIC to create an online training module in INO login to 
increase awareness about the verification of application, etc. MoMA has also formed a 
PMU with 5 Technical consultants which will provide hand holding along with the 
training of stake holders. 
  
Revision of Annual Parental Income: 
It is observed that the rates of scholarships under the three scholarship schemes have 
not been revised since inception. As such, this suggestion has been received from 

14 
 
beneficiaries with whom IIT, Delhi interacted, while conducting the evaluation studies of 
the scholarship schemes. The views of the applicants have been considered and the 
revision in income criteria has been proposed in the EFC and CCEA Notes of Pradhan 
Mantri Educational Empowerment Scheme (PMEES). The proposal is under 
consideration.  
  
Rationalization of Scholarship Rate: 
  
Rationalization of rates of scholarships has been proposed in the EFC Memorandum of 
PMEES. The rationalization has been proposed by merging various components into a 
single scholarship amount. Apart from making it simpler for the students and avoid false 
claims, the rationalization will also help in effective monitoring of the scholarship 
disbursement. The timeline for opening of National Scholarship Portal (NSP) for 
submitting of scholarship applications by the applicants is uniform for all the 
Ministries/Departments whose Scholarship Schemes are on-boarded on the portal. In 
general, the portal is opened from July/August for each Academic Year and remains 
open till October/November for applicants and hence sufficient time is given for 
submission of applications by the applicants.  
  
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 
  
(Recommendation Para No.4.10) 
The Committee note that  that from 2022-23 onwards, the existing five schemes of the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs viz. Seekho Aur Kamao, USTTAD, Hamari Dharohar, Nai 
Roshni and Nai Manzil, have been converged into Pradhan Mantri Virasat Ka 
Samvardhan, (PM-VIKAS) Scheme to prevent any overlapping of objectives and 
achieve better synergy across various components. The Committee find that out of 
Budgetary allocation of ₹330.91 crore for 2022-23, Ministry could spend ₹46.86 crore 
and that ₹540.00 crore allocation has now been allocated under the Scheme for 2023-
24. The Committee foresee that the expenditure with respect to all the sub-Schemes will 
increase once all the Schemes are fully under PM-VIKAS Scheme. Since the modalities 
of the integrated Scheme are still being finalized, the Committee expect that all 
shortcomings observed by the Ministry in the implementation of the erstwhile five 
schemes in the previous years would be taken care of, so that the need for any further 
changes is not felt once the merged Scheme is operationalised. The Committee would 
also urge that the monitoring system devised should be efficient, and effective, based 
on real-time data. Also a proper mechanism needs to be evolved so that the 
appointment of Project Implementing Agencies is done meticulously. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take utmost care in framing the guidelines and 
SOPs for an effective implementation of PM-VIKAS and take necessary measures for a 
full-fledged functioning of the scheme so that the funds allocated for 2023-24 are 

15 
 
utilized in achieving the objectives of the scheme. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the steps taken in this regard by the Ministry in their Action Taken Notes. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
The guidelines and SoP for implementation of the PM VIKAS scheme is under 
preparation. For effective implementation of the scheme, all shortcomings observed in 
the implementation of the erstwhile five schemes in the previous years would be taken 
care of, so that the need for any further changes is not felt once the merged Scheme is 
operationalized. The Ministry will devise efficient, and effective monitoring system, 
based on real-time data and put in place due mechanisms for empanelment of  the right 
Project   Implementing Agencies to implement the scheme at ground level. Further as 
per direction of Cabinet Secretariat, Skill Component of the Scheme will be 
implemented through Skill India Digital (SID) portal of Ministry of Skill Development and 
entrepreneurship, to ensure that there is no duplication of beneficiries and optimum 
utilization of Government funds. 
  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M.  No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 
  
(Recommendation Para No.6.8) 
A Central Waqf Council is mandated to implement the Quomi Waqf Board Taraqqiati 
Scheme to disburse funds to State/UT Waqf Boards so that they can streamline record 
keeping and computerize various functions/process of the Waqf Boards. As the pace of 
the Scheme is yet to achieve the desired momentum, the Committee opine that there is 
a need to identify the difficulties faced in execution of the Scheme so that the Budget 
allocated is fully utilised. The Committee hope that the addition of new components after 
revision of the Scheme such as deployment of technical expert manpower, GIS 
mapping of Waqf property, etc. would improve the functioning of Waqf Boards and the 
budgetary allocation would be utilised effectively. The Committee expect that Central 
Waqf Council alongwith State Waqf Board will take suitable measures to achieve the 
objectives. They feel that the guidelines of the scheme should be periodically reviewed 
and if need is felt, fresh guidelines should be issued by the Ministry to Central Waqf 
Council and State Waqf Boards. Such evaluation of the Scheme by the Ministry would 
help them in making the Scheme more effective and accordingly, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should take necessary action in this direction. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
 Based on the Ministry of Finance’s guidelines for the release of funds to Central Waqf 
Council i.e implementing agency for the scheme “Qaumi Waqf Board Taraqqiati 
Scheme” (QWBTS). CNA/SNA model has been implemented for release of funds. 

16 
 
  
In adopting this procedure, the pace of implementation of QWBTS was a bit slow as 
₹5.00 crore only were released during FY 2022-23 against budget allocation 10.00 
crore. The Scheme is progressing in terms of digitization of data in Waqf Asset 
Management System of India (WAMSI). During the year 2022-23, additional digitization 
in State Waqf Board records has been achieved. Geographical Information System 
(GIS) data capture for Waqf properties has also been done in WAMSI. During 2022-23, 
data pertaining to 66,629 Waqf property parts have been added to WAMSI and GIS 
data pertaining to 1,07,437 Waqf property parts have been captured. New guidelines for 
implementation of QWBTS were formulated on  April, 2021 for the years 2021-22 to 
2025-26 and this scheme would be evaluated before framing fresh guidelines in the 
year 2025-26. 
  
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M.  No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 
  
 (Recommendation Para No.7.10) 
 
The Committee  are happy to note that the funds under Shahari Waqf Sampatti Vikas 
Yojana have substantially increased from ₹2.00 crore in 2021-22 and ₹3.00 crore in 
2020-21 to ₹7.00 crore in 2023-24. As several such properties are under encroachment 
and cases are long pending in State Tribunals, the Committee are of the opinion that 
there is urgent need to expedite such cases to get the Waqf lands free from 
encroachment, for development to achieve the intended objectives of the Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to develop appropriate mechanism to 
achieve the objectives of the Scheme and ensure that the Budget allocated for 2023-24 
is fully utilised. The Committee also desire that State Waqf Boards should be made 
accountable if those are not able to implement the Scheme and avail the facility of 
interest free loan from the Ministry. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
steps envisaged by the Ministry at the action taken stage. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
 Guidelines for implementation of “Shahari Waqf Sampatti Vikas Yojana”(SWSVY) have 
been duly approved by the concerned authorities which provides a comprehensive 
mechanism for implementation of SWSVY and continuous monitoring and evaluation 
mechanism are in place to keep track of the progress made and ensure the 
effectiveness of the scheme. During 2021-22, a total of Rs.1.0 Crore was disbursed in 
loans to three different projects for development of Waqf properties in Karnataka, Uttar 
Pradesh and Kerala. As CNA/SNA model has been fully adopted, CWC would be able 
to utilize the Budget allocation of FY 2023-24 effectively.   
  
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 

17 
 
  
 
(Recommendation Para No.8.12) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs have been making 
arrangements for the Haj Pilgrims through the Haj Committee of India or the private Haj 
Group Organizers in coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs and other 
concerned Ministries. The Consulate General of India, Jeddah has the responsibility to 
look after the Pilgrims and to redress the grievances on reaching Jeddah/Medinah 
airport and during their stay in Saudi Arabia. The Committee find that annual quota of 
India for Haj has increased from 1,36,000 pilgrims during Haj 2014 to 2,00,000 pilgrims 
during Haj 2019. Several progressive measures have also been taken by the Ministry in 
last few years like lifting of restrictions on Muslim women going for Haj without Mehram, 
digitalization of Haj Process etc. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has 
taken steps to cut down cost of air travel by framing Haj policy, 2023 which inter-alia 
stipulates exclusion of items like umbrella, bed sheets, standardized baggage from Haj 
package, and exclusion of mandatory payment of 2,100SR by each pilgrim. The 
Committee feel that the discontinuation of discretionary quota and the effort of the 
Government to receive the full Haj quota of pilgrims will give boost to the Haj pilgrimage. 
The Committee, at the same time, would like to draw the attention of the Ministry 
towards the Budgetary allocation and expenditure incurred in previous years for making 
the arrangement for Haj pilgrims. They are of the opinion that the Budgetary allocation 
made to facilitate Haj pilgrims should be spent meticulously and efforts made 
to rationalise the expenditure on this account. The Committee expect to see the 
procedure further simplified in future in the interest of the pilgrims. In order to further 
smoothen the process for Haj Pilgrimage, the Committee recommend that a feedback 
mechanism should be established for Haj Pilgrims to further update the procedure for 
the pilgrims based on such feedback. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
A feedback mechanism is already in place for haj Pilgrims (both HGO as well as HcoI 
pilgrims) and the Ministry has however taken steps to revamp this feedback mechanism 
on the portal for Haj 2023 so as to ensure that the feedback can be used to improve the 
Haj operations. The haj Committee of India operates on no profit no loss basis and 
charges the pilgrims only for the facilities provided to them. Further there have been a 
number of initiatives for optimum utilization of scarce resources and  for the  economical 
and affordable Haj, which includes rationalizing the number of khadims ul Hujjaj, 
administrative and medical contingent, removing various restrictive provisions in bidding 
process for charters, removing unnecessary costs from Haj packages etc. 
  

18 
 
The Ministry has also made an effort to streamline the procedures and bring 
transparency in the system which includes review & revamping of existing Haj 
application portal, supervision of process of allocation of quota, real time updation to 
pilgrims who have applied through pilgrimage through HcoI through SMS about status 
of seat allocation and waiting list.  The cost ensured on sending deputationist to KSA 
has been brought down by rationalization of number of deputationist being sent 
abroad.  Moreover the procedure for selection of buildings and delegate arrangements 
for the Haj pilgrims by the Consulate General of India to Saudi Arebia have been made 
more transparent and compliant with extant rule in force. 
  
 (Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M. No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
  
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
 (Recommendation Para No.5.17)     
 
The Committee are happy to note that the PMJVK i.e. Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram, erstwhile called the Multi Sectoral Development Programme, has been 
approved for continuation up to 2025-26. It is implemented in all the minority-dominated 
districts of the Country to develop community infrastructure and basic amenities. With 
regard to allocation for PMJVK, the Committee note that due to unspent balance of 
₹2531.93 crore lying with several State/ UT Governments in their SNA account, the 
budgetary allocation for 2023-24 has been reduced to ₹ 600 crore. The Committee have 
been informed that with the revised stipulation of appointing SNAs, the State/UT 
Governments are expected to utilize the funds allocated earlier and furnish the 
Utilization Certificate of these funds before further allocation of funds is made to them. 
Since the Committee learn that several States/UTs have defaulted in utilizing the funds 
allocated under the Scheme, they would like the Ministry to guide the States/ UTs in 
complying to the revised norms so that the Scheme is not made to suffer. The 
Committee note that the execution of large number of projects, for example, 70525 
projects under Education Sector, 5850 projects under Health Sector, 431 Projects under 
Skill Sector and 48512 other Projects sanctioned to different States since inception of 
scheme in 2008-09 is commendable. But, at the same time, 58465 Projects in various 
States/UTs had to be cancelled/ dropped as those could not be started by implementing 
agencies or became unviable. The Committee hope that the Ministry would now be able 
to identify such unviable and incomplete projects with the Geo-tagging App, which has 
been developed, and take appropriate action to ensure completion thereof so that the 
funds are not left idle. The Committee also hope that the Ministry would take adequate 
measures to see that all the identified districts are covered under the revised scheme 
within the stipulated period. The Committee would therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry may consider laying down indicative timelines for the completion of specific 
Projects without any delay. 
   
Reply of the Government 
  
As per the revised guidelines of Ministry of Finance, GoI regarding release of 
funds to the States, SNA model has been implemented with the objective of adopting 
"just in time" release of funds to States for implementing various Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes including Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK). Accordingly, 
release of funds and approval of new projects under PMJVK has been linked to the 
progress of implementation of projects already approved in the States, pace of 

21 
 
expenditure, pending UCs and unspent balance available with the State Governments. 
All the States/ UTs implementing the PMJVK scheme have designated State Nodal 
Agencies (SNA) and opened dedicated bank accounts of the SNAs. Funds under 
PMJVK are being released strictly as per the guidelines of Deptt. of Expenditure. The 
data regarding physical and financial progress of the scheme have been reconciled with 
the State/ UT Governments. As per the expenditure reported by the States/UTs from 
time to time and the data updated as on 20.08.2023, a total of ₹4687 crore is lying 
unspent under PMJVK with the various States/ UTs. Due to the large unspent balance 
with the States, during the FY 2022-23, the BE of ₹1650 crore for the scheme was 
reduced to ₹500 crore at R.E. stage. The final expenditure was around ₹222 
Cr.  However, due to the concerted efforts of the Ministry, the States have released an 
amount of around ₹2113 crore (Central+State share) from the treasury to the SNA 
account of PMJVK during 2022-23 and the implementing agencies of the States have 
also deposited the unspent funds in the SNA account. During 2022-23 the States 
incurred an expenditure of ₹1722 crore from the SNA account on the ongoing projects 
under PMJVK and the balance available as on 31.03.2023 was around ₹2272 crore 
(Source: SNA01 report dated 22.08.2023 from PFMS). Taking into consideration the 
unspent balance available with the State Governments, the B.E. for the scheme for the 
FY 2023-24 has been kept at ₹600 crore only.  For effective implementation of PMJVK 
and to ensure optimum utilisation of funds, the States/ UTs have been given flexibility to 
use the funds released under PMJVK. As per the revised procedure of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, now the release of funds under PMJVK are not tied to 
the individual projects. The amount available in the bank account of State Nodal Agency 
(SNA) of PMJVK forms a common pool, which can be utilised by the States to complete 
the ongoing projects. Detailed guidelines have been issued to the States regarding 
utilisation of unspent balance available in the SNA accounts of the scheme.  With 
regard to the unviable projects, Ministry is constantly monitoring the progress of the 
projects approved and has directed the States to drop/ cancel the projects which have 
not started and become unviable. The States/UTs have also been asked to update the 
progress on the PMJVK Portal and to expedite geo-tagging of PMJVK assets through 
the Bhuvan-PMJVK mobile app. Out of 4,83,462 assets to be geo-tagged under 
PMJVK, a total of 46849 assets have been geo-tagged as on 22.08.2023. States are 
being supported to resolve the issues related to geo-tagging and they have been 
regularly reminded to expedite geotagging. The State of Nagaland and UT of Jammu & 
Kashmir have geo-tagged all the assets, However, States of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Delhi, Himachal, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Odisha and Tripura have not yet 
started geo-tagging. The status of geo-tagging by the States is given in Annexure.   
 The proposals under PMJVK are sent by the States/ UTs with the approval of the 
State Level Committees. States have been sensitised on the revised guidelines and 
coverage of all the districts under the scheme. Ministry consider the proposals received 
from the States/UTs as per the revised PMJVK guidelines. The revised guidelines gives 
emphasis on the timely completion of the projects. States/UTs are now required to fix 
the timelines in advance while submitting the project. The States/UTs are required to 

22 
 
ensure that the projects approved by the Ministry under PMJVK are started and 
completed within the prescribed timelines. Late starting/late implementation of PMJVK 
projects will make the project liable for cancellation by MoMA. The States/ UTs would 
update the progress of the projects on the PMJVK Portal, and the project would be 
monitored as per the timeline given by States/ UTs. Sanctioned projects may be 
cancelled due to non-compliance by States/ UTs, and the funds released for such 
projects will be adjusted on other ongoing projects in the States/ UTs. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs O.M.  No. G-20014/01/2023-Budget dated 25.09.2023) 
  
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;     
                                  
RAMA DEVI 
  20th December, 2023                                            
  29  Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)  
Chairperson,  
Standing Committee on  
Social Justice and                  
Empowerment 
 

24 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
THEIR FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2023-24)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
07  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.11, 3.17, 4.10, 6.8, 7.10 & 8.12 
  
06 86% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.NIL  
 
 
00 00 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No. 5.17 
 
01 14% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
00 00 
   100% 
 
 
 
 
 
 