   
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2020-2021) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants  
(2020-21)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and E mpowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
  
15 

FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2020-2021) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants  
(2020-21)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and E mpowerment (Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.02.2021 
                                    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
(ii) 
 


CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE iv 
 INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER -I Report 1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
14 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
29 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
30 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
37 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
10th November, 2020.   
 
48 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2019-20). 
  
51 
                                         
 
    
   
(iii) 
    

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras 
16. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  17. Shri Arjun Singh 
18. Smt. Supriya Sule 
19. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
$26. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
*28. Shri P. L. Punia 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31. Vacant 
 
__________ 
*  Shri P.L. Punia, MP (RS) retired on 25.11.2020. 
#   Shri Biswajit Daimary, MP (RS) resigned his seat in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 
21.11.2020. 
(iv) 

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
2. Shri Salil Saroj  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2020-21) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Fifteenth Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2020 -21)' of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
3rd March, 2020. The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment have 
furnished their replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained 
in that Report on 3rd September, 2020. The Report was considered and adopted 
by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting 
held on 10th November, 2020. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth  Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
  
     NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                    Chairperson, 
 10 November, 2020                                           Standing Committee on 
 19 Kartika, 1942 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
Empowerment  
(vi) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in the ir Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on "Demands for Grants (20 20-21)" of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
1.2 The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 03.03.2020.  
It contained 17 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations have been examined and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
  
Paragraph Nos.- 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.26, 3.37, 3.38, 4.11, 5.3 and 5.8.  
       (Total: 9, Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government: 
 
Paragraph No. - Nil 
(Total: Nil, Chapter-III) 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted and which require reiteration: 
 
Paragraph Nos. - 2.8, 3.25 and 5.12. 
         (Total: 3, Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature: 
 
Paragraph Nos. - 2.9, 2.10, 3.43, 3.44 and 4.12. 
      (Total : 5, Chapter- V) 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be fur nished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. NON-UTILIZATION OF FUNDS  
Recommendation (Para No.2.8) 
 
1.5 The Committee, in their original Sixth Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that during 2019 -20, the Department had been allocated a 
budget amounting to ₹ 8885.00 crore and the Depa rtment utilised ₹ 5740.19 
crore on 31.01.2020 which was 64.6 per cent of the total allocated funds. The 
Committee further note that on 15.02.2020 the utilisation of the Department was 
enhanced to ₹  6644.85 crore which became 74.79 per cent of the total al located 
funds as RE i.e. ₹ 8885.00 crore. The Committee are disappointed to note the 
uneven pace of utilisation of funds by the Department which is very slow in the 
first three quarters of the financial year 20 19-20. Almost 35 per cent the budget 
remained unutilised and according to the revised instructions of the Ministry of 
Finance, Ministries/Departments could utilise only 25 per cent of their BE in the 
last quarter of the financial year. The Committee observe tha t albeit the 
Department have moved a proposal to Ministry of Finance to provide relaxation 
in the 25 per cent ceiling, if rejected, it can result in surrendering of 10 per cent 
unutilised funds. As late submission of UCs and non -receipt of complete 
proposals are the main reasons for the delay in full utilisation of allocated budget, 
the Committee urge the Department to chalk out a strategy of releasing every 

3 
 
instalment of funds to the States clarifying the deadline for submitting UCs. In 
case UCs are not re ceived within that time -limit, the Department must 
immediately start vigorously pursuing the issue with the State/UT Governments. 
The officers may be delegated the responsibility of personally visiting the States, 
which require handholding to prepare prope r proposals. If need be, the help of 
local public representatives can also be sought to pursue the issue with the 
concerned State Authorities. The Committee further desire to be apprised 
whether a recent decision to continue even if States do not respond w ithin 60 
days applies to the Departmental Schemes too. “ 
1.6  The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action Taken 
Reply, have stated as follows:- 
“The recommendation/observation of the Committee has been noted. Further, it 
is also state d that against the BE/RE 2019 -20 of ₹ 8885.00 crore, the total 
expenditure of the Department was ₹ 8729.53 crore which was 98.25% of BE/RE 
of 2019-20. However, the Department has made the following steps for receiving 
the complete adequate proposals and Ut ilization Certificates etc from the State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations for releasing the financial 
assistance: 
 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  has designated 
Divisional Heads as Nodal Officers for various regions and State 
Governments/Union Territory Administrations. During the field visits of Officers 
of this Department to States/UTs, discussions are held in order to identify 
constraints and to take corrective measures. 
 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  also organizes 
Conferences of State Social Welfare Ministers and the State Social Welfare 
Secretaries wherein all the schemes of the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment are reviewed.  
 
  

4 
 
1.7 The Committee, being very concerned about the uneven pace and delay in 
disbursal and non-utilization of funds allocated to the Department in the financial 
year 2019-20, had noted that it not only lead to hasty utilization of funds in the 
last quarter of the financial year  but also flouted the instruct ion of the Finance 
Ministry to utilise only 25% of funds in this quarter . The Committee have been 
reiterating that utilization of a major chunk of funds in the last quarter  of the 
financial year must not become a norm because timely disbursement of funds i s 
the backbone for the welfare of target groups under various schemes  of the 
Department viz. various Scholarship Schemes for SC and OBC students, Pradhan 
Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojna, National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction  and 
various welfare schemes f or senior citizens,  etc.  The Committee find that the 
Department, in their Action Taken Reply, has not responded on the following 
observations made in the Sixth Report i.e. (i) fixing responsibility/accountability 
of officers to personally visit States/UTs  which require handholding to prepare 
proper proposals; (ii) seeking suggestions from the local public representatives; 
and (iii) intimating the Committee about any decision on continuation of funds if 
the approval of State Government is not received withi n 60 days, provided all 
other criteria have been met by the implementing agency. As the department has 
statedly taken a few steps to improve the situation, the Committee desire the 
Department to provide them with a list of Divisional Heads, who are made no dal 
officers of States/UTs and/or regions alongwith the dates, when it was decided so 
and the details of field visits undertaken by them, if any, so far since 2019 in the 
wake of COVID pandemic .  The Committee also desire to be furnished with the 

5 
 
minutes/gist of discussion held during the Conferences with State Ministers and 
officials, alongwith action taken by the Ministry on the relevant points. 
  

6 
 
B. BABU JAGJIVAN RAM CHHATRAWAS YOJNA (BJRCY) 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25) 
1.8 The Committee, in their original Sixth Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) is 
meant for construction of hostels for Scheduled Castes students to enable and 
encourage children/students to attain quality education. This scheme is a crucial 
one as it provides hostel s which are immensely beneficial to the students hailing 
from rural and remote areas of the country. However to their dismay, the Scheme 
is not performing well. The Committee observe a trend of under utilization of 
funds since 2015 -16 under this scheme exc ept in 2016 -17. In 2017 -18, against 
the RE of ₹ 155.00 crore, the Department utilized only ₹ 74.91 crore which is less 
than 50 per cent of the budgetary allocation. In 2019 -20, the Department was 
allocated ₹ 107.76 crore which was reduced downward to ₹ 25.00 crore at RE 
stage. Out of RE of ₹ 25 crore, ₹ 07.60 crore only was utilized till 31.01.2020. 
The trend of funds released also gives a dismal picture of hardly 7 -8 recipient 
States/UTs out of 17. Out of these only Kerala has established 100 hostels and 
rest are just a sprinkling, which is extremely disappointing. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the reasons for such dismal performance and the steps 
taken to address the issues affecting adversely the utilization of the funds. The 
Committee further find that the demand of ₹ 107.00 crore as BE in 2019 -20 was 
made as the Department had put forth a proposal for construction of five 
residential schools sent to the Ministry of Finance for approval which, however, 
was turned down. Taking into considerati on the number of boys hostels 
constructed under this scheme which is very less, the Committee exhort the 
Department to revisit their proposal of residential schools as this is a better 
option for serving the purpose of this scheme.” 
1.9  The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action Taken 
Reply, have stated as follows:- 

7 
 
 “ During the year 2017 -18, a proposal for revision of the Scheme, Babu Jagjivan 
Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY)‟ to include one new component i.e. „Setting up 
of Residential  Schools for SC Girls‟ was moved for consideration of the 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). In anticipation of approval of the 
proposal, additional funds were allocated under BJRCY for 2017 -18 and 2018 -
19. However, the proposal was not recommended for i mplementation by the 
Expenditure Finance Committee. 
 Under Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY), Central assistance is 
provided to eligible implementing agencies for construction/ expansion of hostels 
for SC boys and girls. As per the extant Scheme gu idelines of Babu Jagjivan 
Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY), 50% of the admissible cost estimate, which is 
₹ 3.00 lakh per inmate, is provided to State Governments for construction of SC 
boys hostels. Therefore, there has been less response from the State 
Governments in submitting proposals for construction of boys hostels under 
BJRCY in comparison to girls hostels where 100% of the admissible cost 
estimate is provided to them.  
 
 Due to above mentioned reasons, budget allocated in RE for 2017 -18 & 2018-19 
could not be utilized. Also, the Scheme guidelines of BJRCY have been revised 
during 2018 -19 and as per the revised scheme guidelines, admissible central 
assistance for construction/ expansion of SC hostels to State Govts./ UT 
Administrations/Central Universitie s/ State Universities is released in two 
instalments. Whereas, as per the earlier scheme guidelines, there was a 
provision for release of 100% admissible central assistance to these 
implementing agencies at the time of sanction of the hostels.  
 
 In some cases, it was observed that the hostels could not be constructed at the 
site where it was sanctioned due to land disputes arising out post -sanction. 
Therefore, under the revised guidelines, submission of a certificate by the 
implementing agencies r egarding availability of land without dispute and 
encroachment has also been made mandatory.  

8 
 
 
 Sanction for construction of hostels under the Scheme depends upon receipt of 
proposals from the State Governments and other implementing agencies 
concerned along with the complete documents/ information required as per the 
scheme guidelines, such as detailed cost estimate, land documents, building 
plan, site plan, list of SC students of feeder Institutions/ colleges, pending UCs, 
physical & financial reports of t he hostels sanctioned earlier, etc. In fact, the 
State Governments submit the proposals for construction of hostels under 
BJRCY as per their requirements. However, in many cases the State 
Governments and other implementing agencies do not send the complete  
proposals/ documents for consideration in time, even after repeated reminders 
from the Department. As a result, less number of hostels are sanctioned with less 
utilization of funds.  Also, the State Governments/ UT Administrations are 
requested regularly to submit the proposals for construction of hostels in the 
districts which are not covered under the scheme. The Department has taken 
various steps for utilization of funds, such as conducting regular video 
conferencing and meetings of the Steering Committ ee. During the Steering 
Committee meetings held on 28.6.2019 and 07.01.2020, implementing agencies 
were impressed upon to ensure timely submission of the requisite 
documents/information so that the hostels could be sanctioned in the respective 
States.  
 
 The Department now has again proposed to restructure the existing Scheme of 
BJRCY by introducing Ambedkar Navodaya Vidyalaya (ANV) scheme for setting 
up of residential schools for SCs for class VI – XII across the country. In - 
principle approval of D/o Expenditure is awaited on the proposal.  In the absence 
of proposals complete in all respects and as per the scheme guidelines, no 
hostel could be sanctioned in the other States during 2019-20.” 
  

9 
 
1.10 The Committee, in their origina l Report, had observed  a trend of  
under-utilization of funds since 2015 -16 till date, barring 2016-17, in the scheme 
‘Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana’ (BJRCY).  To cite an instance, in 2019-20 
the Department could utilize only ₹ 07.60 crore out of total revised estimate of  
₹ 25 crore, which is just around 29 percent of the allocated budget. The 
Committee also observed with dismay that out of 17 States, only 7 -8 States were 
released funds under the scheme and by and large, most States have shown 
dismal interest in constructi on of hostels for Scheduled Caste students.  The 
Committee are also sad to note now that a proposal of the Department for 
construction of five residential schools was turned down by the EFC, Ministry of 
Finance.  As regards the reasons for such dismal perf ormance, the Department, 
in their action taken reply, have stated that the State Governments have shown 
less response in submitting proposals for construction of boys hostels as they 
receive only 50 percent of the admissible cost estimate as central assist ance 
under the scheme. Explaining further, the Department have informed that as per 
the earlier Scheme guidelines, 100 percent  admissible central assistance was 
released to the implementing agencies but as per the revised Scheme guidelines, 
admissible central assistance for construction/ expansion of SC hostels to State 
Governments/UT Administrations/Central Universities/State Universities is 
released in two installments. The Department further submitted that under 
revised guidelines, submission of a certif icate by the implementing agencies 
regarding availability of land without dispute and encroachment has also been 
made mandatory because in certain cases, post -sanction land disputes stalled 

10 
 
construction of hostels. The Committee have also been informed tha t a new 
scheme namely Ambedkar Navodaya Vidyalaya (ANV) Scheme for setting up of 
residential schools for SCs for class VI to XII, is now proposed to restructure the 
BJRCY.  While the same is stated to be awaiting approval from Department 
expenditure, the C ommittee is still skeptical of its success as BJRCY, despite 
being run since 1960 -61 and its several revisions in 2008, 2018 and now, has 
hardly shown good performance.  While the Committee understand that some 
States do not provide their share of resource s as well as dispute -free land for 
Hostels, despite the efforts of the Department to address the constraints on their 
part, they feel that the Scheme, for its meaningful impact, needs to be constantly 
monitored with innovative solutions to identified const raints. The Committee 
desire that as a first step, to generate the necessary thrust for the scheme, the 
Department need to open direct dialogue with the Social Welfare department of 
States and convince them of the significance of Schemes like BJRCY for soc ial 
and educational upliftment of meritorious SC students.   
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in all the matters 
referred to above. 
  

11 
 
C. SCHEME FOR REHABLITATION OF BEGGARS 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12) 
 
1.11 The Committee, in their original sixth report, had recommended as follows: 
"The Committee note that begging is one of the most serious social issues in 
India. There are few beggars in the country who beg because they are 
handicapped/unable to work/old/divyangjan etc. At the same time, there are 
many others who live far below the poverty line being asset-less and illiterate and 
opt for begging to earn their livelihood. However, it is common knowledge that in 
big metropolises, beggar mafia operate to exploit peoples‟ sentiments, whi ch is 
greater threat to social fabric and a cause of immense national shame before the 
world. The Committee are of the considered view that the Department have been 
allocated the subject of beggary and hence they are responsible to deal with the 
menace of beggary in the society. The Committee find in this connection that the 
Department have initiated a pilot project to identify and rehabilitate the beggars in 
cities of the country. The Committee feel that the Department should have taken 
this step long back . They would like them to be apprised of the outcome of the 
project in Indore and of the progress in other cities in this regard. " 
1.12 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, in their Action  Taken 
Reply, have stated as follows:  
 "The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment proposed to formulate a 
scheme for persons engaged in the act of begging which would cover 
identification, rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, counselling, education, 
skill development with the support of State Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies 
and Voluntary Organizations, institutions etc. The scheme is being implemented in 
10 selected cities on Pilot basis from FY 2019-20. The scheme would be extended 
to other cities on the basis of the outcome of the pilot project in subsequent year. 

12 
 
 The 10 identified cities are Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Lucknow, Patna, Nagpur, Indore under the  "Scheme for 
Comprehensive Rehabilitation of Beggars ".In the FY 2019 -20, total ₹ 25 Crore 
and for FY 2020 -21 ₹100 Crore has been allocated to the Scheme. 100% 
Assistance under the Scheme shall be provided to the States/UTs for its 
implementation. The progress of implementation of the project shall be monitored 
by the concerned State Government/UT Administration. The Scheme has following 
components:-  
(i)  Survey/identification  
(ii) Mobilization  
(iii) Rescue /Shelter Home  
(iv) Comprehensive rehabilitation  
 Annual Action Plan from the Municipal Corporation of Indore, Patna and 
Hyderabad has been received in t he Ministry and an amount of ₹ 1.5 Crore to 
Indore and ₹ 2.0 Crore to Hyderabad and ₹ 0.94 Crore to Patna Municipal 
Corporation (50% of 1st instalment) have been released. " 
 
  

13 
 
1.13 Having observed that the Department initiated a pilot project in 10 cities 
including the four metropolises, Indore, Hyderabad, Pune, Patna, Lucknow and 
Bengaluru,  to identify and rehabilitate beggars , the Committee had desired that 
the outcome of the project may be apprised to the Committee.   The Department 
in their A ction Taken reply have not submitted any outcome of the said pilot 
project and have merely informed that t he Scheme would be implemented to 
other cities on the basis of the outcome of the pilot project in subsequent years. 
The Committee would first desire to see whether any ground work/achievement 
has been made with the pilot project, as out of 10 identified cities, the Annual 
Action Plan have been received from only 3 cities viz. Indore, Patna and 
Hyderabad.  The Committee are inclined to conclude that per haps not much 
headway is made as a negligible amount of ₹ 4.44 crore has been allotted so far 
to the 3 cities cited above.  There is absolutely no action on the matter from any 
of the four metropolises where beggar problem has reached epic proportions, 
which is extremely disappointing.  The Committee desire that their displeasure 
may be conveyed to the respective State Governments and sincere efforts be 
made by the department to convince the State Governments to prevent the 
prevailing menace of beggars from  becoming totally uncontrollable and a 
national shame in front of the world.  
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14) 
2.1 The Committee note that the Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC Students 
(PMS-SC) is one of the oldest and most important schemes run by the Department with 
the objective to provide/supplement financial assistance to the Scheduled Castes 
students studying at post matriculation or post -secondary stage to enable them pursues 
post matric education. The Committee find that funds could not be released by the 
Department to the States/UTs due to lack of complete proposals submitted by the 
States/UTs in time. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department sh ould 
vigorously pursue the Governments of States/UTs at the level of Secretaries as well as 
at district level also and direct them to submit the complete proposals at least by the 
end of third quarter of financial year so that the Department could release funds in time 
utilize the amount allocated in full. If need be the officers of the Department can 
personally talk to District Magistrate of the District to speedily and effectively remove the 
hurdles in implementation of the Scheme at District level. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Post Matric Scholarship Scheme for Scheduled Caste is a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme and is implemented through State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations who invites the applications and disburse the scholarship to eligible 
students. This Department releases the Central Assistance over and above the 
Committed Liability of State Governments/Union Territory Administrations on the basis 
of proposals furnished by them for release of Central Assistance. Sometimes, the 
States/UTs fail to furnish the proposal of the release of Central Assistance on time and 
therefore the execution of the Scheme is impacted. In order to find a solution to this, 
frequent meetings and video conferences are scheduled on regular basis to carry out 
discussions on pending and incomplete proposals. Letters for calling proposal with 
prescribed format are also circulated to State Governments/Union Territory 

15 
 
Administrations with reminder time to time. Consequent to the vigorous follow up, in the 
first quarter itself this year, we have received the anticipated demand from 22 out of 30 
States implementing the scheme. Besides this, issues relating to implementation of 
scheme in states are also discussed during the meeting of Inter -state council. Further, 
as per revised  guidelines of scheme circulated on 3.5.2018, Section XIV, it is 
provisioned that the aggregated demand from the States should be submitted to 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment in the prescribed forms and demand 
for Central Assistance submitted beyond 31st December will not be entertained.  
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                        Dated  3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15) 
2.3 The Committee further find that the States of Punjab and Bihar, where there is 
poor implementation of this Scheme, did not put forth any demand for funds as there is 
nil/very less utilization of funds and hence they could  not send UCs to the Department. 
The Committee are perturbed to particularly know the corruption charges on Punjab 
officials and can very well perceive the helpless condition of those poor students who 
are deprived of the scholarships. The Committee, there fore, impress upon the 
Department to pursue the States of Punjab and Bihar in particular to complete the 
formalities at their end and release the scholarships to the beneficiaries in time and 
send the complete proposals to the Department in time. For this the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment could formulate a draft template and send it to 
States/UTs for fast disposal of cases. The transfer of scholarships directly into the 
accounts of the beneficiaries could be a step towards fast and effective implementation 
of the Scheme. The Committee are informed that a proposal for transferring funds 
directly into the bank accounts of the students under Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is 
already awaiting approval of the Cabinet. The Committee, therefore, desir e that the 
Department should pursue this matter seriously and implement it at the earliest in the 

16 
 
interest of the beneficiaries. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual 
progress in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 State Government of Bihar has not submitted the proposal for release of Central 
Assistance for 2016-17 stating vide letter dated 9 th August, 2018 that the demand of the 
State was within the Committed Liability and therefore no Central Assistance was due. 
Thereafter, the State furnished the proposals for 2017 -18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 where 
too the demand was within the revised Committed Liability and therefore no CA was 
due. In the matter of the Government of Punjab, the State has conducted the internal 
audit of the scheme, for the period 2011-12 to 2016-17. As per the findings of the audit, 
Punjab Government vide letter dated 28/01/2020 has sought Rs 309.21 crore towards 
meeting the Arrears for 2015 -16 and 2016 -17. Central Assistance as requested by 
Punjab Government amounting  to ₹ 309.21 crore has already been released and at 
present there is no pending arrears. The demand for 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 are within 
the committed Liability of Punjab and therefore no Central assistance is due. State Govt 
has not provided details of demand fo r 2019 -20 and 2020 -21. All the States/UTs 
including Punjab are written on regular basis and are provided with the Calling 
Proposals in prescribed format, requesting them to furnish it on a regular basis. With 
regard to the proposal for transferring of fund s directly into the bank accounts of the 
Students under DBT, it is submitted that this scheme is implemented through State 
Government who disburse the scholarship from available fund of Central Government 
as Central Assistance and from State Government as Committed Liability. Accordingly 
disbursal of scholarship is done at the level of State Government through their DBT 
Portal of Scholarship. 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 

17 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16) 
2.5 The Committee have now been informed that the Department have put forth a 
proposal to increase the share of the Centre from 90:10 to 60:40.  The Committee are 
constrained to find that despite having passed by the Ministry of Finance the proposal is 
still under consideration of the Cabinet and, therefore, the Committee urge upon the 
Ministry to pursue the matter seriously to get it approved by the Cabinet and implement 
it at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Funding pattern of Post Matric Scholarship scheme for Scheduled Caste 
students, at present is not based  on fixed percentage sharing between Centre and 
State. It is based on concept of Committed Liability. Central Government releases such 
portion of demand for a year under the scheme which is over and above the respective 
committed liability of State. The pr oposal to adopt a fixed sharing of expenditure under 
the Scheme wherein the Centre and State Governments/Union Territory Administrations 
shall cater to the yearly demand in a fixed proportion of 60 (Centre) : 40 (state) instead 
of present system based on t he concept of committed liability is under due 
consideration of the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs and therefore is awaiting 
approval. In case of NE States, Central Share will be 100%. 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.26) 
 
2.7 The Committee also want the Department to apprise them as to why no hostels 
were constructed in other states in 2019 -20 and the addresses of all the hostels 
constructed under this Scheme, State -wise, as agreed to by the Department during the 
course of evid ence. The Committee are of the opinion that if the funds are not being 

18 
 
properly utilized by the States for construction of hostels, the Department can seek 
suggestions from the MPs/MLAs of SC constituencies also due to their vast familiarity 
with the needs  and requirements of their people, and get requisite proposals made, 
which will go a long way in meeting the objectives of the scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
 2.8 The recomme ndations received from the MPs/ MLAs including of SC 
constituencies are duly taken into account while considering the sanction of proposals 
for construction of hostels under BJRCY. 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.37) 
2.9 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY) is an 
important scheme of the Department to ensure integrated development of the selected 
villages with more  than 50 per cent SC population. The objective of the Scheme is to 
provide for and improvement in the various Socio -Economic Indicators of the villages. 
The resource allocation and spending since 2015 -16 shows utilization of more than 95 
per cent in the ye ar 2016 -17 and 2018 -19 the spending was far higher than RE. In 
2019-20, however, the utilization is 55 per cent only till 15.02.2020, due to slow pace of 
disbursals in the first and second quarters which, in the Committee‟s view, could be 
owing to the Nati onal Elections held during that period. The Committee hope the 
Department would be able to spend the amount in the remaining two months of the 
financial year, which the Department appears to be quite confident about.  
Reply of the Government 
 2.10 Against the total allocation of ₹718.00 cr. at RE stage under Pradhan Mantri 
Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY), an amount of ₹717.96 crore has already been released 

19 
 
to the State Governments Union Territory Administration  during the financial year 2029-
20  as such the allocated funds have been utilized fully at the end of financial year. 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38) 
2.11 The Committee find that this scheme is a convergence scheme and the 
Ministries of Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Health and Family Welfare etc. are 
also actively involved at implementation stage of this scheme. The Committee are of the 
considered opini on that when two or more Departments/Ministries are involved at 
implementation stage of any scheme, it is difficult to effectively and properly implement 
that scheme for intended outcome. In this case even when one Department have 
released its share of fun ds, it is not necessary that the other Department/Ministry 
releases its share of funds in coordination with the other Ministries and this will result in 
delayed implementation of Scheme and the ultimate sufferer will be the SC population 
of the villages, who are in dire need of improvement in their socio -economic status and 
the whole purpose would be defeated. The Committee, therefore, opine that an 
objective assessment of these factors needs to be made and if lack of convergence 
among various Department of  Government of India is hampering the pace, the 
Department should not implement this scheme on the basis of convergence with other 
Ministries. In its stead, the Department should implement this scheme directly on the 
basis of the funds allocated under this  scheme to them. The Committee desire that the 
Department should not depend on other Ministries/Departments for the implementation 
of this Scheme and independently monitor it for its prompt implementation at village 
level as the Committee believe that the Department is exclusively responsible for the 
upliftment and empowerment of them through its schemes/programmes. In this 
connection, the Department of Divyangjan from the same Ministry have introduced real 
time monitoring through a mobile -based color -coding application for their schemes, 

20 
 
which can be replicated for better monitoring. The Committee suggests them to explore 
this possibility in the right spirit.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Though the scheme relies heavily on convergence of schemes of other C entral 
Ministries/Departments, the actual convergence  at implementation stage  is being taken 
care of by the Village and District level Convergence Committees which comprise of, 
inter alia, representatives of relevant departments as well. This scheme is bei ng 
implemented and monitored independently by the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment and a web based MIS has been developed for this Scheme to assess 
the real time progress under the scheme. 
 The integrated development of selected villages are to be achieved primarily 
through implementation of the existing schemes of Central and State Governments 
in a convergent manner thereby ensuring access to quality services as well as 
infrastructure development. In case of any shortfall, an amount of ₹20.00 lakh per 
village is allocated for carrying out developmental activities either independently or 
in convergence with activities of other schemes. As such this scheme is being 
implemented as an independent scheme and provides a platform for integration of 
schemes of other Central Ministries/State Governments at one place. 
 The Ministry also undertakes  independent evaluation at regular intervals to assess 
the extent of objective as well as convergence achieved and based on their 
recommendations, necessary corrective measures are taken.  
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 

21 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11) 
 
2.13 The Committee note that the primary objective of Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme 
for OBCs is to motivate children of OBCs studying at Pre-Matric stage. Scholarships are 
awarded to students belonging to OBCs whose parents‟/guardian‟s income from all 
sources does not exceed Rs 250000/ - per annum. The Committee note that there is a 
continuous trend of under -utilisation of allocated funds at RE stage under this Scheme 
since 2015-16. Also despite the increase in BE, AE remained around Rs 121 -128 crore, 
and the number of beneficiaries has remained between 30 -50 lakh except in 2016 -17 
when 154.59 lakh beneficiaries has been reported under similar amount. In this context, 
apart from the actual figure of beneficiaries in 2019 -20, the Committee needs to be 
apprised of the reasons as to why the number of beneficiaries fell after 2016 -17. The 
Department have attributed this continuous under utilization to the same old issues such 
as non furnishing of complete proposals and Utilization Certificates (UCs) of funds 
which is a mandatory provision for further release of funds to any States/  UTs/ 
Implementing Agencies. The Committee is not satisfied with the same. It is amply clear 
that the efforts made by the Department have not yielded the desired results in ensuring 
the timely receipt of UCs and complete proposals from States/UTs and the Department 
have allowed the situation to remain virtually the same during the last five years, except 
in 2016-17. The Committee, therefore, urge them to take up the matter at the highest 
level in the States/UTs at regular intervals, at least once a month, instead of sending 
occasional communications as is being done now. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The fund was released under the scheme to States/UTs for the year 2015 -16 to 
2019-20 on the basis of BE/RE allocated under the scheme. Further, as per mentioned 
₹ 201.57 crore has been utilized from ₹ 220.00 crore during 2019 -20. Out of the funds 
of ₹ 22.00 Crore(10% of BE), ₹ 18.43 was unspent due to less demand in NER States 
as per following details:  

22 
 
                                                           (₹ in crore) 
Year NE Head 
Estimate 
Utilization Unspent 
2015-16 15.00 1.54 13.46 
2016-17 15.00 2.14 12.86 
2017-18 15.00 1.44 13.56 
2018-19 23.20 3.34 19.86 
2019-20 22.00 3.57 18.43 
 
 The scheme of Pre -Matric Scholarship for OBC students is being implemented on 
sharing pattern of 50:50. The State Government furnishes consolidated physical 
achievement which includes the beneficiaries from Central share as well State 
share. During the yea r 2016-17, a few States like Bihar, Karnataka, Jharkhand etc. 
had spent more budget from State Share in compression to Central share. 
Therefore, there was huge surge in physical achievement during 2016 -17 under the 
scheme. Further, during the year 2017 -18 there was less expenditure by the State 
of Bihar and Karnataka under this scheme. Hence the number of beneficiaries 
reduced in 2017 -18 The reason of increase in 48.67 lakh of beneficiaries during 
2015-16 to 154.49 lakh Crore during 2016 -17 as the reported number of 
beneficiaries from the Govt. of Bihar is 101.44 lakh. While adding the total number 
of beneficiaries from rest of states/UTs, the number of beneficiaries has shown as 
154.49 lakh during 2016 -17. During the year 2019 -20 it has also available data of 
the provisional beneficiaries is 93.92 lakh.  
 Further, for releasing of funds to states/UTs under scheme, continuous efforts is 
taken by the Department by sending DO letters, email, letters through Speed Post 
to ask for the complete proposal, Check -list and UC. The Department is holding 
video conferences and review meetings with the Implementing Agencies from time 
to time to pursue the matter.  
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 

23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.3) 
2.15 The Committee had examined and reported upon the Bill titled “The Transgender 
Persons (Protection of Rights) Bill, 2019” under the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) in the Lok Sabha. The 
Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 05.08.2019 and by the Rajya Sabha on 
26.11.2019, assented to by the Hon‟ble President of India on 05.12.2019  and has since 
been notified in the Gazette of India. The Committee observe that the Department have 
the mandate to deal with the issues related to Transgender Persons and formulat 
schemes and take initiatives and welfare measures for their benefit. The Co mmittee are 
perturbed to note that even after a lapse of more than three years since 2016 when the 
work relating to Transgender Persons was allocated to this Department, they are yet to 
take any concrete step to formulate a scheme or any other initiative f or their welfare as 
is evident from the meager allocations made so far. Not even a single rupee was spent 
out of ₹ 4.00 crore budgetary allocations for the purpose in 2017 -18 and in 2019-20, (till 
31.01.2020) just 50 per cent of the budgetary allocation wa s utilised by the Department 
for the purpose. The Committee hope that with the passage of the above mentioned 
Act, the Department have the legislative backing to deal with the issues related to 
Transgender Persons now and formulate schemes for their welfar e and accordingly, 
utilization of budgetary allocations also might go up. The Committee, keeping in view of 
the demands of the Transgender community, also recommend higher allocations for 
their welfare in the coming years. They also urge upon the Department to be sensitive in 
dealing with this issue and formulate schemes in consultation with the community. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Ministry introduced the Bill titled “The Transgender Persons (Protection of 
Rights) Bill, 2019 in the Lok Sabha. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 05.08.2019 
and by the Rajya Sabha on 26.11.2019. The Act has been assented to by the President 
on 05.12.2019 and has been notified in the Gazette of India on the same date. The 
provisions of the said Act have come into forc e from 10.01.2020 vide this Ministry‟s 
Gazette Notification dated 10.01.2020. 

24 
 
 The Ministry constituted a Committee for drafting rules for carrying out the provisions 
of Act titled "The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The draft 
rules submitted by the Committee were placed on the Ministry‟s website for 
comments and feedback from public. Draft rules were also forwarded to State 
Governments, Ministries/Departments for their comments. 
 The comments received from various organizations and in dividuals, state 
governments and central Ministries were examined and most of the suggestions were 
incorporated in the Draft rules.  
 The Ministry prepared a Concept Note on Formulation of Central Sector Scheme for 
Welfare o f Transgender Persons, which wou ld cover rehabilitation, education, health 
care, counseling, skill development, financial assistance to the individuals belonging 
to transgender community and community awareness in the society, involving State 
Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies, Voluntary  Organizations, Community Based 
Organizations (CBOs) and institutions etc. However Since there is a blanket ban on 
the new SFCs, the Scheme has to be postponed to the next financial year. 
 It is further informed that during 2019 -20, the Ministry had release d funds to National 
Backward Classes Finance And Development Corporation (NBCFDC) of the 
Ministry for conducting health camps and skill development training  for Transgender 
persons. 
 During COVID-19, the Ministry was in receipt of  representations from the members of 
the Transgender Community, wherein, they have requested Ministry to support them 
during lockdown as most of them have lost their means of livelihood and facing 
challenges of survival. In immediate response to these representations/emails, the 
Ministry, through  NBCFDC provided subsistence allowance of ₹ 1500 per 
Transgender Person, who  were having bank accounts and sought help from the 
Ministry. About ₹92.64 Lakhs have been released to around 6176 transgender 
persons throughout the country. 
 Further some Transgender Persons who do not have  bank accounts   have 
also requested for support. The details of such Transgender persons were forwarded 
by the Ministry vide email  to the concerned DM/DCs for extending support of worth of 

25 
 
Rs 1500/ -(per person) to t hose needy Transgender people. Ministry requested 
DM/DCs to forward the  details for reimbursement from Ministry, if any,  for the support 
extended. 
 A „COVID Helpline‟ has also launched by the Ministry through NBCFDC from 
14.04.2020 for providing daily psychological counselling on the issues of mental stress 
and anxiety faced by Transgender persons  due to social isolation or other reasons 
during COVID-19 lockdown. 
 Further, keeping in view the problems being faced by the  Transgender community in 
the wake of COVID-19 lockdown, and their request for  a package to be announced for 
their community,  the Ministry has requested Secretary, Department of Economic 
Affairs, (Head of Empowered Group for Economic & Welfare Measures) for considering 
a special Corona Relief Package including subsistence allowance,  monthly ration kits 
and medical assistance for the Transgender community. 
 In view of above, it is evident that the Ministry is taking various steps for the welfare of 
Transgender community (one of its target group).  
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl                                                          Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8) 
2.17 Drug abuse among all age -groups particularly children, teenagers and youth, is 
rampant in the country, particularly Delhi and Punjab. While availability of drugs to them 
does not fall under this Department‟s mandate, the Committee note that the Scheme of 
Assistance for „Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse is being 
implemented by them for identification, counselling, treatment and rehabilitation of 
addicts through Non -Governmental Organizations and other eligible organization. The 
Committee while appreciating the Department for utilizing entire allocated resources for 
four years i.e. from 2015 -16 to 2018-19 for the purpose, but only 71 per cent utilization 
of the funds made available at RE stage in the year 2019-20 has been reported (till Feb, 

26 
 
2020). The Committee hope the rest of the amount, as they themselves mentioned in 
the reply, will be spent in the rest of the financial year. The Committee also observe that 
the Scheme of prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse is being merg ed 
with the Scheme of National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction (NAPDDR) and 
has become one of the components of the merged Scheme which is under revision. The 
Committee may be apprised of the outcome of this revision. As for financial year 2020 -
21, a n amount of Rs 260 crore has been allocated. The Committee desire that the 
Department have to be proactive in this regard since drug addicts are visibly present on 
footpaths, traffic crossings, below metro pillars and in fringe area of a city like Delhi an d 
hence can be easily identified for extending all help under this scheme. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the Department‟s vision and plan in this connection.  
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been conceptualized and 
rolled out a National Action Plan for Drug Demand Reduction for the period 2018 -2025 
which aims at reduction of adverse consequences of drug abuse through a multi -
pronged strategy towards Prevention, Treatment   and Rehabilitation of affected 
individuals and their families . The Action Plan includes components for preventive 
education and awaren ess generation, treatment and rehabilitation, setting quality 
standards, focussed intervention in vulnerable areas with an overall umbrella of 
Capacity building in these components. State/UT specific interventions, surveys, 
studies, evaluation and research etc. are also envisaged.  
 
 The NAPDDR for 2018 -25 focuses on availability of IRCAs in each district, 
conversion of existing IRCAs into treatment clinics, availability of drug addiction 
treatment facilities in Government Hospitals and closed settings such as prisons, 
juvenile homes etc. The Scheme of NAPDDR focuses on the following areas:   
 
 Establishing and assisting de -addiction centres in Government Hospitals and 
Medical Colleges. 
 
 Establishing and assisting de -addiction centres in closed settings such a s Prisons 
and Juvenile Homes and for special groups such as women and children in need for 
care and protection etc. 

27 
 
 As a part of the NAPDDR, this Ministry is also undertaking focussed intervention 
programmes in identified high risk of 131 districts across the country with an aim to 
increase community participation and public cooperation in the reduction of demand 
for dependence -producing substances. These programmes include Community 
Based Peer Led Intervention for early Drug Use Prevention among Adolescents and 
Youth and Outreach and Drop in Centres. The Ministry has made expenditure for 
2018-19 & 2019 -20 under the scheme of  National Action Plan for Drug Demand 
Reduction (NAPDDR)- 
₹ In Crore 
Year BE  RE Exp. % of RE 
2018-19 130 113.00 112.33 99.40 
2019-20 135 135.00 134.88 99.91 
 
 The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has merged the scheme of 
„Assistance for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse‟ into „National Action 
Plan for Drug Demand Reduction (NAPDDR) which is effective from 01.04.20.  
Earlier, the Ministry was  implementing a Central Sector Scheme of Assistance for 
Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse under which, financial 
assistance was given to the voluntary organizations and other eligible agencies for, 
inter-alia, running and maintenance of Integration Rehabilitation Centres for Addicts 
(IRCAs). These IRCAs provide services for Preventive Education and Awareness 
Generation, identification of addicts, motivational counseling, detoxification/de -
addiction and Whole Person Recovery, after care an d reintegration into the social 
mainstream. The Ministry has made the following expenditure for last years i.e. 
since 2015-16 onwards- 
₹ In crore 
Year BE RE Expenditure % of RE 
2015-16 20.15 36.15 36.15 100 
2016-17 35.00 47.00 47.00 100 
2017-18 46.00 46.00 48.97 106.45 
2018-19 50.00 80.00 80.00 100 
2019-20 130.00  112.00 108.93 97.26 
2020-21 (Q1)  
(till June 2020) 
260.00 - 46.59 17.92 
 
 The Ministry has worked out for the drug abusers of Punjab and Delhi and selected 
and providing central assistance  for the following no. of IRCA, CPLI and ODIC 
centre in the above states. 
Sl. No. State IRCA ODIC  CPLI 
1. Delhi 9 6 4 
2. Punjab 27 2 1 

28 
 
 Now, the Ministry is exploring the ODIC and CPLI centres across the India and 
called the proposals from the NGOs for ODIC and CPLI centres. The Ministry is in 
the process for selection of these centres across the country specially focusing on 
Punjab and Haryana. 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                      Dated 3rd September 2020 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 

30 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED  
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.8) 
4.1 The Committee note that during 2019 -20, the Department had been allocated a 
budget amounting to Rs 8885.00 crore and the Department utilised Rs 5740.19 crore on 
31.01.2020 which was 64.6 per cent of the total allocated funds. The Committee further 
note that on 15.02.2020 the utilisation of the Department was enhanced to Rs  6644.85 
crore which b ecame 74.79 per cent of the total allocated funds as RE i.e. Rs 8885.00 
crore. The Committee are disappointed to note the uneven pace of utilisation of funds 
by the Department which is very slow in the first three quarters of the financial year 
2020-21. Al most 35 per cent the budget remained unutilised and according to the 
revised instructions of the Ministry of Finance, Ministries/Departments could utilise only 
25 per cent of their BE in the last quarter of the financial year. The Committee observe 
that al beit the Department have moved a proposal to Ministry of Finance to provide 
relaxation in the 25 per cent ceiling, if rejected, it can result in surrendering of 10 per 
cent unutilised funds. As late submission of UCs and non -receipt of complete proposals 
are the main reasons for the delay in full utilisation of allocated budget, the Committee 
urge the Department to chalk out a strategy of releasing every instalment of funds to the 
States clarifying the deadline for submitting UCs. In case UCs are not receiv ed within 
that time-limit, the Department must immediately start vigorously pursuing the issue with 
the State/UT Governments. The officers may be delegated the responsibility of 
personally visiting the States, which require handholding to prepare proper pr oposals. If 
need be, the help of local public representatives can also be sought to pursue the issue 
with the concerned State Authorities. The Committee further desire to be apprised 
whether a recent decision to continue even if States do not respond withi n 60 days 
applies to the Departmental Schemes too.  
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The recommendation/observation of the Committee has been noted. Further, it is 
also stated that against the BE/RE 2019-20 of Rs 8885.00 crore, the total expenditure of 
the Department was Rs 8729.53 crore which was 98.25% of BE/RE of 2019 -20. 
However, the Department has made the following steps for receiving the complete 
adequate proposals and Utilization Certificates etc from the State Governments/Union 
Territory Administrations for releasing the financial assistance: 
 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  has designated Divisional 
Heads as Nodal Officers for various regions and State Governments/Union Territory 
Administrations. During the field visits of Officers o f this Department to States/UTs, 
discussions are held in order to identify constraints and to take corrective measures. 
 
 The Department of Social Justice and Empowerment  also organizes Conferences of 
State Social Welfare Ministers and the State Social Welfare Secretaries wherein all 
the schemes of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment are reviewed.  
 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

32 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.25) 
4.3 The Committee note that Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojana (BJRCY) is 
meant for construction of hostels for Scheduled Castes students to enable and 
encourage children/students to attain quality education. This scheme is a crucial one as 
it provides hostels which are immensely beneficial to the students hailing from rural and 
remote areas of the country. However to their dismay, the Scheme is not performing 
well. The Committee observe a trend of under utilization of funds since 2015 -16 under 
this scheme exc ept in 2016 -17. In 2017 -18, against the RE of Rs 155.00 crore, the 
Department utilized only Rs 74.91 crore which is less than 50 per cent of the budgetary 
allocation. In 2019 -20, the Department was allocated Rs 107.76 crore which was 
reduced downward to Rs  25.00 crore at RE stage. Out of RE of Rs 25 crore, Rs 07.60 
crore only was utilized till 31.01.2020. The trend of funds released also gives a dismal 
picture of hardly 7 -8 recipient States/UTs out of 17. Out of these only Kerala has 
established 100 hostels and rest are just a sprinkling, which is extremely disappointing. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for such dismal performance 
and the steps taken to address the issues affecting adversely the utilization of the funds. 
The Committee further find that the demand of Rs 107.00 crore as BE in 2019 -20 was 
made as the Department had put forth a proposal for construction of five residential 
schools sent to the Ministry of Finance for approval which, however, was turned down. 
Taking into cons ideration the number of boys hostels constructed under this scheme 
which is very less, the Committee exhort the Department to revisit their proposal of 
residential schools as this is a better option for serving the purpose of this scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
4.4 During the year 2017 -18, a proposal for revision of the Scheme, Babu Jagjivan 
Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY)‟ to include one new component i.e. „Setting up of 
Residential Schools for SC Girls‟ was moved for consideration of the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC). In anticipation of approval of the proposal, additional funds 
were allocated under BJRCY for 2017 -18 and 2018-19. However, the proposal was not 
recommended for implementation by the Expenditure Finance Committee. 
 

33 
 
 Under Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY), Central assistance is 
provided to eligible implementing agencies for construction/ expansion of hostels for 
SC boys and girls. As per the extant Scheme guidelines of Babu Jagjivan Ram 
Chhatrawas Yojna (BJRCY), 50% of the admis sible cost estimate, which is ₹ 3.00 
lakh per inmate, is provided to State Governments for construction of SC boys 
hostels. Therefore, there has been less response from the State Governments in 
submitting proposals for construction of boys hostels under BJ RCY in comparison to 
girls hostels where 100% of the admissible cost estimate is provided to them.  
 
 Due to above mentioned reasons, budget allocated in RE for 2017 -18 & 2018 -19 
could not be utilized. Also, the Scheme guidelines of BJRCY have been revised 
during 2018 -19 and as per the revised scheme guidelines, admissible central 
assistance for construction/ expansion of SC hostels to State Govts./ UT 
Administrations/Central Universities/ State Universities is released in two instalments. 
Whereas, as per th e earlier scheme guidelines, there was a provision for release of 
100% admissible central assistance to these implementing agencies at the time of 
sanction of the hostels.  
 
 In some cases, it was observed that the hostels could not be constructed at the si te 
where it was sanctioned due to land disputes arising out post -sanction. Therefore, 
under the revised guidelines, submission of a certificate by the implementing 
agencies regarding availability of land without dispute and encroachment has also 
been made mandatory.  
 
 Sanction for construction of hostels under the Scheme depends upon receipt of 
proposals from the State Governments and other implementing agencies concerned 
along with the complete documents/information required as per the scheme 
guidelines, such as detailed cost estimate, land documents, building plan, site plan, 
list of SC students of feeder Institutions/colleges, pending UCs, physical & financial 
reports of the hostels sanctioned earlier, etc. In fact, the State Governments submit 
the propos als for construction of hostels under BJRCY as per their requirements. 
However, in many cases the State Governments and other implementing agencies do 

34 
 
not send the complete proposals/ documents for consideration in time, even after 
repeated reminders from t he Department. As a result, less number of hostels are 
sanctioned with less utilization of funds. Also, the State Governments/ UT 
Administrations are requested regularly to submit the proposals for construction of 
hostels in the districts which are not covered under the scheme. The Department has 
taken various steps for utilization of funds, such as conducting regular video 
conferencing and meetings of the Steering Committee. During the Steering 
Committee meetings held on 28.6.2019 and   07.01.2020, impleme nting agencies 
were impressed upon to ensure timely submission of the requisite 
documents/information so that the hostels could be sanctioned in the respective 
States.  
 
 The Department now has again proposed to restructure the existing Scheme of 
BJRCY by i ntroducing Ambedkar Navodaya Vidyalaya (ANV) scheme for setting up 
of residential schools for SCs for class VI – XII across the country. In - principle 
approval of D/o Expenditure is awaited on the proposal.  In the absence of proposals 
complete in all resp ects and as per the scheme guidelines, no hostel could be 
sanctioned in the other States during 2019-20.  
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.12) 
4.5 The Committee note that begging is one of the most serious social issues in 
India. There are few beggars in the country who beg because they are 
handicapped/unable to work/old/divyangjan etc. At the same time, there are many 
others who live far below the p overty line being asset -less and illiterate and opt for 
begging to earn their livelihood. However, it is common knowledge that in big 

35 
 
metropolises, beggar mafia operate to exploit peoples‟ sentiments, which is greater 
threat to social fabric and a cause of  immense national shame before the world. The 
Committee are of the considered view that the Department have been allocated the 
subject of beggary and hence they are responsible to deal with the menace of beggary 
in the society. The Committee find in this c onnection that the Department have initiated 
a pilot project to identify and rehabilitate the beggars in cities of the country. The 
Committee feel that the Department should have taken this step long back. They would 
like them to be apprised of the outcome  of the project in Indore and of the progress in 
other cities in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
4.6 The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment proposed to formulate a scheme 
for persons engaged in the act of begging which would cover identificatio n, 
rehabilitation, provision of medical facilities, counselling, education, skill development 
with the support of State Governments/UTs/Local Urban Bodies and Voluntary 
Organizations, institutions etc. The scheme is being implemented in 10 selected cities 
on Pilot basis from FY 2019 -20. The scheme would be extended to other cities on the 
basis of the outcome of the pilot project in subsequent year. 
 The 10 identified cities are Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, 
Bangalore, Lucknow, Patna, Nagpur, In dore under the  "Scheme for 
Comprehensive Rehabilitation of Beggars ".In the FY 2019 -20, total ₹ 25 Crore 
and for FY 2020 -21 ₹ 100 Crore has been allocated to the Scheme. 100% 
Assistance under the Scheme shall be provided to the States/UTs for its 
implementation. The progress of implementation of the project shall be monitored 
by the concerned State Government/UT Administration. The Scheme has following 
components:-  
(i)  Survey/identification  
(ii) Mobilization  
(iii) Rescue /Shelter Home  
(iv) Comprehensive rehabilitation 
  

36 
 
 Annual Action Plan from the Municipal Corporation of Indore, Patna and 
Hyderabad has been received in the Ministry and an amount of Rs 1.5 Crore to 
Indore and Rs 2.0 Crore to Hyderabad and Rs 0.94 Cr. to Patna Municipal 
Corporation (50% of 1st instalment) have been released.  
 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                         Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.9) 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the utilization of the resources by the Scheduled Caste 
Division (SCD) since 2017 -18 shows that in the year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 Rs 34.18 
crore and Rs 21.67crore were surrendered due to non -utilisation of the funds. Similarly, 
in the year 2019-20 out of Rs 6,13 5 crore, the Division incurred Rs 3,980 crore only (till 
the end of January, 2020) leaving the rest Rs 2,155 crore to be spent in the remaining 
two months of the financial year. This implies that 35 per cent of the allocated resources 
remained unspent till the end of January 2020. 
 
The spending pattern by the Backward Classes Division (BCD) shows that 
division has surrendered Rs 65.69 crore in 2017 -18, over spent Rs 22 crore in 2018 -19 
and spent Rs 1,174 crore only out of Rs 1833 crore in the year 2019 -20 till the end of 
January 2020, leaving the rest Rs 659 crore to be spent in the remaining two months of 
the financial year.  
 
The utilization pattern by the Social Defence, Media and Research (SDMR) 
reveals that Rs 1 crore was over spent in 2017 -18 vis-a-vis RE for the year, and Rs 107 
crore in 2018 -19 over and above RE for the year. In 2019 -20, however, as on January 
2020 the Department are yet to spend Rs 134 crore of the RE allocation Rs 434 crore).  
It is hence evident that in Scheduled Castes Division (SCD) there has been 
continuous under utilization of the allocated amount which is largely due to non receipt 
of the UCs and c omplete proposals from States/UTs in time. Though the Committee 
acknowledge that the steep under utilization in 2019 -20, could partly be attributable to 
the slow pace of disbursement due to National Elections in April/ May, 2019, they hope 
that substantial funds remaining would be spent in the closing months of the financial 
year 2019-20. While specific recommendations will follow under the relevant chapters in 

38 
 
this report, non receipt of UCs and complete proposals in time be taken up at regular 
intervals with the State/UT Governments to have any meaningful impact.  
The Committee while expressing their concern for surrendering ₹ 65.69 crore  
vis-a-vis RE in 2017 -18, appreciate full utilization and in fact over spending of the 
provisions allocated at RE stage  under Backward Classes Division (BCD) in 2018 -19 
and hope the Department would be able to make up the shortfall (Rs 659 crore) in 
spending witnessed in 2019 -20 (till the end of January, 2020), in the remaining two 
months of the financial year. They would like to be apprised of the outcome in this 
regard.  
With regard to the spending pattern of the SDMR, it may be seen that during 
2017-18 and 2018 -19 the actual exceeded the REs and in the year 2019 -20 , the 
Department is yet to incur Rs 134 crore out of RE of Rs 434 crore at the end of January, 
2020. The Committee would like to be apprised of the actual in the final quarter of the 
financial year.  
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 Against the total allocation of Rs 8885.00 crore at RE stage, the expenditure of 
the Department is ₹ 8729.53 crore during the year 2019 -20 which is 98.25%.  The 
details of  Division - wise i.e.   Scheduled Caste Division , Backward Classes Division  
and Social Defence, Media and Research,  Budget Estimate , Revise Estimate, Actual 
Expenditure and % of Exp. w.r.t. RE of the Department for the year 2019 -20 is given  
below:  
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                        Dated  3rd September 2020 
  Annexure-I 
 

39 
 
BE, RE and Expenditure of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment for the 
year 2019-20 
Sl. 
No. 
Programme/Schemes Budget 
Estimate  
(B.E) 
Final 
Estimate 
(F.E) 
Actual 
Expenditure  
% of 
Exp. 
w.r.t. FE 
 
Schemes  
SCD Division  
1. Post Matric Scholarship for SCs 2926.82 2728.21 2711.31 99.38 
2. Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs 30.00   13.37  13.26 99.18 
3. Pradhan Mantri Adharsh Gram Yojna 390.00 717.96 717.83 99.98 
4. Strengthening of machinery for 
Enforcement of Protection of Civil   
Right Act 1955 and Prevention of 
Atrocity Act, 1989. 
530.00 629.60 619.64 
 
98.42 
 
5. Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatrawas Yojna 107.76 25.54 25.00 97.87 
6. Assistance to Vol. Orgns. for SCs  70.00 68.60 67.17 97.92 
7. Pre-matric Scholarships for the 
children of those engaged in unclean 
occupation. 
5.00 29.50 29.40 99.66 
8. State Sch. Castes Development 
Corporations 
30.00 20.20 20.00 99.01 
9. Up gradation of Merit of SC 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10
. 
Special Central Assistance to 
Sceduled Caste Sub Plan  
1100.00 1114.73 1114.73 100.00 
11
. 
National Fellowship for SCs  360.00 246.66 246.66 100.00 
12
. 
Self Employment Scheme of Manual 
Scavengers    
110.00 84.80 84.80 100.00 
13
. 
National Overseas Scholarship for 
SCs.  
20.00 30.00 25.68 85.60 
14
. 
Top Class Education for SCs  40.50 40.05 39.71 99.15 
15
. 
Pre Matric Scholarship for SCs  355.00 354.61 352.70 99.46 
Total SCD Division  6075.09 6103.83 6067.89 99.41 
Backward Classes Division 
1. Pre-matric Scholarship to OBCs 91.50 220.00 220.00 201.31 201.31 
2. Assistance for Skill Development of 
OBCs, DNTs and EBCs 
30.00 34.00 34.00 100.00 
3. Boys & Girls Hostels for OBCs  30.00 21.30 21.29 99.95 

40 
 
4. Post-Matric Scholarship for OBCs  1360.00 1375.28 1299.19 94.47 
5. Scheme for Educational and 
Economical Development of 
Denotified and Nomadic Tribes 
10.00 10.00 9.00 90.00 
6. Post Matric Scholarship for 
Economically Backward Classes 
23.00 14.00 13.99 99.93 
7. Interest Subsidy on Overseas Studies 
of Other Backward Classes 
15.00 26.09 26.09 100.00  
8. National Fellowship for Other 
Backward Classes. And Economically 
Backward Classes. 
 
70.00 52.50 52.50 100 
Total Backward Classes Division  1758.00 1753.17 1657.37 94.54 
Social Defence, Media and Research 
1. Scheme for prevention of Alcoholism 
and Substance (Drugs) Abuse.  
130.00 112.00 108.93 97.26 
2. Research Studies and Publication 5.00 5.00 2.56 51.20 
3. Information & Mass Education Cell  45.00 14.66 10.01 68.28 
4. Assistance to Voluntary 
Organizations for Providing Social 
Defence Services 
3.00 3.00 3.00 100 
5. Integrated Programmes for Sr. 
Citizens 
90.10 107.49 107.30 99.82 
6. National Action Plan for Senior 
Citizens 
40.00 31.51 31.50 99.97 
7. National Survey on Drug Abuse 
andSubstance Abuse 
0.99 0.09 0.00 0.00 
8. National Action Plan on DrugDemand 
Reduction 
135.00 136.50 134.88 98.81 
9. Integrated Programme for 
Rehabilitation of Beggars 
5.00 21.64 21.14 97.69 
10
. 
Scheme for Transgender Persons  5.00 5.00 4.50 90.00 
11
. 
Rashtriya Vayoshri Yojana  0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
Total Social Defence  459.10 436.90 423.82 97.01 
Grand Total for all schemes of the 
Department. 
8292.19  8293.90 8149.08 98.25 
Non Schemes 
Establishment 
1. Secretariat  51.93 53.17 48.94 92.04 

41 
 
 
  
2. National Commission for Scheduled 
Caste.  
24.11 23.94 20.30 84.80 
3. National Commission  for 
Safaikaramcharis 
9.46 9.06 7.53 83.11 
4. National Commission  for Backward 
Classes  
6.30 6.30 5.49 87.14 
5. Development Welfare Board for  
Denotified and Nomadic Tribes 
 
0.00 0.40 0.00 0.00 
Total Establishment  91.80 92.87 82.26 88.58 
Autonomous Bodies 
1. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Foundation  1.00 1.00 1.00 100 
2. National Institute of Social Defence  25.00 22.55 22.55 100.00 
3. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar National  
Memorial. 
5.00 4.67 4.67 100.00 
4. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar International  15.00 15.00 14.97 99.80 
Total Autonomous Bodies  46.00 43.22 43.19 99.93 
Investments 
1. National Scheduled Caste Finance 
and  Development Corporation 
180.00 14.60 14.60 100.00 
2. National Safai Karamcharis Finance 
& Development Corporation 
35.00 35.00 35.00 100 
3. Venture Capital Funds for SCs  60.00 160.00 160.00  100.00 
4. Venture Capital Fund for Backward 
Classes 
50.00 90.00 90.00 100.00 
5. Credit Guarantee fund for SCs  0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 
6. National Backward Classes Finance 
& Development Corporation 
130.00 155.40 155.40 100.00 
Total Investments  455.01 455.01 455.00 100.00 
Total Non Schemes  592.81 591.10 580.45 98.20 
Grand Total Schemes + Non  Schemes 8885.00 8885.00 8729.53 98.25 

42 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10) 
5.3 The Committee are informed that the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
have created a Parliamentary Constituency Level Committee for every Parliamentary 
Constituency and associated the Member of Parliament of that constituency with it. As 
local representatives are well aware of the ground realities of their constituencies, their 
feedback could be of immense help. They can also monitor the pro gress of the 
Schemes/Programmes being implemented in their areas for the welfare of SCs, OBCs, 
Senior Citizens and other target groups of the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment, and also pursue the issue of timely submission of UCs and proposals 
from State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
form Parliamentary Constituency Level Committees on these lines and also ensure the 
involvement of the MPs of that constituency in this Committee as this would only 
improve the efficacy and implementation of the schemes. 
  

43 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The recommendation/observation of the Committee has been noted. 
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                            Dated  3rd September 2020 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.43) 
 
5.5 The Committee note that Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) established by the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of managing, administering and carrying on the important and long -term 
schemes and programmes identified during the Centenary Celebrations of Dr. B.R. 
Ambedkar. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Foundation is running schemes like (i) Medical Aid 
Scheme; (ii) National Merit Award Scheme for meritorious students of Secondary (Class 
10th) Examination; (iii) National Merit Award Scheme for meritorious students of Senior 
Secondary (Class12th) Examination belonging to Scheduled Castes; (iv) Celebration of 
Birth/Death Anniversaries of Great Saints; (v) Social Integration through Inter -Caste 
Marriages; etc. While there is full utilization of the fund allocated, the Committee are of 
the view that apart from celebration of Birth/Death Anniversaries of Great Saints, there 
is not much awareness of other schemes among the intended beneficiaries, regrettably 
not even the public representatives –MPs/MLAs. They, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take appropriate measures to give more publicity to the 
schemes/programmes run b y this Foundation through print/electronic/social media as 
well as to the MPs/MLAs/officials of SC Districts, periodically, so that the intended 
beneficiaries become aware and take advantage of these schemes/programmes. The 
Committee would like to know about the steps taken by the Department to publicize this 
scheme in urban as well as rural areas.  
  

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 The Recommendation/observation of the Parliamentary Committee has been 
noted. However, the following steps have been taken by the Department to publicize 
this scheme in urban as well as rural areas:- 
 
 The Foundation has already taken action for extensive awareness campaign in print 
and electronic media about the Schemes being implemented by the Foundation.  
 
 The Foundation has also involved Dr Ambedkar Chairs to spread awareness about 
the Schemes at regional basis. During seminars, symposia etc organized by the 
Chairs functioning in different State and Central Universities, DAF personnel are 
deputed to inform and clarify the query of the participants relating to the Dr 
Ambedkar Foundation and Schemes in operation.  
 All the Schemes have been converted into FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) 
format to share with the public.  
 
 Actions for awareness campaign in the m asses about the detail provisions under 
the DAF schemes, eligibility and mandatory requirements etc., are being taken 
involving social media, community radio, website etc.  
 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                            Dated 3rd September 2020 
 

45 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.44) 
5.7 The Committee find that under Dr. Ambedkar Scheme of Social Integration 
through Inter-Caste Marriages the procedure for getting the verification of the marriage 
from the States/UTs is very time taking and cumbersome which sometimes takes up to 
2-3 years de feating the very purpose of the scheme. As  the Scheme aims to reduce 
caste prejudice and caste based discrimination, the Committee desire that the 
Department should streamline the procedure for verification of inter castes marriages 
from State/UT Governme nts and direct them to set a time line to complete this 
procedure which should not be more than 15 days. The Department should also ensure 
that the money provided to the beneficiaries is finally given to them, that too within two 
months of marriage. The Committee also desire that the amount of Rs 2.5 lakh provided 
under this scheme should be raised to Rs 5.00 lakh to encourage inter -caste marriages 
which the State Government of Rajasthan is already providing under this scheme.  
Reply of the Government 
5.8 The Recommendation/observation of the Parliamentary Committee has been 
noted. However, the following steps have been taken by the Department to raise the 
amount from Rs 2.5 lakh  to Rs 5.00 lakh to encourage inter-caste marriages :- 
 
 The incentive Scheme f or Inter -Caste Marriage is already existing at State Level 
and the incentives provided to such couples under the State Schemes are also the 
grants given by the Central Govt. for this purpose.  
 Since the process of document verification is complex, the DAF inter-caste scheme 
is being modified / re -drafted to streamline the procedure and to do away with 
multiple recommendations and verification of documents.  
 The provision of accepting applications online is being worked out in the modified 
scheme to expedite  the process of verification and transfer of incentive directly to 
the beneficiary after online confirmation from the office of concerned DM/DC/ 
authority.  
 As regard to the recommendation of enhancing the incentive amount from ₹ 2.50 
lakhs to ₹ 5.00 lakhs, it is stated that the DAF Scheme to provide incentive to the 
inter-caste marriage couples is in addition to the similar scheme in operation by the 
respective State Govts. and the beneficiaries get incentive under DAF scheme in 

46 
 
addition to the amount / in centive the couples get under the respective State 
Schemes.   
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                            Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.12) 
5.9 The Committee are of the view that many a time the intended beneficiaries may 
not be aware of the existence of such a scholarship scheme as there are no awareness 
programmes to create awareness of the sch emes. The Committee are further of the 
view that public representatives – MPs and MLAs are not made aware of the schemes 
leave alone the intended beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
awareness programmes may be conducted at regular inter vals by the Department 
especially in rural areas so that more and more students can avail this scholarship. For 
this, the Department can involve District Magistrates of every district and can have a 
word with them on monthly or bi-monthly basis at Secretary Level also.  
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 Guidelines and benefits of the Schemes, eligibility and rates of Scholarships are 
uploaded on the website of the Ministry for awareness of the beneficiaries. Further, the 
benefits of the Scheme are broadcasted through All India Radio and Doordarshan also. 
The State Govt. also publishes the Scheme through their local dailies and the School 
administration also issued notice intimating the date of applies for Scholarship. District 
Administration needs to launch an awareness camp with the representative of Gram  

47 
 
Panchayat or local bodies so that not a single beneficiary should be remained to avail 
the benefit of the Scheme. This Ministry will take up the matter with State Governments 
and Union Territory Administrations.  
  Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice and Empowerment) 
 
 
O.M. No. 1-1/2020-Parl.                                                            Dated 3rd September 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                    RAMA DEVI 
                       Chairperson, 
10 November, 2020                                                   Standing Committee on 
24 Kartika, 1942 (Saka)                  Social Justice and  
             Empowerment  
  

48 
 
Annexure 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) HELD ON  
TUESDAY, 10TH NOVEMBER, 2020 
 
 The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, 
Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
   PRESENT 
 
  SMT.  RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
  
   MEMBERS 
   LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
3. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
4. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
5. Smt. Geeta Kora 
6. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
7. Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras 
8. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
10. Shri N. Chandrasegharan 
11. Shri P. L. Punia 
12. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
  SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
 
 

49 
 
*****   *****   *****   ***** 
 
*****   *****   *****   ***** 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and congratulated Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras, MP (LS) for his nomination 
to this Committee.  The Chairperson, then informed the Committee that the term of  Shri 
P.L. Punia, MP (RS)  was ending on 25 th November, 2020 and expressed appreciation 
for his support and valuable contribution to the functioning of the Committee to which 
Shri Punia reciprocated.  Thereafter, the Committee paid their humble tribute to Shri 
Durga Prasad Balli and Shri Ashok Gasti, Me mbers during the previous term of the 
Committee (2019 -20) on their sad demise. All the Members and officers of the 
Committee stood in silence for one minute in honour of the departed souls. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draf t Reports of the 
Committee :- 
(i) 15th Report of the Committee on Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 6 th Report of the 
Committee on “Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment.” 
(ii) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
(iii) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
(iv) *****   *****   *****   ***** 
4. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. Then the Reports were adopted without any modifications.  The 
Committee authorised the Chairperson to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament in the next Session.   
5. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
 

50 
 
6. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
7. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
8. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
9. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
10. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
11. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
12. *****   *****   *****   ***** 
 (The Committee then adjourned.) 
______________________________ 
*****Matter not related to this Report. 
 
  

51 
 
APPENDIX 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE   SIXTH  REPORT OF THE  STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT   
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
  Total Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
17  
II. Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government 
(Paragraph Nos. 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 3.26, 3.37, 
3.38, 4.11. 5.3 and 5.8.).  
 
9 52.94% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government – Nil.  
 
- - 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted and which require reiteration 
(Paragraph Nos. 2.8, 3.25 and 5.12). 
However all these paras may be commented 
upon in Chapter – I.  
 
3 17.64% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature (Paragraph Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 
3.43, 3.44 and 4.12.). 
5 29.41% 
 
   
 