   
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants  
(2019-20)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and  Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
 
ELEVENTH  REPORT   
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020/Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
i 
 
11 

ELEVENTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2019-2020) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment) (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants  
(2019-20)' of the Ministry of Social Justice and  Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 10.09.2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.02.2021 
                                    Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05.02.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2020/Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
ii 


 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE iv 
 INTRODUCTION vi 
CHAPTER -I Report 1 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
16 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
27 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
28 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
32 
 ANNEXURE  
 Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment held on 
06.08.2020.             
 
37 
 APPENDIX  
 Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the   
recommendations contained in the Second Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2019-20) on Demands for Grants 2019-20 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
  
39 
                                         
 
iii 
    

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20) 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Durga Prasad Rao Balli 
  4. Shri Shafiqur Rahman Barq 
  5. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar 
14. Shri Vijay Kumar 
15. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
16. Dr. Lorho S. Pfoze 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
 #18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Arjun Singh 
20. Smt. Supriya Sule 
21. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
  *23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
 24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
 25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
  *26. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
  *27. Shri Ashok Gasti 
  *28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri P. L. Punia 
                        *30.  Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
 31. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
_________________ 
# Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 09.12.2019. 
*    Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020.  
  
iv 

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
2. Smt. Madhu Bhutani  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2019-20) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Eleventh Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Second 
Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2019 -20)' of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment ( Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
12th December, 2019. The Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities have furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 13th May, 2020 .  The Report was 
considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 6th August, 2020. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/recomme ndations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report. 
 
  
     NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
6 August, 2020                                            Standing Committee on 
15 Shravana, 1942 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
Empowerment  
 
 
vi 

CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Comm ittee contained in their Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on " Demands for Grants (201 9-20)" of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
1.2 The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on  
12th December, 2019. It contained 12 observations/recommendations. Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observation/recommendations have been received and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Paragraph Nos. 3.11, 3.12, 4.17, 4.19, 5.4, 5.5, 6.9 and 6.10 
(Total: 8, Chapter II) 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which th e Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's reply: 
 Nil. 
    (Total: Nil, Chapter III)  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in r espect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted and which require reiteration:  
 Paragraph No. 2.14 
(Total: 1, Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government are 
of interim in nature: 
 Paragraph Nos. 2.13, 3.10 and 4.18  
                                                       (Total: 3, Chapter V)
   
 
  

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Replies on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken in respect 
of the Recommendations contained in Chapter V of thi s Report for which interim replies  
have been given by the Government may be furnished at the earliest and in any case not 
later than three months after the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Ministry which need 
reiteration or merit comments. 
A. Budgetary Provision and Utilization 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13) 
1.5 The Committee in their Second Report had recommended as follows: 
"The committee note that during the last three years i.e. 2016 -17, 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, the 
actual expenditure remained above 95%. In 2018-19, the allocation was ₹1070.00 crore and the 
actual expenditure was ₹1017.56 crore thus showing utilization of 95.1 0% of the total 
expenditure. The Committee would urge the Department to strive for 100% achievement under 
its flagship schemes/programmes as apart from benefitting more and more PwDs, it will 
strengthen the Department‟s demand for an enhanced budgetary all ocation in next fiscal year. 
At the same time, the Committee feel concerned about the uneven flow of expenditure in the 
current fiscal year. They find from the presentation made by the Department for PwDs during 
the course of oral evidence of their represe ntatives before the Committee that the actual 
expenditure under all the Schemes/Programmes as on 31.10.2019 is ₹373.21 crore, which is 
mere 30% of the total BE/RE o f ₹1204.90 crore. The Department will be required to spend 70% 
of the BE/RE in the next 5 months which could ultimately result in rush of expenditure in the last 
quarter of 2019-20 fiscal. The Committee opine that if a large portion of RE remains unspent till 
last quarter then in the haste of achieving expenditure targets, not only the scrutiny  and 
examination of proposals get compromised,  but there remains hardly any scope of monitoring 
the progress too. The Committee feel that the Department had been setup separately in 2014 to 
focus on sole attention on Divyangjans and hence ensuring their w elfare through timely and 
effective utilization of funds has an enhanced humanitarian angle too, apart from  
a Constitutional duty of the Department. They, therefore, impress upon the Department to 
continue handholding exercises to guide the State Governme nts so that better and timely 

3 
 
proposals are received and a balanced utilization of funds in all the four quarters of a financial 
year is ensured." 
1.6 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated  as 
follows: 
"During the Financial year 2019 -20, as against the revised allocation of    ₹1100.00 crore, the 
Department has released an amount of ₹1016.18 crore which is 92.38% of the allocation.  
2. As submitted earlier to the Committee, the schemes under this Department are all  
Central Sector Schemes, where funds are released to the implementing agencies. Also, the 
Department itself has to ensure the monitoring and utilization of the funds released unlike in 
Centrally sponsored Schemes. The Major schemes/non scheme namely SIPDA,  DDRS, ADIP, 
Scholarship and National Institutes are demand driven based on the proposals received from 
States/UTs/Institutions/NGOs and individuals etc. Generally, proposals are received in the first  
2 quarters which are examined resulting in major releases in the two subsequent quarters. 
3. Under Scholarship Schemes, out of six components of Umbrella scheme - „Scholarships 
for Students with Disabilities‟, Pre -Matric, Post-Matric and Top Class Educations Scholarships 
are being implemented through National Scholarship Portal. The schemes for other Ministries 
are also on boarded on the portal. The portal was open for students on 15.07.2019 and closed 
on 15.11.2019. The last date for verification of applications by the State Government was 
31.01.2020. Therefore major chunk of funds were released in the last quarter of financial year. 
4. There were several reasons attributable to the slow trend of expenditure seen in  
2019-20:- 
a) Imposition of Model Code of Conduct as a result of General Elections due to which the  
pace of expenditure during the 1st quarter was slow. 
b) The scheme of NAP was reviewed so that the outgo reaches the correct beneficiaries as 
per laid down guidelines. 
c)  Skill Training has been undergoing a rigorous overhaul this year to enable streamlining 
of the process, to check financial irregularities by Empanelled Training Partners (ETPs) 
and to ensure a robust and secure fund flow mechanism. These initiatives have slowed 
down the process of release of funds.  

4 
 
d) Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled Bio -Metric Attendance 
System (AEBAS), Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), Video Conferencing (VC) facility, 
trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory features at training centres. 
e) Training is imparted through Empanelled Training Partners (ETPs). Validity of most of 
the ETPs has been expired. 
f) UCs for from State Governments were not received under SIPDA Scheme. 
5. Department has therefore taken steps to ameliorate this situation. These include:- 
a) Reviewed the Schemes to expend the outreach of the schemes running in the 
Department. 
b) Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled Bio -Metric Attendance 
System (AEBAS), Closed Circuit Televisio n (CCTV), Video Conferencing (VC) facility, 
trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory features at training centre. 
c) In the initial stage inspection of centres was carried out by the officers of the Department. 
However, in order to expedite the process  the work of the centre validation has been 
assigned to a 3rd party agency Skill Council for Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD). 
d) To revalidate the empanelment of existing ETPs, efforts are being made to add new 
organisations as ETPs. 
e) Adding Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) as Programme Implementation Agencies (PIAs). 
f) Through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL), the Department is exploring the possibilities 
of training of those Divyangjan employed in unorganised sector but not yet availed any 
formal training. 
g) State/UT Governments letters have been written from Secretary, DEPwD to respective 
Chief Secretaries of the States to furnish Utilization Certificates for previous Grant 
released under SIPDA scheme.  
h) Regular inspections, before, during and after the projec t are carried out to measure  
the work done, before grant is released. 
 
i) Regular video conferences are held with States/UTs to review progress of work being 
made in the States. 

5 
 
j) Screening Committee meetings are being held at short intervals to take up cases 
proposed by stakeholders for carrying out accessibility in Govt. buildings under the SIPDA 
scheme. 
k) Advertisements released by the Department across the Country in National and regional 
newspapers. In addition, an advertisement released in North East (NE) s tates in different 
regional languages.  
l) State Governments requested to popularize these schemes through advertisements by 
their Social Welfare Departments". 
  

6 
 
1.7 The Committee  note that the final overall expenditure of the Department under 
various Schemes  had been 92.38 per cent of the Budget allocation during 2019 -20, 
whereas during the year 2018 -19 it was 95.10 per cent.  However, it is obvious that the 
figure has been arrived at the conclusion of the Financial Year 2019 -20 hence the 
observation of the C ommittee on the slow and uneven pace of expenditure and the need 
to speed up procedures still holds good.  The Department in their Action Taken Reply 
have submitted various reasons for slow trend of expenditure in 2019 -20 such as 
reviewing of National Acti on Plan, overhauling of skill training, non -receipt of Utilization 
Certificates from State Governments under SIPDA Scheme etc.  From the reply of the 
Government, the Committee note the steps taken by the Department to address various 
issues like implementation of Central Guidelines of Aadhar based bio -metric attendance, 
closed circuit TVs, Video C onferencing facility in training centres, assigning of 
revalidation of centres to 3rd party agency and adding Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) as 
programme Implementing Agencies (PIAs) etc.  As the Committee has been continuously 
underlining the significance of physically inspecting the progress of schemes by 
Departmental officers, they particularly appreciate steps like regular inspections/ video 
conferencing for revie wing of work done by the State Governments under various 
schemes.  The Committee are also satisfied to note the Recognition of Prior Learning 
(RPL) module in which the Department are exploring the possibilities to provide formal 
training to untrained Divya ngjans working in unorganized sector which shows the 
sensitivity of the Department towards potential beneficiaries of their schemes.  At the 
same time, the Committee feel that the Department should also provide regular training 
to their own personnel to enhance their skills in examining proposals received from State 
Governments so that the procedural aspects consume less time.   The Committee also 
desire the Department to conduct a n assessment  at the conclusion of Financial Year 
2020-21 to evaluate the impac t of these measures towards improving  the performance of 
the schemes as also the overall expenditure pattern and apprise them of the same.   
 
 
 

7 
 
B. Non-receipt of adequate proposals under major schemes 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14) 
1.8 The Committee, in their Second Report had recommended as follows:  
"The Committee note that during the year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, the actual expenditure under 
some major schemes viz (i) Scholarships for Students with Disabilities (ii) Indian Spinal Injury 
Centre (iii) Establishment of Institute of Sign Language, Research & Training Centre (ISLRTC), 
(iv) Support of Establishment/Modernization of Braille Presses, (v) Establishment of College for 
Deaf in 5 regions of the country, (vi) Establishment of Centre for Disability Sport s, (vii) 
Budgetary Support to National Trust (viii) Setting up of State Spinal Injury Centre, (ix) 
Establishment of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation was very low and  
the allocated budgetary amount was underutilized. The Committee are anguished that  
the Department has been citing repeatedly procedural excuses like non receipt of adequate 
proposals/delayed receipt of proposals, insufficient funds and approval of schemes  during  
the fag end of fiscals etc. for the same, which are not convincing enough. The Committee hence 
reiterate that the Department must adopt prudent fiscal management system and modify  
the procedures if required, to reduce multi -agency clearances and speed up submission  
of proposals." 
1.9 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated  as 
follows: 
"(i) Scholarships for Students with Disabilities: - During 2017-18 and 2018-19, an amount of 
₹56.95 crore and ₹108.22 crore w ere released respectively. Though, there is a shortfall in 
expenditure in 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, it may be noted that during FY 2018 -19, Financial 
disbursement has increased by ₹51.27 crore i.e. by 90.03%. 
2. For timely utilization of funds and to get sufficient number of applications under various 
components of the scheme, the Department has released two advertisements across the 
country on 20.7.2019 and 02.10.2019 to spread awareness and to sensitize all stak e holders.   
A special advertisement was also released with special focus on NE States on 02.10.2019. 
Besides, a video conference was also held with the State Nodal Officers on 11.10.2019 in order 
to expedite verification of applications by the educational institutes and State Nodal Officers.  

8 
 
(ii) Indian Spinal Injury Centre:- SFC has approved the scheme at the fag end of the F inancial 
Year 2018-19. Therefore, no funds were released from the financial year 2017-18 to 2018-19. 
(iii) Establishment of Institu te of Sign Language, Research & Training Centre (ISLRTC): - 
With regard to ISLRTC, it is submitted that ₹5.50 crore and ₹5.00 crore was allocated to the 
Institute during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 respectively. Centre has utilized ₹4.50 crore and  
₹4.85 crore during 2017-18 and 2018-19. 
(iv) Support of Establishment/Modernization of Braille Presses: - During 2017-18, fund was 
released for establishing 6 new Braille Presses, Capacity Augmentation of 2 existing Braille 
Presses and Modernization of 1 existing Brail le Press. Further to this, 12 organizations were 
supported for meeting their recurring expenditure. Though further request for recurring grant in 
aid was received, these could not be considered for insufficient supporting documents from 
implementing agenci es. There was no proposal received for establishment of new Braille 
presses during the year 2018 -19. In addition to this, the proposals received for recurring 
expenditure could not be considered for want of supporting documents from implementing 
agencies. 
(v) Establishment of College for Deaf in 5 regions of the country: - Proposals from only two 
deaf colleges namely National Institute of Speech and Hearing, (NISH) Thiruvananthapuram 
and  Shakuntala Mishra National Rehabilitation University, Lucknow were rec eived   During 
2017-18 and 2018 -19. The proposal from National Institute of Speech and Hearing, (NISH) 
Thiruvananthapuram was only received for non -recurring grants. This was released to them. 
However, since 2019 -20 no further proposals have been received from NISH or Shakuntala 
Mishra National Rehabilitation University, Lucknow. 
 (vi) Centre for Disability Sports: - XII Plan working group in its report, recommended 
establishment of Centre for Disability Sports (CDS). The project was included in the 12 th plan 
and was also part of the Budget Speech of 2014 -15. Since the proposal of setting up of CDS 
was under consideration from 2015 -16 in pursuance to the announcement made in the budget 
speech of 2014-15, token provisions were made from the year 2015 -16. The approval to set up 
first CDS at Gwalior was granted by the Cabinet in February 2019. Thus, the token budget 
provisions made from 2017 -18 to 2018-19 could not be utilized. During the financial year 2019 -
20, an amount of ₹15.07 crore was released to CPwD. 

9 
 
(vii) Budgetary Support to National Trust: - During 2017 -18, RE of ₹17 cr. was included  
₹13 cr. under General Head and ₹4 cr. under NER.  Though the entire allocation under General 
Head was utilized, the NER component could not be completely utilized du e non-availability of 
sufficient number of Registered Organizations in NER.   During the year 2018-19, the RE of ₹20 
was included ₹16 cr. under General Head and ₹4 cr. under NER.  Though the entire allocation 
under General Head was utilized, the NER com ponent could not be completely utilized due to 
non-availability of sufficient number of Registered Organizations in NER. 
2. In order to get sufficient proposals in NER, National Trust has been continuously 
undertaking awareness programmes like Regional Wor kshops / Seminars to motivate NGOs. In 
the North East Summit held in Guwahati on 12 to 13 July 2019, a presentation was made by the 
JS & CEO, National Trust about the schemes and activities of the National Trust. All the 
participants were requested to moti vate NGOs for joining with the National Trust. A meeting of 
all ROs of the North Eastern states was conducted on 08.07.19 for expansion of coverage of 
schemes and activities of the National Trust in North Eastern States.  
3. It may be noted that in Financi al Year 2019-20, an amount of ₹20.00 crore was allocated 
to National Trust and the entire allocation was utilized by National Trust. 
(viii) Setting up of State Spinal Injury Centre: -  During the year 2017 -18, entire allocation of  
₹5.00 crore was utilised and during 2018-19, an amount of ₹2.82 crore was released and due to 
insufficient proposals under the scheme, entire allocation could not be utilized. 
(ix) National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation: - In the budget announcement for the 
year 2014 -15, Hon‟ble Finance Minister declared Government‟s intention to establish NIMHR. 
Accordingly, the matter was pursued from 2015 -16 onwards and token budget provision was 
made. Final decision to set up NIMHR, initially at Bhopal, was taken in May 2018 and 
subsequently in October 2018, it was decided to establish this Institute on a piece of 25 acres of 
land allotted by Government of Madhya Pradesh at Sehore along Bhopal-Indore Highway. Thus, 
token provisions made in the year 2017 -18 was remained unutilized. The approval to establish 
NIMHR at Sehore was accorded in October 2018 and layout with other details were under 
finalization, only meagre amount could be utilized for some preparatory activities and substantial 
portion of allocation could not be utilized d uring 2018 -19.  NIMHR has been made functional 
from a temporary accommodation provided by Government of Madhya Pradesh at Sehore. 

10 
 
During the financial year 2019 -20, an amount of ₹17.26 crore was released for construction of 
NIMHR. 
However, observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance." 
  

11 
 
1.10 The Committee note the details of actual expenditure on all the nine heads pointed 
by them, which has been furnished by the Department of PwDs now in their Action Taken 
reply.  It is a matter of concern that even after their repeated recommendations that the 
Department must adopt prudent fiscal management system, modify the procedure to 
reduce multi-agency clearance and speed up submission of proposals, there was delay 
in release of funds mostly a s either the approvals were received late or there were no 
worthwhile proposals.  While the department has rightly focused on NE region, the 
Committee desire an equal attention on other areas too in Bihar, U ttar Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, etc . The reply of the Department contains often repeated 
excuses for under utilization of funds e.g.  approval of schemes by S tanding Finance 
Committee (SFC) at the fag end of fiscal  year, non-releasing of funds, non consideration 
of proposals due to required support ing documents, delay in approval of establishment 
of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation (NIMHR) at Sehore /Madhya Pradesh 
etc.   The Committee are also perturbed to observe that lack of adequate planning in 
formulation and launching of schem es as also their tardy implementation is leading to 
under utilisation of funds under many schemes.  For example, as against the setting up 
of five regional colleges for Deaf, the Department could manage to get proposals for only 
two and subsequently failed  to get proposals for recurr ing expenditure even for those 
two colleges.  Similarly, the establishment of NIMHR was announced in the Budget 
speech of Finance Minister for the year 2014 -15, but the site for accommodation of the 
same could be approved  only 3 years later, i.e.  in October, 2018  which led to non -
utilization of funds in 2018 -19.  The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the 
Department to launch their schemes after due-diligence to obviate delay in execution and 
the scope of underutilization of funds under their schemes.   
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
C. Motorized Tricycle 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10) 
1.11 The Committee in their second Report had recommended as follows: 
 "As a vast majority of PwDs come from the economically and socially backward sections 
of the society, they neither have the resources to meet the cost difference of motorized tricycle 
nor the access to MPs/MLAs/CSR funds.  The issue of the Department bearing full cost of 
motorized tricycle has been commented upon many times in the past, particula rly in this 
committee‟s 48 th and 55 th Reports, 16th Lok Sabha. It seems that the Department has hitherto 
remained evasive on the matter. Now, the Department have statedly decided to consider the 
issue of revision of cost norms during the forthcoming appraisal for revision of ADIP Scheme, 
which is likely to  be held during next financial year. As the next financial year is approaching 
now, the Committee are optimistic that the Department would sincerely take up this issue and 
bring it to the desired conclusion to mitigate the plight of PwDs in need of motorized tricycle." 
1.12 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated  as 
follows: 
 "The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. The matter may be 
considered during appraisal of the ADIP Scheme."  

13 
 
1.13 The Committee in their  earlier Reports have been repeatedly recommending that 
the Department must bear the entire cost of motorized tricycle to be provided under the 
ADIP Scheme. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department have now 
expressed their intend to comply with the C ommittee’s long pending demand and would 
consider it during appraisal of the ADIP Scheme. The Committee strongly recommend 
that the issue be presented for approval during the said appraisal and all the procedural 
pre-requisites for revision of cost norms be readied in right earnestness. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
D. Increase in Disability Pension Amount 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18) 
1.14 The Committee in their Second Report had recommended as follows: 
 "The Committee is pained to find that some of the State Governments are giving less 
than ₹500/- per month as Disability Pension to PwDs. They fail to understand as to how can a 
person survive with this paltry amount wh ich is not even sufficient to meet bare minimum basic 
needs of an individual. The Committee firmly believe that lack of any skill to earn and a meager 
amount as pension forces many PwDs to take up begging outside religious places, at traffic 
signals etc. in order to survive. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central 
Government must increase its contribution from ₹300/- to PwDs pensioners to a reasonable 
amount and also explore the possibility of making it mandatory for every State/UT Go vernment 
to give some amount with a provision for revision periodically to help PwDs to cope up with 
inflation, as Disability Pension. In need be Central Government should have a relook at the 
existing policies too in this direction."  
1.15 The Department of Empowerment of PwDs in their action taken reply have stated as 
follows: 
 "Ministry of  Rural Development has been requested to review Indira Gandhi National 
Disability Pension Scheme for increasing quantum of  Disability Person from ₹300/- per PwDs 
per month to a reasonable amount (Copy at Annexure A)." 

15 
 
1.16 Having noted the fact that some State Governments are giving less than ₹ 500/ - per 
month as disability pension to PwDs, the Committee had recommended that the Central 
Government must increase its con tribution from ₹ 300/ - to PwDs pensioners to a 
reasonable amount.  The C ommittee are happy to note that  the Department have 
approached the Ministry of Rural Development for enhancing the quantum of Disability 
Pension being provided to PwDs under Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme 
in order to ensure increasing the amount of  ₹ 300/- per month to a  reasonable amount.  
The Committee would like to impress  upon the Department  to continuously pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Rural Development till the amount of disability pension is 
enhanced sufficiently.  The Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.11) 
2.1 From the deposition of the Department, the Committee find that they are confident on 
being able to achieve the expenditure target fully under ADIP scheme by 31 st March, 2020 and 
have listed the activities to be undertaken during the remaining part of the financial year. 
However, the Committee have observed that the progress of expenditure has remained almost 
static between 30 th September, 2019 and 31 st October, 20 19 as the actual expenditure in 
September, 2019 was shown as ₹74.51 crore and in October, 2019 it was ₹74.61 crore against 
the Budget allocation of ₹230.00 crore. The committee would, therefore, like the Department to 
submit their phased actual expendit ure performance to the Committee in the last 4 months, to 
substantiate their claim on achieving 100 percent expenditure target.  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Under the ADIP scheme, the Budget Estimate was ₹230.00 crore which was reduced to 
₹222.50 crore at Revised Estimate (RE) stage due to demand of funds under other schemes of 
the Department.  Out of RE of ₹222.50 crore, an amount of ₹213.83 crore was released during 
2019-20. ₹8.67 crore (₹3.93 crore under ROC and ₹4.74 crore under NE) could not be released 
during 2019 -20. Though, sufficient proposals were processed for release of funds , however, 
due to COVID-19 pandemic, funds could not be released as holding of camps for distribution of 
aids and assistive devices was not possible in terms of Govt.  orders relating to lockdown and 
maintaining Social Distancing. Hence, to avoid parking of funds, grant -in-aid against the 
proposals of NGOs was not released during the month of March, 2020 on the advice of 
Integrated Finance Division of the Department.  
Details of funds released under ADIP Scheme during the last five months is as under:- 
Period Funds released (₹in crore) 
Upto to 31.10.2019 74.61 
From 1.11.2019 to 31.03.2020 139.22 
Total 213.83  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 

17 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12) 
2.3 The committee find that the Department is in the process of awarding contract for 
conduction third party Impact Evaluation Study of all their schemes in cluding ADIP scheme. The 
contract is expected to be awarded within this financial year and depending upon timeline 
provided by the awardee firm/institute, the study is expected to be completed by next financial 
year. The Committee is of the firm opinion th at the phrase “depending upon the timeline” makes 
the entire process open -ended with hardly any fixed targets. Hence the Committee recommend 
that the study needs to be completed in a time bound manner and therefore, urge the 
Department to carry out the stu dy within a stipulated time schedule and avoid undue extension 
of time-line. They would like to be apprised of the progress on the matter at action taken stage.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 As submitted earlier, the Department had issued advertisement for third party Impact 
Evaluation Studies  in respect of all its schemes/p rogrammes including the ADIP Scheme. 
However, due to non -receipt of sufficient proposals, it was decided to expedite the evaluation 
process by nominations. The meeting for selecting a sui table agency/vendor for third party 
Impact Evaluation Study of all the Schemes by nomination is scheduled for the second week of 
May, 2020.  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.17) 
2.5 The Committee observe with concern that even though the Accessible India Campaign 
(AIC) project under the Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2016 (RPwD Act) came into force 
on 19.04.2017, the execution at State/UT level is slow due to delay in submissi on of cost 
estimates and subsequent implementation of retrofitting projects of buildings by the concerned 
States/UTs/Public Works Department. So far only total of 480 buildings all over India have been 
completed under AIC which the number of buildings audi ted is 1662 and number of buildings 
funded for retrofitting is 1058. In view of thousands of Government buildings all over the country 
which are to be made accessible for PwDs, the work so far done is minuscule. The Committee 

18 
 
also find that initially many States like West Bengal, Manipur, Himachal Pradesh, Andhra 
Pradesh etc. did not embark upon the work of retrofitting of buildings. The committee are 
disappointed that at this pace, only a small fraction of the work under AIC can be accomplished 
by the year  2022 after which central assistance will no longer be available. The Committee, 
were later informed that 34 States/UTs are on noard now to start work on 1058 buildings. They, 
therefore, urge upon the Department to take up work of converting all the Govern ment buildings 
into accessible structures for PwDs all over the country at Mission mode and make every 
possible effort to persuade the States/UTs to accomplish the project with right earnestness, as it 
aims to make life easy and comfortable for PwDs and bring them into the mainstream. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 Under the target of Built Up Environment of Accessible India Campaign (AIC) a total of 
1662 selected State Govt. buildings have been audited in 34 participating States/UTs. UTs of 
Daman and Diu and Dadra Nagar Haveli are not participating in AIC. So far, funds amounting to 
₹436.44 Crores have been released for retrofitting of 1151 such audited buildings, spread 
across 32 out of 34 participating States/UTs, with the exception of Manipur, due to pendi ng UCs 
and Lakshadweep, due to pending revised cost estimates. Also, funds were not released for 
remaining 511 buildings, of the 1662 audited buildings, due to pending submission of revised 
cost estimates, fresh cost estimates and utilization certificates.  Out of funds released so far, 
approximately, 25 Crores have been dispersed as 2 nd instalment for 123 buildings in 3 States 
namely, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab. Up till March 31 st 2020, approximately 1100 Central 
and State Govt. buildings have been ma de completely accessible by CPWD and State/UT 
Govts, respectively.   
2. To achieve the targets under AIC, Department has taken several initiatives. These 
include :- 
(i) Preparing a summarized compilation of 10 key accessibility features based on the 
Harmonized Guidelines and Space Standards. These have helped to bring clarity about 
the requirements of features.It has been circulated to all States and UTs for ease of 
reference during designing and planning for retrofitting of buildings. 
(ii) An online Management Info rmation System (MIS) portal has been developed and 
launched by HMSJE on September 18, 2019 for monitoring the progress of targets and to 
create a centralized data source related to accessibility in built -up environment, transport 

19 
 
and ICT ecosystem under AI C. Provisions have been made to upload real time data of 
execution work along with pictures of the retrofitting work being carried out at site. After a 
series of training sessions with respective officials of States/UTs and Central 
Ministries/Departments, details of 757 buildings of States/UTs and CPWD, along with 733 
photographs of 300 buildings have been uploaded on MIS portal. The data uploaded by 
CPWD and various State Govts. were scrutinized and the shortcomings noticed were 
communicated through letter s so that the features of accessibility may be provided 
appropriately and complete correctness. 
(iii) Department regularly takes follow ups with CPWD and participating States/ UTs. 
Monitoring is done through meetings, letters, telecommunications, video conferences and 
through the MIS portal. Issue specific letters were sent to all States/UTs for submission of 
physical & financial progress and Utilization Certificates. Specific issues are even 
followed up over telephones and whatsapp to elicit responses. This help ed the 
Department to seek more funds at Revised Expenditure stage and against an initial 
Budget Expenditure of 105 crores, was able to release ₹134 crores. 
(iv) Also, States/UTs were called for review meeting at the Department to present the 
proposals and status of work achieved by them while also troubleshooting specific issues 
being faced by the State Govt. in implementing the targets of AIC. As may be seen in the 
case of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram, where it was observed that proposals did not 
include all accessibility features due to which holistic retrofitting was not being foreseen, 
the States were requested to revisit each proposal technically and make them holistic 
and complaint with accessibility standards. In this particular case the Department was 
able to curb duplication of work and delay in release of funds while also enhancing 
awareness amongst officials of the field. 
(v) Specifically in regards to States mentioned in the observation which were reported to not 
have started retrofitting work, the status of progress is as follows: 
a. West Bengal - ₹1493.74 Lakhs have been released for retrofitting of 26 buildings 
in FY 2017 -18 as well as 2018 -19. Field visits for verifying work progress was 
conducted by Department in November 2019, when only 3 buildings were allowed 
to be inspected, where retrofitting work was observed to have been done in an ad -
hoc manner. Even, after repeated follow ups no formal report on progress of work 

20 
 
has been submitted by the State Govt. Also, 9 revised and 1 fresh cost estimates 
are to be submitted to DEPwD for fund release.  State Govt. has not submitted any 
UCs pertaining to AIC so far. 
b. Manipur – No funds could be released even after repeated follow up and 
discussions since the State has to submit UCs amounting to ₹157.52 Lakhs for FY 
2013-14 and 2014 -15, for which no recor d is traceable at the State Govt. level. 
State has also been informed that if need be this amount may be refunded to 
Government of India so that funds may be appropriated for benefit of Persons with 
Disabilities. 
c. Himachal Pradesh - ₹439.46 Lakhs have been  released for retrofitting of  
11 buildings in FY 2018-19 as well as 2019-20 and State has reported that work is 
in progress. However, 10 revised and 1 fresh cost estimates are to be submitted to 
DEPwD for fund release. State Govt. has not submitted any UC s pertaining to AIC 
so far 
d. Andhra Pradesh - ₹1436.33 Lakhs have been released for retrofitting of 38 
buildings in FY 2018-19 and State has reported that work is in progress. However, 
2 revised and 1 fresh cost estimates are to be submitted to DEPwD for fu nd 
release. State Govt. has not submitted any UCs pertaining to AIC so far. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19) 
2.7 The Committee note that the Department provides assistance for setting up and running 
District Disability Rehabilitation Centres in unserved and under-served districts of the country for 
providing specific training to rehabilitation professionals and for s ensitizing PwDs about different 
welfare schemes implementing for them. The Committee further note that there is a huge 
shortage of nearly 20 lakh trained professionals today to provide rehabilitation services to the 
PwDs for which the Department has strive d to develop curriculum in collaboration with  
Melbourne University, which is laudable. They would urge the Department to continue their 

21 
 
efforts. The Committee also feels that MPs and MLAs should be involved in the process of 
setting up of CRCs and DDRCs as they are well aware about the problems  and needs of PwDs 
in their respective constituencies. The Department has seemingly evaded a reply on the issue of 
involvement of MPs/MLAs in this process. The Committee still feel that the input provided by the 
MPs/MLAs could be of immense use as they are well aware of the local conditions and special 
needs of the PwDs in their areas. The specific inputs provided by the public representatives 
about their area can be of vital importance in planning and setting up of such centres. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to seek inputs from al MPs/MLAs and ensure 
that these inputs are utilised during the Departmental meetings for practical decision. The 
Committee further desire to be apprised about the progress in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
2.8 1) Observations of Standing Committee regarding seeking inputs from all the 
MPs/MLSs and ensuring that these inputs are utilized during Departmental meetings for 
practical decisions in so far as the setting up of DDRCs are concerned have been noted with 
due regards. Each DDRC functions under the supervision of DMT headed by the District 
Magistrate/Collector. It also comprises of district officials from the Department of Social Welfare, 
Health, Panchayati Raj,  Women & Child Welfare Department, Nodal officer from implementing 
agency and representative from reputed NGOs/public representatives for better coordination 
and monitoring. In order to comply with the observation/recommendations of the Standing 
Committee, each DDRC receiving GIA from this Department has been advised to invite Hon‟ble 
MPs/MLAs of the respective constituency as a special invitee to the meeting of District 
Management Team (DMT) at-least once in a year (copy at Annexure-B). 
2) For setting up o f Composite Regional Centres for Skill Development, Rehabilitation & 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (CRCs), concerned State Governments/UTS are 
requested to provide land (free of cost) and also temporary built up accommodation to run the 
CRC till the time of construction own building. Keeping in view the provision of land and built up 
accommodation by State Government, decision to set up CRC in respective State/UT is taken. 
In this process, suggestions received from people‟s representatives are also considered.  
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 

22 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.4) 
2.9 The Committee observe that under the three scholarship schemes for students with  
Disabilities, viz., Pre -matric scholarship, Post -matric Scholarship and Top Class Education, the 
Department have released funds for the left out students of the previous financial year, i.e., 
2018-19 which is impinging upon the budget allocation of curren t year, i.e., 2019 -20. On the 
other hand funds earmarked for SC, ST Category and North East Region remained unutilized 
for want of sufficient demand. The Committee are unable to understand why the Department is 
not re -appropriating the surplus funds to the  general category after the closing date of 
application. Committee feel it is undesirable on one hand to allow surplus funds of one category 
to lapse and on the other, allow the left out of other category under the same scheme to spill 
over to the next fin ancial year. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the 
specific decisions of the Department on this matter and recommend the Department to make 
necessary modifications in the scheme to correct this undesirable scenario. 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 As per Government instructions, certain percentage of funds of the total budget is 
required to be earmarked for SC, ST category and NE Region mandatorily. The funds 
earmarked for these categories can‟t be re -appropriated for the General category as per the 
Government instructions.  
2. In order to avoid this undesirable scenario, enhanced allocation has been allocated under 
General Category for the Financial Year 2020-21. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
  

23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.5) 
2.11 The Committee observe with concern that under the Scheme of National fellowship for 
PwDs (NFPwD), the University Grant Commission (UGC) released the first list of the selected 
students on 14.08.2019 and the award letters were issued to the selected students on 21.10. 
2019. The UGC is still in the process of selecting students for the year 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 
even though the third quarter of the current fiscal is about t o close. The Committee deprecate 
this kind of inordinate delay on the part of UGC as delay has been depriving PwDs to the 
benefits of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge upon the Department to convey 
their concern to the selection authority , i.e., UGC and get the selection process completed for 
2018-19 and 2019-20 without further delay and stipulate a time -frame to complete the selection 
process for 2018-19 and 2019-20. 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 i. The Department has been continuously pu rsuing the matter with University Grant 
Commission (UGC) for selection of candidates for National Fellowship for Persons with 
Disabilities for the year 2018 -19 & 2019 -20.  UGC has already invited online applications for 
NFPwD 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. The last date of submission of online application was 29 th 
February, 2020. As per the information received from UGC, applications received, have been 
verified by UGC and the list of selected candidates for 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 will be sent by 
UGC during month of May, 2020. 
 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 

24 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9) 
2.13 The Committee are sad to note that the National Trust for the welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Mu ltiple Disabilities, a statutory body under the 
Department of Empowerment of PwDs, has been receiving less grants against the actual 
requirement. As per the Department, since the interest income from its corpus fund was also 
falling due to fall in interest  rates, the trust has to reduce the funding pattern under its schemes 
and no new projects could also be sanctioned because of the paucity of funds. However now 
the committee note that during the financial year 2019-20, the trust is restoring the initial funding 
pattern and has asked for an additional budgetary support of ₹14.93 crore at RE stage. 
Considering the facts, the Committee would like to impress upon the Department to provide the 
Trust with requisite funds as it has been dealing with diseases like  autism, cerebral palsy, 
mental retardation etc. which are long term and need sophisticated treatments and to ensure 
sufficient budgetary support in future also so that the Trust carry out its mandate effectively. 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 Budgetary requirement and allocations of funds to National Trust during the financial year 
2017-18 to 2019-20 are as under:- 
         (₹in crore) 
Financial year Requirement by 
National Trust 
Funds allocated 
2017-18 17.00 17.00 
2018-19 20.00 20.00 
2019-20 20.00 20.00 
  
2. From the above table, it is seen that the funds to the National Trust had been allocated 
as per the requirement in the past. Keeping in view of thee additional budget requirement of 
National Trust to carry out its activities, an amount of ₹39.50 crore has been allocated for the 
Financial year 2020-21 which is ₹19.50 crore more as compare to the financial year 2020-21. 
3. In addition to the Budgetary support from the Department, The National Trust has a 
corpus fund of ₹100.00 crore and interes t of fund is also used for meeting the expenditure of 
National Trust. 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 

25 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.10) 
2.15 The Committee are happy to note that AIIMS has been operating a toll -free helpline (No. 
1800-11-7776) for the parents to understand and identify the symptoms of autistic disorder in 
their child. The helpline provide telephone based consultation and can be accessed by any one 
from any part of India. The Committee feel even though this helpline is operational for the last 
one and a half year, in the absence of a regular awareness generation activity, most of the 
parents may not be aware of its existence. The Committee would, therefo re, desire the 
Department to undertake concerted awareness generation programme at national level through 
audio-visual, print and if found suitable, the social media. In Committee's view, through this 
programme the parents could also be made aware of the s pecific indicative symptoms and 
behavioural disorder in their ward well in time so that they are able to immediately identify the 
type of disability and consult the helpline for further course of action. This will prove helpful in 
early identification, intervention and treatment of their autistic child. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Department has noted the helpline number and accordingly it will post it in it‟s social 
media platforms as well as it will urge all State Govt‟s to post it in their websites as well as social 
media and gradually it can be done through print media (DAVP) across all States. The 
Department is also striving to send the helpline number in Doordarshan through scroll which will 
reach all States.  
 The National Trust has been taking c oncerted awareness generation programme on 
Autism Spectrum Disorder at national level through audio -visual, print and the social media. In 
this regard, the following booklets have been developed in collaboration with Dr. Shefali Gulati, 
Head, Child Neurolo gy Department, AIIMS, Delhi and uploaded in the download section of the 
website of the National Trust (www.thenationaltrust.gov.in) -  
1. Autism - The Fact (A comprehensive guide for parents and health care providers. 
2. Indian Scale for Assessment of Autism (ISSA) 
3. Tools for Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder 
 The National Trust, in collaboration with Child Neurology Department, AIIMS, Delhi has 
conducted 4 Master Training Programmes for doctors (Psychiatrists, Paediatricians and Clinical 
Psychologists) for assessment, diagnostic and certification of  Autism in the country, in which 

26 
 
more than 300 such doctors have been trained. The 5th Master training programme for the 
doctors was planned on 15th,16th and 17th April, 2020 in Vigyan Bhavan, Delhi. But, due to 
COVID-19, the same has been postponed.  
 A dedicated WhatsApp group of Experts in Autism has been created by the National 
Trust to gather up to date information on prevention, assessment and research on Autism on 
global basis.  
 The National Trust w ill also prepare more such materials in the form of audio -visual and 
print in collaboration with Dr. Shefali Gulati, Head, Child Neurology Department, AIIMS, Delhi 
and other experts in the field and disseminate these information to the parents through onli ne 
mechanism and social media.   
 In addition to  this,  the Department also operates Awareness Generation and Publicity 
Scheme and aim of  this scheme is to give wide publicity of Govt. of India‟s schemes relating to  
welfare of  persons with disabilities through organising   National/ International workshop/events, 
street plays, film shows, Print Media,  road shows, vocational  training, disability  benefit, 
providing assistive devices subsidized utility, autistic disorder Childs, support services includi ng 
language interpreter, helpline, rehabilitation etc. including their social, economic and educational 
environment across the country. A t the beginning of the financial year, Secretaries/Chief 
Secretaries of the States/UTs are requested to   encourage the  Govt./Non Governmental  
Organisations of their State/UT to send their more and more   proposals for publicity/promotion 
of Government of India‟s schemes relating to PwDs including autistic disorder child,  so that the 
enthusiasm in the PwDs, self -esteem i s increased and to ensure confidence building in the 
PwDs, so that they can realise aspirations. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO  
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14) 
4.1 The Committee note that during the year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, the actual expenditure 
under some major schemes viz (i) Scholarships for Students with Disabilities (ii) Indian Spinal 
Injury Centre (iii) Establishment of Institute of Sign Language, Research & Training Centre 
(ISLRTC), (iv) Support of Establishment/Modernization of Braille Presses, (v) Establishment of 
College for Deaf in 5 regions of the country, (vi) Establishment of Centre for Disability  Sports, 
(vii) Budgetary Support to National Trust (viii) Setting up of State Spinal Injury Centre, (ix) 
Establishment of National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation was very low and the 
allocated budgetary amount was underutilized. The Committee ar e anguished that the 
Department has been citing repeatedly procedural excuses like non receipt of adequate 
proposals/delayed receipt of proposals, insufficient funds and approval of schemes during the 
fag end of fiscals etc. for the same, which are not con vincing enough. The Committee hence 
reiterate that the Department must adopt prudent fiscal management system and modify the 
procedures if required, to reduce multi -agency clearances and speed up submission of 
proposals. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 (i) Scholarships for Students with Disabilities: - During 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, an 
amount of ₹56.95 crore and ₹108.22 crore were released respectively. Though, there is a 
shortfall in expenditure in 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, it may be noted that during FY 2018 -19, 
Financial disbursement has increased by ₹51.27 crore i.e. by 90.03%. 
2. For timely utilization of funds and to get sufficient number of applications under various 
components of the scheme, the Department has released two advertisements across the 
country on 20.7.2019 and 02.10.2019 to spread awareness and to sensitize all stake holders.  A 
special advertisement was also released with special focus on NE States on 02.10.2019. 
Besides, a video conference was also held with the State Nodal Officers on 11. 10.2019 in order 
to expedite verification of applications by the educational institutes and State Nodal Officers.  

29 
 
(ii) Indian Spinal Injury Centre:- SFC has approved the scheme at the fag end of the FY 2018-
19. Therefore, no funds were released from the financial year 2017-18 to 2018-19. 
(iii) Establishment of Institute of Sign Language, Research & Training Centre (ISLRTC): - 
With regard to ISLRTC, it is submitted that ₹5.50 crore and Rs. 5.00 crore was allocated to the 
Institute during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 respectively. Centre has utilized ₹4.50 crore and ₹4.85 
crore during 2017-18 and 2018-19. 
(iv) Support of Establishment/Modernization of Braille Presses: - During 2017-18, fund was 
released for establishing 6 new Braille Presses, Capacity Augmentation of  2 existing Braille 
Presses and Modernization of 1 existing Braille Press. Further to this, 12 organizations were 
supported for meeting their recurring expenditure. Though further request for recurring grant in 
aid was received, these could not be consider ed for insufficient supporting documents from 
implementing agencies. There was no proposal received for establishment of new Braille 
presses during the year 2018 -19. In addition to this, the proposals received for recurring 
expenditure could not be conside red for want of supporting documents from implementing 
agencies. 
(v) Establishment of College for Deaf in 5 regions of the country: - Proposals from only two 
deaf colleges namely National Institute of Speech and Hearing, (NISH) Thiruvananthapuram 
and  Shaku ntala Mishra National Rehabilitation University, Lucknow were received   During 
2017-18 and 2018 -19. The proposal from National Institute of Speech and Hearing, (NISH) 
Thiruvananthapuram was only received for non -recurring grants. This was released to them . 
However, since 2019 -20 no further proposals have been received from NISH or Shakuntala 
Mishra National Rehabilitation University, Lucknow. 
 (vi) Centre for Disability Sports: - XII Plan working group in its report, recommended 
establishment of Centre for Disability Sports (CDS). The project was included in the 12 th plan 
and was also part of the Budget Speech of 2014 -15. Since the proposal of setting up of CDS 
was under consideration from 2015 -16 in pursuance to the announcement made in the budget 
speech of 2014-15, token provisions were made from the year 2015 -16. The approval to set up 
first CDS at Gwalior was granted by the Cabinet in February 2019. Thus, the token budget 
provisions made from 2017 -18 to 2018 -19 could not be utilized. During the financial year  
2019-20, an amount of ₹15.07 crore was released to CPwD. 

30 
 
(vii) Budgetary Support to National Trust: - During 2017-18, RE of ₹17 cr. was included ₹13 
cr. under General Head and ₹4 cr. under NER.  Though the entire allocation under General 
Head was utilized, the NER component could not be completely utilized due non -availability of 
sufficient number of Registe red Organizations in NER. During the year 2018 -19, the RE of  
₹20 was included ₹16 cr. under General Head and ₹4 cr. under NER.  Though the entire 
allocation under General Head was utilized, the NER component could not be completely 
utilized due to non-availability of sufficient number of Registered Organizations in NER. 
2. In order to get sufficient proposals in NER, National Trust has been continuously 
undertaking awareness programmes like Regional Workshops / Seminars to motivate NGOs. In 
the North East Summit held in Guwahati on 12 to 13 July 2019, a presentation was made by the 
JS & CEO, National Trust about t he schemes and activities of the National Trust. All the 
participants were requested to motivate NGOs for joining with the National Trust. A meeting of 
all ROs of the North Eastern states was conducted on 08.07.19 for expansion of coverage of 
schemes and activities of the National Trust in North Eastern States.  
3. It may be noted that in Financial Year 2019 -20, an amount of ₹20.00 crore was allocated 
to National Trust and the entire allocation was utilized by National Trust. 
(viii) Setting up of State Spi nal Injury Centre:-  During the year 2017 -18, entire allocation of  
₹5.00 crore was utilised and during 2018-19, an amount of ₹2.82 crore was released and due to 
insufficient proposals under the scheme, entire allocation could not be utilized. 
(ix) National Institute of Mental Health Rehabilitation: - In the budget announcement for the 
year 2014 -15, Hon‟ble Finance Minister declared Government‟s intention to establish NIMHR. 
Accordingly, the matter was pursued from 2015 -16 onwards and token budget provisio n was 
made. Final decision to set up NIMHR, initially at Bhopal, was taken in May 2018 and 
subsequently in October 2018, it was decided to establish this Institute on a piece of 25 acres of 
land allotted by Government of Madhya Pradesh at Sehore along Bhopal-Indore Highway. Thus, 
token provisions made in the year 2017 -18 was remained unutilized. The approval to establish 
NIMHR at Sehore was accorded in October 2018 and layout with other details were under 
finalization, only meagre amount could be utilized for some preparatory activities and substantial 
portion of allocation could not be utilized during 2018 -19.  NIMHR has been made functional 
from a temporary accommodation provided by Government of Madhya Pradesh at Sehore. 

31 
 
During the financial year 2019 -20, an amount of ₹17.26 crore was released for construction of 
NIMHR. 
However, observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13) 
5.1 The committee note that during the last three years i.e. 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018 -19, 
the actual expenditure remained above 95%. In 2018-19, the allocation was ₹1070.00 crore and 
the actual expenditure was ₹1017.56 crore thus showing utilization of 95.1 0% of the total 
expenditure. The Committee would urge the Department to strive for 100% achievement under 
its flagship schemes/programmes as apart from benefitting more and more PwDs, it will 
strengthen the Department‟s demand for an enhanced budgetary all ocation in next fiscal year. 
At the same time, the Committee feel concerned about the uneven flow of expenditure in the 
current fiscal year. They find from the presentation made by the Department for PwDs during 
the course of oral evidence of their represe ntatives before the Committee that the actual 
expenditure under all the Schemes/Programmes as on 31.10.2019 is ₹373.21 crore, which is 
mere 30% of the total BE/RE ₹1204.90 crore. The Department will be required to spend 70% of 
the BE/RE in the next 5 mon ths which could ultimately result in rush of expenditure in the last 
quarter of 2019-20 fiscal. The Committee opine that if a large portion of RE remains unspent till 
last quarter then in the haste of achieving expenditure targets, not only the scrutiny an d 
examination of proposals get compromised, but there remains hardly any scope of monitoring 
the progress too. The Committee feel that the Department had been setup separately in 2014 to 
focus on sole attention on Divyangjans and hence ensuring their welfa re through timely and 
effective utilization of funds has an enhanced humanitarian angle too, apart from a 
Constitutional duty of the Department. They, therefore, impress upon the Department to 
continue handholding exercises to guide the State Governments s o that better and timely 
proposals are received and a balanced utilization of funds in all the four quarters of a financial 
year is ensured.  
Reply of the Government 
5.2 During the Financial year 2019 -20, as against the revised allocation of   ₹1100.00 crore, 
the Department has released an amount of ₹1016.18 crore which is 92.38% of the allocation.  

33 
 
2. As submitted earlier to the Committee, the schemes under this Department are all 
Central Sector Schemes, where funds are released to the implemen ting agencies. Also, the 
Department itself has to ensure the monitoring and utilization of the funds released unlike in 
Centrally sponsored Schemes. The Major schemes/non scheme namely SIPDA, DDRS, ADIP, 
Scholarship and National Institutes are demand drive n based on the proposals received from 
States/UTs/Institutions/NGOs and individuals etc. Generally, proposals are received in the first 2 
quarters which are examined resulting in major releases in the two subsequent quarters. 
3. Under Scholarship Schemes, out of six components of Umbrella scheme - „Scholarships 
for Students with Disabilities‟, Pre -Matric, Post-Matric and Top Class Educations Scholarships 
are being implemented through National Scholarship Portal. The schemes for other Ministries 
are also on b oarded on the portal. The portal was open for students on 15.07.2019 and closed 
on 15.11.2019. The last date for verification of applications by the State Government was 
31.01.2020. Therefore major chunk of funds were released in the last quarter of financial year. 
4. There were several reasons attributable to the slow trend of expenditure seen in 2019 -
20:- 
(i) Imposition of Model Code of Conduct as a result of General Elections due to which the 
pace of expenditure during the 1st quarter was slow. 
(ii) The scheme of NAP was reviewed so that the outgo reaches the correct beneficiaries as 
per laid down guidelines. 
(iii) Skill Training has been undergoing a rigorous overhaul this year to enable streamlining of 
the process, to check financial irregularities by Empanelled Training Partners (ETPs) 
and to ensure a robust and secure fund flow mechanism. These initiatives have s lowed 
down the process of release of funds.  
(iv) Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled Bio -Metric Attendance 
System (AEBAS), Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), Video Conferencing (VC) facility, 
trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory features at training centres. 
(v) Training is imparted through Empanelled Training Partners (ETPs). Validity of most of 
the ETPs has been expired. 
(vi) UCs for from State Governments were not received under SIPDA Scheme. 
5. Department has therefore taken steps to ameliorate this situation. These include:- 

34 
 
(i) Reviewed the Schemes to expend the outreach of the schemes running in the 
Department. 
(ii) Implementation of Centre guidelines including Aadhar Enabled Bio -Metric Attendance 
System (AE BAS), Closed Circuit Television (CCTV), Video Conferencing (VC) facility, 
trained trainers and accessibility as mandatory features at training centre. 
(iii) In the initial stage inspection of centres was carried out by the officers of the Department. 
However, in order to expedite the process the work of the centre validation has been 
assigned to a 3rd party agency Skill Council for Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD). 
(iv) To revalidate the empanelment of existing ETPs, efforts are being made to add new 
organisations as ETPs. 
(v) Adding Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) as Programme Implementation Agencies (PIAs). 
(vi) Through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL), the Department is exploring the possibilities 
of training of those Divyangjan employed in unorganised s ector but not yet availed any 
formal training. 
(vii) State/UT Governments letters have been written from Secretary, DEPwD to respective 
Chief Secretaries of the States to furnish Utilization Certificates for previous Grant 
released under SIPDA scheme.  
(viii) Regular inspections, before, during and after the project are carried out to measure the 
work done, before grant is released. 
(ix) Regular video conferences are held with States/UTs to review progress of work being 
made in the States. 
(x) Screening Committee meetings are being held at short intervals to take up cases 
proposed by stakeholders for carrying out accessibility in Govt. buildings under the SIPDA 
scheme. 
(xi) Advertisements released by the Department across the Country in National and regio nal 
newspapers. In addition, an advertisement released in North East (NE) states in different 
regional languages.  
  

35 
 
(xii) State Governments requested to popularize these schemes through advertisements by 
their Social Welfare Departments. 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10) 
5.3 As a vast majority of PwDs come from the economically and socially backward sections 
of the society, they neither have the resources to meet the cost difference of motorized tricycle 
nor the access to MPs/MLAs/CSR funds.  The issue of the Department bearing full cost of 
motorized tricycle has been commented upon many times in the past, particularly in this 
committee‟s 48 th and 55 th Reports, 16th Lok Sabha. It seems that the Department has hitherto 
remained evasive on the matter. Now, the Department have statedly decided to consider the 
issue of revision of cost norms during the forthcoming appraisal for revision of ADIP Scheme, 
which is likely to  be held during next financial year. As the next financial year is approaching 
now, the Committee are optimistic that the Department would sincerely take up this issue and 
bring it to the desired conclusion to mitigate the plight of PwDs in need of motorized tricycle. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance. The matter may be 
considered during appraisal of the ADIP Scheme. 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

36 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18) 
5.5 The Committee is pained to find that some of the State Governments are giving less than 
₹500/- per month as Disability Pension to PwDs. They fail to understand as to how can a person 
survive with this paltry amount which is not even sufficient to meet bare minimum basic needs of 
an individual. The Committee firmly believe that lack of any ski ll to earn and a meager amount 
as pension forces many PwDs to take up begging outside religious places, at traffic signals etc. 
in order to survive. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Central Government 
must increase its contribution from ₹300/- to PwDs pensioners to a reasonable amount and also 
explore the possibility of making it mandatory for every State/UT Government to give some 
amount with a provision for revision periodically to help PwDs to cope up with inflation, as 
Disability Pension. In need be Central Government should have a relook at the existing policies 
too in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 M/o Rural Development has been requested to review Indira Gandhi National Disability 
Pension Scheme for increasing quantu m of Disability Person from ₹300/- per PwDs per month 
to a reasonable amount (Copy at Annexure A). 
 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. No.1/4/2019-
20/Budget/DEPwD dated 13th May, 2020) 
 
         Comments of Committee 
 
(Please see Para 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
6 August, 2020                                            Standing Committee on 
15 Shravana, 1942 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
Empowerment  
 

37 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20) HELD ON THURSDAY, 6TH AUGUST, 2020 
 
The Committee met from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in Main Committee Room  Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI         - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
3. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
4. Shri Akshaibar Lal  
5. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
6. Smt. Ramilaben Bara  
7. Shri Ashok Gasti  
8. Shri P.L. Punia  
9. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
10. Shri Ramkumar Verma  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
 
 ***     ***     *** 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee to the 
sitting of the Committee convened for consideration and adoption of four Draft Action Taken 
Reports of the Committee on “Demands for Grants 2019 -20” and taking evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 

38 
 
and Empowerment) on “The Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019".  
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration of the following draft Reports for adoption: 
(i) ***     ***     *** 
(ii) Eleventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Second Report on “Demand for Grants 2019 -
20” of the Ministry of Social Justice and Emp owerment (Department of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
 (iii) ***     ***     *** 
(iv) ***     ***     *** 
 4. The Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Reports without any amendment and 
authorised the Chairperson to present the Reports to Parliament or to th e Hon‟ble Speaker,  
Lok Sabha.   
5.  ***     ***     *** 
6. ***     ***     *** 
7. ***     ***     *** 
8. ***     ***     *** 
(The Committee then adjourned.) 
______________________________ 
*** Matter not related to this Report. 
 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT  OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2019-20)  
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-20)’  
OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT  
(DEPARTMENT OF EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
Total     Percentage 
 
Total number of Recommendations        12 
 
(I) Observations/Recommendations which have       8  66.67% 
been accepted by the Government :   
Paragraph Nos. - 3.11, 3.12, 4.17, 4.19,  
5.4, 5.5, 6.9 and 6.10.   
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the       0        0% 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
the replies of the Government :  
Paragraph No.  - Nil       
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of      1  8.33%  
which replies of the Government have not been 
 accepted and  which require reiteration: 
 Paragraph No. - 2.14      
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect         3     25% 
of which replies of the Government are of in 
nature: 
Paragraph NoS. - 2.13, 3.10 and 4.18.       
 