i 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023) 
 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Soc ial 
Justice and Empowerment ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the 
functioning of Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS)'  of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
41 

ii 
 
 
 
FORTY-FIRST REPORT   
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2022-2023) 
 
  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS     
 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the 
functioning of Eklavya Mod el Residential Schools (EMRS)'  of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2022 
 
                                       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Appendix-I Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 9 th 
December, 2022. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report 
on ‘Review of the functioning of Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRS)’. 
 
 
 
 
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha 
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Nauriyal - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar      - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi - Under Secretary 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Forty-First Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRS)' of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabh a and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 1st April, 2022. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report 
on 24th August, 2022.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
9.12.2022. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                        RAMA DEVI 
                                   Chairperson, 
09 December, 2022                                                              Standing Committee on 
18 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)                     Social Justice and  
                         Empowerment 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty -Fourth 
Report on ‘Review of the Functioning of Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS)’. 
 
2. The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
01.04.2022. It contained 11 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No.2.8, 6.12 & 9.9 
(Total:03, Chapter: II) 
  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.3.7, 4.10 & 7.7 
(Total:03, Chapter: III) 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: – 
Rec. Para No. 2.24, 8.19, 10.6 & 11.5 
(Total:04, Chapter: IV) 
  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No.5.9 
(Total:01, Chapter: V) 
  
 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter -I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendation contained in Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not late r than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.24) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
 “The Committee note that the original target, which aimed that 452 new Eklavya 
Model Residential Schools (EMRSs) including 12 Eklavya Model Day Boarding 
Schools (EMDBS) would be set up in the remaining 462 sub -districts by the year 
2022 is nowhere near completion and the target year stands revised as 2025 
now. The Committee are surprised to note that out of 452 schools proposed to 
be sanctioned as per the phasing plan between 2018 -2019 to 2021 -2022, only 
350 schools could be sanctioned and the remaining 102 schools are remaining to 
be sanctioned as the location for these schools is yet to be finalised. It is 
disappointing that the construction work of only 100 schools could begin till date 
whereas the construction work of 332 schools is to begin by March 2022, which 
has just passed. The Committee lament the fact that there is a substantial gap 
between the number of schools proposed to be sanctioned and the number of 
schools sanctioned and also with regard to timelines fixed for construction work.  
  The Committee also find the Ministry deficient in complying with the 
standard period of 24 months fixed for completing the construction work as the 
present position states that detailed Project Report and Master Layout Plan for 
174 schools a nd construction work for 100 schools could begin out of 350 
schools sanctioned till date.  Further worrying is the fact that very few schools 
have their own buildings as only 20 schools have been made functional from own 
buildings. 103 schools are functioni ng from alternate buildings since 2018 -19 till 
2021-22. The Committee are quite apprehensive with regard to the achievement 
of target even by March 2025 as construction of 252 schools is yet to begin. The 
Committee have been made to believe by the Ministry that after establishment of 
National Educational Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) on revamping of the 

3 
 
Scheme, things are going to improve substantially but the facts still speak 
otherwise, even after two years of establishment of NESTS. The Committee 
would, therefore, opine that the Ministry must not take more into background 
after setting up of NESTS as things are still not progressing satisfactorily, 
therefore, close monitoring of the pace of work is required to be done by the 
Ministry to achieve the targets. The Committee, therefore, like the Ministry to set 
up a stringent in -built mechanism to ensure compliance of norms/timelines fixed 
with regard to sanctioning/ construction/functioning of schools so that the work 
of making EMRS/EMDBS functional fro m their own buildings is not delayed and 
there is no deviation from targets at any stage. 
Reply of the Government 
6. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “It is humbly submitted that the Ministry has not fixed the target of setting up all 
452 schools by 2022. In the Cabinet Note 2022, funds for setting up 452 new 
schools were provided and construction time time -line was fixed in a phased 
manner. Accordingly, 396 out of 452 EMRSs have been sanctioned as on date. 
Some states have pleaded inability to provide land in the designated blocks due 
to area being forest, hilly terrain or suitable land not being available.  In view of 
this, the Ministry has asked States to identify alternate land in neighboring blocks 
/districts which have majority tribal population. For all such remaining locations, 
NESTS and Ministry are continuously following up with the State Governments to 
provide suitable land free from all encumbrances. As on date, under the new 
scheme, Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction (A/A& E/S) has been 
issued for 275 locations, construction work has commenced on 180 locations out 
of total 396 locations where suitable land has been provided by States. On many 
other locations, where land has been  found to be suitable, estimates are being 
prepared for technical and administrative sanctions. Steps have also been taken 
to monitor the quality of construction through premier institutions like IITs/NITs. 
NESTS has constituted a dedicated construction wi ng consisting of experienced 
engineers and architects to strengthen the monitoring mechanism  and to 
minimize the delay in construction. NESTS civil team is consistently monitoring 
the construction activities assigned to PSUs/CPWD/State Govt. at various 
locations across the States. It is therefore expected that significant progress will 
be made during the coming months.” 
 

4 
 
7. Keeping in view of the slow progress of construction of EMRS, the  
Committee had recommended the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to set up a  
stringent in-built mechanism to ensure compliance of norms/timelines fixed 
with regard to sanct ioning/construction/functioning of schools so that the 
work of making EMRS/EMDBS functional from their own buildings is not 
delayed and there is no deviation fr om targets at any stage. The Ministry in 
their action taken replies  submitted that the co nstruction work has 
commenced only at 180 locations out of  275 locations wherein  
Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction (A/A& E/S) has been 
issued.  The Committee note that  Ministry have been able to sanction only 
396 EMRS out of 452 EMRS  proposed to be set  up. The Committee believe  
that by allowing the States to identify alternate land in neighboring blocks 
/districts which have majority tribal population  as they could not provide 
land in the designated blocks due to area being forest, hilly terrain or 
suitable land not being available  would expedite the process of sanctioning/ 
construction of Schools. T he Committee wish to remind  that the Ministry 
should have factored in likely impediments at the initial planning stage  as 
availability of land free from all encumbrances particularly in hilly terrain has 
always been one of the obstacles for construction of EMRS.  The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should take suitable steps to start the construction 
work at the remaining 95 locations as the work has commenced only at 180 
locations out of 275 locations  and also direct the NESTS to monitor the 
progress of construction work so that the Schools are set up in the stipulated 
period of two years . The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken thereon. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8.19) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are surprised to note that the provision for Smart Classes & Atal 
Tinkering Labs in EMRSs and the procurement of mobile tablets and educational 

5 
 
kits for students of EMRSs has been delayed so much that the very objective to 
provide online edu cation to EMRS schools during COVID Pandemic could not 
materialise. The Committee feel that this delay has made students to suffer 
irreversibly as they require these facilities well in time to continue their studies in 
distant mode. The Committee are unabl e to understand reasons for continued 
delay in having these facilities in schools. The fact that tenders were called twice 
under such specifications for which no Indian company could bid shows that the 
NESTS/Ministry failed to find a workable solution to p revent altogether stopping 
of learning for tribal school students during COVID pandemic. The Committee 
feel that Ministry must realise that students cannot be deprived of the right to 
education due to the non-serious approach of the persons responsible to execute 
the work. The Committee, therefore, opine that responsibility needs to be fixed 
for the casual approach in this matter. The Committee find that the Management 
Information System proposed to be developed has also been lingering for long 
without any sound justification. The Ministry therefore must ensure to complete 
the targets set for establishing online learning system, Smart classes and Atal 
tinkering labs and also to procure the mobile tablets and educational kits within 
the laid down timeframe. A s the tribal students belong to remote areas and do 
not possess resources to voice their requirements vigorously, it is the bounden 
duty of the Ministry to recognize and fulfil their educational requirements well in 
time. The Committee would, therefore, li ke to strongly recommend the Ministry 
to install smart classes, Atal tinkering labs in all the EMRSs in consultation with 
the concerned Ministries/Departments within a fixed time schedule. The 
Committee also desire that as the management Information system , which is 
currently proposed to be developed, could be an effective tool for monitoring of 
the schools, particularly those set up in far flung areas, should be developed in a 
time bound manner without further delay”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
9. The Minist ry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “With respect to Atal Tinkering Labs, it is shared that till date, there are 18 
EMRSs where process of ATL establishment has commenced  and these are 
spread across 8 S tates namely  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Telangana, Odisha, Karnataka, Sikkim, and Manipur. For establishment of Agile -
ATLs in EMRSs, deliberations had happened with NITI Aayog, however due to 
scarcity of funds at the organization level, other funding opt ions are being 
explored. NESTS, MoTA has collaborated with ERNET, MEITY regarding smart 

6 
 
class establishment in 175 EMRSs (48 EMRSs -1st year and 127 EMRSs in 2 nd 
year. As per latest update, Infrastructure is operational in 43 EMRSs and for 5 
EMRSs work order is in process of issuance.   
 “With the establishment of NESTs, it was decided to setup a Managerial 
Information System (MIS) to maintain the information at one place for rigorous 
monitoring of the progress. Accordingly, the work on developing the same was 
assigned in January 2021. The MIS is currently under development and several 
modules have already been made live for data entry by schools. The technical 
development of the basic modules of MIS is likely to be over by July 2022. Most 
of the basic modul es has already been completed and made live for data entry 
and other basic modules like finance; result etc. will be made live soon. 
 
10. Considering continued delay in establishing of online learning system, 
Smart classes and Atal tinkering labs  in EMRS  and also in procurement of 
mobile tablets and educational kits within the laid down timeframe , t he 
Committee had directed the Ministry to complete them in a time bound 
manner. The Committee find from the Action Taken Notes that not much  
progress  has been made even today as  only  18  Atal Tinkering Labs have 
been established in EMRSs spread across 8 States.  The Committee  note that 
the Ministry have  collaborated with ERNET, MEITY for  establishment of  
smart class es in only 175 EMRSs.  While expressing their concern  for 
educational empowerment of the tribal students , the Committee feel that 
any further delay in providing  these facilities in all the EMRS would deprive 
students from latest technology in education  which have become very 
essential in the cu rrent scenario. The Committee  would, therefore,  like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that necessary directions 
may be issued at the appropriate level so that the online learning system, 
Smart classes and Atal tinkering labs are established as envisaged and 
mobile tablets and educational kits are procured so that the seamless 
education is provide d to tribal students even in disruptive situations.  The 
Committee are also of the considered opinion that the full fledged 
Management Information System (MIS) should be established without any 

7 
 
further delay to equip the management for effective monitoring of EMRS. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.10.6) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are astonished to note that the Ministry have not been able to 
identify the locations for establishing two Centre of Excellence (CoE) for sports 
with specialized state-of-the-art for one identified individual sport and one group 
sport for which preliminary sanction has been issued out of the fifteen such 
Centres proposed to be set up in tribal majority districts in each State/UT and Rs. 
127 lakhs sanctioned too. The Committee are perturbed to find that the 
discussion with Sports authority of India is still underway for collaboration under 
‘Khelo India Programme’ and detailed standard procedure have not been devised 
to establish such Centres. The Committee are unable to understand the objective 
of releasing an advance amount of Rs. 127 lakhs for two CoEs sanctioned and to 
include financial provision in the Cabinet Note for continuation of the EMRSs 
during 2021-22 to 2025-26 when Ministry have not been able to locate places for 
establishing two CoEs. The Committee wonder as how much time would be 
required to establish all 15 CoEs. The Committee are also concerned about the 
financial implication of the delay as the cost of such Centres is likely to increase 
substantially if there is  too much delay in taking decisions. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Ministry to take necessary action immediately to 
complete the modalities in consultation with Sports Authority of India, States/UTs 
and other stakeholders so that the location no t only for two CoE is finalised but 
location for all 15 CoEs is finalized and timeline should be fixed for completion 
work of all CoEs.” 
 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
12. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “The Proposal for establishment of CoEs has been received from 6 States. The 
Ministry has undertaken several rounds of consultation with Sports Authority of 
India to understand what Infrastructure can be provided in the available 
budgetary allotment of Rs 5  cr.  Discussions have also taken place on provision 
of coaches for different games.  All other States also have been asked to submit 
proposals. It is proposed that each CoE will have facility for 1 major sport, 2 
minor sports, Indoor sports facility and a playground with outdoor facilities.” 
 
13. The Committee are disappointed to find that the location for 
establishing two Centres of Excellence  for sports out of the 15 such Centres 
proposed to be set up in tribal majority districts in each State/UT is yet to be 
finalized as the proposal for establishment of CoEs has been received only 
from 6 States and all other States have now been asked to submit their 
proposals. The Committee are not happy with the lackadaisical approach of 
the Ministry in handling the CoE Project. The Committee feel that had the 
Ministry conducted proper study to examine the viability of the project and 
taken States  Governments into confidence before initiating the proposal , 
such hurdles would not have cropped in, at least, finalizing the location for 
establishing them . Since these CoEs will be co -located with an existing o r 
proposed EMRS, the Committee believe that the  students of EMRS  who have 
talent in sports would be benefitted from the sports and coaching facilities 
available in CoEs.   The Committee also find that  each CoE will now have a 
facility for 1 major sport, 2 minor sports, Indoor sports facility and a 
playground with outdoor facilities as against the earlier proposal of having 
state-of-the-art facility for o ne identified individual sport and one group 
sport and discussion is underway with Sports Authority of India to 
understand what Infrastructure can be provided in the available budgetary 
allotment of ₹ 5 crore . Since the Project is at a very preliminary sta ge the 

9 
 
Committee strongly believe that the budgetary allotment of ₹5 cr ore 
provided may fall short, if there is any further delay in finalizing the locations 
of the Project. Hence, the Committee foresee serious shor tcomings in the 
budget allocations too.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry 
to assess the shortcomings in the Project as it is not moving forward at a 
desired pace and plug them at the preliminary level so that these Centres 
come up smoothly. They would also like the Ministry to fix the deadlines for 
completion of each stage of the Project to ensur e that at least 2 targeted 
Sports Centres are completed in a time bound manner as there is an urgent 
need to make available be st of sports facilities   to boost the performance of 
athletes and sportsperson of tribal belts of the country since they have been 
giving outstanding performance at National and International level.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.11.5) 
14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee are surprised to note that 3 States namely Bihar, Tamil Nadu 
and West Bengal have still not signed MoU and are reluctant to shift to CBSE 
Board and are insisting on continuation of State Board Curriculum in the schools 
set up in their States whereas the norms stipulate that all the EMRSs set up are 
to be affiliated with CBSE in order to grant better sum per child studying in these 
schools. The Committee would like the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the 
States and give them a  time period to sign MoU with NESTS so that the norms 
established including affiliation of schools with CBSE Board are applicable to 
them for smooth running of Schools and the students studying in these schools 
get standardized education and the uniform st andard of education is established 
across all the EMRSs in the country. In order to bring them on board, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry pursue the matter at higher level with 
the States and sort out the issue fast”. 
Reply of the Government 
15. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 

10 
 
 “3 States namely Bihar, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have not signed the MOU 
as the States are not willing to get EMRSs in their state affiliated to CBSE  which 
is one of t he criteria for signing of MoU. They are of the opinion that the State 
Education pattern (State Board) suits more to the State rather than the CBSE 
pattern. Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs has addressed to Chief Secretary of 
the concerned States and discussed this issue in meetings with the States and 
the Ministry has been regularly pursuing for the same. Additionally, in the letters 
dated 08.09.2021 and 10.12.2020, the Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs 
personally wrote to the Chief Ministers of the concerned States of Bihar and 
Tamil Nadu respectively, to pursue the matter. The Ministry in coordination with 
NESTS has been following up on the same”. 
 
16. The Committee find that de spite of their efforts, the Ministry has been 
unable to convince the States of Bihar, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal to shift 
to the CBSE curriculum  from State Board . The Committee understand that 
one of the norms stipulated for EMRS is affiliation  under CBSE. The 
Committee feel that by  disagreeing to affiliate th eir EMRS  under CBSE , 
these States would forfeit the  benefits under the EMRS scheme which would 
otherwise have given a significant boost to the educational infrastructure o f 
tribal areas and benefit number of tribal students who constitute one of the 
most socially vul nerable groups.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation ,the Committee call upon the Ministry to vigorously pursue 
the matter with the se States and encourage  them  to shift to CBSE so that  
there is uniformity across all EMRSs in the country and th e objectives of the 
scheme is well served. 
 
--------- 
  

11 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.8) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that out of 288 schools sanctioned in 
1997-98, that is prior to revamping of the EMRS Scheme in 2018 -19, only 244 schools 
could be made functional. They further find that the construction work of only 202 
schools has b een completed till date and the construction work of 20 schools is yet to 
begin, whereas construction work of 66 schools is targeted to be completed by October, 
2024. The pace with which the work has been progressing seems to be quite slow as 
construction work of only 202 schools has been completed despite the Scheme being in 
existence for more than two decades. Construction work of 20 schools could not begin 
till date, despite the same being entrusted to Central/State Public Sector undertakings 
after the r evamping of Scheme in 2018 -19. The Committee are of the firm opinion that 
the routine issues relating to tendering process, land transfer, finalization of construction 
agency, etc. cannot be kept lingering for months and delaying the work inordinately 
when a target completion date is set. The Committee feel that the Ministry should take 
dynamic measures to ensure that, at least, all the 288 old sanctioned schools are made 
functional from their own buildings in a time bound manner in order to achieve the 
envisaged objectives of the Scheme. The Committee would therefore, like the Ministry 
to take concrete steps so that the construction work of 66 schools is completed as 
stipulated and begin the construction work of the remaining 20 schools at the earliest so 
that all the old schools are made functional from their own building.  
As the teaching activities have not been undertaken since the pandemic of COVID -19 
started, there is all the more urgency that at least now the tribal children must have 
school facilities to resume their education, particularly since online mode of education is 
not feasible for remote tribal areas. Hence, the Committee may be apprised in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has always respected the guidance rece ived from time to time 
from the Hon’ble Committee .The EMRS scheme is flagship scheme of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs where in residential schools are being set up in India since 1997. When 
the EMRSs were initiated in the beginning, the modality was to pr ovide grants to States 
under Article 275(1) of the Constitution, and it was the complete responsibility of the 
States to provide land and complete the construction. Under the old pattern of grant -in-
aid, 288 schools were sanctioned, out of which constructi on in 214 schools is complete 
as on date. In 56 schools’ construction is in progress and in 18 schools’ construction 

12 
 
could not be started due to land issues. The States were responsible for identification of 
land and construction of schools. 
Realizing the importance of EMRS, the scheme was revamped in 2019 as a Central 
Sector Scheme wherein it was decided that every block with more than 50% ST 
population and at least 20,000 ST persons, will be eligible to have an Eklavya Model 
Residential Scho ol. Eklavya schools will be developed to be on par with Navodaya 
Vidyalayas. The Department ofExpenditure has given concurrence, and Cabinet 
hasapproved setting up of 452 schools by 2025-26 in a phased manner.    
With regard to the concerns shown by the Ho n’ble Committee in respect of some 
of the schools under the old scheme not being made functional or construction not 
complete, it is humbly submitted thatthe identification of land and providing suitable land 
for construction free from all encumbrances, with forest clearance etc. are the 
responsibility of the State Government  under the old scheme and also the revamped 
scheme.  As the construction of school takes about 2 years, the States have been 
advised to make the schools functional from alternate buildi ng preferably a government 
building and make provision of teachers on deputation till the construction is 
complete.However due to remoteness of the blocks, where these schools are being 
constructed, sometimes it is difficult to find alternate government bu ilding in the same 
block to make the schools function.  Despite several constraints, the sustained efforts of 
Ministry and States have shown substantial progress in making 378 schools functional, 
including schools sanctioned under the old scheme.   Ministry in coordination with 
NESTS is reviewing the matter with States/ UTs and construction agencies in a regular 
manner through VCs and State visits. NESTS is continuously reviewing the matter with 
respective State Governments for expediting the progress of construction work.  
Further, it is submitted that in 175 schools, through collaboration between Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs and Ministry of Electronics and IT, for providing online education, smart 
classes are being set up.    
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
(Recommendation Para No. 6.12) 
 
 The Committee find that after the revamping of EMRS Scheme, the responsibility 
of construction of 452 new schools sanctioned since 2018 -19, has been entrusted to 
PSUs and CPWD, except for 42 schools where the State Governments have been 
entrusted the respo nsibility. The Committee also find that the budgetary provision for 
capital cost of ₹ 2146.50 crore has been made for 2024-25 and ₹ 210.00 crore for 2025-
26. The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for keeping such a low 
budgetary provision for these two years when only expenditure sanction for 174 schools 
have been granted till date and expenditure sanction for 278 schools is yet to be 
awarded. As the construction of schools in remote/hills/difficult tribal areas taken much 

13 
 
more time than those in regular areas, there is a high possibility than 278 schools would 
not be ready in another three years and ₹ 210 crore would be quite insufficient in 2025 -
26. The Committee are apprehensive about the financial crunch EMRSs may face at 
that time. The Comm ittee would, therefore, like the Ministry to review the financial 
allocation made for construction of schools so that there is no financial crisis as 
allocation is likely to lapse in case of non -utilization. Further, the Committee are sad to 
note that the construction work is not progressing at the required pace as construction 
work could begin only at 43 locations out of the administrative and expenditure sanction 
issued for 104 EMRSs to PSUs for construction. The Committee would, therefore, like 
the Ministry to regularly review the status of work undertaken and strive to remove all 
bottlenecks so that the work is completed in a targeted period. The Committee would 
also like the Ministry to monitor the work entrusted to States and seek compliance to 
avoid delay on their part. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As submitted earlier, the construction of school takes about 2 years for pre -construction 
and construction activities, after suitable land free from all encumbrances have been 
provided.As on 30 .06.2022, construction is in progress in 236 schools which includes 
EMRSs sanctioned in Grant -in-Aid model earlier. The Ministry of Finance agreed to 
allocate funds as per requirement of this Ministry for construction of all 452 new schools 
in a phased manner. NESTS has cons tituted a dedicated construction wing from the 
experienced engineers and architects to strengthen the monitoring mechanism. NESTS 
civil team is consistently monitoring the construction activities assigned to PSUs/ 
CPWD/ State Govt. at various locations acr oss the States.  The funds are being 
released to States/Construction Agencies as per requirement submitted by them in 
phased manner. Since schools sanctioned in these 2 years will be reaching completion 
and new schools will need funds for starting construction, maximum fun ds requirement 
will be in 2023-24 and 2024-25, accordingly budget has been estimated and provisions 
have been made. During the year 2025 -26as per the proposed timeline,  only a few 
schools will be under construction and in completion stage.Therefore, budget  provision 
has been made accordingly. Ministry of Finance has assured to provide adequate 
funding support depending on the progress made. During any particular year, if 
budgetary grants are completely utilized and if more grants are needed, Ministry of 
Finance will provide additional grants. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
 
 
 

14 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 9.9) 
 
The Committee appreciate the performance of EMRS students in examinations as well 
as extra-curricular activities and are of the view that the responsibility of the Department 
has been increased now in order to make the requisite infrastructure available timely to 
students. The Committee are, however, perplexed to note that as it is aimed to bring 
EMRSs at par with JNVs, the admission guidelines are yet to be framed by NESTS and 
the dedicated online portal is also under development. The Committee are aware that 
the management of Schools is the responsibility of State/UT Governments. However, to 
ensure the un iformity of infrastructure across the schools is now the responsibility of 
NESTS. The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary action may be taken by 
NESTS to frame admission guidelines in a time bound manner so that they are 
uniformly applied by State/ UT Governments across EMRSs. The State/UT 
Governments following their own guidelines, would mean defeating the objective of 
uniform procedure for admissions in the schools. The Committee also desire that the 
online portal should be expeditiously developed so that the details of the facilities 
available to students, infrastructure in schools, details of the teachers with their 
qualification are made available by the respective schools on portal for the benefit of the 
prospective students/teachers. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and NESTS are thankful for Hon’ble Committee’s  kind 
appreciation.EMRS School admission guidelines have been duly drafted and laid for the 
Academic Committee’s approval. To maintain uniformity in the school admission 
procedures across all States/UTs, following the lines of NVS pattern, the draft 
guidelines have been formulated. The guidelines have been approved in the Academic 
Committee meeting held on 27.06.2022 with some minor changes. The changes will be 
duly incorporated followed by its implementation from next session i .e.2023-2024.The 
final guidelines shall be shared with the States/UT EMRS Societies fo r uniform school 
admission procedures across the States/UTs.  
As far as d evelopment of online portal i .e. MIS is concerned, a ll basic modules  are 
operational.The Hon’ble Committee would appreciate that development of portal and 
updation of data is an ongoi ng process. Based on the experience, feedback from 
stakeholdersand learnings, the MIS is being regularly updated . Status of online portal 
development is as under: - 
•      All basic modules have been finalized. Modules pertaining to  Human Resource, 
Student details, School and Academic information etc have already been developed 
and are functional. 
•      Construction, alumni and promotion module has been made live. Finance module 
and result module is under finalization. 

15 
 
•      Training of result module and construction module has been done respectively on 
27th Apr & 29th Apr, 2022. 
•      Design of PGI index, Admission detail, and Infrastructure module has been 
finalized for further development. 
•      Additional modules will be designed after completion of above basic modules.  
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
 
  

16 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 3.7) 
 
The Committee observe that a minimum of 15 acres of land is required for establishing 
Eklavya Model Residential School (EMRS) in a sub -district having 50% ST population 
and at least 20,000 tribal persons and a minimum of 5 acres of land is required for 
establishing Eklavya Model Day Boarding School (EMDBS) in a sub -district having 90% 
ST population. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite a provision of 
relaxation on the minimum requirement of land in North east, hilly areas and LWE 
affected areas in the guidelines, several discrepancies such as land not found 
technically suitable, land falling under forest area, etc. appear and since the process of 
resolving the issues takes time, there is a delay in acquisition of land required for setting 
up EMRS in selected districts. The Committee believe that the criteria of minimum area 
of 15 acres of land in a sub -district having 50% ST population and at least 20,000 tribal 
persons for construction of EMRS is impractical as a single piece of 15 acres of land 
may not be easily available in hilly areas. Further, the criteria of 50% ST population and 
at least 20,000 tribal persons for sanctioning of EMRS and 90% ST population for 
sanctioning of EMDBS makes identification of land more cumbersome. The Committee 
hence feel that the guidelines with regard to area/population needs to be revisited as 
together these stipulations make acquisition of land for setting up of EMRS/EMDBS 
quite complex. The Committee hence are of the opinion that these should be 
immediately reviewed and viable solutions worked out so that the delay in acquisition of 
land can be prevented. The Committee also recommend that such review should be 
undertaken without compromising upon the infrastructural requirements of 
EMRS/EMDBS. The Committee desire that such tribal areas with widely scattered tribal 
population must not be deprived of the benefits of EMRSs/EMDBS which are a means 
towards their educational empowerment. The Committee note that out of three 
approved EMDBS, construction work of two sch ools is in progress and work of one 
school is yet to begin.The Committee desire that the construction work of all the three 
EMDBS should be completed in time and the Ministry should take necessary steps to 
encourage/sensitize the States/UTs to submit speed ily, proposals for construction of 
EMDBS so that maximum Tribal students are able to get quality education. 
 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Taking the suggestion of the committee and the problems pointed out by states in 
finding 15 acres of land, the architectural design of EMRS campus has been modified to 
be accommodated in 8 -9 acres of the land.  In such places, the school building design 
would be Ground plus 2, in place of Ground plus 1.  On case to case basis, based on 
difficulties pointed out by the States  and Construction Agencies, the land requirement 
and construction plan are being modified. As observed by the Hon’ble Committee, land-
constraintis considered carefully while examining the proposals. At the same time, since 
for all-round development of trib al boys and girls, it is desirable to provide playgrounds 
and other facilities of a residential campus, effort is being made to obtain land with 
reasonable area, so that all components of the project like hostel, staff quarters, 
laboratories and playgrounds can be provided. 
The construction of 3 EMDBS was approved for the states of Gujarat, Rajasthan and 
Tripura. However, recently all the 3 state governments have proposed for conversion of 
EMDBS into EMRS. Since the criteria of establishment of EMDBS differ  from EMRS, 
the Ministry has sought clarification from the state governments on the fulfillment of 
criteria at these locations. NESTS in coordination with Ministry of Tribal Affairs is 
following up with the States to expedite the process.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.10) 
 
The Committee find that National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) 
established in 2019 to plan, construct, establish, endow and administer the EMRS is 
expected to do all things necessary to provide good quality modern education to tribal 
students, common core -curriculum of NCERT, CBSE affiliation of schools, 
training/capacity building Programmes for teaching and non -teaching staff, review the 
existing MoUs signed by the State/UT EMRS Societies or the State Governments, etc. 
The Committee, furthe r, note that the EMRS Societies required to be set up at the 
State/UT level to maintain, control and manage the schools within 30 days from issue of 
the Guidelines have been established in 27 out of 28 States/UTs till date. However, the 
Committee are pertu rbed to note that only 6 posts in NESTS have been filled up till 
date, thus leaving 26 posts vacant out of the 28 posts approved by Ministry of Finance. 
The Committee are unable to comprehend as to how NESTS would be able to justify its 
role and responsibility with such a set up. As only two top posts have been filled, it can 
be safely assumed that NESTS would be hardly functional as of now. The Committee 
are, therefore, of the opinion that no further delay should happen in recruitment of 
sanctioned strength of NESTS. NESTS should also ensure that the EMRS Societies are 
established in all States/UTs urgently and MOU with State/UT EMRS Societies or the 

18 
 
State Governments is reviewed/signed without any further delay for the smooth 
functioning of Schools. Keepin g the role and responsibility of NESTS that is likely to 
multiply in future, as they have to run and coordinate for the intended 740 schools with 
3.5 lakh tribal students, the Committee further strongly feel that the present sanctioned 
strength of NESTS pe rhaps either needs to be reviewed and enhanced or its technical 
capabilities are of a superior level so that they are able to smoothly run the schools. In 
view of the increasingly responsibility of Project Monitoring Units with the increase in 
pre-construction and post -construction activities of schools in future, the Committee 
would also like that the number of Experts in Project Monitoring Units is kept adequate 
to enable them to effectively supervise and monitor pre -construction and post -
construction activities of EMRSs. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry  fully appreciates the concern shown by the Hon’ble Committee. It  is 
submitted that the process of filling up the vacant position at NESTS has been 
expedited. As on date, out of 28 posts sanctioned for NESTS, 16 posts have already 
been filled and recruitment of 09 posts i s in its final stage. Letters for document 
verification/interviews for the 9 posts have been issued. Recruitment of other 3 posts is 
in process through deputation. Post wise Status has been detailed out as under: 
 
Status of appointment in NESTS 
(As on 22.06.2022) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Post No. of 
Post(s) 
Status 
1 Commissioner (JS Level) 1 Filled 
2 Additional commissioner (Director Level) 1 Filled 
3 Private Secretary to Commissioner 1 Under process through deputation 
4 Joint Commissioners (DS Level) 2 Filled 
5 Stenographer Grade I (to Additonal 
Commissioner) 
1 Offer of appointment will be issued 
after Medical Examination. 
6 Deputy Commissioner (US Level) 2 Filled 
7 Stenographer Grade II (to Joint Commissioner) 2 Offer of appointment will be issued 
after Medical Examination. 
8 Assistant Commissioner (SO Level) 4 Filled 
9 Office Superintendent – Finance (ASO Level) 2 Offer of appointment issued. 
10 Office Superintendent – Admin (ASO Level) 2 Under Process through deputation 
11 Office assistant (UDC level) 4 Offer of appointment will be issued 
after Medical Examination. 
12 MTS 6 Filled 

19 
 
  Total 28   
  
Further, NESTS has established a wing of Civil Consultants consisting of engineers who 
have earlier worked on post of Superintendent Engineer, Executive Engineer and 
Assistant Engineer in various Government organizations to deal with day -to-day matter 
of c onstruction related works. Engineering consultants have also been hired for local 
inspection on a regular basis. These consultants monitor the progress of construction 
and share periodic reports along with photographs for easy monitoring at NESTS level.  
NESTS has also established a PMU of Consultants where skilled consultants 
specialized in specific field like Academic, Coordination, IT, HR, MIS, Database 
Management etc. have been hired for the support in the implementation of EMRS. As 
instructed by the Ho n’ble Committee, all efforts will be made to strengthen the human 
resource with NESTS. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
(Recommendation Para No. 7.7) 
 
The Committee find that several training Programmes were organized for teachers and 
Principals of EMRSs during the last two years. However, the participation of schools, 
Principals and teachers was found to be limited in these Programmes. The Committee 
are of the opinion that the teachers/Principals training Pro gramme should be 
periodically organized and participation be made compulsory to upgrade their teaching/ 
leaderships skills which would enable them in coping with the fast -changing scenario of 
imparting education. The Committee would like NESTS to develop e xchange 
Programmes of Principals/teachers at national/ international level so that they can 
participate in advanced training Programmes. The Committee appreciate the initiatives 
such as collaboration with National apex bodies such NCERT, NITI Aayog, NIEPA etc. 
to conduct professional capacity building Programmes and desire that participation of 
EMRS teachers should be mandatory therein. Also, the Committee feel that the 
collaboration between NESTS and the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship t o initiate vocational education courses would benefit students and 
teachers in developing skills, hence, necessary action may be taken for an early start of 
vocational education courses across the EMRSs. The Committee are of the view that 
concrete steps sh ould be taken to increase the number of Programmes and hence 
recommend that an annual calendar for professional capacity development 
Programmes for Principals/teachers may be drawn incorporating various Programmes 
and shared with all EMRSs and EMDBSs so th at maximum participation could be 
ensured. 
 
 

20 
 
Reply of the Government 
The suggestions given by the Hon’ble Committee are welcome. Due to covid pandemic 
situation, NESTS could not organise Annual Cultural and Sports meet in last 2 years, 
where Principals, teachers and students get chance to exchange their views and share 
their best practices. NESTS in coordination with Ministry  has been regularly organizing 
training programmes for its EMRS teachers and principals in collaboration with several 
premier institu tions such as NCERT, NIEPA, Tata Trusts, School Innovation Cell 
(Ministry of Education) etc .for the last two years, which reveals encouraging leap taken 
forward to create constructive space for teaching fraternity to upgrade their knowledge 
and skills 
The training data illustrates that around 1200 EMRS teachers and principals have 
undergone the training programmes under different projects from Leadership Training to 
Holistic Advancement; from Design Thinking to Experiential Learning as espoused in 
NEP 2020. 
As recommended by the Committee, NESTS has developed annual academic/training 
out-lining programmes/projects to be taken up each year. The training programmes 
organized centrally are recommended to be compulsorily attended by EMRS teaching 
fraternity, mee ting the mandate of 50 hours of professional development training of 
teachers as given in NEP 2020. 
Nomination of outstanding Principals and Teachers from all the EMRSs across the 
States/UTs had been solicited by NESTS, MoTA.  Based on which, a pool of key 
resource persons has been formed at National level who may further emerge as 
prospective master trainers for capacity building programmes organized in collaboration 
by NESTS in future. The training of trainer model framework shall be developed in 
future co urse to benefit the EMRS ecosystem and further roll -out at scale once 
adequate regular teaching staff joins the EMRS school system. 
NESTS shall be developing comprehensive teacher training framework that shall be 
composite of concrete guidelines delineatin g training of trainers (ToT) model, teaching 
staff exchange programmes etc. 
For introduction of vocational education/skill education courses in EMRSs, schools may 
be encouraged to commence such courses as part of CBSE syllabus in the future 
course. For bri nging trainers related to skill courses on -board for schools, assistance 
from MoSD&E will be pursued in future.  
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 2.24) 
 
The Committee note that the original target, which aimed that 452 new Eklavya Model 
Residential Schools (EMRSs) including 12 Eklavya Model Day Boarding School 
(EMDBS) would be set up in the remaining 462 sub -districts by the year 2022 is 
nowhere near completion and the target year stands revised as 2025 now. The 
Committee are surprised to note that out of 452 schools proposed to be sanctioned as 
per the phasing plan between 2018 -2019 to 2021 -2022, only 350 schools could be 
sanctioned and the remaining 102 schools are remaining to be sanctioned as the 
location for these schools is yet to be finalised. It is disappointing that the construction 
work of only 100 schools could begin till date whereas the construction work of 332 
schools is to begin by March 2022, which has just passed. The Committee lament the 
fact that there is a substantial gap between the number of schools proposed to be 
sanctioned a nd the number of schools sanctioned and also with regard to timelines 
fixed for construction work.  
The Committee also find the Ministry deficient in complying with the standard period of 
24 months fixed for completing the construction work as the present position states that 
detailed Project Report and Master Layout Plan for 174 schools and construction work 
for 100 schools could begin out of 350 schools sanctioned till date. 
Further worrying is the fact that very few schools have their own buildings as on ly 20 
schools have been made functional from own buildings. 103 schools are functioning 
from alternate buildings since 2018 -19 till 2021 -22. The Committee are quite 
apprehensive with regard to the achievement of target even by March 2025 as 
construction of 252 schools is yet to begin.  
The Committee have been made to believe by the Ministry that after establishment of 
National Educational Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) on revamping of the Scheme, 
things are going to improve substantially but the facts still speak otherwise, 16 even 
after two years of establishment of NESTS. The Committee would, therefore, opine that 
the Ministry must not take more into background after setting up of NESTS as things are 
still not progressing satisfactorily, therefore, cl ose monitoring of the pace of work is 
required to be done by the Ministry to achieve the targets.  
The Committee, therefore, like the Ministry to set up a stringent in -built mechanism to 
ensure compliance of norms/timelines fixed with regard to sanctioning / 

22 
 
construction/functioning of schools so that the work of making EMRS/EMDBS functional 
from their own buildings is not delayed and there is no deviation from targets at any 
stage. 
Reply of the Government 
It is humbly submitted that the Ministry has not fixed the target of setting upall 452 
schools by 2022. In the Cabinet Note 2022, funds for setting up 452 new schools were 
provided and construction time time-line was fixed in a phased manner.Accordingly, 396 
out of 452 EMRSs have been sanctioned as on da te. Some states have pleaded 
inability to provide land in the designated blocks due to area being forest, hilly terrain or 
suitable land not being available.  In view of this, the Ministry has asked States to 
identify alternate land in neighboring blocks / districts which have majority tribal 
population. For all such remaining locations, NESTS and Ministry are continuously 
following up with the State Governments to provide suitable land free from all 
encumbrances. As on date, under the new scheme, Administra tive Approval and 
Expenditure Sanction (A/A& E/S) has been issued for 275 locations, construction work 
has commenced on 180 locations out of total 396 locations where suitable land has 
been provided by States. On many other locations, where land has been f ound to be 
suitable, estimates are being prepared for technical and administrative sanctions. Steps 
have also been taken to monitor the quality of construction through premier institutions 
like IITs/NITs. 
NESTS has constituted a dedicated construction wing  consisting of experienced 
engineers and architects to strengthen the monitoring mechanismand to minimize the 
delay in construction. NESTS civil team is consistently monitoring the construction 
activities assigned to PSUs/CPWD/State Govt. at various locati ons across the States. It 
is therefore expected that significant progress will be made during the coming months. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
(Recommendation Para No. 8.19) 
 
The Committee are surprised to note th at the provision for Smart Classes & Atal 
Tinkering Labs in EMRSs and the procurement of mobile tablets and educational kits for 
students of EMRSs has been delayed so much that the very objective to provide online 
education to EMRS schools during COVID Pan demic could not materialise. The 
Committee feel that this delay has made students to suffer irreversibly as they require 
these facilities well in time to continue their studies in distant mode. The Committee are 
unable to understand reasons for continued d elay in having these facilities in schools. 
The fact that tenders were called twice under such specifications for which no Indian 
company could bid shows that the NESTS/Ministry failed to find a workable solution to 
prevent altogether stopping of learning for tribal school students during COVID 
pandemic. The Committee feel that Ministry must realise that students cannot be 

23 
 
deprived of the right to education due to the non -serious approach of the persons 
responsible to execute the work. The Committee, theref ore, opine that responsibility 
needs to be fixed for the casual approach in this matter. The Committee find that the 
Management Information System proposed to be developed has also been lingering for 
long without any sound justification. The Ministry, therefore must ensure to complete the 
targets set for establishing online learning system, Smart classes and Atal tinkering labs 
and also to procure the mobile tablets and educational kits within the laid down 
timeframe. As the tribal students belong to remote  areas and do not possess resources 
to voice their requirements vigorously, it is the bounden duty of the Ministry to recognize 
and fulfill their educational requirements well in time. The Committee would, therefore, 
like to strongly recommend the Ministry  to install smart classes, Atal tinkering labs in all 
the EMRSs in consultation with the concerned Ministries/Departments within a fixed 
time schedule. The Committee also desire that as the management Information system, 
which is currently proposed to be d eveloped, could be an effective tool for monitoring of 
the schools, particularly those set up in far flung areas, should be developed in a time 
bound manner without further delay. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
With respect to Atal Tinkering Labs, it is shared that till date, there are 18 EMRSs where 
process of ATL establishment has commenced and these are spread across 8 states 
namely Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Odisha, Karnataka, 
Sikkim, and Manipur. For establishment of Agile -ATLs in EMRSs, deliberations had 
happened with NITI Aayog, however due to scarcity of funds at the organization level, 
other funding options are being explored.  
NESTS, MoTA has collaborated with ERNET, MEITY regard ing smart class 
establishment in 175 EMRSs (48 EMRSs -1st year and 127 EMRSs in 2 nd year. As per 
latest update, Infrastructure is operational in 43 EMRSs and for 5 EMRSs wor k order is 
in process of issuance.   
“With the establishment of NESTs, it was decid ed to setup a Managerial Information 
System (MIS) to maintain the information at one place for rigorous monitoring of the 
progress. Accordingly, the work on developing the same was assigned in January 2021. 
The MIS is currently under development and severa l modules have already been made 
live for data entry by schools. The technical development of the basic modules of MIS is 
likely to be over by July 2022. Most of the basic modules has already been completed 
and made live for data entry and other basic modu les like finance; result etc . will be 
made live soon. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
  

24 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10.6) 
 
The Committee are astonished to note that the Ministry have not been able to identify 
location for establishing two Centre of Excellence (CoE) for sports with specialized 
state-of-the-art for one identified individual sport and one group sport for which 
preliminary sanction has been issued out of the fifteen such Centres proposed to be set 
up in tri bal majority districts in each State/UT and Rs. 127 lakhs sanctioned too. The 
Committee are perturbed to find that the discussion with Sports authority of India is still 
underway for collaboration under ‘Khelo India Programme’ and detailed standard 
procedure have not been devised to establish such Centres. The Committee are unable 
to understand the objective of releasing an advance amount of Rs. 127 lakhs for two 
CoEs sanctioned and to include financial provision in the Cabinet Note for continuation 
of the EMRSs during 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 when Ministry have not been able to locate 
places for establishing two CoEs. The Committee wonder as how much time would be 
required to establish all 15 CoEs. The Committee are also concerned about the financial 
implication of the delay as the cost of such Centres is likely to increase substantially if 
there is too much delay in taking decisions. The Committee would, therefore, like the 
Ministry to take necessary action immediately to complete the modalities in consultation 
with Sports Authority of India, States/UTs and other stakeholders so that the location 
not only for two CoE is finalised but location for all 15 CoEs is finalized and timeline 
should be fixed for completion work of all CoEs. 
Reply of the Government 
TheProposal for establishment of CoEs has been received from 6 States. The Ministry 
has undertaken several rounds of consultation with Sports Authority of India to 
understand what Infrastructure can be provided in the available budgetary allotment of 
Rs 5 cr.  Dis cussions have also taken place on provision of coaches for different 
games.All other States also have been asked to su bmit proposals. It is proposed that 
each CoE will have facility for 1 major sport, 2 minor sports, Indoor sports facility and a 
playground with outdoor facilities. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
(Recommendation Para No. 11.5) 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that 3 States namely Bihar, Tamil Nadu and West 
Bengal have still not signed MoU and are reluctant to shift to CBSE Board and are 
insisting on continuation of State Board Curriculum in the schools set up in their States 
whereas the norms stipulate that all the EMRSs set up are to be affiliated with CBSE in 
order to grant better sum per child studying in these schools. The Committee would like 
the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the States and give them a time period to  sign 
MoU with NESTS so that the norms established including affiliation of schools with 
CBSE Board are applicable to them for smooth running of Schools and the students 

25 
 
studying in these schools get standardized education and the uniform standard of 
education is established across all the EMRSs in the country. In order to bring them on 
board, the Committee recommend that the Ministry pursue the matter at higher level 
with the States and sort out the issue fast. 
Reply of the Government 
3 States namely Bihar , Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have not signed the MOU as the 
States are not willing to get EMRSs in their state affiliated to CBSEwhich is one of the 
criteria for signing of MoU. They are of the opinion that the State Education pattern 
(State Board) suits more to the State rather than the CBSE pattern . Secretary, Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs  has addressed to Chief Secretary of the concerned States  and 
discussed this issue in me etings with the States and the Ministry has been regularly 
pursuing for the same. Additionally, in the letters dated 08.09.2021 and 10.12.2020, the 
Hon’ble Minister of Tribal Affairs personally wrote to the Chief Ministers of the 
concerned States of Bihar and Tamil Nadu respectively, to pursue the matter. The 
Ministry in coordination with NESTS has been following up on the same. 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
  

26 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.9) 
The Committee are constrained to note that the teachers appointed for EMRSs by the 
States are not in accordance with a uniform criterion for the appointment of teachers for 
schools despite the existence of the Scheme since 1997-98 as the Ministry did not have 
control over these schools except for giving grant to the States to establish EMRSs. The 
Committee have now been informed that a recruitment advertisement has been 
released for a total of 3400 vacancies across 16 States/UTs as per the criteria 
formulated on the pattern of KendriyaVidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas and that the 
National testing Agency is to conduct national level EMRS -Teaching Staff Selection 
Examination. However, recruitment process is on hold due to non -notification of 
Recruitment Rules by majority States/UTs. The Committee feel that had this decision 
been taken by the Ministry back when EMRS came into existence, the schools could 
have achieved a uniform standard of education across the Country. The Committee find 
that the matter is still at a standstill as they have not been able to advertise vacancies of 
teachers for all the States/UTs as Recruitment Rules framed by NESTS have not been 
notified by the States/EMRS societies established across States/UTs. Unless all the 
States are b rought on board, the recruitment of teachers would continue to suffer. The 
Committee would, therefore recommend that all formalities must now be completed and 
the examinations for the vacancies advertised should be held at the earliest without 
waiting for States/UTs who have not notified Recruitment Rules and teachers recruited 
following State specific reservation Roster so that they are adequately trained before 
posting. NESTS may also follow up with the States/UTs who have not notified model 
Recruitment Rules framed by them and ensure that these States notify said rules in a 
specific time period so that the recruitment of teachers for these States is also 
conducted in a time bound manner. States/UTs still delaying notification of model 
Recruitment Rules fr amed by NESTS should be aggressively pursued at appropriate 
level so that they are notified soon and quality of education imparted in schools is not 
compromised. The Committee would also like the Ministry to take all necessary action 
for the recruitment of  non-teaching staff too for efficient management of EMRS. They 
desire to be apprised of the progress at the action taken stage. 
  

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As pointed out by the Hon’ble Committee, this Ministry appreciates the concern that for 
smooth runnin g of schools and for quality education, permanent teaching and non -
teaching staff is required. However as stated earlier, under the old Grant -in-aid based 
scheme, the States were responsible for recruitment of teachers and many states had 
recruited permane nt teachers. However, some States have appointed 
contractual/outsourced teachers on temporary basis.After the Cabinet approval, Ministry 
is in consultation with Department of Expenditure for working on the modalities of 
recruiting teachers.The Ministry has  proposed that all teachers and non -teaching staff 
will be employees of NESTS and will be recruited centrally on line with Navodya 
Vidyalaya.After the approval of Department of Expenditure, NESTSwould start process 
to recruit quality human resources in EMR Ss. Meanwhile States have been asked to 
hire Guest/ Retired Teachers for EMRSs. Guidelines for hirin g of Guest/ Retired 
teachers have been  shared with States. NESTS is also preparing a pool of retired 
teachersfrom NVS/KVS/State education de partment forall 8 Regional offices of NVS, 
which has further been shared with all States/UTs EMRS Societies. The endeavour is to 
deploy experienced teachers in  all states for the time being. States have also been 
asked to take teachers on deputation basis from other Govt. schools, wherever required 
till the issue of appointment of teachers is resolved. Efforts are also being made to 
provide quality training to the EMRS teachers. 
 
[Ministry of Tribal Affairs’ OM F.No.11011/01/2021-EMRS dated 24/8/2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
09   December, 2022                                                 Standing Committee on 
18  Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
         Empowerment 
  

28 
 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) HELD ON FRIDAY, 9th DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath ‘B.P. Saroj 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
  7. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  8. Smt. Supriya Sule 
9. Smt. Rekha Verma 
10. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
11. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
12. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
13. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
14. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
15. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri V.P Nauriyal  - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

29 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt 
the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iv) 41th Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the functioning of Eklavya 
Model Residential Schools (EMRS)' of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then auth orized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and 
to present the same to both the Houses on 12.12.2022. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
  

30 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT ON 
‘REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF EKLAVYA MODEL RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS 
(EMRS)’. 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
11  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.8, 6.12 & 9.9 
 
03 27.27% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.3.7,4.10 & 7.7 
 
 
03 27.27% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No. 2.24, 8.19,10.6 & 11.5 
 
04 36.37% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. 5.9 
01 9.09% 
   100% 
 
 