 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ((SEVENTEENTHMinistry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty‘Demands for Grants (2023with Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment).July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)
50 
i 
          STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)     SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)      Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)   Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons h Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment).   FIFTIETH REPORT           LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)   
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Persons with Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND (SEVENTEENTHMinistry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty‘Demands for Grants (2023with Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment).Presented to Lok Sabha on                                        Laid in Rajya Sabha on   July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)      ii 
   FIFTIETH  REPORT      STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-2023)    SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)    Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities)  Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment).     Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.7.2023  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.7.2023      LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  July, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka)    
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons 

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(iv) 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted 
and which require reiteration. 
 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 
 
 
 
Appendix-I Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 26.7.2023. 
 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment). 
 
 
 
 
    
  

iv 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
 
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath (B.P. Saroj) 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Sardar Simranjit Singh Mann 
16. Shri V. Sreenivasa Prasad 
17. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
  19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Devendrappa Y. 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
26. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
27. Shri Naryana Koragappa 
28. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
 29. Shri Ramji 
 30. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
    31. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt.Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ved Prakash Nauriyal - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar      - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee to submit 
the Report on their behalf, do present this Fiftieth Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Forty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
 
2. The Forty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 23.3.2023. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) have furnished their 
replies indicating action taken on the recommendations contained in that 
Report on 16.6.2023.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 
26.7.2023. 
 
3. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Forty-Fifth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is 
given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference Observations/ Recommendations/ Comments 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          RAMA DEVI 
                                     Chairperson, 
26th July, 2023                                                                   Standing Committee on 
4     Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                                      Social Justice and  
                                      Empowerment 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Fifth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment). 
 
2. The Forty-Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 23.03.2023. It contained 17 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken 
Replies of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have 
been examined and are categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No. 1.16, 2.8, 3.15, 5.26, 5.28, 
6.7, 6.8, 7.9 and 10.6. 
(Total: 09, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.25 & 5.29. 
(Total: 02, Chapter: 
III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 1.17, 1.18 and 5.27. 
(Total: 03, Chapter: 
IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: –   
Rec. Para No. 4.24, 8.9 & 9.8. 
(Total: 03, Chapter: V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in 
respect of the recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report 

2 
 
may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No.1.17) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee note that since the work of Census 2021 was delayed due to 
the Covid-19 pandemic, the Department are dependent on data generated by 
Census 2011. According to Census 2011 data there are 2.68 persons with 
disabilities which accounts for more than 2.21 % of the total population. As 
the next Census (2021) is yet to be completed and results reported, the 
actual figures of persons suffering from the disabilities added after the Act of 
2016 will be available in an year or two. In this connection, the Committee 
would like the Department to utilize all available data to arrive at the best 
estimation so that such persons are identified and brought into the ambit of 
the welfare schemes for Divyangjan. While the National Sample Survey (76th 
Round) has issued some sampled estimates of disabled persons, the focus is 
on counting only the people with bench mark disabilities and as per experts 
captures only a part of the population. The Committee therefore urge the 
Department to find an alternate way to include all the disabled persons, as 
much as possible in their welfare schemes till the Census figures come, 
particularly since most of these Divyangjan suffer from either mental or 
intellectual disability. The Committee also urge the Department to emphasize 
upon the disability surveyors conducting the NSS of Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation to consult disability experts while any survey is 
being designed, extensively train and sensitize surveyors on types of 
disabilities to include all the categories of disability that are covered in the Act 
of 2016 which is the ultimate aim of the legislation”. 
6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 

3 
 
“In India, the major sources of statistics on disability are the decennial 
Population Censuses conducted by the Registrar General of India (RGI) and 
the sample surveys on disability conducted by National Sample Survey (NSS) 
of National Statistical Office. As indicated in observation of Standing 
Committee, the Census 2011 puts the total number of PwDs at 2.68 crore. 
The main objective of 76th round of NSS during July-December, 2018 was to 
estimate indicators of incidence and prevalence of disability such as cause of 
disability, age at onset of disability, facilities available to the persons with 
disability, difficulties faced by persons with disability in accessing/using public 
building and public transport, arrangement of regular care giver, 
representation of PwDs in labour market, education system etc. This data is 
used during policy formulation for empowerment of PwDs. However, in this 
survey, there is no account of total number of PwDs presently in India.  
With a view to tackle this situation and to bring all PwDs under the ambit of 
welfare schemes meant for them, the Department has mandated UDID card 
for its various schemes as well as schemes of its associated organizations. In 
case a person with disability does not have UDID card, he/she may apply for 
benefits with the help of UDID enrolment number along with certificate of 
disability. 
In respect of sensitization of disability surveyors, Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation has been requested on 05.06.2023 (copy 
enclosed)”. 
7. The Committee, while observing in their earlier recommendation 
that census data related to persons with disabilities in India was more 
than a decade old, had suggested that till the time the latest census 
figures were available, the Department should utilize such 
resources/surveys which would assist them in gauging the number of 
PwDs in India. The Committee had hoped that doing so would ensure that 
a larger number of PwDs could be brought within the ambit of social 
welfare schemes meant for them. However, the concern expressed by the 
Committee was not effectively addressed as the Department have simply 
stated that they had made the use of Unique Disability ID (UDID) cards 

4 
 
mandatory for beneficiaries to access the benefits of schemes meant for 
PwDs. The contention of the Department that UDID scheme was a suitable 
parameter for estimating the PwD population in the country  may not 
work, as, by the Department’s own admission, they have issued 94.09 lakh 
UDID cards so far whereas the PwD population even 10 years ago was 
more than double that number. The Committee fail to understand the 
rationale of the Department for doing so. Besides they, during their study 
visits, have been made aware, that surveys are being conducted in certain 
States to ascertain the updated population of divyangjan, particularly 
since there is a better coverage of disabilities in the Act.  The Department 
can explore results of such surveys for gaining a fair understanding of 
their target population by adopting an out of the box approach, because 
the next Census results may take a considerable time to come.  The 
Committee feel that  there is an urgent requirement to explore innovative 
solutions to this issue. They therefore reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that the Department must explore other avenues and 
collaborate with the State Governments and other 
Departments/Organizations, who are engaged in implementation of the 
schemes for welfare of PwDs, in order to arrive at a realistic assessment of 
the PwD population in the country.  
Recommendation (Para No.1.18) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee have come to know that aids and appliances used by PwDs 
attract 5 percent charge under the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The 
Committee believe that aids and appliances are critical for persons with 
disabilities to pursue independence, literacy and employment with dignity. 
While taking cognizance of the fact that the Department was taking up this 
issue with the GST Council at the highest level, the Committee wish to 
emphasise that being a social welfare department attending to the most 
marginalized section of the society, the Department, should endeavour to 
have these items declared tax free. They therefore desire the Department to 

5 
 
pursue this matter for reaching a favourable conclusion that would make aids 
and appliances more affordable to the persons with disabilities in India”. 
9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“It is to apprise the Committee that the Department is making a continuous 
endeavor in this regard. A letter dated 17.04.2023 was sent to GST Council to 
draw their attention in this regard requesting to exempt aids and assistive 
devices from GST (copy enclosed)”. 
10. The Committee had recommended for a proactive approach for 
exemption of Goods and Services Tax (GST) on aids and appliances for 
PwDs due to the fact that such an action would make aids and appliances 
more affordable. The Committee take note of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard, but are of the opinion that mere 
correspondence would not yield the requisite outcome.  There is a 
requirement of greater degree of involvement to address this pressing 
need.  The Committee are of the opinion that  aids and appliances are 
essential items for persons with disabilities for their daily mobility to gain 
access to the opportunities of education, employment or enjoyment of 
other rights or the discharge of duties as  responsible citizens. Hence, the 
Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge 
the Department to continue with sustained efforts to prioritise the 
removal of GST on aids and appliances, as without them many PwDs 
would be forced into living a restricted and confined life or in a state of 
seclusion.  
Recommendation (Para No.5.26) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the constraints with respect to performance of the 
Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 (SIPDA) inter-alia include the adverse effect of Covid19, non-submission 
of viable proposals by the Implementing Agencies, pendency of utilisation 

6 
 
certificates, proposals not duly recommended etc. The Department are 
making all the efforts for achieving the targets for the year 2023-24. The 
Committee emphasise that SIPDA is the most comprehensive scheme for 
PwDs in India today and therefore call upon the Department to fortify their 
monitoring and coordination mechanism. As a CPMU has been set up and a 
Sugamya Bharat App has been launched, the Committee hope that targets set 
for various schemes under SIPDA would be achieved optimally. The 
Committee trust that the Department would continue to take appropriate 
steps to boost their performance during FY 2023-24 with regard to utilisation 
of allocated budget by taking recourse to robust measures which would 
entitle them to obtain requisite Revised Estimates/funds through 
supplementary grants for effectively carrying out the planned activities.” 
12.  The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 “The Department is taking initiatives to enhance the existing ecosystem for 
the  easy accessibility for Persons with Disabilities. Some recent initiatives that 
include  are:-  
a. Memorandum of Understanding with Council of Architecture: 
Department envision to encourage formal educating bodies to focus and 
mandate courses in the Bachelor of Architecture in the existing curriculum 
pertaining to universal accessibility and mandatory study of 
standards/guidelines formulated for this purpose. DEPwD and COA have 
joined hands to mandate the Inclusion of mandatory credits/modules etc. 
related to universal accessibility, accessibility features for PwDs in the 
B.Arch course and other related matters pertaining to outreach etc.  
b. Training of State officers for universal accessibility: In view of the 
growing demand for an inclusive, safe, and comfortable experience for 
Persons with Disabilities, ensuring incorporation of accessible features in 
the built environment is the need of the hour and for the same, 
accessibility at core is essential to be imparted in the minds of 
implementing agencies to ensure the universal accessibility. In view of the 

7 
 
above context, this Department envision to propose a 2-3 day training 
courses for all State PWD engineers regarding the sensitization towards 
the importance of accessibility for all, key accessible features in buildings 
as per Harmonised Guidelines 2021 of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs (MoHUA), statutory provisions in the Right of Persons with 
Disability Act 2016 (RPwD Act 2016) and Right of Persons with Disability 
Rules 2017 (RPwD 2017). This course may help in sensitizing the State 
PWD engineers towards the latest guidelines for achieving universal 
accessibility in built environment, create understanding for making new 
buildings accessible by incorporating key accessible features and retrofit 
the existing buildings as per the latest guidelines of MoHUA. For this 
purpose, it is requested from CPWD training academy to curate a 2–3-day 
training course for all State PWD engineers and share the information 
regarding a tentative timeline and procedure for launching this course. In 
view of this context, department letter vide dated 07.02.2023 was shared 
with CPWD training academy.  
c. In addition to the above, CPWD is conducting two trainings both offline 
and online in the current FY 2023-24 for CPWD officers. In this regard, 
this department have requested CPWD training academy to provide slots 
for the training of State PWD officers in the upcoming training 
programmes.  To which CPWD training academy have responded to 
accommodate 20 State/UT PWD officers. For this purpose, States/UTs 
have been requested to nominate PWD officers who shall be attending the 
upcoming training in month of August. As on date, nominations from 
Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh have been 
received. The response from other States/UT is awaited.”  
13. The Committee take note of the measures  initiated by the 
Department for boosting the performance under their flagship Scheme for 
Implementation of Persons with Disabilities Act (SIPDA) Scheme. They 
appreciate that the Department has approached it at the micro level 
where accessibility studies are mandated and built into the curriculum of 
architectural studies. They also find that the Department are planning to 
impart training to CPWD/PWD officials at all levels regarding key 

8 
 
accessible features in buildings and for sensitization towards importance 
of accessibility for all. Since both these agencies are primarily in charge of 
executing public works, the Committee are of the opinion  that such 
trainings would result in a better understanding of the obstacles faced by 
PwDs in accessing public spaces and would therefore would go a long way  
in creating an environment that is inclusive for people with disabilities.  
The Committee desire that States/UTs may also be urged to impart such 
training to their urban planners, architects and relevant execution 
agencies and be provided with sample training modules on line by the 
Department of the Central Ministry, as part of their handholding support 
to States/UTs. 
Recommendation (Para No.5.27) 
14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee find that the Accessible India Campaign under the umbrella 
scheme of the SIPDA is the flagship scheme of the Department. It seeks to 
achieve universal accessibility for persons with disabilities in Built 
Environment (Buildings), Transport System and Information &Communication 
Technology ecosystem across the country. The importance accorded to this 
scheme can be gauged from the fact that the Campaign is being monitored 
by Prime Minister Office through PRAGATI, Central Advisory Board headed by 
the Minister, SJE and Cabinet Secretariat through a Committee of 
Secretaries. Under the Central Government all 1100 identified buildings have 
been completed which shows lack of enthusiasm of States towards this 
Campaign. Under the targets for accessible transportation, the Committee 
find that that while all 35 International Airports have been made accessible, 
55 out of 69 Domestic Airports have been made accessible In respect of 
Railways,709 Type A1, A & B Railway Stations had been made fully 
accessible. In terms of the road transport sector the Committee found that 
5.96% buses are fully accessible and 29.05% of buses are currently partially 
accessible. The Committee wish to stress that the AIC presents a gateway to 
better mobility and reach to ensure equality in opportunities and the promise 
of a better life for PwDs. The Committee are also of the opinion that 

9 
 
accessibility does not, merely mean access to the point of entrance of a 
building, public transport system etc. Rather it implies that a person with 
disability has access, equal to all others, to all sections and not restricted by 
his or her disabilities. The Committee feel that the challenges before PwDs 
are immense and therefore prudent strategies need to be chalked out to 
remove the impediments to fully achieve the intended objectives of the 
scheme within the intended timelines. The Committee desire to be informed 
about the progress made in this direction”. 
15. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 “In addition to the initiatives mentioned in the reply of the observation 5.26, 
the Department is taking up the matter of Formulation of Sector Specific 
Standards of Accessibility with the 20 Ministries/Departments to enhance the 
accessibility. 
 Following the provisions of the Rights for Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) 
Act 2016 (Section 40) and RPwD Rules 2017 (Rule 15) and as per CoS 
recommendations, the task of formulation of Sector Specific Standards of 
Accessibility has been entrusted with 20 Ministries/Departments which had to 
be sent to DEPwD for notification under the RPwD Rules, 2017. This work 
has been initiated and is being followed up by DEPwD through regular 
letters, video conferences and Ministry/Department specific discussions. So 
far, out of 20 Ministries/Departments Accessibility for the ICT products and 
services have been notified in RPwD Rules (Amendment) 2023 by BIS and 
adopted by MEITY. In addition to the above, it is to highlight that 
Department of Law and Justice, Department of Consumer Affairs and 
Department of telecommunication are following the guidelines of MEITY and 
MoHUA respective to their domain. Other than this, 5 Ministries namely 
MoHUA, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare and Department of Sports have notified their guidelines in 
official gazette and are currently underway of draft and final notification in 
RPwD Rules. Remaining 11 ministries are at various stages of finalisation of 
their respective sector specific accessibility guidelines”. 

10 
 
16. The Committee had, in earlier recommendation, appreciated the 
Accessible India Campaign as an excellent step towards building an 
inclusive society. However extension of deadlines has delayed the 
fulfillment of the goals which can potentially dilute the outcomes of the 
scheme. The Committee find that while progress has been made in terms 
of framing of AIC specific guidelines, trainings etc , yet the objectives of 
the scheme are far from being realized . For instance, so far out of the 20 
Ministries / Departments entrusted with the task of formulation of Sector 
Specific Standards of Accessibility, only 9 Ministries have done it so far 
and 11 are yet to finalise their guidelines. The Committee would like to 
stress on the fact that AIC seeks to build a truly inclusive and barrier free 
environment for PwDs and hence such a lackadaisical attitude of some of 
the Government agencies is very disheartening. They, therefore, impress 
upon the Department to accord utmost priority to removing any 
impediments in successful implementation of the scheme and 
continuously remind the remaining Departments to finalise their 
guidelines expeditiously, in coordination with the Ministries/States/UTs 
so as to enable the PwDs avail the intended benefits seamlessly. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.7) 
17. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that National Action Plan (NAP) for Skill Development of 
Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) was launched in March, 2015 to provide skill 
training to PwDs for enabling them to become self reliant and productive and 
to integrate them with the mainstream of the society. The skilling of PwDs 
assumes considerable significance in helping them seek gainful employment 
resulting in their financial empowerment. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the purpose of imparting training and certifying the 
candidates and to enhance employment skills for the section of society 
perceived as most unemployable, should not suffer for want of necessary 
procedural formalities of validation of training centres and setting up of a CNA 
for the Scheme for PFMS monitoring. Hence, the Department are urged to 
focus on faster decisions at all levels so as to leverage the placement/self-

11 
 
employment of the trained/certified candidates to a sizeable extent as well as 
to maximize utilisation of the earmarked funds apart from appointing a CNA 
for monitoring purposes. In view of the fact that Skill training under NAP is a 
critical component and focal point for effective implementation of SIPDA, the 
Committee urge the Department to follow up the measures initiated so as to 
ensure maximum involvement of the district machinery as well as efficient 
centralized monitoring. The Committee further find that the Department is 
taking initiatives like collaborating with e-commerce giants like Amazon and 
Flipkart and tying up with NGOs and other organizations to not only impart 
training but also for placement of the trained candidates. The Department 
was also mooting approaching industry organizations like CII, FII, ASSOCHAM 
etc to extend mentorship for such training programmes. While this is very 
welcome step, the Committee would like to be kept informed of any actions 
taken in this regard”. 
18. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities), in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“This is a Central Sector scheme which is implemented through empanelled 
training partners. Earlier, State Government recommendation was required for 
submitting project specific proposals. However, delay and no response from 
the State Governments lead to procedural delay. Hence, keeping in view that 
this is a Central Sector Scheme, recommendation of State Govt. is now not 
mandatory. The Department has set up a Central Project Monitoring 
Unit(CPMU) to oversee the implementations of various scheme/Programme of 
the Department including National Action Plan for Skill Development of 
Persons with Disabilities(PwDs). 
          The skill training is conducted for Persons with Disabilities who have 
certain infrastructural & accessibility requirements to attend the training 
courses, hence center validation is important to check accessibility of the 
centers. CNA accounts have already been opened and operational. So, there 
would not be any more procedural delay due to CNA. The Centre validation 
process has been made easy to avoid any delay in the process. As soon as 

12 
 
request received from empanelled training partner(ETPs), immediate action is 
taken by SCPwD to validate centre through on-line mode/physical mode as 
the case may be.     
The Department is in the process of developing PM-DAKSH Portal for online, 
effective, transparent and faster process of implementation of the scheme. 
Candidates can register for the skill training courses of their choice. Details of 
the candidates will be fetched through UDID. Candidates will have their 
profiles to access study material, question papers, details of training, 
assessment and certification. Desirous training partners can also apply for the 
scheme through this portal and their applications (EOI & PSP), center 
validation, issuance of offer and commencement letters etc. will be processed 
through the portal. Administration (DEPwD), SCPwD and NHFDC will also 
have their own login credentials to view and update on their work.  On the 
PM-DAKSHA Portal provision has also been made for placement of trained 
PwDs in various Job aggregators and tracking of placed candidates. 
The guidelines for the National Action Plan for Skill Development of Persons 
with Disabilities is being revised. Many additions and changes have been 
made in order to make the process of applications, target allocation and 
installments more easier and less time consuming and to promote ease of 
doing business and employment of PwDs. Certain reasonable 
accommodations specific to persons with disabilities have also been added.  
The Department has connected with different job aggregators and corporate 
working in the field of hiring persons with disabilities. MOUs will be signed 
with the organizations and a portal for providing job opportunities and 
employment to PwDs will be collaboratively developed. Data regarding job 
vacancies will be fetched and made available on a Job vacancies map to 
registered persons with disabilities”.  
19.  While appreciating the various efforts made by the Department to 
optimally achieve the targets set during 2023-24 under National Action 
Plan (NAP), the Committee urge the Department to expedite finalisation of 
the Guidelines  for NAP as well as MoUs with job aggregators and 
corporates working in the field of hiring PwDs. The Committee also 

13 
 
appreciate the proposal of developing a job portal exclusively for PwDs 
and call upon the Department to bring more vigour to the measures 
already initiated so that larger number of PwDs, enrolled and trained 
under NAP, are suitably employed.  It would greatly contribute in the 
empowerment of PwDs, which is the sole objective under the Department.  
 
 
 
 
  

14 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.16) 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities have an enormous social responsibility on their shoulders, and a national 
obligation as well, to mainstream disability, remove stigma and negative stereotyping 
and laying the foundation of a truly inclusive society through their schemes and 
initiatives, and contribute directly and indirectly to the nation's welfare. The 
Committee further note that as a signatory to The United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of persons with Disabilities (CRPD), India has enacted the Rights of Persons 
with Disabilities Act, 2016 which seeks to empower persons with disabilities to live 
independently and with dignity. While the Government of India aims to create an 
inclusive society for persons with disabilities yet there are numerous hurdles faced in 
this regard such as lack of economic opportunities, lower educational achievements, 
poorer health, and higher rates of poverty. The Committee are however of the 
opinion that the biggest stumbling block would be the high prevalence of social 
stigma attached to disability. They are of the opinion that persons with impairments 
become ‘disabled’ only when the society denies them an enabling environment that 
gives them a chance to lead a dignified life. The Committee understand that there 
are many historical and other factors responsible for their predicament, nonetheless, 
they are convinced that with earmarking of adequate funds alongwith perspective 
planning, proactive leadership and prudent and judicious management of the 
allocations, a truly inclusive society can be evolved. 
Reply of the Government: 
Social stigma attached to disability is one of the many problems faced by the 
Persons with Disabilities historically and empowerment of these persons will uplift 
not only their economic conditions but also pave way for replacement of social 
stigma with positive and self-reliant identity. Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016 (RPwD) by the Government is a major step in this direction. The Act has 
safeguards to prevent abuse and discrimination on the basis of disability and on 
other hand, the Act also provides for tangible benefits to persons with disabilities for 
their overall empowerment. Further, the Central Government is also implementing 

15 
 
various schemes under which financial aid is provided to these persons and 
provisions related to assistive devices and corrective surgeries are also available. 
These endeavors have already started to show results across the country and will 
further improve the condition in few years to come. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.2.8) 
The Committee note that the BE amount proposed by the Department for the year 
2023 -24 was ₹1,239.65 crore, which was reduced to ₹1,225.15 crore as BE by the 
Ministry of Finance. Reportedly, the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) had in 
2021, locked both the allocations and physical targets towards the Central Sector 
Schemes namely ADIP, SIPDA, DDRS and Scholarship for 5 years ie. till 2025-26. 
The Committee therefore urge the Department to review the underutilization of funds 
and take appropriate remedial measures with focused attention on regular 
monitoring and strict evaluation to ensure optimal utilization of the remaining amount 
in the coming 3 years till 2025-26 as per the EFC decision, locking targets of four 
schemes of the Department. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Department is taking appropriate remedial measures to utilize the allocated 
funds under the Central Sector Schemes of the Department. However, the 
suggestion of the Committee is noted for compliance and more effective budgetary 
utilization. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.3.15) 
The Committee find that non receipt of Utilization Certificates and non-receipt of 
adequate proposals under SC, ST and NER Categories, deficient documents from 
NGOs/IAs affected the overall financial performance of the Department. In this 
context, the Committee find that non-receipt/late receipt of ‘Utilization Certificates’ 
and viable adequate proposals under SC, ST and NER Categories from various 
States/ implementing partners has become a perennial problem causing under-
utilization of funds consistently over the years. Taking into cognizance the various 
measures taken by the Department which include inter-alia monitoring of flow of 

16 
 
funds through PFMS, physical visits, video conferencing with Implementing 
Agencies/State Governments, Review Meetings by Secretary, DEPwD, monitoring of 
expenditure under various schemes through periodic senior level officers meetings 
etc. for maximum utilization of allocated funds, the Committee feel that these efforts 
should result in better financial performance and receipt of good proposals from 
States well in time, hence desire that focused attention needs to be paid towards 
removing all impediments and concrete measures taken accordingly. The Committee 
note that the introduction of the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) model with effect from 
1.4.2022 has brought in a revised process of fund flow under Central Sector 
Schemes on the PFMS Portal, which was finalised in August, 2022. Recognising that 
changes in existing processes and procedures take time to regularise, the 
Committee urge the Department to expedite all necessary procedural formalities for 
implementation of the CNA model in their Central Sector Schemes. 
Reply of the Government: 
Artificial Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO) and National Institutes 
functioning under the administrative control of the Department are the major 
implementing agencies in respect of 'Assistance to Disabled Persons for 
Purchase/Fittings of Aids/Appliances (ADIP)' Scheme. They have been instructed by 
this Department to increase their activities in NE Region for the distribution of aids & 
assistive devices to Divyangjan under the Scheme.  Further, Ali Yavar Jung National 
Institute for Speech and Hearing Disabilities(AYJNISH), Mumbai, the Nodal Agency 
for implementation of the Cochlear Implant program has also been directed to create 
awareness about the need, importance and provisions of the said program in order 
to maximize the benefit of the Programme for the beneficiaries in NE Region. .
 Further, the process of the implementation of the CNA module has been 
successfully completed and the funds are released and utilized by the Implementing 
Agencies through CNA Module under the Central Sector Schemes of the 
Department. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
  

17 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.26) 
The Committee note that the constraints with respect to performance of the Scheme 
for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA) inter-
alia include the adverse effect of Covid19, non-submission of viable proposals by the 
Implementing Agencies, pendency of utilisation certificates, proposals not duly 
recommended etc. The Department are making all the efforts for achieving the 
targets for the year 2023-24. The Committee emphasise that SIPDA is the most 
comprehensive scheme for PwDs in India today and therefore call upon the 
Department to fortify their monitoring and coordination mechanism. As a CPMU has 
been set up and a Sugamya Bharat App has been launched, the Committee hope 
that targets set for various schemes under SIPDA would be achieved optimally. The 
Committee trust that the Department would continue to take appropriate steps to 
boost their performance during FY 2023-24 with regard to utilisation of allocated 
budget by taking recourse to robust measures which would entitle them to obtain 
requisite Revised Estimates/funds through supplementary grants for effectively 
carrying out the planned activities. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Department is taking initiatives to enhance the existing ecosystem for the easy 
accessibility for Persons with Disabilities. Some recent initiatives that include are:  
a. Memorandum of Understanding with Council of Architecture: 
Department envision to encourage formal educating bodies to focus and 
mandate courses in the Bachelor of Architecture in the existing curriculum 
pertaining to universal accessibility and mandatory study of 
standards/guidelines formulated for this purpose. DEPwD and COA have 
joined hands to mandate the Inclusion of mandatory credits/modules etc. 
related to universal accessibility, accessibility features for PwDs in the 
B.Arch course and other related matters pertaining to outreach etc.  
b. Training of State officers for universal accessibility: In view of the 
growing demand for an inclusive, safe, and comfortable experience for 
Persons with Disabilities, ensuring incorporation of accessible features in 
the built environment is the need of the hour and for the same, 
accessibility at core is essential to be imparted in the minds of 
implementing agencies to ensure the universal accessibility. In view of the 
above context, this Department envision to propose a 2-3 day training 

18 
 
courses for all State PWD engineers regarding the sensitization towards 
the importance of accessibility for all, key accessible features in buildings 
as per Harmonised Guidelines 2021 of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs (MoHUA), statutory provisions in the Right of Persons with 
Disability Act 2016 (RPwD Act 2016) and Right of Persons with Disability 
Rules 2017 (RPwD 2017). This course may help in sensitizing the State 
PWD engineers towards the latest guidelines for achieving universal 
accessibility in built environment, create understanding for making new 
buildings accessible by incorporating key accessible features and retrofit 
the existing buildings as per the latest guidelines of MoHUA. For this 
purpose, it is requested from CPWD training academy to curate a 2–3-day 
training course for all State PWD engineers and share the information 
regarding a tentative timeline and procedure for launching this course. In 
view of this context, department letter vide dated 07.02.2023 was shared 
with CPWD training academy.  
c. In addition to the above, CPWD is conducting two trainings both offline 
and online in the current FY 2023-24 for CPWD officers. In this regard, this 
department have requested CPWD training academy to provide slots for 
the training of State PWD officers in the upcoming training programmes.  
To which CPWD training academy have responded to accommodate 20 
State/UT PWD officers. For this purpose, States/UTs have been requested 
to nominate PWD officers who shall be attending the upcoming training in 
month of August. As on date, nominations from Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, 
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh have been received. The response from 
other States/UT is awaited.  
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 

19 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.28) 
 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Government in issuing 89.29 lakh 
Unique Disability Identity (UDID) Cards so far in the country. The Committee note 
that the Unique Identification Card is a single document of identification and 
verification of the disabled for availing various benefits in the future. The entire 
process of application is only available in online mode and that the persons in 
remote and rural areas of low connectivity may be denied the benefits of the 
scheme, the Committee were happy to find that efforts are being made by the 
Department to personally reach these people at their location through their network 
to get them enrolled under the scheme and that even the persons have less than 
40% disability are also being considered for issuing the cards. Another laudable 
initiative has been the despatch of physical UDID cards by SpeedPost which 
ensures better accountability. The Committee also appreciate that UDID card is 
available under the DigiLocker App saving PwDs the trouble of carrying the physical 
card. The Committee feel that all these steps are in the right direction and encourage 
the Department to explore other innovative methods of increasing the coverage 
under UDID. The Committee also suggest that appropriate publicity be given to this 
scheme to increase the coverage especially in rural areas where a large majority of 
the disabled reside. 
Reply of the Government: 
As on 25.05.2023, 94.09 Lakh Unique Disability Identity (UDID) Cards has been 
generated in the country.  
The Department has noted the suggestions of the Committee.  
In order to bring transparency and to reduce the burden of paperwork on the PwDs, 
the UDID has been mandated for various schemes of the Department and its 
associated organizations. In case of UDID number is not available, UDID enrollment 
number (generated through UDID Portal) along with certificate of disability is 
mandated. The Department has conducted two meetings in the month of April, 2023 
and May, 2023 with 54 lowest performing districts in the country to reduce pending 
applications for UDID.   The Chief Medical Officers (CMOs) and District Social 
Welfare Officers were requested to speed up the UDID Project along side creating 
awareness in rural areas. The Department through its National Institute for 

20 
 
Empowerment of Persons with Visual Disabilities (NIEPVD), Dehradun has released 
an awareness  generation  program to promote UDID Project through its community 
based radio channel  and youtube channel ‘91.2 NIVH Hello Doon’ .  It promotes 
awareness of the process and benefits of the UDID. State Coordinators are 
designated in each States/UTs with a monthly remuneration upto Rs. 50,000/- per 
month for facilitating the PwDs and monitoring the progress of UDID.The Scheme 
also has provision to release Rs. 1.50 lakh to 2.50 lakh to State social welfare in 
each district based on the population of the district for awareness generation and 
publicity of UDID. 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.6.7) 
The Committee note that National Action Plan (NAP) for Skill Development of 
Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) was launched in March, 2015 to provide skill 
training to PwDs for enabling them to become self reliant and productive and to 
integrate them with the mainstream of the society. The skilling of PwDs assumes 
considerable significance in helping them seek gainful employment resulting in their 
financial empowerment. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
purpose of imparting training and certifying the candidates and to enhance 
employment skills for the section of society perceived as most unemployable, should 
not suffer for want of necessary procedural formalities of validation of training 
centres and setting up of a CNA for the Scheme for PFMS monitoring. Hence, the 
Department are urged to focus on faster decisions at all levels so as to leverage the 
placement/self-employment of the trained/certified candidates to a sizeable extent as 
well as to maximize utilisation of the earmarked funds apart from appointing a CNA 
for monitoring purposes. In view of the fact that Skill training under NAP is a critical 
component and focal point for effective implementation of SIPDA, the Committee 
urge the Department to follow up the measures initiated so as to ensure maximum 
involvement of the district machinery as well as efficient centralized monitoring. The 
Committee further find that the Department is taking initiatives like collaborating with 
e-commerce giants like Amazon and Flipkart and tying up with NGOs and other 
organizations to not only impart training but also for placement of the trained 
candidates. The Department was also mooting approaching industry organizations 
like CII, FII, ASSOCHAM etc to extend mentorship for such training programmes. 

21 
 
While this is very welcome step, the Committee would like to be kept informed of any 
actions taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government: 
This is a Central Sector scheme which is implemented through empanelled training 
partners. Earlier, State Government recommendation was required for submitting 
project specific proposals. However, delay and no response from the State 
Governments lead to procedural delay. Hence, keeping in view that this is a Central 
Sector Scheme, recommendation of State Govt. is now not mandatory. The 
Department has set up a Central Project Monitoring Unit(CPMU) to oversee the 
implementations of various scheme/Programme of the Department including 
National Action Plan for Skill Development of Persons with Disabilities(PwDs).   The 
skill training is conducted for Persons with Disabilities who have certain 
infrastructural & accessibility requirements to attend the training courses, hence 
center validation is important to check accessibility of the centers. CNA accounts 
have already been opened and operational. So, there would not be any more 
procedural delay due to CNA. The Centre validation process has been made easy to 
avoid any delay in the process. As soon as request received from empanelled 
training partner(ETPs), immediate action is taken by SCPwD to validate centre 
through on-line mode/physical mode as the case may be.   The Department is in the 
process of developing PM-DAKSH Portal for online, effective, transparent and faster 
process of implementation of the scheme. Candidates can register for the skill 
training courses of their choice. Details of the candidates will be fetched through 
UDID. Candidates will have their profiles to access study material, question papers, 
details of training, assessment and certification. Desirous training partners can also 
apply for the scheme through this portal and their applications (EOI & PSP), center 
validation, issuance of offer and commencement letters etc. will be processed 
through the portal. Administration (DEPwD), SCPwD and NHFDC will also have their 
own login credentials to view and update on their work.  On the PM-DAKSHA Portal 
provision has also been made for placement of trained PwDs in various Job 
aggregators and tracking of placed candidates. 
The guidelines for the National Action Plan for Skill Development of Persons with 
Disabilities is being revised. Many additions and changes have been made in order 
to make the process of applications, target allocation and installments more easier 
and less time consuming and to promote ease of doing business and employment of 

22 
 
PwDs. Certain reasonable accommodations specific to persons with disabilities have 
also been added. The Department has connected with different job aggregators and 
corporate working in the field of hiring persons with disabilities. MOUs will be signed 
with the organizations and a portal for providing job opportunities and employment to 
PwDs will be collaboratively developed. Data regarding job vacancies will be fetched 
and made available on a Job vacancies map to registered persons with disabilities.  
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.6.8) 
The Committee desire the Department to organize effective awareness campaigns in 
tandem with the State/UT Governments and other stakeholders, to educate the 
target group about the long term benefits of the scheme so as to persuade and 
mobilize them to get themselves enrolled under the immensely gainful scheme. The 
Committee would also like the Department to create a mechanism to track 
candidates placed across all the schemes, for at least one year, post completion of 
training/certification/orientation to gauge their placement/self employment proportion 
and the effectiveness of the training imparted. Based on the findings and feedback 
from beneficiaries, the Department can take remedial measures as required. 
Reply of the Government: 
The Department is implementing Awareness Generation and Publicity Scheme 
separately under which awareness about various scheme/programme of the 
Department is being spread about various scheme Programme of the Department in 
across the country.  
The skilling scheme of the department is being on-boarded on PM DAKSH 
under the Skilling portal wherein the Empanelled Training Partners will share all the 
details of PwDs placed after training. Accordingly, the Department shall track and 
verify the details of PwDs placed on PM DAKSH. The PwDs shall also have the 
opportunity to rate and provide feedback on the ETPs and Employers with whom 
they are placed. The Department then shall take necessary measures to improve the 
skill training and employment of PwDs. 
A National Level Stakeholder Consultation meeting was organized by the 
Department on 4th May, 2023 to create awareness about the scheme in which more 
than 100 experts and resource persons in the skilling and placement ecosystem 
participated including industry leaders, academicians, NGO founders, job 
aggregators and persons with disabilities experienced in skill training. Suggestions 
were taken from the participants on the scheme guidelines and through working 
groups, various models for skilling and employment were developed. 

23 
 
Moreover, based on the 4th May National Level Stakeholder Consultation, 
various companies and Job aggregators lime Lemon Tree Hotels, Youth4Jobs, 
Amazon, Atypical Advantage, Infosys, Nukkad Cafe among others have shown their 
interest to collaborate with the Department to provide job opportunities to PwDS. 
Accordingly, in parallel to the Skilling portal, the Department has designed an 
Employment portal on PM DAKSH that shall be a one-stop-destination for PwDs to 
apply for jobs across the country. Under the Employment portal of PM DAKSH, the 
companies and Job Aggregators shall share the job vacancies available for PwDs, 
that will be Geo-tagged by the Department and accordingly the PwDs would be able 
to apply as per their interest. Further once the PwDs apply to the job they are 
interested in via PM DAKSH, all the details of PwDs would be tracked on PM 
DAKSH including their post-application placement processes as well as post-
placement details. Eventually, review and feedback mechanism shall also be 
developed on PM DAKSH wherein the PwDs can rate as well as share their 
experiences with an employer and thus remedial measures shall be taken by the 
Department in consultation with the Employers. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.7.9) 
The Committee find that under DDRS, funds are released to NGOs for projects of 
Special Schools, rehabilitation centres, preparatory schools, cross disability pre-
schools, early interventions centres, etc. relating to rehabilitation of persons with 
disabilities aimed at enabling them to reach and maintain their optimal, physical, 
sensory, intellectual, psychiatric or socio-functional levels. The Committee have 
been assured by the Department of full utilization in the current financial. They 
therefore urge the Department to intensify their efforts in removing the recurring 
impediments which have been hampering the implementation of the DDRS and 
ensure maximum achievement of financial and physical targets. 

24 
 
Reply of the Government: 
During the financial year 2022-23,  grants-in-aid for an amount of Rs.114.69 
Crore  against RE for Rs. 105.0 crore has been released  to Non-Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs) for running the projects under Deendayal Divyangjan 
Rehabilitation  Scheme against RE 105.00 Crore. 
Further, GIA has been released to 389 NGOs during 2022-23 as compared to 318 in 
2021-22. Total 35349 beneficiaries  have been benefitted during the year 2022-23 as 
compared to 30173 in 2021-22. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.10.6) 
The Committee note that NHFDC administers two loan schemes viz Divyangjan 
Swavlamban Yojana for loans upto ₹50.00 lakh and Vishesh Microfinance Yojana for 
loans upto ₹60,000. The Committee further note that since 2020-21, the organization 
is no longer receiving funds from the Government. The Committee find that the 
coverage of loans of the NHFDC is spread across several States. The Committee 
have been apprised about the steps initiated by the NHFDC as part of their efforts to 
improve their performance. Taking into account the crucial need to augment creation 
of gainful employment opportunities for the intended beneficiaries, the Committee 
desire that the measures so initiated be pursued vigorously so as to achieve the 
desired end results. The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism to assess the requirement and sustainability of 
loans forwarded so as to ensure increased fund disbursal and utilisation to effectively 
meet the requirements of the intended beneficiaries. The Committee further 
recommend that the performance of the Implementing agencies be constantly 
monitored with an aim to encourage due diligence and proper utilisation of the loan 
amount disbursed. 
Reply of the Government: 
A. In the matter of pursuing the measures for empowerment of the target group, 
the Corporation has been following the principal of advance funding as well as 
refinancing. Under advance funding mechanism, the Corporation : 

25 
 
a)  At the beginning of each financial year, NHFDC notionally allocate funds to 
the implementing agencies.  
b)  Funds up to 50% of notional allocation is released as advance funds by 
NHFDC to the implementing agencies after receipt of request for release, for further 
disbursement to PwDs under their delegated authority for speedy implementation of 
project.  
c)  The balance amount shall be released, on request, on receipt of 80% 
utilization of 50% of Notional Allocation released earlier.  
d)  The minimum notional allocation is Rs 20.00 lakhs to any SCA.  
In addition to the above, the Corporation continuously reviewed its schemes and 
take appropriate action to reach out to maximum number of Persons with Disabilities. 
following measures have been put in place: 
i) Simplification of Lending Guidelines and Credit based funding -NHFDC has 
revisited on August, 2019 its schemes and Guidelines to enhance its effectiveness 
and extend the outreach. NHFDC introduced new Guidelines for Credit Based 
Funding and amalgamated all existing loan schemes (self-employment & education 
loan scheme) into a single loan scheme called Divyangjan Swablamban Yojana to 
enhance its effectiveness and reach to the persons with disabilities. 
ii) NHFDC has enhanced upper loan limit from Rs. 25.0 lakh to Rs. 50.00 lakh. 
iii) NHFDC has enhanced education loan limit from Rs. 10lakh to Rs. 50lakh. 
iv) NHFDC has reduced rate of interest on education loan from 9% to 4% p.a.. 
v) Delegation of Authority to SCA :  The authority of SCA to  sanction loan to the 
beneficiary is enhanced from Rs. 10.0 lakh to Rs. 50.0 lakh per project. Now SCAs 
can sanction and release loan upto Rs.50.00 Lakhs from advance funds under 
delegation of authority. 
vi) UDID No. : In the interest of transparency and identification, an additional 
condition of Possession of Unique Disability ID (UDID) Number/ UDID Enrollment 
Number (in case UDID No. is not available) has been stipulated as one of the 
essential requirement under DSY. 

26 
 
vii) Enhancement of activities area : NHFDC has enhanced activities area. Now 
PwDs can apply for loan for starting any activity contributing directly or indirectly in 
the income generation or helping PwD in their overall process of empowerment.  
viii) Tie ups with Public Sector Banks/ Regional Rural Banks/Rural Livelihood 
Mission : NHFDC has tied-up with some Public Sector Banks/ Regional Rural Banks 
enhance the outreach of the Corporation. Also, NHFDC has initiated dialogues with 
various Rural Livelihood Mission for financing disabled SHGs for various livelihood 
supports. 
ix)  NHFDC Swavalamban Kendra (NSK) : NHFDC has rolled out the concept of 
NHFDC Swavalamban Kendra (NSK) by converging the credit needs, skilling needs, 
assured business linkage needs, etc on pilot scale basis and aspires to convert into 
a grandiose scheme. These NSKs are as mini incubation centers with hands on 
skilling on the locally relevant and viable businesses to train the PwDs for self-
employment opportunities in and around their localities. 
x) Marketing/ online marketing support to the PwD Entrepreneurs :  
NHFDC is also facilitating PwD entrepreneurs in marketing (online & offline) their 
goods and services by aggregation of their products and services, using online 
marketing platform.  Some of the products made by PwDs are now available on 
leading e-marketing platform. During the current financial year 2023-24, NHFDC 
shall organize 12 Divya Kala Mela (one in the each month) across the country. 
xi) Marketing/ online marketing support to the PwD entrepreneurs :  
Providing hand holding support to PwD entrepreneurs in marketing their products is 
an important aspect in the process of effort of their economic empowerment through 
concessional loaning. As the PwD entrepreneurs with their mobility/communication 
limitations, may sometimes find it difficult to market their products and services. 
(a) Offline marketing support: 
NHFDC extends assistance to Persons with Disabilities in marketing their products. 
PwDs are regularly sponsored to participate in various exhibitions. NHFDC also 
facilitate online and offline marketing of Products of PwDs to enhance their business 
reach. 

27 
 
Since last financial year, the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities made NHFDC as the nodal organization to organize National Exhibition 
of products and artifacts made by Divyang artisans under the brand name of Divya 
Kala Mela. So far four (04) Divya Kala Melas have been held namely at Delhi (2nd to 
7th December 2022), Mumbai (16th to 25th February 2023), Bhopal (12th to 21st March 
2023) and Guwahati (11 to 17 May 2023). The Divya Kala Melas turned out to be 
grand success in terms of sheer number of public turn out and sales. The recently 
held Divya Kala Mela at Guwahati also evoked good response. The Divya Kala 
Melas are also helpful in sensitizing the society about disability issues.  These 
exclusive exhibitions cum fairs are helpful in the economic empowerment of PwDs 
by giving them platform for marketing. 
 Online Marketing of Products of PwD Entrepreneurs:  
NHFDC has initiated efforts to directly support the PwD entrepreneurs in marketing 
their goods and services using existing online marketing platform. Some of the 
products made by PwDs are now available on leading e- marketing platforms 
[Amazon, Flipkart, Gem etc] with the efforts of NHFDC. Also, NHFDC Foundation 
has opened up a window of online marketing of such products through online 
store (https://nhfdcfoundation.org/store/). 
B) NHFDC has following mechanism for monitoring of the schemes/performance of 
implementing agencies and effectively utilization of loan : 
i)   Utilization of loan: 
The funds made available to implementing agencies are to be utilised within a period 
of 120 days from the date of release of funds. The implementing agencies are 
required to submit the utilisation of funds.  
ii) Field Inspection of NHFDC beneficiaries:  
NHFDC periodically conducts field inspection of assisted beneficiaries by the officials 
of NHFDC and/or outside agencies in various states. 
iii) Evaluation  by external agencies:- 
NHFDC also engages external agencies from time to time to evaluate/inspect the 
implementation of its schemes in the states. 

28 
 
Recently, an impact assessment was carried out in respect of NHFDC schemes, 
through third party agency NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS). The 
assessment covered the period from 2014-15 to 2019-20 (i.e. 6 years) in 21 states.  
iv) National and Regional conferences/ workshops:  
NHFDC regularly organizes National and Regional conferences/workshops of its 
State Channelising Agencies. The performance of SCA’s in respect of 
implementation of NHFDC schemes is reviewed by CMD, NHFDC. The bottlenecks 
in implementation of schemes of NHFDC in respective states are also discussed and 
evaluated. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.25) 
 
The Committee, appreciate the initiative of the Department for launching the ‘Arjun 
ADIP-MIS’ Portal for ADIP Scheme from 15th September, 2022.Developed through 
C-DAC, this portal would not only undertake Real Time Monitoring of beneficiary 
data but also prevent and check duplication of beneficiaries. Besides, it also includes 
online registration of beneficiaries for new devices/repair and file grievances and 
facilitates the implementing agencies in data management and compliance. The 
Committee are confident that this initiative will bring about a welcome change in 
maintaining and generating disability statistics for arriving at accurate numbers for 
equitable allocation as well as setting targets. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is making continuous efforts for streamlining and improving various 
functionalities of the Portal. Also, various types of MIS reports are being incorporated 
from time to time for generating disability statistics. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.29) 
 
The Committee drew the attention to the difficulties faced by those Divyangjan who 
are unable to get their Aadhaar card made due to the fact that owing to particular 
type of disability, they are unable to mark their finger prints for registration purpose. 
When enquired about any remedy for such cases, it was informed that there is a 
provision of ‘Bio-metric exception’ for such Divyangjan desirous of obtaining Aadhaar 
Cards for themselves. Hence, the Committee desire that during the meetings of the 
Central Advisory Board with representatives of the States, the issue may be flagged 
and the implementation authorities are urged to use the Bio-metric exception for 
facilitating such Divyangjan in obtaining their Aadhaar cards. 
 
 

30 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.17) 
The Committee note that since the work of Census 2021 was delayed due to the 
Covid-19 pandemic, the Department are dependent on data generated by Census 
2011. According to Census 2011 data there are 2.68 persons with disabilities which 
accounts for more than 2.21 % of the total population. As the next Census (2021) is 
yet to be completed and results reported, the actual figures of persons suffering from 
the disabilities added after the Act of 2016 will be available in an year or two. In this 
connection, the Committee would like the Department to utilize all available data to 
arrive at the best estimation so that such persons are identified and brought into the 
ambit of the welfare schemes for Divyangjan. While the National Sample Survey 
(76th Round) has issued some sampled estimates of disabled persons, the focus is 
on counting only the people with bench mark disabilities and as per experts captures 
only a part of the population. The Committee therefore urge the Department to find 
an alternate way to include all the disabled persons, as much as possible in their 
welfare schemes till the Census figures come, particularly since most of these 
Divyangjan suffer from either mental or intellectual disability. The Committee also 
urge the Department to emphasize upon the disability surveyors conducting the NSS 
of Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to consult disability experts 
while any survey is being designed, extensively train and sensitize surveyors on 
types of disabilities to include all the categories of disability that are covered in the 
Act of 2016 which is the ultimate aim of the legislation. 
Reply of the Government 
In India, the major sources of statistics on disability are the decennial Population 
Censuses conducted by the Registrar General of India (RGI) and the sample 
surveys on disability conducted by National Sample Survey (NSS) of National 
Statistical Office. As indicated in observation of Standing Committee, the Census 
2011 puts the total number of PwDs at 2.68 crore. The main objective of 76th round 
of NSS during July-December, 2018 was to estimate indicators of incidence and 
prevalence of disability such as cause of disability, age at onset of disability, facilities 
available to the persons with disability, difficulties faced by persons with disability in 

32 
 
accessing/using public building and public transport, arrangement of regular care 
giver, representation of PwDs in labour market, education system etc. This data is 
used during policy formulation for empowerment of PwDs. However, in this survey, 
there is no account of total number of PwDs presently in India.  
With a view to tackle this situation and to bring all PwDs under the ambit of welfare 
schemes meant for them, the Department has mandated UDID card for its various 
schemes as well as schemes of its associated organizations. In case a person with 
disability does not have UDID card, he/she may apply for benefits with the help of 
UDID enrolment number along with certificate of disability. In respect of sensitization 
of disability surveyors, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has 
been requested on 05.06.2023 (copy enclosed). 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No.1.18) 
 
The Committee have come to know that aids and appliances used by PwDs attract 5 
percent charge under the Goods and Services Tax (GST). The Committee believe 
that aids and appliances are critical for persons with disabilities to pursue 
independence, literacy and employment with dignity. While taking cognizance of the 
fact that the Department was taking up this issue with the GST Council at the highest 
level, the Committee wish to emphasise that being a social welfare department 
attending to the most marginalized section of the society, the Department, should 
endeavour to have these items declared tax free. They therefore desire the 
Department to pursue this matter for reaching a favourable conclusion that would 
make aids and appliances more affordable to the persons with disabilities in India. 
Reply of the Government: 
It is to apprise the Committee that the Department is making a continuous endeavor 
in this regard. A letter dated 17.04.2023 was sent to GST Council to draw their 
attention in this regard requesting to exempt aids and assistive devices from GST. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 

33 
 
(Recommendation Para No.5.27) 
The Committee find that the Accessible India Campaign under the umbrella scheme 
of the SIPDA is the flagship scheme of the Department. It seeks to achieve universal 
accessibility for persons with disabilities in Built Environment (Buildings), Transport 
System and Information &Communication Technology ecosystem across the 
country. The importance accorded to this scheme can be gauged from the fact that 
the Campaign is being monitored by Prime Minister Office through PRAGATI, 
Central Advisory Board headed by the Minister, SJE and Cabinet Secretariat through 
a Committee of Secretaries. Under the Central Government all 1100 identified 
buildings have been completed which shows lack of enthusiasm of States towards 
this Campaign. Under the targets for accessible transportation, the Committee find 
that that while all 35 International Airports have been made accessible, 55 out of 69 
Domestic Airports have been made accessible In respect of Railways,709 Type A1, 
A & B Railway Stations had been made fully accessible. In terms of the road 
transport sector the Committee found that 5.96% buses are fully accessible and 
29.05% of buses are currently partially accessible. The Committee wish to stress 
that the AIC presents a gateway to better mobility and reach to ensure equality in 
opportunities and the promise of a better life for PwDs. The Committee are also of 
the opinion that accessibility does not, merely mean access to the point of entrance 
of a building, public transport system etc. Rather it implies that a person with 
disability has access, equal to all others, to all sections and not restricted by his or 
her disabilities. The Committee feel that the challenges before PwDs are immense 
and therefore prudent strategies need to be chalked out to remove the impediments 
to fully achieve the intended objectives of the scheme within the intended timelines. 
The Committee desire to be informed about the progress made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government: 
In addition to the initiatives mentioned in the reply of the observation 5.26, the 
Department is taking up the matter of Formulation of Sector Specific Standards of 
Accessibility with the 20 Ministries/Departments to enhance the accessibility. 
Following the provisions of the Rights for Persons with Disabilities (RPwD) Act 2016 
(Section 40) and RPwD Rules 2017 (Rule 15) and as per CoS recommendations, the 
task of formulation of Sector Specific Standards of Accessibility has been entrusted 
with 20 Ministries/Departments which had to be sent to DEPwD for notification under 
the RPwD Rules, 2017. This work has been initiated and is being followed up by 

34 
 
DEPwD through regular letters, video conferences and Ministry/Department specific 
discussions. So far, out of 20 Ministries/Departments Accessibility for the ICT 
products and services have been notified in RPwD Rules (Amendment) 2023 by BIS 
and adopted by MEITY. In addition to the above, it is to highlight that Department of 
Law and Justice, Department of Consumer Affairs and Department of 
telecommunication are following the guidelines of MEITY and MoHUA respective to 
their domain. Other than this, 5 Ministries namely MoHUA, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Sports 
have notified their guidelines in official gazette and are currently underway of draft 
and final notification in RPwD Rules. Remaining 11 ministries are at various stages 
of finalisation of their respective sector specific accessibility guidelines. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4.24) 
 
The Committee find that Assistance of Disabled Persons for Purchase/Fitting of 
Aids/Appliances (ADIP) is one of the most important schemes for empowerment of 
PwDs by providing assistive devices and corrective surgeries. They note that an 
amount of ₹235.00 crore has been allocated as BE 2022-23 under ADIP, which was 
revised to ₹230.00 crore at RE stage and actual expenditure so far is ₹146.01 crore. 
An amount of ₹245.00 crore has been allocated as BE 2023-24. The outbreak of 
Covid-19 Pandemic and restrictions due to social distancing norms which disrupted 
the entire manufacturing and distribution mechanism of the Scheme have been cited 
as the reasons for shortfalls in expenditure. While taking note of the genuine 
predicament of the Department as large gathering for distribution of aids and 
appliances as well as for holding of camps were suspended, the Committee impress 
upon the Department to now resort to a focused approach by taking up special 
drives regularly for holding of camps, programmes etc during the year 2023-24 to 
ensure full utilization of the BE allocation of ₹245 crore as earmarked for the fiscal. 
The Department has also informed the Committee about their future plan on holding 
camps this year. In this regard, the Committee would like to recommend that in 
addition to the holding of camps etc, the Department should also place emphasis on 
extensive publicity of the scheme so that greater number of PwDs are acquainted 
with the services offered under this scheme and maximum number of PwDs can 
avail the benefits of the same.The Committee suggest that the Department can 
earmark certain days like national holidays/festivals/International day of PwDs etc., 
as is done for the Pulse Polio Immunization campaign, for holding of simultaneous 
camps all across the country annually so that a public perception around this idea is 
created and greater turnout at such camps is ensured. 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government: 
In the year 2022-23, the total expenditure was Rs. 242.25 cr. against the budget 
allocation of Rs. 235.00 cr. which was revised to Rs. 230.00 cr. at RE stage. Artificial 
Limbs Manufacturing Corporation of India (ALIMCO) and National Institutes 
functioning under the administrative control of the Department are the major 
implementing agencies in respect of 'Assistance to Disabled Persons for 
Purchase/Fittings of Aids/Appliances (ADIP)' Scheme. They have been instructed by 
this Department to increase their activities on PAN India basis for the distribution of 
aids & assistive devices to Divyangjan under the Scheme. Hence,  the total budget 
allocation for the year 2023-24 i.e. Rs.245.00 crore is expected to be utilized fully by 
31.3.2024. Noted for compliance on the suggestions of the Committee to 
earmark certain days like national holidays/festivals/International day of PwDs 
etc.,as is done for the Pulse Polio Immunization campaign, for holding of 
simultaneous camps all across the country.  
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) 
O.M. No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
(Recommendation Para No.8.9) 
 
The Committee appreciate the performance under the scheme for scholarship for 
Students with disabilities. It is one of the few schemes where performance of the 
Department has been exceptional. During 2020-21, while the percentage of 
expenditure was almost 98 percent, the following year i.e 2021-22, there was 
overachievement where they managed to spend ₹120.32 cr against RE of ₹110.00 
cr. For the current financial year, the Committee have been assured of a similar 
performance. In respect of physical targets, while the Covid 19 impacted and 
lockdown period of 2020-21 saw a shortfall in the number of beneficiaries, the 
following year the Department appears to have recouped the losses and the 
achievement almost matched the targets. In view of the assurances given by the 
Department that expenditure for the current financial will not only match RE, but also 
exceed the amount, the Committee are of the opinion that allocations for scholarship 
should be strengthened and the Department should approach the Ministry of Finance 
for further augmentation of the outlay. The Committee are of the strong opinion that 
providing monetary support acts as a safety net for students with Disabilities which 
also arrests the dropout rate and gives them an impetus to remain within the 

37 
 
educational system .The Committee desire that the momentum created so far be 
persisted with and periodic assessment of the scheme be carried out so that any 
corrective actions if required can be initiated at the earliest. As the guidelines for 
Free Coaching Scholarship Schemes for students with disabilities are under review, 
they urge the Department to expedite the finalization of the guidelines so that the 
scheme can be rolled out at the earliest and beneficiaries can increase their 
employability through coaching/training/guidance. The Committee would like to be 
kept informed of all decisions taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The process of suitable modification and finalization of the guidelines of Free 
Coaching Scheme is being expedited and it will be completed soon. An online portal 
is being developed for better implementation of Free Coaching scheme and as soon 
as the portal becomes operational, the scheme will be rolled out for beneficiaries. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
(Recommendation Para No.9.8) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that in keeping with the aim for inclusion of PwDs 
in all walks of life, the Cabinet had granted approval for 2 Centres For Disability 
Sports at Gwalior and Shillong respectively. The Committee find that the centre at 
Gwalior is slated for completion by June 2023 and the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for the centre at Shillong is statedly under preparation. The Committee would like to 
highlight that the North Eastern region of India has a rich tradition of sports and the 
development of a sports centre in the region will go a long way in encouraging the 
participation of Sportspersons in national and international sports. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the DPR for the Shillong Centre and other preparations be 
completed fast so that the exercise of securing the necessary permissions, 
allocations etc may begin in right earnest. 
  

38 
 
Reply of the Government: 
The Centre for Disability Sports at Gwalior is likely to be completed by July 2023. 
The DPR for centre for Disability Sports at Shillong has been prepared and DIB note 
was presented before the Delegated Investment Board, the Board has reviewed the 
project report and recommended that a field visit to Shillong may be planned to 
consult with Sports personnel and other stakeholder in the north east region and 
based on their suggestion DPR may be modified in terms of the cost and facilities 
proposed. 
 (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan) O.M. 
No.1/4/2023-24/Budget/DEPwD dated 16th June, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              RAMA DEVI 
                                            Chairperson, 
26th July, 2023                                                               Standing Committee on 
4     Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                               Social Justice and  
                                    Empowerment  
 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2022-23) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 26TH JULY, 2023. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON  
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  4. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
  5. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  6. Smt. Supriya Sadanand Sule 
  7. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt.Sumtira Balmik 
9. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai Bara 
10. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
11. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
12. Smt Mamata Mohanta 
13. Shri Mukul Balkrishna Wasnik 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita Bhatt Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 
 

40 
 
 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iii)  Fiftieth Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
 Forty-Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
 (2023-24)’ of the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
 Disabilities  (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if 
any, on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report 
and to present the same to both the Houses on the ensuing session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 
  

41 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-FIFTH REPORT ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24)’ OF THE DEPARTMENT OF 
EMPOWERMENT OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (MINISTRY OF SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT). 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
17  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.1.16, 2.8, 3.15, 5.26, 5.28, 6.7, 
6.8, 7.9 and 10.6 
  
09 52.94% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No.4.25 & 5.29  
 
 
02 11.76% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
 
Rec. Para No.1.17, 1.18 & 5.27  
 
03 17.64% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. 4.24, 8.9 & 9.8 
03 17.64% 
   100% 
 
 
 
 