 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (
(SEVENTEENTH
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty
‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’  
August
36 
i 
   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT   
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND  LOK SABHA) Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty
‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the
Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 
                                       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
August, 2022/Sravana
ii 
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.8.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 5.8.2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2022/Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Rights of Persons with Disabilities 

iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE No.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 (iv)  
 
INTRODUCTION  (v)  
CHAPTER I Report 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which have 
been accepted by the Government  
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s reply  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration  
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect 
of which replies of the Government are 
interim in nature 
 
 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix- I Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee held 
on 02.08.2022 
 
 
Appendix- II Analysis of the Action taken by the 
Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation 
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’  
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
 
 SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  9. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
10. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
11. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
12. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
13. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
14. Smt. Geeta Kora 
15. Shri Vijay Kumar 
16. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  18. Shri Arjun Singh 
19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
20. Smt. Rekha Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
23. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
24. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
26. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
*28. Vacant 
**29. Vacant 
***30. Vacant 
****31.   Vacant 
 
* Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla Resigned w.e.f 16.03.2022 
** Smt. Jharna Das Baidya retired w.e.f. 02.04.2022 
*** Smt. Chhaya Verma retired w.e.f. 29.06.2022 
               **** Shri Ramkumar Verma  retired w.e.f. 04.07.2022 
 

v 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T.S. Rangarajan  - Joint Secretary  
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Director 
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar        - Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Banani Sarker Joshi  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment (2021-22) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the 
Report on their behalf, do present this Thirty Sixth Report on the action taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Assessment 
of Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 
(SIPDA)’ relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department 
of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
 
2. The Twenty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 06th August, 2021. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities) furnished their replies 
indicating action taken on the observations/recommendations contained therein 
on 10th November, 2021. The Report was considered and adopted by the Standing 
Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their sitting held on 2nd  
August, 2022. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Third Report of the Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix. 
4. For facility of reference, observations/recommendations/comments of the 
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of this Report.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;         RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
02  August, 2022                                                  Standing Committee on 
11  Sravana, 1944 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
         Empowerment 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Assessment of Scheme for Implementation of the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’ relating to the Ministry of Social 
Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities). 
 
2. The Twenty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 06.08.2021. It contained 20 observations/recommendations.  Replies of Government 
in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined and are 
categorized as under: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Para No. 4.23, 4.26, 5.8, 6.17, 6.18, 6.20, 7.8, 
8.11, 9.4, 11.3 & 13.5 
 
 
 
(Total: 11, Chapter: II)  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: – Para No. 2.8, 2.9, 2.10 
 
 
(Total: 03, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Para No. 3.13, 6.19, 10.4 & 12.3 
 
 
 
 
(Total: 04, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: –  Para No.4.24 & 4.25 
 
 
 (Total: 02, Chapter: V) 
 

2 
 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. CREATION OF BARRIER FREE ENVIRONMENT FOR PERSONS WITH 
DISABILITIES 
 Recommendation (Para No.3.13) 
5. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that grant is provided to the Departments of the 
State Governments/Union Territories, Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies/ 
Public Sector     Undertakings     set     up     by     the     Central/State      
Governments/ UT Administrations including Central and State Universities, to 
create Barrier Free Environment for the persons with disabilities, which includes 
making Government websites at the Central/State and District levels accessible 
to PwDs. The Department could, however, release only ₹44.30 crore during 
2018-19 to 2020-21. Further, only 11 States/UTs could be benefitted under this 
component since 2017-18 and Grants-in-aid could be released to the 
Universities/Colleges/ Institutions etc. in 9 States only. Considering the number 
of States/UTs where no proposals have been undertaken so far, the Committee 
doubt as to when the entire Country would be covered. As there appears to be a 
lack of enthusiasm amongst State Governments/UT administrations on this sub-
scheme, the Committee feel that the Department needs to make extra efforts 
than merely sending routine letters to raise awareness, sensitize and remind 
States/UTs every year for sending viable proposals, if they intend to make this 
sub-Scheme successful. This could also include offering expert advice on 
preparation of viable proposals, preparing ready Reckoners and setting of annual 
targets as being done under Accessible India Campaign (AIC) etc. particularly 
since the Scheme is proposed to continue till 2024-25, after merger of AIC. The 
Committee also note that the work of making websites accessible for the 

3 
 
disabled is languishing as no funds have been released in this regard during the 
last three years. Further, the progress in making the private websites accessible 
is moving at a snail pace as the guidelines are yet to be framed. With on-line 
work becoming a norm in recent times, the Committee are of the strong opinion 
that the methodology adopted for fund allocation/release may be reworked to 
speed up these objectives. The Committee also recommend that the proposals 
received from States currently pending with the Department should be 
expeditiously processed and if handholding is required on some aspects, support 
must be forthcoming from them so that the proposals could be approved and 
implemented in coordination with respective State/UT. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) in their Action taken reply have submitted as under: 
 
“While efforts are made to seek proposals from States/UTs, Implementing 
Agencies (IAs), SIPDA is a Central Sector Scheme hence it depends on 
States/UTs also to send proposals with complete documentation as prescribed 
under the scheme. They are requested to also clear the pending Utilization 
Certificates (UCs)of the previous releases before any further releases can be 
made. The Department takes serious efforts to sensitize the States/UTs to send 
the proposals under Barrier Free component. In the beginning of every financial 
year, the Department invariably writes to all States/UTs to send the proposals 
under Creation of Barrier Free Environment for persons with disabilities under 
SIPDA scheme. In 2020-21, the letter was issued to States/UTs only on 
16.09.2021 due to the proceedings of EFC for the appraisal of the continuation of 
SIPDA scheme being underway earlier. States/UT Governments are advised to 
send the proposals (in original) in correct format along with the documents 
referred to in the checklist as per applicable guidelines prescribed in SIPDA 
scheme. Further, the Department regularly writes to States/UTs and takes up the 
issue at every level including during visits at the level of Hon’ble Minister, Hon’ble 
Ministers of States, Secretary, Joint Secretary and other officials. Video 
Conferencing sessions with States/UTs invariably feature this issue to clear their 
pendency of Utilization Certificates so that any new proposal would not be on 
hold for want of the submission of utilization certificates. Demi-official letters are 
regularly written to States/UTs for example 23.02.2021, 30.06.2021, 05.08.2021 
and 27.08.2021 for clearing the pending UCs. These efforts have helped to bring 
down the pendency of UCs of Institutions/Autonomous organizations from            
₹32.52 crore to  ₹10 crore and of States/UTs from  ₹305.78 crore to  ₹254.44 
crore in the period March, 2021 to September 2021. The accessibility of websites 
in Barrier Free Environment depends upon proposals received. However, the 
Barrier Free sub scheme has a set of eligibility criteria and the guidelines, 

4 
 
following which the proposals need to be sent for grants. These are conveyed to 
States/UTs who are required to follow the procedures while submitting proposals. 
If any State/UT sends the proposal in the correct format as per requirements laid 
down, then it helps in processing it expeditiously. However, all 58 proposals of 
the States/UTs go through technical scrutiny and if some documents/information 
is required, then the same is asked for and thereafter the proposal is placed 
before the Screening Committee of the Department for recommendation.” 
 
7. Keeping in view the lukewarm response by the implementing agencies for 
creation of Barrier Free Environment both in physical and virtual terms as the 
Ministry could release ₹ 44.30 crore during 2018-19 to 2020-21, the Committee had 
recommended to the Ministry to evaluate the objectives/methodology of the 
Scheme and analyse the reasons for its poor performance and take corrective 
actions. The Ministry in their action taken reply have submitted that they were 
undertaking regular correspondence and holding video conferencing sessions 
with the State Governments/UTs for initiating steps for ensuring accessibility for 
PwDs. Further, the Committee also note that the Ministry were regularly 
reminding States/UTs for urgent need to clear pendency of utilization certificates 
which is a pre-requisite for this Scheme.  The Committee, however, feel that these 
efforts, perhaps, are not proving to be adequate as only 11 States have so far  
benefitted from the Scheme. They believe that the Ministry needs to constantly 
sensitise the State Governments on the requirement of a Barrier Free 
Environment for disabled persons to increase their reach and mobility, empower 
them and make them  independent and productive members of the society 
instead of remaining dependent on others.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should bring some out of box ideas for effective implementation of 
this component.  There should also be continuous efforts to make States aware 
about the eligibility criteria of proposals so that those are devoid of any technical 
infirmities to the maximum possible extent.  While reiterating their earlier 
recommendation, the Committee would like the Ministry to move beyond simply 
corresponding with States on this matter and take effective measures for 
expediting the process to ensure that the PwD gets wide accessibility in the 
physical and virtual world across the country in a comfortable manner without 
any impediments.   
 

5 
 
B. NATIONAL ACTION PLAN FOR SKILL DEVELOPMENT FOR PwDs. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.19) 
8. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
“The National Action Plan for Skill Development for PwDs was launched to 
enable persons with disabilities to become self reliant, productive and 
contributing members of the Society. However, it has been found that only 41931 
PwDs have been employed so far out of 1.27 lakh trained. The Committee are 
unable to understand the reasons for such a low level of employment despite 
several measures taken by the Department such as instruction to ETPs to ensure 
employment after training, NHFDC extending loans to PwDs, establishment of 
NSK’s in various States, etc. Moreover, the Department also has the sub-scheme 
of providing incentives to private employers for providing jobs to PwDs, under 
SIPDA, which should be used for trained PwDs. The Committee would also 
emphasize that if training is imparted in a trade that already exists in that area 
and the loan procedures are simplified, the Scheme would attract more persons 
for the training which will make them self reliant. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a comprehensive study may be conducted to identify the 
reasons for such a low employability despite several initiatives of the Department 
and suggest suitable remedy.” 
Reply of the Government 
9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) in their Action taken Reply, have submitted as under: 
 
“Regarding placement of PwDs trained under NAP, it is stated that the 
scheme is implemented as per Common Norms issued by M/o Skill Development 
&Entrepreneurship (MSDE). As per the existing guidelines/norms, the payment of 
final installment is linked to placement and it is released to ETPs on the basis of 
their performance on placement criteria only. As per extant criteria, 3rd instalment 
is not released to ETPs with placement below 40% whereas it is released on Pro-
rata basis to ETPs with placement between 40 to 70% and full amount of 3rd 
instalment is released only to such ETPs achieved a target of 70% placement. 
3rdinstalment has not been released to any ETP for want of authentic data and 
documents. In order to determine the actual number of placed/employed persons 
with disabilities against trained PwDs under “National Action Plan for Skill 
Development of PwDs” as of date, the Department is in the process of collecting 
data from all the ETPs provided fund for skill training to PwDs since 2016-17. 
  

6 
 
With a view to encouraging ETPs for placement, there is also a provision 
of incentive in Common Norms for ETPs which is ₹3,000/- per candidate for 
placement above 70% and ₹ 5000/- per candidate for placement above 85%. As 
per Common Norms, ETPs are also provided fund for organizing job outreach 
activities. Association of Sector Skill Councils as Project Implementing Agencies 
will also help in enhancement of employment opportunities as these 
organizations have good industry connect in their sectors. The Department has 
also been taking initiatives in this regard. NHFDC keeps organizing job fairs on 
regular basis. In order to explore and enhance employment opportunities for 
PwDs, the Department is exploring the possibilities to associate e- commerce 
companies such as Flipkart and Amazon. The Department also envisages to 
holding National level Webinars with speakers from ETPs and big companies to 
explore placement opportunities in private/public sectors and understand the 
issues involved in placement of persons with disabilities in such companies and 
resolve them.” 
 
10. The Committee had directed the Ministry to undertake a comprehensive 
study to identify the reasons for low employment rates, as less than one-third of 
persons with disabilities received gainful employment, in spite of being trained 
under the National Action Plan for Skill Development of PwDs. In their reply, the 
Ministry have submitted that several steps such as incentives to ETPs for 
placement of trained PwDs, association of Sector Skill Councils as project 
implementing agencies, job fairs by NHFDC are being taken by them.  The 
Ministry are also statedly in the process of collecting data from all ETPs for skill 
training to PwDs since 2016-17 under National Action Plan for Skill Development 
of PwDs.  Appreciably, they are further exploring the possibilities for inclusion of 
the skilled PwDs in the burgeoning e-commerce segment. While taking into 
consideration  the efforts being made by the Ministry in this regard and desiring 
to be apprised of progress thereon, the Committee wish to impress upon the 
Ministry to intensify the measures already initiated, strengthen the collaborative 
efforts and take corrective action so that the purpose of imparting training is well 
served. The Committee would like to be apprised about the status of collecting  
data of actual number of placed/employed trained PwDs under National Action 
Plan for PwDs for Skill Development of PwDs since 2016-17. 
  

7 
 
C. STATE COMMISSIONER FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 
Recommendation (Para No.10.4) 
11. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
“As stipulated in the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, all the 
State Governments are required to appoint a State Commissioner for persons 
with disabilities. Also, the State Governments, with the concurrence of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court, by notification, are required to specify for each district, 
a Court of Session to be a Special Court to try the offences under this Act for the 
purpose of providing speedy justice to PwDs. The Committee are surprised to 
note that only 18 States/UTs have appointed independent 
Commissioners/officers holding additional charge till date and 23 States/UTs 
have designated special Courts in terms of the Act, in the last 5 years. The 
Committee are of the view that in the absence of full time State Commissioners 
and designated special Courts, the Scheme is bound to suffer as both the 
Institutions have important role to play as envisaged in the Act. The Committee 
also observe that since the State Commissioner is supposed to have special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation, 
hence appointment of officers with additional charge violates the provisions of the 
Act and defeats the intended purpose of this office. The Committee would 
therefore like the Department to pursue with the States for the appointment of 
State Commissioners and designation of Special Courts without further delay.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
12. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) in their Action taken reply have submitted as under: 
 
“Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCPD) has been 
continuously emphasizing the need of full time State Commissioner for Persons 
with Disabilities for dealing with matters concerned with persons with disabilities 
in all review meetings with States/UTs on earlier occasions. It is also one of the 
recommendations of the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities on 
order to monitor the status of implementations of provisions of the Act. This was 
also communicated in writing to the Chief Secretaries of States/UTs vide D.O. 
letters dated 16.05.2018 and 03.09.2020. The inputs on the 
observation/recommendation are as under: 
 
Special Courts for PwDs in the States/UTs Twenty-nine States/UTs have 
reported availability of Special Courts for PwDs to try the offences under RPwD 

8 
 
Act, 2016 for the purpose of providing speedy justice to persons with Disabilities. 
The list is as under: 
 
Status of Availability of Special Court for PwDs in the States/ UTs 
S.No. Names of the State / UTs Status of 
Constitution Special 
Court 
Yes / No 
1. Andaman & Nikobar Yes 
2. Andhra Pradesh Yes 
3. Arunachal Pradesh No 
4. Assam Yes 
5. Bihar Yes 
6. Chandigarh (UTs) Yes 
7. Chhatisgarh Yes 
8. Dadar & Nagar Haveli (UTs) & Daman & Diu No 
9. Delhi (UTs) Yes 
10. Goa Yes 
11. Gujarat Yes 
12. Haryana No 
13. Himachal Pradesh Yes 
14. Jammu & Kashmir No 
15. Jharkhand Yes 
16. Karnataka Yes 
17 Kerala Yes 
18 Ladshadweep (UTs) Yes 
19. Madhya Pradesh Yes 
20. Maharashtra Yes 
21. Manipur No 
22. Meghalaya Yes 
23. Mizoram Yes 
24. Nagaland Yes 
25. Odisha Yes 
26. Puducherry (UTs) Yes 
27. Punjab Yes 
28. Rajasthan Yes 
29. Sikkim Yes 
30. Tamilnadu Yes 
31 Telangana Yes 
32. Tripura Yes 
33. Uttar Pradesh Yes 
34. Uttrakhand Yes 
35. West Bengal No 

9 
 
 
Appointment of independent Commissioner in States/UTs Sixteen States/UTs 
have reported the availability of Full Time State/UT Commissioners whereas in the 20 
States/UTs the Commissioners have an Additional Charge. Hence, all States have in 
place a Commissioner.  It is also pertinent to mention here that in the erstwhile Persons 
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 
1995 under Section 58 (a), “Coordinate the work of Commissioners” is one of the Prime 
functions of the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCPD)” whereas 
under RPwD Act, 2016 the same has not been mentioned under Section 75. Hence as 
directed by the Committee, the Department will also pursue with the States/UTs on this 
matter.” 
 
13. Concerned about the violation of the Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 
2016, where it is imperative to have a State Commissioner for persons with 
Disabilities in each State, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry 
should pursue with States for appointment of State Commissioner for PwDs and 
designation of Special Courts for PwDs expeditiously. From the reply provided by 
the Ministry, the Committee find that as many as six States are yet to designate 
Special Courts to try the offences under RPwD Act, 2016.  Besides, over 20 States 
/ UTs have State Commissioners for PwDs with additional charge. The Committee 
are unhappy with the manner in which the provisions of the Act are being flouted. 
They wish to remind the Ministry that redressal of grievances is one of the most 
important rights envisaged under this Act and dilution in establishing an 
appropriate mechanism for the same would be an injustice to PwDs, who are one 
of the most marginalised sections in the Country. In view of the crucial and 
urgent need involved in the establishment of special courts in every State of the 
country, the Committee urge the Ministry to accord focused attention in this 
regard so that they make substantial progress in protecting the rights of Persons 
with Disabilities. 
  

10 
 
D. HELPLINE FOR PwDs 
Recommendation (Para No.12.3) 
14. The Committee in their Report had recommended as follows: 
“The Central Advisory Board on disability, in November, 2020, had inter-
alia urged the States/UTs to set up helpline numbers for the disabled persons. 
The Committee are surprised to note that only 10 States have established 
helpline till date which does not include Delhi, and desire that the matter should 
be vigorously pursued with all the remaining States/UTs to ensure that helpline is 
established in all the States/UTs within three months. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the status at the Action Taken stage.” 
Reply of the Government 
15. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) in their Action taken reply have submitted as under: 
 
“The Department issued Comprehensive Disability Inclusive Guidelines for 
Protection and Safety of Persons with Disabilities on 26.03.2020 which, inter-alia, 
mandates the States/UTs to setup helpline for them. The matter was also 
discussed in the meeting of Central Advisory Board on Disability held in 
November, 2020. The Board urged the States/UTs to take measures for the 
implementation of these guidelines and submit a detailed consolidated report. As 
per information available from various States/UTs, following 11 States/UTs have 
so far established helpline for persons with disabilities:- 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Status 
1. Bihar Helpline number set up for Divyangjan- 8448385590, 
0612-2215041 
2. Chandigarh Helpline Number -181 set up for Women, Children, 
 
Senior Citizens and PwDs kept active during COVID 19. 
3. Haryana Helpline number set up for Divyangjan: 
9888176357 (For Sign Language), 9876377800, 
9888888363 
4. Jharkhand Helpline number set up for Divyangjan: 
0651-2401825 
5. Karnataka Toll Free counseling Helpline number for Mental Health: 
18001212830 

11 
 
6. Nagaland Helpline set up for Divyangjan except Hearing Impaired 
- 8258953837, 
For Hearing Impaired 9862300893 
7. Odisha Helpline set up for Divyangjan – 0674-2392803 
8. Rajasthan Helpline number set up for Divyangjan – 18001806127 
9. Tamil Nadu Helpline number set up for Divyangjan – 18004250111 
10. Telengana Toll free helpline for PwDs – 18005728980 
11. Uttar Pradesh Helpline number set up for Divyangjan – 18001801995 
 
The Department requested other States/UTs which have, so far, not set 
up helpline for PwDs vide letter no. 02-01/2021-DD-III dated 06/09/2021 to 
expedite setting up of helpline for PwDs.” 
16. The Committee had recommended for pro-active measures to encourage 
more States in setting up helplines so that coverage is pan-India as only 10 
States have set up helplines for addressing the queries/ problems of PwDs. The 
Committee, however, find that there has been almost no progress in this sphere 
as the coverage has extended to a mere 11 States now. The Committee fail to 
understand this lethargic attitude of the Ministry to enthuse more States in 
undertaking this simplest of tasks. In view of the imperatives involved in the 
setting up of helplines for effective redressal/ resolution of queries of PwDs in all 
States/UTs, the Committee call upon the Ministry to dynamically track the status 
of implementation with the State Governments/ UTs so that the requisite actions 
are taken in a time bound manner. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 4.23) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that the overall progress of the AIC or 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan has been rather slow. Only 494 buildings (29.7%) out of a 
total of 1662 identified buildings have been made accessible by 9 States/UTs and 558 
websites (64.61%) out of 917 websites have been made accessible under this 
Abhiyansince its inception in December, 2015. Despite postponing initial target date of 
July, 2016, several States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab and Tripura still do not have any 
targets/timelines for making 193 buildings accessible by the extended date of June, 
2022. The Committee arealso not satisfied with the pace of work of the line Ministries 
as Railways are lagging much behind the schedule of making model Railway Stations or 
providing complete facilities for Pwds in their identified stations. Similarly the progress 
in other transportation sector i.e. Airports and road transport is discouraging as mostly 
‘partial’ accessibility has been ensured. The Committee also find that penal provisions 
under the Act exist, however those have not been invoked in the cases where 
performance of States/UTs and line Ministries is not satisfactory and in its stead, target 
dates are being extendedcontinuously. The Committee hope that there would not be 
any further extension beyond June, 2022. They recommend that the Department should 
adhere to the deadlines instead of extending those and vigorously pursue with the line 
Ministries/States/UTs to finish the work by target dates. The Committee also 
recommend invoking of penal provisions, in case timelines are not met, as a last resort, 
in the interest of Divyangjan. 
Reply of the Government 
On the issues highlighted in the observation at Para 4.23 above the response of the 
Department is as follows: 
1. Status of Implementation of Built Environment and ICT Ecosystem Targets of 
AIC:Under the Accessible India Campaign for the Target 1.1, so far, access audits have 

13 
 
been conducted for 1662 State Government buildings, of which funds amounting to Rs. 
496.69 crores have been released for initiating retrofitting work in 1183 buildings. So 
far, 16 States/UTs (Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Chandigarh, Delhi, 
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) have reported completion of 
work in 510 buildings. As per information available on the MIS Portal of AIC, further 
work is in progress in 282 buildings reported by 9 States/UTs (Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh).Under the ICT Ecosystem target, 603 State Government 
websites have been made accessible and 459 have been made live. 
2. Follow-Up and Monitoring the progress by State/UT Governments: In regard to 
the matter of repeated extension of timelines and setting up targets by States/UTs for 
completion of work within the extended date of June, 2022, the matter is being 
regularly followed up with all States/UTs through video conferences and letters. During 
the VCs held on 8th and 9th June 2021 and on 14th and 16th September 2021 each 
State/UT was asked to submit the timelines for the completion of work under the AIC 
and a google sheet was also circulated to capture real-time data. Response were 
received from 22 States/UTs, details of which have been provided in Annexure A.The 
work of retrofitment was affected as the construction industry witnessed a slowdown 
due to the pandemic. Letters on regular basis are sent to State/UT Governments latest 
having been sent 31.05.2021 and 22.09.2021.Separately follow-up is also being 
conducted through telephonic and virtual discussions from time to time to State/UT 
Governments including Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab and Tripura to expedite the matter and 
facilitate the troubleshooting of any implementation related issues being faced by them. 
Consequently, responses have been received from Arunachal Pradesh where cost 
estimates for all buildings have been received for processing and release of funds; 
Jammu & Kashmir where 7 buildings have been reported to have been made accessible, 
Punjab where 3 buildings have been made accessible along with retrofitment being 
carried out in 17 other premises and Tripura where work is in progress in 7 buildings 
along with a report that all buildings would be completed within due timelines. 
 3. Follow-up with Central Ministries/Departments: Regular follow-ups are also done 
with Central Ministries/Departments to facilitate and expedite the completion of targets 
under Accessible India Campaign as well as the work of formulation of accessibility 
standards/guidelines. Video conferences and sensitization workshops were held with 20 
Ministries/Departments which were on-boarded for the formulation of accessibility 
standards/guidelines, including line Ministries/Departments such as Railways, Civil 
Aviation, etc. on 23.03.2021, 24.03.2021, 11.06.2021, 29.09.2021 and 29.10.2021, 
wherein discussions were held regarding the status of work progress in regard to the 
targets of AIC. For enhancing the understanding of web-accessibility among the officials 

14 
 
of Central Ministries/Departments, the Department also conducted sensitization 
workshops on Website Accessibility for all Central Ministries/Departments on 
14.07.2021, 22.07.2021 and 29.10.2021. 
4. Accessibility in the Transportation Sector: So far, under the transportation sector 
of AIC, all 709 A1, A & B category railway stations have been provided with seven Short 
Term Facilities. Ministry of Railways has also prepared the guidelines for accessibility 
and completed CCPD Consultation. The final version of the guidelines, incorporating the 
suggestions made by CCPD, is due for submission to this Department for Notification 
under the RPwD Rules 2017.Further, Ministry of Railways vide O.M dated 09.09.2021 
informed that for ‘Model Accessible Railway Station’, New Delhi, Chennai and Kanpur 
Railway Stations have been identified to be developed as Showcase Stations having all 
possible accessible features (list attached at Annexure C) for PwDs. All the enumerated 
facilities except sign language have been provided at New Delhi railway station. 
Similarly, all the enumerated facilities except Braille Signage Board have been provided 
at Kanpur railway station. At Chennai station all the facilities have been provided except 
Divyang friendly few signages which will be recouped soon. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has also reported that 35 International Airports and 55 
Domestic Airports have been provided with features of accessibility and Ambulifts are 
available at 12 airports. The Department, to showcase the efforts being made to make 
air travel accessible for all, has also developed the 2nd Volume of ACCESS- The Photo 
 Digest on Airports which would be launched shortly. This handbook serves as a guide 
for professionals, wherein the requirements of accessibility in the aviation sector is 
explained simplistically through graphical representation and photographs of good 
practices observed in 50 airports from across the country. Similarly, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways is looking into the target of providing accessibility in public 
transport carriers and have reported that, 44,153 (30.01%) buses have been made 
partially accessible and 8,443 (5.73%) made fully accessible. 
The Department has been consistently conveying to these line Ministries for the 
formulation of holistic accessibility standards/guidelines which would cater to end to 
end accessibility of sector specific infrastructure and services. The timeline for the 
notification of the standards/guidelines has been set as 31st December 2021, following 
which as per Section 46 of the Rights for Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 a 
timeframe of 2 years shall be provided for making all services which includes Railways, 
Civil Aviation and Road Transport accessible, i.e. by December 2023. At present, both 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Road Transport & Highways have had consultations of 
their draft guidelines with the Office of Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities 
(CCPD) as required under Section 40 of the RPwD Act 2016, before finalizing the drafts. 

15 
 
Ministry of Railways has also formulated the guidelines and completed CCPD 
consultation. 
5. Monitoring adherence to timelines and invoking penal provisions: In view of the 
expanse of the coverage of the task at hand, the Central Advisory Board, the highest 
decision-making body in the disability sector had extended the timelines for completing 
all target of AIC as June 2022. This would also be in-line with the provisions of the 
RPwD Act, 2016. For services, the timeline for the Notification of the Rules, 2017 has 
been set for December 2021.The Department has taken a policy decision to set the 
sunset date for the Campaign as 31st March 2024, beyond which the Campaign will be 
merged with the Barrier Free Component of SIPDA Scheme. To achieve this vision, 
States/UTs have been informed that no proposal for the release of 1stinstalment of 
funds would be considered beyond 31st December 2021, such that an appropriate 
period of 6 months is available for the completion of work by June 2022. Timeline of 
31st December 2021 has been set for the Ministries/Departments working in the 
services sector to notify the sector specific standards/guidelines under the RPwDRules 
2017. Furthermore, it is submitted that under Sections 89-95 of the RPwD Act 2016, 
penal provisions have been provided for any contravention of the Act or Rule. All 
stakeholders have been reminded of these provisions through letters, sensitization 
workshops and video conferences. As an additional step and as per the directions of 
Hon’ble Prime Minister, the Department also launched the Sugamya Bharat App in 
March 2021 so that complaints regarding inaccessibility of public centric buildings and 
services can be crowdsourced and forwarded to the organizations responsible for 
necessary corrective action. In case of non-responsiveness by organization/department 
in-charge in resolving the issues raised on the App, the Office of the Chief 
Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities and State Commissioner of Persons with 
Disabilities can also take up suo- moto action. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.26) 
 
 In pursuance of the recommendation of National Institute of Labour Economics 
Research and Development, which undertook third party audit of AIC, the Department 
of Higher Education has been directed to develop educational modules for inclusion of 
universal accessibility related studies in the curriculum for Civil Engineering and 

16 
 
Architecture. The Committee also find that all States/UTs have been directed to carry 
out activities similar to the one organized by students of Architecture of Chandigarh 
College of Architecture for community engagement in the field of accessibility and to 
organize training of concerned officers conducted by CPWD on accessibility. The 
Committee, while appreciating these initiatives taken by the Department, would like to 
be informed about the latest status of work done on the directions given to the 
Department of Higher Education and also to States/UTs. The Committee would also like 
the Department to vigorously pursue with all the stakeholders for the implementation to 
avoid any delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Coordination with Department of Higher Education: The Department has been 
coordinating with DoHE on a regular basis, requesting them to expedite the matter 
pertaining to the provision of accessibility features in Higher Educational Institutes, 
inclusion of Accessibility in the curriculum for Civil Engineering and Architecture courses 
and formulation of accessibility standards/guidelines for the higher education sector. 
Several letters have been sent to the Ministry in this regard with the latest being sent 
on 1st October 2021 at the level of the Secretary. In regard tothe formulation of 
standards/guidelines for the higher education sector, UGC has been tasked with 
compiling a holistic document, inclusive of guidelines for the accessibility of physical 
environment as well as associated services and the pedagogical requirements. The draft 
guideline has been prepared and is under public consultation. Consultation with the 
Office of Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities is anticipated to be completed 
by November 2021. The Ministry has also been informed of the Sugamya Bharat App, 
launched on 2nd March 2021 through which, PwDswill be able to raise complaints 
pertaining to inaccessibility of infrastructure and services which would demand prompt 
resolution from the Government’s end. 
 2. Status of work done by the Department of Higher Education: DoHE apprised 
DEPwD vide e-mail dated 16.09.2022, of the inputs received from AICTE vide letter No. 
AICTE/P&AP/Misc/2021/916 dated 3.9.2021(attached) on the 
observation/recommendation and action taken is as follows:- 
a. Inclusion of Accessibility in Higher Education 
1. AICTE constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. M. Balakrishnan, 
former Deputy Director, IIT-Delhi for suggesting initiatives for enabling differently abled 
students by providing accessibility to learning and other infrastructure facilities in 

17 
 
institutions and equal opportunities of empowering them for taking better education 
through various other measures. 
2. The committee submitted its report in April 2021 and it covers the following 
points: 
a) Accessibility Standards for Students with Disabilities Studying in Technical 
Institutions; 
b) Framing Syllabus on Disability, Accessibility and Universal Design; 
c) Introduction of a New Elective Course on Design of Assistive Technologies (for 
other than Civil Engg. and Architecture Students) 
d) Suggested online SWAYAM course(s) and the list of faculty members who will be 
able to offer these courses; 
e) Suggested conducting one Seminar for NGOs and Department of Rehabilitation 
which are already working in this area for sensitizing people and create awareness on 
this issue; 
f) Suggested designing a short term certificate diploma course of one-year duration 
for teachers; and 
g) Suggested that AICTE take an initiative for the promotion of proactive 
engagement of college community (Students and Staff) with NGOs working for the 
people with disability in the neighborhood. 
3. The recommendations of the committee was considered by AICTE Executive 
committee in its 143rd meeting held on June 10, 2021 and the Executive Committee 
appreciated the suggestions of the Committee as it will enable students to provide 
accessibility not only to infrastructural resources, but also to other educational facilities 
for differently abled friendly educational resources and approved the same. 
4. DoHE further, conveyed that architecture curriculum was still awaited from 
School of Planning   & Architecture (SPA). The   same,   as   and   when received, 
would be forwarded to the Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities. 
b. Model Accessible College: The Executive Committee also accorded approval to 
develop one model college in some selected states, which will be having all provisions 
as mentioned in the recommendations of the committee and approved the tentative 
proposed budget of Rs. 75.00 crore (Rupees Seventy-Five Crore only) for 15 states @ 
Rs. 5.00 crore per institute. A detailed proposal for making the institute divyang-friendly 
with learning assistive devices would be chalked out and implemented accordingly. 

18 
 
3. Status regarding verification audits through Student’s Engagement Programmes 
and conducting training of concerned officials through CPWD’s Training Institute: All 
States/UTs, were requested vide letter dated 13.08.2020 to carry out verification audits 
of their facilities through Student’s Engagement Programmes and were also requested 
vide letter dated 23.10.2020 to organize training of their officers through CPWD’s 
Training Institute in Ghaziabad. Only the State of Meghalaya during VCs held in 
December, 2020 and January 2021 informed that the State Government was 
considering conducting training of officials through CPWD so that the verification audits 
of the State Government buildings could be facilitated. 
4. Other initiatives pertaining to education sector taken by the Department: The 
Department is also coordinating with the Department of School Education (DoSEL) and 
Literacy. it has been reported that 8,33,703 government and government aided schools, 
out of 11,68,292 (71%) have been made barrier free with the provision of ramps, 
handrails and accessible toilets, content on accessibility has been integrated by NCERT 
in Classes 1 to 12 and B.Ed syllabi and by State Boards as well as under the Samagra 
Shiksha Abhiyan, provision has been made for in-service training of teachers, and for 
training of special educators. DoSEL has also prepared the draft accessibility 
standards/guidelines for their sector, in consultation with the Office of CCPD which are 
under finalization before being shared with the Department for Notification. 
Furthermore, the Department, on 24.08.2021, jointly with Ministry of Education 
launched ‘Priya-The Accessibility Warrior’, an E-Comic cum Activity Book on Accessibility 
for raising awareness and sensititvity among school going children and stakeholders of 
the education sector. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.5.8) 
 
 Regular receipt of UCs from State/UTs is very significant in the timely release of funds 
under the two sub-Schemes i.e. Creation of Barrier Free Environment and Accessible 
India Campaign, as further installments are not released and future projects not 
considered by the Department in the absence of Utilization Certificates from the 
States/UTs and Implementing Agencies. The Committee are very concerned about the 
delay in submission of Utilisation Certificates by several States and UTs. In case of 
Barrier Free Environment, Utilization Certificates to the tune of ₹ 1259.92 lakh are 
statedlypending from many States for several years. Similarly, in case of Accessible 
India Campaign, Utilization Certificates are pending against several States since 2010-

19 
 
2011. While COVID pandemic has impacted construction activities since 2020, it is 
surprising that lack of knowledge about various standards and similar reasons have 
largely contributed in delay in submission of UCs. The Committee feel disappointed that 
the available mechanism in this regard has not been able to address the persisting 
problem of submission of Utilization Certificates by the States/UTs despite the 
Department making efforts like, sending letters to State Governments, holding VCs for 
getting the pending certificates from States/Implementing agencies, creation of MIS 
Portal as well as monitoring by Secretaries, Ministers and even PMO. The Committee 
feel that withholding of 2nd installment in the absence of pending UCs, which is 
mandatory, obviously makesan adverse impact on the creation of barrier free 
environment for PwDs. Hence, there is a need to study the issue in depth and work out 
a new methodology including hand holding with the stakeholders and sensitization of all 
the Implementing Agencies about the rights of disabled persons as well as assistance of 
established Central agencies like NBCC, so that in submission of Utilization Certificates 
could be expedited and the work on Barrier Free Environment is not disrupted in the 
interest of the disabled persons. The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts 
of the Department to resolve the issue of Utilization Certificates at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As has been rightly noted by the Parliamentary Standing Committee because of the 
pending UCs, further releases are withheld which adversely and persistently affects the 
Schemes. As mentioned in reply to 3.13 earlier, as a result of the continuous efforts 
made by the Department, the pendency of UCs of Institutions/Autonomous 
organizations has been brought down from Rs.32.52 crore to Rs.10 crore and from 
States/UTs from Rs.305.78 crore to 254.44 crore in the period March, 2021 to 
September 2021. Further, Department writes to States/UTs to furnish utilization 
certificate and sends repeated reminders. DO letters were written on 23.02.2021, 
30.06.2021 and 05.08.2021 to States/UTs. Further, the issue is also raised in meetings 
held by Hon’ble Minister, Hon’ble Ministers of State, Secretary and Joint Secretary and 
the status is taken and State/ UTs are requested to furnish the pending UCs.   No new 
sanctions are given unless a substantial portion of the pending UCs is submitted and 
sincere efforts are made to reduce their pendency. However, because of COVID 19 
pandemic that has affected construction activities, the States/UTs are slow in furnishing 
the UCs. However, efforts are going on to make the States/UTs sensitized for clearing 
the pendency of UCs, therefore the Department recently has written DO letters to the 

20 
 
State Governments of Puducherry, Assam, Uttarakhand, Punjab and Himachal Pradesh 
on 27.08.2021 and 29.10.2021 followed up with phone calls and reminder letters on 
27.08.2021. A review meeting by VC was also taken by Secretary, DEPwD with these 
states on 08.11.2021. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.6.17) 
The Committee find that the under National Action Plan for Skill Development since its 
inception in 2016-17, Department has released ₹126.00 Crore and could train 1.27 Lakh 
PwDs. The Committee are concerned to know that the National Action Plan for Skill 
Development, which came into existence in 2016-17, had to undergo vigorous overhaul 
within a span of two years due to operational issues such as lack of guidelines, non-
commencement of training or substantial delay in commencement and completion of 
training, lack of infrastructural facilities/manpower, etc. The Committee strongly feel 
that number of beneficiaries would have been more had the Department prudently 
drawn up proper guidelines for the Scheme at the beginning itself. Thereafter COVID-
19 pandemic derailed all skill training efforts. Now, since the Department has reportedly 
taken several initiatives such as switching from ‘project’ mode to ‘batch mode’, 
introduction of Biometric attendance, inspection of centres, condition of three years of 
experience for ETPs in skill training, etc. to address the operational issues, the 
Committee expect that the quality of skill training and the number of beneficiaries 
would improve and the disabled persons would also be saved from incompetent ETPs. 
The Committee also hope that the Department would be able to achieve the target of 
85000 beneficiaries fixed for 2021-22 and would similarly fix such targets for future so 
that good number of PwDs could be trained and made self reliant as early as possible. 
The Committee feel that to further boost the skill training, the process of development 
of Management Information System needs to be expedited to enable the organizations 
to submit the proposals for empanelment and training in online mode. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that a mechanism may be suitably devised and the initiatives 
taken to overcome the flaws are strictly implemented. 
 

21 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Management Information System is now fully functional which enables organizations to 
submit application for empanelment and Project Specific Proposals online. Regarding 
target for 2021-22, it is stated that situation like COVID pandemic has affected training 
activities as though training activities were allowed by the eligible Empanelled Training 
Partners, it was allowed in non-containment zone and that too with 50% or less 
capacity. Further, as per decision of EFC in its meeting held on 11.08.2021, budget for 
Scheme of Implementation of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (SIPDA) has 
reduced which has resulted in reduced budgetary provisions for   National Action Plan 
for Skill Training of PwDs for next five years including 2021-22. Accordingly, targets 
under National Action Plan for Skill Training of PwDs have now been revised. As per the 
new targets, During 2021-22, 10,000 PwDs will be provided skill training under Short 
Term Training (STT) programme and 12,000 PwDs under Recognition of Prior Learning 
(RPL) in total financial outlay of Rs. 36 Crore. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.6.18) 
 The Committee are surprised to note that several States have neither received 
any funds nor there are any beneficiaries since inception of NAP. On being enquired, 
the Committee was aghast to know during the course of evidence of representatives of 
the Department that such situation prevails in many States as either there are no ETPs 
or ETPs registered in one State are running the Skill Centres in another State. The 
Department had assured the Committee to address these issues very shortly. The 
Committee are of the opinion that such system deprives new organizations to become 
part of the Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mechanism may be 
devised to promote organizations in all the States where ETPs are not existing and 
discourage ETPs from operating Centres in States other than where they are registered. 
Reply of the Government 
It is a fact that there are some states where there are no Empanelled Training Partners 
(ETPs). However, it is also a fact that many existing ETPs have centres in almost all 
States thereby providing skill trailing to PwDs of almost all the States. The 
Organizations empanelled with the Department as ETPs conduct training projects of 

22 
 
other Departments/Ministries of central and state governments also and, therefore, it is 
not in the hands of this Department to restrict any ETP to open Centres in States where 
they are registered. Such restriction may not be appropriate as it does not help the 
Department in expanding its reach and coverage across the country which is the 
objective of the National Action Plan for Skill Training of PwDs. With respect to the 
mechanism to promote organizations in all states, now that MIS has been made 
functional and it may help the organizations in submitting their proposals for 
empanelment online and the Department may be able to address this issue. State Skill 
Development Missions (SSDM) have also been requested to submit proposals and two 
states have also been assigned targets so far. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.20) 
 The prevailing COVID situation has adversely affected the overall education 
scenario and forced all entities to switch over to the online education system. The 
Committee find that the Department has allowed training in blended mode, however, it 
has not gained much popularity since training modules of most of the trades include 
practical components. Also ETPS are not forthcoming as they are required to ensure the 
employability of trainees. The Committee were informed that the training is presently 
being allowed specifically in trades in which practical components is also possible 
online. The Skill Council for Persons with Disabilities (SCPwD) has also developed online 
content for training. The Committee desire that the content developed by SCPwD 
should be included in the training modules by all the ETPs. The Committee also desire 
that in order to make training worthy during such circumstances, the Department may 
conduct a study to address problems faced by ETPs so that the purpose of training is 
achieved. The Committee would also like the Department to explore ways and means 
adopted by advanced countries for their PwDs during the COVID-19 pandemic and 
adopt them in collaboration with line Ministries/Departments so that the training of 
PwDs does not suffer. The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
pursue for the early transfer of Vocational Rehabilitation Centres, as decided by Skill 
India mission in June, 2018 to the Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities as it has been inordinately delayed. 

23 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department allows and encourages conduct of online training to ETPs including content 
for training developed by SCPwD in their training modules. To ensure that training 
activities are not affected due to situations arisen in view of COVID-19 pandemic, 
Department decided to conduct Webinar from time to time to resolve issues, if any, 
faced by ETPs in providing quality skill training to PwDs. Recently, a National Webinar 
with ETPs has been conducted. 
As regards transfer of National Career Service Centers for Differently Abled (NCSC for 
DA) erstwhile Vocational Rehabilitation Centers (VRCs) from M/o Labour and 
Employment to Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (Divyangjan), 
it is stated that Department is pursuing the matter for early transfer. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.8) 
The Committee are surprised to note that the Awareness Generation and Publicity 
Scheme launched in 2014-15 has not taken off despite its revision in 2015-16 as only 
160 events have taken place since its inception. In 2018-19, 2019- 20 and 2020-21, 
only 15, 17 and 15 events were held respectively and several States in the country have 
not organized even a single event till date. The Committee were informed during the 
evidence that the various proposals from NGOs were sent back as those did not have 
the recommendation of State Governments as mandated under the guidelines. The 
Committee are not convinced with this submission as there are several other 
Government Institutions/ Organizations which can organize such events, apart from 
NGOs but perhaps this sub-scheme does not have provisions on the same. The 
Committee feel that it is required to identify and iron out any flaws and bring out 
innovative features so that these events are organized by the institutions/Organizations, 
either Government or non-Government, as envisaged under the Rules. The Committee 
also suggest that social media platforms and Indian micro-blogging sites like KOO app 
can be explored to allow them to create awareness about rights of the PwDs, as these 
are easily accessible through mobile phones. The Committee are also concerned about 

24 
 
the funds allocation because more events can only be organized if funds are enhanced. 
The Committee, therefore, feel that the funds allocation for the sub-scheme may be 
reviewed as wider dissemination of information to create awareness is necessary for the 
success of SIPDA and the welfare of PwDs. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Under the AGP Scheme, each & every proposal received from the 
Government./Non-Government. Organisations are placed before the Screening 
Committee after scrutiny of the proposal. Under the Scheme, funds are released on 
pan-India basis not state wise. 
2. As regards the Committee’s observations regarding non organization of a single 
event by some of the States, it is pointed out that from the year 2018-19 to 2020- 21, 
no proposals have been received from States like Andhra Pradesh, Kerala Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal etc. It is also a fact that during the 
beginning of the Financial Year, letters are sent to Chief Secretaries of all the 
States/UTs, and Vice Chancellor (UGC). In the year 2020, to give wider publicity to the 
Scheme, an advertisement regarding the Scheme was published in leading newspapers 
including regional languages ones (135 Newspapers), 
3. The Committee also observed that the programmes can be held through other 
Government Institutions /organizations apart from NGOs and that this scheme does not 
have any provision on the same. In this regard, it is pointed out that under the Scheme, 
there is enough provision of conducting the programme through Government Institutes. 
During the year 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, 10, 05, and 07 number of programmes 
respectively were conducted by Government organizations including Institutes under 
the administrative control of DEPwD. Even though letters are sent to Govt. 
Organizations in the beginning of the years, Govt. Organizations including institutes 
under the administrative control of DEPwD may again be requested for holding the 
programmes. 
4. As regards the suggestion of the committee for the use of social media platform 
to create awareness about the rights of the PwDs, the same will be considered once the 
scheme is finalized. 
5. Regarding paucity of funds under the Scheme, it is stated that the AGP Scheme 
is a sub-scheme of umbrella scheme SIPDA and there is flexibility of funds. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 

25 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8.11) 
The Scheme was launched with an objective to promote research in prevention and 
prevalence of disability and the application of science and technology for the 
development of indigenous aids and appliances for PwDs. The Committee are perturbed 
to note that the fund allocation under the scheme is too meagre. Only ₹ 3.30 crore 
were allocated for research on disability related technology, products and issues and ₹ 
1.49 crore could only be spent since 2016-17. To develop indigenous aids and 
appliances for PwDs, the Committee desire that the Department should make sincere 
efforts to enhance its allocation so as to encourage ALIMCO, DRDO, National Institutes 
and other Organisations for research on disability related technology products. The 
Committee are convinced that the limited availability of funds is hampering the research 
and as a result the Department has not been able to develop even small products such 
as retrofit kits and batteries for motorized Tricycles necessitating those to be imported. 
Nonetheless, the Committee are happy to note that ‘Sugamya’ Cane for visually 
impaired persons has been developed by ALIMCO and that the Cochlear implant, being 
developed by DRDO, is at trial stage. The Committee desire to know about the mass 
production status after the launch of ‘Sugamya’ Cane. They expect that with the 
success of clinical trials, the Cochlear implant would be developed soon and made 
available to the persons with hearing impairment and would also like to see that the 
project to develop a Mobile App for persons with disability is completed in a time bound 
manner. They would like to stress upon the fact that there is a need to enhance 
allocation to promote research to develop technology indigenously and minimize 
dependence on import. The Committee also recommend that the Department should 
keep abreast of the development of technologies, Apps etc. by various talented private 
entrepreneurs in the country too and involve them, wherever needed. 
Reply of the Government 
Proposed allocation for the Research & Development scheme over next five years 
period has been substantially increased in comparison to the expenditure incurred 
during the last five years. Rs. 10.00 crore is being provided under this scheme for the 
next five years period. ‘Sugamya Cane’, manufactured in-house by ALIMCO is proposed 
to be launched during the exhibition of aids and assistive devices to be held in 
Parliament House Annexe during the Winter Session 2021-22. Mass production of 1000 

26 
 
canes per month is expected to commence from January, 2022. The Defence Research 
Development Organization (DRDO) is in the process of developing the indigenized 
Cochlear Implant ‘Shravan’. The trial of the Cochlear Implant developed by DRDO was 
delayed due to COVID-19 pandemic and now is in process and the outcome of cochlear 
implantation will be known after 6-8 months of audio-verbal therapy and complete 
follow up is estimated to take 18 months as per the protocol. Commercial production 
would be commenced only after the successful trials of the implant. ‘ALIMCO Mitra’ 
mobile app for Android phones was launched on 31.10.2021 by the Hon’ble Minister 
(SJ&E). 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.9.4) 
The Committee note that the Scheme launched in 2008-09 to provide incentives to 
private employers to provide jobs to PwDs, despite its noble objectives, was, perhaps 
not found to be attractive and hence could not take off. It was subsequently revised in 
2016 incorporating several measures to make it more attractive to employers in private 
sector so that employment opportunities are created by them for persons with 
disabilities and that they become self reliant. The Committee are disheartened to note 
that even after that, not a single penny has been released on this Scheme since 2016-
17. The Committee were informed by the Department during the evidence that they 
propose to modify this Scheme so that the disabled get employment in private sector. 
The Committee recommend that Department in their process of review, should 
exhaustively examine the reasons due to which Scheme has failed and also examine the 
role of Entrepreneurs/Employers in offering employment to disabled in advanced 
countries. They may need to be informed about the kind of jobs that can be handled by 
PwDs efficiently.The Committee also recommend that providing direct incentives to 
private employers may work instead of opting to share EPF contributions. They further 
feel that suggestions can also be obtained from the Entrepreneurs/Employers and other 
stakeholders before the Scheme is revised. 
Reply of the Government 
In view of the fact that the Incentive to Private Employers Scheme did not take off 
despite its review in 2016-17, as informed to the Committee, this sub-scheme 

27 
 
component of the Umbrella SIPDA Scheme has been decided to be merged with the 
sub-scheme of National Action Plan (NAP) for Skill Development of Persons with 
Disabilities (PwDs) under SIPDA. It is expected that on merger of the scheme with Skill 
Training under NAP, there shall be a demand of fund/proposals under this scheme since 
instead of being a standalone scheme, it shall function synergistically in providing 
gainful employment to PwDs, whilst assisting skilled PwDs under NAP. On the lines of 
the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee about providing direct incentives to 
private employers instead of opting to share EPF Contributions, the EFC (Expenditure 
Finance Committee) has also suggested that the Department should delink the issue of 
component of contribution towards EPF, ESIC, Gratuity etc. which have a continuing 
liability created and consider incentivizing private employers through say, a one-time 
grant. With the merger of the said schemes, further modalities of implementation of the 
same shall be carried out under NAP after due consideration of the recommendations of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
The Department proposed to merge the sub-scheme of "Incentive to Private Employers" 
with "National Action Plan for Skill Development of PwDs". However, the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) observed that the objective of the National Action Plan for 
Skill Development is to impart skill training to promote employment of persons with 
disabilities both in public and private sector. Linking with a component of contribution 
towards EPF, ESIC gratuity or any such component where there is a continuing liability 
created with NAP may raise implementation and legal issues. It may be appropriate to 
delink this issue and consider incentivizing private employees through say, a one-time 
grant, if the Department may want to consider any such proposal. In pursuance of the 
recommendations of EFC necessary action is being taken by the Department 
accordingly. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.11.3) 
The Committee appreciate that ‘Sugamya Bharat’ App has been launched on 02 March, 
2021 with an objective to crowd source the complaints being faced by PwDs in regard 
to inaccessibility of public infrastructure services. Out of total 518 complaints received, 
158 could only be closed and 360 were forwarded to the concerned authorities. As per 
the information provided by the Department, only 26 complaints have been resolved till 
date. The Committee are of the view that the number of complaints in the initial 
months of the launch of App, particularly during the pandemic when lockdown was 
imposed in various parts of the country and people were mostly indoors, reflects poorly 

28 
 
on the status of Barrier Free Environment in the country. The Committee strongly 
believe that the number of complaints would multiply once the App gains popularity 
amongst the public. Keeping the volume of complaints into consideration and the time 
consumed in addressing the complaints, as only 26 complaints have been resolved out 
of 518 received, the Committee feel that strong mechanism needs to be developed to 
follow up and resolve the complaints in minimum time possible. The Committee desire 
that the nature of the complaints may also be studied to understand the problems faced 
by PwDsin a particular area so that they can be addressed suitably in the upcoming 
projects. The Committee also desire that wide publicity should be given to Sugamya 
Bharat APP so that more PwDsuse it and all the stakeholders, who are responsible for 
providing accessibility related facilities and services to PwDs, get the feedback from the 
beneficiaries. 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee has recommended that a strong mechanism needs to be developed in 
order to follow up and resolve the complaints in minimum possible time. 
A. The following steps have been taken by the Ministry to expedite the resolution of 
the complaints: 
1. As soon as a Complaint is received, it is acknowledged with minimum delay. 
Apart from this, the Complaint is followed up through emails and telephonic reminders. 
In the event that the Complaint is not acknowledged, the Complaint is escalated to the 
next higher Authority. Letters are sent out to DMs/DCs with copies to Principal 
Secretary and Chief Secretary at the State level. Similar action is taken with respect to 
complaints at Central level. Accordingly, such letters were addressed on 9thApril, 2021, 
5th May 2021, 10thJune 2021, 12thJuly 2021 and 12th August 2021, requesting the 
concerned authorities to acknowledge the pending Complaints. 
2. In view of the fact that the country was in the grip of a pandemic and in order to 
make forward movement possible on the pending complaints, it was decided to take up 
COVID related issues directly with the concerned authorities. Accordingly, letters 
forwarding COVID related complaints were addressed at the level of Joint Secretary to 
the concerned Principal Secretaries (9thJune, 2021) and from Secretary DEPwD to Chief 
Secretaries of all States/UTs. (14thJune, 2021).A demi-official reminder from Joint 
Secretary to Principal Secretaries on COVID related complaints was also sent out on 
16thAugust 2021 and 06thOctober 2021. 

29 
 
3.  It was also decided to take up those categories in which a large number 
of complaints were registered in other verticals and which could be addressed easily by 
the concerned authorities despite the pandemic. An analysis of the complaints in Built 
Environment Vertical showed that maximum complaints received from across the 
country related to inaccessibility in Banks. Accordingly, a demi-official letter from 
Secretary DEPwD addressed to Secretary Banking was sent on 8thJuly, 2021. 
4. Similarly, letters dated 20th July 2021 were addressed by Joint Secretary to 
Nodal Officers in the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways as also to Principal 
Secretaries Transport in the States highlighting Transport related complaints pending 
for action. 
5. All these efforts seem to have worked as all concerned authorities are getting in 
touch and necessary information is being shared with the respective offices, apart from 
guiding them on the operation of the Dashboard. 
B. The Committee’s desire for the nature of complaints to be studied to understand 
the problems faced by PwDs in a particular area so that they can be addressed suitably 
in the upcoming projects has been noted for future compliance. 
 (Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities) O.M. dated 2021) 
Recommendation (Para No.13.5) 
The Committee are happy to find that the reservation for persons with disabilities has 
been enhanced form 3% to 4% in Government Sector and 3% to 5% is higher 
educational sector. Appreciably, the Department has also notified 3566 posts in Group 
A, B, C & D for disabled persons on 4 January, 2021. The Committee are also aware of 
the fact that Hon’ble Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment has taken up the 
matter for implementation of the provisions of reservation with the Chief Ministers of 
the States. Also, Central Advisory Board has advised States/UTs to develop online 
mechanism for compilation of data on appointment of persons with disabilities. The 
Committee, in view of the decisions taken with respect to the implementation of 
reservation provision by Central/State/UT Governments, urge upon the Department to 
follow up the implementation in this regard and suitably pursue with the 
StateGovernment/UT Administration for ensuring reservations for disabled persons as 
well as development of online mechanism for compilation of data on appointment of 

30 
 
persons with disabilities. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress 
made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
As stated earlier, DoPT is the nodal Central Department on matters regarding 
recruitment of personnel. They have an online system for compilation of information 
relating to recruitment of personnel including persons with disabilities recruited as per 
the reservation policy of the Government in terms of RPwD Act, 2016. DoPT also 
monitors the position and the Department obtains consolidated information from DoPT 
as and when required.  
As advised by the Committee, the Department requested States/UTs vide letter no. 02-
01/2021-DD-III dated 06/09/21to implement reservation for PwDs in their 
establishments and develop an online mechanism for the compilation of data on the 
appointment of persons with disabilities in terms of the provisions of RPwD Act, 2016. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.8) 
 The Committee find that the Department of Empowerment of Pwds, Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment, has been releasing funds since 1999 under an 
Umbrella Scheme for the implementation of the provisions of the erstwhile Persons with 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995, 
called ‘SIPDA’, in various fields like access to education and vocational training, 
employment, public transport, built-up environment and information and 
communication systems so as to uphold the independence and dignity of Pwds. Various 
sub-schemes or components under SIPDA have been added/removed in 2018-19, 2019-
20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 after the enactment of the Rights of Persons with Disability 
Act, 2016. In 2018-19, the Scheme had six components and now in 2021-22, it has 13 
components. The Committee are surprised to note that the Scheme, when it had six 
components in 2016-17, had budgetary allocation of ₹ 193 crore and in 2021-22, when 
its components have more than doubled, the budgetary allocation is ₹ 209.77 Crore, a 
mere ₹ 16.77 crore more. The Committee lament the fact that the Budget for SIPDA, 
which should have been at least doubled in a span of 5 years in order to achieve the 
objectives envisaged under the added subschemes/components, has remained almost 
stagnant. Furthermore, the expenditure status of the Scheme is alarming to the 
Committee as they find that the pace of expenditure during the year 2016- 17 onwards 
has not increased despite expansion in the scope of the Schemes during the period, 
rather the expenditure has nose-dived in 2019-20 to 2020-21, which, as per the 
Department, has happened mainly due to COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee feel that 
holding COVID-19 responsible for it is not justified as the Department has themselves 
also stated reasons like pendency of UCs, lack of proposals under NAP for skill 
development as well as Braille Press sub-scheme, etc. for reduction in actual 
expenditure. The Department should have analysed the reasons for insufficient number 
of proposals under these sub-schemes and promoted the same in the interest of 

32 
 
persons with disabilities. The Committee also feel that adding & removing sub-schemes 
in an umbrella scheme has its pitfalls. If the Department had exhaustively examined the 
scope of SIPDA at the time of revision of the Scheme in 2016-2017, there perhaps 
would not have been any need to add or remove the Schemes in subsequent years. The 
Committee, further, are of the view that the need for poorly performing components 
like Braille press, Research on disability Technology etc. should have been pre- 
examined and decisions taken accordingly, particularly for research which is generally 
undertaken by outside institutions like DRDO. They are of the opinion that SIPDA has 
been amended every now and then which has affected not only beneficiaries but also 
made it difficult for Implementing agencies and other stakeholders to understand the 
new processes, guidelines and provisions of this frequently reworked Scheme for proper 
implementation. 
Reply of the Government 
A) The BE, RE and fund release in respect of SIPDA for the years 2016-17 to 2017-18 
are shown Table 1 and those of FY 2018-19 onwards in Table 2: 
Table 1: Pertaining to Financial years 2016-17 and 2017-18 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Components
/ Sub-
Schemes 
Year BE RE Fund 
release 
1. Creation of barrier 2016-17 193.00  193.00 186.83 
 free environment     
2. Accessible India     
 Campaign (AIC)     
3. National Action     
 Plan for Skill     
 Development for     
 PwDs     
 
4. Composite 
Regional
 Centre
s (CRCs) 
 
    
  2017-18 207.00 257.00 272.23 

33 
 
 
5.  
District Disability Rehabilitation 
Centre (DDRCs) 
    
 
6. 
 
Unique
 Disabilit
y Identification 
    
  
Table- 2: Pertaining to Financial Years 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 
 
  Sub scheme wise notional allocation of 
BE, RE and Fund release 
  (Rs. in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Componen
ts/ Sub-
Schemes 
2018-19 20
19
-
20 
20
20
-
21 
202
1-
22 
BE RE Fund 
release
d 
BE RE Fund 
releas
ed 
BE RE Fund 
release
d 
BE Fund 
released 
(as on 
30.09.20
21 ) 
1
. 
Creation
 
of 
barrier
 f
ree 
environment 
6.00 10.00 15.55 13.00 19.60 15.55 18.00 16.00 25.22 9.32 3.75 
2. Accessib
le India 
Campaig
n* 
93.00 100.0
0 
112.40 105.0
0 
112.00 134.19 105.00 56.37 54.03 80.00 13.00 
3. National 
Action Plan 
for Skill 
Developm
ent for 
PwDs 
121.0
0 
70.00 43.75 100.0
0 
40.00 4.33 77.00 30.00 4.50 80.85 1.19 
4. Compos
ite 
Regiona
l 
Centres (CRCs) 
43.00 60.00 76.85 70.00 70.00 50.10  
Both Components discontinued 
5. District 
Disability 
Rehabilitati
on 
Centre 
(DDR
Cs) 
6.00 10.00 5.26 7.50 4.00 3.18 
6. Unique 
Disability 
Identificati
on (UDID) 
31.00 8.30 7.01 13.00 10.00 7.87 13.00 6.00 5.10 9.00 1.66 

34 
 
7. Awareness 
Generation 
and Publicity 
(AGP) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Merged under 
SIPDA w.e.f. 
FY 2019-20 
3.00 2.00 2.12 2.50 1.00 1.17 2.50 0.0 
8. Research 
 o
n Disability 
Related 
Technology, 
Product
 a
nd Issues 
1.00 0.40 0.0 1.00 0.50 0.45 1.00 0.13 
9. In-service Training 2.00 2.00 0.0 2.00 0.50 0.0 2.00 0.0 
10. Incentive to 0.50 0.0 0.0 1.00 0.0 0.0 0.10 0.0 
11. Deaf College Merged under SIPDA w.e.f. FY 2020-
21 
3.00 0.0 0.0 3.00 0.0 
12. Media 18.00 6.00 6.08 7.00 0.0 
13. State 
Spinal 
Injury 
Centre 
5.00 2.52 1.73 5.00 0.0 
14. Braille Press 6.00 4.00 5.15 6.00 0.80 
15. Indian Spinal 
Injury Centre 
Merged under 
SIPDA w.e.f. FY 
2021-22 
4.00 0.0 
 Total 300.0
0 
258.3
0 
260.82 315.0
0 
260.00 217.34 251.50 122.89 103.43 209.7
7 
20.53 
 
Note: 
(i) Component/ Sub-Scheme-wise notional allocation of BE & RE has 
been effective since 2018-19. 
(ii) The RE of overall SIPDA for FY 2021-22 is yet to be finalized. 
 
Table- 3: Status at a glance for BE, RE and AE from 2016-17 onwards 
(Rs. in crore) 
Fin.Year BE 
(in₹) 
RE 
(in₹) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(in₹) 
2016-17 193.00 193.00 186.83 
2017-18 207.00 257.00 272.23 
2018-19 300.00 258.00 260.82 
2019-20 315.00 260.00 217.34 
2020-21 251.50 122.89 103.43 
2021-22 209.77 - 20.53* 
    

35 
 
* Expenditure of 2021-22 upto 30.09.2021 
 
 From the above tables it is evident that during F.Y. 2016-17, there were six 
components and the BE was Rs.193.00 crore.During 2016-17, there was no notional 
allocation among the sub-schemes and the same was introduced from F.Y. 2018-19. 
The minor schemes such as Awareness Generation and Publicity (AGP), Research on 
Disability Related Technology, Product and Issues, In-Service Training, Incentive to 
Private Employers, Media, Deaf Colleges, Braille Press, SSIC and ISIC have been added 
in SIPDA and two components i.e. Composite Regional Centers (CRC) and District 
Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRCs)were removed. Although the eight components 
were added under SIPDA, these were minor sub-schemes having a total BE allocation of 
Rs.30.60 crore only during F.Y. 2021-22 out of the total BE allocation of Rs.209.77 
crore. Further, two components, namely, CRC and DDRC were removed from SIPDA 
and clubbed with different components i.e. CRC with National Institutes and DDRCs 
with DDRS scheme. CRC and DDRCs had major allocation i.e. Rs.77.50 crore (during FY 
2019-20 i.e. last year, the allocation was made   under SIPDA but   from F.Y. 2020- 21 
these were removed from SIPDA). 
As a result, there is a decrease of Rs.46.90 crore due to adding/removing of sub- 
schemes. Hence, for drawing a parallel and if budgetary allocation has to be compared 
on equal basis, then Rs.46.90 croreis to be added in the budgetary allocation of 
Rs.209.77 crore which would reflect an increased budget allocation of around Rs.63.67 
crores over the period from 2016-17 to 2021-22, that is around 33% increase over the 
span of last 5 years. Further, due to the effect of Covid-19, the RE allocation of FY 
2020-21 was reduced under SIPDA from Rs.251.50 crore to 122.89 crore. The reduced 
RE of FY 2020-21 and various Covid-19 related factors have impacted the BE allocation 
of FY 2021-22 also. Hence, if a true comparison needs to be done with F.Y. 2016-17, 
then the normal year of F.Y. 2019-20 should be considered. During F.Y. 2019-20, four 
new components namely AGP, Research on Disability related technology product, In- 
ServiceTraining and Incentive to Employees have been added which had a budgetary 
allocation of Rs.6.50 crore only. Reducing Rs.6.50 crore from BE allocation of FY 2019- 
20 of Rs.315.00 crore is Rs.308.50 crore. Hence, if comparison of allocation between FY 
2016-17 and FY 2019-20 is done, then there is increased in Budget allocation from 
Rs.193.00 crore to 308.50 crore i.e. around 60% in span of 3 years. 
(B) The reasons for the reduced expenditure in NAP Skill Training, Research and 
Development and Braille Press schemes are as follows: 
For Skill training under NAP, the reasons of low expenditure is as under: 
(i) As per the existing guidelines/norms, the payment of final installment is linked to 
placement and it is released to ETPs on the basis of their performance on placement 

36 
 
criteria only. As per the extant criteria, the 3rd installment is not released to ETPs with 
placement below 40% whereas it is released on pro-rata basis to ETPs with placement 
between 40 to 70% and the full amount of the 3rd installment is released only to such 
ETPs as have achieved a target of 70% placement. 
(ii) 3rd installment has not been released to any ETP for want of authentic data and 
documents. In order to determine the actual number of placed/employed persons with 
disabilities against trained PwDs under “National Action Plan for Skill Development of 
PwDs” as of date, the Department is in the process of collecting data from all the ETPs 
provided fund for skill trailing to PwDs since 2016-17. 
 (iii) With a view to encouraging the ETPs for placement, there is provision of 
incentive in Common Norms for ETPs also which is Rs.3000/- per candidate for 
placement above 70% and Rs.5000/- per candidate for placement above 85%. As per 
Common Norms, ETPs are also provided fund for organizing job outreach activities. It 
was due to various initiatives taken towards streamlining in 2019-20 and the pandemic 
situation which have affected skilling activities severely from Feb/March, 2020 onwards. 
Reason for low expenditure under Braille Press: From 2014-15 to 2020-21, 12 new 
Braille Presses have been set up across the country, 12 existing Braille Presses 
modernized and the capacity of 03 existing Braille Presses augmented, thus largely 
meeting the targets set forth under the Scheme. In 2019-20, the actual expenditure 
was less mainly due to the non receipt of adequate and complete proposals from the 
implementing agencies, particularly in respect of recurring grants in aid which is 
provided under the scheme   @ Rs. 2/- per page for printing Braille text books and 
course material for supplying free of cost to the school going visually impaired children. 
In the year 2020-21, the performance of the scheme was improved and the actual 
expenditure (Rs. 5.15 crore) was higher than the initial notional allocation (Rs. 4.00 
crore). 
Measures undertaken under Research and Development scheme 
To give a boost to the research being funded under the Research & Development 
scheme being implemented by the Department, the following measures are being taken 
while continuing the scheme over the next five year period: 
i. Objectives of the scheme have been broadened in line with the provisions under 
the Rights of Persons with Disability Act, 2016. 
ii. Every year the Steering Committee will identify the priority areas/themes for 
inviting proposals in identified areas / themes during a particular year. 
iii. To facilitate smooth and early consideration and decision on the proposals 
received, frequent meeting of Steering Committee will be held under this scheme. 

37 
 
 The minor sub-schemes have been added under the umbrella schemes of SIPDA 
because their budgetary allocation was very less i.e. less than Rs.10 crores. If there 
were separate sub-schemes then any fund not utilized would have lapsed. However, if it 
is underutilized in the umbrella scheme SIPDA, the same can be utilized in other sub- 
schemes of SIPDA. As could be seen from the above table although there were RE 
allocation under the sub-schemes AGP, R&D and In Service Training during FY 2019- 
20, the expenditure was less than the RE allocation. The same were utilized under 
Accessible India Campaign (AIC) where the RE allocation was only rupees 110 crore but 
the actual expenditure was Rs.134.19 crore, hence it could be seen that due to minor 
sub-schemes put under SIPDA scheme, there is optimal utilization of funds. Further, the 
scheme is under review of EFC again in 2021-22 as per the direction of the Department 
of Expenditure (DoE) vide OM dated 08.12.2020. As per para 2(vii) “With regards to 
Umbrella Central Sector Scheme, it may be ensured that the financial outlay of each 
scheme under the umbrella is not less than Rs.25 crore for five years and financial 
outlay of any standalone Central Sector Scheme should not be less Rs.50 crore for five 
years.” Keeping the above guidelines in view, the following 10 sub- schemes are 
proposed to be kept under SIPDA for the plan period 2021-22 to 2025-26: 
S.no. Sub-Scheme 
1 Creation of Barrier Free Environment 
2 Accessible India Campaign (AIC) 
 
3 
NAP-Skill Training Program with Incentive to Private Employer 
4 UDID 
 
5 
Awareness Generation Publicity (AGP)& In Service Training 
6 Research & Disability 
7 Assistance to Spinal Injury Centres 
8 Cross Disability Early Intervention Centre 
 
 
 
9 
Projects under SIPDA 
Deaf College 
Braille Press 
10 CPMU cum Data Strategy Unit 
 
 It is further pointed out that although the sub-schemes of the SIPDA have been 
added/removed frequently, yet the sub-schemes guidelines and implementing agencies 

38 
 
remain same and is reviewed only during the EFC/SFC review and not while 
addition/removal from SIPDA. Because of addition/removal only the Budgeting head 
gets changed and the rest of the procedure followed remains same. The stakeholders 
are adequately sensitized about such changes through letters, VCs, etc. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment 
of Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.2.9) 
 With regard to the mechanism for allocating funds under SIPDA, the Committee 
are informed by the Department that the Scheme get a single allocation and notional 
allocation is made for each of the sub-schemes each year so that there is optimum 
utilization of funds. It has further been informed that if there is shortfall of proposals on 
one component of the Scheme then the same can be covered by other components, 
where there are adequate proposals. From this, it appears that in case if any of the 
sub-scheme is lagging behind, then no extra effort would, perhaps, be made to 
promote that particular sub-scheme and the funds will be diverted to another more 
popular sub-Scheme under SIPDA. Hence, the main thrust of the Department seems to 
be on spending the full allocation, even if it is at the expense of a less popular sub-
scheme. The Committee feel that this trend would dilute the objectives of the Scheme, 
as all the sub-Schemes, once included, will have different roles to play for the 
empowerment of PwDs and the optimum benefits of SIPDA would be achieved, if all the 
sub-schemes successfully perform together. Moreover all the sub components have 
their own program Divisions and guidelines. Hence, the Committee recommend the 
Department to re-examine the decision of having a single allocation vis-a-vis separate 
allocation under each sub-Scheme, in consultation with stakeholders so that objectives 
of SIPDA are better achieved with better fiscal management and monitoring. 
Reply of the Government 
The objective of clubbing the smaller sub-schemes into single umbrella schemes of 
SIPDA is to have optimal utilization of funds so that the shortfall on one sub-scheme 
can be covered by other sub-schemes and to have fewer budget lines for small small 
schemes. It has been pointed out correctly that each sub-scheme has its own set of 
objectives and guidelines which are different from other sub-scheme and is being 
implemented by different Program Divisions. The monitoring of each sub scheme is 
being done separately by each Program Division and they are responsible for the 
performance of their sub-schemes. During the EFC review, NITI AAYOG has also given 
a separate set of Output/Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF) target for each sub- 
scheme separately. 

39 
 
Inspite of all the efforts made by the Program Division there may be instances beyond 
the control of Program Division wherein a particular sub-scheme may not be able to 
receive sufficient proposals, complete in all respects, from implementing agencies which 
may result in the non release of notionally allocated funds under the sub-scheme. In 
such circumstances, if the fund gets lapsed in one sub-scheme, the same can be 
utilized under another sub-scheme. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Recommendation (Para No.2.10) 
 The Committee are surprised to note that the Central Advisory Board (CAB), an 
apex policy recommending body in disability matters was not taken into confidence 
before the merger/de-merger of sub-schemes under SIPDA as it has been informed to 
them by the Department that the Expenditure Finance Committee is competent to 
sanction the changes in Schemes. Notwithstanding the expertise and mandate of the 
Expenditure Finance Committee, the Committee opine that the role of Central Advisory 
Board should not have been overlooked, particularly when the members of the CAB are 
experts in the field of disability and rehabilitation, directly interacting with the 
stakeholders and are responsible for the performance of the Scheme. The Committee, 
therefore, feel that the Central Advisory Board should be involved to play a proactive 
role in major policy decisions on SIPDA and the Department should seek their advice on 
the various aspects of Scheme on the basis of functional experience gained by them. 
Reply of the Government 
The merger/de-merger of the SIPDA Sub-Schemes was considered on the basis of the 
guidelines of Revision of the Scheme as circulated by DoE/Ministry of Finance vide OM 
dated 08.12.2020. As per para 2(vii) “With regards to Umbrella Central Sector Scheme, 
it may be ensured that the financial outlay of each scheme under the umbrella is not 
less than Rs.25 crore for five years and financial outlay of any standalone Central sector 
scheme should not be less Rs.50 crore for five year”. The recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee are being brought to the attention of the Central 
Advisory Board in its upcoming meeting. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 

40 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.13) 
The Committee note that grant is provided to the Departments of the State 
Governments/Union Territories, Autonomous Bodies/Statutory Bodies/ Public Sector     
Undertakings     set     up     by     the     Central/State      Governments/ UT 
Administrations including Central and State Universities, to create Barrier Free 
Environment for the persons with disabilities, which includes making Government 
websites at the Central/State and District levels accessible to PwDs. The Department 
could, however, release only ₹ 44.30 crore during 2018-19 to 2020-21. Further, only 11 
States/UTs could be benefitted under this component since 2017-18 and Grants-in-aid 
could be released to the Universities/Colleges/ Institutions etc. in 9 States only. 
Considering the number of States/UTs where no proposals have been undertaken so 
far, the Committee doubt as to when the entire Country would be covered. As there 
appears to be a lack of enthusiasm amongst State Governments/UT administrations on 
this sub-scheme,the Committee feel that the Department needs to make extra efforts 
than merely sending routine letters to raise awareness, sensitize and remind States/UTs 
every year for sending viable proposals, if they intend to make this sub-Scheme 
successful. This could also include offering expert advice on preparation of viable 
proposals, preparing ready Reckoners and setting of annual targets as being done 
under Accessible India Campaign (AIC) etc. particularly since the Scheme is proposed to 
continue till 2024-25,after merger of AIC. The Committee also note that the work of 
making websites accessible for the disabled is languishing as no funds have been 
released in this regard during the last three years. Further, the progress in making the 
private websites accessible is moving at a snail pace as the guidelines are yet to be 
framed. With on-line work becoming a norm in recent times, the Committee are of the 
strong opinion that the methodology adopted for fund allocation/release may be 

41 
 
reworked to speed up these objectives. The Committee also recommend that the 
proposals received from States currently pending with the Department should be 
expeditiously processed and if handholding is required on some aspects, support must 
be forthcoming from them so that the proposals could be approved and implemented in 
coordination with respective State/UT. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
While efforts are made to seek proposals from States/UTs, Implementing Agencies 
(IAs), SIPDA is a Central Sector Scheme hence it depends on States/UTs also to send 
proposals with complete documentation as prescribed under the scheme. They are 
requested to also clear the pending Utilization Certificates (UCs)of the previous releases 
before any further releases can be made. The Department takes serious efforts to 
sensitize the States/UTs to send the proposals under Barrier Free component. In the 
beginning of every financial year, the Department invariably writes to all States/UTs to 
send the proposals under Creation of Barrier Free Environment for persons with 
disabilities under SIPDA scheme. In 2020-21, the letter was issued to States/UTs only 
on 16.09.2021 due to the proceedings of EFC for the appraisal of the continuation of 
SIPDA scheme being underway earlier. States/UT Governments are advised to send the 
proposals (in original) in correct format along with the documents referred to in the 
checklist as per applicable guidelines prescribed in SIPDA scheme. Further, the 
Department regularly writes to States/UTs and takes up the issue at every level 
including during visits at the level of Hon’ble Minister, Hon’ble Ministers of States, 
Secretary, Joint Secretary and other officials. Video Conferencing sessions with 
States/UTs invariably feature this issue to clear their pendency of Utilization Certificates 
so that any new proposal would not be on hold for want of the submission of utilization 
certificates. Demi-official letters are regularly written to States/UTs for example 
23.02.2021, 30.06.2021, 05.08.2021 and 27.08.2021 for clearing the pending UCs. 
These efforts have helped to bring down the pendency of UCs of 
Institutions/Autonomous organizations from Rs.32.52 crore to Rs.10 crore and of 
States/UTs from Rs.305.78 crore to 254.44 crore in the period March, 2021 to 
September 2021. The accessibility of websites in Barrier Free Environment depends 
upon proposals received. However, the Barrier Free sub scheme has a set of eligibility 
criteria and the guidelines, following which the proposals need to be sent for grants. 
These are conveyed to States/UTs who are required to follow the procedures while 
submitting proposals. If any State/UT sends the proposal in the correct format as per 
requirements laid down, then it helps in processing it expeditiously. However, all Page 
14 of 58 proposals of the States/UTs go through technical scrutiny and if some 
documents/information is required, then the same is asked for and thereafter the 

42 
 
proposal is placed before the Screening Committee of the Department for 
recommendation. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No.6.19) 
 The National Action Plan for Skill Development for PwDs was launched to enable 
persons with disabilities to become self reliant, productive and contributing members of 
the Society. However, it has been found that only 41931 PwDs have been employed so 
far out of 1.27 lakh trained. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for 
such a low level of employment despite several measures taken by the Department 
such as instruction to ETPs to ensure employment after training, NHFDC extending 
loans to PwDs, establishment of NSK’s in various States, etc. Moreover, the Department 
also has the sub-scheme of providing incentives to private employers for providing jobs 
to PwDs, under SIPDA, which should be used for trained PwDs. The Committee would 
also emphasize that if training is imparted in a trade that already exists in that area and 
the loan procedures are simplified, the Scheme would attract more persons for the 
training which will make them self reliant. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
comprehensive study may be conducted to identify the reasons for such a low 
employability despite several initiatives of the Department and suggest suitable remedy. 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding placement of PwDs trained under NAP, it is stated that the scheme is 
implemented as per Common Norms issued by M/o Skill Development 
&Entrepreneurship (MSDE). As per the existing guidelines/norms, the payment of final 
installment is linked to placement and it is released to ETPs on the basis of their 
performance on placement criteria only. As per extant criteria, 3rdinstalment is not 
released to ETPs with placement below 40% whereas it is released on Pro-rata basis to 
ETPs with placement between 40 to 70% and full amount of 3rdinstalment is released 
only to such ETPs achieved a target of 70% placement. 3rdinstalment has not been 
released to any ETP for want of authentic data and documents. In order to determine 
the actual number of placed/employed persons with disabilities against trained PwDs 

43 
 
under “National Action Plan for Skill Development of PwDs” as of date, the Department 
is in the process of collecting data from all the ETPs provided fund for skill training to 
PwDs since 2016-17. 
  
With a view to encouraging ETPs for placement, there is also a provision of incentive in 
Common Norms for ETPs which is Rs.3000/- per candidate for placement above 70% 
and Rs.5000/- per candidate for placement above 85%. As per Common Norms, ETPs 
are also provided fund for organizing job outreach activities. Association of Sector Skill 
Councils as Project Implementing Agencies will also help in enhancement of 
employment opportunities as these organizations have good industry connect in their 
sectors. The Department has also been taking initiatives in this regard. NHFDC keeps 
organizing job fairs on regular basis. In order to explore and enhance employment 
opportunities for PwDs, the Department is exploring the possibilities to associate e- 
commerce companies such as Flipkart and Amazon. The Department also envisages to 
holding National level Webinars with speakers from ETPs and big companies to explore 
placement opportunities in private/public sectors and understand the issues involved in 
placement of persons with disabilities in such companies and resolve them. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10.4) 
As stipulated in the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, all the State 
Governments are required to appoint a State Commissioner for persons with disabilities. 
Also, the State Governments, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, by notification, are required to specify for each district, a Court of Session to be 
a Special Court to try the offences under this Act for the purpose of providing speedy 
justice to PwDs. The Committee are surprised to note that only 18 States/UTs have 
appointed independent Commissioners/officers holding additional charge till date and 
23 States/UTs have designated special Courts in terms of the Act,in the last 5 years. 
The Committee are of the view that in the absence of full time State Commissioners 
and designated special Courts, the Scheme is bound to suffer as both the Institutions 

44 
 
have important role to play as envisaged in the Act. The Committee also observe that 
since the State Commissioner is supposed to have special knowledge or practical 
experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilitation, hence appointment of officers 
with additional charge violates the provisions of the Act and defeats the intended 
purpose of this office. The Committee would therefore like the Department to pursue 
with the States for the appointment of State Commissioners and designation of Special 
Courts without further delay. 
Reply of the Government 
Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCPD) has been continuously 
emphasizing the need of full time State Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities for 
dealing with matters concerned with persons with disabilities in all review meetings with 
States/UTs on earlier occasions. It is also one of the recommendations of the Chief 
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities on order to monitor the status of 
implementations of provisions of the Act. This was also communicated in writing to the 
Chief Secretaries of States/UTs vide D.O. letters dated 16.05.2018 and 03.09.2020.The 
inputs on the observation/recommendation are as under: 
Special Courts for PwDs in the States/UTs Twenty-nine States/UTs have reported 
availability of Special Courts for PwDs to try the offences under RPwD Act, 2016 for the 
purpose of providing speedy justice to persons with Disabilities. The list is as under: 
 
Status of Availability of Special Court for PwDs in the Status/ UTs 
S.No. Names of the State / UTs Status of 
Constitution Special 
Court 
Yes / No 
1. Andaman & Nikobar Yes 
2. Andhra Pradesh Yes 
3. Arunachal Pradesh No 
4. Assam Yes 
5. Bihar Yes 
6. Chandigarh (UTs) Yes 
7. Chhatisgarh Yes 
8. Dadar & Nagar Haveli (UTs) & Daman & Diu No 
9. Delhi (UTs) Yes 
10. Goa Yes 
11. Gujarat Yes 
12. Haryana No 

45 
 
13. Himachal Pradesh Yes 
14. Jammu & Kashmir No 
15. Jharkhand Yes 
16. Karnataka Yes 
17 Kerala Yes 
18 Ladshadweep (UTs) Yes 
19. Madhya Pradesh Yes 
20. Maharashtra Yes 
21. Manipur No 
22. Meghalaya Yes 
23. Mizoram Yes 
24. Nagaland Yes 
25. Odisha Yes 
26. Puducherry (UTs) Yes 
27. Punjab Yes 
28. Rajasthan Yes 
29. Sikkim Yes 
30. Tamilnadu Yes 
31 Telangana Yes 
32. Tripura Yes 
33. Uttar Pradesh Yes 
34. Uttrakhand Yes 
35. West Bengal No 
 
Appointment of independent Commissioner in States/UTs Sixteen States/UTs have 
reported the availability of Full Time State/UT Commissioners whereas in the 20 
States/UTs the Commissioners have an Additional Charge. Hence, all States have in 
place a Commissioner.  It is also pertinent to mention here that in the erstwhile Persons 
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 
1995 under Section 58 (a), “Coordinate the work of Commissioners” is one of the Prime 
functions of the Chief Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities (CCPD)” whereas 
under RPwD Act, 2016 the same has not been mentioned under Section 75. Hence as 
directed by the Committee, the Department will also pursue with the States/UTs on this 
matter. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

46 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12.3) 
The Central Advisory Board on disability, in November, 2020, had inter-alia urged the 
States/UTs to set up helpline numbers for the disabled persons. The Committee are 
surprised to note that only 10 States have established helpline till date which does not 
include Delhi, and desire that the matter should be vigorously pursued with all the 
remaining States/UTs to ensure that helpline is established in all the States/UTs within 
three months. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status at the Action 
Taken stage. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department issued Comprehensive Disability Inclusive Guidelines for Protection and 
Safety of Persons with Disabilities on 26.03.2020 which, inter-alia, mandates the 
States/UTs to setup helpline for them. The matter was also discussed in the meeting of 
Central Advisory Board on Disability held in November, 2020. The Board urged the 
States/UTs to take measures for the implementation of these guidelines and submit a 
detailed consolidated report. As per information available from various States/UTs, 
following 11 States/UTs have so far established helpline for persons with disabilities:- 
 
Sl. No. State/UT Status 
1. Bihar Helpline number set up for Divyangjan- 8448385590, 
0612-2215041 
2. Chandigarh Helpline Number -181 set up for Women, Children, 
 
Senior Citizens and PwDs kept active during COVID 19. 
3. Haryana Helpline number set up for Divyangjan: 
9888176357 (For Sign Language), 9876377800, 
9888888363 
4. Jharkhand Helpline number set up for Divyangjan: 
0651-2401825 
5. Karnataka Toll Free counseling Helpline number for Mental Health: 
18001212830 
6. Nagaland Helpline set up for Divyangjan except Hearing Impaired 
- 8258953837, 
For Hearing Impaired 9862300893 

47 
 
7. Odisha Helpline set up for Divyangjan – 0674-2392803 
8. Rajasthan Helpline number set up for Divyangjan - 18001806127 
9. Tamil Nadu Helpline number set up for Divyangjan - 18004250111 
10. Telengana Toll free helpline for PwDs - 18005728980 
11. Uttar Pradesh Helpline number set up for Divyangjan - 18001801995 
 
The Department requested other States/UTs which have, so far, not set up helpline for 
PwDs vide letter no. 02-01/2021-DD-III dated 06/09/2021 to expedite setting up of 
helpline for PwDs. 
 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

48 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.24) 
 The Committee feel that Railways is one of the major partners in the Accessible 
India Campaign as it has widest presence across the nation and rail transport is the 
maximum used service by Divyangjan. However, while the Committee would like to 
believe that the Department are sincerely trying to pursue matters, the accessibility 
guidelines are yet to be notified as those are awaited from the Ministry of Railways. The 
Ministry of Railways was not able to provide update on the Model Accessible Railway 
Stations as it was directed in the AIC Review Meeting held on 19 December, 2019 to 
complete New Delhi Railway Station under Model Accessible Railway Stations by 30 
January, 2020. First of all, the Committee desire to know current position on this 
aspect. Further, the Committee have also been informed that the update on 
accessibility guidelines, Model accessible Railways Stations, Action Taken Report on the 
findings of verification audit of selected Railway Stations are also awaited from them, 
which is quite disappointing and unworthy of a seasoned and gigantic Ministry like the 
Railways. The Committee,   therefore, recommend that the Department should seek 
reasons for non-compliance by the Ministry of Railways and take up the matter at 
Ministerial level so that the work on accessibility guidelines, Model accessible Railways 
Stations and Action Taken Report on the findings of verification audit of selected 
Railway Stations is completed at least now. The Ministry of Railways may also be made 
aware of the penal provisions of the Act in case there is further delay by them in 
completing their targets. 
Reply of the Government 
On the issues raised and recommendations made by Standing Parliamentary 
Committee, the comments of Ministry of Railways have been sought vide letter dated 
26.08.2021. Accordingly, the response has been given below: 
1. Accessibility Standards: The Department conducts regular Monthly review 
meetings with concerned Ministries to understand the progress of the work on the 
formulation of accessibility standards. During a review meeting held on 14.06.2021, 

49 
 
Railways informed that the suggestions/comments given by the O/o Chief 
Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities (CCPD) in January 2021 have been 
incorporated and the final set of standards are due for Railway Board’s approval. 
Thereafter, as informed by Ministry of Railways letter dated 09.09.2021, ‘Indian 
Railways is making every effort possible to make railway services fully accessible in 
compliance with RPwD Act, 2016. Accordingly, the Harmonized Guidelines and 
Standards of Accessibility & Provisioning of Facilities for Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) 
in Indian Railways were issued to zonal railways in February 2020. However, there were 
some observations of the office of Chief Commissioner of Persons with Disabilities 
(CCPD) on the above Harmonized Guidelines. These observations are being addressed 
by the Ministry of Railways on priority and the same will be sent to the office of CCPD 
at the earliest.’ The Department also worte to Railways vide letters dated 12.03.2021, 
01.07.2021 and 05.08.2021 to submit the finalized standards to this Department for 
notification under the RPwD Rules, 2017. Taking further follow up, a letter dated 
02.09.2021 at the level of Hon’ble Minister has also been issued to Hon’ble Minister of 
Railways to direct concerned officials to act in this regard on immediate basis. 
2. Model Accessible Railway Stations: Ministry of Railways vide O.M dated 
09.09.2021 has informed that as a ‘Model Accessible Railway Station’, New Delhi, 
Chennai and Kanpur Railway Stations have been identified to be developed as 
Showcase Stations having all possible accessible features (list attached at Annexure C) 
for PwDs. All the enumerated facilities except sign language have been provided at New 
Delhi railway station. Similarly, all the enumerated facilities except Braille Signage Board 
have been provided at Kanpur railway station. At Chennai station all the facilities have 
been provided except Divyang friendly few signages. These will be recouped soon’. The 
Department has also highlighted this issue in a letter dated 02.09.2021 issued at the 
level of Hon’ble Minister. 
3. Verification Audit: In addition to previous several communications sent to the Ministry of 
Railways, the Department once again highlighted this issue in a letter dated 02.09.2021 issued 
at the level of Hon’ble Minister for submitting the report at the earliest. The Ministry of Railways 
vide letter dated 09.09.2021 informed that ‘the verification audit of selected 70 Railway stations 
was done by School of Planning and Architecture, Delhi (SPA, Delhi). The shortcomings as 
brought out in the SPA audit report have almost been attended and the amenities have been 
provided. However, it may be noted that maintenance/upgradation of existing facilities at 
stations is an ongoing and continuous process.’ 
4. Penal Provisions of RPwD Act, 2016: The recommendation of the committee with 
regards to informing penal provision of the RPwD Act, 2016 to Ministry of Railways was 
conveyed to Railways in a letter dated 26.10.2021. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 

50 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.25) 
 The Committee find that several Ministries are yet to start work on accessibility 
guidelines/standards which they were supposed to firm up in consultation with Chief 
Commissioner for persons with Disabilities and submit to DEPwD by June, 2021. The 
Committee are surprised from further revelation that all the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India have failed to accomplish the task by the target date of June, 
2021 as they still are at various stages of finalization. The Committee are unable to 
understand the reasons for the tardy response from the Ministries/Departments of the 
Government of India in finalizing the accessibility standards by the stipulated date as 
this would mean that the Department would not be able to achieve the targets of 
Accessible India Campaign in the absence of sector-wise accessibility standards and a 
collective sense of responsibility from all Ministries/Departments. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to recommend that their sentiments are conveyed to them and suitable 
steps taken for early finalization of accessibility standards by various 
Ministries/Departments for being notified urgently. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The matter of slow progress in respect of the formulation of accessibility 
Standards/Guidelines are regularly discussed with the 20 concerned Central 
Ministries/Departments and necessary handholding support is extended by the 
Department to facilitate the process. Vide letter dated 23.09.2021 (Annexure D), all 
Central Ministries/Departments were conveyed the sentiments of the Standing 
Committee on their tardy response in finalization and notification of the accessibility 
standards. 
2. The latest status on the Central Ministries/Departments on the formulation of 
accessibility standards is annexed at Annexure E which reflects that 07 
Ministries/Departments have completed the consultation with CCPD and are currently at 
advanced stage of finalization of the guidelines and 10 Ministries are at present at the 
stage of drafting of the guidelines. 
3. Further, for monitoring the progress in AIC the following measures are being 
undertaken by the Department – 
i. Letters-DEPwD has regularly written letters and requested
 all Ministries/Departments (e.g. on, 21.12.2020, 19.05.2021, 07.06.2021, 

51 
 
01.07.2021 and 23.09.2021) to take measures to ensure accessibility in their sector as 
well as expedite the task of formulation of holistic accessibility standards/guidelines. 
Letters were written to Ministry of Railways (02.09.2021) and Ministry of Shipping 
(27.09.2021) at the level of Hon’ble Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, also to 
further lay emphasis on the criticality of the matter. Correspondence with Ministries of 
Housing & Urban Affairs, Department of Financial Services, Education, Health & Family 
Welfare and Jal Shakti has been made, addressing sector specific issues being faced by 
the Ministries in regard to the formulation of accessibility standards/guidelines. 
ii. Regular Video Conferences - For expediting and facilitating the task of 
formulation of the guidelines, regular Video Conferences are organized with Central 
Ministries/Departments, which were held in March, July, September and October, 2021. 
Recently, the Department conducted a VC on 29.10.2021, where the progress made by 
all Ministries/Departments was again reviewed. These Ministries/Departments have yet 
again been requested to formulate timelines to achieve the set targets and 
recommendations of the penal position & the recommendation of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee. 
iii. Meetings- To provide hand holding support to facilitate the work of formulation 
of guidelines,DEPwD also attended one to one meetings on the issue with Ministry 
ofSports on 01.04.2021, Ministry of Culture on 01.04.2021 and 19.08.2021, Ministry of 
Education on 13.04.2021, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, National Institute of 
Urban Affairs (NIUA) and CPWD on 20.05.2021, Ministry of Home Affairs on 
29.06.2021, Ministry of Jal Shakti on 05.07.2021, Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation on 12.08.2021, Ministry of Higher Education on 17.08.2021 and with Ministry 
of Justice on 18.08.2021. Individual letters detailing specific issues were also sent to the 
Ministries/Departments, such as Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on 12.01.2021, 
Central Zoo Authority and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 
14.02.2021, Ministry of Civil Aviation on 11.03.2021, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on 04.03.2021, Ministry of Railways on 12.02.2021 and 05.08.2021, 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on 09.04.2021 and Ministry ofJal Shakti on 
07.07.2021 and 17.07.2021. 
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of 
Persons with Disabilities O.M dated 10.11.2021)] 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
02   August, 2022                                                  Standing Committee on 
11  Sravana, 1944 (Saka)      Social Justice and  
         Empowerment 

52 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) HELD ON TUESDAY, 2nd 
AUGUST, 2022 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, Parliament House Annex, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
                  PRESENT 
 
  SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON  
 
                    MEMBERS 
 
   LOK SABHA 
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  7. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
  8. Smt. Geeta Kora 
  9. Shri Vijay Kumar 
10. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
11. Smt. Supriya Sule 
  
 
  RAJYA SABHA 
12. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
13. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
14. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
15. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
16. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri T.S. Rangarajan - Joint Secretary 
3. Smt. Mamta Kemwal - Director  
4. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 

53 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider and adopt 
the following draft Reports: 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
 
(ii) 36 th Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Twenty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Assessment of 
Scheme for Implementation of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
Act, 2016 (SIPDA)’ relating to the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities). 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX  XX  
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Report was adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report in the 
light of consequential changes that might arise out of factual verification of the draft 
Report and to present the same to both the Houses. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report 

54 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-THIRD REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT ON ‘ASSESSMENT OF SCHEME FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RIGHTS OF PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES ACT, 2016 
(SIPDA)  
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 
 
20  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No. 4.23,  4.26, 5.8, 6.17, 6.18, 6.20, 
7.8, 8.11, 9.4, 11.3 & 13.5. 
 
11 55% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply- Rec. Para No.2.8, 2.9, 2.10 
 
03 15% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration–  
 
Rec. Para No. 3.13, 6.19,10.4 & 12.3. 
 
04 20% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature– Rec. Para No.4.24 & 4.25 
 
 
02 10% 
   100% 
 
 