i 
 
34                           
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2021-22)   
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)    
 (MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS)   
 
“REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF EKLAVYA MODEL  
RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS (EMRS)”         
 
THIRTY- FOURTH REPORT 
               
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2022/Chaitra, 1944 (Saka)    
 
 

ii 
 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT (2021-22)    
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)   
 
 
(MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS)    
“REVIEW OF THE FUNCTIONING OF 
EKLAVYA MODEL RESIDENTIAL 
SCHOOLS (EMRS)” 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01.04.2022 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.04.2022              
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2022/Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
     
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
INTRODUCTORY 
1 
CHAPTER – II   ESTABLISHMENT OF EMRSs 4 
CHAPTER - III LAND REQUIREMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF EMRSs 17 
CHAPTER – IV   NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY FOR TRIBAL 
STUDENTS (NESTS) 
22 
CHAPTER – V   RECRUITMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 28 
CHAPTER – VI   CONSTRUCTION COSTS & BUDGET 34 
CHAPTER – VII  CAPACITY BUILDING OF PRINCIPALS AND TEACHERS 39 
CHAPTER – VIII   SCHOOL INFRASTRUCTURE 43 
CHAPTER – IX  PERFORMANCE OF EMRSs 51 
CHAPTER – X   CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE FOR SPORTS 56 
CHAPTER – XI   AFFILIATION OF EMRSs TO CBSE 59 
 ANNEXURES*  
 APPENDIX 62 
* To be appended later. 
  

iv 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2020-21) 
 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  3. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  4. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  5. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  6. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  7. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  8. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
  9. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
10. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
11. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
12. Smt. Geeta Kora 
13. Shri Vijay Kumar 
14. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
15. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  16. Shri Arjun Singh 
17. Smt. Supriya Sule 
18. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
21. Vacant #
 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
23. Smt. Ramilaben Bara 
24. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
25. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha* 
27. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa* 
29. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
30. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
31.  Shri Ramji* 
__________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020 
#  Shri Pashupati Kumar Paras ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 
07.07.2021 consequent upon his appointment as Union Minister. 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2021-22) 
 
SMT. RAMA DEVI - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
   Lok Sabha  
  2. Shri Deepak (Dev) Adhikari 
  3. Smt. Sangeeta Azad 
  4. Shri Bholanath 'B.P. Saroj' 
  5. Smt. Pramila Bisoyi 
  6. Shri Thomas Chazhikadan 
  7. Shri Chhatar Singh Darbar 
  8. Shri Y. Devendrappa 
  9. Smt. Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
10. Shri Hans Raj Hans 
11. Shri K. Shanmuga Sundaram 
12. Shri Abdul Khaleque 
13. Smt. Ranjeeta Koli 
14. Smt. Geeta Kora 
15. Shri Vijay Kumar 
16. Shri Akshaibar Lal 
17. Shri V. Srinivas Prasad 
  18. Shri Arjun Singh 
19. Smt. Supriya Sule 
20. Smt. Rekha Verma 
21. Shri Tokheho Yepthomi 
 
   Rajya Sabha  
22. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
23. Smt. Jharna Das Baidya 
24. Smt. Ramilaben Becharbhai  Bara 
25. Shri Abir Ranjan Biswas 
26. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
27. Shri N.Chandrasegharan 
28. Shri Narayan Koragappa 
29. Smt. Mamata Mohanta 
30. Smt. Chhaya Verma 
31. Shri Ramkumar Verma 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Anita B. Panda  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt Mamta Kemwal   Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar Deputy Secretary  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2021-22) having been authorized by the Committee, do present, on their behalf, 
this Thirty-fourth Report on ‘Review of the Functioning of Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools (EMRS)’  
2.  The Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment (17th Lok Sabha) 
had selected the subject ‘Review of the Functioning of Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools (EMRS)’ for examination during 2020-21 and in 2021-22. The Committee 
were briefed on the subject by the representatives of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs at 
their sitting held on 30.06.2021 and took evidence on 26.08.2021. 
3. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the material and 
information which the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject ‘Review of the Functioning of Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS). 
They would also like to place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting 
held on 31.03.2022. Minutes of the related sittings are given in the appendix to the 
Report. 
4. For ease of reference, the Observations and Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
   NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                   Chairperson, 
    31 March, 2022        Standing Committee on 
    10 Chaitra, 1944 (Saka)               Social Justice and  
         Empowerment  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
  
Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) was set up in the year 1999 with the objective of 
providing more focused approach on the integrated socio-economic development of the 
Scheduled Tribes (STs), the most underprivileged section of the society, in a coordinated 
and planned manner. Since its inception, Ministry of Tribal Affairs has taken various 
initiatives for overall upliftment of Tribals across the country. Amongst these, providing 
quality education to ST students have been among the main focus of the Ministry as 
educational development is a stepping-stone to economic and social development and  
is also the most effective instrument for overall empowerment.  
1.2 Accordingly, Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRSs) was introduced in the 
year 1997-98 to provide quality upper primary, secondary and senior secondary level 
education to Scheduled Tribes (ST) and PVTG students (Class 6th to 12th) in tribal 
dominated areas, along with extra-curricular activities, to enable them to access the best 
opportunities in education and to bring them at par with the general population. Initially, 
the Scheme was funded under a Special Area Programme, Grants under Article 275(1) 
of the Constitution of India. Under this Scheme, 288 schools were sanctioned wherein 
the State were responsible for providing land, construction of school, recruitment of 
teachers and management of schools.  
1.3 Realizing the importance of the EMRSs, the Government announced in the Union 
Budget of 2018-19 that the Government is committed to provide the best quality 
education to the tribal children in their own environment and to realize this mission, it has 
been decided that by the year 2022, every block with more than 50% ST population and 
at least 20,000 tribal persons, will have an Eklavya Model Residential School. Eklavya 
schools will be on par with Navodaya Vidyalayas and will have special facilities for 
preserving local art and culture besides providing training in sports and skill 
development. In terms of the aforesaid Budget announcement, Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA), in its meeting held on 17.12.18, inter-alia approved the 

2 
 
revamping of the EMRS Scheme. Consequently, a separate revamped Scheme of 
EMRS was created with the following salient features: 
(i) Set up Schools with a capacity of 480 students each, catering to students 
from Class VI to XII in every block with more than 50% ST population and at least 
20,000 tribal persons. 
(ii) Set up Eklavya Model Day Boarding Schools (EMDBS) in sub-districts with 
90% or more ST population and 20,000 or more tribal persons.  
(iii) Minimum land of 15 acres in case of EMRS and 5 acres in case of EMDBS 
to make available better infrastructure facilities for academic education as well as 
extracurricular activities. 
(iv) Construction cost of ₹ 37.80 crore per school for plain area and ₹ 48.00 
crore  for schools in North East, hilly areas, difficult areas and areas affected by 
Left Wing Extremism. 
(v) Recurring grant of ₹1.09 lakh per student per annum in case of EMRS and 
₹ 0.85 lakh in case of EMDBS. 
(vi) Establish National Education Society for Tribal Students as an 
autonomous Society under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to establish, endow, 
maintain, control and manage schools and to do all acts and things necessary for 
or conducive to the promotion of such schools. 
(vii) Set up Centre of Excellence for sports in tribal majority districts with all 
related infrastructure (buildings, equipment etc.) including specialized 
state-of-the-art facilities for two identified sports (including one group sport and 
one individual sport) which will be common for a State. 
(vii) Utilization of upto 10% seats by non-ST students. Priority shall be given to 
children of EMRSs staff, children who have lost their parents to Left Wing 
Extremism and insurgencies, children of widows, children of divyang parents etc. 
(viii) Reservation of 20% seats under sports quota for deserving ST students 

3 
 
who have excelled in the field of sports. 
1.4 The Department of Expenditure and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) had in 2018, approved setting up of 452 new EMRS/EMDBS in sub-districts. Out 
of the total 740 (288 old +452 new) schools, which are required to be sanctioned by 
31.3.2022, 620 schools were sanctioned by 13.07.2021, out of which 367 are functional. 
All existing and new schools have been brought under the EMRS scheme.  A National 
Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) has since been established which would 
coordinate with State EMRS societies to manage these schools.  
  

4 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF EMRSs 
   
(I) CONSTRUCTION OF OLD EMRS 
 
As per the information provided by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs on 13.07.2021, 
244 schools have been made functional out of 288 schools sanctioned under Article 
275(1) of the Constitution of India.  As per the provision contained in the Article, funds 
for construction of the EMRS was dependent on the allocation of funds for the particular 
State which was subject to submission of pending Utilization Certificates.  As informed 
by the Ministry the Construction work has completed in 202 schools, 66 are under 
construction and construction is yet to start for 20 schools.  
 
2.2 As regards to the reasons due to which construction work of 66 schools has not 
been completed and by when construction work of remaining 20 schools is likely to 
begin, the Committee found from Annexure-I of post evidence reply submitted by the 
Ministry that the date for completion of work in respect of 66 schools varies between 
December 2021 to October 2024 except in case of two schools viz. Bajpur, Uttarakhand 
where there is court stay and in case of Kalimpong, West Bengal, where there is no 
response. As regards 20 Schools where construction is yet to begin, it has been noticed 
that in case of 5 schools, tendering process is in progress, land transfer is under process 
for 6 schools, finalisation of construction agency is under process for 5 schools, DPR 
preparation is in progress for 2 schools and land identification is in process and forest 
land diversion is in progress in each school. 
 
2.3 On being enquired about the status of schools where construction has 
completed, the Ministry of Tribal affairs submitted vide post evidence reply: 
  
"195 schools have started functioning from their own building and the 
remaining 3 schools functioning from other Government buildings."  
 
 

5 
 
2.4   On being asked the reasons due to which the several schools sanctioned prior 
to 2018-19 have not been made functional till date and why in certain cases the 
construction work has either not started or is in progress, the Ministry inter-alia submitted 
in their written reply that: 
 "One of the reasons for slow progress of construction under old scheme 
was that the release of the funds for construction of the EMRSs was 
dependent upon the share of allocation of funds for the particular State 
under Article 275 (1) which was subject to submission of pending utilization 
certificates. Therefore, the period of construction varied in different 
locations depending upon the availability of funds with the State 
Governments. The other reasons were delay in identification suitable land 
in terms of area, accessibility, topography, free from encumbrances, etc.     
During the process of identification of suitable site, some States have 
expressed difficulties in identifying an appropriate alternate building for a 
residential school given the remoteness of the locations." 
 
2.5    On being enquired about the procedure adopted for sanctioning of old schools, 
the Secretary submitted during the course of evidence that: 
“ वषᭅ 2018-19 क े पहले क े िजतने िव᳒ालय थे, उनमᱶ हम ᮕांट देते थे, लेᳰकन बनाने का और 
सुपरिवजन का काम रा᭔य सरकार का होता था। 275(1) क े ᮕांट मᱶ ऐसा नहᱭ था ᳰक यहां 
से हम पूरा का पूरा सᱹ᭍शन कर दᱶ, उसमᱶ से क ु छ भाग रा᭔य सरकार अपनी तरफ से भी 
देती थᱭ।” 
 
2.6      He further added :  
“पहले जो सᱹ᭍शन होता था, उसमᱶ इतना िडटेल मᱶ न जाकर जैसे ही लᱹड कᳱ ᳯरᳰᲤिजशन 
आती थी, हम लोग सᱹ᭍शन कर देते थे। बाद मᱶ हम लोगᲂ ने पाया ᳰक एक ᭡लॉट मᱶ हमᱶ 
जमीन नहᱭ िमली, बीच मᱶ या तो रोड है या कोई ᮧाइवेट जमीन आ गई है या वहाँ पर 
इतनी पथरीली जमीन है ᳰक वहाँ पानी नहᱭ िमल सकता है।” 
 
 
2.7 With regard to the initiatives taken by the Ministry after revamping of the 
Scheme to ensure that the old schools sanctioned are constructed and made functional 
in their own buildings within the given timeframe, the Ministry submitted vide post 
evidence reply that: 
 "Central/State PSUs, CPWD and Engineering Wing of State Governments 

6 
 
have been assigned the work of construction. Regular monitoring of the 
construction work is being done by NESTS. All the schools are now being 
constructed on a similar design; however, modifications are being allowed as 
per site specific requirements." 
 
  

7 
 
2.8 The Committee are constrained to note that out of 288 schools sanctioned in 
1997-98, that is prior to revamping of the EMRS Scheme in 2018-19, only 244 schools 
could be made functional.  They further find that the construction work of only 202 
schools has been completed till date and the construction work of 20 schools is yet to 
begin, whereas construction work of 66 schools is targeted to be completed by October, 
2024. The pace with which the work has been progressing seems to be quite slow as 
construction work of only 202 schools has been completed despite the Scheme being in 
existence for more than two decades. Construction work of 20 schools could not begin 
till date, despite the same being entrusted to Central/State Public Sector undertakings 
after the revamping of Scheme in 2018-19.   The Committee are of the firm opinion that 
the routine issues relating to tendering process, land transfer, finalization of 
construction agency, etc. cannot be kept lingering for months and delaying the work 
inordinately when a target completion date is set.   The Committee feel that the Ministry 
should take dynamic measures to ensure that, at least, all the 288 old sanctioned schools 
are made functional from their own buildings in a time bound manner in order to achieve 
the envisaged objectives of the Scheme. The Committee would therefore, like the 
Ministry to take concrete steps so that the construction work of 66 schools is completed 
as stipulated and begin the construction work of the remaining 20 schools at the earliest 
so that all the old schools are made functional from their own building. As the teaching 
activities have not been undertaken since the pandemic of COVID-19 started, there is all 
the more urgency that atleast now the tribal children must have school facilities to 
resume their education, particularly since online mode of education is not feasible for 
remote tribal areas.  Hence, the Committee may be apprised in this regard. 

8 
 
(II) ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW EMRSs 
 
2.9 As per the revised norms of EMRSs, every block with more than 50% ST 
population and at least 20,000 tribal persons, will have an Eklavya Model Residential 
School by the year 2022. As per 2011 census, there are 564 sub-districts across the 
country i.e. blocks/taluka/tehsil having more than 50% ST population and at least 20,000 
tribal persons. Out of these sub-districts, EMRS was sanctioned in 102 sub-district  at the 
inception of the Scheme. It was proposed to establish new EMRSs in the remaining 462 
sub-districts by the year 2022. 
  
2.10 Wherever density of ST population is higher in identified Sub-Districts (90% or 
more), it is proposed to set up Eklavya Model Day Boarding School (EMDBS) on an 
experimental basis for providing additional scope for ST Students seeking to avail school 
education without residential facility. Accordingly, 12 such EMDBS will be set based on 
the demand of the concerned State/UT. The features of EMDBS will remain                                   the same as 
EMRS except that there would be no residential facility, land requirement would be of 5 
acres, there would be provision of morning snacks, lunch and evening snacks, 
transportation facility in convergence with State/UT and recurring cost @ existing 
₹85000 per student per year. 
 
2.11 As per the phasing plan, new schools are to be sanctioned in the following 
manner: 
Year Number of schools to 
be sanctioned 
Schools 
sanctioned 
so far 
2018-19 50 50 
2019-20 150 100 
2020-21 150 150 
2021-22 152 32 
Total 452 332 
Out of the 332 schools sanctioned so far, Detailed Project Report (DPR) and 
Master Layout Plan (MLP) has been approved for 174 schools and construction work 
has commenced for 100 schools. 

9 
 
2.12  With regard to the procedure laid down for sanctioning of the EMRS, the Ministry 
submitted to the Committee vide the post evidence reply that:  
 
"State Government submits a preliminary land suitability report for each of 
the locations highlighting the exact location of the land; type  of land; area of land 
identified; status of availability of basic services like approach road, drinking 
water, electricity; any encroachment etc. This preliminary report is scrutinized by 
NESTS and on the recommendation to MoTA, “provisional sanction” is accorded. 
Based on the provisional sanction, State Government is required to complete all 
land formalities including demarcation of land, land alienation and then transfer of 
land in the name of State/UT EMRS Society.  On completion of the formalities 
and submission of relevant records, NESTS accords a “formal sanction” to the 
construction agency to commence the pre- construction work. 
 
Once formal sanction is issued based on availability and suitability of land, 
pre-construction activities like demarcation of land, survey and soil investigation 
report, Preparation of Master layout plan (MLP) and detailed project report (DPR) 
is to be prepared by construction agencies in consultation with respective States. 
States have been asked to complete Pre-construction activities in 5-6 months.  
Thereafter, construction work is to be completed in 18 months.  Thus a period of 
24 months is earmarked for pre-construction activities and construction work.” 
 
2.13 In this regard, the Ministry further submitted in their reply that: 
 
   “Administrative approval is granted to start construction of schools 
after scrutiny of MLP and DPR. A dedicated construction wing in NESTS 
examines these documents and to ensure that these are as per physical and 
financial norms fixed by NESTS. Funds are provided through NESTS to the 
construction agency for construction. Quality control agencies from IIT/NIT 
are being assigned for ensuring quality norms. 
 
   A dedicated team at NESTS constantly follows up with states and 
construction agencies to monitor the progress of construction of these 
schools. NESTS has appointed construction agency for each of these 452 
new schools who are required to work in close coordination with States for 
pre-construction and construction activities.” 
 
 
2.14 On being asked about the details of funds sanctioned for the construction of new 
schools since 2018-19, the number of new schools constructed, schools made functional 

10 
 
from their own building and schools functioning from alternate building, the Ministry 
submitted the following reply: 
 
Year 
Fund 
Sanctioned for 
new schools  
(In Lakhs) 
Schools made 
functional from 
own building 
Schools 
functioning 
from alternate 
building 
2018-19 2312.00 3 18 
2019-20 7212.00 5 35 
2020-21 38181.40 12 50 
2021-22 17128.83 0 0 
 
 
 
2.15 With regard to the measures taken to ensure that the sanctioned Schools are 
made functional at the earliest, the Ministry submitted to the Committee vide post 
evidence reply that:  
 
"It would take at least 2 years for completion of construction of school after 
“formal sanction” is granted to State. In the interregnum till the construction 
of the building is over, the States are encouraged to identify temporary 
alternate suitable buildings and recruit teachers to make the schools 
functional. States have been advised to admit students of class 6th to 8th 
initially in such schools. As per norms, each EMRS school will have classes 
from 6th to 12th Standard with 480 students. From 6th -10th there is provision 
of 30 students each in 2 sections and for 11th and 12th there would be 3 
streams of commerce, Arts and Science [(5x2X30= 300) + (30 X 3 X2=180) 
= 480 students]. Depending on the size of temporary building and availability 
of teachers, schools can admit students in different classes, so that by the 
time construction is completed, the student of class VIII reaches class X.  
This ensures sufficient number of students and teachers when the school 
building is completed. However, given the remoteness of the locations and 
the residential nature of the schools, some States find difficulties in 
identifying such alternate buildings and prefer to make schools functional 
only when the construction of the building is complete. Secondly, 
functionality of school should match with starting of academic session. 
Based on these limitations and requirements though 620 schools have been 
sanctioned, only 367 are functional. States are being encouraged to plan 
recruitment of permanent teachers so that all such schools can be made 

11 
 
functional from next academic session where administrative approval has 
been given and construction started." 
 
2.16 On being asked whether the Ministry would be able to achieve the target of setting 
up 740 EMRSs by August 2023, particularly when only 367 schools have been made 
functional till date and reasons for slow pace of the project, the Ministry submitted before 
the Committee vide post evidence reply that: 
 
"As per the phasing plan approved by CCEA, all 740 schools have to be 
sanctioned by March 2022. As on date, 620 schools have already been 
sanctioned and remaining 120 will be sanctioned during this financial year 
subject to receipt of land details from the concerned States. Further, the 
completion of construction and making schools functional are two parallel 
activities which can go together.” 
 
Category Target Schools 
Sanctioned 
Construction 
Completed 
Under 
Construction 
Not 
Started 
Old Schools 
(funded under 
Article 275) 
288 288 198+4 66 20 
New Schools  
(As per CCEA 
approval) 
452 332 0 100 232 
Total 740 620 198+4 166 252 
 
2.17 The Ministry has set following targets and timelines for sanction of 740 schools, 
make them functional and complete construction: 
(i) Formal sanction of remaining 120 schools (740-620) by 2022 as approved 
by CCEA.  Ministry is aggressively pursuing with States to ensure that suitable 
land is provided for each such school.  Ministry is also considering on 
case-to-case basis change of location,  in the same or neighbouring block in 
case land is not available in that block or there are issues like forest clearance or 
litigation pending in courts. 
(ii) Make those schools functional where construction has started and 
permanent teachers have been employed from next academic session of 
2022-23. 

12 
 
(iii) Start construction in all 620 schools by March 2022 where provisional 
sanction has been given and pre construction activities are underway. Out of 620 
schools sanctioned, there are 252 schools, where construction is to be started by 
31.03.2022. 
(iv) Efforts are being taken to complete construction of all sanctioned schools 
by 2025. Because of the pandemic, work at the ground level was affected. 
Depending on the improvement in the local situation, construction agencies have 
been advised to increase the speed of work. 
(v) Meanwhile, while the construction of schools is in progress,  States are 
being regularly advised to make the schools functional from alternate buildings 
provided there is availability of regular teachers for running these schools. 
(vi) A dedicated engineering wing has also been setup in NESTS to monitor 
the progress of schools and facilitate approvals of master layout plans, detailed 
projects reports, scrutiny of land records etc. 
 
2.18 With regard to the efforts made by the Ministry to make all the schools functional, 
the Secretary Ministry of Tribal Affairs informed during the deliberations with the 
Committee submitted that:  
“बᱟत से अभी ᭭टॉटᭅ नहᱭ ᱟए हᱹ। मᱹने अभी रा᭔य क े साथ ᳯर᳞ू ᳰकया था। कहᱭ-कहᱭ पर जमीन 
पूरी भी नहᱭ है। िहली एᳯरया मᱶ एक सम᭭या यह रहती है ᳰक 15 एकड़ का एकसाथ ᭣लॉक िमलना 
और वह भी लेवल पर, वह थोड़ा सा मुि᭫कल रहता है। िहली एᳯरया मᱶ जमीन का थोड़ा इ᭫यू 
रहता है।” 
 
2.19 On being enquired about the provisions for establishing EMRS in a block where 
the tribal population is less than 20,000, the representative of the Ministry informed 
during the evidence before the Committee that:   

13 
 
  अभी हम लोगᲂ क े जो नॉ᭥सᭅ हᱹ, अभी जो गाइडलाइन है, जो क ै िबनेट से एᮧू᭪ड है, वह यह है 
ᳰक एक ᭣लॉक मᱶ, हम ᭣लॉक को एक यूिनट मान रहे हᱹ, वहाँ पर जनजातीय जनसं᭎या 20 हजार 
होनी चािहए और 50 ᮧितशत से अिधक लोग वहाँ होने चािहए। हम लोगᲂ का यह एक पैमाना 
है।” 
2.20 On being enquired further about any alternative available so that the sanctioned 
Schools are made functional at the earliest, in those cases where States/UTs are not 
able to acquire land for Schools, the  Ministry inter-alia submitted before the Committee 
vide post evidence reply that: 
 
“Under the new scheme with establishment of NESTS, efforts have been 
taken to ensure that EMRSs are sanctioned only when suitable land has been 
identified and the same needs to be certified by the State Government concerned. 
In very specific instances where States have informed regarding unavailability of 
land in a particular block, then they have been allowed to locate the school in 
neighbouring block while giving priority to the students of the original location 
during admissions. Relaxation have also been given on the quantum of land 
required based on requests of State Governments, particularly in hilly locations. 
 
Given the fact that States have been advised to ensure that  schools are 
made functional from alternate buildings while the construction of the own building 
is underway, efforts are being taken to ensure that maximum schools are made 
functional at the earliest.” 
 
 
2.21 With regard to the requisite formalities to sanction remaining 120 schools if 
completed and the target fixed to complete the construction of all 740 schools, the 
Committee were informed vide post evidence reply that: 
"18 out of 120 locations have already been sanctioned. The  process for 
the remaining 102 locations is in progress. The same shall be completed once the 
requisite land is identified by the concerned State Government. The construction 
of 740 Schools is expected to be completed by March 2025 subject to availability 
of required funds.” 
 
2.22 The Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated that: 
“हमारा जो अभी सबसे मह᭜वपूणᭅ ल᭯य है, वह है – नए एकल᳞  िव᳒ालयᲂ कᳱ मंजूरी, उनक े 

14 
 
िलए ज़मीन कᳱ ᳞ व᭭था का िनमाᭅण करना। 50 से अिधक ᭭थानᲂ पर जमीन उपल᭣ध होने क े साथ ही 
ए᭭टीमेट वगैरह को ᭭वीक ृत करने कᳱ ᮧᳰᮓया कर दी गईहै। अभी िपछले महीने हमारे माननीय मंᮢी जी 
ने पाँच एकल᳞  िव᳒ालयᲂ कᳱ आधारिशला का शुभार᭥भ ᳰकया था। उसमᱶ माननीय सिमित क े सद᭭य 
महोदय ने भी भाग लेकर हमारा उ᭜साहव᳍ᭅन ᳰकया था।” 
 
2.23 On being enquired about the status of EMBDS and the reasons for introducing this 
concept, the Committee were inter-alia informed by the Ministry in the post evidence reply that: 
“452 schools approved to be set up by the Department of Expenditure and Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs also includes three EMDBS, one each in Rajasthan, 
Tripura and Gujarat. The work of Schools in Rajasthan and Tripura is in progress, 
however the work of School in Gujarat is yet to start. No specific request was received 
from States/UTs for establishment of day boarding schools. However, on an experimental 
basis it was decided to introduce the concept of day boarding schools during the 
revamping of the scheme. Proposals were sought from States to establish the EMDBS as 
per the approval of CCEA. However only 3 such proposals were received, which were 
duly sanctioned.” 
 
  

15 
 
2.24 The Committee note that the original target, which aimed that 452 new Eklavya 
Model Residential Schools (EMRSs) including 12 Eklavya Model Day Boarding School 
(EMDBS) would be set up in the remaining 462 sub-districts by the year 2022 is no where 
near completion and the target year stands revised as 2025 now. The Committee are 
surprised to note that out of 452 schools proposed to be sanctioned as per the phasing 
plan between 2018-2019 to 2021-2022, only 350 schools could be sanctioned and the 
remaining 102 schools are remaining to be sanctioned as the location for these schools 
is yet to be finalised.  It is disappointing that the construction work of only 100 schools 
could begin till date whereas the construction work of 332 schools is to begin by March 
2022, which has just passed. The Committee lament the fact that there is a substantial 
gap between the number of schools proposed to be sanctioned and the number of 
schools sanctioned and also with regard to timelines fixed for construction work. The 
Committee also find the Ministry deficient in complying with the standard period of 24 
months fixed for completing the construction work as the present position states that 
detailed Project Report and Master Layout Plan for 174 schools and construction work 
for 100 schools could begin out of 350 schools sanctioned till date. Further worrying is 
the fact that very few schools have their own buildings as only 20 schools have been 
made functional from own buildings.  103 schools are functioning from alternate 
buildings since 2018-19 till 2021-22. The Committee are quite apprehensive with regard to 
the achievement of target even by March 2025 as construction of 252 schools is yet to 
begin. The Committee have been made to believe by the Ministry that after establishment 
of National Educational Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) on revamping of the 
Scheme, things are going to improve substantially but the facts still speak otherwise, 

16 
 
even after two years of establishment of NESTS. The Committee would, therefore, opine 
that the Ministry must not take more into background after setting up of NESTS as things 
are still not  progressing satisfactorily, therefore, close monitoring of the pace of work 
is required to be done by the Ministry to achieve the targets.  The Committee, therefore, 
like the Ministry to set up a stringent in-built mechanism to ensure compliance of 
norms/timelines fixed with regard to sanctioning/construction/functioning of schools so 
that the work of making EMRS/EMDBS functional from their own buildings is not delayed 
and there is no deviation from targets at any stage.  
 
 
                     
  

17 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
LAND REQUIREMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF EMRSs 
 
 
3.1 As per norms, land has to be provided by the concerned State/UT, as far as 
possible free of cost, or on nominal cost free from all encumbrances with clear land use 
for development and expansion of schools. The land identified should be preferably 
in the vicinity of District/Sub-District headquarters with proper road connectivity. A 
minimum of 15 acres of Land required for establishing EMRSs and a minimum of 5 acre 
of Land is required for establishing Eklavya Model Day Boarding School (EMDBS).   
The Ministry informed that relaxation on the minimum requirement of land can be 
granted on case to case basis       on the specific needs e.g. in North East, hilly areas and 
LWE affected areas. 
 
3.2 When asked about the justification of the 15 acres of land for required 
construction of EMRS, the Ministry submitted vide Post evidence reply that: 
 The school is fully residential with capacity of 480 students (Boys and 
Girls).  
 The constructed area building (School, Girls Hostel, Boys Hostel including 
warden residence, Kitchen and Dining, 15 type III quarters, 10 type II 
quarter, principal quarter, guest house and services) requires nearly 02 
acres of land for construction.  
 Sports Infrastructure consisting of playground, basketball, volley wall, Kho- 
Kho for boys and girls each, archery requires approximately 07 acres of 
land  
 Land scaping, vegetation garden, skill development centres, Herbal 
Garden etc require 03 acres of land  
 Development works such as road, pathways, parking etc 02 acres of land  
 The future provisions of 01 acre of land have been kept for construction of 
auditorium/multipurpose hall etc.  
 
 

18 
 
 
3.3 As regards the requirement of 5 acres of land as a pre-requisite for EMDBS, the 
justification provided by the Ministry is as under:  
 
 The constructed area building (School, Kitchen and Dining, and services) 
requires nearly 01 acre of land for construction.  
 Sports Infrastructure consisting of playground, basketball, volley wall, Kho 
Kho for boys and girls each, archery requires approximately 04 acre of land 
including other development work. 
3.4 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs also submitted the following reasons for delay in 
identification of land as shared by States are as under: 
 
 Suitable land for construction of EMRS is not available and if the land is 
available, transfer of land from the revenue department and arrangement 
of other legal document related to land take time.  
 In many locations where land was identified several discrepancies also 
been noticed and the process of resolving the issues take time  
 In many locations identified land was not technically suitable for 
construction of EMRS. So, the process of identification of alternate land 
were explored.   
 Moreover, in several locations identified land were reported as forest land 
at later stage requiring filling of application for diversion. 
 
3.5 When asked about the instances of relaxations with regard to quantum of land 
and also if any, school was allowed in location different from the identified one due to 
unavailability of land, the Ministry submitted vide Post evidence reply that: 
"As per the guidelines, relaxations can be granted regarding  quantum of 
land on case-to-case basis whereby States/UTs find it difficult to identify the 
requisite quantum of land. Relaxation in such cases is granted subject to 
condition that the available land shall be sufficient to cover all essential features 
and items are covered by adopting special design of building and layout. This 
problem was envisaged in the beginning and hence was included in the 
guidelines.” 

19 
 
3.6 On being enquired whether the criteria of population for setting up of 
EMRS/EMDBS was fixed after due consultation with Stakeholders, the Ministry 
submitted vide Post evidence reply that: 
"The criteria was decided based on consultation with relevant line 
stakeholders including Ministry of Finance, NITI Aayog, Ministry of Social Justice 
& Empowerment, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Department of 
Youth Affairs, Department of Higher Education and the National Commission for 
Scheduled Tribes.” 
  

20 
 
3.7 The Committee observe that a minimum of 15 acres of land is required for 
establishing Eklavya Model Residential School (EMRS) in a sub-district having 50% ST 
population and at least 20,000 tribal persons and a minimum of 5 acres of land is 
required for establishing Eklavya Model Day Boarding School (EMDBS) in a sub-district 
having 90% ST population. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite a provision 
of relaxation on the minimum requirement of land in North east, hilly areas and LWE 
affected areas in the guidelines, several discrepancies such as land not found 
technically suitable, land falling under forest area, etc. appear and since the process of 
resolving the issues takes time, there is a delay in acquisition of land required for setting 
up EMRS in selected districts. The Committee believe that the criteria of minimum area of 
15 acres of land in a sub-district having 50% ST population and at least 20,000 tribal 
persons for construction of EMRS is impractical as a single piece of 15 acres of land may 
not be easily available in hilly areas. Further, the criteria of 50% ST population and at 
least 20,000 tribal persons for sanctioning of EMRS and 90% ST population for 
sanctioning of EMDBS makes identification of land more cumbersome. The Committee 
hence feel that the guidelines with regard to area/population needs to be revisited as  
together these stipulation make acquisition of land for setting up of EMRS/EMDBS quite 
complex. The Committee hence are of the opinion that these should be immediately 
reviewed and viable solutions worked out so that the delay in acquisition of land can be 
prevented. The Committee also recommend that such review should be undertaken 
without compromising upon the infrastructural requirements of EMRS/EMDBS. The 
Committee desire that such tribal areas with widely scattered tribal population must not 
be deprived of the benefits of EMRSs/EMDBS which are a means towards their 

21 
 
educational empowerment.  The Committee note that out of three approved EMDBS , 
construction work of two schools is in progress and work of one school is yet to begin.  
The Committee desire that the construction work of all the three EMDBS should be 
completed in time and the Ministry should take necessary steps to encourage/sensitize 
the States/UTs to submit speedily, proposals for construction of EMDBS so that 
maximum Tribal students are able to get quality education. 
 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
NATIONAL EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY FOR TRIBAL STUDENTS (NESTS) 
 
  
4.1 National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) registered under 
Societies Registration Act, 1860, was established in 2019 as an autonomous body under 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to manage the schools in similar pattern as Navodaya 
Vidyalaya Samiti. NESTS is mandated to plan, construct, establish, endow and 
administer the Schools  and to do all acts and things necessary for or conducive to tribal 
education. The NESTS shall function through an Executive Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Tribal Affairs. The Executive Head of the administrative 
pyramid will be the Commissioner (Joint Secretary level) who shall execute the policies 
laid down by the Executive Committee. The NESTS will be guided by a Steering 
Committee headed by the Hon’ble Minister  for Tribal Affairs. A Project Management Unit 
has been setup in the NESTS with consultants hired on contract basis in the areas of 
Monitoring & Evaluation, Human Resources, Finance, Administration, and Information 
Technology. A dedicated office space for NESTS was identified, refurbished and 
completed. NESTS has been functioning from the new space since December, 2020. 
Out of the 28 posts approved by Ministry of Finance for NESTS, 6 posts have been filled.  
4.2 The envisaged Roles and Responsibilities of the National Education Society for 
Tribal Students inter-alia stipulates : 
(i) Operationalisation of the scheme in all its contours. 
 
(ii) Plan, construct, establish, endow and administer the Schools and to do all 
acts and  things necessary for or conducive to tribal education. 
 
(iii) Provide good quality modern education-including a strong component of 
inculcation of values, awareness of the  environment, adventure activities and 
physical education to the tribal children. 
 
(iv)  Provide facilities, at a suitable stage for instruction through a common 
medium all over the country as per the language norms of CBSE. 
 

23 
 
(v) Offer a common core-curriculum of NCERT to ensure uniformity in 
standards. 
 
(vi) Facilitate CBSE affiliation of schools. 
 
(vii) Facilitate conduct of training/capacity building programmes for teaching 
and non-teaching staff in coordination with the State/UT EMRS Societies. 
 
(viii) Transfer the admissible Recurring Costs based on the actual requirement 
as to be projected by the State/UT EMRS Society in the beginning of the financial 
year for onward transmission to the schools through PFMS. 
 
(ix) Provide detailed standards and norms for recruitment of Teaching and 
Non-Teaching staff and continuation of existing staff. 
 
(x) Review the existing MoUs signed by the State/UT EMRS Society or the 
State Government with Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) regarding 
running of the existing schools and take appropriate decision to enter into a fresh 
MoU only if  the academic results are found good and  any other benchmarks as 
to be decided. 
 
(xi) If need be, could entrust the recruitment of teachers  for  States to an 
independent  agency duly ensuring reservation quota prescribed therein. 
 
(xii) Aid, establish and conduct other institutions as  may be required for the 
furtherance                                                 of the Society's objectives in any part of India. 
 
4.3 As per the Guidelines, EMRS Societies registered under Societies Registration 
Act or Indian Trust Act or any other corresponding State Act are to be set up at the 
State/UT level within 30 days from issue of the Guidelines. These State Societies will 
maintain, control and manage the Schools as per the guidelines and norms formulated 
by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India and undertake other responsibilities 
as delegated by the MoTA/ NESTS. In order to bring the States on-board for the 
revamped scheme of EMRS, it was decided to enter into a MoU with the State/ UT 
EMRS Society by NESTS.   
 
4.4 When asked about the latest position of EMRS Societies in the States/UTs, the 
Ministry stated that concerted efforts were undertaken to ensure that each and every 
State/UT having an EMRS is eligible to set up EMRS, also sets up the State/UT Level 
EMRS Society, duly registered under the Societies Registration Act. Accordingly, 

24 
 
State/UT Level EMRS Society has been established in 27 out of 28 States/UTs. Efforts 
are being taken to ensure that the Society is in place in the remaining State at the 
earliest. The MoU basically outlines the roles and responsibilities of NESTS and 
State/UT EMRS Societies in implementing the revamped programme of EMRS. 
 
4.5 On being asked how far NESTS and State/UT level EMRS Societies have been 
able to justify their envisaged role when several schools are yet at nascent stage, the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted in their written reply that: 
 
"NESTS is mandated to plan, construct, establish, endow and to do all acts 
and things necessary for or conducive to tribal education whereas State Societies 
are mandated to maintain, control and  manage the schools as per the 
guidelines and norms formulated by MoTA and NESTS. 367 schools are currently 
functional and the remaining schools will be functional in next few years. 
Cumulatively there will be 740 schools with around 3.5 lakh students. This would 
require a massive administrative set-up for management of the schools. NESTS, 
since its inception, has taken a number of steps in streamlining construction of 
schools, capacity building of teachers, CBSE affiliation of schools, facilitating 
recruitment of teachers etc. 147 schools (out of 367 functional EMRSs) have 
been made functional after NESTS came into existence.” 
 
 
4.6 On being enquired about the status of EMRS society in the States, the 
representative of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted before the Committee during the 
course of the meeting that:  
“ने᭭ट भी एक सोसाएटी ही है। जैसे हम नेशनल एजुकेशन को सासाइटी कहते हᱹ, वैसे ही ᭭टेट 
को हम लोगᲂ ने एक सोसाइटी रिज᭭टडᭅ करने क े िलए कहा है। वह एक यूिनट कᳱ तरह होगी। 
वह एनजीओ नहᱭ ᱟआ, वह एक तरह से ᭭टेट गवᭅनमᱶट का ही यूिनट है।” 
 
4.7 On being enquired, how frequently review meetings are held with the State/UT 
Governments and State EMRS Societies and the directions/instructions issued 
thereupon, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
 
  " Review meetings are held with States/UT Government and  State EMRS 
societies periodically on various issues. The last meeting was held on 06.10.2021 
on the issue of construction of EMRSs.  Depending on the agenda of the 

25 
 
meeting, decisions are taken and accordingly instructions are issued to the 
concerned for follow-up on the matters."  
 
4.8 With regard to the structure of PMU set up to monitor the progress of various 
aspects related to EMRS and guidelines issued to them in this regard along with the 
inspections carried out by them, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post 
evidence reply that: 
  " A PMU has been setup with dedicated human resources in  areas like 
monitoring & evaluation, human resources, finance, coordination, academics, and 
data management. Apart from this, a civil wing consisting of one chief engineer 
level officer (retd.) and 8 retired consultants at the rank of Executive engineer and 
Assistant Engineer has been created for effective supervision and monitoring of 
pre-construction and post-construction activities of EMRS. 
  In view of the lockdown due to the prevailing COVID-19 situation, schools 
remained closed, and many are still closed. In view of this physical inspections 
have not been possible, however, regular reports and information were sought from 
the States and the Schools to monitor various aspects." 
 
4.9 On being asked to justify the delay in filling up all the sanction post of NESTS, the 
representative of the Ministry stated during the deliberation of the Committee that: 
 
 
“वषᭅ 2019 मᱶ NESTS कᳱ ᭭थापना ᱟई। क ु ल 28 पद हᱹ। इसमᱶ किम᳤र और ᭔वाइंट किम᳤र 
क े जो पद डे᭡युटेशन क े मा᭟यम से ᳰकए जाने थे, वे पूरे ᳰकए जा चुक े हᱹ। चूंᳰक यह नई सं᭭था 
है, इसिलए बᱟत से लोग डे᭡युटेशन पर आने क े िलए भी तैयार नहᱭ थे। उसके बाद हमने एजᱶसी 
को भतᱮ करने कᳱ िज᭥मेदारी दी। उ᭠हᲂने भतᱮ क े िलए आवेदन-पᮢ िनकाल भी ᳰदए हᱹ। सारे आवेदन 
भी आ गए हᱹ।” 
 
  

26 
 
4.10 The Committee find that National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS) 
established in 2019 to plan, construct, establish, endow and administer the EMRS is 
expected to do all things necessary to provide good quality modern education to tribal 
students, common core-curriculum of NCERT, CBSE affiliation of schools, 
training/capacity building Programmes for teaching and non-teaching staff, review the 
existing MoUs signed by the State/UT EMRS Societies or the State Governments, etc. 
The Committee, further, note that the EMRS Societies required to be set up at the 
State/UT level to maintain, control and manage the schools within 30 days from issue of 
the Guidelines have been established in 27 out of 28 States/UTs till date. However, the 
Committee are perturbed to note that only 6 posts in NESTS have been filled up till date, 
thus leaving 26 posts vacant out of the 28 posts approved by Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee are unable to comprehend as to how NESTS would be able to justify its role 
and responsibility with such a set up.  As only two top posts have been filled, it can be 
safely assumed that NESTS would be hardly functional as of now.  The Committee are, 
therefore, of the opinion that no further delay should happen in recruitment of 
sanctioned strength of NESTS. NESTS should also ensure that the EMRS Societies are 
established in all States/UTs urgently and MOU with State/UT EMRS Societies or the 
State Governments is reviewed/signed without any further delay for the smooth 
functioning of Schools. Keeping the role and responsibility of NESTS that is likely to 
multiply in future, as they have to run and coordinate for the intended 740 schools with 
3.5 lakh tribal students, the Committee further strongly feel that the present sanctioned 
strength of NESTS perhaps either needs to be reviewed and enhanced or its technical 
capabilities are of a superior level so that they are able to smoothly run the Schools. In 

27 
 
view of the increasingly responsibility of Project Monitoring Units with the increase in 
pre-construction and post-construction activities of schools in future, the Committee 
would also like that the number of Experts in Project Monitoring Units is kept adequate  
to enable them to effectively supervise and monitor pre-construction and 
post-construction activities of EMRSs.  
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECRUITMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 
 (Teaching and non-teaching staff) 
 
5.1 A special drive at the Central level in association with the State Governments is 
initiated to fill up the vacancies of teaching staff at EMRSs with an objective to recruit 
quality human resources, technically equipped and motivated in order to maintain the 
quality standards of EMRSs. The recruitment of the teaching staff (Principal, Vice 
Principal, PGT and TGT) for EMRSs shall be state specific i.e. as per the State, where 
the schools are located, in accordance with the recruitment rules of the respective State 
and only eligible candidates having domicile certificate of the State can apply. A 
roadmap has been devised to recruit the teaching staff for EMRSs by conducting 
ETSSE-2021, i.e. EMRS Teaching Staff Selection Examination. The recruitment 
advertisement has been released for total of 3400 vacancies across 16 States/UTs. 
National Testing Agency (NTA), an autonomous organization under Ministry of 
Education is to conduct National Level EMRS-Teaching Staff Selection Examination. 
Vacant positions have been calculated by the respective States, following the 
State-specific reservation roster. Appointment of teaching staff will be completed by the 
States/UTs following State-specific reservation roster. The Ministry stated in their 
background note that due to Covid -19 pandemic, examination for ETSSE-2021 is 
postponed and Ministry is in consultation with States to start recruitment process. 
5.2 On being enquired, whether the teachers available in schools to provide quality 
education to the students are as per the sanctioned strength, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
“As per the guidelines, recruitment of teachers and other related aspects 
are handled by the State EMRS Society. However, in order to ensure uniformity, 
NESTS identified 52 posts including Teaching and non-Teaching staff for each 
school and shared model recruitment rules with the State EMRS Societies for 
notifying the same at their level. Based on the request of the State EMRS 
Societies and the concerned State Government, NESTS has taken an initiative of 
conducting a national level test for selection of teachers while the States shall be 

29 
 
responsible for final selection and posting of the teachers. The data regarding 
existing staff in the schools is being collected through the online portal.” 
5.3 With regard to the criteria fixed for teachers and other staff recruitment and the 
system available to ensure that competent teachers are available particularly for science 
subjects at senior level, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply 
that: 
"In order to ensure availability of competent teachers for imparting quality 
education to the students, the criteria for recruitment  of teaching staff under 
EMRS schools have been formulated in the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas & 
Navodaya Vidyalayas. The norms formulated by NESTS for EMRS are as under: 
Post Age Educational qualification 
Post 
Graduate 
Teachers 
40 years Two Years Integrated Post Graduate Course from Regional 
College of Education of NCERT in the concerned subject with at 
least 50% marks in aggregate.  
OR 
 Master Degree from a recognized university with at least 
50% marks in aggregate in the following subject. 
 PGT (Physics)–Physics / Applied Physics/ Nuclear 
Physics. 
 PGT (Chemistry) Chemistry/ Bio. Chemistry. 
 PGT (Biology) - Botany/ Zoology/ Life Sciences/Bio 
Sciences/ Genetics/ Micro Biology/Bio Technology/ 
Molecular Bio/Plant Physiology provided they have studied 
Botany and Zoology at Graduation level.  
 PGT (Maths) Mathematics/ Applied Mathematics. 
 PGT Information Technology-B. Tech (computer science / 
IT) / Master’s Degree in Computer Application/ Computer 
Science/ Information Technology/ M. Tech (Computer 
Application/ Computer Science/ Information Technology). 
 B. Ed or equivalent degree from a recognized University 
(Not applicable on PGT IT). 
 Proficiency in teaching in Hindi and English medium. 
Trained 
Graduate 
Teachers 
35 years Four years integrated degree course of Regional College of 
Education of NCERT in the concerned subject with at least 50% 
marks in aggregate. 
OR 
 
Bachelor’s Degree with at least 50% marks in the concerned 
subject/combination of subject and in aggregate. 
For TGT (Science)- Bachelor Degree in Science with any two of 
the following subjects: Botany, Zoology and Chemistry. 

30 
 
5.4 On being enquired, whether 3400 posts proposed to be filled for functional 
schools includes teaching and non-teaching staff are sufficient to meet the requirement 
of functional schools and are in tune with number fixed by NESTS, the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
"Advertisement was published for 3400 teaching posts (vacancies) for 16 
States. Posts presently held by Contractual /Adhoc teachers were not advertised. 
So, the vacancies shared by States were sufficient to meet the requirement of 
functional schools in these States and are in tune with number fixed by NESTS. 
Recruitment process is on hold due to non-notification on RRs by majority States.”  
 
5.5 The representative of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs further informed the Committee 
during the evidence that: 
“हमने जो ᳰफगर िलया है, वह थोड़ा क ं जरवेᳯटव भी िलया है। चूंᳰक हम भी पहली बार यह वᱶचर 
कर रहे थे। नेशनल लेवल पर इसको कराना है, इसिलए, क ं जरवेᳯटव चलᱶ। ᭍यᲂᳰक अ᭡वाइंटमᱶट ᭭टे᭗स 
को ही देनी है, इसिलए हमने ᭭टे᭗स से ही ᳰफगर मंगवाए थे। ऐसा न हो ᳰक हम ᭔यादा करᱶ और 
अ᭡वाइंटमᱶट मᱶ ᳰदᲥत आ जाए। एजुकेशन िडपाटᭅमᱶट से कई जगह लोग डेपुटेशन पर भी काम कर 
रहे हᱹ, जैसे राज᭭थान मᱶ कर रहे हᱹ। वहां पढ़ाई का जो ᭭तर है, उसमᱶ कोई ᳰदᲥत नहᱭ है। ᭍यᲂᳰक, 
वे सारे क े सारे डेपुटेशन पर हᱹ। जो डेपुटेशन पर हᱹ, वे रेगुलर ए᭥᭡लाइज हᱹ।”   
5.6 With regard to the delay in bringing uniformity in recruitment procedure and salary 
of teaching or non-teaching staff despite revamping of Scheme in 2018, the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
  "NESTS was established in 2019 and became functional towards in 2020 
with posting of requisite staff. Soon after this, model  Recruitment Rules were 
drafted and shared with the States. Based on  the feedback received from 
States, the same were modified and the final version was shared with the States 
which included the minimum qualification, recruitment method, pay scale etc. 
Thereafter States have been requested to notify these recruitment rules so that 
the same can be applied to any fresh recruitment." 

31 
 
5.7 During the deliberation with the Committee, the representatives of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs brought to the knowledge of the Committee with regard to the disparity in 
the salaries of the teachers working in the schools: 
”अब तक हम ᮕांट देते थे और टीचसᭅ क े वेतन आᳰद क े बारे मᱶ, वे ᳰकतना वेतन टीचसᭅ को दे 
रहे हᱹ, ᳰकतनᲂ कᳱ िनयुिᲦ कर रहे हᱹ, हम उनको बताते थे, लेᳰकन वे रा᭔य ᳇ारा ही संचािलत 
थे। जब हमने देखा ᳰक टीचसᭅ कᳱ Ფािलटी सफर कर रही है, ᭍यᲂᳰक वे कांᮝै᭍चुअल हᱹ। जो का᭠ᮝे᭍ट 
का टीचर है, उसे अ᭒छा काम करने का कोई इ᭠सेि᭠टव नहᱭ रहेगा और वह हमेशा दूसरी जगह 
नौकरी तलाशता रहेगा।”  
5.8 He further added: 
“हमने यहाँ से आरआर बनाया और रा᭔य को कहा ᳰक आपक े 52 पद होने चािहए, 26 टीᳲचग क े 
और 26 नॉन टीᳲचग क े, ᳲᮧिसपल, वाइस ᳲᮧिसपल, पीजीटी, टीजीटी आᳰद क े सारे नॉ᭥सᭅ हमने ᳰफ᭍स 
ᳰकए और उसके बाद रा᭔यᲂ को कहा ᳰक आप ᭭वयं इनको भतᱮ कᳱिजए और सीबीएसई से एᳰफिलएट 
होइए ताᳰक जो सीबीएसई क े नॉ᭥सᭅ हᱹ, उनक े अनुसार टीचसᭅ को वेतन भी िमल सक े। उसमᱶ कायᭅ 
धीमा चल रहा था तो NEST ने खुद ही पहल करक े मतलब हमने आगे बढ़कर एनटीए, नेशनल 
टेᳲ᭭टग एजᱶसी क े साथ बात कᳱ और पूरे रा᳦ीय ᭭तर पर टीचसᭅ कᳱ िनयुिᲦ क े िलए कायᭅᮓम बनाया। 
उसका िव᭄ापन भी ᳰदया, जैसे गुजरात से मँगाया तो यहाँ पर 161 टोटल पद उ᭠हᲂने बताए ᳰक 
ये पद खाली हᱹ। 16 रा᭔यᲂ मᱶ, क ु छ रा᭔यᲂ मᱶ चुनाव क े चलते नहᱭ हो पाया, हमने उनको भतᱮ 
ᮧᳰᮓया से अलग कर ᳰदया।” 
 
  

32 
 
5.9 The Committee are constrained to note that the teachers appointed for EMRSs by 
the States are not in accordance with a uniform criteria for the appointment of teachers 
for schools despite the existence of the Scheme since 1997-98 as the Ministry did not 
have control over these schools except for giving grant to the States to establish EMRSs. 
The Committee have now been informed that a recruitment advertisement have been 
released for a total of 3400 vacancies across 16 States/UTs as per the criteria formulated 
on the pattern of Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas and that the National 
testing Agency is to conduct national level EMRS-Teaching Staff Selection Examination. 
However, recruitment process is on hold due to non-notification of Recruitment Rules by 
majority States/UTs. The Committee feel that had this decision been taken by the 
Ministry  back when EMRS came into existence, the schools could have achieved a 
uniform standard of education across the Country.  The Committee find that the matter 
is still at a standstill as they have not been able to advertise vacancies of teachers for all 
the States/UTs as Recruitment Rules framed by NESTS have not been notified by the 
States/EMRS societies established across States/UTs.  Unless all the States are brought 
on board, the recruitment of teachers would continue to suffer. The Committee would, 
therefore recommend that all formalities must now be completed and the examinations 
for the vacancies advertised should be held at the earliest without waiting for States/UTs 
who have not notified Recruitment Rules and teachers recruited following State specific 
reservation Roster so that they are adequately trained before posting.  NESTS may also 
follow up with the States/UTs who have not notified model Recruitment Rules framed by 
them and ensure that these States notify said rules in a specific time period so that the 
recruitment of teachers for these States is also conducted in a time bound manner. 

33 
 
States/UTs still delaying notification of model Recruitment Rules framed by NESTS 
should be aggressively pursued at appropriate level so that they are notified soon and 
quality of education imparted in schools is not compromised. The Committee would also 
like the Ministry to take all necessary action for the recruitment of non-teaching staff too 
for efficient management of EMRS. They desire to be apprised of the progress at the 
action taken stage. 
     

34 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
CONSTRUCTION COSTS & BUDGET 
 
6.1 As per the guidelines the Capital Cost fixed for Eklavya Model Residential 
Schools' complex, including hostels and staff quarters is upto ₹ 37.80 crore for plains  
and ₹48.00 Crore for North East, Hilly and areas affected by Left Wing Extremism. As 
regards to Eklavya Model Day Boarding Schools, the capital cost for the school complex, 
including other facilities is upto ₹14.00 crore and ₹ 20.00 Crore for North East, hilly 
areas, difficult areas and areas affected by Left Wing Extremism. The Recurring Cost for 
Eklavya Model Residential Schools @ ₹ 1,09,000/- per child per year is admissible w.e.f. 
1.4.2019 whereas Recurring cost of Eklavya Model Day Boarding Schools @ ₹ 85,000/- 
per child per year is admissible for students enrolled. For procurement of essential 
non-recurring items like furniture/equipment including for kitchen, dining, hostel, 
recreation, garden etc., maintenance grant upto ₹ 20 lakh per school may be allowed 
once in every 5 years. Upgradation of already sanctioned EMRSs on need basis with unit 
cost subject to a maximum of ₹ 5 crore per school (to be staggered over four years i.e. 
2018-19 to 2021-22). However, priority is to be given to earlier constructed schools. 
6.2  As per the norms, fund release with regards to construction of new schools and 
upgradation of existing schools are to be tied to the selection of construction agencies 
and allotment of work of individual schools to the agencies by NESTS. Upon allotment of 
work, an agreement is to be signed between NESTS and construction agencies in case 
of Central/State PSUs. Upon signing of agreement, if applicable, mobilization advance is 
to be released to the NESTS for further release to construction agencies applicable for 
new construction. Funds are to be released to construction agencies in installment and 
the quantum of installment is to be as per the provisions prescribed under GFRs. 
Subsequent release of funds to construction agencies shall be linked to the physical 
performance and certificate of fund utilization/fund transfer by the agencies. The 
maximum permissible cost is based on a school with 480 students and running till 12th 
Standard. Schools running at lesser capacity and not till 12th standard (in three streams) 
shall be eligible for recurring cost based on the actual enrolment in the schools. 

35 
 
 
6.3 Consequent to approval of revamping of EMRSs scheme by CCEA in December 
2018, the norms for construction of EMRSs and EMDBS including the Campus layout, 
built-up area, façade design, material specifications etc. was standardized. It was 
decided to entrust the construction work to agencies like CPWD and other PSUs (Central 
and State). Accordingly, the construction work of 452 new EMRSs has been assigned to 
following agencies based on a standardized building design. 
 
Implementing Agency No of Schools 
Assigned 
PSUs  
(HSCL, NPCC, WAPCOS, TCIL, 
MANIDCO, MTDC, B&R and EPIL) 
370 
CPWD  40 
State Government 42 
Total 452 
 
6.4 The details of funds sanctioned for the construction of new schools since 
2018-19, year-wise and the number of new schools constructed, schools made 
functional from their own building and schools functioning from alternate building, etc. 
was furnished to the Committee as follows: 
 
Year 
Fund Sanctioned 
for new schools  
(In Lakhs) 
Schools made 
functional from own 
building 
Schools 
functioning 
from alternate 
building 
2018-19 2312.00 3 18 
2019-20 7212.00 5 35 
2020-21 38181.40 12 50 
2021-22 17128.83 0 0 
 
 
6.5 The Eleventh Finance Commission approved the continuation of the Scheme with 

36 
 
the following Budget: 
   (₹ in crores) 
Particulars 2020-21 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 Total 
Capital Costs 3836.12 7356.45 6972.15 2146.50 210.00 20520.95 
Recurring Costs 1094.26 1370.69 1648.32 1928.35 2212.15 8253.77 
Sports 
Meet/Cultural 
Meet, Training 
Programmes 
25.00 25.00 30.00 30.00 35.00 145.00 
Grand Total 4955.38 8752.14 8650.47 4104.85 2457.15 28919.72 
 
 
6.6   On being enquired about the reasons due to which capital costs allocation has a 
decreasing trend from 2023-24 especially when large numbers of schools are under 
construction or construction work is likely to begin, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in 
their Post evidence reply that: 
  "The budgetary provisions have been worked out based on 
progress of construction of schools which is expected to peak during 
2022-23 and 2023-24 and thereafter there will be progressive decrease in 
number of schools under construction." 
 
6.7 On being asked whether the budget for recurring costs has taken into 
consideration the increase in number of students after schools shifts back to their 
building, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
  "The budget for recurring cost has been worked out considering the 
gradual increase in number of students annually ranging from  100000 students in 
2021-22 to around 200000 students in 2025-26 at a unit cost of ₹ 1.09 lakh per 
student."  
 
6.8 As regards to the in-built mechanism available to absorb inflation effect in the 
estimated annual expenditure per student so that the facilities available to students are 
not adversely affected for want of funds, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their 
written reply that: 

37 
 
   " Keeping inflation and other requirement in view the recurring cost was 
enhanced from ₹ 42000 per student in 2017-18 to ₹ 1,09,000 in 2019-20. The per 
student norm was revised keeping in view the existing norms of Navodaya 
Vidyalayas. If required, the recurring cost can be enhanced in future subject to 
approval of Ministry of Finance and the Cabinet." 
 
6.9 On being enquired about the performance of the Public Sector agencies identified 
to undertake construction of schools in terms of completion of construction work in time, 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply that: 
  "Out of 174 Administrative Approvals and Expenditure Sanctions (AA& ES 
issued, 104 have been issued in favour of PSUs where construction work has 
commenced at 43 locations." 
 
6.10 On being asked, whether the period for 18 months fixed is sufficient to complete 
the construction work and the construction work of how many schools could be 
completed within the stipulated period, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post 
evidence reply that: 
  “The period of 18 months has been fixed for completion of part construction 
with the approved cost of ₹ 20 (₹ 24 crore for hilly/NE/LWE) to make school 
functional with entry level classes. Construction is in progress in 100 locations. 
The work in these locations were hindered due to prevailing COVID-19 during last 
two waves. However, agencies have been asked to expedite the work to complete 
within the stipulated period.”  
  
6.11 As regards the penal provisions, where the construction work of schools is not 
completed within the stipulated period, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post 
evidence reply that: 
"If the Construction Agency fails to maintain the required progress or to 
complete the work and clear the site on or before extended date of completion, it 
shall, without prejudice to any other right or remedy available under the law to 
NESTS on account of such breach, compensation @ ₹ 10,000/- (Rupees Ten 
Thousand Only) per week of delay, subject to max. of 10% of service charges. 
The decision of NESTS regarding amount of compensation and period of 
unjustified delay shall be the final and binding on the construction  agency. In 
case CA recovers any compensation for delay or Liquidated damages from its 
contractor on account of any unjustified delay, the same shall be credit to 
NESTS.” 

38 
 
 
6.12 The Committee find that after the revamping of EMRS Scheme, the responsibility 
of construction of 452 new schools sanctioned since 2018-19, has been entrusted to 
PSUs and CPWD, except for 42 schools where the State Governments have been 
entrusted the responsibility. The Committee also find that the budgetary provision for 
capital cost of ₹ 2146.50 crore has been made for 2024-25 and ₹ 210.00 crore for 2025-26. 
The Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for keeping such a low budgetary 
provision for these two years when only expenditure sanction for 174 schools have been 
granted till date and expenditure sanction for 278 schools is yet to be awarded. As the 
construction of schools in remote/hills/difficult tribal areas taken much more time than 
those in regular areas, there is a high possibility than 278 schools would not be ready in 
another three years and ₹ 210 crore would be quite insufficient in 2025-26.  The 
Committee are apprehensive about the financial crunch EMRSs may face at that time. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to review the financial allocation made 
for construction of schools so that there is no financial crisis as allocation is likely to 
lapse in case of non-utilization. Further, the Committee are sad to note that the 
construction work is not progressing at the required pace as construction work could 
begin only at 43 locations out of the administrative and expenditure sanction issued for 
104 EMRSs to PSUs for construction.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry 
to regularly review the status of work undertaken and strive to remove all bottlenecks so 
that the work is completed in a targeted period. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry to monitor the work entrusted to States and seek compliance to avoid delay on 
their part. 

39 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF PRINCIPALS AND TEACHERS  
  
7.1 The Ministry in collaboration with National Institute of Educational Planning and 
Administration (NIEPA), an autonomous organization established by Government of 
India organized a capacity building programme in school leadership for EMRS school 
Heads and Principals. The leadership programme was conducted in an online mode for 
10 days' duration from 21st September to 1st October, 2020. The training was attended 
by 50 EMRS school principals from 12 States. In collaboration with Art of Living Trust, a 
Teacher Development Programme was organized for the EMRS School Teachers online 
for 5 days' duration from 28th September to 3rd October, 2020. The training was 
targetted for 50 regular EMRS school teachers from two States, namely, Karnataka and 
Telangana. The Ministry in collaboration with Indian Association of Physics Teachers 
(IAPT), an autonomous voluntary organization, organized a teacher development 
workshop for secondary level physics teachers of EMRS schools. IAPT organization 
works for the upgradation of Physics teaching and Physics teachers, through various 
academic programmes and activities all over India. 
  
7.2 The Ministry of Tribal Affairs informed that the workshop was conducted in an 
online mode for 5 days' duration from 19th October to 23rd October, 2020. The training 
was attended by more than 60 EMRS school teachers from 3 States. In order to make 
this a round-the year process, a calendar of training programmes is being finalized and 
partnership with other training institutions is also being explored. IT Software Training 
Programme organized in collaboration with Spoken Tutorial- IIT Bombay for around 50 
(PGT) EMRS Teachers of 2 States. Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training 
Programme organized for EMRS school heads and principals in collaboration with Atal 
Innovation Mission (AIM), NITI Aayog.  
 
7.3 Further, it has been decided to Include EMRS as a unique entity like KVS, NVS in 
public portal of National Award to Teachers, MoE and CBSE Affiliation Portal. It has also 

40 
 
been decided to associate EMRS school heads/principals in national level academic 
forum constituted to take policy level education decisions Pool of Key Resource Persons 
(KRPs) i.e. best and outstanding EMRS teachers and principals from across the country. 
Further, School Admission Guidelines, Teacher Performance Evaluation 
Formats/Annual Performance Appraisal Formats (APAR) etc are also be standardised. 
7.4 On being enquired about the facilities available to improve the teaching skills of 
teachers, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs inter-alia stated in their written reply that:  
  “Collaborations have been established with National apex bodies such as 
NCERT, NIEPA, NITI Aayog etc. to organise and conduct professional capacity 
building programmes for EMRS teachers and Principals.” 
 
7.5 With regard to the programmes being developed in collaboration with MoSD&E 
and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS), the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their 
written reply that:  
 
  "Collaboration has been established by NESTS with MoSD&E with an 
objective to initiate vocational education courses in EMRSs and build the 
professional competency of teachers in skill courses. The preliminary objective is to 
build the professional competency of EMRS teachers in Information Technology. 
This initiative shall foster Skill Development amongst teachers and students, keeping 
in view also the apprenticeship and future job prospects of students. An MoU is being 
signed between NESTS and MoSD&E to formalize the collaboration. 
  Collaboration has also been established with NVS with an objective to 
initiate a mentorship plan for EMRSs across the states. The mentorship action plan 
for effective coalition between NVS and EMRS shall include mentorship of EMRSs by 
NVS, to facilitate for more effective functioning, coordination, leadership, 
governance, management etc. The larger objective is to form positive synergy 
amongst schools, leading to efficient coalition. Co-mapping of JNVs and EMRSs has 
done by NESTS and the discussion is in progress by NESTS to decide the future 
course." 
 
7.6 On being enquired during the course of deliberation with regard to Kaushal 
Vikas(Skill development) in these schools, the representative of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs that: 

41 
 
 
“कौशल िवकास क े िलए िमिन᭭ᮝी कᳱ जो ᭭कᳱम है, उसक े अंदर उनका भी एक ᮧपोजल आया है। उसमᱶ 
यह है ᳰक जहां-जहां पर िजन-िजन ᭭क ू᭨स मᱶ वोकेशनल टीचसᭅ हᱹ, उनको कौशल िवकास योजना क े साथ 
जोड़ ᳰदया जाए। इसक े अलावा िजन ᭭क ू᭨स मᱶ वोक ेशनल टीचसᭅ नहᱭ है, उनको ᳯर᭭पेि᭍टव आईटीआईज़ 
क े साथ जोड़ ᳰदया जाए। इसक े अलावा हमारा माइᮓोसॉ᭢ट क े साथ एम.ओ.यू. ᱟआहै, िजसमᱶ उ᭠हᲂने 
आ᳷टᳰफिशयल इंटेलीजᱶस क े िलए पूरे इंिडया मᱶ 50 हजार बᲬᲂ का ᮧपोजल ᳰकया है। इिनिशएली 
उ᭠हᲂने 50 ᭭क ू᭨स सᱹ᭍शन ᳰकए हᱹ।” 
 
  

42 
 
7.7 The Committee find that several training Programmes were organized for teachers 
and Principals of EMRSs during the last two years.  However, the participation of 
schools, Principals and teachers was found to be limited in these Programmes.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that the teachers/Principals training Programme should be 
periodically organized and participation be made compulsory to upgrade their teaching/ 
leaderships skills which would enable them in coping with the fast changing scenario of 
imparting education. The Committee would like NESTS to develop exchange 
Programmes of Principals/teachers at national/ international level so that they can 
participate in advanced training Programmes.  The Committee appreciate the initiatives 
such as collaboration with National apex bodies such NCERT, NITI Aayog, NIEPA etc. to 
conduct professional capacity building Programmes and desire that participation of 
EMRS teachers should be mandatory therein.  Also, the Committee feel that the 
collaboration between NESTS and the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship to initiate vocational education courses would benefit students and 
teachers in developing skills, hence, necessary action may be taken for an early start of 
vocational education courses across the EMRSs. The Committee are of the view that 
concrete steps should be taken to increase the number of Programmes and hence 
recommend that an annual calendar for professional capacity development Programmes 
for Principals/teachers may be drawn incorporating various Programmes and shared 
with all EMRSs and EMDBSs so that maximum participation could be ensured. 
 
  

43 
 
CHAPTER-VIII 
 
SCHOOL INFRASTRUCTURE 
 
8.1 The EMRSs will be compliant to the provisions of the Right to Education Act, 2009 
and other norms as prescribed by Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) and 
Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti. T h e  facilities in school would include State-of-the-art 
infrastructure; study materials; uniforms (including customized climatic clothing for hilly 
areas); facilities for preparatory classes for competitive entrance examinations; remedial 
classes for weak students; medical facilities including telemedicine and tie up with 
prominent hospitals in the vicinity; provision of adequate purified drinking water and 
sanitation facilities; scouts, guides, NCC, School bands and related activities; 
extra-curricular activities like dance, music, painting, trekking, excursions/ exposure 
visits, study tours to be made part of the curriculum and students to participate in school 
level competitions in various spheres including academics, sports and co-curricular.  
 
INTELLIGENT EDUCATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Smart-Classes) 
  
8.2 A project entitled “Establishment of intelligent educational infrastructure (Smart) in 
Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRSs)” has been initiated to enhance the learning 
and productivity of students in-coordination with the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) through ERNET India, an autonomous society of MeitY. 
Ministry has decided that under this project, ERNET shall install the Smart Class facilities 
in 100 selected EMRS schools and with priority to schools in North-East and remote 
areas where internet connectivity is not available.  
 
8.3 On being enquired about the current status of smart classes proposed to be 
established in schools, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post evidence reply 
that:  
  " During the year 2021, it was decided to implement Smart Classes in the 
EMRS. Accordingly, a project is being implemented through ERNET India, an 
autonomous society under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 

44 
 
to establish smart classes in 175 schools. As per the plan shared by ERNET, 48 
schools are to be covered during 2021-22 and the remaining in next year.  
 
8.4 In this regard, the representative of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs informed the 
Committee during the deliberation held on 13 August, 2021 that: 
   
“ᳰदस᭥बर तक हमारा जो टारगेट है, उसमᱶ 50 ᭭क ू᭨स हᱹ। उनमᱶ क ु छ फॉमᱷ᭨टीज़ ᭭टे᭗स को करनी है, जैसे 
अगर कहᱭ लाइटᳲनग हो रही है तो उसक े िलए ᭠युᮝल कᳱ ᳞व᭭था हो, ऐसी सारी ᳞व᭭थाएं होने क े 
साथ, हमारा टारगेट है ᳰक हम लोग 50 ᭭क ू᭨स इस साल ᳰदस᭥बर मᱶ क᭥पलीट कर लᱶगे। बाकᳱ 175 
᭭क ू लᲂ मᱶ, ‘एरनेट’ और िमिन᭭ᮝी ऑफ इले᭍ᮝािन᭍स एंड इनफामᱷशन टेᲣोलॉजी क े ᮣू हर ᭭क ू ल मᱶ छ: 
᭍लॉसेज ऑनलाइन हᲂगी।” 
 
Establishment of Atal Tinkering Labs(ATLs) in EMRS Schools 
8.5 Collaboration was established with NITI Aayog for establishing Atal Tinkering 
Labs in EMRS Schools.  ATL Labs provide a workspace to school children where young 
minds give shape to their ideas.  Multi-pronged strategy was adopted for ATL 
establishment in EMRS schools.  In first step, all the EMRS schools were encouraged to 
apply for ATLs directly after cross-checking their eligibility criteria from NITI Aayog 
website.  In second step, a 10-point online parametric assessment tool was 
administered to do internal research on the status of ATL establishment in EMRS 
schools.  In third step, communication was established with NITI Aayog team to retrieve 
information for ATL establishment and provide information for ATL establishment in 
schools.  
8.6 The first ATL was established in EMRSs during 2018. Currently ATLs have been 
established in 13 schools in 6 States. 5 more schools have also been selected for 
establishment of ATL. Subsequent to establishment of NESTS, concerted efforts have 
been taken recently to collaborate directly with the Atal Innovation Mission, NITI Aayog 
to ensure establishment of ATLs in atleast 100 schools. The establishment of ATL is 
dependent on multiple factors including requisite space, adequate STEM teachers, basic 
infrastructure and participation in science & innovation events. Efforts are being taken by 
NESTS to prepare the schools accordingly to meet all the requisites.  
8.7 With regard to the requirement for establishment of ATLs in schools, the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post evidence reply that:  

45 
 
  "The requisites for establishing ATL are as follows: 
 
Criteria Requirement 
Infrastructure  All weather area (1000 sq. ft.) in regular/plain 
regions 
 All weather area (750 sq. ft.) in Hilly/Himalayan 
regions and Northeastern, Island states/UTs 
 Computer Lab with internet facility 
 Steady electricity connection 
 Science Lab (Physics, Chemistry, Biology) 
 Library and Playground 
 At least Class/Grade VI to X 
 School established at least 5 years ago from 
date of application 
Faculty  Existing Faculty: Mathematics, Sciences and 
Computer teachers with PGT degree. 
 Polytechnic/STEM Graduates may be hired as 
STEM Teachers independently by respective 
schools 
Reach  Enrolment – Min. 300 students in Class/Grade 
VI-X in regular/plain regions. 
 Enrolment – min. 200 students in Class/Grade 
VI-X in Hilly/Himalayan regions and Northeaster, 
Island states/UTs. 
 Regular attendance of 75% & above of the staff 
& enrolled students during the academic years 
from 2016-17 to 2019-20 
 
8.8  On being further enquired about the time by which ATLs are likely/targeted to be 
established in 100 selected schools/all the EMRS, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in 
their Post evidence reply that:  
  "Efforts are being made to provide required support to eligible 
 EMRSs to apply for ATL as and when applications are invited by NITI Aayog." 
 
PROCUREMENT OF MOBILE TABLETS 
 
8.9 The Ministry informed that one critical factor which was statedly raised by several 
States during Covid -19 pandemic was unavailability of gadgets such as smart phone/ 
mobile devices with the students. To tackle this situation, a Committee was constituted 
by the Ministry to decide about the mechanism of providing tablets/ mobile devices for 
students of EMRSs. Through these initiatives, EMRSs were expected to be getting the 

46 
 
much needed technological face-lift with robust technological resourcefulness which 
shall mitigate the students’ learning losses, building adaptive education systems, 
particularly for students from vulnerable and disadvantaged communities as tribal 
students. 
 
8.10 On being enquired by the Committee about the status of 30,000 devices planned 
to be procured through GeM for students in classes 10th to 12th to ensure online 
education and robust learning management system proposed to be developed by 
C-DAC for these devices, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post evidence 
reply that:  
"The bid for procurement of tabs was floated on the GeM portal. However, in 
view of poor response from bidders due to multiple factors, the bid had to be floated 
once again. Technical evaluation of the bids is under process. 
The Learning Management System is under process by Centre for 
Development of Advanced Computing (CDAC), Mumbai. The draft design was 
shared with the Ministry and based on the feedback, the  same is being revised. 
However, deployment of the LMS will be dependent on the completion of the 
procurement of tabs.”   
 
8.11 The representative of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs further informed that: 
 
“मᱹ िनवेदन करना चाहता ᱠं ᳰक इसके िलए दो बार टᱶडर ᱟआ। जब इिनिशयली टᱶडर ᱟआ और 
उसमᱶ ‘मेड इन इंिडया’ का ᭍लॉज आया, तब इंिडया मᱶ ऐसी कोई भी क ं पनी नहᱭ थी, जो 
हमारी ᭭पेिशᳰफक े श᭠स – 10 इंच का टैब और 3 जीबी कᳱ रैम – पर खरी उतरती हो। इस 
वजह से हमᱶ दो बार टᱶडर करना पड़ा। तीसरी बार जो टᱶडर ᳰकया गया है, उसकᳱ ᮧोसेस शुᱧ हो 
गई है और जैसे ही यह ᮧोसेस पूरी होगी, हमारा जो लᳺनग मैनेजमᱶट िस᭭टम इस टैब क े अंदर 
जाएगा, ᳰफर चाहे ᳰकसी ᭭क ू ल मᱶ इंटरनेट कनेि᭍टिवटी हो या नहᱭ हो, बᲬे उस टैब क े मा᭟यम 
से पूरी जानकारी ले पाएंगे।“ 
 
EDUCATIONAL KITS 
 
8.12 On being enquired about the time by when the process of procuring educational 
kits is likely to be completed and made available to students across EMRSs, the Ministry 
of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post evidence reply that:  
 

47 
 
"The procurement of educational kits is being done through NCERT wherein 
the tendering process is in progress. MoU has been signed with Microsoft and 
training of teachers is scheduled to be held.” 
8.13 With regard to the study conducted to assess the infrastructural requirement of 
students/teachers in the far flung tribal areas, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their 
reply that:  
 
  "A detailed analysis was carried out by NESTS to identify the 
infrastructural requirement of the schools. The same was done in consultation with 
the Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, CPWD and keeping in view the various 
compliances necessary under the National Building Code, CBSE etc. Accordingly, 
the infrastructural norms were worked out and a standard uniform design has been 
finalised for implementation. All the new schools are being constructed based on 
the new design. Old schools are also being upgraded gradually to ensure 
availability of requisite infrastructure. 
 
MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEM 
 
8.14 The Ministry informed that for the effective monitoring of EMRSs across the 
country, a need to develop its own EMRS-MIS arose. Accordingly, a detailed document 
for capturing progress/ implementation status of EMRS and document on reporting 
formats have been developed in accordance with EMRS Guidelines, Bye laws & Rules of 
NESTS, School Performance Index of NITI Aayog, UDISE document etc. Module 
designing and website development and advancement are in progress.  
 
8.15  On being enquired about the date when decision taken to set up MIS, expenditure 
likely to be incurred on it, expected date by which it would be set up and the current 
arrangement for undertaking the work proposed to be done through MIS, the Committee 
were informed as under:  
“With the establishment of NESTs, it was decided to setup an MIS. 
Accordingly, the work on developing the same was assigned in January 2021. 
The MIS is currently under development and several modules have already been 

48 
 
made live for data entry by schools. The technical development of the MIS is likely 
to be over by March 2022.” 
 
8.16 On being asked, whether any complaint has ever been received with regard to 
infrastructure, facilities in school, quality of education since revamping of EMRSs 
Scheme, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post evidence reply that:  
     
   "As per the guidelines, State/UT EMRS societies will be responsible for the 
management of schools sanctioned/established in the State/UT in accordance with 
the norms and guidelines laid down by the NESTS." 
 
8.17 As regards to the Grievance redressal mechanism available in schools, the 
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs that:  
  " Day-to-day management and administration of the schools is being done 
by the State/UT EMRS Society. However, to redress common grievances, if any, 
regular meetings are being held with the State/UT Governments and the State/UT 
EMRS Society."  
8.18 On being enquired about the number of students reported to have left school due 
to poor infrastructure/facilities etc., the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their Post 
evidence reply that:  
"No specific instances have come to notice about students leaving school 
due to poor infrastructure facilities. The endeavour of the Ministry has been to 
provide quality infrastructure facilities in all the schools.” 
 
  

49 
 
8.19 The Committee are surprised to note that the provision for Smart Classes & Atal 
Tinkering Labs in EMRSs and the procurement of mobile tablets and educational kits for 
students of EMRSs has been delayed so much that the very objective to provide online 
education to EMRS schools during COVID Pandemic could not materialise. The 
Committee feel that this delay has made students to suffer irreversibly as they require 
these facilities well in time to continue their studies in distant mode. The Committee are 
unable to understand reasons for continued delay in having these facilities in schools. 
The fact that tenders were called twice under such specifications for which no Indian 
company could bid shows that the NESTS/Ministry failed to find a workable solution to 
prevent altogether stopping of learning for tribal school students during COVID 
pandemic. The Committee feel that Ministry must realise that students cannot be 
deprived of the right to education due to the non-serious approach of the persons 
responsible to execute the work. The Committee, therefore, opine that responsibility 
needs to be fixed for the casual approach in this matter. The Committee find that the 
Management Information System proposed to be developed has also been lingering for 
long without any sound justification.  The Ministry, therefore must ensure to complete 
the targets set for establishing online learning system, Smart classes and Atal tinkering 
labs and also to procure the mobile tablets and educational kits within the laid down 
timeframe. As the tribal students belong to remote areas and do not possess resources 
to voice their requirements vigorously, it is the bounden duty of the Ministry to recognize 
and fulfill their educational requirements well in time. The Committee would, therefore, 
like to strongly recommend the Ministry to install smart classes, Atal tinkering labs in all 
the EMRSs in consultation with the concerned Ministries/Departments within a fixed time 

50 
 
schedule. The Committee also desire that as the management Information system, which 
is currently proposed to be developed, could be an effective tool for monitoring of the 
schools, particularly those set up in far flung areas, should be developed in a time bound 
manner without further delay. 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER-IX 
PERFORMANCE OF EMRSs 
 
9.1 As per the old scheme, the management of the schools including admission 
process was responsibility of the State Government. States have been conducting the 
admission tests both in online and offline mode for filling the seats. However, in order to 
ensure uniformity and transparency in the admission procedure for admission in EMRS, 
NESTS is in the process of developing Admission Guidelines for EMRS Schools. As per 
the extant guidelines of EMRS, the following provisions pertain to admissions: 
 The number of seats for boys and girls will be equal. 
 The total maximum sanctioned strength of a school shall be 480 students. 
 At the Upper Primary and Secondary level i.e., from class VI to X, every class will 
have maximum 60 students in 2 sections of 30 students each  
 At the Senior Secondary level (class XI &XII), there will be three sections per 
class for the three streams in Science, Commerce &Humanities. The maximum 
sanctioned strength of each section should be 30 students. In case of short fall in 
a section, ST students from other schools may be admitted as per procedure. 
 10% of the seats of EMRSs/EMDBS can be filled up by non-ST candidates (shall 
not exceed the total strength of 480). Priority shall be given to children of 
EMRSs/EMDBS staff, children who have lost their parents to Left wing extremism 
and insurgencies, children of widows, children of divyang parents etc. 
 90% of the seats are reserved for the tribal students.   
 
9.2 On being enquired about the number of students currently studying in Schools 
against the sanctioned strength, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their written reply 
that: 
 
  "During the current academic year i.e., 2021-22, 85700 students are 
currently enrolled in the schools. The admission process is still in progress because 
of the COVID–19 situation. During the year 2020-21, 14983 students got admitted 
and during 2021-22, 3536 students have so far been admitted"  
 

52 
 
9.3 As regards to the performance of the students in class X and XII examinations, 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their written reply that: 
  
  "The performance of students of Class X & XII in the Board Examination for 
the year 2019-20 is as mentioned below: 
  8233 students from 162 EMRS had appeared in class 10th Examination out of 
which 7575 (92.01 %) students cleared class-X examination. 3994 (53%) 
students secured 1st division and around 1377 students scored 90% or more.  
  71 EMRS had produced 100% and 40 EMRSs produced result between 95%-100 
% in class-X examination. 
 6333 students from 131 EMRSs had appeared in class 12th Examination out of 
which 5596 (88.36 %) students passed class-XII examination. 3222 (58%) 
students secured 1st division and around 1079 students scored 90% or more. 
 Humanities Stream had recorded highest pass percentage of 96% followed by 
science 90% and 73% Commerce. 
 46 EMRSs had produced 100% result and 22 EMRS between 95% and 100%." 
 
9.4 On being asked whether any mechanism is available to keep a check on the 
quality of education imparted in EMRSs and also for maintaining good standard of living 
including food, infrastructure etc., in the schools, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in 
their written reply that: 
 
"NESTS has been setup with a mandate to ensure proper functioning 
of the schools through the State/UT EMRS Societies. These State EMRS 
Societies are required to manage the school in the  respective States based 
on the guidelines prescribed. The State Tribal Welfare/Development Departments 
also provide oversight in effective functioning of the schools. Apart from this 
District Level Committees under the Chairmanship of District Collectors have also 
been constituted by the States for supervision and providing support to the 
schools. 
  
Apart from this a dedicated online portal is under development where                                   
details of the facilities available to students, infrastructure in the school, details of 
the teachers with their qualification will be made available by the respective 
schools.” 
 

53 
 
9.5 On being enquired about the students who dropped out mid-way from school or 
did not complete their education upto class XII, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their 
Post evidence reply that:  
 
  " Day to day running and management of the schools is the responsibility of 
the State/UT EMRS Societies. No specific instance of drop-out has come to the 
notice of the Ministry." 
 
9.6 The Secretary of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted before the Committee 
with regard to dropout rate that: 
 
“हमᱶ इसको देखना पड़ेगा। हम लोग ᭭क ू लवाइज इसको चेक करᱶगे। यह बᱟत इंपोटᱸट चीज है ᳰक 
बᲬᲂ का ᮟॉप रेट िब᭨क ु ल नहᱭ होना चािहए। यह कहना ᳰक ᮟॉप रेट नहᱭ है, तो िबना इनफोमᱷशन 
क े हम नहᱭ कह सकते हᱹ।”  
 
9.7 As regards to the Performance of all the Students in the extra co-curricular 
activities at National and International Level and any specialized training imparted to 
such students to enhance their skills, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their written 
reply that: 
 
"EMRSs focus on both academic and extra-curricular activities for 
all-round development of students. Round the year, EMRS students participate in 
several State level and district level competitions, cultural and sports activities. 
The performance of EMRS students have also been recognized at National level 
and International Level. National Level EMRS Sports Meet and Cultural Meet 
organized by the Ministry provides a national platform for the students to 
showcase their talent. Specialized training is imparted to students at the school 
level in different areas including vocational and career guidance, karate, 
self-defense, computer and IT, skills like agriculture vocation, tailoring and 
designing etc. Different skill development workshops viz. theatre, art and craft, 
handicraft, traditional art, music and dance etc. are also being organized in the 
schools. 
 

54 
 
9.8 On being enquired about the comparative Analysis conducted with regard to the 
performance of EMRSs vis-à-vis Navodaya Vidyalayas, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
inter-alia stated in their written reply that: 
 
"During the last 2 years, with the revamping of the scheme and establishment 
of NESTS, efforts have been taken to bring the EMRSs at par with JNVs in terms of 
facilities, quality of education and performance of students with special focus on 
scholastic and co-scholastic areas. 
NESTS has forged collaborations with the national apex bodies  and voluntary 
organizations like National Institute of Educational Planning and Administration 
(NIEPA), NITI Aayog, Spoken Tutorial, IIT–Bombay, Indian Association of Physics 
Teachers (IAPT), Art of Living Foundation (AOL), All India Council of Technical 
Education etc.  
Just like JNVs, to promote experimentation and innovations, associations have 
been initiated with Central Board of Secondary  Education (CBSE); National 
Council of Educational Research and training (NCERT); Centre for Creative Learning 
(CCL) IIT-Gandhi Nagar and other such bodies of national importance. All of this 
combinedly provide impetus to EMRS teachers and students to excel in different 
educational arenas.  
Also, students have been encouraged to participate in several  competitions 
such as Ganga Quest, CBSE-WWF Challenge, DAKSHANA Scholarship Test for 
competitive examination preparation etc. The results of 2019-20 EMRS Board Results 
of class X showcased 92.01% result; while grade XII Board Results showcased 
88.36% result. Concerted efforts are being made to enhance the performance of our 
students in Boards Classes.”  
 
  

55 
 
9.9 The Committee appreciate the performance of EMRS students in examinations as 
well as extra-curricular activities and are of the view that the responsibility of the 
Department has been increased now in order to make the requisite infrastructure 
available timely to students. The Committee are, however, perplexed to note that as it is 
aimed to bring EMRSs at par with JNVs, the admission guidelines are yet to be framed by 
NESTS and the dedicated online portal is also under development. The Committee are 
aware that the management of Schools is the responsibility of State/UT Governments.  
However, to ensure the uniformity of infrastructure across the schools is now the 
responsibility of NESTS. The Committee, therefore, desire that necessary action may be 
taken by NESTS to frame admission guidelines in a time bound manner so that they are 
uniformly applied by State/UT Governments across EMRSs.  The State/UT Governments 
following their own guidelines, would mean defeating the objective of uniform procedure 
for admissions in the Schools. The Committee also desire that the online portal should 
be expeditiously developed so that the details of the facilities available to students, 
infrastructure in schools, details of the teachers with their qualification are made 
available by the respective schools on portal for the benefit of the prospective 
students/teachers.  
 
  

56 
 
CHAPTER-X 
 
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE FOR SPORTS 
 
10.1 It is intended to have a dedicated infrastructure for setting up Centre of 
Excellence for sports with State-of-the-Art facilities, equipment and scientific back up 
along with specialized training, boarding and lodging facilities, sports kit, sports 
equipment, competition exposure, insurance, medical expenses etc. as per norms of 
Sports Authority of India. This Centre of Excellence will have specialized state-of-the-art 
facilities for one identified individual sport and one group sport in each State/UT. CoE for 
Sports will be co-located with an existing or proposed EMRS. The facilities will not only 
be restricted to students of EMRS but will also be open for other students on nominal 
charges (if found feasible) as to be decided by NESTS. Detailed norms with regard to 
management of the CoE for Sports will be laid down by NESTS  in consultation with the 
Sports Authority of India.  
 
10.2 On being enquired about the number of Centres of Excellence for sports 
proposed to be set up and the current status thereof and how the requirement of sports is 
being presently met in these schools, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs stated in their written 
reply that: 
 
  "Fifteen Centre of Excellence for sports are proposed to be set up in tribal 
majority districts with all related infrastructure (buildings, equipment etc.) including 
specialized state-of-the-art facilities for two identified sports (including one group 
sport and one individual sport) in each State/ UT. Presently preliminary sanctions 
have been accorded for two CoE for Sports. In order to make the initiative impactful, 
discussions are underway with Sports Authority of India for collaboration under Khelo 
India programme and detailed standard operating procedure (SoP) is being devised 
to establish such centres. Facilities for sports is an inherent component in all the 
EMRSs. Regular coaching is being done for promotion of sporting talent among the 
students through the physical education teachers in the schools. In order to give a 
national platform to the students, two National Level EMRS Sports Meet have also 
been organized." 
 

57 
 
10.3 On being asked with regard to survey conducted to identify the districts to set up 
two CoEs for which preliminary sanction has been accorded, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  
stated in their Post evidence reply that:  
"Establishment of CoE for sports is being done in consultation with Sports 
Authority of India. The location of the CoE is based on the availability of land 
within existing EMRSs as decided by the respective State." 
 
10.4 As regards to the financial estimates/allocation for setting up of CoE and the 
target fixed to set up the proposed CoE, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs  stated in their Post 
evidence reply that:  
 
 "An advance amount of ₹ 127 lakh each was released to the two CoE 
sanctioned. 15 CoE are planned to be established in the country. Financial 
provisions have been included in the Cabinet Note for continuation of the Scheme 
of EMRSs during 2021-22 to 2025-26." 
 
10.5 On being enquired about the sport activities in which students in schools 
participate and whether equisite infrastructure including coach, etc. is available for such 
sports in all the schools, the Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted that:  
“Some of the sports offered to students in EMRSs include volleyball, 
badminton, Kabaddi, Kho- Kho, archery, hockey, table-tennis, football, basketball 
etc. There is a provision of Physical Education Teacher (P.E.T.) in each school. 
Specialized coaches and instructors for different sports are also engaged by 
respective States, wherever required.” 
 
  

58 
 
10.6 The Committee are astonished to note that the Ministry have not been able 
to identify location for establishing two Centre of Excellence (CoE) for sports with 
specialized state-of-the-art for one identified individual sport and one group sport 
for which preliminary sanction has been issued out of the fifteen such Centres 
proposed to be set up in tribal majority districts in each State/UT and ₹ 127 lakh 
sanctioned too. The Committee are perturbed to find that the discussion with 
Sports authority of India is still underway for collaboration under ‘Khelo India 
Programme’ and detailed standard procedure have not been devised to establish 
such Centres. The Committee are unable to understand the objective of releasing 
an advance amount of ₹ 127 lakh for two CoEs sanctioned and to include financial 
provision in the Cabinet Note for continuation of the EMRSs during 2021-22 to 
2025-26 when Ministry have not been able to locate places for establishing two 
CoEs. The Committee wonder as how much time would be required to establish 
all 15 CoEs.  The Committee are also concerned about the financial implication 
of the delay as the cost of such Centres is likely to increase substantially if there 
is too much delay in taking decisions. The Committee would, therefore, like the 
Ministry to take necessary action immediately to complete the modalities in 
consultation with Sports Authority of India, States/UTs and other stakeholders so 
that the location not only for two CoE is finalised but location for all 15 CoEs is 
finalised and timeline should be fixed for completion work of all CoEs.  
 
 
  

59 
 
CHAPTER-XI 
AFFILIATION OF EMRSs TO CBSE 
 
11.1 As per the norms all the EMRSs set up are to be affiliated with CBSE. NESTS has 
already signed the MoU with State/UT EMRS Societies in 25 States/UTs. The remaining 
3 States namely Bihar, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal are being pursued at the highest 
level to shift to CBSE Board. However, these States are insisting on continuation of State 
Board Curriculum in these schools. As these States have not signed MoU, they are being 
paid at old rates. NESTS is responsible for ensuring compliance to the conditions as 
mentioned in the MoU. Efforts are being made to encourage these States to enter into 
the MoU to bring uniformity in education across EMRSs. 
  
11.2 On being enquired the reasons due to which all the schools have not been 
affiliated with CBSE till date, the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted before the 
Committee during the evidence that: 
“हम लोग उसकᳱ ᮧᳰᮓया कर रहे हᱹ। उनको सीबीएसई मᱶ करने क े िलए एक ᮧोसेस होता है। 
᭭क ू लᲂ से पूरी िडटे᭨स आती है, रा᭔य सरकार को रेकमᱶड करना होता है। ᳰफर सीबीएसई 
ᮓाइटेᳯरया देखता है ᳰक वहां पर ᳰकतने बᲬे और ᳰकतने टीचसᭅ हᱹ। इसमᱶ इसी िलए थोड़ी देर हो 
रही है, लेᳰकन इसमᱶ सम᭭या नहᱭ है। क ु छ एक रा᭔य ऐसे हᱹ, िज᭠हᲂने कहा है ᳰक हम सीबीएसई 
मᱶ नहᱭ जाएंगे।”  
 
11.3 He further added that: 
 
“िबहार ने सीबीएसई मᱶ जाने से मना ᳰकया है। हम लोग िबहार से ᳯरᲤे᭭ट कर रहे हᱹ। पि᳟म 
बंगाल ने भी मना ᳰकया है । तिमलनाडु ने भी मना ᳰकया है। हम लोग रा᭔यᲂ से ᳯरᲤे᭭ट कर रहे 
हᱹ। अगर ये रा᭔य सीबीएसई को मान लᱶ, तो नवोदय िव᳒ालय मᱶ  जैसा ᭭टᱹडडᭅ है, वैसा ही 
᭭टᱹडडᭅ एकल᳞  मᱶ भी हो जाएगा, लेᳰकन दो-तीन रा᭔यᲂ से थोड़ा और िड᭭कशन कर क े उनको 
मनाने कᳱ आव᭫यकता है।” 
11.4 With regard to the efforts being made by the Ministry to bring these States on 

60 
 
board, the Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs submitted before the Committee during the 
deliberation that: 
“हम लोग इसको काफᳱ गंभीरता से ले रहे हᱹ। हम लोग यह चाहते हᱹ ᳰक सभी रा᭔य सीबीएसई 
पैटनᭅ पर चले आएं। इसका एक लाभ यह भी है ᳰक सीबीएसई मᱶ आने से हम लोग उ᭠हᱶ ᮧित 
बᲬा 1,09,000 ᱧपये देते हᱹ। अगर सीबीएसई मᱶ नहᱭ आएंगे, तो उन लोगᲂ को पुराने पैटनᭅ क े 
अनुसार थोड़ा कम पैसा िमलेगा। हम लोग इन तीनᲂ रा᭔यᲂ को समझाने कᳱ कोिशश कर रहे हᱹ 
ᳰक वे हमारे साथ आ जाएंगे, तो थोड़ा अ᭒छा रहेगा।” 
  

61 
 
11.5 The Committee are surprised to note that 3 States namely Bihar, Tamil 
Nadu and West Bengal have still not signed MoU and are reluctant to shift to 
CBSE Board and are insisting on continuation of State Board Curriculum in the 
schools set up in their States whereas the norms stipulate that all the EMRSs set 
up are to be affiliated with CBSE in order to grant better sum per child studying in 
these schools.  The Committee would like the Ministry to vigorously pursue with 
the States and give them a time period to sign MoU with NESTS so that the norms 
established including affiliation of schools with CBSE Board are applicable to 
them for smooth running of Schools and the students studying in these schools 
get standardized education and the uniform standard of education is established 
across all the EMRSs in the country. In order to bring them on board, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry pursue the matter at higher level with the 
States and sort out the issue fast. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;       RAMA DEVI 
                  Chairperson, 
31 March, 2022        Standing Committee on 
10 Chaitra, 1944 (Saka)     Social Justice and  
        Empowerment 
 
  

62 
 
APPENDIX 
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Sl.No Para No. Observations/ Recommendations 
1. 2.8 The Committee are constrained to note that out of 288 schools 
sanctioned in 1997-98, that is prior to revamping of the EMRS 
Scheme in 2018-19, only 244 schools could be made 
functional.  They further find that the construction work of 
only 202 schools has been completed till date and the 
construction work of 20 schools is yet to begin, whereas 
construction work of 66 schools is targeted to be completed by 
October, 2024. The pace with which the work has been 
progressing seems to be quite slow as construction work of 
only 202 schools has been completed despite the Scheme 
being in existence for more than two decades. Construction 
work of 20 schools could not begin till date, despite the same 
being entrusted to Central/State Public Sector undertakings 
after the revamping of Scheme in 2018-19.   The Committee 
are of the firm opinion that the routine issues relating to 
tendering process, land transfer, finalization of construction 
agency, etc. cannot be kept lingering for months and delaying 
the work inordinately when a target completion date is set.  
The Committee feel that the Ministry should take dynamic 
measures to ensure that, at least, all the 288 old sanctioned 

63 
 
schools are made functional from their own buildings in a time 
bound manner in order to achieve the envisaged objectives of 
the Scheme. The Committee would therefore, like the Ministry 
to take concrete steps so that the construction work of 66 
schools is completed as stipulated and begin the construction 
work of the remaining 20 schools at the earliest so that all the 
old schools are made functional from their own building. As 
the teaching activities have not been undertaken since the 
pandemic of COVID-19 started, there is all the more urgency 
that atleast now the tribal children must have school facilities 
to resume their education, particularly since online mode of 
education is not feasible for remote tribal areas.  Hence, the 
Committee may be apprised in this regard. 
2. 2.24 The Committee note that the original target, which aimed that 
452 new Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRSs) including 
12 Eklavya Model Day Boarding School (EMDBS) would be set 
up in the remaining 462 sub-districts by the year 2022 is no 
where near completion and the target year stands revised as 
2025 now. The Committee are surprised to note that out of 452 
schools proposed to be sanctioned as per the phasing plan 
between 2018-2019 to 2021-2022, only 350 schools could be 
sanctioned and the remaining 102 schools are remaining to be 
sanctioned as the location for these schools is yet to be 

64 
 
finalised.  It is disappointing that the construction work of 
only 100 schools could begin till date whereas the 
construction work of 332 schools is to begin by March 2022, 
which has just passed. The Committee lament the fact that 
there is a substantial gap between the number of schools 
proposed to be sanctioned and the number of schools 
sanctioned and also with regard to timelines fixed for 
construction work. The Committee also find the Ministry 
deficient in complying with the standard period of 24 months 
fixed for completing the construction work as the present 
position states that detailed Project Report and Master Layout 
Plan for 174 schools and construction work for 100 schools 
could begin out of 350 schools sanctioned till date. Further 
worrying is the fact that very few schools have their own 
buildings as only 20 schools have been made functional from 
own buildings.  103 schools are functioning from alternate 
buildings since 2018-19 till 2021-22. The Committee are quite 
apprehensive with regard to the achievement of target even by 
March 2025 as construction of 252 schools is yet to begin. The 
Committee have been made to believe by the Ministry that after 
establishment of National Educational Society for Tribal 
Students (NESTS) on revamping of the Scheme, things are 
going to improve substantially but the facts still speak 

65 
 
otherwise, even after two years of establishment of NESTS. 
The Committee would, therefore, opine that the Ministry must 
not take more into background after setting up of NESTS as 
things are still not  progressing satisfactorily, therefore, close 
monitoring of the pace of work is required to be done by the 
Ministry to achieve the targets.  The Committee, therefore, 
like the Ministry to set up a stringent in-built mechanism to 
ensure compliance of norms/timelines fixed with regard to 
sanctioning/construction/functioning of schools so that the 
work of making EMRS/EMDBS functional from their own 
buildings is not delayed and there is no deviation from targets 
at any stage.  
 
3. 3.7 The Committee observe that a minimum of 15 acres of land is 
required for establishing Eklavya Model Residential School 
(EMRS) in a sub-district having 50% ST population and at least 
20,000 tribal persons and a minimum of 5 acres of land is 
required for establishing Eklavya Model Day Boarding School 
(EMDBS) in a sub-district having 90% ST population. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that despite a provision of 
relaxation on the minimum requirement of land in North east, 
hilly areas and LWE affected areas in the guidelines, several 
discrepancies such as land not found technically suitable, 

66 
 
land falling under forest area, etc. appear and since the 
process of resolving the issues takes time, there is a delay in 
acquisition of land required for setting up EMRS in selected 
districts. The Committee believe that the criteria of minimum 
area of 15 acres of land in a sub-district having 50% ST 
population and at least 20,000 tribal persons for construction 
of EMRS is impractical as a single piece of 15 acres of land 
may not be easily available in hilly areas. Further, the criteria 
of 50% ST population and at least 20,000 tribal persons for 
sanctioning of EMRS and 90% ST population for sanctioning of 
EMDBS makes identification of land more cumbersome. The 
Committee hence feel that the guidelines with regard to 
area/population needs to be revisited as  together these 
stipulation make acquisition of land for setting up of 
EMRS/EMDBS quite complex. The Committee hence are of the 
opinion that these should be immediately reviewed and viable 
solutions worked out so that the delay in acquisition of land 
can be prevented. The Committee also recommend that such 
review should be undertaken without compromising upon the 
infrastructural requirements of EMRS/EMDBS. The Committee 
desire that such tribal areas with widely scattered tribal 
population must not be deprived of the benefits of 
EMRSs/EMDBS which are a means towards their educational 

67 
 
empowerment.  The Committee note that out of three 
approved EMDBS , construction work of two schools is in 
progress and work of one school is yet to begin.  The 
Committee desire that the construction work of all the three 
EMDBS should be completed in time and the Ministry should 
take necessary steps to encourage/sensitize the States/UTs to 
submit speedily, proposals for construction of EMDBS so that 
maximum Tribal students are able to get quality education. 
4. 4.10 The Committee find that National Education Society for Tribal 
Students (NESTS) established in 2019 to plan, construct, 
establish, endow and administer the EMRS is expected to do 
all things necessary to provide good quality modern 
education to tribal students, common core-curriculum of 
NCERT, CBSE affiliation of schools, training/capacity building 
Programmes for teaching and non-teaching staff, review the 
existing MoUs signed by the State/UT EMRS Societies or the 
State Governments, etc. The Committee, further, note that the 
EMRS Societies required to be set up at the State/UT level to 
maintain, control and manage the schools within 30 days from 
issue of the Guidelines have been established in 27 out of 28 
States/UTs till date. However, the Committee are perturbed to 
note that only 6 posts in NESTS have been filled up till date, 
thus leaving 26 posts vacant out of the 28 posts approved by 

68 
 
Ministry of Finance. The Committee are unable to comprehend 
as to how NESTS would be able to justify its role and 
responsibility with such a set up.  As only two top posts have 
been filled, it can be safely assumed that NESTS would be 
hardly functional as of now.  The Committee are, therefore, of 
the opinion that no further delay should happen in recruitment 
of sanctioned strength of NESTS. NESTS should also ensure 
that the EMRS Societies are established in all States/UTs 
urgently and MOU with State/UT EMRS Societies or the State 
Governments is reviewed/signed without any further delay for 
the smooth functioning of Schools. Keeping the role and 
responsibility of NESTS that is likely to multiply in future, as 
they have to run and coordinate for the intended 740 schools 
with 3.5 lakh tribal students, the Committee further strongly 
feel that the present sanctioned strength of NESTS perhaps 
either needs to be reviewed and enhanced or its technical 
capabilities are of a superior level so that they are able to 
smoothly run the Schools. In view of the increasingly 
responsibility of Project Monitoring Units with the increase in 
pre-construction and post-construction activities of schools 
in future, the Committee would also like that the number of 
Experts in Project Monitoring Units is kept adequate  to 
enable them to effectively supervise and monitor 

69 
 
pre-construction and post-construction activities of EMRSs.  
5. 5.9  The Committee are constrained to note that the teachers 
appointed for EMRSs by the States are not in accordance with 
a uniform criteria for the appointment of teachers for schools 
despite the existence of the Scheme since 1997-98 as the 
Ministry did not have control over these schools except for 
giving grant to the States to establish EMRSs. The Committee 
have now been informed that a recruitment advertisement 
have been released for a total of 3400 vacancies across 16 
States/UTs as per the criteria formulated on the pattern of 
Kendriya Vidyalayas and Navodaya Vidyalayas and that the 
National testing Agency is to conduct national level 
EMRS-Teaching Staff Selection Examination. However, 
recruitment process is on hold due to non-notification of 
Recruitment Rules by majority States/UTs. The Committee feel 
that had this decision been taken by the Ministry  back when 
EMRS came into existence, the schools could have achieved a 
uniform standard of education across the Country.  The 
Committee find that the matter is still at a standstill as they 
have not been able to advertise vacancies of teachers for all 
the States/UTs as Recruitment Rules framed by NESTS have 
not been notified by the States/EMRS societies established 
across States/UTs.  Unless all the States are brought on 

70 
 
board, the recruitment of teachers would continue to suffer. 
The Committee would, therefore recommend that all 
formalities must now be completed and the examinations for 
the vacancies advertised should be held at the earliest without 
waiting for States/UTs who have not notified Recruitment 
Rules and teachers recruited following State specific 
reservation Roster so that they are adequately trained before 
posting.  NESTS may also follow up with the States/UTs who 
have not notified model Recruitment Rules framed by them 
and ensure that these States notify said rules in a specific time 
period so that the recruitment of teachers for these States is 
also conducted in a time bound manner. States/UTs still 
delaying notification of model Recruitment Rules framed by 
NESTS should be aggressively pursued at appropriate level so 
that they are notified soon and quality of education imparted in 
schools is not compromised. The Committee would also like 
the Ministry to take all necessary action for the recruitment of 
non-teaching staff too for efficient management of EMRS. They 
desire to be apprised of the progress at the action taken stage. 
 
6. 6.12  The Committee find that after the revamping of EMRS Scheme, 
the responsibility of construction of 452 new schools 
sanctioned since 2018-19, has been entrusted to PSUs and 

71 
 
CPWD, except for 42 schools where the State Governments 
have been entrusted the responsibility. The Committee also 
find that the budgetary provision for capital cost of ₹ 2146.50 
crore has been made for 2024-25 and ₹ 210.00 crore for 
2025-26. The Committee are unable to comprehend the 
reasons for keeping such a low budgetary provision for these 
two years when only expenditure sanction for 174 schools 
have been granted till date and expenditure sanction for 278 
schools is yet to be awarded. As the construction of schools in 
remote/hills/difficult tribal areas taken much more time than 
those in regular areas, there is a high possibility than 278 
schools would not be ready in another three years and ₹ 210 
crore would be quite insufficient in 2025-26.  The Committee 
are apprehensive about the financial crunch EMRSs may face 
at that time. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry 
to review the financial allocation made for construction of 
schools so that there is no financial crisis as allocation is 
likely to lapse in case of non-utilization. Further, the 
Committee are sad to note that the construction work is not 
progressing at the required pace as construction work could 
begin only at 43 locations out of the administrative and 
expenditure sanction issued for 104 EMRSs to PSUs for 
construction.  The Committee would, therefore, like the 

72 
 
Ministry to regularly review the status of work undertaken and 
strive to remove all bottlenecks so that the work is completed 
in a targeted period. The Committee would also like the 
Ministry to monitor the work entrusted to States and seek 
compliance to avoid delay on their part. 
 
7. 7.7  The Committee find that several training Programmes were 
organized for teachers and Principals of EMRSs during the last 
two years.  However, the participation of schools, Principals 
and teachers was found to be limited in these Programmes.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the teachers/Principals 
training Programme should be periodically organized and 
participation be made compulsory to upgrade their teaching/ 
leaderships skills which would enable them in coping with the 
fast changing scenario of imparting education. The Committee 
would like NESTS to develop exchange Programmes of 
Principals/teachers at national/ international level so that they 
can participate in advanced training Programmes.  The 
Committee appreciate the initiatives such as collaboration with 
National apex bodies such NCERT, NITI Aayog, NIEPA etc. to 
conduct professional capacity building Programmes and 
desire that participation of EMRS teachers should be 
mandatory therein.  Also, the Committee feel that the 

73 
 
collaboration between NESTS and the Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship to initiate vocational 
education courses would benefit students and teachers in 
developing skills, hence, necessary action may be taken for an 
early start of vocational education courses across the EMRSs. 
The Committee are of the view that concrete steps should be 
taken to increase the number of Programmes and hence 
recommend that an annual calendar for professional capacity 
development Programmes for Principals/teachers may be 
drawn incorporating various Programmes and shared with all 
EMRSs and EMDBSs so that maximum participation could be 
ensured. 
8. 8.19  The Committee are surprised to note that the provision for 
Smart Classes & Atal Tinkering Labs in EMRSs and the 
procurement of mobile tablets and educational kits for 
students of EMRSs has been delayed so much that the very 
objective to provide online education to EMRS schools during 
COVID Pandemic could not materialise. The Committee feel 
that this delay has made students to suffer irreversibly as they 
require these facilities well in time to continue their studies in 
distant mode. The Committee are unable to understand 
reasons for continued delay in having these facilities in 
schools. The fact that tenders were called twice under such 

74 
 
specifications for which no Indian company could bid shows 
that the NESTS/Ministry failed to find a workable solution to 
prevent altogether stopping of learning for tribal school 
students during COVID pandemic. The Committee feel that 
Ministry must realise that students cannot be deprived of the 
right to education due to the non-serious approach of the 
persons responsible to execute the work. The Committee, 
therefore, opine that responsibility needs to be fixed for the 
casual approach in this matter. The Committee find that the 
Management Information System proposed to be developed 
has also been lingering for long without any sound 
justification.  The Ministry, therefore must ensure to complete 
the targets set for establishing online learning system, Smart 
classes and Atal tinkering labs and also to procure the mobile 
tablets and educational kits within the laid down timeframe. As 
the tribal students belong to remote areas and do not possess 
resources to voice their requirements vigorously, it is the 
bounden duty of the Ministry to recognize and fulfill their 
educational requirements well in time. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to strongly recommend the Ministry to install 
smart classes, Atal tinkering labs in all the EMRSs in 
consultation with the concerned Ministries/Departments within 
a fixed time schedule. The Committee also desire that as the 

75 
 
management Information system, which is currently proposed 
to be developed, could be an effective tool for monitoring of 
the schools, particularly those set up in far flung areas, should 
be developed in a time bound manner without further delay. 
9. 9.9 The Committee appreciate the performance of EMRS students 
in examinations as well as extra-curricular activities and are of 
the view that the responsibility of the Department has been 
increased now in order to make the requisite infrastructure 
available timely to students. The Committee are, however, 
perplexed to note that as it is aimed to bring EMRSs at par with 
JNVs, the admission guidelines are yet to be framed by NESTS 
and the dedicated online portal is also under development. The 
Committee are aware that the management of Schools is the 
responsibility of State/UT Governments.  However, to ensure 
the uniformity of infrastructure across the schools is now the 
responsibility of NESTS. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
necessary action may be taken by NESTS to frame admission 
guidelines in a time bound manner so that they are uniformly 
applied by State/UT Governments across EMRSs.  The 
State/UT Governments following their own guidelines, would 
mean defeating the objective of uniform procedure for 
admissions in the Schools. The Committee also desire that the 
online portal should be expeditiously developed so that the 

76 
 
details of the facilities available to students, infrastructure in 
schools, details of the teachers with their qualification are 
made available by the respective schools on portal for the 
benefit of the prospective students/teachers.  
10. 10.6 The Committee are astonished to note that the Ministry have 
not been able to identify location for establishing two Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) for sports with specialized state-of-the-art for 
one identified individual sport and one group sport for which 
preliminary sanction has been issued out of the fifteen such 
Centres proposed to be set up in tribal majority districts in 
each State/UT and ₹ 127 lakh sanctioned too. The Committee 
are perturbed to find that the discussion with Sports authority 
of India is still underway for collaboration under ‘Khelo India 
Programme’ and detailed standard procedure have not been 
devised to establish such Centres. The Committee are unable 
to understand the objective of releasing an advance amount of 
₹ 127 lakh for two CoEs sanctioned and to include financial 
provision in the Cabinet Note for continuation of the EMRSs 
during 2021-22 to 2025-26 when Ministry have not been able to 
locate places for establishing two CoEs. The Committee 
wonder as how much time would be required to establish all 15 
CoEs.  The Committee are also concerned about the financial 
implication of the delay as the cost of such Centres is likely to 

77 
 
increase substantially if there is too much delay in taking 
decisions. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to 
take necessary action immediately to complete the modalities 
in consultation with Sports Authority of India, States/UTs and 
other stakeholders so that the location not only for two CoE is 
finalised but location for all 15 CoEs is finalised and timeline 
should be fixed for completion work of all CoEs.  
11. 11.5 The Committee are surprised to note that 3 States namely 
Bihar, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal have still not signed MoU 
and are reluctant to shift to CBSE Board and are insisting on 
continuation of State Board Curriculum in the schools set up 
in their States whereas the norms stipulate that all the EMRSs 
set up are to be affiliated with CBSE in order to grant better 
sum per child studying in these schools.  The Committee 
would like the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the States 
and give them a time period to sign MoU with NESTS so that 
the norms established including affiliation of schools with 
CBSE Board are applicable to them for smooth running of 
Schools and the students studying in these schools get 
standardized education and the uniform standard of education 
is established across all the EMRSs in the country. In order to 
bring them on board, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry pursue the matter at higher level with the States and sort 
out the issue fast. 
 
 