i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE & EMPOWERMENT) 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of 
Social Justice & Empowerment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
21 

ii 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL JUSTICE & EMPOWERMENT) 
 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice & Empowerment) 
 
    Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026 
                                          Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted and which require 
reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 
5.8.2026. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-
27)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 
(Department of Social Justice & Empowerment) 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) 
 SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Ramji 
25. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
28. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
29. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
30. Smt. Maya Chintaman Ivnate 
31.  Dr. Mukeshbhai J. Rathwa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar   - Joint Secretary 
 
2. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 
 
3. Dr.  Visakh R. Pillai  - Committee Officer 
 
 
  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
do present this Twenty First Report on the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice & Empowerment). 
 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
11.03.2026. The Ministry Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
& Empowerment) have furnished their replies indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report on 15.06.2026. The Report was considered 
and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment at their 
sitting held on 5.8.2026. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry Social Justice and 
Empowerment (Department of Social Justice & Empowerment) is given in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
 5th August, 2026                                                            
 14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,   
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
 

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventeenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27)' of the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice and Empowerment). 
2.   The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
[11.03.2026]. It contained 25 observations/recommendations. Action Taken Replies 
of Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been 
examined and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
Rec. Para No. 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 5.20, 5.22, 6.15, 
6.16, 7.38, 7.39, 7.41, 8.23, 8.24, 8.25 and 9.13 
          
 
 
Total: 14, (Chapter II) 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply: 
Rec. Para No. 3.13, 3.15, 4.38 and 7.40 
 
 
 
Total: 4, (Chapter III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:  
Rec. Para No. 3.14, 4.39, 4.42 and 10.9 
 
 
 
Total: 4, (Chapter IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:  
Rec. Para No. 4.40, 4.41 and 5.21 
 
Total: 3, (Chapter V) 
 
 
3.   The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I and final action taken notes in respect of the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 

2 
 
 
4.  The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government which 
need reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that the target for beneficiaries is fixed on the basis of 
the Annual Action Plan received in April/May from the States/UTs. However, 
the Committee find that the scholarship is released in the next academic 
year as the State/UT Governments are not able to complete the formalities 
of processing of application as scheduled. The Committee feel that the 
scholarship for an academic year should be disbursed in the same 
academic year so that a student is able to use the scholarship fruitfully. The 
Committee has time and again recommended that appropriate measures 
be taken in this regard, however, the practice remains the same. The 
Committee are happy to be informed that the guidelines are under revision 
and the scholarship will be disbursed in the first four to five months of the 
academic year. The Committee hope that the Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment will leave no stone unturned to ensure that the 
scholarship is disbursed timely and the revised guidelines will yield the 
desired results from the academic year 2026-27.” 
6. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under: 
"States/UTs which have their own scholarship portals generally open their 
portals between July-September and largely remain open. NSP opens the 
portal in June for inviting applications from eligible applicants from the 
States/UTs which are on-boarded on NSP. While most States/UTs 
complete the verification process within the stipulated time frame, some 
States/UTs take additional time which at time varies from few months to a 
year in some cases, to finalize the verification process and push the State 
share paid data to NSP. This leads to delays in processing and 
disbursement of central share. Over the years, most States/UTs have 
aligned with the prescribed timelines. However, in certain States, the 
processes of verification, validation, and certification continue to take 
additional time. Nonetheless, based on trends observed over the past five 
years, an overall growth trajectory in coverage and efficiency is evident. If 
all States/UTs align with the advanced timelines of completing the process 
by the end of third quarter and adhere to the prescribed schedule, the 
overall process of application, verification, and disbursement can be further 
streamlined, minimizing delays and reducing spill over cases." 
 

3 
 
 
7.      Observing the delay in the disbursal of Scholarship to the students, the 
Committee had recommended that the Department should take concrete 
measures to ensure that scholarships are disbursed within the same academic 
year in which they fall due. The Committee inter-alia note that the Department 
have again given the routine reply that NSP opens the portal in June for inviting 
applications from eligible applicants from the States/UTs, some States/UTs take 
additional time which at time varies from few months to a year in some cases 
and if all States/UTs align with the advanced timelines of completing the 
process by the end of third quarter and adhere to the prescribed schedule, the 
overall process of application, verification, and disbursement can be further 
streamlined, minimizing delays and reducing spill over cases. The Committee 
are disheartened with the reply as they had expected the Department to find 
some solution to the persisting problem but the students have again been left 
at the mercy of the States. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation as they strongly believe that unless the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment take some strict measures for the completion of 
process within the prescribed time period, the trend of spill over to next year 
will continue.  
Recommendation (Para No. 4.39) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee are happy to note that the beneficiaries of the PM- CARES 
Children Scheme have been included in the free coaching scheme for SCs 
and OBCs from 2024-25. All beneficiaries of the PM- CARES Children 

4 
 
Scheme are eligible to avail the benefits of the scheme irrespective of 
income whereas the ceiling of the total family income for SC and OBC 
students is ₹8 lakh per annum. The Committee find that the target fixed for 
2023-24 and 2024-25 could not be achieved even after the inclusion of PM-
CARES Children Scheme. The requirement for coaching support is well 
recognized particularly among students belonging to the educationally 
disadvantaged sections of Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes. 
It is also well known that the coaching is an expensive affair and everybody 
cannot avail coaching due to its high cost, hence the candidates from 
Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes aspiring for coaching 
cannot avail this facility even if the annual income of family is more than ₹ 
8 Lakh. The Committee strongly feel that the total family income criterion 
fixed for SC and OBC students may be one of the major hurdles preventing 
candidates from these categories from availing the benefits. The Committee 
also does not understand the reason for fixing a target of 7000, which is 
double the previous target, particularly when the target fixed earlier is not 
being achieved. The Committee desire that the family income ceiling should 
be re-examined so that a large number of candidates can avail the facility 
and scheme becomes more effective.” 
9. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under:- 
"The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. It is submitted that 
the target of 7,000 slots has been proposed to expand the reach of the Free 
Coaching Scheme and to ensure wider coverage of eligible beneficiaries 
across the country. At present, only 14 Central Universities are actively 
imparting coaching, covering limited States, which has affected access and 
utilization of slots. Therefore, expansion through State Universities/DACE 
and introduction of Student-Centric Mode is proposed to ensure better 
regional representation, wider choice of coaching courses/institutes and 
improved utilization of slots." 
 
10.  The prime objective of the Committee’s recommendations to re-examine the 
annual family income ceiling was to increase the annual income ceiling of the 
Beneficiaries to ensure maximum of needy students are able to avail the benefit 
of Scheme, thereby enabling the Department to achieve, the target fixed for each 
year.  However, the Department has not given any positive reply on the issue 
except that they have taken note of it. The Committee are principally of the view 

5 
 
that the SC/OBC children should be treated at par with the beneficiaries of ‘PM 
Cares Children’s Schemes’ as they have suffered not only economically but 
also socially since ages.  Hence, the Committee would like to reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and expect that the Department will duly consider 
revising the income eligibility criteria positively so that the target of 7000 slots 
fixed for 2026-27 is achieved. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.42) 
11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee are concerned to note the poor physical and financial 
performance of the scheme of ‘Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs’ over the 
years. The objective of the scheme is to provide coaching of good quality for 
economically disadvantaged SCs & OBCs to enable them to appear in 
competitive examination and/or for securing admission in reputed technical and 
professional higher education institution. Out of the BE of ₹ 47 cr in 2023-24 
AE was only ₹ 7.76 cr BE was reduced to ₹ 35 cr in 2024-25 still AE was ₹ 
17.68 cr only. Similarly in 2025-26, BE was further downgraded to ₹ 20 cr & AE 
was only ₹ 7.11 cr. The physical performance has been equally poor as vis-à-
vis the target of 3500 achievement has only been 223 in 2023-24, 2136 in 2024-
25 & 431 in 2025-26. The Committee are not satisfied with the explanation 
given by the department for this poor performance such as limited participation 
by the Central Universities and delayed proposals. The performance has 
remained poor inspite of changes introduced by the Department over the years 
such as making Dr. Ambedkar Foundation as the Central Nodal Agency. The 
Committee note that the proposal for 16th Finance Committee cycle includes 
inclusion of state Universities and introduction of student centric mode for wider 
coverage. The Committee desire that these changes be made effective at the 
earliest to ensure that the BE of ₹ 20 cr for this purpose for the year 2026-27 is 
fully utilized.” 
12. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under: 
"The concerns of the Committee regarding the performance of the “Free 
Coaching for SCs and OBCs” scheme are duly noted. The Department has 
been continuously extending support to the stakeholders including institutions 
and eligible applicants. Moreover, there has been a positive trend as far as the 
expenditure is concerned. The actual expenditure during 2023-24 was Rs. 7.76 

6 
 
Cr which increased to Rs. 17.68 Cr during 2024-25 and Rs. 9.866 Crores during 
2025-26." 
13.  In their Original Report the Committee noted poor physical and financial 
performance of the scheme of ‘Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs’ despite 
introducing changes and making Dr. Ambedkar Foundation as the Central Nodal 
Agency. As the Committee were informed that the proposal to include State 
Universities and to introduce student centric mode for wider coverage is under 
consideration of Expenditure Finance Committee for 16th Finance Commission 
cycle, they recommended that the changes may be made effective at the 
earliest.  However, the Department has remained silent on the issue in their 
reply.  Since the Report of the 16th Finance Commission has already been laid 
in the Parliament, hence, the Committee should have been apprised by the 
Department on the recommendation and decision of the 16th Finance 
Commission on the proposal under their consideration in this regard. The 
Committee do not appreciate this approach of the Department and would like to 
be informed in this regard at the earliest. In case, the proposal has not been 
considered positively the Committee would like to recommend that the 
Department should take necessary steps to ensure that the budget is not 
revised downward at the revised estimate stage and also in the coming years 
and the Budgetary allocation made for 2026-27 under the ‘Free Coaching for 
SCs and OBCs’ Scheme is utilised, fully. 
 
 

7 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10.9) 
14. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: 
“The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
is the custodian of civic rights and is responsible for the prevention of atrocities 
against Scheduled Castes. Funds are allocated to the Department for 
strengthening of machinery for enforcement of protection of Civil Rights Act, 
1955 and Prevention of Atrocities Act, 1989. The Department has accordingly 
taken measures over the years for the functioning and strengthening of 
Protection Cells and Special Police Stations as envisaged under these Acts. 
The Committee however find that though almost all States/UTs have set up 
Protection Cells but only 181 Special Police Stations have been established in 
only 7 States/UTs. The Committee are shocked to know that even after more 
than three decades of enactment of PoA Act only 7 States/UTs have such 
police stations. The Committee are of the opinion that the setting up of Special 
Police Stations by the States/UTs is essential as victims first approach police 
station for protection at the time of atrocity and it is assumed these police 
stations would be able to address such situations more effectively. The 
Committee do not find any information regarding setting up of Special Courts 
also. The regular meetings with the State government over the years have also 
failed to yield the desired result. The Committee note that the Department has 
submitted a proposal before the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to 
enhance the relief amounts and provide financial support to States for setting 
up Special Police Stations and Special Courts. The Committee hope that the 
Department should have incorporated the expected increase in funds for the 
year 2026-27 so that there is no shortage of funds to meet the expenditure 
likely to increase with the approval of the proposal. The Committee accordingly 
desire that the Department should take necessary steps to ensure that the 
proposal is approved at the earliest so that it is implemented from 2026-27 itself 
and the machinery is adequately strengthened.” 
15. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice 
and Empowerment), in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as under: 
"Rule 8 of the SC/ST (PoA) Rules, 1995 provides for setting up of Special 
Police Stations for registration of complaints relating to offences against 
members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. In the proposed EFC 
outlay for 2026-27 to 2030-31, provision has been made for one-time financial 
assistance of ₹5 lakh for establishment of such Police Stations, with cost 
sharing between the Central and State Governments and UTs with 
legislature.   The recurring expenditure will be borne by the respective State 
Governments. Section 14 of the SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 provides for 
establishment/designation of Exclusive Special Courts/Special Courts for 
speedy trial of offences under the Act. Several States/UTs have already 
designated Special Courts under the Act. The Department regularly reviews 
implementation of the provisions of the Act and Rules with States/UTs through 
review meetings, advisories and communications, and reiterates the need for 

8 
 
establishment of Special Courts for expeditious disposal of cases. The 
Department has submitted a proposal for enhanced budgetary support before 
the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for strengthening implementation of 
the PCR Act, 1955 and the SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989, including support for key 
components under the Scheme. The Department is actively pursuing approval 
of the proposal so that the revised provisions may be implemented at the 
earliest with adequate budgetary support." 
16 .  Taking cognizance of the fact that Special Police Stations have only 
been established in 7 States/UTs even after more than three decades of 
enactment of PoA Act, the Committee recommended that necessary steps may 
be taken for early approval of the proposal submitted for consideration by 
Expenditure Finance Committee to make a provision in the outlay for 2026-27 to 
2030-31 to establish of Special Police Stations. The Committee have not been 
informed of the status of the proposal and the road map drawn by the 
Department in this regard. The Committee expects that the Department will 
establish the Special Police Station across the country as envisaged in the Act 
in a time bound manner for the benefit of Scheduled Castes. The Committee 
would also like to be informed of current status of the Special Police Stations 
and Special Courts established in the country, States/UT wise. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13) 
The Committee appreciate that the BE has been continuously increased over the last few 
years. From ₹ 12847 cr in 2023-24 it has now been increased to ₹ 13687.59 cr for the year 
2026-27.The Committee however are not pleased to note that the Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment has not been able to spend the allocated amount over all these 
years. Even in the year 2025-26, ₹7317.95 crore only has been spent out of the Revised 
Estimates of ₹11402.74 crore. The Department still has a balance of almost 30 percent of the 
Revised Estimates, even though the financial year 2025–26 is about to end. The Committee 
are also concerned to note that the Budget Estimates is invariably reduced by almost 25 to 
30 percent every year at the time of the revision of estimates. The Committee do not find this 
to be a good indicator with regard to the performance of the Department. The hurdles in 
implementing Schemes, due to which the estimates are to be revised downwards or the funds 
remain unspent, should not be a recurring feature. These issues need to be resolved within a 
specific time period. The Committee, therefore, expect that the factors such as onboarding of 
States/UTs on SNA-SPARSH, submission of Utilization Certificates, release of matching 
shares by the State Governments, etc., will be sorted out in this financial year so that there is 
no more hindrance in the implementation of the Schemes. The Committee are optimistic with 
regard to the changes proposed to Expenditure Finance Committee of the Ministry of Finance 
in the Schemes of the Department of Social justice and expect that once approved for next 
financial cycle of 2026-27 to 2030-31 will not only benefit but also boost the morale of the 
deprived sections of society. 
Reply of Government 
The Department agrees to the fact that the Department has not been able fully utilize the 
Budget Estimate (BE) allocation however it is submitted that the Department has reached 
almost 100 % utilization of  Revised Estimate (RE) allocation during the FY 2024-25 (99.70 
%) and 2025-26 (98.99 %). Further, it may be noted that at the time of the Standing Committee 
meeting, the expenditure incurred by the Department stood at Rs. 7,317.95 crore. However, 
expenditure increased substantially during the remaining period of the financial year and 
reached Rs. 11,409.00 crore as on 31.03.2026. This represents a utilization of 98.99% against 
the total RE allocation of Rs. 11,922.43 crore, (comprising Rs. 11,402.74 crore under Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) and Rs. 553.42 crore from the SCWF).  The Department 
acknowledges that during the Revised Estimates (RE) exercise, the Budget Estimates (BE) 
are typically reduced by approximately 25–30 percent each year. In this regard, it is submitted 
that the RE meetings are generally held after the completion of the second quarter of the 
financial year, and the revision is primarily based on the expenditure incurred up to 30th 
September of the concerned financial year. However, the expenditure pattern of this 
Department is distinct in nature. A significant portion of the budget is allocated towards 
scholarship schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes, which are subject to certain 
structural and procedural constraints, resulting in comparatively lower expenditure during the 
first half of the financial year.  Expenditure under scholarship schemes generally shoots up 
during the last quarter of the financial year, as the processes of application verification and 
release of the corresponding State share are completed by most of the State Governments 
during the second and third quarters due to the fact that States/UTs operating their own 

10 
 
scholarship portals and generally open it between July to September. Further, in many cases, 
these portals remain open for an extended period due to administrative and operational 
reasons, thereby delaying the completion of the scholarship disbursement process.   This 
Department intends to take up the matter with Department of Expenditure for ensuring that 
RE is not fixed merely on the basis of progress of budget utilisation upto the second quarter.  
It is further submitted that implementation of centrally sponsored schemes is undertaken by 
the respective States/UTs. The release of funds is contingent upon several factors, including 
receipt of complete proposals from the States/UTs, submission of Utilization Certificates, SNA 
SPARSH on-boarding and fulfilment of other prescribed requirements.   To comply with 
procedural requirements by the States/UTs relating to the SNA to SNA-SPARSH platform and 
integration with the National Scholarship Portal to facilitate real-time fund management and 
monitoring the Department is continuously pursuing with the States/UTs to ensure timely 
compliance with these requirements through regular review meetings, Chintan Shivirs etc.  
Further, the recommendation of the committee is noted and efforts will be made for its 
compliance. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14) 
The Committee find that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment surrendered 
₹2345.1897 crore out of ₹10309.00 crore sanctioned for the Scheduled Caste Division in 
2024-25. Similarly, the Department surrendered ₹540.3672 crore out of ₹2064.41 crore 
sanctioned to the Backward Classes Division and ₹79.5324 crore out of ₹412.4600 crore 
sanctioned for the Social Defence Division. The Committee are unable to comprehend the 
reasons due to which large portion of the allocation had to be surrendered in respect of the 
Schemes meant for the poorest of the poor section of the Society i.e., SCs, OBCs, EBCs and 
DNTs. Further, nearly 20 to 25 percent of the budget allocated for Top Class Education for 
SCs and Top Class School and College schemes for OBCs, EBCs and DNTs was surrendered 
by the Department. The Committee cannot draw any other conclusion than that the surrender 
of funds can take place only when either there is no proper assessment or the Implementing 
agencies are not strictly implementing the Schemes. The justification provided that the 
Department was in receipt of fewer proposals, delays in submission of replies, inadequate 
number of eligible admissions is not convincing to the Committee. The Committee are of the 
firm opinion that in a country where a large proportion of the population is young and requires 
proper education and skill development, the funds allocated should not remain unutilized due 
to the petty hindrances which can be resolved with little efforts. The Committee expect that 
the Department will take due care to ensure that educational schemes do not suffer and that 
problems arising in implementation are resolved immediately without any loss of time. 
Reply of Government 
The Department acknowledges that it could not fully utilize the Budget Estimates (BE) 
allocation of Rs. 13,539.64 crore during FY 2024–25. However, it is pertinent to note that Rs. 
3,099.47 crore was reduced at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage. Consequently, the actual 
surrender by the Department was only Rs. 31.18 crore against the RE allocation, resulting in 
a utilization of 99.70% of the RE funds. As such the Department achieved near-complete 
utilization of the funds available under the RE.  Further, it is submitted that the RE meetings 
are generally held after the completion of the second quarter of the financial year, and the 
revision of fund allocation is primarily based on the expenditure incurred up to 30th September 
of the concerned financial year. However, the expenditure pattern of this Department is distinct 
in nature. A significant portion of the budget is allocated towards scholarship schemes and 
Centrally Sponsored Schemes, which are subject to certain structural and procedural 

11 
 
constraints, resulting in comparatively lower expenditure during the first half of the financial 
year.  To address these constraints, the Department intends to bring the matter to the attention 
of Ministry of Finance so that RE is not fixed merely on the progress of budget utilization upto 
the second quarter of the financial year.The Department is continuously undertaking 
measures to minimize savings/surrender of funds and avoid reductions at the Revised 
Estimates (RE) stage. Regular review meetings are being held with States/UTs to expedite 
implementation and fund utilization. In addition, Chintan Shivirs and periodic consultations are 
organized to identify bottlenecks and devise corrective measures. The Department also 
closely monitors the achievement of monthly and quarterly expenditure targets through 
regular reviews. These efforts are aimed at ensuring timely fund release, improving utilization 
of allocated funds.  Further efforts are being made for maximum utilization of fund allocated 
towards scholarship schemes and some of the efforts are as follows:  i. Regular Hand holding 
meetings/workshops for National Scholarship Portal (NSP) on-boarded States/ UTs and other 
States/UTs having their own scholarship portals;  ii. Online end to end processing, verification 
of eligibility credentials through online transaction to ensure greater transparency, control 
duplicity and wrongful claims by institutions; and  iii. Periodic review by holding meetings at 
National level, Regional level, State level and Field visits by Senior Officers.  iv. Disbursal of 
scholarships through DBT to Aadhar seeded accounts of the beneficiaries.  v. Awareness 
campaign through electronic and print media, short films on Scheme, etc among the targeted 
beneficiaries regarding the Schemes.  Further the recommendation of the committee is noted 
and efforts will be made for its compliance. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15) 
The Committee are happy to note that the Budget Estimates have been successively 
increasing every year from ₹12847.02 crore in 2023–24 to ₹13687.59 crore for the year 2026–
27. The Committee are however not happy to note that, the percentage allocation for the 
department of the total budget of Central Government has declined from 0.29% in 2023– 24 
to 0.26% in 2026–27. In the current scenario, when the Government of India is working 
towards the welfare of SCs, OBCs, EBCs, DNTs, etc., the Committee feel that the annual 
share of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment should increase rather than 
decrease. Though the decline seems to be marginal. The Committee feel it is a matter of 
grave concern and the Department should take it up with the Ministry of Finance. Also, the 
Committee have no doubt on the sincerity of the Government but strongly feel that there is a 
lack of coherence between the Central and State Governments due to which there is under-
utilization of Budgetary Estimates, resulting into surrender of funds. The Committee note that 
right steps are being taken by the Government for the welfare of the deprived sections of 
society but the hurdles in implementing is perhaps due to deficiencies in the mechanisms 
developed for smooth implementation. The Committee are, therefore, not happy to note that 
the same problems continue to recur and the budgetary allocations continues to remain 
underutilized year after year even though the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
promises the Committee every year that it will fully utilise the funds allocated in the next 
financial year. The Committee’s main concern is that the citizens eligible for the benefits of 
the Scheme meant to improve their life are not deprived for the inefficiencies of others. The 
Committee hope that the Budgetary Allocation for 2026–27 will be fully utilized with minimal 
revisions and that the Department will take sufficient measures to break this vicious cycle. 
The Committee would like to be informed in this regard. 
 

12 
 
Reply of Government 
The observations of the Committee regarding the decline in the Department’s share in the 
total Union Budget and the need for enhanced allocation have been noted. In this regard, it is 
submitted that under the draft EFC of schemes (2026–27 to 2030–31), enhanced outlay has 
been proposed for almost all the schemes, reflecting the Department’s efforts to scale up 
interventions and strengthen support for deprived sections of society through expanded 
coverage and increased unit costs.  With regard to the committee’s concern regarding under-
utilisation of Budgetary Estimates, it is submitted that recurring implementation challenges 
have been identified and corrective measures have been initiated, including fund flow through 
SNA-SPARSH, strengthening of monitoring mechanisms, and capacity building at State and 
district levels. The draft EFC incorporates these measures through structured institutional 
support, outcome-based monitoring, and improved digital tracking systems. These steps are 
expected to improve fund utilisation, minimise surrenders, and ensure timely delivery of 
benefits to the intended beneficiaries. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.20) 
The Committee are worried with regard to the expenditure incurred during 2023-24 and 2024-
25 under the Scheme PM-AJAY as the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment was 
able to spend only about 25 to 30 percent of the Budgetary allocation during these years. The 
situation has further deteriorated as only ₹244.61 crore has been spent till February 2026. 
The Committee have been time and again informed that delays in the implementation of the 
SNA system, pending utilization certificates, high SNA balances with States/UTs, etc., have 
adversely affected the Scheme. The Committee are unable to understand the reasons for the 
recurrence for such problems year after year or should the Committee conclude that there is 
no solution to these issues. The Committee feel that the Department presents the same 
problem differently every time at the time of Examination of Demands for Grants. This time 
the Committee have been informed that due to the involvement of various 
Departments/Organisations at the State/UT level, mapping under the Financial Management 
Information System could not be completed at this stage due to which there was delay in the 
clearance of bills. Again, the Committee is not satisfied with this version as the Scheme is in 
existence since 2021-22 and the problem presented this year may have been faced by the 
Department during earlier years too, hence, the Department should have sorted out this long 
time back. The Committee would appreciate if the hurdles highlighted in 2025-26 do not recur 
in 2026- 27 and the expenditure of the budget allocated for 2026-27 is fully utilized. The 
Committee recommend that the Department resolves issues hampering the Scheme in a time 
bound manner for the smooth operationalization of the Scheme for the welfare of targeted 
sections of the society. The Committee also emphasize that the new provisions with respect 
to the Scheme proposed to the Expenditure Finance Committee are approved at the earliest 
so that the scheme do not suffer in 2026-27. 
Reply of Government 
The Department has taken note of the observations of the Committee regarding utilization of 
funds under the PM-AJAY Scheme. It is submitted that an amount of Rs.686.47 crore has 
been utilized under the Scheme during the FY 2025-26. The lower utilization in certain years 
was due to issues in fund flow mechanisms. Initially, funds were released through the SNA 
mechanism. However, with the introduction of the SNA SPARSH system w.e.f. 1st July 2025, 
certain challenges were encountered including delays by States/UTs in onboarding and 
mapping on the SNA-SPARSH platform, which affected fund releases as the onboarding 

13 
 
process remained incomplete across several States. Further, with regard to the concerns of 
the Committee regarding recurrence of bottlenecks and full utilization of funds, it is submitted 
that necessary measures have been initiated to ensure that the issues experienced in 2025–
26 do not recur in 2026–27 and that the allocated budget is fully and efficiently utilized. The 
Department has initiated action from the beginning of the financial year by actively pursuing 
States/UTs for timely submission of proposals through regular communications so that mother 
sanctions can be issued without delay. It is further submitted that pending approval of the draft 
EFC of the Scheme, the Department of Expenditure, vide O.M. dated 23.03.2026, has 
informed for continuation of ongoing schemes up to 30th September 2026 or till approval, on 
the basis of the previous financial year’s provisions. Accordingly, the Department has initiated 
sanction of funds based on proposals received from States/UTs and is actively pursuing them 
to ensure implementation of the Scheme without any disruption. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.22) 
The Committee observe that the funds allocated under the Grants-in- Aid Scheme during 
2023-24 and 2024-25 remained under-utilised and the situation did not improve much in 2025-
26 as the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has been able to spend only 
₹156.77 crore out of the Budget Estimate of ₹920.20 cr. It may therefore, be concluded that 
the Department has been able to spend approximately 35% of the Budgetary allocation since 
2023-24. The Committee also note that the Department has sanctioned 1785 projects under 
the perspective plans for three years and the status of the Projects sanctioned under Plan is 
not available with the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment. The Committee feel 
that the scheme launched with the objective of reducing poverty among SC communities by 
generating additional employment opportunities through skill development and other income-
generating activities has not picked up been able to maintain the required momentum. The 
Committee therefore desire that the Department should make efforts to identify the problem 
areas and find the solutions so that the scheme gains momentum in achieving the income-
generating initiative to effectively address the problem of poverty among SC communities. 
The Committee also desire that monitoring mechanism should be evolved in the Department 
of Social Justice and Empowerment so that the updated information is available with them for 
the projects sanctioned. 
 
Reply of Government 
The Department has noted the observation of the Committee regarding utilisation of funds 
under the Grants-in-Aid component of PM-AJAY. During 2023–24, 2024–25 and 2025–26, 
fund release increased progressively from Rs.165.17 crore, Rs.347.02 crore to Rs.358.62 
crore respectively, which indicates improvement. However, utilisation by States/UTs has 
remained below expectations. The Department is continuously pursuing States/UTs for timely 
submission of proposals and action plans to enhance performance in 2026–27. Further, it is 
submitted that the Scheme is demand-driven, wherein States/UTs submit project proposals 
based on their requirements, which are appraised and approved by the Project Appraisal-
cum-Convergence Committee (PACC). Funds are released against approved proposals, and 
upon completion, States/UTs upload project and beneficiary details on the PM-AJAY portal.  
Further, regarding identification of problem areas and strengthening of monitoring 
mechanisms have been addressed in the draft EFC of PM-AJAY. Key measures include 
enhancement of financial assistance for livelihood activities from Rs.50,000 to Rs.75,000, 
introduction of a dedicated livelihood component for the most marginalized SC households 

14 
 
with provision for grant, training, handholding and capacity building, and establishment of a 
robust monitoring framework through outcome-based indicators, regular reviews, and an 
integrated MIS with real-time data tracking and API-based integration. These measures are 
expected to improve implementation efficiency and achieve sustainable income generation 
outcomes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.15) 
The Committee are pleased to find that the Scheme of Residential Education for Students in 
High School in Targeted Areas (SHRESHTA) has been introduced to enable students from 
the SC community to receive better education. The Scheme runs under two modes. In mode 
1 fee is reimbursed to private residential schools affiliated to CBSE/State Boards for providing 
high quality residential education to meritorious SC students. The Committee had observed 
during the study visit to some residential schools selected under this mode that the students 
are finding difficult to adjust in the schools located in States other than their domicile State 
due to linguistic and cultural difference. The Committee accordingly recommended 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment during the Examination of Demand for 
Grants for the year 2025-26 to examine the issue and suitably revise the Scheme to 
accommodate the students selected in the Schools selected under the Scheme in their 
domicile State. The Committee, however, found during the Examination of Demand for Grants 
for the year 2026-27 that 703 students have been given admission in the academic year 2025-
26 in the schools selected in the States in the State other than domicile State. Taking 
cognizance of non-adherence to the recommendation of the Committee, the Committee 
express their displeasure and feel that should have at least examined the issue and reported 
back to the Committee on the pros and cons of the recommendation instead of showing 
ignorance to the Committee on the subject. The Committee would like the Department to 
consider the issue and in the process they may take feedback from the students. The 
Committee expects positive response from the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government 
Under the SHRESHTA Scheme, selection of students is undertaken on the basis of merit 
through the National Entrance Test for SHRESHTA (NETS). Schools under Mode-I are 
selected from the list of CBSE-affiliated private residential schools and district-recommended 
schools during 2021-22, subject to their consent for participation under the Scheme. During 
the counseling process, students are required to indicate two preferred States. One can be 
the domicile state and the other a neighboring state. This dual-choice provides an alternative 
for students in the event that they are ineligible for or unable to secure a seat within their 
domicile region. Thereafter, allotment is made on the basis of merit, availability of seats and 
preferences exercised by the students. In certain cases, students are allotted schools outside 
their domicile State due to factors such as non-participation of schools from the home State, 
limited availability of seats in preferred schools within the State or higher demand for certain 
institutions. Further, in some cases, students and their parents voluntarily opt for schools 
outside their domicile State in view of perceived educational advantages, better academic 
facilities and future opportunities. It has also been observed that some students belong to 
families that are temporarily residing in other States owing to the occupation or service 
conditions of parents. In view of the observations of the Standing Committee, the Department 
brought in key changes to improve accessibility and participation under the Scheme, including 
increase in the number of examination centres from 143 to 167 to enable wider participation 

15 
 
of eligible students across States. Efforts are also being made to encourage greater 
participation of schools from different States so as to enhance the possibility of 
accommodating students within or nearer to their domicile States, wherever feasible. 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.16) 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment provides grants 
to the Non- Government Organisations/Voluntary Organisations for running and maintenance 
of the projects of Residential/Non-Residential Schools and Hostels for SC students. The 
Committee note that the number of Schools selected every year has gone down since 2023-
24 as 142 schools were selected in 2022-23, 137 in 2024-25 and 130 in 2025- 26. Similarly, 
the number of selected students has also declined from 16479 in 2022- 23 to 14281 in 2024-
25. The Committee expect that the number of schools as well as the number of students 
should increase every year in order to achieve the objective of the scheme. The deficiencies 
due to which there has been a decline in the number of students and the schools need to be 
identified and suitable action taken so that the objective of the Scheme is achieved. The 
Committee desire that the scheme is duly popularized not only by the Central but by the State 
Governments as well to attract more students. The Committee expect that the Department of 
Social Justice and Empowerment will take suitable measures to overcome the deficiencies of 
the scheme 
Reply of Government 
Under Mode-II of the SHRESHTA Scheme, only those NGOs/VOs which were empaneled 
during 2021-22 and whose projects were already receiving Grant-in-Aid (GIA) are eligible for 
continuation, subject to fulfilment of prescribed conditions and satisfactory performance. No 
provision presently exists for empanelment of new NGOs/VOs under the Scheme. 
Consequently, the number of institutions and beneficiaries has gradually declined since 2022-
23 due to closure/discontinuation of certain projects on account of reasons such as non-
renewal of school recognition certificates, non-availability of valid Scheduled Caste certificates 
of beneficiaries, non-compliance with Scheme guidelines or closure of NGOs/VOs for 
administrative and operational reasons. However, due to efforts during 2025-26 the number 
of beneficiaries under Mode-II has increased to 13051. Continuous monitoring of the 
functioning of empaneled institutions is being undertaken to ensure compliance with Scheme 
norms and timely resolution of operational issues. The Department is also examining 
measures for strengthening implementation and improving outreach of the Scheme. For wider 
publicity and awareness, the Department regularly communicates with State Governments/UT 
Administrations requesting them to disseminate information regarding the Scheme at the 
State, district and local levels so as to encourage greater participation of eligible students. 
Information regarding the Scheme is also made available through the Department’s website 
and e-Anudaan portal. 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.38) 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has neither 
been able to exhaust the budgetary allocation nor achieve the targets fixed for 2023-24, 2024-
25 and 2025-26 under various components of PM-YASASVI. The Committee find that certain 
procedural issues such as pending Aadhaar seeding, bank account validation, utilization 
certificates (UCs), etc., are challenges before the Department in optimizing the utilization of 
resources and maximizing the targets laid down under the Scheme. The Committee note that 
despite various measures such as periodic review, third party evaluation, awareness of 

16 
 
Scheme, etc. taken by the Department to address the challenges in implementing the 
schemes these challenges continue to recur year after year. The Committee have no doubt 
about the sincerity of the Department, but it would appreciate if suitable steps are taken so 
that the issues hampering the Scheme dies down once and for all and the Scheme is smoothly 
implemented.  The Committee also note that the income eligibility has been enhanced from 
2.5 lakh to 4.5 lakh by the Department and has also introduced disability allowance of 10,000 
per annum from 2026-27. However, the Committee find that the Budgetary Estimate for 2025-
26 has not increased for most of the sub-components of the Scheme for the year 2026-27. 
The Committee expect that the expenditure on the sub-components may multiply as the 
number of applicants may increase with the enhanced income eligibility and disability 
allowance. The Committee would therefore, like the Department to timely assess the funds 
requirement for the year 2026-27 to meet the increased demand under each sub-component 
of the Scheme. The Committee believe that the Department will take all necessary measures 
to ensure that no applicant is deprived of the Scheme for want of funds. The Committee would 
like to be informed in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
The targets for 2024-25 were fixed during the Appraisal and approval of continuation of 
Schemes in the last financial cycle.  The changes proposed under the scheme will be 
implemented in the current EFC cycle 2026-27 to 2030-31.The appraisal of the Schemes for 
continuation during the current financial cycle 2026-27 to 2030-2031 is under review process 
in consultation with stake holders. Department is continuously engaged with State/UTs 
through meetings and regular follow ups to mitigate the challenges faced by the targeted 
beneficiaries in Aadhaar seeding, bio-metric authentication, etc.  Reasons for short fall are 
due to contingency factors such as incomplete proposals from States/UTs, non-rendition of 
utilization certificate for the fund released during previous years, etc.  Some of the steps 
undertaken by the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to ensure the effective 
implementation and to monitor the progress and outreach of welfare schemes for the Other 
Backward Classes (OBCs):  i. Regular Hand holding meetings/workshops for National 
Scholarship Portal (NSP) on-boarded States/ UTs and other States/UTs having their own 
scholarship portals;  ii. Online end to end processing, verification of eligibility credentials 
through online transaction to ensure greater transparency, control duplicity and wrongful 
claims by institutions; and  iii. Periodic review by holding meetings at National level, Regional 
level, State level and Field visits by Senior Officers.  iv. Disbursal of scholarships through DBT 
to Aadhar seeded accounts of the beneficiaries.  v. Awareness campaign through electronic 
and print media, short films on Scheme, etc among the targeted beneficiaries regarding the 
Schemes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.39) 
The Committee note that the target fixed for 2024-25 under Post Matric, Scholarship Scheme 
was not achieved and the same target was again fixed for 2025-26. The Committee are not 
sure about the status of achievement vis-a-vis the target fixed for 2025-26 as the Committee 
have been informed that the details of Beneficiaries are not available with them and will be 
available only when the proposal for 2026-27 are received from the State/UT Government. 
The Committee are surprised to find that the target for 2026-27 has been reduced to 34 lakhs 
in comparison to previous two years. The Committee feel that the approach of the Department 
appears to be that if you are not able to achieve the goal it is better to bring down the goal so 
that you don't have to face the failure. The Committee are not satisfied with the way the 
Scheme is being implemented by the Department as they strongly feel that the Scheme can 

17 
 
be considered successful only if the target fixed are achieved and the target for next year are 
enhanced. The Committee are of the opinion that the target fixed should increase every year 
so that the revised estimates also Increase consequently. The Committee are happy to note 
that a proposal has been submitted for revision of the scheme to the Expenditure Finance 
Committee with regard to the income ceiling and scholarship rates. In view of the proposed 
revision, the Committee feel that the budgetary allocation made may not be sufficient as the 
number of beneficiaries is likely to increase significantly. The Committee hope that the 
Department will make all efforts to implement the proposals from 2026-27 and seek 
enhancement of the budget at the RE stage to meet the requirement of funds so that students 
do not suffer. The Committee expect that the proposal will be approved urgently so that the 
beneficiaries get the benefit in the year 2026-27 itself. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the effect of the changes proposed to EFC on the Scheme in their action taken 
reply. 
Reply of Government 
The Department has released an amount of Rs.1138.88 crore out of the BE allocation of 
Rs.1250.00 crore during 2025-26 which comes to more than 91% of the allocation . Further 
the target for 2026-27 in physical numbers is 33.24 Lakh (targeted beneficiaries). The 
appraisal of the Schemes for continuation during the current Financial Cycle is under review 
process in consultation with stake holders including the finalization of Scheme guidelines.  In 
this regard the year on year proposed outlay for the new EFC cycle is as under: 
  
Year on year proposed outlay for the new EFC cycle (from 2026-27 to 2030-31) 
Components  2026-27 2027-28 2028-29 2029-30 2030-31 Total 
Financial (in crore) Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
  3645.18 3827.5 4018.86 4219.85 4430.83 20142.23 
                
Further, when compared with EFC cycle 2021-22 to 2025-26, there is a significant increase 
in proposed outlay during the 16th FC as compared to the outlay during 15th FC :  
 
Year on year approved outlay for the previous EFC cycle (from 2020-21 to 2025-26) 
Components  2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 Total 
Financial (in 
crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Financial 
(in crore) 
Post-Matric Scholarship for 
OBC, EBC & DNT Students 582.00 640.50 704.50 775.00 852.50 3554.50 
                
Recommendation (Para No. 7.41) 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
has introduced a new scheme called SAMRAS for the construction of high-quality hostels in 
Central Universities for students belonging to all categories including SCs, OBCs, EBCs, 
DNTs and even General category students. The Committee are not able to understand about 
the status of similar schemes such as Scheme of Hostels for SCs under PM-AJAY, 
construction of hostel for OBC Boys and Girls under PM-YASASVI after the introduction of 
SAMRAS Scheme. The Committee may like to recommend that the Department should draw 
the modalities of the new Scheme SAMRAS as early as possible so that it can be implemented 

18 
 
in the next financial year. The Committee would be happy if the other Hostel Schemes of the 
Department continue so that the students are not deprived of the Scheme as they have a 
dedicated budget for the targeted caste. 
Reply of Government 
The proposed SAMRAS (Scheme for Construction of Integrated High-Capacity Hostels for 
aspirational and priority groups) has been conceptualized with the objective of providing 
modern, safe and high-quality hostel facilities to students belonging to Scheduled Castes 
(SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs), Other Backward Classes (OBCs) including Denotified Tribes 
(DNTs), Economically Weaker Sections (EWS), Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and other 
priority groups pursuing education from Class IX onwards up to Graduate/Postgraduate level. 
With regard to the status of the existing Hostel Scheme for SCs under PM-AJAY and Hostel 
Scheme for OBC Boys and Girls under PM-YASASVI, it is submitted that the proposal 
envisages rationalization of hostel interventions by subsuming and integrating the hostel 
components of these schemes under the SAMRAS framework. The objective is to create 
larger, better equipped and inclusive hostel infrastructure with improved facilities and 
economies of scale while ensuring continued support to the targeted beneficiary groups.  D/o 
Expenditure, did not agree to the proposal of implementing Samras as a standalone new 
scheme. DoE advised that the proposed intervention may instead be considered as a 
component under an existing scheme of the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
in accordance with the policy contained in DoE O.M. dated 06.06.2025, which discourages 
proliferation of new schemes and encourages convergence with existing umbrella schemes. 
This proposal is under examination in the Department.  The Department further assures that 
the interests of SC, OBC, DNT and other priority students will remain fully safeguarded under 
the proposed scheme through earmarked seat allocations and appropriate safeguards in the 
scheme guidelines. The proposed framework provides for dedicated representation of various 
beneficiary categories and flexibility to States/UTs to align seat allocation with local 
demographic requirements.  The Committee's recommendation regarding early finalization of 
modalities of the scheme has been noted. The Department is in the process of finalizing the 
scheme framework, operational guidelines and approval mechanisms in consultation with the 
concerned stakeholders and Ministries. Necessary efforts are being made to complete the 
requisite formalities so that the scheme may be implemented at the earliest.  The Department 
remains committed to ensuring that students belonging to the targeted communities are not 
deprived of hostel facilities and educational opportunities. The proposed SAMRAS framework 
seeks to strengthen hostel infrastructure and expand access to quality residential facilities 
while continuing to address the educational needs of disadvantaged and marginalized 
sections of society. 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.23) 
The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment 
has been allocated ₹740.00 crore for the year 2026-27 under Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana 
(AVYAY), over and above the allocations made for 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26. 
Unfortunately, the Department was not able to spend the Revised Estimate for 2024-25 and 
has been able to spend only 60% of the allocation in 2025-26. The Committee hope that the 
Department will be able to spend the Budgetary Allocation for 2025-26 and would take 
necessary initiatives to rule out the reasons such as delays in approval, revision of scheme 
guidelines, etc., resulting in under-utilisation of funds. The Committee expect that the changes 
proposed to the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) will be approved at the earliest so that 

19 
 
the senior citizens can reap the benefits of the changes proposed from 2026-27 onwards and 
the budget allocated for 2026-27 is also fully utilized 
Reply of Government 
It is submitted that under the Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana (AVYAY), the Department has made 
sustained efforts towards effective implementation of the Scheme and optimal utilization of 
funds. Against the Revised Estimate (RE) of ₹519.69 crore during FY 2025-26, an expenditure 
of ₹451.97 crore has been incurred, constituting approximately 86.97% utilization of the RE 
allocation. The expenditure under the Scheme has shown significant improvement compared 
to previous years, despite certain implementation-related challenges.  It is further submitted 
that one of the major reasons for non-utilization of the complete Budget Estimate (BE) was 
the delay in submission of complete proposals, utilization certificates and other requisite 
documents by implementing agencies and States/UTs. Several States/UTs also failed to 
utilize the released funds in accordance with the provisions of SNA-SPARSH despite 
continuous follow-up and review meetings conducted by the Department. The Department 
has taken several measures to address these bottlenecks. These include regular review 
meetings with State Governments, strengthening of monitoring mechanisms, timely scrutiny 
of pending cases and expeditious examination of proposals for release of funds.     Further, 
the proposal for continuation/restructuring of AVYAY, along with modifications in Scheme 
components has already been prepared for submission to the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). The proposed changes are aimed at strengthening service delivery 
mechanisms for senior citizens, expanding outreach, improving accessibility of benefits and 
ensuring better convergence among various components of the Scheme. The Department is 
actively pursuing for early approval of the EFC proposal so that the revised interventions may 
be implemented effectively from FY 2026-27 onwards. 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.24) 
The Committee have been made to understand that the Department proposes to associate 
State/UT governments for the smooth implementation of Schemes and also proposes to 
increase funding limit to Start ups under SAGE, increase in daily food nutrition, etc. As per the 
proposal the Centre and State would be sharing expenditure in the ratio of 60:40. The 
Committee are sure that the measures being proposed would enhance the performance of 
the Scheme in the interest of senior citizens but they are apprehensive for the 40% share of 
State government. The Committee do not want the Scheme to suffer for want of funds from 
State Governments. Therefore, they would like Department to take precautionary steps so 
that States timely contribute their share and the Schemes are implemented flawlessly. The 
Committee would also like the Department to ensure that the proposal under submission is 
approved at the earliest so that the proposal is implemented from 2026-27 onwards. 
Reply of Government 
It is submitted that under the Integrated Programme for Senior Citizens (IPSrC), States/UTs 
have been consulted and requested to provide the information regarding provision made in 
their budget etc. with respect to the implementation of revised funding pattern of Centre-State 
sharing in the ratio of 60:40 from FY 2026-27 onwards. The concerns regarding timely 
contribution of the State share and smooth implementation of the Scheme have been duly 
noted by the Department. In this regard, the Department is taking proactive measures to 
ensure effective coordination with States/UTs for seamless implementation of the Scheme. 
Regular consultations and review meetings are being conducted with the State 

20 
 
Governments/UT Administrations to sensitize them regarding timely provision of their 
matching share and to ensure advance planning for allocation of funds in their respective 
State Budgets. The Department is also pursuing the proposal for revision and strengthening 
of the Scheme, including enhancement in assistance under SAGE, improvement in nutritional 
support and greater involvement of States/UTs, for expeditious approval so that the revised 
framework may be implemented from FY 2026-27 in the interest of senior citizens across the 
country. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.25) 
The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Department and the initiatives taken by it for the 
welfare of Senior Citizens over the years. In order to have better management the Department 
has proposed to associate State/UT Governments in the implementation of the Schemes. The 
Committee also feel that the available machinery with the senior citizens Division of the 
Department is not sufficient to cater to the requirement of the senior citizens. The Department 
has also received suggestions from various quarters for a separate dedicated Department for 
the welfare of senior citizens. The Department should examine the infrastructure available in 
the Department to manage the affairs of Senior Citizens. As is already known that the 
population of Senior Citizens in the country is projected to increase from 8.4% to 14.9% of the 
total population by 2036, and a small Division in the Department cannot be expected to cater 
to the increasing population of senior citizens. The Committee would also like to draw the 
attention towards the creation of separate Department for Divyangjan in 2012 by the 
Government. The separate Department was created to manage the affairs of comparatively 
less population of Divyangjan in the country and is effectively catering to their needs. The 
Committee would also like to express that once the ‘Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and 
Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is enacted the responsibilities of the Division will 
multiply. In view of the large population of Senior Citizens which continues to increase every 
year, the Committee would like the Government to examine creation of a separate dedicated 
Department under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as has been created for 
Divyangjan to ensure greater focus on policy matters relating to Senior Citizens and better 
coordination among stakeholders. 
Reply of Government 
It is submitted that the observations and suggestions regarding strengthening of the 
institutional mechanism for welfare of senior citizens and examination of the feasibility of 
creation of a separate dedicated Department for Senior Citizens have been duly noted by the 
Department. In this regard, it is submitted that the Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment is presently functioning as the nodal Department for matters relating to the 
welfare of senior citizens and is continuously undertaking various policy, programme 
implementation, monitoring and coordination activities under the Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana 
(AVYAY) and other related initiatives. The existing administrative mechanism is presently 
catering to the requirements of senior citizens and the Department is effectively discharging 
its responsibilities in coordination with State/UT Governments and other stakeholders. 
Further, the Department has already initiated several measures for strengthening 
implementation and outreach through enhanced convergence with States/UTs, improved 
monitoring mechanisms and expansion of service delivery frameworks. The observations 
regarding future institutional requirements, particularly in view of the growing elderly 
population and the proposed legislative framework under the Maintenance and Welfare of 

21 
 
Parents and Senior Citizens (Amendment) Bill, 2019 will continue to be kept under 
consideration by the Government while reviewing the administrative and institutional 
framework for welfare of senior citizens from time to time. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9.13) 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice & Empowerment, in a joint initiative 
with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, has been implementing the ‘NAMASTE’ 
scheme since 2023-24 for the safety and dignity of sanitation workers comprising Manual 
Scavengers, Sewer and Septic Tank Workers. The Department has also included waste 
pickers under the scheme since 2024-25. The Committee are happy to note that the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has also proposed a new target group 
consisting of drain-cleaners, workers at Sewage Treatment Plants and Faecal Sludge 
Treatment Plants during the next financial cycle, i.e., 2026-27 to 2030-31. The Committee 
finds that 89,248 Sewer and Septic Tank Workers and 1,87,120 waste pickers have been 
validated, out of which 87,037 Sewer and Septic Tank Workers and 7,499 waste pickers have 
been provided PPE kits. The Committee appreciate the measures such as occupational safety 
training, safety devices, workshops, health insurance coverage, etc., taken by the Department 
since the initiation of the scheme in 2023-24. However, the Committee are of the opinion that 
profiling, distribution of PPE kits and provision of occupational safety training to all sanitation 
workers will require greater effort, time and funds. The Department of Social Justice and 
Empowerment should therefore expedite the process and lay down a time frame to complete 
all necessary steps for the economic and social welfare of sanitation workers. The Committee 
also feel that the funds provided under the scheme need to be increased, as the Department 
has already spent 93% of the Revised Estimate for 2025-26, therefore, the allocation of 
₹110.00 crore made for 2026-27 may not be sufficient to complete the tasks undertaken by 
the Department as a large number of workers are still to be provided PPE kits and other 
benefits. Further, after the inclusion of the new target group from 2026-27 under the scheme, 
the Department may face a shortage of funds. The Committee would therefore like the 
Department to take sufficient steps so that basic facilities such as PPE kits, training and health 
insurance are provided to all workers at the earliest, and budget constraints should not 
become a hurdle, especially when several deaths of sewer and septic tank workers are still 
being reported. 
Reply of Government 
National Action for Mechanised Sanitation Ecosystem (NAMASTE) scheme, a Central Sector 
Scheme, is a joint initiative of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA). Scheme is 
being implemented since 2023-24 to ensure safety and dignity of Sewer and Septic Tank 
Workers (SSWs). Components of erstwhile Self-Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of 
Manual Scavengers (SRMS) have been subsumed in the Scheme. Waste pickers engaged 
in Solid Waste Management have been added as target group under NAMASTE scheme 
since 2024-25.  It is submitted that the implementation of activities related to PPE Kits, 
occupational safety training and health insurance under NAMASTE entails extensive inter-
departmental convergence and coordination with multiple stakeholders, including Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs), State Governments, and empaneled agencies. At present, distribution 
of PPE kits is progressing as per plan across States/UTs. SFC in its meeting held on 
13.08.2025 has approved for providing the Occupational Safety Training from the budget of 
NAMASTE scheme. Further, Occupational Safety Training activities are being provided 

22 
 
through a pool of empaneled training institutions. Efforts are being taken to expand the pool 
of trainers, obtain support from local authorities for training spaces and facilitate availability 
of sanitation workers for participation in occupational safety training programmes. Timelines 
for key activities have been laid down in the SFC Note for the current Financial Cycle and 
approved by SFC in its meeting held on 13.04.2026. Progress is being regularly monitored 
to ensure adherence. Further, the Budget Estimates (BE) for FY 2026–27 is Rs. 110 crore 
and budget availability would not be a constraint in providing the benefits to beneficiaries. 
Department is committed to ensuring coverage for the interventions outlined in the scheme. 
The expenditure under NAMASTE scheme in F.Y. 2025-26 is Rs. 96.25 Cr. as compared to 
Rs. 35.64 Cr. in the financial year 2024-25.  
The achievements under NAMASTE scheme as on 30.04.2026 are as under:- 
i. Sewer and Septic Tank Workers (SSWs) Component 
a. 89,248 SSWs have been profiled and validated across the country. 
b. 87,037 PPE kits have been provided to validated SSWs.  
c. 753 Safety Devices Kit for Emergency Response Sanitation Unit (ERSU) 
delivered to States / UTs.  
d. Swachhta Udyami Yojana (SUY) – Capital Subsidy released to 963 sanitation 
workers. 
e. 1,562 Workshops have been conducted on Prevention of Hazardous Cleaning 
of Sewer and Septic Tanks in Municipal Corporations / Municipalities / Nagar 
Palikas and other such organisations engaging SSWs. 
f. Occupational Safety trainings provided to 3492 SSWs. 
ii. Waste Pickers Component 
a. 2,49,166 Waste Pickers have been validated with e-KYC.   
b. 1,23,780 PPE kits for waste pickers have been delivered.  
c. Occupational Safety & Skill Upgradation trainings have commenced for 1,565 
waste pickers across India. 
d. 124835 Waste Pickers are eligible under NAMASTE scheme for Ayushman 
Cards and 86051 Waste Pickers have been provided Ayushman Bharat  - 
Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya Yojana (AB-PMJAY) card. 
iii. Self -Employment Scheme for Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers 
a. Capital subsidy has been released to  2652 Manual Scavengers/ dependents 
for undertaking self-employment projects. 
b. Skill development training provided to   27928 Manual Scavengers/ 
dependents. 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.13) 
The Government provide financial assistance to Scheduled Caste students to increase the 
Gross Enrolment Ratio of SC students in higher education through the Post Matric Scholarship 
Scheme. In this regard, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment spent ₹5476.22 
crore in 2023-24, ₹5581.52 crore in 2024-25 and ₹4934.67 crore in 2025-26 by 24 March, 
2026. Similarly, the number of students provided scholarships in 2023-24 was 47.38 lakhs, 
48.04 lakhs for 2024-25 and 36.07 lakhs for 2025-26 in March, 2026. The Committee are not 
able to understand how the Department is going to enhance the Gross Enrolment Ratio of SC 
students in higher education when the actual expenditure and the number of beneficiaries has 
actually decreased in 2025-26. In fact, the achievement (36.07 lakhs) vis-à-vis the target 
(76.55 lakhs) is very poor. The Committee feel that the objective of the Department to achieve 
a higher enrolment ratio can only be achieved when there is a substantial increase in the 
number of beneficiaries and actual expenditure. The Committee would like the Department to 
take appropriate action so that the number of beneficiaries increase, such as, publicizing the 
Scheme, obtaining feedback from the students, etc. The Committee would like to be informed 
of the concrete measures taken by the Department to enhance the number of beneficiaries. 
Reply of Government 
Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) is a key indicator for measuring the level of participation and 
inclusiveness in the education system by comparing total enrolment at a particular level of 
education, irrespective of age, with the population of the corresponding eligible age group. 
During the Financial Year 2025–26, under the Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme for SC 
students, 47.53 lakh beneficiaries were covered up to 31st March 2026.    It is further 
submitted that the target of 76.58 lakh beneficiaries was based on the projections envisaged 
for 2025-26 as per the EFC outlay for the cycle (2020-21 to 2025-26). Under the Post Matric 
Scholarship Scheme for SC students, which are implemented through DBT mode, States/UTs 
submit targets in their Annual Action Plans based on their own assessment. These proposals 
are appraised every year by the Project Appraisal Committee (PAC) under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, generally in April/May. This 
appraisal process ensures that allocations are based on actual requirement and beneficiary 
projections as submitted by the States/UTs. Over the past few years, many States have 
outperformed their annual targets by successfully covering more beneficiaries than proposed 
in the annual action plans which are a healthy sign of success of the scheme.  Accordingly, 
the aggregate target set by all States/UTs for 2025–26 was 57,64,869 beneficiaries against 
which central share was disbursed to 47.53 lakh beneficiaries. It is submitted that release of 
the central share is contingent upon the States/UTs releasing their share and uploading the 
State/UT share-paid data on the National Scholarship Portal. Difference between projected 
beneficiaries and actual numbers are on account of non- release of State share and delay in 
completion of beneficiary verification and other procedural requirements by States. The 
scheme is open-ended and demand-driven, and the Government remains committed to the 
welfare of SC students.  States/UTs are being regularly followed up to upload the State/UT 
share-paid data. Continuous handholding support, is being provided for achievement of 
targets. 

24 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15) 
The Committee observe that the number of beneficiaries has increased marginally between 
2022-23 and 2024-25 but the number of beneficiaries has substantially gone down in Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal during 
the period 2022-23 to 2024-25. The Committee also find that approximately 40% of the target 
fixed for 2025-26 has only been achieved till the time of examination of Demand for Grants 
(2026-27). The Committee are not able to comprehend the reasons for the decline in the 
number of beneficiaries and the factors that have become a hindrance in achieving the target 
particularly in the context when the population of the country is increasing. The Committee 
would especially like to draw the attention of the Department with regard to the States where 
the number of beneficiaries has gone down. The Committee are of the view that schemes 
meant for deprived sections of society cannot be left entirely at the mercy of the Implementing 
Agencies, Governments need to take control of the Schemes. The Central Government 
instead of making the State/UT Governments entirely responsible for implementing the 
Scheme, the Committee feel that the Department should also be held responsible in case the 
Schemes are not being implemented, meticulously. The Committee would therefore like the 
Department of Social Justice and Empowerment to take necessary action in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
The Department has noted the observations of the Committee regarding the variation in the 
number of beneficiaries across States and the shortfall in achievement of targets. In this 
regard, it is submitted that most of the Schemes are demand-driven, wherein States/UTs 
identify beneficiaries based on local requirements and submit proposals accordingly. Hence, 
the number of beneficiaries is dependent on the proposals received and their implementation 
by the States/UTs.  The decline of beneficiaries in certain States and the shortfall in targets 
are primarily due to delays in submission of proposals by  the State/UTs. The Department is 
however, regularly pursuing with the States/UTs through Chintan Shivirs, review meetings 
and regular communications to ensure timely submission of proposals and effective 
implementation. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.38) 
The Committee note that the Annual Expenditure under the National Fellowship for SC 
Scheme was more than the Budget Estimates in the years 2023-24 and 2024-25 and is likely 
to exceed the Budget Estimate again in 2025-26 as they have been able to spend ₹204.04 
crore against the Budget Estimate of ₹212.00 crore at the time of examination. The Committee 
find that the target of 2000 fellowships fixed at the inception of the scheme in 2005-06 has 
remained the same even in subsequent years. The Committee does not find any justification 
for not increasing the target for more than 20 years and thereby restricting students from 
availing the benefits of the scheme to undertake advanced studies and research leading to 
PhD degrees. The Committee believe that increasing the number of fellowships under this 
scheme would provide greater opportunities to under-privileged candidates in addition to 
those qualifying the cut-off marks notified by UGC-CSIR for NETJRF. Even after the several 
evaluations of the scheme conducted over the year, the Committee are surprised that no 
recommendation for enhancement of fellowship numbers has been made till date. The 
Committee are of the view that the department should analyses the number of applications 
received under the scheme in the last three years. If the number of applications received each 

25 
 
year is increasing then it justifies the need to increase the number of fellowships so that a 
larger number of applicants get an opportunity to avail the fellowship. It is also a fact that 
several students do not pursue advanced studies due to lack of financial assistance. Keeping 
in view the educational backwardness of a large section of the SC population, the Committee 
strongly believe that the number of fellowships need to be enhanced so that the scheme 
accommodates more aspiring students. The Committee would like to be informed of the action 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
a)   The Allocation viz a viz expenditure under NFSC Scheme during last three financial years 
from 2023-24 to 2025-26, are given as under: 
  
Financial year RE 
(Rs. in crore) 
Funds received by NSFDC 
(Rs. in crore) 
  
Expenditure/ 
funds utilized 
(Rs. in crore) 
2023-24 188.00 207.74 199.80 
2024-25 212.00 209.50 216.75 * 
  
2025-26 220.00 212.90 215.17 # 
 *       Expenditure during 2024-25 was more than the fund released by this department 
which is attributed to the unspent balance of FY 2023-24 in CNA account of NSFDC which 
was utilized in FY 2024-25. 
  
#        Expenditure during 2025-26 was more than the fund released by this department 
which is attributed to the unspent balance of FY 2024-25 in CNA account of NSFDC which 
was utilized in FY 2025-26 
  
b)      Details of Slots,  candidates selected under UGC NET and Joint CSIR UGC NET 
Examinations during last during last three financial years from 2023-24 to 2025-26, are 
given as under: 
  
Year Examination Allotted 
Slots 
Number of 
Candidates 
selected by NTA 
Number of 
Students joined 
NFSC Fellowship 
%age of joined 
w.r.t. candidates 
selected 
2023 UGC NET June 2023 750  872 262 30.05 
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
December 2022 and 
June 2023 (Merged 
cycle)  
500 404 86 21.29 
UGC NET December 
2023 
750 879 254 28.90 
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
December 2023 
250 268 60 22.39 
A. Total 2250  2423 662 27.32 
2024 UGC NET June 2024 750 805 270 33.54 
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
June 2024  
250 253 25 9.88 

26 
 
UGC NET December 
2024 
750 841 189 22.47 
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
December 2024  
250 257 19 7.39 
B. Total 2000  2156 503 23.33 
2025 UGC NET June 2025 750 858 69 8.04 
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
June 2025  
250 *      
UGC NET December 
2025 
750 *      
Joint CSIR UGC NET 
December 2025  
250 *      
C. Total 2000  858 69 8.04 
  Grand Total 6250 5437 1234 22.70 
*List of selected/shortlisted candidates yet to be provided by NTA and Award 
Letters yet to be issued. 
  
As per the extant NFSC Scheme Guidelines, while the merit for award of fellowships under 
NFSC is drawn-up through the NET examination, preference is given to such students 
who have already taken admission in M.Phil/Ph.D. However, in case sufficient such 
candidates are not available, the candidates who have not taken admission in M.Phil/Ph.D 
are also selected in the order of merit in the NET examination.  Under the Scheme 
Guidelines, the admissible period for joining the fellowship is 3 months for ‘Pursuing’ 
candidates and 3 years for ‘Non-pursuing’ candidates. Analysis of the above data reveals 
that only 27.32% and 23.33% of the candidates selected during the years 2023 and 2024, 
respectively, have joined the NFSC Fellowship. In respect of candidates selected during 
the year 2025, only 8.04% have joined the fellowship so far.  Since a large number of slots 
have remained unfilled, enhancement of slots is not considered necessary at this stage.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.40) 
The Committee note that the Top Class Education in School Scheme for OBCs/EBCs/DNTs 
students started in 2022-23 was proposed to be discontinued from 2026-27.  The Committee 
are not able to understand the reasons for this proposal as large number of people benefitted 
from the Scheme In 2024-25 and 2025-26 and a similar trend is expected in 2025-26. Keeping 
the utility of the Scheme to the people, the Committee are happy to know that the scheme has 
now been approved for continuation in 2026-27 and also believes that the scheme will 
continue beyond 2026-27. Since the budgetary allocation of ₹ 20.00 crore for 2026-27 is much 
lower in comparison to the budget of ₹100.00 crore allocated for 2025-26 and the target of 
40000 fixed for 2026-27 in comparison to the target of 30000 fixed for 2025-26, the Committee 
expect that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment will be able to meet the target 
laid down for 2026-27 with the limited budget so that the target section of the Society gets due 
benefit. The Committee would like to recommend for the continuation of the Scheme beyond 
2026-27 in the interest of the society and would also like to be informed with respect to the 
utilization of budgetary allocation for 2026-27 in their action taken reply. 
 
 

27 
 
Reply of Government 
The Scheme was implemented in 2022-23. The response and timely verification of the 
applications by the State Government was slow and sluggish during the early years of 
implementation of the Scheme. Accordingly, a budget  of Rs. 20.00 crore was proposed for 
committed liabilities for the year 2025-26 . However, with the efforts of the Department the 
performance of the Scheme has improved and the proposal for Appraisal of the Scheme for 
continuation during the current Financial Cycle is proposed by the Department with the 
projected expenditure of Rs.1406.88 crore for the entire Financial Cycle from FY 2026-27 to 
FY 2030-31. 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14) 
The Committee note that the target for beneficiaries is fixed on the basis of the Annual Action 
Plan received in April/May from the States/UTs. However, the Committee find that the 
scholarship is released in the next academic year as the State/UT Governments are not able 
to complete the formalities of processing of application as scheduled. The Committee feel that 
the scholarship for an academic year should be disbursed in the same academic year so that 
a student is able to use the scholarship, fruitfully. The Committee has time and again 
recommended that appropriate measures be taken in this regard, however, the practice 
remains the same. The Committee are happy to be informed that the guidelines are under 
revision and the scholarship will be disbursed in the first four to five months of the academic 
year. The Committee hope that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment will leave 
no stone unturned to ensure that the scholarship is disbursed timely and the revised guidelines 
will yield the desired results from the academic year 2026-27. 
Reply of Government 
States/UTs which have their own scholarship portals generally open their portals between 
July-September and largely remain open. NSP opens the portal in June for inviting 
applications from eligible applicants from the States/UTs which are on-boarded on NSP. While 
most States/UTs complete the verification process within the stipulated time frame, some 
States/UTs take additional time which at time varies from few months to a year in some cases, 
to finalize the verification process and push the State share paid data to NSP. This leads to 
delays in processing and disbursement of central share. Over the years, most States/UTs 
have aligned with the prescribed timelines. However, in certain States, the processes of 
verification, validation, and certification continue to take additional time. Nonetheless, based 
on trends observed over the past five years, an overall growth trajectory in coverage and 
efficiency is evident. If all States/UTs align with the advanced timelines of completing the 
process by the end of third quarter and adhere to the prescribed schedule, the overall process 
of application, verification, and disbursement can be further streamlined, minimizing delays 
and reducing spill over cases. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.39) 
The Committee are happy to note that the beneficiaries of the PM- CARES Children Scheme 
have been included in the free coaching scheme for SCs and OBCs from 2024-25. All 
beneficiaries of the PM- CARES Children Scheme are eligible to avail the benefits of the 
scheme irrespective of income whereas the ceiling of the total family income for SC and OBC 
students is ₹8 lakh per annum. The Committee find that the target fixed for 2023-24 and 2024-
25 could not be achieved even after the inclusion of PM-CARES Children Scheme. The 
requirement for coaching support is well recognized particularly among students belonging to 
the educationally disadvantaged sections of Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes. 
It is also well known that the coaching is an expensive affair and everybody cannot avail 
coaching due to its high cost, hence the candidates from Scheduled Castes and Other 

29 
 
Backward Classes aspiring for coaching cannot avail this facility even if the annual income of 
family is more than ₹ 8 Lakh. The Committee strongly feel that the total family income criterion 
fixed for SC and OBC students may be one of the major hurdles preventing candidates from 
these categories from availing the benefits. The Committee also does not understand the 
reason for fixing a target of 7000, which is double the previous target, particularly when the 
target fixed earlier is not being achieved. The Committee desire that the family income ceiling 
should be re-examined so that a large number of candidates can avail the facility and scheme 
becomes more effective. 
Reply of Government 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. It is submitted that the target of 7,000 
slots has been proposed to expand the reach of the Free Coaching Scheme and to ensure 
wider coverage of eligible beneficiaries across the country. At present, only 14 Central 
Universities are actively imparting coaching, covering limited States, which has affected 
access and utilization of slots. Therefore, expansion through State Universities/DACE and 
introduction of Student-Centric Mode is proposed to ensure better regional representation, 
wider choice of coaching courses/institutes and improved utilization of slots. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.42) 
The Committee are concerned to note the poor physical and financial performance of the 
scheme of ‘Free Coaching for SCs and OBCs’ over the years. The objective of the scheme is 
to provide coaching of good quality for economically disadvantage SCs & OBCs to enable 
them to appear in competitive examination and/or for securing admission in reputed technical 
and professional higher education institution. Out of the BE of ₹ 47 cr in 2023-24 AE was only 
₹ 7.76 cr BE was reduced to ₹ 35 cr in 2024-25 still AE was ₹ 17.68 cr only. Similarly in 2025-
26, BE was further downgraded to ₹ 20 cr & AE was only ₹ 7.11 cr. The physical performance 
has been equally poor as vis-à-vis the target of 3500 achievement has only been 223 in 2023-
24, 2136 in 2024-25 & 431 in 2025-26. The Committee are not satisfied with the explanation 
given by the department for this poor performance such as limited participation by the Central 
Universities and delayed proposals. The performance has remained poor inspite of changes 
introduced by the Department over the years such as making Dr. Ambedkar Foundation as 
the Central Nodal Agency. The Committee note that the proposal for 16th Finance Committee 
cycle includes inclusion of state Universities and introduction of student centric mode for wider 
coverage. The Committee desire that these changes be made effective at the earliest to 
ensure that the BE of ₹ 20 cr for this purpose for the year 2026-27 is fully utilized. 
Reply of Government 
The concerns of the Committee regarding the performance of the “Free Coaching for SCs and 
OBCs” scheme are duly noted. The Department has been continuously extending support to 
the stakeholders including institutions and eligible applicants. Moreover, there has been a 
positive trend as far as the expenditure is concerned. The actual expenditure during 2023-24 
was Rs. 7.76 Cr which increased to Rs. 17.68 Cr during 2024-25 and Rs. 9.866 Crores during 
2025-26. 
 
 

30 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10.9) 
The Committee note that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment is the custodian 
of civic rights and is responsible for the prevention of atrocities against Scheduled Castes. 
Funds are allocated to the Department for strengthening of machinery for enforcement of 
protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 and Prevention of Atrocities Act, 1989. The Department 
has accordingly taken measures over the years for the functioning and strengthening of 
Protection Cells and Special Police Stations as envisaged under these Acts. The Committee 
however find that though almost all States/UTs have set up Protection Cells but only 181 
Special Police Stations have been established in only 7 States/UTs. The Committee are 
shocked to know that even after more than three decades of enactment of PoA Act only 7 
States/UTs have such police stations. The Committee are of the opinion that the setting up of 
Special Police Stations by the States/UTs is essential as victims first approach police station 
for protection at the time of atrocity and it is assumed these police stations would be able to 
address such situations more effectively. The Committee do not find any information regarding 
setting up of Special Courts also. The regular meetings with the State government over the 
years have also failed to yield the desired result. The Committee note that the Department 
has submitted a proposal before the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to enhance the 
relief amounts and provide financial support to States for setting up Special Police Stations 
and Special Courts. The Committee hope that the Department should have incorporated the 
expected increase in funds for the year 2026-27 so that there is no shortage of funds to meet 
the expenditure likely to increase with the approval of the proposal. The Committee 
accordingly desire that the Department should take necessary steps to ensure that the 
proposal is approved at the earliest so that it is implemented from 2026-27 itself and the 
machinery is adequately strengthened. 
Reply of Government 
Rule 8 of the SC/ST (PoA) Rules, 1995 provides for setting up of Special Police Stations for 
registration of complaints relating to offences against members of Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. In the proposed EFC outlay for 2026-27 to 2030-31, provision has been 
made for one-time financial assistance of ₹5 lakh for establishment of such Police Stations, 
with cost sharing between the Central and State Governments and UTs with legislature.   The 
recurring expenditure will be borne by the respective State Governments. Section 14 of the 
SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989 provides for establishment/designation of Exclusive Special 
Courts/Special Courts for speedy trial of offences under the Act. Several States/UTs have 
already designated Special Courts under the Act. The Department regularly reviews 
implementation of the provisions of the Act and Rules with States/UTs through review 
meetings, advisories and communications, and reiterates the need for establishment of 
Special Courts for expeditious disposal of cases. The Department has submitted a proposal 
for enhanced budgetary support before the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) for 
strengthening implementation of the PCR Act, 1955 and the SC/ST (PoA) Act, 1989, including 
support for key components under the Scheme. The Department is actively pursuing approval 
of the proposal so that the revised provisions may be implemented at the earliest with 
adequate budgetary support. 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.40) 
The Committee appreciate that the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment provide 
scholarships to meritorious SC students for pursuing studies beyond the 12th class in the 
selected 274 premier Institutions and Top 100 National Institutional Ranking Framework under 
the Top Class Education scheme. The Committee note that no target will be fixed from 2026-
27 onwards and scholarships will be provided to all eligible SC students but subject to the 
availability of budget. The Committee feel that non-fixing of target become meaningless if the 
budget is not appropriately enhanced as the budget available for 2026- 2027 is ₹120 crore 
whereas actual expenditure incurred in 2024-2025 was ₹103.26 crore. The Committee are of 
the view, that the Scheme will give much benefit to the candidates if the Budget is enhanced 
to accommodate all applicants getting admission in selected Institutions. Hence, the changes 
proposed, if implemented, may prove superfluous unless the budget is substantially 
enhanced, as the available budget can only accommodate a limited number of students and 
not all eligible candidates. The Committee also find that the family income ceiling of ₹8 lakh 
fixed in 2020-21 may also be one of the constraints for students intending to avail scholarship 
under the scheme. The Committee would also like to draw the attention to the fact that the 
Department is spending the allocated budget despite receiving less applications than the 
target fixed for previous years. This sufficiently indicates that the income eligibility criteria need 
to be revised to attract more applicants, as it has been more than five years since the ceiling 
was revised from ₹6 lakh to ₹8 lakh. The students with the income eligibility limit of ₹8 lakh 
may still not be in a position to bear the burden of the high fees charged by such institutions. 
The Committee are sure that the Department will understand and take substantive measures 
to enhance the income ceiling and annual budget to extend the benefits of the scheme to the 
maximum number of needy candidates securing admission in to premier selected Institutions. 
Reply of Government 
The Department remains committed to ensuring that financial constraints do not hinder access 
to quality higher education for eligible SC students and will take appropriate steps to 
strengthen the scheme in line with the Committee’s recommendations. Enhanced budgetary 
allocations have been proposed in the new EFC cycle 2026-27 to 2030-31. The schemes are 
under review for the next financial cycle in consultation with the stakeholders including 
concerned Ministries and Departments. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.41) 
The Committee are happy to note that the slots of National Overseas Scholarships for SCs 
have been increased from 125 to 250 from the year 2026-27 based on the recommendations 
of this Committee’s report in March 2025. Simultaneously, it is surprising to note that the 
Budget Estimate for 2026-27 is same as 2025-26. The Committee are unable to understand 
how the Department will provide scholarship to the students if the demand for 250 slots is 
received in 2026-27 in the limited Budget meant for 125 slots only. The Committee also find 
that the Overseas Scholarships offered by some States is more preferred over National 

32 
 
Overseas Scholarship as these State Governments provides the facility of direct transfer of 
scholarship amounts to students’ bank accounts and there is no restriction to return to India. 
The Committee believe that all efforts should be made to make the scheme more popular 
among students and necessary changes should be made in provisions that are becoming 
impediments in making the scheme attractive to candidates. The Committee observed that 
the slots earmarked for Denotified, Nomadic and Semi- Nomadic Tribes, Landless Agricultural 
Laborers and Traditional Artisans have remained unutilized over the years due to financial 
constraints. The Committee recommend that the government find out ways and means to fill 
the earmarked slots this year. The Committee are deeply concerned with the outcome of this 
Scheme as the Department may not find sufficient students to fill the available slots for 2026-
27 unless the restrictions applicable are waived off and the income eligibility criteria is 
amended. The Committee strongly feel that the scheme needs to be exhaustively re-
examined with respect to income ceiling limit, budgetary allocation, etc. and revised in the 
interest of the targeted sections of the society. The Committee would like to be informed of 
the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of Government 
It is submitted that under the proposed Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) framework for 
the next financial cycle, the budgetary allocation for the NOS Scheme is being considered for 
suitable enhancement including increase in number of slots. The Department is also taking 
continuous steps to improve the outreach and effectiveness of the Scheme. Efforts are being 
made to enhance awareness among potential beneficiaries and ensure timely disbursal of 
scholarships to eligible students. In this regard, advertisements are regularly published in 
newspapers, and communications are sent to Principal Secretaries and Secretaries of Social 
Welfare Departments of all States and Union Territories for wider dissemination of the 
Scheme. Further, funds are released in advance to the respective Indian Missions abroad 
through Letters of Authorization to facilitate timely payment of scholarships. With regard to the 
concern about unutilized slots earmarked for Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes, 
Landless Agricultural Labourers and Traditional Artisans, it is submitted that such unfilled slots 
are considered under the broader Scheduled Caste (SC) category to ensure optimal utilization 
of available scholarships. The Department intends to make the Scheme more attractive and 
accessible. The provisions of the Scheme, including eligibility conditions and other 
parameters, are being examined under the proposed draft EFC for appropriate rationalization. 
The Department remains committed to strengthening the Scheme so as to maximize its reach 
and impact among the targeted sections. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.21) 
Under ‘Adarsh Gram’ Scheme, the Department of Social Justice and Empowerment has spent 
between 25 to 35 percent of the total budgetary allocation during 2023-24 and 2024-25 and 
only ₹81.52 crore out of the ₹1070.00 crore budget estimated for the year 2025- 26. As per 
the scheme, a selected village is declared as an ‘Adarsh Gram’ once it achieves open 
defecation free status and secures a minimum score of 70 out of 100 on the 50 prescribed 
socio-economic indicators. The Committee note that 47357 villages have been identified 
across the country under the Scheme but only 13,947 villages have been declared as ‘Adarsh 
Grams’ by State Governments since 2021-22. As informed by the Department 5510 villages 
are likely to be declared ‘Adarsh Grams’ by the State Governments in the current financial 
year. The Committee are surprised to find that so many villages still do not qualify to be 
declared as “Adarsh Gram” after so many years of India’s independence. The Committee 
desire that the Scheme is meticulously implemented so that the villages are open Defecation 

33 
 
Free and the basic amenities such as internal approach roads, solid and liquid waste 
management infrastructure, soak pits, street lights, etc., are provided in a time bound manner 
as promised under the Scheme. The Committee would appreciate if all the 47357 villages 
identified are declared ‘Adarsh Gram’ in a year or so and the infrastructure stipulated under 
the Scheme is made available in all the villages by next Financial Cycle. The Committee would 
like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of Government 
The Department has taken note of the observations of the Committee regarding 
implementation of the Adarsh Gram component under PM-AJAY. During FY 2025–26, an 
expenditure of Rs.303.19 crore has been incurred under this component. Out of 47,357 
identified villages, the component is under implementation in about 36,000 villages, with 
around 6,000 villages taken up during the current year. States such as Bihar (3,021 villages) 
and West Bengal (8045 villages) have started implementing this component. Further, 
declaration of ‘Adarsh Gram’ involves a detailed and time-consuming process of preparation 
of Village Development Plans (VDPs), including baseline surveys, identification of gaps 
across 50 socio-economic indicators, Gram Sabha validation, and multi-level approvals at 
district and State levels. Out of 47330 villages covered so far, 15739 villages have been 
declared as ‘Adarsh Gram’, and the Department acknowledges that a significant number of 
villages are yet to be declared as such. In this regard, continuous efforts are being undertaken 
through regular review meetings, video conferences with States/UTs, field visits, and Chintan 
Shivirs to expedite implementation, strengthen coordination, and address 
bottlenecks.  Further, in response to the Committee’s observations regarding expediting the 
declaration of all identified villages as ‘Adarsh Gram’, the Department has proposed key 
reforms in the draft EFC of PM-AJAY for the Adarsh Gram component for the next financial 
cycle (2026–27 to 2030–31), including coverage of all eligible villages, alignment of VDPs with 
GPDP for decentralized planning, digitization of processes, strengthened institutional support 
through PMUs/TSGs, enhanced convergence, and outcome-based monitoring, along with 
revised cost norms of about Rs. 30 lakh per village for gap-filling activities with phased 
allocations, aimed at facilitating time-bound achievement of these objectives. 
 
 
 
New Delhi, 
5th August, 2026 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on                                                                                                  
Social Justice and Empowerment 
 
 
  

34 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE  SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5TH AUGUST, 2026. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, Room No. 
113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
    PRESENT 
 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
   
  MEMBERS 
 
  Lok Sabha 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
7. Smt. Bag Mitali 
8. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
9. Shri Godam Nagesh 
10. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
11. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
12. Adv. Priya Saroj 
13. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
14. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
15. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
17. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
18. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
19. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Social Justice 
and Empowerment (Department of Social Justice & Empowerment). 
 
(ii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
(iv)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, on the 
draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any modifications.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and to 
present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report 
 
 

36 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-
27)' OF THE MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (DEPARTMENT OF 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT). 
 
Category Total Percentage 
I.  Total number of Recommendations 25 - 
II.  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government (Para No. 2.13, 2.14, 
2.15, 5.20, 5.22, 6.15, 6.16, 7.38, 7.39, 7.41, 8.23, 8.24, 
8.25 and 9.13) 
14 56.0% 
III.  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply (Para No. 3.13, 3.15, 4.38 and 
7.40) 
4 16.0% 
IV.  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration (Para No. 3.14, 
4.39, 4.42 and 10.9) 
4 16.0% 
V.  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature (Para 
No. 4.40, 4.41 and 5.21) 
3 12.0% 
Total 25 100% 
 