i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
24 

ii 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT   
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026  
                                          Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted and 
which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee held 
on 5.8.2026. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
           COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) 
 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Ramji 
25. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
28. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
29. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
30. Smt. Maya Chintaman Ivnate 
31.  Dr. Mukeshbhai J. Rathwa 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa   - Director 
3. Shri K. Gin Zou Lian    - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twenty Fourth Report on the Action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
11.03.2026. The Ministry of Minority Affairs have furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 9.06.2026. The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 5.8.2026. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
 5th August, 2026                                            
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
       
  

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
11.03.2026. It contained 5 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Para No.2.6, 3.12, & 5.9 
(Total: 03, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 4.18 & 5.9 
(Total: 02, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are interim in nature: – 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the recommendations 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 

2 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.18) 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that 12017-Education, 1383-Health, 941-Skill and 1772-
WCD have been sanctioned under PMJVK and that 33% beneficiaries across 
projects are women. In this regard an Evaluation- cum-Impact Assessment Study 
of the Scheme was carried out by the Ministry through the Indian Institute of 
Public Administration, New Delhi, to assess the scheme’s progress in infrastructure 
creation, its actual functionality, the degree of beneficiary reach and awareness, 
the variation in implementation across States and the overall developmental 
impact on minority communities. The Committee observe from the findings of the 
study that the PMJVK has substantially expanded access to essential infrastructure 
in minority areas by constructing schools, classrooms, hostels, health facilities, 
drinking water systems and community centres. However, the study further states 
that there are visible gaps between physical creation and functional utilization. In 
schools and PHCs there is shortage of required staff, functional digital rooms, 
limited diagnostic 28 facilities etc. The drinking water system faces sustainability 
concerns and inadequate maintenance arrangements. Along with this, the study 
has also found out other gaps viz. delay in funds, low awareness of the scheme 
etc. The Committee desire the Ministry to take suitable corrective measures in 
coordination with the States/UTs and other Ministries to address the issues found 
in the study. If need be, the budgetary allocation of the scheme may also be 
enhanced so that the success of the scheme in improving the lives of the minority 
communities is sustained and infrastructure created does not remain idle”. 
                            
6. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “ (PMJVK Scheme) 
  Under the provisions of the PMJVK Guidelines, the responsibility for ensuring 
the functionality and operationalization of assets created under the Scheme rests 
with the respective State Governments/UT Administrations, as stipulated under 
Clause 3.4.3(i) and (j). Further, the State Level Committee (SLC), constituted 
under the Chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary of the State/UT, is also 
mandated to oversee and ensure the functionality of these assets. 
  The Ministry has taken cognizance of the observations arising from the 
Evaluation-cum-Impact Assessment Study and has engaged in deliberations 
through various stakeholder and review meetings to address the identified gaps. 

3 
 
  In this regard, it has been proposed to revise the PMJVK Guidelines with 
specific emphasis on improving the sustainability and functionality of assets. 
Notably, an Operations and Maintenance (O&M) provision is being incorporated 
for all future projects under the Scheme. This will ensure that adequate 
arrangements for upkeep and continued utilization of assets are made at the 
planning stage itself. 
Further, the revised framework will: 
 Mandate inclusion of Operation and Maintenance costs as an integral 
component of the Detailed Project Cost; 
 Require States/UTs to clearly define ownership and responsibility for long-
term management of assets; 
 Emphasize third-party quality assessment of completed projects to ensure 
standards and functionality. 
These measures are aimed at bridging the gap between asset creation and 
effective utilization, thereby enhancing the overall impact of the Scheme on the 
targeted communities”. 
        
PRADHAN MANTRI JAN VIKAS KARYAKARAM (PMJVK) 
7. The Committee note from the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry that 
under the provisions of the PMJVK Guidelines, the responsibility for ensuring 
the functionality and operationalization of assets created under the Scheme 
rests with the respective State Governments/UT Administrations and that the 
State Level Committee, under the Chairpersonship of the Chief Secretary, is 
entrusted with overseeing the functionality of such assets. The Committee 
further note that the Ministry has taken cognizance of the findings of the 
Evaluation-cum-Impact Assessment Study and has proposed to revise the 
PMJVK Guidelines by incorporating provisions relating to Operations and 
Maintenance (O&M). 
 The Committee are of the considered view that revision of the 
Guidelines alone may not adequately address the persistent issues relating to 
shortage of manpower, delays in operationalization of schools and health care 
facilities, inadequate maintenance arrangements, low awareness among 

4 
 
beneficiaries and delays in release and utilization of funds, which were 
specifically brought out in the Evaluation Study. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry evolve a robust 
monitoring and accountability mechanism in close coordination with the State 
Governments/UT Administrations and the concerned line Ministries to ensure 
that assets created under PMJVK become fully functional within a stipulated 
timeframe. The Committee also desire that periodic third-party evaluation and 
social audits should mandatorily be undertaken to assess not only the quality 
of infrastructure but also its actual utilization and service delivery outcomes. 
While reiterating their recommendation for enhancement of the budget of the 
Scheme, the Committee further recommend that the Ministry devise 
measurable performance indicators for monitoring the status of 
operationalization of assets, availability of essential staff and services and 
corrective measures taken in respect of deficient projects. The Committee 
expect that these measures would ensure that the substantial public 
investment made under PMJVK translates into tangible socio-economic 
benefits for the targeted minority communities and that the assets created 
under the Scheme do not remain underutilized or idle. 
Recommendation (Para No.5.9) 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs is implementing 
Pradhan Mantri Virasat Ka Samvardhan Scheme since 2023- 24. The PM-VIKAS 
scheme could not be implemented during the years 2023-24, 2024-25 as the 
guidelines of scheme were not approved. Out of the Budgetary allocations, RE 
made for this scheme during these years, the Ministry spent only on the 
committed liabilities relating to erstwhile five schemes which were converged 
into this scheme. In this regard the Committee in their earlier reports had 
commented on the extraordinary delay in the implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee are now happy to note that the implementation of PM-VIKAS has 
commenced and the Ministry has allocated 47 projects with a financial 
implication of more than ₹700 crore covering over 1.51 lakh beneficiaries under 
the scheme. The implementation of all these is likely to be completed before 
31.03.2027. The Committee note that this is a very important scheme of the 

5 
 
Ministry and keeping this in view, the Committee hope that the Ministry shall 
endeavor to fully implement and meet the targets of the scheme for the benefit 
of the intended beneficiaries. The Committee would also further like the Ministry 
to expedite the process of finalization of Third-Party Agencies for the concurrent 
monitoring and field inspections of the scheme and the Committee be intimated 
of the action taken in this regard”. 
  
9. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
  
(PM-VIKAS Scheme) 
“It is submitted that the delay in implementation of the Scheme during the 
years 2023–24 and 2024–25 was primarily due to the time taken in finalization 
and approval of the scheme guidelines, as well as in the process of convergence 
of the erstwhile five schemes into a unified framework. During this period, the 
Ministry utilized the allocated funds mainly towards committed liabilities of the 
earlier schemes. 
The Ministry is pleased to inform that the PM-VIKAS Scheme has now been 
fully operationalized, and significant progress has been achieved. A total of 60 
projects have been approved/allocated, with a financial implication of over ₹895 
crore, covering approximately 1.56 lakh beneficiaries. All these projects are at 
various stages of implementation and are targeted for completion by 31.03.2027. 
The Ministry fully concurs with the Hon’ble Committee on the importance of 
the Scheme and remains committed to achieving the intended objectives and 
targets in a time-bound manner. To ensure effective implementation, the Ministry 
has strengthened monitoring and review mechanisms and is maintaining close 
coordination with implementing agencies and stakeholders. The Ministry seeks to 
leverage AI-enabled interventions, including IVR (Interactive Voice Response) 
systems for beneficiaries outreach, awareness and real-time feedback, along with 
data-driven analytics for improved monitoring and decision making. 
Further, with regard to the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee on 
finalization of Third-Party Agencies for concurrent monitoring and field 
inspections, it is submitted that the Ministry has initiated the process for 
empanelment/selection of such agencies. Necessary steps are being taken to 
expedite their finalization so as to ensure robust monitoring, improved 
transparency, and real-time assessment of project outcomes under the Scheme”. 
 

6 
 
PRADHAN MANTRI VIRASAT KA SAMVARDHAN SCHEME (PM-VIKAS) 
10. The Committee note and appreciate that the PM-VIKAS Scheme has 
now been fully operationalized. The Committee further note that the number 
of approved/allocated projects has increased to 60, with a financial 
implication of over ₹895 crore covering approximately 1.56 lakh beneficiaries, 
as against 47 projects with a financial implication of over ₹700 crore covering 
1.51 lakh beneficiaries at the time of examination of the Demands for Grants. 
The Committee hope that the Ministry would ensure timely completion of all 
the approved projects by 31.03.2027 through close monitoring and effective 
coordination with the implementing agencies so that the intended benefits 
reach the targeted beneficiaries within the stipulated timeframe. 
 In the Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have proposed to strengthen 
monitoring through AI-enabled interventions, including IVR-based beneficiary 
outreach and data-driven analytics. While taking note of these initiatives, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure their early 
operationalization and periodically assess their effectiveness in improving 
implementation, beneficiary outreach and project monitoring. 
 The Committee are, however, constrained to note that the process for 
empanelment/selection of Third-Party Agencies for concurrent monitoring 
and field inspections, which was specifically recommended by the Committee 
in its original Report, has not yet been finalized and is still under process. The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to 
complete the empanelment of Third-Party Agencies at the earliest so that an 
independent and robust monitoring mechanism is put in place for ensuring 
transparency, accountability and timely assessment of outcomes under the 
Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in 
this regard in the next Action Taken Statement. 
  
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6) 
The Committee note that the Ministry could spend only ₹1,032.65 crore and ₹1,396.01 
crore out of the RE of ₹2,608.93 crore and ₹1,868.18 crore during the years 2023-24 
and 2024-25, respectively. In the year 2025-26, the same trend was observed and the 
Ministry was able to spend only ₹1,461.98 crore out of the Revised Estimates (RE) of 
₹2,160.45 crore. A major chunk of the budgetary allocation pertains to PMJVK and with 
regard to lower utilization of budgetary allocation in the scheme, the Ministry has once 
again attributed it to the adjustment of the States/UTs to the mandatory administrative 
and financial reforms introduced by the Ministry of Finance through PFMS and SNA 
guidelines. The Committee further note that the Ministry could also not spend the 
amount allocated during 2024-25 and 2025-26 under various scholarship schemes as 
these schemes were not approved. The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry 
that they are closely working with the States/UTs and constantly endeavouring to revive 
the scheme. In so far as PM-VIKAS scheme is concerned, the Committee note that 47 
projects have now been allocated under the scheme and according to the Ministry under 
this scheme during 2025-26, the Ministry could spend ₹129.06 crore out of the 
budgetary allocation (RE) of ₹312.01 crore. the Budget utilization would improve in the 
upcoming financial year with the progress in the allocated projects. The Committee note 
that the Ministry is continuously handholding and following up with the States/UTs to 
adjust and comply with the administrative and procedural changes. The Committee in 
the past too has acknowledged the efforts of the Ministry and is confident now also that 
with the support of the Ministry, the States will be able to adopt the reforms leading to 
improved compliance and accelerated project execution. The Committee recommend the 
Ministry to constantly monitor and pursue the matter with the States/UTs and other 
concerned agencies to take appropriate action on their part so that the scholarship 
schemes are revived at the earliest and also projects under PMJVK and PM-VIKAS 14 are 
approved and executed within the set timelines so that the allocated budget of ₹3,400 
crore for the year 2026-2027 is fully utilized 
  
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Observations of Hon'ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
(PMJVK Scheme) 
  The Ministry respectfully submits that the apparent shortfall in utilization of 
budgetary allocation under PMJVK during FY 2023–24 was largely transitional and 
procedural in nature. This arose due to the mandatory migration of the scheme to 
the Single Nodal Agency (SNA) framework in pursuance of the administrative and 
financial reforms introduced by the Ministry of Finance. 
  Under the revised framework, release and utilization of funds were subject to 
fulfilment of several preconditions, including transfer of existing scheme balances to 
SNA accounts, reconciliation and approval of PFMS legacy data, adherence to 
utilization benchmarks, and alignment with revised fund-flow procedures. States/UTs 
required adequate time to realign their financial systems, update legacy records, and 
comply with these new requirements. This transition phase constrained fund 
utilization during FY 2023–24, resulting in expenditure of ₹187.88 crore against RE of 
₹550.00 crore (34.16%). 
  Thereafter, the Ministry undertook sustained and proactive measures, including 
regular review meetings, close coordination with States/UTs, and provision of 
technical assistance and handholding support to facilitate compliance and expedite 
onboarding under the new system. As a result, significant progress was achieved in 
approval of PFMS legacy data and operationalization of SNA accounts across 
States/UTs. 
  Consequently, fund utilization under PMJVK improved substantially in subsequent 
years. During FY 2024–25, expenditure reached ₹955.20 crore against RE of ₹908.90 
crore, achieving 105.09% utilization. Similarly, in FY 2025–26, expenditure stood at 
₹1,563.87 crore against RE of ₹1,565.00 crore, reflecting near full utilization at 
99.93%. The Break-up of funds utilized during the F.Y. 2023-24 to 2025-26 is as 
under: - 
                                                                                    (₹. in crore) 
Financial Year Revised  
Estimate 
Actual Expenditure % Expenditure 
2023-24 550.00 187.88 34.16% 
2024-25 908.90 955.2 105.09% 
2025-26 1565.00 1563.87 99.93% 
  

9 
 
  
  Further strengthening the financial architecture, PMJVK was brought under the 
SNA-SPARSH Just-in-Time (JIT) system with effect from July 2025. This system 
enables real-time, seamless release of funds through integration of PFMS, e-Kuber, 
and State Treasuries, thereby enhancing efficiency, transparency, and timeliness in 
fund flow. All States and Union Territories with legislature have since been onboarded 
onto this platform. 
  In view of the stabilization of the SNA-SPARSH system, improved compliance by 
States/UTs, and strengthened monitoring mechanisms put in place by the Ministry, 
the utilization of funds under PMJVK has reached optimal levels. The Ministry, 
therefore, submits that the shortfall observed in FY 2023–24 was a one-time 
transitional phenomenon, and with the system now fully operational, the allocated 
funds for FY 2026–27 are expected to be fully and efficiently utilized. 
PM-VIKAS Scheme 
  The Ministry respectfully acknowledges the observations and recommendations of 
the Hon'ble Committee regarding the utilization of funds under the PM-VIKAS 
Scheme. 
It is submitted that during the financial year 2025–26, an expenditure of ₹207.33 
crore was incurred against the Revised Estimates (RE) of ₹312.01 crore. The lower 
utilization is primarily attributed to the initial time required for operationalization of 
newly sanctioned projects, including finalization of implementing agencies, execution 
of agreements, and compliance with revised administrative and financial procedures. 
The Ministry would like to inform the Hon'ble Committee that as of now 60 
projects have already been approved and allocated under the PM-VIKAS Scheme, 
and most of these projects are now at various stages of implementation. The 
Ministry anticipates a significant acceleration in both physical and financial progress 
in the coming financial year. 
To ensure improved utilization and timely execution, the Ministry has undertaken 
the following measures: 
 Strengthened monitoring mechanisms, including periodic review meetings at 
senior levels 
 Coordination and continuous handholding of implementing agencies 
 Streamlining of approval and fund release processes to minimize delays 
 Strict adherence to timelines for project execution 
 The Ministry is planning to leverage AI-enabled interventions, including IVR 
(Interactive Voice Response) systems for beneficiary outreach, awareness, and 

10 
 
real-time feedback, as well as data-driven monitoring to identify implementation 
gaps 
The proposed AI-based IVR system is expected to enhance beneficiary engagement, 
improve last-mile communication, and strengthen grievance redressal, thereby 
contributing to more effective implementation of the Scheme. 
 The Ministry assures the Hon'ble Committee that all efforts are being made to 
expedite implementation and enhance fund utilization under the Scheme. With the 
ongoing progress of approved projects, it is expected that the budget allocation for FY 
2026–27 will be effectively utilized. 
(Scholarship Scheme) 
  This Ministry regularly follows up with States/UTs through VCs, meetings, letters, 
and online clarifications on doubts, etc. Recently, it has been decided that regional 
workshops will be organized in the States/UTs wherein on-the-spot doubts of the 
States/UTs would be clarified to facilitate the early disposal of pending legacy issues. 
  In addition, the attention of CBI has also been drawn through letters and personal 
interactions between officials of MoMA and CBI. They have also been sensitized for the 
expeditious disposal of the required investigations. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No G-20014/01/2026-Budget Dated 
09.06.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12) 
The Committee note that the Pre and Post Matric Scholarship Schemes have not been 
approved beyond 2021-22 and the scholarship has not been disbursed for the year 2022-
23 onward due to reporting of gross irregularities in the implementation of the scheme 
by States/UTs thus 20 resulting in very less budgetary utilization. The Ministry is also 
giving priority and taking various measures for the revival of the scheme such as holding 
meetings at senior level, writing letters to the Chief Secretaries and letter to the CBI etc. 
Further, the Ministry is also proposing to conduct a study to understand the limitations at 
the State level. The Committee find that despite these measures no substantial progress 
has been made for the closure of the issue, apparently due to lack of commitment and 
concrete action by the States. The Committee feel that the issue is long drawn out and 
in current state of affairs its resolution is nowhere near. Undoubtedly, this delay is 
depriving the targeted beneficiaries the benefits of the scheme. The Committee feel that 
withholding the approval of the scheme pending recovery of the embezzled amount of 
Rs.144 crore by institutes across the States is injustice to the minority students for no 

11 
 
fault of theirs. The Committee therefore desire that the Ministry may explore the 
possibility of implementing the scheme in those States/UTs where no or very less 
irregularities have been reported after due diligence and authentication of the 
beneficiaries. This will not only help in reviving the scheme but also improve the 
educational prospects of the students belonging to the minority communities. The 
Committee, also reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry should take 
strong measures to get the States to be proactive in the matter as well as publicize 
substitutes of these schemes if at all available elsewhere to the beneficiaries. In addition 
to this, the Committee recommend that selection of assessment agency to conduct a 
study to understand the limitation as to why the States have not been able to complete 
the investigation and its impact on the education of the minority students and 
submission of report may also be done on priority basis and Committee be apprised of 
the outcome of the steps taken by them in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
(Scholarship Scheme) 
  Recommendation 1 
The Committee therefore desire that the Ministry may explore the possibility of 
implementing the scheme in those States/UTs where no or very less irregularities have 
been reported after due diligence and authentication of the beneficiaries. 
 The Ministry agrees with the concern of the Hon’ble Committee that deserving 
minority students should not suffer due to irregularities committed by certain 
institutions/individuals. 
 Accordingly, the Ministry is in the process of closure of the pending legacy issues 
at the earliest. 
 Physical as well as VC meetings are being organized to clarify doubts of the 
States/UTs for early closure of pending cases. 
 Once it is done, the Schemes will be taken up with the competent authority for 
renewal. 
 
Recommendation 2 
The Committee, also reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry should take 
strong measures to get the States to be proactive in the matter as well as publicize 
substitutes of these schemes if at all available elsewhere to the beneficiaries. 
 A letter in this regard has been sent to all the concerned states. 
Recommendation 3 
The Committee recommend that selection of assessment agency to conduct a study to 
understand the limitation as to why the States have not been able to complete the 

12 
 
investigation and its impact on the education of the minority students and submission of 
report may also be done on priority basis and Committee be apprised of the outcome of 
the steps taken by them in this regard. 
 In this regard, it is submitted that to expedite the process, it has been decided 
that physical meetings would be organized with the States/UTs, in which they 
would be guided by the Ministry officials as to how the pending legacy issues are 
disposed of at the earliest. 
 For this, regional workshops have been proposed and be completed by July, 2026. 
 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No G-20014/01/2026-Budget Dated 
09.06.2026) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Minority Affairs is implementing Pradhan Mantri 
Virasat Ka Samvardhan Scheme since 2023- 24. The PM-VIKAS scheme could not be 
implemented during the years 2023-24, 2024-25 as the guidelines of scheme were not 
approved. Out of the Budgetary allocations, RE made for this scheme during these years, 
the Ministry spent only on the committed liabilities relating to erstwhile five schemes 
which were converged into this scheme. In this regard the Committee in their earlier 
reports had commented on the extraordinary delay in the implementation of the scheme. 
The Committee are now happy to note that the implementation of PM-VIKAS has 
commenced and the Ministry has allocated 47 projects with a financial implication of 
more than Rs.700 crore covering over 1.51 lakh beneficiaries under the scheme. The 
implementation of all these is likely to be completed before 31.03.2027. The Committee 
note that this is a very important scheme of the Ministry and keeping this in view, the 
Committee hope that the Ministry shall endeavor to fully implement and meet the targets 
of the scheme for the benefit of the intended beneficiaries. The Committee would also 
further like the Ministry to expedite the process of finalization of Third-Party Agencies for 
the concurrent monitoring and field inspections of the scheme and the Committee be 
intimated of the action taken in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 (PM-VIKAS Scheme) 
It is submitted that the delay in implementation of the Scheme during the years 
2023–24 and 2024–25 was primarily due to the time taken in finalization and approval of 
the scheme guidelines, as well as in the process of convergence of the erstwhile five 

13 
 
schemes into a unified framework. During this period, the Ministry utilized the allocated 
funds mainly towards committed liabilities of the earlier schemes. 
The Ministry is pleased to inform that the PM-VIKAS Scheme has now been fully 
operationalized, and significant progress has been achieved. A total of 60 projects have 
been approved/allocated, with a financial implication of over ₹895 crore, covering 
approximately 1.56 lakh beneficiaries. All these projects are at various stages of 
implementation and are targeted for completion by 31.03.2027. 
The Ministry fully concurs with the Hon’ble Committee on the importance of the 
Scheme and remains committed to achieving the intended objectives and targets in a 
time-bound manner. To ensure effective implementation, the Ministry has strengthened 
monitoring and review mechanisms and is maintaining close coordination with 
implementing agencies and stakeholders. The Ministry seeks to leverage AI-enabled 
interventions, including IVR (Interactive Voice Response) systems for beneficiaries 
outreach, awareness and real-time feedback, along with data-driven analytics for 
improved monitoring and decision making. 
Further, with regard to the recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee on finalization 
of Third-Party Agencies for concurrent monitoring and field inspections, it is submitted 
that the Ministry has initiated the process for empanelment/selection of such agencies. 
Necessary steps are being taken to expedite their finalization so as to ensure robust 
monitoring, improved transparency, and real-time assessment of project outcomes under 
the Scheme. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No G-20014/01/2026-Budget Dated 
09.06.2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
  
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
(Recommendation Para No.4.18) 
The Committee note that 12017-Education, 1383-Health, 941-Skill and 1772-WCD have 
been sanctioned under PMJVK and that 33% beneficiaries across projects are women. In 
this regard an Evaluation- cum-Impact Assessment Study of the Scheme was carried out 
by the Ministry through the Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi, to 
assess the scheme’s progress in infrastructure creation, its actual functionality, the 
degree of beneficiary reach and awareness, the variation in implementation across 
States and the overall developmental impact on minority communities. The Committee 
observe from the findings of the study that the PMJVK has substantially expanded access 
to essential infrastructure in minority areas by constructing schools, classrooms, hostels, 
health facilities, drinking water systems and community centres. However, the study 
further states that there are visible gaps between physical creation and functional 
utilization. In schools and PHCs there is shortage of required staff, functional digital 
rooms, limited diagnostic 28 facilities etc. The drinking water system faces sustainability 
concerns and inadequate maintenance arrangements. Along with this, the study has also 
found out other gaps viz. delay in funds, low awareness of the scheme etc. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to take suitable corrective measures in coordination with 
the States/UTs and other Ministries to address the issues found in the study. If need be, 
the budgetary allocation of the scheme may also be enhanced so that the success of the 
scheme in improving the lives of the minority communities is sustained and infrastructure 
created does not remain idle. 
  
Reply of the Government 
  (PMJVK Scheme) 
  Under the provisions of the PMJVK Guidelines, the responsibility for ensuring the 
functionality and operationalization of assets created under the Scheme rests with the 
respective State Governments/UT Administrations, as stipulated under Clause 3.4.3(i) 
and (j). Further, the State Level Committee (SLC), constituted under the Chairpersonship 

16 
 
of the Chief Secretary of the State/UT, is also mandated to oversee and ensure the 
functionality of these assets. 
  The Ministry has taken cognizance of the observations arising from the Evaluation-
cum-Impact Assessment Study and has engaged in deliberations through various 
stakeholder and review meetings to address the identified gaps. 
  In this regard, it has been proposed to revise the PMJVK Guidelines with specific 
emphasis on improving the sustainability and functionality of assets. Notably, an 
Operations and Maintenance (O&M) provision is being incorporated for all future projects 
under the Scheme. This will ensure that adequate arrangements for upkeep and 
continued utilization of assets are made at the planning stage itself. 
Further, the revised framework will: 
 Mandate inclusion of Operation and Maintenance costs as an integral component 
of the Detailed Project Cost; 
 Require States/UTs to clearly define ownership and responsibility for long-term 
management of assets; 
 Emphasize third-party quality assessment of completed projects to ensure 
standards and functionality. 
These measures are aimed at bridging the gap between asset creation and effective 
utilization, thereby enhancing the overall impact of the Scheme on the targeted 
communities. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No G-20014/01/2026-Budget Dated 
09.06.2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
5th August, 2026                                                            
14  Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment 
 
  

18 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE  SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
5TH AUGUST, 2026. 
 
 The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
     PRESENT 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON  
   
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
7. Smt. Bag Mitali 
8. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
9. Shri Godam Nagesh 
10. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
11. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
12. Adv. Priya Saroj 
13. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
14. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
15. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
   
Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
17. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
18. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
19. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

19 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(ii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iii) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
(iv)  Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-
27)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
TWENTIETH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2026-27)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
  Total  Percentage 
I. Total number of Recommendations 5  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.6, 3.12 & 5.9 
3 60% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
00 0% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration:–  
Rec. Para No. 4.18 & 5.9 
02 40% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature:- 
Rec. Para No. NIL 
00  0% 
   100% 
 
 
        