i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ 
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 

ii 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- 
III 
Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -
IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I Minutes of the sixteenth Sitting of the Committee 
held on 5.8.2026. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
        COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Ramji 
25. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
28. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
29. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
30. Smt. Maya Chintaman Ivnate 
31.  Dr. Mukeshbhai J. Rathwa  
 

v 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Krishendra Kumar   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Ms. Melody Vungthiansiam   - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Twenty Third Report on the Action taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. 
 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
11.03.2026. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs have furnished their replies indicating action 
taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 15.06.2026. The Report 
was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice and 
Empowerment at their sitting held on 5.8.2026. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs is given in 
Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
5th August, 2026                                                            
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
       
  

1 
 
REPORT 
 
          CHAPTER - I 
 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Nineteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of 
Tribal Affairs. 
 
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
11.03.2026. It contained 11 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government: 
Rec. Para No. 2.8, 3.9, 3.10, 4.5, 7.9, 8.7 
and 9.7 
(Total: 07, Chapter: II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s reply:   
Rec. Para No. 5.14 and 6.8 
(Total: 02, Chapter: III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:   
Rec. Para No. 5.12 and 5.13  
(Total: 02, Chapter: IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim 
in nature:    
NIL 
(Total: NIL, Chapter: V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this report may be furnished to 
them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of the Report.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
A. EKLAVYA MODEL RESIDENTIAL SCHOOLS (EMRS) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.12) 
 
5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows: - 
 
“723 Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS) have been sanctioned out of 
728 targeted to be set up in the country to provide quality education to the 
tribal children from class VI to XII in their own environment from the year 2018-
19 to enable them to get access to the best opportunities in education. An 
allocation of ₹7150.01 crore has been made for the year 2026-27 for EMRS 
Scheme which is 46.67 percent of the total budget of the Ministry. The 
Committee note that under the Scheme, out of budgetary allocation of 
₹6,399.00 crore and ₹7,088.60 crore in the years 2024-25 and 2025-26, 
₹4,716.29 crore and ₹4,011.25 crore (till 19.01.2025) were utilized respectively. 
The Committee find that despite concerted efforts made by the Ministry to 
overcome the hurdles in implementation of scheme, the Ministry have been 
able to achieve a very limited success as BE of ₹7,088.60 Cr. for 2025-26 was 
reduced to ₹4,900.00 Cr at RE stage and the Ministry have been able to utilize 
only ₹4,011.25 Cr till 19.01.2026. Since the Ministry have not been able to 
address the problems and the problems still persist, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to persuade the implementing agencies to comply with the norms so 
that the hurdles are taken care of and the EMRS are established within the 
given timeline.” 
 
 
6. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “Ministry of Tribal Affairs has approved 728 Eklavya Model Residential Schools 
(EMRSs) across the country. Out of these, construction of 428 EMRS buildings 
has been completed, work at 249 locations is in progress, and 51 EMRSs are at 
the pre-construction stage as on 30.04.2026. The completion of works has been 
affected due to issues related to land availability, forest clearances, and the 
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
To ensure timely completion of EMRS projects, senior-level officers convened 
meetings with construction agencies and directed all concerned agencies to 
expedite the execution and completion of works within the stipulated timelines. 
In addition, the Ministry has undertaken several measures to accelerate the 
construction and operationalization of EMRSs, which include: 
i. Fast-tracking of DPR mechanism is done to reduce delays. 
ii. Punitive action against non-performing construction agencies: Action 
has been initiated against underperforming construction agencies. Works 

3 
 
allotted to such agencies have been withdrawn and reassigned to CPWD and 
other competent agencies. 
iii. Escrow mechanism for fund management: Escrow accounts have been 
established to ensure timely availability of funds to construction agencies and 
to avoid diversion or delays in utilization of sanctioned funds. 
iv. Dedicated coordination mechanism: Dedicated officers have been 
deployed at the central level to coordinate with State Governments, district 
administrations, and other concerned authorities for resolution of land 
acquisition, land-use conversion, and forest clearance issues. Letters have also 
been issued to District Collectors for expeditious resolution of land, forest, and 
other bottlenecks. 
v. Capacity building of construction agencies: National-level workshops and 
review meetings are being organized for field engineers and project managers 
to standardize construction practices, strengthen quality control, and ensure 
adherence to project timelines. 
vi. Regular stakeholder review meetings: Periodic review meetings are 
conducted with State Governments, district administrations, and construction 
agencies to identify bottlenecks, assess progress, and take corrective actions in 
a time-bound manner. 
vii. Enhanced monitoring and reporting: A robust monitoring mechanism has 
been established, including monthly progress reports, site inspections, and 
digital dashboards for tracking physical and financial progress. 
viii. Issue escalation and resolution mechanism: A structured escalation 
framework has been instituted for addressing critical issues requiring inter-
departmental coordination and timely resolution at higher levels. 
ix. Emphasis on quality and safety compliance: Regular inspections are 
conducted to ensure adherence to prescribed quality standards and safety 
norms at construction sites. 
Through the above-mentioned efforts, the NESTS has successfully utilized the 
budget allocation of ₹4,896.40 crore received during the financial year 2025–
26.”  
 
 
7.  Noting that BE of ₹7,088.60 crore was substantially revised 
downward at RE stage to ₹4,900.00 crore in 2025-26, the Committee had 
urged the Ministry of Tribal Affairs to persuade the implementing Agencies 
to comply with the norms so that the hurdles are taken care of and the 
EMRS are established within the given timeframe and the BE allocation of 
₹7,150.01 crore for 2026-27 is not subjected to reduction at the RE stage, 
as it is being done every year. The Committee are happy to find that NESTS 
have utilized the RE of ₹4,896.40 crore during the financial year 2025-26, 

4 
 
they are however, not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. The measures 
taken by the Ministry to accelerate the construction and operationalization 
of EMRSs are repetitive and these measures have been largely taken by the 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs earlier also but the same problems persist. The 
Committee feel that some alternative is to be developed by the Ministry as 
these problems are recurring and the measures taken have not been able 
to resolve the issues, as a result, only 428 out of 728 sanctioned EMRS 
building have been completed till date, construction is still in progress at 
249 locations and 51 schools remain at the pre-construction stage. 
Additionally, the Committee are also concerned with the cost escalation as 
the delay in completion of construction of school buildings would increase 
the cost of construction and thus unnecessarily increase the budget of 
National Education Society for Tribal Students (NESTS). The Committee, 
therefore, desire that Ministry of Tribal Affairs should take this matter 
seriously and find some alternate solution like setting up of an independent 
agency which may be competent enough to handle the issues that are 
delaying the work and the schools are made operational from their own 
buildings in a time bound manner. 
 
     
Recommendation (Para No. 5.13) 
 
 
8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee have noted from the replies of the Ministry that out of 499 
functional schools as on date, 377 schools are functioning from the permanent 
buildings, 111 from other Government Buildings and 11 from rented premises. 
The Committee in previous years highlighted the need that all the EMRS 
should be made functional from their own buildings and should not run from 
rented or other Government buildings as these buildings may be lacking 
required infrastructure for a school. Considering the fact that there is no 
scarcity of resources at the disposal of the Ministry, the Committee still 
consider this as an essential prerequisite for the comprehensive development 
of EMRS infrastructure with a keen eye on the wholesome growth of tribal 
students. The Committee also believe that rented premises may not cater to 
the needs of present day educational needs like technological and AI labs, 
smart-classrooms, sporting arenas etc. Therefore, the Committee desire that 

5 
 
a comprehensive action plan should be chalked out to make all the remaining 
EMRS schools functional from their own buildings and the construction work 
of each EMRS is completed in a stipulated period of 2-3 years. The Committee 
would like to be informed of steps taken in this regard.” 
 
9.  The Ministry of Tribal Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“Ministry has already prepared and implemented a comprehensive action plan 
for expediting the completion and operationalization of all remaining EMRSs 
from their own permanent buildings. The status has shown improvement and, 
as on 30.04.2026, 381 EMRSs are functioning from their own buildings, 108 
from other Government buildings, and 10 from rented buildings. Further, more 
than 10 EMRSs, where construction has already been completed recently, are 
also in the process of shifting to their own permanent premises. 
To ensure timely completion of EMRS projects, senior-level officers convened 
meetings with construction agencies and directed all concerned agencies to 
expedite the execution and completion of works within the stipulated 
timelines. In addition, the Ministry has undertaken several measures to 
accelerate the construction and operationalization of EMRSs, which include: 
Fast-tracking of DPR mechanism is done to reduce delays. 
Punitive action against non-performing construction agencies: Action has been 
initiated against underperforming construction agencies. Works allotted to 
such agencies have been withdrawn and reassigned to CPWD and other 
competent agencies. 
Escrow mechanism for fund management: Escrow accounts have been 
established to ensure timely availability of funds to construction agencies and 
to avoid diversion or delays in utilization of sanctioned funds. 
Dedicated coordination mechanism: Dedicated officers have been deployed at 
the central level to coordinate with State Governments, district 
administrations, and other concerned authorities for resolution of land 
acquisition, land-use conversion, and forest clearance issues. Letters have also 
been issued to District Collectors for expeditious resolution of land, forest, and 
other bottlenecks. 
Capacity building of construction agencies: National-level workshops and 
review meetings are being organized for field engineers and project managers 
to standardize construction practices, strengthen quality control, and ensure 
adherence to project timelines. 
Regular stakeholder review meetings: Periodic review meetings are conducted 
with State Governments, district administrations, and construction agencies 
to identify bottlenecks, assess progress, and take corrective actions in a time-
bound manner. 
Enhanced monitoring and reporting: A robust monitoring mechanism has been 
established, including monthly progress reports, site inspections, and digital 
dashboards for tracking physical and financial progress. 

6 
 
Issue escalation and resolution mechanism: A structured escalation 
framework has been instituted for addressing critical issues requiring inter-
departmental coordination and timely resolution at higher levels. 
Emphasis on quality and safety compliance: Regular inspections are 
conducted to ensure adherence to prescribed quality standards and safety 
norms at construction sites. 
Through the above-mentioned efforts, the NESTS has successfully utilized the 
budget allocation of ₹4,896.40 crore received during the financial year 2025–
26.”  
 
 
10.   The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
may take necessary steps so that the building of Schools are constructed at 
the earliest and the Schools start functioning from their own building as 
111 schools functioning from Government buildings and 11 from rented 
premises may not be adequately supported by the educational 
infrastructure envisaged under the EMRS scheme including technological 
and AI labs, smart classrooms and sporting arenas, etc. The Ministry in their 
reply have informed that as on 30.04.2026, 381 EMRS are functioning from 
their own permanent buildings, 108 from other Government buildings and 
10 from rented buildings. The Committee remain unsatisfied with the fact 
that 118 schools are still functioning from Government and rented 
buildings. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and also desire that all necessary measures may be taken 
so that the schools functioning from Government buildings and rented 
premises are supported with the educational infrastructure envisaged 
under the EMRS scheme including technological and AI labs, smart 
classrooms and sporting arenas. 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have been allocated ₹15,421.97 
crore by the Ministry of Finance against the proposed demand of ₹ 17,223.47 crore 
for the financial year 2026-27. The Committee are content with the fact that this 
allocation of ₹15,421.97 crore exceeds by 18.63% and 3.32% than the funds allocated 
to the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for the year 2024-25 and 2025-26, respectively. The 
Committee are of the view that this allocation is a clear reflection of Government’s 
firm resolve for tribal development throughout the country. The Committee would like 
to underscore that with an enhanced allocation of resources, the responsibility now 
squarely lies on the Ministry to ensure that allotment of funds made at BE stage may 
not get reduced at RE stage as were done rather routinely in preceding years. The 
Committee express their discontent with the submission of the Ministry that not only 
RE for 2025-26 was reduced by ₹4,101.63 Cr, but ₹8,757.04 Cr. out of the total 
Revised Estimate of ₹10,824.18 Cr. for 2025-26 could only be utilized by the Ministry 
till 23.02.2026. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry 
should take concrete steps to utilize the unspent portion of RE for 2025-26 within the 
remaining period left of the present financial year and ensure that the target fixed 
under each of the schemes are achieved. The Committee also expect that the Ministry 
will address troubling issues once and for all to clear the deck for better usage of 
budgetary allocation in future. The Committee also hope that the Ministry would make 
a concerted effort to ensure that at least 50% of the allocated fund for 2026-27 are 
put to use by the month of September, 2026, so that the Budget allocation for 2026-
27 is not reduced at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The budgetary allocation of Rs. 14,925.81 crore for the year 2025-26 was reduced to 
Rs. 10,824.18 crore at RE stage and 101.21% of the RE allocation i.e. Rs 10,955.13 
crore has been utilized. To ensure optimum utilization of funds released to the 
States/UTs under the schemes, Ministry will continue to conduct meetings/ 
conferences with the State/UT Governments at regular intervals besides written 
communications and will strive for complete utilization of funds through better 
planning and further follow up actions to avoid reduction at RE stage. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs under the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme ‘Support to Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs)’ provide financial 
assistance to 29 Tribal Research Institutes (TRIs) for execution and implementation 
of the sanctioned projects and activities. The Committee, however, find that budget 
estimates for 2023-24, 2024-25 and 2025-26 were revised downward at RE stage from 
₹118.64 crore to ₹50.00 crore, ₹111.00 crore to ₹90.00 crore and again ₹111.00 crore 
to ₹90.00 respectively. The revised estimate could also not be spent fully during 2023-
24 and for the financial year 2025-26, only a meager 29.93% of RE the Ministry has 
been able to spend till 19.02.26. The Committee, therefore, believe that mere 
allocations of funds would not ensure effective implementation of TRI Scheme. The 
Committee note with concern the inability of State treasuries in transferring funds 
allocated by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, timely submission of Annual Action Plans 
and Utilization Certificates (UCs), clearance of SNA balances, submission of progress 
report/DPR etc by the State Authorities etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry that they should endeavor to devise a specific mechanism, sound in 
technical knowhow and procedural matters, in consultation with States/UTs, to 
remove technical and procedural bottlenecks, administrative delays, capacity building 
issues etc. The Committee would also like the Ministry to consider the suggestions 
received from NITI Aayog for effective implementation of the scheme. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs provides financial assistance to 29 State/UT Tribal Research 
lnstitutes (TRls) under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme "Support to Tribal Research 
lnstitutes (TRls)" for undertaking research, documentation, training, preservation of 
tribal culture and heritage, strengthening institutional infrastructure, and 
implementation of tribal welfare-related knowledge initiatives. Funds under the 
scheme are released to the State/UT TRls based on Annual Action Plans (AAPs) 
submitted by the respective State Governments/UT Administrations and approved by 
the Apex Committee chaired by Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  
The Ministry has taken note of the observations of the Hon'ble Committee regarding 
expenditure trends, procedural delays, and implementation bottlenecks under the 
scheme. ln this regard, it is submitted that the lower expenditure reported till 
19.02.2026 reflected the interim position during the financial year and was due to 
impediments such as SNA SPARSH implementation in the State. Subsequently, 
expenditure under the scheme accelerated and the final expenditure during FY 2025-
26 reached Rs. 82.06 crore against Revised Estimate (RE) of Rs. 90.00* crore. 
Similarly, during FY 2024-25, against RE of Rs. 90.00 crore, the Ministry achieved 
expenditure of Rs. 90.00 crore.  

9 
 
The Ministry acknowledges that effective implementation of the scheme requires 
timely project approval, efficient fund flow, regular monitoring, strengthening of 
institutional capacities of State/UT TRls, and resolution of procedural bottlenecks 
relating to submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs), clearance of Single Nodal 
Account (SNA) balances, submission of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), and timely 
finalisation of Annual Action Plans. 
 
Accordingly, the Ministry has initiated several systemic and procedural reforms in 
consultation with States/UTs for improving implementation efficiency and 
accountability under the scheme. The key measures undertaken are as under:  
i. Advance Planning and Timely Approvals: State/UT Tribal Research Institutes 
have been advised to submit their Annual Action Plans for FY 2026-27 by March-April 
2026 to facilitate timely appraisal and approval of projects. The Ministry has 
completed scrutiny of the proposals received from States/UTs and meetings of the 
Apex Committee have already been conducted for 13 States and for remaining 
States/UTs, it is scheduled on June 4th and 5th. lt ensures timely sanction and 
implementation of projects.  
 
ii. Standardization of Annual Action Plans (AAPs): A standardized format for 
submission of AAPs has been developed and circulated to all State/UT TRls to 
improve quality, uniformity, accountability, and timely appraisal of proposals.  
 
 
iii. Strengthened Monitoring Framework: Quarterly review meetings with State/UT 
TRls shall be conducted for monitoring progress of approved projects and activities. 
The Ministry has also intensified periodic review through video conferences, physical 
meetings, and written communications with State Governments/UT Administrations.  
 
iv. Digital Monitoring and Dashboard-based Tracking: An online monitoring 
dashboard is being developed for improved project tracking and oversight. ln 
addition, status of ongoing and completed projects is being updated on the National 
Tribal Research Portal (NTRP) for strengthening monitoring, transparency, and 
knowledge management. National tribal Research Portal is being used to monitor the 
Financial and Physical activities of all proposals.  
 
 
v. Nodal Officer Mechanism: State-wise nodal officers have already been 
designated within the Ministry for continuous coordination, review, and follow-up 
with State/UT TRls on issues relating to fund utilisation, project progress, submission 
of UCs, and SNA balance rationalisation.  
 
vi. Physical Review and Field Monitoring: Physical review visits were undertaken 
during April 2026, particularly for monitoring construction of TRI buildings and 

10 
 
implementation of other sanctioned activities, to ensure timely completion and 
effective utilisation of funds.  
 
vii. Outcome-based Monitoring: The Ministry has initiated outcome-oriented 
monitoring indicators such as number of research projects undertaken, number of 
projects completed annually, timely submission of reports and UCs, and progress in 
implementation timelines. States have also been advised to surrender or close long-
pending projects which have not been initiated.  
 
viii. Capacity Building and lnstitutional Strengthening: Capacity-building and 
training sessions relating to technology and Artificial lntelligence applications in tribal 
development and research have been conducted for TRI officials. Additional thematic 
training programmes shall also be organised in future for strengthening institutional 
capacities of TRls.  
 
ix. National-level Convergence and Knowledge Sharing: A National Workshop of 
TRls is proposed to be organised in June 2026 with a focus on strengthening 
convergence among TRls, improving research quality, and enhancing collaboration 
with academic institutions, technology companies, NGOs, llMs, and other expert 
organisations. Existing knowledge-sharing platforms and repositories are also being 
strengthened for wider dissemination and utilisation of tribal research outputs.  
 
The Ministry has also examined the recommendations made by NlTl Aayog regarding 
strengthening of Tribal Research lnstitutes and many of the recommendations are 
being incorporated in the revised implementation framework of the scheme. Particular 
emphasis is being placed on positioning TRls as knowledge and policy support 
institutions for tribal development, improving quality of research activities, 
strengthening institutional capacity, enhancing convergence with academic and 
research institutions, and establishing robust monitoring mechanisms.  
 
Further, proposals relating to targeted tribal research fellowships, enhanced 
collaboration frameworks, and additional institutional strengthening interventions are 
proposed to be taken up after approval of the revised EFC of the scheme.  
 
It is further submitted that the State Government of Bihar has established the 29th 
Tribal Research lnstitute in the country, thereby further strengthening the institutional 
ecosystem for tribal research and policy support.  
 
The Ministry remains committed to improving fund utilisation, strengthening 
institutional capacities of State/UT TRls, ensuring timely implementation of projects, 
and enhancing the overall effectiveness and impact of the scheme through continuous 
monitoring, digital oversight, convergence-based approaches, and outcome-oriented 
interventions. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 

11 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.10) 
 
The Committee note that out of 11 Tribal Freedom Fighters’ Museum sanctioned by 
the Ministry, only 4 Museums have been inaugurated till date and rest of the Museums 
are either under the different stages of construction or curation development. Since 
very little progress has been achieved in last one year, the Committee once again 
convey their discontent at the delayed progress of work on this front. The Committee, 
therefore, desire to underscore the fact that the construction and inauguration delays 
of such museums defeats the objective for which Museum are being established. The 
Ministry, while accepting the onus for the delays, conveyed that necessary measures 
have been taken to expedite the construction of Tribal Freedom Fighters Museums in 
the country. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry must take concrete 
measures and take an holistic approach to include in its ambit all factors that have 
long been hindering the progress of the scheme. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
upscale their ongoing endeavors so that all sanctioned Museums are completed by 
March, 2027 as informed to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The projects for establishment of 11 Tribal Freedom Fighters’ Museums across 10 
States are sanctioned by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs based on the proposals received 
from the State Governments. Out of 11 Museums, 04 Tribal Freedom Fighters' 
Museums have already been inaugurated in the states of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh 
and Chhattisgarh, while the remaining are at various stages of civil construction and 
curation development. Latest, the Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh Memorial and Tribal 
Freedom Fighters’ museum situated at Nava Raipur Chhattisgarh was inaugurated by 
the Hon'ble Prime Minister in November,2025. 
 
The above projects are either fully or partially funded by the Central Government 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme - 'Support to Tribal Research Institute" and 
"Proviso to Article 275 (1)" based on the additional requirements and proposals 
received from Slate Governments. The work related to identification of land, 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), floating of tenders, selecting Project 
Managing consultants/agencies, all civil and curation components of the Museums 
have been entrusted to the concerned State Government authorities. The delays in 
completion of certain Museums have been caused mainly due to certain factors such 
as finalization/change of site, time taken in preparation and approval of Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs), administrative and tendering processes, changes in 
implementing/consulting agencies, shortage of labour and specialized technical 
manpower, statutory/environmental clearances, disruptions due to adverse weather 
conditions, and legal or local law-and-order related constraints in some States. 

12 
 
 
It may be considered that the concerned State Government Authorities are responsible 
for early completion of the Museum works. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs takes periodic 
reviews & regular follow up of the development works of the under construction 
Museums in the meetings at Secretary/Joint Secretary/Director level with the 
concerned State authorities and related agencies. Besides, periodic 
visits of the construction sites are also being undertaken by the Ministry. The Ministry 
also seeks support from expert agencies and institutions for feedback and suggestions 
with respect to story line, curation activities etc. The Ministry takes note of the 
observations and recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee as 
recorded in Para 3.10 of the Nineteenth Report. The timelines for completion of the 
construction of sanctioned Museums have been set for November 2026 in Mizoram, 
Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala and for 2027 in Gujarat and Goa. The Ministry 
will make all efforts to 
adhere to these timelines. The pace of construction and curation is satisfactory in all 
states except Manipur, where the project is currently at the DPR preparation and land 
identification stage. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.5) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that Budget allocation of ₹25 Cr for the scheme for 
2023-24 was augmented to ₹45 Cr at the RE stage and the Ministry could spend 
₹32.04 Cr during the financial year, which far exceeded the initial Budget allocation. 
The Committee would have been ever happier, had the Ministry been able to utilize 
the entire Revised Allocation of ₹45 Cr. The Committee are rather disappointed to find 
that the Ministry could utilize only ₹28.33 Cr. for 2024-25, thereby indicating a 
reduction of ₹3.71 Cr in actual expenditure in 2024-25 vis-à-vis 2023 24. This under-
utilization also underlines year-on-year fluctuation in performance of the TRI-ECE 
scheme. The Committee have been informed that for the year 2025-26, the Ministry 
have forwarded a re-appropriation file of ₹5 Cr. for seeking additional allocation from 
the Ministry of Finance to meet up committed expenses under the scheme. Therefore, 
the Committee expect that the additional allocation will be provided to the Ministry 
and fruitfully utilized till the end of financial year 2025-26. The Committee are hopeful 
that budget allocation of ₹32 Cr. for 2026-27 will not be downsized at the RE stage 
and the Ministry will be able to spend the entire corpus across the desired areas, 
including, organization of National and State-level events, Integrated Media activities, 
Outreach and Branding, strengthening of Centers of Excellences etc. In respect of 
planning of expenditure, the Committee would strongly recommend the Ministry to 
include more State-level Institutes and Research Institutes/ Organizations and State-
Universities under the provision of grants, thereby broadening and expanding the 
horizon and scope of the scheme. The Committee would like to be informed of steps 
taken in this regard.  

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has taken note of the observations and recommendations 
of the Committee regarding utilisation trends and implementation of the scheme 
"Tribal Research, lnformation, Education, Communication and Events (TRl ECE)". The 
Ministry remains committed towards ensuring optimum utilisation of allocated funds 
and strengthening the overall implementation framework of the scheme through 
improved planning, monitoring and institutional convergence.  
The enhancement of Budget Estimate (BE) from Rs.25.00 crore to Rs.45.00 crore 
during FY 2023-24 was primarily necessitated due to large-scale lnformation, 
Education and Communication (lEC) activities undertaken for awareness generation 
under flagship initiatives of the Ministry, particularly PM JANMAN, including nationwide 
outreach campaigns through outdoor publicity, electronic media, radio, community 
engagement activities and other communication interventions. Subsequently, 
rationalisation of allocation at the later stage of the financial year resulted in an 
effective availability of approximately Rs.35.00 crore, against which expenditure 
amounting to Rs.32.04 crore was achieved during FY 2023-24.  
Further, during FY 2024-25, against the allocation of Rs.32.00 crore, expenditure 
amounting to Rs.28.33 crore was incurred under the scheme. The variation in 
expenditure during different financial years is attributable to the nature and scale of 
activities undertaken under the scheme, including national outreach campaigns, tribal 
events, media and communication activities, and project-based interventions through 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and partner institutions. The Ministry has taken measures 
to improve expenditure planning and ensure greater stability and predictability in 
implementation under the TRI-ECE framework. 
 For FY 2025-26, the enhancement in Revised Estimate from Rs.27.00 crore to 
Rs.32.00 crore was necessitated due to increased activities and committed liabilities 
relating to Janjatiya Gaurav Divas/Janjatiya Gaurav Varsh programmes, Tribal 
Business Conclave, National Tribal Literary Festival, Adi Chitra National Tribal Painting 
Exhibition, Republic Day participation, media and outreach activities, and 
strengthening of Centres of Excellence. The Ministry is making all efforts for optimal 
utilisation of the allocated funds and timely settlement of committed liabilities under 
the scheme.  
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee regarding broadening 
the institutional base under the scheme. ln this regard, the Ministry is expanding 
partnerships and collaborations with State-level institutions, Tribal Research lnstitutes 
(TRls), universities, research organisations, academic institutions, technology 
institutions, NGOs and specialised agencies for undertaking thematic studies, cultural 
documentation, capacity-building initiatives, digital interventions, language 
preservation, outreach activities and evidence-based policy support. Greater 
convergence with State level institutions is also being incorporated in the revised 
operational framework of the scheme.  
Further, the Ministry has prepared a comprehensive medium-term roadmap under 
TRI-ECE focusing on:  

14 
 
i. lntegrated media, lEC, outreach and branding activities for flagship schemes of 
the Ministry.  
ii. strengthening and expansion of Centres of Excellence through revised 
guidelines and performance-based monitoring. 
iii. preservation and promotion of tribal languages, arts, crafts and traditional 
knowledge systems. enhanced use of digital platforms, Al-enabled tools and 
technology-based interventions for tribal communication, documentation and 
knowledge dissemination. 
iv. organisation of national and State-level tribal events and cultural initiatives. 
 The Ministry has also initiated reforms for strengthening implementation and 
monitoring under the scheme, including development of standardized project formats, 
improved appraisal mechanisms, milestone-based releases, monitoring through key 
performance indicators (KPls), strengthening of digital repositories and enhanced 
coordination with partner institutions. The Ministry is shifting towards a more outcome 
oriented implementation framework under TRI-ECE to ensure improved effectiveness, 
accountability and wider outreach of scheme interventions. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7.9) 
 
The Committee note that Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh Abhiyan (DAJGUA) was 
launched on 2nd October, 2024 to saturate critical gaps in social infrastructure, health, 
education, livelihood etc. through 25 interventions implemented by 17-line Ministries 
of Govt. of India by convergence and outreach to ensure holistic and sustainable 
development of tribal areas and communities. The Abhiyan will cover 63, 843 villages 
in 549 districts and 2911 blocks spread across all tribal majority villages and 
aspirational block in 30 States/UTS during FY 2024-25 to FY 2028 29. Since multiple 
Ministries are involved and the Abhyan is stipulated to be completed by 2028-29, the 
Committee feel that in the prevailing circumstances the role of Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
becomes extraordinarily important as they have to effectively coordinate and monitor 
the pace of work so that the objectives of the Scheme are achieved in the given time 
period. The Committee, however, find that during the financial year 2025-26, BE of 
₹2,000 Cr. was reduced to ₹500 Cr at RE stage and only ₹250.02 Cr. has so far been 
utilized by the Ministry till 19.01.26. The Committee are made to understand that the 
initial hurdles such as transition of financial control and operation responsibility from 
the State/UT Departments, familiarization with PFMS system have largely been now 
streamlined, hence the improved expenditure performance is expected in the 
subsequent period. The Committee have no doubt with regard to the expenditure 
performance as the hurdles have been taken care of but the concern of the Committee 
is with regard to the performance of the line Ministries as it does not appear to be at 
the required pace because the progress of the work is very tardy and far behind the 
target fixed upto March, 2026. The Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Jal 
Shakti and Ministry of New and Renewable Energy are yet to start work and several 

15 
 
Ministries are yet to complete task assigned for completion by March, 2026. This 
directly points to the deep mismanagement in the execution of the scheme, the 
Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Ministry should take capacity building 
measures and provide technical support to implementing agencies, including local 
bodies and field-level officials so that the momentum picks up. The Committee would 
appreciate if the Ministry conducts comprehensive implementation audit across all 
participating states and implementing agencies so that the bottlenecks are identified 
and the necessary action is taken to plug them. The Committee also recommend the 
establishment of a dedicated monitoring and coordination mechanism at both the 
Central and State levels and creation of a digital dashboard with real-time progress 
indicators to track physical and financial performance, enabling early detection of 
delays and deviations. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures taken 
by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken note of the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee regarding the implementation of the Dharti Aaba Janjatiya Gram Utkarsh 
Abhiyan (DAJGUA).  
 The Committee’s concerns regarding the pace of implementation, inter-
ministerial coordination, and expenditure performance have been carefully examined. 
In this regard, the Ministry has undertaken several measures to ensure the timely and 
effective implementation of the programme. These, inter alia, include:- 
(i) Initial operational challenges, including the transition of financial control and 
familiarization with the PFMS platform at the State/UT level, which affected the pace 
of expenditure during FY 2025–26, have largely been addressed. Consequently, 
expenditure momentum is expected to improve substantially during the subsequent 
implementation period. 
(ii) To facilitate effective monitoring of interventions being implemented by Line 
Ministries, quarterly and annual targets have been fixed for all concerned Ministries. 
(iii) Regular inter-ministerial review meetings are being conducted to monitor physical 
and financial progress, identify bottlenecks, and ensure timely resolution of 
implementation-related issues. 
(iv) To strengthen monitoring and coordination mechanisms at both Central and State 
levels, States/UTs have been advised to establish dedicated and integrated Project 
Management Units (PMUs) at the State and district levels, along with appropriate 
monitoring structures, for effective implementation and convergence. 

16 
 
(v) Capacity-building initiatives and technical support mechanisms are being provided 
periodically to implementing agencies, local bodies, and field-level officials to enhance 
execution efficiency and ensure timely achievement of targets. 
(vi) The Ministry is also developing a comprehensive digital monitoring framework with 
real-time tracking of physical and financial progress under various interventions. This 
mechanism will facilitate early identification of delays and enable timely corrective 
action. 
(vii) In addition, the Ministry undertakes periodic implementation reviews at the 
highest levels with all stakeholders, complemented by field-level assessments by 
Ministry officials across participating States/UTs and implementing agencies, to 
identify gaps, strengthen accountability, and improve outcomes under the Abhiyan. 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8.7) 
 
The Committee appreciate that overseas scholarship scheme, namely, the National 
Overseas Scholarship Scheme, a Central Sector Scheme of Ministry of Tribal Affairs, 
under which scholarships are given to the meritorious Schedule Tribe (ST) students 
for pursuing higher education in top 1000 ranked Institutes/Universities abroad. The 
Scheme is implemented through the Indian Embassies/Missions abroad, Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Committee have also been informed that ST students with annual 
family income not exceeding ₹6.0 lakhs are eligible to apply for the Scholarship under 
the Scheme. The Committee are content to note that from the forthcoming EFC cycle 
the number of annual slots have been proposed to be enhanced from 20 to 50 and 
the Annual Maintenance Allowance from USD 15,400 to USD 19,250. The Committee 
consider both the changes to be a positive step towards ensuring the welfare of 
meritorious ST students pursuing their academic dreams abroad. However, the 
Committee cannot but underscore a long pending desire from ST communities to 
increase the eligibility criterion with regard to annual family income not exceeding 
₹6.0 lakhs applicable in scholarship under the scheme. The Committee genuinely feel 
that the annual income ceiling of ₹6.00 lakhs ought to be augmented and brought in 
parity to the need of the time. The Committee are happy that during the deliberation, 
Secretary, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, as well, recognized this need and assured the 
Committee to take necessary steps to raise annual family income ceiling of ₹6.00 lakh 
under National Overseas Scholarship Scheme for ST students to bring it at least to the 
level of Gross annual family income ceiling followed under National Overseas 
Scholarship for SCs. The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken 
by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs in this regard. 
 
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has noted the observation of the Hon’ble Committee. In this regard, it is 
submitted that revision of income ceiling is under consideration as part of Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) proposal for continuation of NOS Scheme for the Finance 
Cycle 2026-27 to 2030-31. 
As per the EFC proposal, the income limit has been proposed to be enhanced from 
Rs. 6 lakhs per annum to Rs. 8 lakhs per annum, in order to: 
Bring parity with similar scholarship schemes being implemented by the Ministry of 
Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE); 
Widen the Beneficiary base; and  
Address concerns regarding inflation and rising cost of living. 
The Change in Scheme Norms regarding increase in number of slots, enhancement of 
Annual Maintenance Allowance etc. will be implemented subject to approval of EFC by 
Cabinet. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9.7) 
 
The Committee note that under proviso to Grants under Article 275 (1) of the 
Constitution of India, financial assistance is provided to the State Governments with 
notified STs based upon proposals received from them. The Committee note that a 
significant percentage of Budgetary allocation is earmarked for the grants. However, 
the Committee have found that for the financial year 2025-26 ₹1,541.47 Cr. was 
allocated at BE stage which was reduced to ₹1,171.00 Cr. at the RE stage and the 
Ministry have been able to utilize only ₹327.29 Cr. till 19.01.26 of the financial year. 
In this regard, the Committee firmly believe that grants under Article 275(1) of the 
Constitution of India represent a vital constitutional commitment to tribal welfare and 
strengthening the disbursal of funds, institutional capacity and oversight functions of 
the Ministry of Tribal Affairs vis-à-vis the grants are of utmost importance for 
meaningful and measurable improvements in the socio-economic conditions of 
Scheduled Tribes. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
to take suitable measures to improve co-ordination with States, creation of 
standardized project frameworks and outcome-based monitoring mechanism for 
better utilization of grants. The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the initiatives taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee. The Ministry allocates the 
budget earmarked under proviso to Grants under Article 275(1) of the Constitution of 
India at the beginning of the financial year. However, the participating States usually 
submit proposals very late, mainly due to pending Utilization Certificates (UCs) for 
previously sanctioned projects.  
2. The Ministry has focused on clearance of pending UCs before sanctioning fresh 
projects and also on completion of committed liability projects for meaningful 
outcomes. This resulted in reduction of allocation at the RE stage during 2025-26 but 
improved utilization of already released amount to the States 
3.  In order to improve further coordination with the participating States and 
effective utilization of Grants, the following measures have been taken:- 
(i) The Ministry has prepared an Annual Action Plan for the current financial year and 
communicated the same to all participating States in March 2026. States were also 
informed that quarterly review meetings would be conducted under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary (Tribal Affairs) to review progress vis-à-vis the budgetary 
allocations earmarked for each State. 
(ii) States have been requested to submit prioritized project proposals in the 
prescribed format. The Ministry is undertaking due diligence of the proposals received 
to facilitate better planning, timely submission of proposals, improved utilization of 
funds through continuous follow-up with the States, and effective outcome-based 
monitoring of projects sanctioned under Article 275(1) grants. 
(iii) The Ministry is further strengthening coordination with State Governments through 
regular review meetings at various levels and closer monitoring of physical and 
financial progress to ensure effective implementation of welfare interventions for 
Scheduled Tribes. 
(iv) Field visits are also being undertaken by officials of the Ministry to assess the 
implementation status of sanctioned projects, verify progress on the ground, and 
facilitate timely resolution of issues affecting project execution. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.14) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs have made several 
proposals to the EFC for approvals such as increase in the annual expenditure for 
students, recruitment of teachers, zonal offices for NESTS etc for the functioning of 
EMRS. The Committee expect that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs would get approval at 
the earliest and they would be able to implement them from next academic year. The 
Committee would like to be informed about the further developments made in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Increase in annual Expenditure: The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), in its 
meeting held on 27.02.2026, recommended an enhancement in the per-student cost 
for EMRS students from ₹1,47,062/- to ₹1,47,355.99/- per annum.  
Recruitment: 
The Department of Expenditure (DoE), Ministry of Finance had approved the creation 
of 38,480 teaching and non-teaching posts for 740 EMRSs across the country @52 
posts per school – 31 teaching and 21 non-teaching, to be filled in a phased manner 
from 2022-23 to 2026-27 
 
i. ESSE-2023- NESTS issued advertisements to fill 10,391 teaching and non-
teaching posts in the first phase of recruitment under ESSE-2023 in June/July 2023. 
A total of 7083 posting orders were issued for teaching post. 
ii. ESSE-2025- Notification for ESSE- 2025 was issued on 19.09.2025 for 
recruitment of 7,267 posts (5647 teaching and 1620 non-teaching posts). The Tier-II 
examination of ESSE 2025 was conducted from 22nd to 25th March 2026, and the 
results are awaited. 
iii. A total of 21 posts for each Regional Office (RO), along with an additional 48 
posts for the NESTS Headquarters, have been sanctioned by the Personnel Division of 
the Department of Expenditure (DoE). Further, an allocation of ₹89.98 crore has been 
recommended by the DoE in the EFC. 
 
For Construction: 
i. Upgradation of infrastructure in old EMRSs amounting to Rs. 930 is 
recommended for 71 buildings aged 15 years and above @ ₹10 Cr. each and 44 
buildings aged 10–15 years @ ₹5 Cr. Each. 
ii. Additional infrastructure amounting to Rs. 1,785Cr. is recommended by 
Department of expenditure in old EMRSs and EMRS 2.0, for staff quarters, roof sheds, 
industrial RO systems, and labs. 

20 
 
iii. EFC recommended establishment of 50 new EMRSs in LWE and uncovered 
areas during the 16th FCC, with a tentative outlay of ₹2,145 Cr. 
 
Head Quarter and Regional offices: 
An amount of ₹50 Cr. (including land cost) is recommended for construction of the 
NESTS Headquarters building. 
National Cadet Corps (NCC): 
Establishment of 100 NCC units @ ₹15 lakh per unit per annum is recommended 
during the current FC cycle. Expansion in subsequent FC cycles will be considered 
based on performance and outcomes. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.8) 
 
The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Janjati Adivasi Naya Maha Abhiyan (PM-
JANMAN) is an ambitious scheme of Govt. of India for the holistic development of 
Tribal Communities of the Country with a view to saturate 29000 tribal dominated 
villages by 2025-26 with an total dedicated corpus of ₹24,000 Cr. The Scheme is 
spread across 9-line Ministries/Departments over 11 interventions across health, 
education, nutrition, road and connectivity, construction of Multi-purpose Centers and 
Anganwadis, installation of solar panels, electrification and sanitation etc. The 
Committee also note that RE for 2025-26 was reduced to ₹184.99 Cr. from ₹300 Cr. 
allocated at BE stage and the Ministry could utilize only ₹113.70 Cr. till 19.01.26. The 
Committee find that there is slow and tardy progress in execution of works by the 
several Ministries as the work done by the Ministries like, M/o Rural Development, M/o 
Education and M/o Jal Shakti, is lagging far behind the target. The Committee, 
therefore, again emphasize that the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, as the nodal Ministry, 
must dovetail a well thought out mechanism and system of timely execution with PM-
JANMAN in order to complete the pending work of the line-Ministries within the 
extended period, i.e, one year beyond its initial date of completion on 31st March, 
2026. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Tribal Affairs has duly noted the observations of the Committee. In 
this regard, MoTA being the nodal Ministry under the Scheme has been taking 
following measures to address the progress of interventions: 
1. MoTA is taking regular review meetings with the line Ministry and the State 
Governments for timely execution of the interventions. 
2. Monthly progress is being monitored regularly. 
3. For the current financial year, MoTA has suggested quarterly targets to line Ministries. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 

21 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.12) 
 
723 Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRS) have been sanctioned out of 728 
targeted to be set up in the country to provide quality education to the tribal children 
from class VI to XII in their own environment from the year 2018-19 to enable them 
to get access to the best opportunities in education. An allocation of ₹7150.01 crore 
has been made for the year 2026-27 for EMRS Scheme which is 46.67 percent of the 
total budget of the Ministry. The Committee note that under the Scheme, out of 
budgetary allocation of ₹6,399.00 crore and ₹7,088.60 crore in the years 2024-25 and 
2025-26, ₹4,716.29 crore and ₹4,011.25 crore (till 19.01.2025) were utilized 
respectively. The Committee find that despite concerted efforts made by the Ministry 
to overcome the hurdles in implementation of scheme, the Ministry have been able to 
achieve a very limited success as BE of ₹7,088.60 Cr. for 2025-26 was reduced to 
₹4,900.00 Cr at RE stage and the Ministry have been able to utilize only ₹4,011.25 Cr 
till 19.01.2026. Since the Ministry have not been able to address the problems and the 
problems still persist, the Committee urge the Ministry to persuade the implementing 
agencies to comply with the norms so that the hurdles are taken care of and the EMRS 
are established within the given timeline. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs has approved 728 Eklavya Model Residential Schools (EMRSs) 
across the country. Out of these, construction of 428 EMRS buildings has been 
completed, work at 249 locations is in progress, and 51 EMRSs are at the pre-
construction stage as on 30.04.2026. The completion of works has been affected due 
to issues related to land availability, forest clearances, and the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic. 
To ensure timely completion of EMRS projects, senior-level officers convened meetings 
with construction agencies and directed all concerned agencies to expedite the 
execution and completion of works within the stipulated timelines. In addition, the 
Ministry has undertaken several measures to accelerate the construction and 
operationalization of EMRSs, which include: 
i. Fast-tracking of DPR mechanism is done to reduce delays. 
ii. Punitive action against non-performing construction agencies: Action has been 
initiated against underperforming construction agencies. Works allotted to such 
agencies have been withdrawn and reassigned to CPWD and other competent 
agencies. 

22 
 
iii. Escrow mechanism for fund management: Escrow accounts have been 
established to ensure timely availability of funds to construction agencies and to avoid 
diversion or delays in utilization of sanctioned funds. 
iv. Dedicated coordination mechanism: Dedicated officers have been deployed at 
the central level to coordinate with State Governments, district administrations, and 
other concerned authorities for resolution of land acquisition, land-use conversion, 
and forest clearance issues. Letters have also been issued to District Collectors for 
expeditious resolution of land, forest, and other bottlenecks. 
v. Capacity building of construction agencies: National-level workshops and 
review meetings are being organized for field engineers and project managers to 
standardize construction practices, strengthen quality control, and ensure adherence 
to project timelines. 
vi. Regular stakeholder review meetings: Periodic review meetings are conducted 
with State Governments, district administrations, and construction agencies to identify 
bottlenecks, assess progress, and take corrective actions in a time-bound manner. 
vii. Enhanced monitoring and reporting: A robust monitoring mechanism has been 
established, including monthly progress reports, site inspections, and digital 
dashboards for tracking physical and financial progress. 
viii. Issue escalation and resolution mechanism: A structured escalation framework 
has been instituted for addressing critical issues requiring inter-departmental 
coordination and timely resolution at higher levels. 
ix. Emphasis on quality and safety compliance: Regular inspections are conducted 
to ensure adherence to prescribed quality standards and safety norms at construction 
sites. 
Through the above-mentioned efforts, the NESTS has successfully utilized the budget 
allocation of ₹4,896.40 crore received during the financial year 2025–26. 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.13) 
 
The Committee have noted from the replies of the Ministry that out of 499 functional 
schools as on date, 377 schools are functioning from the permanent buildings, 111 
from other Government Buildings and 11 from rented premises. The Committee in 
previous years highlighted the need that all the EMRS should be made functional from 
their own buildings and should not run from rented or other Government buildings as 
these buildings may be lacking required infrastructure for a school. Considering the 
fact that there is no scarcity of resources at the disposal of the Ministry, the Committee 
still consider this as an essential prerequisite for the comprehensive development of 
EMRS infrastructure with a keen eye on the wholesome growth of tribal students. The 
Committee also believe that rented premises may not cater to the needs of present 
day educational needs like technological and AI labs, smart-classrooms, sporting 
arenas etc. Therefore, the Committee desire that a comprehensive action plan should 
be chalked out to make all the remaining EMRS schools functional from their own 

23 
 
buildings and the construction work of each EMRS is completed in a stipulated period 
of 2-3 years. The Committee would like to be informed of steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has already prepared and implemented a comprehensive action plan for 
expediting the completion and operationalization of all remaining EMRSs from their 
own permanent buildings. The status has shown improvement and, as on 30.04.2026, 
381 EMRSs are functioning from their own buildings, 108 from other Government 
buildings, and 10 from rented buildings. Further, more than 10 EMRSs, where 
construction has already been completed recently, are also in the process of shifting 
to their own permanent premises. 
To ensure timely completion of EMRS projects, senior-level officers convened meetings 
with construction agencies and directed all concerned agencies to expedite the 
execution and completion of works within the stipulated timelines. In addition, the 
Ministry has undertaken several measures to accelerate the construction and 
operationalization of EMRSs, which include: 
i. Fast-tracking of DPR mechanism is done to reduce delays. 
ii. Punitive action against non-performing construction agencies: Action 
has been initiated against underperforming construction agencies. Works allotted to 
such agencies have been withdrawn and reassigned to CPWD and other competent 
agencies. 
iii. Escrow mechanism for fund management: Escrow accounts have been 
established to ensure timely availability of funds to construction agencies and to avoid 
diversion or delays in utilization of sanctioned funds. 
iv. Dedicated coordination mechanism: Dedicated officers have been 
deployed at the central level to coordinate with State Governments, district 
administrations, and other concerned authorities for resolution of land acquisition, land-
use conversion, and forest clearance issues. Letters have also been issued to District 
Collectors for expeditious resolution of land, forest, and other bottlenecks. 
v. Capacity building of construction agencies: National-level workshops and 
review meetings are being organized for field engineers and project managers to 
standardize construction practices, strengthen quality control, and ensure adherence to 
project timelines. 
vi. Regular stakeholder review meetings: Periodic review meetings are 
conducted with State Governments, district administrations, and construction agencies 
to identify bottlenecks, assess progress, and take corrective actions in a time-bound 
manner. 

24 
 
vii. Enhanced monitoring and reporting: A robust monitoring mechanism has 
been established, including monthly progress reports, site inspections, and digital 
dashboards for tracking physical and financial progress. 
viii. Issue escalation and resolution mechanism: A structured escalation 
framework has been instituted for addressing critical issues requiring inter-
departmental coordination and timely resolution at higher levels. 
ix. Emphasis on quality and safety compliance: Regular inspections are 
conducted to ensure adherence to prescribed quality standards and safety norms at 
construction sites. 
Through the above-mentioned efforts, the NESTS has successfully utilized the budget 
allocation of ₹4,896.40 crore received during the financial year 2025–26. 
 
 
Ministry of Tribal Affairs OM No. 16015/02/2026-PC dated 15.06.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
5th August, 2026                                                        
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                         
Standing Committee on 
Social Justice and 
Empowerment 
 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE  SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2025-26) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 
5TH AUGUST, 2026. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
     PRESENT 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
  MEMBERS 
  Lok Sabha 
2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
7. Smt. Bag Mitali 
8. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
9. Shri Godam Nagesh 
10. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
11. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
12. Adv. Priya Saroj 
13. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
14. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
15. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
Rajya Sabha 
 
16.  Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
17. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
18. Dr. Meenakshi Jain 
19. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Juby Amar  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar - Deputy Secretary 
 

27 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
 (i) XX  XX  XX  XX 
 (ii)XX  XX  XX  XX 
 (iii) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs 
 (iv)  XX  XX  XX  XX 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XX Does not pertain to this Report 
  

28 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
NINETEENTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2026-27)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF TRIBAL AFFAIRS 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 11  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No. 2.8, 3.9, 3.10, 4.5, 7.9, 8.7 
and 9.7  
7 64% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
Rec. Para No. 5.14 and 6.8 
 
02 18% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 5.12 and 5.13 
 
02 18% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
NIL  
00 00 
   100% 
 
 
 
        