i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND 
EMPOWERMENT  
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
11 

ii 
 
 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT 
(2024-25) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
 
 
     Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.8.2025 
                                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.8.2025 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2025/ Shravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
  


iii 
 
 
 
CSJE. NO:219 
 
Price : Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by 
  

iv 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE  
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iv) 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
CHAPTER -I REPORT  
CHAPTER- II Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government. 
 
CHAPTER- III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government's reply. 
 
CHAPTER -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted and which require reiteration. 
 
CHAPTER- V Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature. 
 
 APPENDIX  
Appendix-I  Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the 
Committee held on 06.08.2025. 
 
Appendix-II Analysis of Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ 
of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL  
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) 
SHRI P.C. MOHAN    - CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
   Lok  Sabha 
 
 2. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3. Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare 
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chhatrapal Singh Gangwar 
6. Km.Priyanka Satish Jarkiholi 
7. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
9. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
10. Smt. Bag Mitali 
11. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
12. Shri Godam Nagesh 
13. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
14. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
15. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
16. Adv. Priya Saroj 
17. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
18. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
19. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
20. Dr. Lata Wankhede 
21. Shri Surendra Prasad Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
23. Smt. Geeta alias Chandraprabha 
24. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
25. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
26. Shri Ramji 
27. Shri Rameswar Teli 
28. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
29. Smt. P. T. Usha 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Shri Niranjan Bishi 
   
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Krishendra Kumar       - Deputy Secretary 
 

vi 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Social Justice and Empowerment 
(2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, do present this Eleventh Report on the Action taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18.12.2024. The Ministry of Minority Affairs have furnished their replies indicating 
action taken on the recommendations contained in that Report on 19.03.2025. The 
Report was considered and adopted by the Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment at their sitting held on 06.08.2025. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs is given 
in Appendix. 
 
4. For facility of reference observations/ recommendations/ comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                                             
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social 
Justice and Empowerment 
 
      

1 
 
  
                     
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
 The Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ of the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs. 
1.2. The Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
18.12.2024. It contained 8 observations/recommendations.  Action Taken Replies of 
Government in respect of all the observations/recommendations have been examined 
and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government: - 
Rec. Para No. 2.9, 4.13, 4.14 & 5.8. 
(Total: 04, Chapter: 
II) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: –  
Rec. Para No. NIL 
(Total: 00, Chapter: 
III) 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 2.8, 3.16 & 5.9 
(Total: 03, Chapter: 
IV) 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: – 
Rec. Para No.2.10 
(Total: 01, Chapter: V) 
1.3. The Committee desire that action taken notes on the 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished 
to them at the earliest and in any case not later than three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with the replies received from the Government 
which need reiteration or merit comments. 

2 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.8) 
1.5. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee note that the delay in adoption of procedural changes 
introduced by  the Ministry of Finance such as SNA system, PFMS by the 
State/UT Governments  resulted in under-utilisation of Budgetary/ Revised 
Estimates in 2023-24 and 2024-25.  The Committee firmly believe that 
with these procedural changes the financial  resources of the Government 
of India will not get stuck up in the State treasury and  can be fruitfully 
utilised by the Ministry of Minority Affairs on other welfare measures. 
 Since the State/UT Governments have streamlined the system by adopting the 
procedural changes, the Committee expect that the Ministry of Minority Affairs 
would be able to spend their budgetary allocation for 2024-25 on the various 
schemes for the welfare of minority communities. The Committee are, however, 
apprehensive as they feel that the actual expenditure in 2024-25 may again be 
less than the Budgetary Estimates as the approval of several Schemes of 
Ministry of Minority Affairs is at various stages. The Committee, therefore desire 
that the approval of the Schemes of the Ministry of Minority Affairs should be 
expedited so that Schemes such as Scholarship Schemes and PM-VIKAS are 
implemented without any delay, thus avoiding under-utilisation of Budgetary 
Estimates. In view of the above, the Committee, recommend that the necessary 
mechanism may be evolved so that the Schemes requiring approval is timely 
obtained so that the benefit of the Schemes reaches the deprived sections of 
the Minority Communities.” 
1.6. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “The Observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.  
PMJVK: 
The Ministry has taken pro-active steps to utilise BE allocations in respect of 
PMJVK Scheme. The expenditure till 31.01.2025 under the scheme is ₹641.41 
crore against the RE of ₹908.90 crore. Furthermore, additional amount of ₹100 
crore have been requested for in the 2nd batch of supplementary for F.Y. 2024-
25 and it is assured that the fund will be utilised fully. 
Scholarship: 
Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and 
Meritc-cum-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified 
minority communities. Under these schemes, the scholarship amount is 
disbursed to the beneficiaries through Direct Benefits Transfer Mode under 

3 
 
Aadhar Mode Biometric System while the administrative expenses release to 
States/UTs on reimbursement basis. Hence the SNA system is not applicable in 
case of 3 scholarship schemes for minorities.  
As these schemes are yet to be approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 
neither any target fixed nor scheme could be implemented from 2022-23 
onwards. This Ministry endeavours to get these schemes approved for 
implementation beyond 2021-22 after harmonization with similar schemes of 
other Central Ministries, with approval of the Competent Authority in the 
Government at the earliest. 
PM VIKAS: 
Ministry has expedited the roll out of PM VIKAS scheme. Approval of the 
competent authority has already been obtained on the scheme of the guidelines 
of the PM VIKAS Scheme. The Ministry has started the receiving proposals from 
the eligible organisation under the scheme. Meeting of Screening Committee 
was held on 12th February,2025 to examine and discuss the proposals. The 
meeting of the Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
MoMA was held on 10th March,2025. On ground project implementation is 
expected to start in April,2025.” 
  
1.7. The Committee in their original Report had noted the under-
utilization of Budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Minority Affairs in 
2023-24 and 2024-25 due to  various reasons such as delay in adoption of 
procedural changes introduced by the Ministry of Finance for 
implementation of various schemes and pending approvals for continuation 
of three Scholarship Schemes namely Pre-Matric, Post-Matric and Merit-
cum-Means beyond 2021-22 because of the ongoing process of 
harmonization of these schemes with similar schemes of other 
Ministries/Departments.  The Committee had accordingly inter-alia desired 
that the approval of these schemes should be expedited without any delay 
to avoid under-utilization of Budgetary allocation. On scrutiny of the Action 
Taken Replies of the Ministry of Minority Affairs, the Committee find that 
the process of harmonization of scholarship schemes with similar schemes 
of other Central Ministries is still not complete. As these Schemes are in 
abeyance since 2022-23, the Committee strongly believe that the education 
of the students must have suffered due to non-availability of financial 
assistance to them from these Schemes. It is the strong desire of the 

4 
 
Committee that the students should not be made to suffer for no fault and 
necessary efforts should be made by the Ministry of Minority Affairs.  Since 
these scholarship schemes are crucial for educational upliftment of 
economically weaker sections of Minority communities, the Committee 
recommend that concrete steps need to be taken to complete the process 
of the harmonization in a time bound manner so that the students can avail 
the benefits of the schemes as being availed by the students of the similar 
Schemes of other Central Ministries.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.16) 
1.8. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee find that the Ministry of Minority Affairs implements Pre-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Merit cum means based 
scholarship, Maulana Azad National Fellowship and Padho Pradesh Scheme for 
the educational empowerment of minority communities. The Committee, 
however, find that the Maulana Azad National Fellowship and Padho Pardesh 
Scheme have been discontinued with effect from 2022-23 and the remaining 
educational empowerment Schemes viz. Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-
Matric Scholarship Scheme are pending for approval since 2021-22. The 
Committee are of the view that education of the students belonging to minority 
communities should not be made to suffer for the administrative delays and 
necessary measures should be taken to ensure that there is no interruption in 
implementation of the Schemes. Since, the process of harmonisation of 
Scholarship Schemes of all the Ministries/ Departments is in progress, the 
Committee desire this exercise should be expedited. The Committee are aware 
that several other educational empowerment Schemes such as National 
Fellowship, National Overseas Scholarship, Free Coaching, Residential 
education, etc. are being implemented for the educational empowerment of 
various marginalised sections of the society by various Ministries/Departments. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry of Minority Affairs to examine 
the need of implementing other educational empowering schemes for the poor 
students of minority communities so that they may also avail the best of 
education and contribute in the growth of the nation. The Committee would 
also like to recommend that the Scholarship Schemes pending for approval 
should be approved without further delay.” 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
1.9. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
“Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and 
Meritc-m-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified 
minority communities. As these schemes are yet to be approved for 
implementation beyond 2021-22 neither any target fixed nor scheme could be 
implemented from 2022-23 onwards. This Ministry endeavours to get these 
schemes approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 after harmonization 
with similar schemes of other Central Ministries, with approval of the Competent 
Authority in the Government at the earliest.” 
 
1.10. The Committee in their Original Report found that several schemes 
such as National Fellowship, National Overseas Scholarship, Free Coaching, 
Residential Education, etc. are being implemented without any interruption 
in other Central Ministries/Departments such as Department of Social 
Justice and Empowerment, Department of Empowerment of Persons with 
Disabilities and Ministry of Tribal Affairs.  However, these schemes have 
been discontinued by Minority Affairs.  In the absence of these schemes, 
the Ministry of Minority Affairs is depriving needy and deserving students 
of Minority communities from pursuing higher education.  The Committee 
had accordingly recommended to reconsider the decision to discontinue the 
above-mentioned educational schemes for minority communities.  The 
Committee, however, find from the Action Taken Replies of the Ministry of 
Minority Affairs that no action has been taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
The Committee firmly believe that deprived sections of the society from 
across the communities deserve to pursue higher education, hence, 
members of the Minority Community should avail same benefits as being 
provided to other marginalised sections of the society by the other Central 
Ministry/Departments. The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry of Minority Affairs should take 
affirmative action in this regard. 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.9) 
1.11. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Virasat ka Samvardhan (PM 
VIKAS) Scheme created by merging various Schemes i.e., Seekho aur Kamao, 
USTTAD, Hamari Dharohar, Nai Roshni and Nai Manzil was allocated ₹540.00 
crore in 2023-24. The Committee also note that under PM VIKAS Committed 
Liabilities head, Actual Expenditure was ₹209.42 crore out of Revised Estimates 
of ₹215.98 crore in 2023-24. The Committee further note that under PM VIKAS 
Scheme head, for the year 2023-24 the Revised Expenditure was ₹109.88 crore 
and no expenditure could be made as the scheme did not initiate. Since the 
Scheme is approved till 2025-26, the Committee believe that the Ministry of 
Minority affairs will make efforts to ensure that the benefits reaped from the 
erstwhile Schemes by the poor section of the minority communities would 
continue. The Committee recommend that the Department should take steps 
to remove all the hurdles in implementation of the Scheme so that BE for the 
year 2024-25 would be utilized fully. The committee would like to be informed 
in this regard.” 
 
1.12. The Ministry of Minority Affairs, in their Action Taken Reply, have submitted as 
under:- 
 “The observation of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.” 
 
1.13. In their original Report, the Committee noted that the several 
schemes such as Seekho aur Kamao, USTTAD, Hamari Dharohar, Nai Roshni, 
and Nai Manzil have been merged into a single scheme i.e., Pradhan Mantri 
Virasat Ka Samvardhan (PM VIKAS) but no expenditure was incurred under 
the Scheme in the year 2023-24. The Committee had, accordingly, 
recommended the Ministry of Minority Affairs to take steps to remove all 
the hurdles in implementation of the Scheme so that BE for the year 2024-
25 is fully utilized as the 15th Finance Commission cycle will come to an end 
by 2025-26.  The Committee are not satisfied with the routine reply of the 
Ministry that they have noted the observations of the Committee for 
compliance. The Committee expected a more comprehensive reply, clearly 
outlining the concrete steps taken to ensure full utilization of Budget 
allocation in 2024-25 under the scheme.  Hence, the Committee desire that 

7 
 
the Ministry should make sincere efforts to address the issues hindering 
expenditure and ensure timely approval of viable projects/proposals under 
all the four components of PM-VIKAS Scheme so that the allocated funds 
are fully utilized.  The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise them 
about the steps taken in this regard at Final Action Taken stage. 
 
 
  

8 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9) 
The Committee note that ₹2,064.95 crore were surrendered by the Ministry of Minority 
Affairs out of Budgetary Allocation of ₹3,094.60 crore in 2023-24. The Committee find 
that the major reasons for surrendering of funds are revalidation of applications under 
Pre-Matric, Post-Matric and Merit cum means Scholarship Schemes, discontinuation of 
some Schemes, less / non-receipt of proposals from State/ UT Governments. The 
Committee feel that the responsibility of implementation of the Schemes since lies 
with the States/ UT Governments, they should timely complete all the procedural 
formalities on their part so that the Ministry of Minority Affairs is able to release funds. 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Minority Affairs should develop a 
mechanism to guide the various implementing agencies so that a delay by State/UT 
Governments is avoided and may also examine incorporating a penal provision against 
the State/ UT Governments in case the response from the State/ UT Governments is 
not received in a stipulated time period 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and Meritc-
m-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified minority 
communities. Under these schemes, the scholarship amount is disbursed to the 
beneficiaries through Direct Benefits Transfer Mode under Aadhar Mode Biometric 
System while the administrative expenses release to States/UTs on reimbursement 
basis.  
As these schemes are yet to be approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 neither 
any target fixed nor scheme could be implemented from 2022-23 onwards. This 
Ministry endeavours to get these schemes approved for implementation beyond 2021-
22 after harmonization with similar schemes of other Central Ministries, with approval 
of the Competent Authority in the Government at the earliest. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs    OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget    Dated      
19.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13) 
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry of Minority Affairs by 
developing community infrastructure and basic amenities in the identified areas for 
improving the quality of life of the minority community under Multi-Sectoral 
Development Scheme. The Committee believe that the Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas 
Karyakram (PMJVK) introduced in 2017-18 to replace Multi-Sectoral Development 
Scheme has great potential to further improve the quality of life as it would cover the 
entire country including aspirational districts. The Committee note that the allocation 

9 
 
to the Ministry of Minority Affairs under this head has considerably gone down in 
comparison to the allocation made in 2021-22 and 2022-23. The Committee feel that 
since all the districts in the Country are covered under the Scheme, the allocation 
should have been enhanced. There is no doubt that the State/UT Government plays 
an important role as they have been entrusted the responsibility of implementing the 
Scheme, however, the Ministry of Minority Affairs cannot absolve themselves from the 
responsibility to successfully implement the Scheme hence State/UT Governments 
should have been regularly pursued to follow the PFMS and SNA guidelines. The 
Committee are happy to find that the PFMS and SNA guidelines have now been 
adopted by most of the States and UTs but would like the Ministry to ensure that the 
remaining States/UTs also comply to the PFMS and SNA guidelines without any delay. 
In order to stop recurrence of such issues the Ministry of Minority Affairs may review 
them on regular basis. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance. The 
frequency of review meetings regarding implementation of PMJVK, timely completion 
of approved projects, adherence to the PFMS and SNA guidelines have been increased. 
States/UTs are being instructed and helped for the specific’s issues being faced by 
them for completion and execution of approved projects. 
  
Presently the expenditure status as Rs. 641.41 crore against the RE of Rs. 908.90 
crore as on 31.01.2025 is satisfactory.  During the financial year 2025-26, the budget 
estimates   for implementation of PMJVK scheme is    an amount of Rs. 1913.97 crore. 
  
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget Dated    
19.03.2025) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14) 
The Committee note that 809296 Projects have been completed and 115811 Projects 
are in progress under Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK). The Committee 
find that 145981 projects have been dropped due to various reasons but not due to 
non-receipt/availability of funds from State/UT Governments. The most prevalent 
reasons for dropping the Projects is due to the non-availability of land for the Project 
and inordinate delay on part of the respective States/UTs. The Committee find that 
the Ministry of Minority Affairs would ensure that the funds are released for newly 
Projects only after completion of due tendering process and award of works and have 
also advised the State/UT Governments to utilize the unspent balance in SNA Account 
for completion of ongoing Projects before asking for fresh funds and reconcile the 
account with the Central Government. The Committee also find that hew Projects 
would be approved only after review of performance regarding execution of earlier 
approved Projects to the concerned State/UTs/CGO. The Committee hope that the 
steps taken by the Ministry would yield the desired results and the Ministry, in future, 
may not face any difficulty in execution of the Projects approved by them. Since large 

10 
 
number of Projects sanctioned to States/CGOs are under execution, the Committee 
would like the Ministry to lay down the time limit for completion of these Projects so 
that they are not inordinately delayed as delay increases the cost and also causes the 
inconvenience to the beneficiaries. Further, the Committee are sure that a mobile app 
PMJVK Bhuvan developed by the Ministry would help in keeping check on the progress 
of the Projects under execution, however, Committee desire that the Ministry will 
ensure that all the State/UT Governments will take necessary steps to geo-tag all such 
Projects a time bound manner and the Ministry may caution the State/UT 
Governments in case of any irregularity or delay observed. The Committee strongly 
believe that the infrastructure and basic amenities created under the scheme are 
crucial for improving the quality of life of the people belonging to Minority communities 
and the Projects dropped must have been a great service for them. The Committee 
desire that these dropped projects may be revisited with a view to revive them and 
the necessary steps may be taken by the Ministry of Minority Affairs to address the 
hindrances execution of such Projects. The Committee would like to be apprised in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Most of the observation of Hon’ble committee are already being implemented 
by the Ministry.  Further, the Ministry from time-to-time issues instructions to the 
States /UTs/ CGOs for timely execution and completion of the projects keeping in view 
the principle of time overrun means cost overrun. During the review meeting taken at 
the level of Joint Secretary in December, 2024 and again at the level of the Secretary 
(Minority Affairs) in January, 2025 all the State Govt. have been instructed to complete 
the projects units by the June 2025 which were sanctioned up to the year 2020-21. A 
National Review Meeting held on 11.03.2025 under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(MA), with representatives from the State/UT Governments and CGOs to review and 
evaluate the performance of States/UTs/CGOs in execution of PMJVK. 
  
As regard the dropped projects, this is to state that all the units have been 
dropped after due consultations and as requested by the concerned State Govts. /U.T. 
Administrations / CGOs only. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget    
19.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.8) 
 
Keeping the importance of skill development for the financial independence and 
growth of the poor people in the country, the Committee strongly feel that the 
erstwhile Schemes of skill development of the Ministry of Minority Affairs viz., Seekho 
aur Kamao, USTTAD, Hamari Dharohar, Nai Roshni and Nai Manzil may have served 
the purpose for poor people in the Minority Communities. The Committee note that 
large number of people from the Minority Communities benefitted from these Schemes 

11 
 
during 2018-19 to 2022-23. However, these Schemes are not in operation since 2023-
24. The Committee are of the view that any move of the Government to dilute them 
would adversely affect the economic empowerment of the Minority Communities. The 
Committee find that the Ministry of Minority Affairs have spent ₹ 209.42 crore on the 
committed liability after merger of all these Schemes into a single scheme called 
Pradhan Mantri Virasat ka Samvardhan (PM VIKAS). The Committee hope that the 
Ministry of Minority Affairs will continue funding the committed liability for the required 
period so that beneficiaries undergoing training continue to get training. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the number of persons currently undergoing 
training under the erstwhile Schemes and the time by which their training would be 
completed. 
Reply of the Government  
PM VIKAS is an umbrella scheme converging five erstwhile scheme of the 
Ministry namely-Seekho aur Kamao, USTTAD, Hamari Dharohar, Nai Roshani and Nai 
Manzil. PM VIKAS scheme has the following components namely: 
I  Component   1: - Skilling and Training 
II Component   2:- Woman Leadership and Entrepreneurship 
III  Component  3:- Education(through NIOS) 
IV Component   4:- Infrastructure Development 
 
PM VIKAs Scheme shall integrate credit linkages through NMDFC and coordinate with 
other Ministries like Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and 
other stakeholders. 
 As the erstwhile schemes have already been converted into the Umbrella PM 
VIKAS scheme, thus there are no candidates currently undergoing training under these 
schemes. Ministry has expedited the roll out of PM VIKAS scheme. Approval of the 
competent authority has already been obtained on the scheme of the guidelines of 
the PM VIKAS Scheme. The Ministry has started the receiving proposals from the 
eligible organisation under the scheme. Meeting of screening Committee was held on 
12th February,2025 to examine and discuss the proposals. The meeting of the 
Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary MoMA was held   on 10th 
March, 2025. On ground project implementation is expected to start in April,2025. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs    OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget    Dated      
19.03.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8) 
The Committee note that the delay in adoption of procedural changes introduced by 
the Ministry of Finance such as SNA system, PFMS by the State/UT Governments 
resulted in under-utilisation of Budgetary/ Revised Estimates in 2023-24 and 2023-24. 
The Committee firmly believe that with these procedural changes the financial 
resources of the Government of India will not get stuck up in the State treasury and 
can be fruitfully utilised by the Ministry of Minority Affairs on other welfare measures. 
Since the State/UT Governments have streamlined the system by adopting the 
procedural changes, the Committee expect that the Ministry of Minority Affairs would 
be able to spend their budgetary allocation for 2024-25 on the various schemes for 
the welfare of minority communities. The Committee are, however, apprehensive as 
they feel that the actual expenditure in 2024-25 may again be less than the Budgetary 
Estimates as the approval of several Schemes of Ministry of Minority Affairs is at 
various stages. The Committee, therefore desire that the approval of the Schemes of 
the Ministry of Minority Affairs should be expedited so that Schemes such as 
Scholarship Schemes and PM-VIKAS are implemented without any delay, thus avoiding 
under-utilisation of Budgetary Estimates. In view of the above, the Committee, 
recommend that the necessary mechanism may be evolved so that the Schemes 
requiring approval is timely obtained so that the benefit of the Schemes reaches the 
deprived sections of the Minority Communities. 
Reply of the Government 
The Observations of Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance.  
 
PMJVK: 
The Ministry has taken pro-active steps to utilise BE allocations in r/o PMJVK 
Scheme. The expenditure till 31.01.2025 under the scheme is ₹641.41 crore against 
the RE of ₹908.90 crore. Furthermore, additional amount of ₹100 crore have been 
requested for in the 2nd batch of supplementary for F.Y. 2024-25 and it is assured that 
the fund will be utilised fully. 
 
Scholarship: 
Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and 
Meritc-cum-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified minority 
communities. Under these schemes, the scholarship amount is disbursed to the 
beneficiaries through Direct Benefits Transfer Mode under Aadhar Mode Biometric 
System while the administrative expenses release to States/UTs on reimbursement 

14 
 
basis. Hence the SNA system is not applicable in case of 3 scholarship schemes for 
minorities.  
As these schemes are yet to be approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 
neither any target fixed nor scheme could be implemented from 2022-23 onwards. 
This Ministry endeavours to get these schemes approved for implementation beyond 
2021-22 after harmonization with similar schemes of other Central Ministries, with 
approval of the Competent Authority in the Government at the earliest. 
PM VIKAS: 
Ministry has expedited the roll out of PM VIKAS scheme. Approval of the 
competent authority has already been obtained on the scheme of the guidelines of 
the PM VIKAS Scheme. The Ministry has started the receiving proposals from the 
eligible organisation under the scheme. Meeting of Screening Committee was held on 
12th February,2025 to examine and discuss the proposals. The meeting of the 
Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary MoMA was held on 10th 
March,2025. On ground project implementation is expected to start in April,2025. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs  OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget    Dated    
19.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16) 
The Committee find that the Ministry of Minority Affairs implements Pre-Matric 
Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Merit cum means based 
scholarship, Maulana Azad National Fellowship and Padho Pradesh Scheme for the 
educational empowerment of minority communities. The Committee, however, find 
that the Maulana Azad National Fellowship and Padho Pardesh Scheme have been 
discontinued with effect from 2022-23 and the remaining educational empowerment 
Schemes viz. Pre-Matric Scholarship Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme are 
pending for approval since 2021-22. The Committee are of the view that education of 
the students belonging to minority communities should not be made to suffer for the 
administrative delays and necessary measures should be taken to ensure that there is 
no interruption in implementation of the Schemes. Since, the process of harmonisation 
of Scholarship Schemes of all the Ministries/ Departments is in progress, the 
Committee desire this exercise should be expedited. The Committee are aware that 
several other educational empowerment Schemes such as National Fellowship, 
National Overseas Scholarship, Free Coaching, Residential education, etc. are being 
implemented for the educational empowerment of various marginalised sections of 
the society by various Ministries/Departments. The Committee would, therefore, like 
the Ministry of Minority Affairs to examine the need of implementing other educational 
empowering schemes for the poor students of minority communities so that they may 
also avail the best of education and contribute in the growth of the nation. The 
Committee would also like to recommend that the Scholarship Schemes pending for 
approval should be approved without further delay. 
 

15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and Meritc-
m-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified minority 
communities. As these schemes are yet to be approved for implementation beyond 
2021-22 neither any target fixed nor scheme could be implemented from 2022-23 
onwards. This Ministry endeavours to get these schemes approved for implementation 
beyond 2021-22 after harmonization with similar schemes of other Central Ministries, 
with approval of the Competent Authority in the Government at the earliest. 
 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget Dated 
19.03.2025) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9) 
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Virasat ka Samvardhan (PM VIKAS) 
Scheme created by merging various Schemes i.e., Seekho aur Kamao, USTTAD, 
Hamari Dharohar, Nai Roshni and Nai Manzil was allocated ₹540.00 crore in 2023-24. 
The Committee also note that under PM VIKAS Committed Liabilities head, Actual 
Expenditure was ₹209.42 crore out of Revised Estimates of ₹215.98 crore in 2023-24. 
The Committee further note that under PM VIKAS Scheme head, for the year 2023-24 
the Revised Expenditure was ₹109.88 crore and no expenditure could be made as the 
scheme did not initiate. Since the Scheme is approved till 2025-26, the Committee 
believe that the Ministry of Minority affairs will make efforts to ensure that the benefits 
reaped from the erstwhile Schemes by the poor section of the minority communities 
would continue. The Committee recommend that the Department should take steps 
to remove all the hurdles in implementation of the Scheme so that BE for the year 
2024-25 would be utilized fully. The committee would like to be informed in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted for compliance. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget Dated   
19.03.2025) 
 
  

16 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation Para No.2.10) 
The Committee note that the Schemes of the Ministry of Minority Affairs are now broadly 
classified into three categories viz. (i) Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram, (ii) Educational 
Empowerment initiatives; and (iii) Skilling and livelihood initiatives. The Committee believe 
that these Schemes are ray of hope for the poor people of Minority Communities and their 
welfare can be carried out with the sincere and effective implementation of the Schemes 
falling under each of the component. The Committee find that in many of the Schemes no 
physical targets were fixed. Since the welfare measures are meant for poor people of the 
minority communities, it becomes necessary that the physical targets are fixed annually to 
assess the success of the Scheme and also to find the percentage of population of minority 
community benefitted from these Schemes. Further, this would also help in appropriate 
allocation of funds under each Scheme at the beginning of the financial year. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Minority Affairs may examine the viability of fixing 
targets under each Scheme and develop a suitable system to annually fix the physical targets 
under various Schemes that have a quantifiable outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
The observation of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted for compliance. 
As regards, Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakram (PMJVK) required targets are fixed 
on the OOMF (Output Outcome Monitoring Framework) of the NITI Aayog.  Regular quarterly, 
half-yearly and annual reviews are done not only at the Ministry’s level but at the level of NITI 
Aayog. Ministry implements three scholarship schemes viz. Pre-Matric, Post Matric and Meritc-
m-Means for the educational empowerment of 6 centrally notified minority communities. 
Under these schemes, the scholarship amount is disbursed to the beneficiaries through Direct 
Benefits Transfer Mode under Aadhar Mode Biometric System while the administrative 
expenses release to States/UTs on reimbursement basis.  
As these schemes are yet to be approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 neither 
any target fixed nor scheme could be implemented from 2022-23 onwards. This Ministry 
endeavours to get these schemes approved for implementation beyond 2021-22 after 
harmonization with similar schemes of other Central Ministries, with approval of the 
Competent Authority in the Government at the earliest. 
(Ministry of Minority Affairs    OM No. G-20014/1/2025- Budget    Dated      
19.03.2025) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
06th August, 2025                                          
15 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)  
P.C. MOHAN 
Chairperson,                                 
Standing Committee on Social Justice 
and Empowerment 

17 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT (2024-25) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 06TH AUGUST, 2025. 
 
The Committee met from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Chairperson’s Chamber, 
Room No. 113, E-PHA, Block ‘B’, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
                     
    PRESENT 
  SHRI P.C. MOHAN - CHAIRPERSON 
    MEMBERS 
    Lok Sabha 
2.       Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
3.       Shri Bhaskar Murlidhar Bhagare   
4. Smt. Vijaylakshmi Devi 
5. Shri Chintamani Maharaj 
6. Shri Murari Lal Meena 
7. Shri Bhojraj Nag 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel 
9. Shri Rajkumar Roat 
10. Shri Matheswaran V. S. 
11. Shri Sasikanth Senthil 
12. Shri Anoop Pradhan Valmiki 
 
   Rajya Sabha 
 
13.    Smt. Sumitra Balmik 
14. Shri Narayana Koragappa 
15. Smt. Phulo Devi Netam 
16. Shri Rameswar Teli 
17. Smt. Mamata Thakur 
18. Shri Abdul Wahab 
19. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Mamta Kemwal  - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Vinay Pradeep Barwa  - Director 
3. Shri Krishendra Kumar  - Deputy Secretary 

18 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following draft Reports: 
(i) *** *** *** ***  
(ii)  *** *** *** *** 
(iii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024-
25)’ of the Ministry of Minority Affairs. 
 
3. The Chairperson then requested the Members to give their suggestions, if any, 
on the draft Reports. The Reports were adopted by the Committee without any 
modifications.  
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports 
and to present the same to both the Houses during the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
____________________________________________________________________ 
*** Does not pertain to this Report. 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN 
FOURTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2024-25)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF MINORITY AFFAIRS 
 
  Total  Percentage 
 
I. Total number of Recommendations 8  
II. Observations/ Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government- 
Rec. Para No.2.9, 4.13, 4.14 & 5.8 
4 50% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s reply: - 
NIL 
00 00 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: –  
Rec. Para No. 2.8, 3.16 & 5.9 
03 37.5% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government are interim in 
nature: - 
Rec. Para No.2.10  
01 12.5% 
   100% 
 