Union Government 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
Report No. 29 of 2013
(Performance Audit)
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Network Projects of 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
for Tenth Five Year Plan


 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on  
Network Projects of  
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 
for Tenth Five Year Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
Report No. 29 of 2013 
(Performance Audit) 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan i | P a g e  
 
 
 
 Para- 
graph No. 
Page 
No. 
   
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
CHAPTER 1- INTRODUCTION 
Organisation structure of CSIR 1.1 1 
Network Projects 1.2 2 
Scope of Audit 1.3 3 
Audit objectives 1.4 4 
Audit criteria 1.5 4 
Audit methodology 1.6 4 
Structure of Audit Report 1.7 5 
Acknowledgement 1.8 5 
CHAPTER 2- PLANNING, EXECUTION AND MONITORING OF NETWORK PROJECTS 
Delay in preparation of Network Project Guidelines 2.1 7 
Delays in sanctioning and completion of projects 2.2 7 
Deficiencies in identification and project formulation 2.3 8 
Deficiencies in involving industry with projects 2.4 11 
Non-utilisation of equipment procured under projects 2.5 14 
Monitoring and evaluation 2.6 14 
Impact assessment not conducted 2.7 17 
CHAPTER 3- OUTCOME OF NETWORK PROJECTS 
Development and commercialisation of technology 3.1 19 
Generation of intellectual property 3.2 22 
Publishing of research papers 3.3 24 
Generation of external cash flow 3.4 27 
Other outcomes 3.5 29 
CHAPTER 4- AUDIT FINDINGS FROM SPECIFIC PROJECTS 
Unproductive expenditure in executing a project without requisite 
infrastructure 
4.1 31 
Unfruitful expenditure due to non-utilisation of equipment 4.2 32 
Poor planning of project leading to incomplete activity 4.3 33 
Failure to take ethical clearance for studies on human subjects 4.4 34 
Incomplete activities under projects 4.5 34 
Contents 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
ii | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
 Page 
No. 
 
CHAPTER 5- CONCLUSION  39 
APPENDICES  
I List of Network Projects taken up by CSIR during Tenth Five Year Plan 43 
II Details of 27 projects selected for audit  46 
III Delay in sanctioning of network projects 50 
IV List of projects that were completed beyond scheduled duration of 
Tenth Plan 
52 
V Statement showing measurable deliverables proposed in 27 selected 
network projects 
53 
VI List of equipment procured and installed at the fag end/after 
completion of the project 
56 
VII Status of meetings of Monitoring Committee and Task Force  67 
VIII Project wise position of number of technologies developed and 
commercialised 
70 
GLOSSARY OF NAMES OF LABORATORIES OF CSIR 72 
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan iii | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been 
prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 of the 
Constitution for being laid before the Parliament. 
The report, covering the period upto March 2012, contains significant 
results arising from performance audit of Network Projects of 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for Tenth Five Year Plan 
(2002-07).  
The observations in this Report are those which were noticed by 
Audit during 2011-12.  For completeness, the observations relating to 
earlier years, not covered in previous Reports have also been 
included, wherever pertinent.  Similarly, results of audit subsequent 
to March 2012 have also been mentioned, wherever relevant. 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan v | P a g e  
 
 
 
Why did we decide to examine this issue? 
Government formulated the Tenth Five Year Plan with high expectations from Science and 
Technology sector in contributing to growth rate of the economy. As Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research (CSIR) had developed knowledge networks across its constituent 
laboratories, the Planning Commission suggested that Research and Development (R&D) 
efforts of CSIR should be consolidated and inter-institutional R&D projects should be taken 
up. Consequently, in Tenth Five Year Plan, CSIR adopted a new approach in selection and 
implementation of in-house R&D projects in its constituent laboratories by introducing 
network projects.  
Network project was defined as a project, where more than one CSIR laboratory collectively 
source inputs and implement the identified objectives together.   Emphasis was laid on 
networking of resources and capabilities of CSIR. According to the guidelines for network 
projects, the projects aimed at ‘generation of knowledge, usable knowledge and useful 
knowledge as products. Therefore, those projects which target usable and useful knowledge 
as products are exacted to afford commercialisable results’. 
During Tenth Five Year Plan, CSIR took up 54 network projects/programmes at estimated 
cost of `1860 crore. The emphasis of Planning Commission on consolidation of R&D efforts 
of CSIR laboratories and new methodology adopted by CSIR for implementing R&D projects 
in networking mode, together with significant financial outlay involved, prompted us to 
undertake performance audit of network projects.   
What were our audit objectives? 
Audit was conducted with a view to examine:  
• whether these projects were planned and executed efficiently and effectively 
in accordance with the guidelines laid down for network projects;  
• whether monitoring and evaluation mechanism of network projects was 
effective; and  
• whether expected benefits from projects in terms of generation of external 
cash flow, publishing of research papers and filing of patents were achieved.   
 
Executive Summary

Report No. 29 of 2013 
vi | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
What did Performance Audit reveal? 
Audit selected 27 network projects for detailed examination. Performance Audit revealed 
that: 
Planning, 
execution and 
monitoring of 
network 
projects 
 
CSIR formulated the guidelines for network projects only in September 
2004, more than two years after commencement of Tenth Five Year 
Plan.  By then, 26 out of 27 selected projects had already been 
sanctioned.   
There were delays in sanctioning projects, due to which actual 
commencement of the projects was delayed by periods ranging from 12 
to 34 months from the scheduled date of commencement i.e. April 
2002. 
Project proposals of 10 projects did not include any details of targeted 
outputs and measurable deliverables viz. financial, economical, 
technological and societal benefits over the five year period, as was 
required under the guidelines. Absence of deliverable parameters made 
defining the success of network projects more abstract rather than 
concrete. 
In five projects, laboratories failed to identify and involve industry at 
any stage during implementation of projects, even though it was stated 
in the guidelines that it was necessary to involve industry at some 
convenient stage of the project. 
38 items of equipment (each costing more than `10 lakh) costing 
`48.73 crore from 15 projects, were received/installed/commissioned 
either after completion of project or at the fag end of project duration.  
This resulted in non-utilisation of equipment for the intended purpose.  
There was shortfall in meetings of Task Force (TF) and Monitoring 
Committee (MC) against prescribed frequency, in 15 and 19 projects 
respectively, ranging between one to 90 per cent . Recommendations 
made by MC during its review of projects were not followed in two 
projects. 
Although network projects was a new initiative and was viewed as 
providing a new learning experience to CSIR, it neither carried out 
impact assessment of network projects on its own nor did it engage an 
external agency for the same.  
(Paragraphs 2.1 to 2.7)

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan vii | P a g e  
Outcome of 
network 
projects 
A total of 399 technologies were developed from 27 network projects, 
of which 51 technologies were transferred to end users, 38 
technologies were commercialised and revenue of `3.83 crore was 
realised as of July 2012. 
The research carried out with a total expenditure of `621.80 crore 
resulted in commercialisation of only 10 per cent  of the technologies 
developed and revenue generation of less than one per cent of the total 
expenditure on network projects.  
264 patents were filed out of which 103 patents were granted. Out of 
264 patents, only 41 patents constituting 16 per cent were filed jointly 
in networked mode.  
A total of 2,008 research papers were published. There were no joint 
publications in 17 out of 27 network projects. 677 papers (34 per cent) 
out of 2,008 had a journal impact factor of zero. 1,298 papers (65 per 
cent) had journal impact factor below 2 and 1,902 (95 per cent) papers 
had journal impact factor below 5. 
Total external cash flow (ECF) from 27 network projects was `79.74 
crore. There was no ECF from nine network projects. Total expenditure 
incurred on these projects was `199.16 crore.  
(Paragraphs 3.1 to 3.4)
Audit findings 
from specific 
projects 
Animal models developed by CDRI under a project executed at a cost of 
`30.56 crore could not be submitted to international agencies as the 
tests were carried out in facilities of CDRI that did not have GLP 1 
accreditation, which was a necessary pre-condition. 
Equipment procured at cost of `14.05 crore under a project taken up by 
CRRI remained unutilised, due to delay in procurement and injudicious 
procurement.  
Five single molecules developed by CSIR Headquarters under a project 
executed at a cost of `32.77 crore could not be taken to IND 2 stage, as 
CSIR could not establish facilities for testing the single molecules. 
(Paragraphs 4.1 to 4.3)
 
 
 
                                                            
1 Good Laboratory Practices 
2 Investigational New Drug 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
viii | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
What do we recommend? 
• CSIR may ensure timeliness in sanctioning plan projects having a definite time frame 
of implementation. 
• CSIR may ensure that in future, comprehensive project proposals containing defined 
and measurable deliverables expected to be achieved from the project are prepared.  
• The objective of CSIR being scientific and industrial research, adequate and minimum 
interaction with appropriate industry leading to commercialisation of its research 
should be formalised and monitored, for its projects.     
• CSIR may ensure timely procurement of equipment and their installation so that 
equipment are utilised in projects under which they were procured. 
• CSIR may ensure that meetings of various monitoring committees are held as per 
prescribed frequency. 
• In future, formal impact assessment of important projects may be done by involving 
outside experts along with CSIR’s own experts. 
• CSIR may ensure that targets are set in a judicious manner after assessing the 
available resources and associated risks of research, so as to present a realistic 
picture. 
• CSIR may ensure that resources required for a particular project are planned in 
advance and optimally utilised so as to avoid adverse impact on outcome of 
project. 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 1 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) was established in 1942 as an 
autonomous body registered under Societies Act, 1860 for scientific and industrial research 
and development (R&D). It is under administrative control of Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India.  
1.1   Organisation structure of CSIR 
The Society of CSIR comprises of 28 members and is headed by the Prime Minister of India, 
with the Minister, Science and Technology as its Vice President and Director General (DG), 
CSIR as the ex-officio Secretary. Functions of the Society include reviewing progress and 
performance of CSIR, giving policy directions and approving the annual report and yearly 
accounts of CSIR. The affairs of CSIR are administered, directed and controlled by a 
Governing Body (GB), which is headed by DG, CSIR. The DG, CSIR is also the Secretary, DSIR.  
The structure of CSIR is as under: 
  
 
Society 
 
  
   
 
  
   
Governing 
Body 
 
  
    
 
  
 
Advisory Board 
 Director 
General 
CSIR 
 Performance 
Appraisal 
Board   
     
 
  
Management 
Councils of 
respective 
laboratories 
 CSIR 
laboratories 
(37)  
each headed by 
Director  
 Research 
Councils of 
respective 
laboratories 
  
 
Chapter 1 - Introduction

Report No. 29 of 2013 
2 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
GB is assisted by Advisory Board and Performance Appraisal Board. Advisory Board provides 
science and technology inputs, reviews major R&D areas of CSIR and suggests new R&D, 
Networked/Mission oriented programmes. Performance Appraisal Board reviews the 
performance of CSIR laboratories and suggests remedial measures for improving their 
performance.  
There are 37 laboratories/Institutes under CSIR, each headed by a Director, who in turn is 
assisted by Research Council and Management Council.  
1.2  Network Projects 
Government formulated the Tenth Five Year Plan 1 with high expectations from Science and 
Technology sector in contributing to the growth of the economy. The responsibility of CSIR, 
as one of the largest research organisations in industrial sector, in helping the industry to 
achieve higher growth rates and become competitive globally was duly recognised. As CSIR 
had developed knowledge networks across its constituent laboratories, the Planning 
Commission suggested that R&D efforts of CSIR should be consolidated and inter-
institutional R&D projects should be taken up. Consequently, in Tenth Five Year Plan, CSIR 
adopted a new approach in selection and implementation of in-house research and 
development projects in its constituent laboratories by introducing network projects.  
 
                                                            
1  Period from 2002 to 2007  


Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 3 | P a g e  
Network project was defined as a project, where more than one CSIR laboratory collectively 
source inputs and implement the identified objectives together.  The salient features of such 
a project were: 
• Emphasis on networking of resources and capabilities of CSIR. 
• Both competence and resources were pooled and tasks were undertaken by 
participating laboratories. 
• Each network project was coordinated by one lead laboratory designated as the 
Nodal laboratory. 
• Selected network R&D projects were multi-disciplinary in nature. 
• The projects targeted substantial increases in value through inputs of science and 
technology in knowledge driven areas. 
• The output of network projects was expected to generate new areas of business.   
Planning Commission recommended a budgetary support of `2,430 crore for 
implementation of network projects, against which CSIR took up 54 network 
projects/programmes during Tenth Five Year Plan at estimated cost of `1,860 crore.  
The list of 54 network projects along with nodal and participating laboratories is given at 
Appendix I.   
1.3  Scope of Audit 
The emphasis of Planning Commission on consolidation of R&D efforts of CSIR laboratories 
and new methodology adopted by CSIR for implementing R&D projects in networking mode, 
together with significant financial outlay involved, prompted us to undertake performance 
audit of network projects.  
Performance Audit of network projects was conducted under Section 20(1) of Comptroller 
and Auditor-General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. Of total 54 
projects, three infrastructure development
2 projects with cost of `700 crore and four basic 
research3 projects with cost of `105 crore were excluded from the scope of audit.  Of the 
remaining 47 projects, 27 projects, all relating to applied research, with total expenditure of  
`622 crore were selected for audit. Projects were selected based on their estimated cost, 
also giving preference to projects executed by different nodal laboratories. Activities of 
                                                            
2  These projects related to setting up world class facility in drug research, development and manufacture of 
small civilian aircraft and acquisition of oceanographic research vessel. 
3  The projects related to comprehensive traditional knowledge digital documentation and library, 
mathematical modelling and computer simulation, National Science Digital Library and consortium access 
to Electronic Journals 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
4 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
projects which could not be completed during Tenth Five Year Plan and were extended in 
the Eleventh Five Year Plan were also examined.  Projects selected for audit are also given in 
Appendix I. 
1.4  Audit objectives 
Audit was conducted with a view to examine:  
•  whether these projects were planned and executed efficiently and effectively in 
accordance with the guidelines laid down for network projects;  
•  whether monitoring and evaluation mechanism of network projects was effective; 
and  
•  whether expected benefits from projects in terms of generation of external cash 
flow4, publishing of research papers and filing of patents were achieved.   
1.5  Audit criteria  
The criteria used to assess performance of network projects of CSIR were drawn from the 
following sources: 
•  Guidelines for Financial, Administrative, Scientific, Monitoring and MIS of Networked 
Projects (September 2004), referred to as the Guidelines hereafter; 
•  Targets, wherever set by CSIR for deliverables such as number of technologies 
developed, intellectual property generated, research papers published and amount 
of external cash flows generated, etc.;  
•  Minutes of meetings of various monitoring committees; 
•  Rules and regulations of CSIR e.g. Guidelines for Technology Transfer and Utilisation 
of Knowledgebase-2005; and  
•  Government of India rules and regulations. 
1.6  Audit methodology 
The Entry conference with CSIR was held on 21 November 2011. Audit was conducted 
between October 2011 and March 2012 during which records and documents at Nodal 
laboratories as well as participating laboratories were examined. Preliminary audit findings 
were issued to CSIR for their comments in April 2012. The audit conclusions after taking into 
                                                            
4  External cash flow is the total amount from various external sources like royalties, licensing, awards, 
contract R&D, consultancies, etc.  
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 5 | P a g e  
consideration replies of CSIR were discussed with the audited entity in an exit conference 
held on 19 October 2012. This report has been prepared after including results of 
discussions held in the exit conference. The revised report was issued to DSIR/CSIR on 30 
October 2013 for their comments. Replies of CSIR on revised report were awaited (30 
November 2013).  
1.7  Structure of Audit Report 
The findings, observations and recommendations of audit on selected network projects of 
CSIR are given in succeeding chapters, arrangement of which is as follows: 
Chapter 2 contains an overview of audit findings in planning, execution and monitoring of 
network projects by nodal laboratories and participating laboratories. 
Chapter 3 contains observations of audit on outcome of network projects, in terms of 
generation and commercialisation of technologies, generation of patents, publication of 
research papers, generation of external cash flow and capacity building. 
Chapter 4 contains audit findings from specific projects, such as delays in establishment of 
infrastructure required for the projects, injudicious procurements, inadequate planning, 
incomplete activities, etc.   
Chapter 5 contains conclusion of the report.   
1.8  Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation extended by CSIR Headquarters and various laboratories 
during conduct of the performance audit.  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 7 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
As discussed in Chapter 1, Network projects were projects in which more than one 
laboratory collectively sourced inputs in implementing the identified objectives. The 
projects were to be executed during Tenth Plan period. Network projects were envisaged as 
target oriented projects and their output was expected to generate new areas of business.  
For selection and implementation of network projects, CSIR formulated ‘Guidelines for 
Financial, Administrative, Scientific, Monitoring and MIS of Networked Projects’ (Guidelines) 
in September 2004 for guiding its constituent laboratories for successful execution of the 
projects. The Guidelines contained detailed mechanisms for identification and project 
formulation, preparation of project proposal, implementation of the project, financial 
arrangements, monitoring and MIS.  
The details of 27 selected projects including names of the nodal and participating 
laboratories, date of sanction, date of completion, number of activities taken up under the 
project and completed, sanctioned cost and expenditure of projects, outputs from projects, 
etc. is given in Appendix II. This chapter presents an overview of deficiencies observed by 
audit in selection, implementation and monitoring of 27 selected projects.  
2.1  Delay in preparation of Network Project Guidelines 
Audit observed that CSIR formulated the Guidelines for network projects only in September 
2004, after more than two years of commencement of Tenth plan.  By then, 26 of the 27 
selected projects had already been sanctioned.  Thus, applicability of Guidelines of CSIR 
regarding identification of the project and process of preparation of detailed project 
proposals were rendered redundant in most of the projects.  
CSIR did not offer comments on the observation (November 2013).  
2.2  Delays in sanctioning and completion of projects  
According to Para 2.1 of the Guidelines, laboratories were required to identify R&D areas for 
network projects and submit detailed project proposals to CSIR at the beginning of the Five 
Year Plan. Para 2.4.1 of the Guidelines stipulated that the date on which financial sanction 
was issued was deemed to be the date of start of each project. Para 2.4.1.2 (iv) further 
Chapter 2 –  Planning, execution and 
 monitoring of network projects 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
8 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
stated that since network projects were a planned activity, laboratories had agreed to 
complete the same during Tenth Five Year Plan period.  
Audit observed delays in sanctioning projects, which affected the schedule of activities of 
network projects and their completion within the plan period. Actual commencement of 
these projects was delayed by periods ranging from 12 to 34 months from the scheduled 
date of commencement i.e. April 2002, as given in Table 1: 
Table 1: Delays in sanctioning of Network Projects 
Delay in years Number of projects 
Upto one year 1 
More than one year and upto two years 24 
More than two years 2 
 
The detailed list of these projects is given in Appendix III . The delays in sanctioning of 
projects also led to consequential delay in their completion. Examination revealed that of 27 
projects, 14 were completed in time and 13 were completed after delays ranging from six to 
48 months. The details are given in Appendix IV.  
CSIR did not comment on the observation (November 2013).  
 
 
2.3  Deficiencies in identification and project formulation 
Para 2.1 of the Guidelines stipulated that laboratories of CSIR would identify, through 
internal exercise, discussions, meetings with peers and users, R&D areas of importance and 
project proposals would be prepared on the basis of the key areas identified through these 
discussions. The project proposals were to be complete with specific details and time 
schedules of activities and projects, user involvement (if any), target outputs, milestones, 
etc. Para 2.1.1 further stated that project proposals should detail the activities by including 
deliverables over the five year period in terms of financial, economical, technological, 
societal benefits, etc.    
Prior to issue (September 2004) of the Guidelines for network projects, Ministry of Finance 
(MoF) had also introduced (May 2003) guidelines for formulation, appraisal and approval of 
Recommendation 1: 
CSIR may ensure timeliness in sanctioning plan projects having a definite time frame of 
implementation. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 9 | P a g e  
Government funded plan schemes/projects. The MoF guidelines stated that terms of 
reference of project proposals should indicate development objectives in order of 
importance and deliverables/ outputs for each development objective should be spelt out 
clearly. Success criteria for each deliverable/output of the project should be specified in 
measurable terms to assess achievements against the goals.  
Audit observed deficiencies in identification of project objectives and project formulation, 
which are discussed below:  
2.3.1  Project deliverables not identified in project proposals 
As stated above, project proposals were required to include targeted outputs and 
deliverables over the five year period. Audit observed that project deliverables for all 
parameters viz. financial, economical, technological and societal benefits were quantified in 
only one out of 27 projects examined by audit. Project proposals of 10 projects did not 
contain deliverables for any of the above measurable parameters and 16 project proposals 
contained only some of the project deliverables.  
The number of projects in which measurable deliverables were not found in their project 
proposals is given in Table 2. The detailed position is given in Appendix V.  
Table 2: Project deliverables not defined in project proposals 
Measurable deliverable No. of projects in 
which deliverable 
was not defined out 
of 27 projects 
Percentage of projects 
in which deliverable 
was not defined 
Number of  technologies  20 74 
Number of patents  14 52 
Number of publications  18 67 
Generation of revenue from sale of technology   26 96 
Generation of External Cash Flow (ECF) 18 67 
Generation of import substitution  24 89 
Generation of societal benefits  24 89 
Generation of employment  24 89  
 
Absence of deliverable parameters indicates that projects were taken up without definite 
targets, thereby leaving no criteria for measurement of achievements against any of the 
above parameters. This made defining the success of network projects more abstract rather 
than concrete.  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
10 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
CSIR did not offer comments on the observation (November 2013).  
 
 
 
2.3.2  Deficiency in project formulation 
In two projects, audit noticed that unrealistic project objectives and targets were set, which 
resulted in incomplete activities under the projects. In another project, it was seen that 
though participating laboratories were asked to rectify deficiencies in project proposals 
submitted by them, revised proposals were not received and the project was nevertheless 
sanctioned. The cases are detailed below:  
Projects having deficiencies in project formulation 
Exploration and exploitation of microbial wealth of India for novel compounds and 
biotransformation process- IMTECH 
IMTECH took up (January 2004) above project at sanctioned cost of `20.47 crore with a view to 
collect and isolate micro-organisms from various parts of the country and exploit them as a major 
source of biotechnological products and processes. It was seen that work on exploitation of 
microbial cultures was not completed because focus was restricted during the project tenure 
towards only exploration of microbial diversity.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that it was realised that it was not possible to explore and exploit the 
microbial diversity simultaneously. CSIR also stated that the targets set in the project were part of 
CSIR’s ambitious delivery strategy and were of an indicative range.  
Development of medicinal plant chemotypes5 for enhanced marker and value added  
compounds-CIMAP 
The project envisaged development of 20 chemovars from 10 identified medicinal plants which were 
to be released to farmers for commercial cultivation. The project was completed (March 2007) after 
incurring an expenditure of `21.66 crore. Audit observed that as against target of at least 20 
chemovars only five were developed, reportedly due to over ambitious targets.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that it always put ambitious targets and that not all scientific endeavours 
provided anticipated results.  
                                                            
5  A chemotype or chemovar is a chemically distinct entity in a plant or microorganism . 
Recommendation 2: 
CSIR may ensure that in future, comprehensive project proposals containing defined 
and measurable deliverables expected to be achieved from the project are prepared. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 11 | P a g e  
Design analysis and health assessment of special structures including bridges- SERC 
SERC took up (March 2004) above project at a sanctioned cost of `16.70 crore to be implemented 
with six6 other CSIR laboratories. Based on a review of operation of network project by CSIR, SERC 
impressed upon (January 2004) all participating laboratories to furnish inputs clearly defining scope 
of work of participating laboratory, correlation of inputs with specific outputs and deliverables and 
commitment on measurable performance in terms of papers, patents and technology transfer, etc.  
Audit observed that revised project proposals were received from only three laboratories namely 
AMPRI, CMERI and CECRI. Audit further observed that AMPRI made no commitment in respect of 
transfer of technology in its project proposal and CMERI did not indicate any target on development 
of technology or generation of patents.  In spite of non-receipt of revised project proposals from 
three out of six participating laboratories, consolidated project proposal was finalised and sanction 
obtained.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that output of the project was commendable as was evident from 
publications, developing knowledgebase, developing a few advanced courses, imparting trainings for 
capacity building of engineers, evolving patents and producing PhD thesis and M. Tech dissertations.  
The reply of CSIR may be viewed in the context that output of the project could not be measured in 
quantifiable terms in absence of targets. Further, of 24 technologies developed, none was 
transferred, no patents were granted and all the papers published had zero impact factor7.  
 
2.4  Deficiencies in involving industry with projects 
Para 6.1 of the Guidelines stated that ‘network projects of CSIR aim at the generation of 
knowledge, usable knowledge and useful knowledge as products. Therefore, those projects 
which target usable and useful knowledge as products are exacted to afford 
commercialisable results. In these projects, it was necessary to involve industry at some 
convenient stage’. The para further stipulated that when emergence of a process or product 
with potentials for commercialisation was recognised, an interested industry was to be 
invited to meeting of the monitoring committee, a suitable presentation made to the 
potential client and a business led model adopted for further work under the project.  
A total of 399 technologies were developed from 27 network projects, of which 51 
technologies were transferred and 38 technologies were commercialised. The sale of 
technologies generated revenue of `3.83 crore. As such, very limited knowledge generated 
by CSIR in the form of technologies were utilised for societal benefits. While examining the 
projects, audit found that in case of five projects, laboratories failed to identify and involve 
industry at any stage during implementation of projects, due to which the final 
product/process developed failed to find commercial use in the industry, as discussed 
below:  
                                                            
6  CBRI, CMERI, CRRI, NML, AMPRI and CECRI 
7  An indication of quality of a research paper is impact factor of the journal in which the paper is published.   

Report No. 29 of 2013 
12 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Failure to involve industry with projects during implementation 
Developing capabilities in advanced manufacturing technology- CMERI 
CMERI took up (January 2004) above project at a sanctioned cost of `17.85 crore. The project 
envisaged development of indigenous manufacturing technologies with a view to reduce 
dependence on imported technologies, promote self reliance in manufacturing of speciality 
components for strategic sectors, import substitution, improve product quality, etc. The project 
proposal stated that certain industries were consulted for their involvement in the project. 
However, there was no further involvement of industry with the project. Out of six technologies 
developed from the project, only one was transferred and one commercialised.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that Indian industries needed some more time to reach maturity to provide 
the essential inputs both from design side as well as from process technology side for product 
development.  Therefore transfer of technology to the industry did not take place.  
Developing capabilities & facilities for Micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) and  
sensors-CEERI 
CEERI undertook above project (January 2004) at a sanctioned cost of `31.71 crore. The project 
was completed (March 2007) after incurring total expenditure of `31.89 crore. 
The project proposal envisaged that the technologies and products developed under this 
programme would be transferred to the industry for production. It was however seen that industry 
was not involved at any stage of the project.  Monitoring Committee (MC) had also recommended 
(February 2005) that potential customers may be identified and invited to the next MC meeting to 
be informed of development under the project. MC further recommended (April 2007) that market 
survey of the polymer gas sensor should be done to ascertain the status of use of the sensors. 
Audit however observed that neither any potential client was invited to meetings of the MC nor 
was any formal market survey conducted by CEERI. Out of 16 technologies developed under the 
project, only two were commercialised.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that there were no real MEMS labs in the country. Also the Indian market 
was not taking risk and relied on imported technologies rather than investing in R&D. CSIR further 
added that in MC meetings, interim results were discussed which were sometimes confidential in 
nature and it was not appropriate to expose those to the industry. 
The reply of CSIR is contrary to the Guidelines of network project which provide for interested 
industries to be invited to MC meetings.  
Positioning Indian nutraceuticals8  and neutrigenomics9 on a global platform-CFTRI 
CFTRI took up (August 2003) the above project at a sanctioned cost (revised) of `14.74 crore. The 
project was expected to result in development of globally competitive and cost effective 
technologies for the production of diverse groups of nutraceuticals from foods.  One of the 
activities of the project was to develop effective active ingredients from oils and fats having 
nutraceutical and nutrigenomic properties. It was stated in the project proposal that efforts would 
be made to network with agencies like Technology Mission for Oils and Pulses (TMOP) and industry 
                                                            
8  Neutraceuticals are food products which have health and medical benefits e.g. ayurvedic medicines such as 
‘Çhyavanprash’. 
9  Neutrigenomics is a study focusing on the health benefits from a variety of plant resources and their 
ingredients. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 13 | P a g e  
for commercialisation of the process after generating initial results. Audit observed that neither 
TMOP nor industry was involved during implementation of the project. Although four processes 
were developed from this activity, only one process was stated to be commercialisable.   
CFTRI accepted (January 2012) that no efforts were made for ensuring participation of agencies like 
TMOP and industry at the beginning of the project and that commercialisation was initiated only 
after getting the outcome of the project.  
Environment friendly leather processing technology-CLRI 
The project was sanctioned (January 2004) by CSIR for implementation by CLRI based on the 
request of Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) for support from CSIR laboratories in 
addressing problems viz. TDS10 and colour water recycle in tanneries and desired that cost effective 
solutions be found in a time-bound manner (before December 2005) for enabling the industry to 
comply with the demands of Corporate Charter 11.  In the project proposal, CLRI envisaged that 
implementing the improved technologies developed through the project would lead to a saving of 
`40-60 crore per year for Indian leather sector and stated that this saving was possible only if CSIR 
was able to influence at least 75 per cent  of the industry in leather sector. The project was 
completed (March 2007) after incurring an expenditure of `17.44 crore.  
At the time of initiating the project, it was supported by the All India Skin and Hide Tanners and 
Merchants Association (AISHTMA).  Audit observed that there was no further interaction between 
CLRI/CSIR and the Association either during tenure of the project or after its completion.  Thus, 
though the project was designed for industry, CLRI did not make adequate efforts to involve 
industry during implementation of the project.  Out of 13 technologies developed, four were 
transferred, two were commercialised and revenue of `25 lakh12 was earned. Audit observed that 
one technology 13 stated to be transferred under network project was already being delivered by 
CLRI in the form of consultancy services since 2004-05 onwards.   
CSIR did not offer comments on the issue (November 2013). 
Development of catalysis and catalysts-NCL 
NCL took up (August 2003) above project at a sanctioned cost of `23 crore with a view to providing 
indigenous technologies for the chemical manufacturing industry. The project was completed 
(September 2007) after incurring total expenditure of `23 crore. Audit observed that there was no 
association with industry at any stage of the project. Out of five technologies developed, one was 
transferred and one was commercialised. Audit further observed that though outputs were 
achieved under three activities 14, scaling up work for possible commercialisation was not done in 
any of the activities as of July 2012. 
                                                            
10  Total Dissolved Solids 
11  Tanneries are one of the 17 red category industries which have entered into a Charter (March 2003) for 
Corporate Environmental Commitment for Pollution Prevention and Control with the Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) under Ministry of Environment and Forests.  The Charter included action points for 
the tanneries for waste management, reduction of pollution and compliance to environmental standards.  
12  Figures as per project completion report 
13  Technology for design packages for secured land fill 
14 (i) Out of 15 mesoporous materials synthesised, characterised and standardised, 13 materials were not 
scaled up; (ii) Under the activity ‘Catalysis for specialty chemicals’, out of eight processes developed, seven 
processes were not scaled up and (iii) Though process for synthesis of chiral auxiliaries was developed, it 
was not scaled up.  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
14 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that scaling up was out of the scope of the work as that would have 
involved an industrial partner and added that the processes would be scaled up as and when 
industry would show interest.  
The reply of CSIR was in contradiction of the project proposal, in which scaling up was mentioned 
as an objective under each of above three activities.  
 
 
 
 
 
2.5  Non utilisation of equipment procured under projects 
A sum of `375 crore was approved by CSIR for procurement of equipment for 27 projects, of 
which records relating to procurement of equipment of `172 crore were examined in audit.  
It was observed that 38 items of equipment (each costing more than `10 lakh) costing 
`48.73 crore from 15 projects, were received/installed/commissioned either after 
completion of project or at the fag end of project duration.  The list of equipment is given in 
Appendix VI . As such, projects were declared completed without installing/utilising the 
equipment.  The delayed procurement of equipment was injudicious, resulting in non-
utilisation of equipment for the intended purpose.   
 
 
2.6  Monitoring and evaluation 
Provisions for monitoring and evaluation of network projects were contained in Para 4 of 
the Guidelines for network projects. Three levels of monitoring of network projects were 
defined, viz. laboratory level, Task Force (TF) level and Monitoring Committee (MC) level. 
The monitoring mechanism for each level as per the Guidelines was as follows: 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                         
 
Recommendation 3: 
The objective of CSIR being scientific and industrial research, adequate and minimum 
interaction with appropriate industry leading to commercialisation of its research 
should be formalised and monitored, for its projects.
 
Recommendation 4: 
CSIR may ensure timely procurement of equipment and their installation so that 
equipment are utilised in projects under which they were procured. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 15 | P a g e  
Table 3: Monitoring mechanism for network projects 
Level Monitoring 
level 
Composition Scope of monitoring  Frequency 
of meeting 
First Laboratory Director of concerned 
participating Laboratory 
Monitoring of individual 
activities assigned to the 
Laboratory. Concerned 
scientists were required to 
make a presentation of the 
activity before the Director.  
Monthly 
Second Task Force  Director of the nodal 
Laboratory, Directors/ 
nominees of participating 
laboratories and Head, R&D 
Planning Division, CSIR.  
Monitoring of all the 
activities of the project. 
Participating laboratories 
were to present the 
progress of the activities to 
the Task Force.  
Quarterly  
Third Monitoring 
Committee  
Members of the Task Force 
and external experts with 
an eminent Scientist as 
Chairperson 
To study critically approved 
project proposal, evolve 
suitable and monitorable 
parameters, monitor timely 
delivery of goals and 
milestones and make 
suitable recommendations 
for further actions and 
course changes. 
Half yearly  
 
Audit evaluated second and third levels of monitoring mechanism and our observations are 
given in subsequent paragraphs. 
2.6.1  Shortfall in frequency of monitoring 
Audit observed shortfall in the meetings of TF and MC against prescribed frequency. The 
extent of shortfall is given in Table 4:  
Table 4: Shortfall in frequency of meetings of Monitoring Committee and Task Force 
Range of shortfall  
(in per cent) 
No. of projects having shortfall in 
meetings of Monitoring 
Committee 
No. of projects having shortfall 
in meetings of  Task Force 
No shortfall 5 1 
1 to 30 5 1 
31 to 60 10 7 
61 to 90 4 7 
Details not available 3 11 
TOTAL 27 27 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
16 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
It is seen that MC met at prescribed frequency in only five projects and TF in the case of only 
one project. In the remaining projects, shortfall ranged between one to 90 per cent. Project 
wise details of shortfall in meetings of the two committees are given in Appendix VII. 
The substantial shortfall in holding meetings of monitoring bodies reflected inadequate 
internal controls in monitoring mechanism.   
While accepting the observation, CSIR stated (July 2012) that besides full fledged MC 
meetings, several other meetings and field demonstrations were conducted as per advice of 
MC.   
 
 
2.6.2  Non-compliance with recommendations of MC 
Audit further observed that recommendations made by MC during its review of projects 
were not followed in two projects, as detailed below: 
Non-compliance with recommendations of MC 
Industrial waste minimisation and clean up-NEERI 
NEERI took up (April 2004) above project with the objective of studying the problems of at least 10 
categories of highly polluting industries and providing cost effective environmental solutions for 
treatment of air emissions, waste and waste water. The project was completed (September 2007) 
after incurring expenditure of `13.93 crore. 
During review of the project, MC felt (December 2004) that detailed milestones for pilot projects, 
field tests for commercialisation and utilisation of technology in the industry should be prepared and 
accordingly it circulated certain monitorable parameters 15 to all participating laboratories. The 
monitorable parameters were again circulated (August 2005) in MC meeting. However, audit 
observed that no further progress against the same was furnished in the next four meetings of MC.  
Subsequently MC recommended (March 2007) closure of 11 activities, completion of 22 activities 
and carrying forward of four activities.  MC also recommended that project reports with techno 
economic feasibility, lab scale demonstration, field demonstration and industrial demonstration 
should be prepared in respect of the closed projects. Though this was reiterated (September 2007) 
in the final MC meeting NEERI did not prepare project reports. 
                                                            
15  Execution of pilot projects and testing them in field for commercialisation and utilisation of technology by 
the industry, identifying the technologies, benchmarking them and finding industrial partner for fine tuning 
the solution, delineation of milestones with an emphasis on commercialisation and utilisation of 
technology, studying technology on a pilot scale at a user site , etc. 
Recommendation 5: 
CSIR may ensure that meetings of various monitoring committees are held as per 
prescribed frequency. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 17 | P a g e  
 
CSIR stated (July 2012) that out of 37 activities, objectives of 27 activities were achieved completely.  
CSIR, however, did not comment on the issues of non-preparation of detailed milestones and project 
reports as directed by MC. 
Coal preparation for quality enhancement-CIMFR 
CIMFR took up (May 2004) above project at a sanctioned cost of `14 crore.  While reviewing the 
project, MC recommended (June 2006) that techno-economic feasibility study may be conducted. 
However, this was not done by CIMFR. In its next meeting (December 2006) MC, while expressing its 
dissatisfaction, recommended extension of the project duration by six months for preparation of the 
techno-economic feasibility report. Audit, however, observed that techno-economic feasibility 
report was not prepared by CIMFR.  The project was closed (September 2007) after incurring total 
expenditure of `7.31 crore. 
CSIR did not offer any comment on the issue (November 2013).  
 
2.7  Impact assessment not conducted 
The Guidelines of network projects stated that an impact assessment mechanism for each 
network project would be designed and implemented by CSIR both as an internal alert 
during execution and in final outcome analysis (para xxii of summary recommendations). 
The Guideline however, did not specify how or by whom impact assessment would be 
carried out.  It was observed that CSIR neither carried out impact assessment of network 
projects on its own nor did it engage an external agency for the same.  
CSIR confirmed (August 2012) that as the Guidelines did not provide for external-body 
evaluation of outcome of the projects, no external-body evaluation was conducted.  
Audit is of the opinion that impact assessment of network projects was significant as it was 
a new initiative and was viewed as providing a new learning experience to CSIR. Further, an 
unbiased impact assessment would be possible only by involving outside experts in the field 
along with CSIR’s own expertise.  
 
 
Recommendation 6: 
In future, formal impact assessment of important projects may be done by involving 
outside experts along with CSIR’s own experts. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 19 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
The activities of CSIR during the Tenth Five Year Plan provided for target oriented network 
R&D. As per para 2.1.1 of the Guidelines, the project proposals should detail out the 
deliverables/outcome over a five year period in terms of financial, economical, 
technological, societal benefits, etc. Audit evaluated the outcome of research from network 
projects on the following parameters: 
•  number of technologies developed; 
•  intellectual property in terms of number of patents; 
•  publishing of research papers in scientific journals;  
•  generation of external cash flows
16; 
•  extent of inter laboratory cooperation 17; and  
•  development of human resources. 
Based on these parameters, the outcome of 27 selected projects is discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
3.1  Development and commercialisation of technology 
As stated earlier in para 2.4 of this report, network projects of CSIR aimed at generation of 
knowledge, usable knowledge and useful knowledge as products. Therefore, those projects 
that targeted usable knowledge and useful knowledge as products were to be exacted to 
afford commercialisable results.   
A total of 399 technologies were developed from 27 network projects examined in audit, of 
which 51 technologies were transferred to end users and 38 technologies were 
commercialised and revenue of `3.83 crore was realised as of July 2012.  The detailed 
position of project wise development and commercialisation of technologies is given in 
Appendix VIII. The summarised position is given in Table 5: 
                                                            
16  External cash flow is the total amount from various external sources like royalties, licensing, awards, 
contract R&D, consultancies, etc. 
17  During Entry Conference (November 2011), CSIR suggested that Audit should evaluate the outcome of the 
networked R&D efforts of CSIR Laboratories by covering both tangible and intangible benefits. The 
suggestion was agreed to and CSIR was requested to provide adequate inputs for evaluation of intangible 
benefits. However, no such input was received from CSIR.  
 
Chapter 3 –  Outcome of network projects 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
20 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Table 5: Summarised position of total number of technologies developed and transferred 
from 27 selected network projects 
Range of 
technologies 
developed 
through a 
single 
project 
Number of 
projects in 
which range 
of 
technologies 
in col. 1 
were 
developed 
Total number of technologies Expenditure 
incurred on 
the projects 
(` in crore) 
Revenue generated 
on transfer/ 
commercialisation 
of technologies  
(` in crore) 
Number of  
technologies 
commercialised 
as percentage 
of  number of 
technologies 
developed 
Revenue 
generated 
from sale of 
technologies 
as a 
percentage of 
expenditure 
incurred on 
the project 
Developed Transferred Commercialised 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
0 3 Nil Nil Nil 41.84 Nil Nil Nil 
1-10 12 67 21 9 280.45 0.90 13 0.32 
11-20 3 40 5 4 68.20 2.28 10 3.34 
21-30 5 115 3 3 118.86 0.13 3 0.10 
31-40 1 33 19 19 19.34 0.01 58 0.05 
41-50 2 82 3 3 44.49 0.51 4 1.15 
51 and 
above 
1 62 0 0 48.62 0 0 0 
Total 27 399 51 38 621.80 3.83 10 0.62 
 
Audit observed that:  
• The research carried out with a total expenditure of `621.80 crore through the 27 
projects resulted in commercialisation of only 10 per cent  of the technologies 
developed and revenue generation of `3.83 crore (till July 2012) which was less than 
one per cent of the total expenditure on network projects.  
• Of `3.83 crore revenue generated from 27 projects, only two 18 projects contributed 
`2.28 crore and `51 lakh respectively.  
• There was ‘nil’ technology development in case of three projects costing `41.84 
crore.  
• Three projects developed 144 technologies, but were able to commercialise only 
three technologies which generated revenue of `51 lakh.   
• In the case of two projects, although more than 20 technologies were developed 
from each project, none of them were transferred or commercialised. 
   
                                                            
18  (i) Environment friendly leather processing technology and (ii) Industrial waste minimisation and clean up 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 21 | P a g e  
The above statistics indicate that although CSIR was able to increase the stock of knowledge, 
it failed to transfer the same for larger benefits to society.   
As already mentioned in Chapter 2 of this report, the nodal laboratories were required to 
detail out the measurable deliverables/outcome of their projects over a five year period in 
terms of financial, economical, technological, societal benefits, etc. in the project proposals 
of the network projects. Audit, however, observed that out of 27 projects, targets for 
generation of technologies were defined in seven projects only. The status is as under: 
Table 6: Targets and achievements of projects in which measurable deliverables in terms 
of generation of technologies were defined. 
Name of Project Nodal 
laboratory 
Number of 
technologies 
targeted 
Number of 
technologies 
developed 
Shortfall 
(-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Percentage  
of shortfall 
(-)/ 
Excess(+) 
Industrial waste minimisation 
and clean up 
NEERI 10 41 (+)31 (+)310 
Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI 10 33 (+)23 (+)230 
Developing cells and tissue 
engineering 
CCMB 3 2 (-)1 (-)33 
Medicinal plant chemotypes 
for enhanced marker and 
value added compounds 
CIMAP 20 7 (-)13 (-)65 
Electronics for societal 
purposes 
CSIO 30 11 (-)19 (-)63 
New and improved road 
technologies 
CRRI 36 21 (-)15 (-)42 
Drug target development 
using in-silico biology 
IGIB 250 62 (-)188 (-)75 
Total 359 177 (-)182 (-)51 
 
Thus, target of development of technologies was exceeded in the case of two projects and 
shortfall in five projects ranged from 33 per cent  to 75 per cent . No targets were set in 
remaining 20 projects. 
Further, target for revenue realisation from sale of technologies was set in only one 
project19. Against target of revenue realisation of `10 crore from the project, achievement 
was ‘nil’.    
                                                            
19  Drug target development using in-silico biology- nodal laboratory: IGIB 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
22 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that direct economic impact of any project would need post project 
surveillance and assessment of the returns after a period of ten years of implementation of 
the project.  CSIR added that its recent economic analysis of several past projects had shown 
that total direct benefit to CSIR plus licensee plus user beneficiary was on an average over 
thousand times higher than the revenue received/granted by CSIR over a 10 year period.   
The reply of CSIR is not acceptable as (a) in many projects, targets were not defined; (b) 
targets were to be achieved over a five year period and (c) revenue realisation was less than 
one per cent  of expenditure as of July 2012. Further no document to justify revenue 
realisation over thousand times over investment was on record.  
3.2  Generation of intellectual property 
Major achievements of scientific research are primarily reflected in intellectual property 
rights (patents) and research publications.  The Guidelines also encouraged culture of multi-
lab and multi-author patents/papers under the network projects (para 3.9 (iv)). This was 
reiterated by CSIR in the entry conference (November 2011) wherein it was stated that 
involvement of scientists of more than one laboratory in filing patents together was very 
important.  
CSIR’s achievement as of July 2012 in generation of intellectual property in terms of filing 
and grant of patents from 27 projects is given below (patents filed both in India and 
abroad): 
Table 7: Patents filed and granted from 27 selected network projects 
Range of 
patents 
filed 
under a 
single 
network 
project 
Number 
of 
network 
projects 
in which 
patents in 
col. 1 
were filed 
Total number of 
patents 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of joint  patents  
 
Number of 
patents filed 
from earlier 
R&D projects 
but marked 
under network 
projects 
Net patents 
filed from 
network 
projects 
(Col. 3-
Col.7) 
Patent 
granted to 
patent filed 
in 
percentage 
Filed Granted Filed Granted 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
1-10 15 73 31 2 0 6 67 46 
11-20 5 78 13 20 2 12 66 20 
21-30 3 75 50 13 6 0 75 67 
31-40 1 38 9 6 0 0 38 24 
TOTAL 27 264 103 41 8 18 246 42 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 23 | P a g e  
It can be seen from the above table that: 
• In all 264 patents were filed out of which 103 patents were granted. 
• Out of 264 patents, only 41 patents constituting 16 per cent  were filed jointly in 
networked mode. 
• Of 41 patents filed jointly only eight patents (20 per cent) were granted. 
• Three projects implemented at a cost of `61 crore did not generate any patent. 
Audit further observed that out of 264 patents stated to have been filed, 18 patents were 
actually generated from earlier R&D projects but were exhibited under network projects. 
Further, out of 27 network projects selected, only 13 project proposals contained 
measureable deliverables for generation of intellectual property in terms of number of 
patents. The achievement of these 13 projects is given in Table 8:  
Table 8: Achievements in terms of generation of patents for 
projects in which targets were set 
Name of Project Nodal 
laboratory 
Number of 
patents 
targeted to 
be obtained 
Actual 
number of 
patents 
filed 
Shortfall Percentage  
of shortfall 
Developing new building construction 
materials 
CBRI 20 19 1 5 
Developing capabilities & facilities for 
Micro-electromechanical systems 
(MEMS) and sensors 
CEERI 50 16 34 68 
Positioning Indian nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics in a global platform 
CFTRI 60 7 53 88 
Medicinal plant chemotypes for 
enhanced marker and value added 
compounds 
CIMAP 25 10 15 60 
Capacity building for coastal placer 
mineral mining 
CIMFR 20 2 18 90 
Developing capabilities in advanced 
manufacturing technology  
CMERI  12 2 10 83 
Development and commercialisation of 
new bioactives and traditional 
preparation  
CSIR Hq.  50 29 21 42 
New and improved road technologies CRRI 7 1 6 86 
Drug target development using in-silico 
biology 
IGIB 50 18 32 64 
Newer scientific herbal preparations for 
global positioning 
IIIM 7 5 2 29 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
24 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Name of Project Nodal 
laboratory 
Number of 
patents 
targeted to 
be obtained 
Actual 
number of 
patents 
filed 
Shortfall Percentage  
of shortfall 
Exploration and exploitation of 
microbial wealth of India for novel 
compounds and  biotransformation 
process 
IMTECH 20 14 6 30 
Industrial waste minimisation and clean 
up 
NEERI 111 24 87 78 
Design analysis and health assessment 
of Special structures including bridges 
SERC 5 2 3 60 
Total 437 149 288 66 
 
Thus, it is seen from the table that none of the 13 projects in which targets for generation of 
patents were set, achieved the same. The shortfall ranged from five to 90 per cent.  
CSIR did not offer any comment on above issue (November 2013). 
3.3  Publishing of research papers   
As mentioned in para 3.3 above, major achievements of a scientific research organisation 
are reflected in its research publications. Besides, para 3.9 (iv) of the Guidelines provided for 
promoting the culture of multi-lab and multi-author papers. The Guidelines further 
stipulated that acknowledgement in publications to the specific network program should be 
included as means of relating outputs of the project (para 2.5.3.3).    
A total of 2008 research papers were published from 27 network projects selected for audit. 
The details are given in Table 9: 
Table 9: Number of publications from 27 network projects 
Number of 
publications 
from a single 
network 
project 
Number of 
network 
projects 
from which 
the 
publications 
in col.1 were 
made 
Total 
number 
of papers 
published 
Number of 
papers 
published 
jointly  
Names of the  nodal laboratories that undertook 
the network projects 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1-30 5 94 6 CIMFR, CFTRI, CSIO, IIIM and IIP 
31-60 10 403 31 CCMB, CGCRI, CIMAP, CIMFR, CMERI, CSIR (HQ), 
CRRI, IICB, IMMT and NIO 
61-90 4 288 7 CEERI, CLRI, IMTECH and NPL 
91 and above 8 1,223 60 CBRI, CDRI, IGIB, NAL, NCL, NEERI, NML and  SERC 
TOTAL 27 2,008 104  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 25 | P a g e  
From the table it can be seen that although CSIR had achieved a noteworthy average of 74 
publications per network project, only 104 publications constituting five per cent of the total 
were brought out jointly by participating laboratories. Audit further observed that  
•  There were no joint publications in 17 out of 27 network projects. 
•  Although 2008 papers were stated to be published from the 27 projects, there was 
no record to show acknowledgment in publications to the specific network project, 
as required under the Guidelines.  
An indication of quality of a publication is impact factor20 of the journal in which the paper is 
published. Impact factor indicates standing of the journal in the world and is used to 
evaluate research output of scientists. The value of impact factor generally lies between 0 
and 50 but varies from subject to subject. 
The journal impact factors of research publications from 27 network projects was as shown 
in Table 10: 
Table 10: Impact factor of publications 
Range of Impact Factor Number of Publications 
0 677 
0 to 1 324 
1 to 2 297 
2 to 5 604 
5 to 10 76 
10 to 20 7 
20 to 30 0 
Above 30 1 
Not available 22 
Total 2,008 
 
It can be seen from the table that 
•  677 papers (34 per cent ) out of 2,008 had a journal impact factor of zero and 
therefore were not quoted anywhere. 
                                                            
20  Impact factor is defined as the ratio of the number of citations received by a research paper in a particular 
year to the number of research papers published over a fixed period of time (usually two years), in a 
particular periodic publication, i.e journal.  
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
26 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
•  Of 2,008 research papers published, 1,298 papers (65 per cent) had journal impact 
factor below 2 and 1,902 (95 per cent) papers had journal impact factor below 5. 
•  Only 84 papers (4.18 per cent) had journal impact factor above 5. 
Thus, although network projects resulted into a large number of published research papers, 
a significant number of these (95 per cent) had impact factor of less than 2.  
Audit also observed that targets for publications were set in only nine projects and no 
targets were fixed for joint publications. The achievements under these nine projects are 
given in Table 11: 
Table 11: Achievements in terms of research papers published in nine projects  
where targets were set 
Name of Project Nodal 
laboratory 
Number of 
papers 
proposed to 
be published 
Actual 
number of 
papers 
published 
Shortfall 
(-)/ 
Excess (+) 
Percentage  
of shortfall 
(-)/ excess 
(+) 
Medicinal plant chemotypes 
for enhanced marker and 
value added compounds 
CIMAP 25 35 (+)10 (+)40 
Capacity building for coastal 
placer mineral mining 
CIMFR 40 47 (+)7 (+)18 
Developing capabilities in 
advanced manufacturing 
technology  
CMERI  25 44 (+)19 (+)76 
Drug target development 
using in-silico biology 
IGIB 100 129 (+)29 (+)29 
Exploration and exploitation 
of microbial wealth of India 
for novel compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH 12 69 (+)57 (+)475 
Design analysis and health 
assessment of Special 
structures including bridges 
SERC 50 357 (+)307 (+)614 
Industrial waste minimisation 
and clean up 
NEERI 295 115 (-)180 (-)61 
Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI 150 134 (-)16 (-)11 
Positioning Indian 
nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics in a global 
platform 
CFTRI 35 28 (-)7 (-)20 
Total 732 958 (+)226 (+)31 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 27 | P a g e  
It can be seen that targets for publishing of research papers were exceeded in six projects 
and there was shortfall in remaining three projects.  
Thus, the overall achievement of CSIR in terms of number of research papers published was 
noteworthy, however, the efficacy of networking through involvement of more than one 
laboratory in writing scientific papers was insignificant.  
CSIR did not offer comments on the issue (November 2013).   
3.4  Generation of External Cash Flow 
One of the performance indicators prescribed in the Guidelines was extent of external cash 
flow (ECF) realised through projects. The status of ECF from 27 selected projects as of July 
2012 is given in Table 12:  
Table 12: Status of External Cash Flow from 27 selected projects 
ECF generated from 
a single network 
project 
Number of 
projects from 
which ECF in 
Col.1 
generated 
Total ECF 
generated 
(` in crore) 
 
Names of the nodal laboratories 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
No ECF 9 0 CCMB, CDRI, CFTRI, CSIO, CSIR Hq, IICB, IIIM, 
IMTECH and NIO 
Upto `1 crore 4 0.52 CIMAP, IIP, NCL and SERC  
`1-2 crore 4 6.93 CGCRI, CIMFR, IMMT and NEERI 
`2-3 crore 1 2.27 CLRI 
`3-4 crore Nil Nil - 
`4-5 crore  1 4.01 CMERI 
`5 -10 crore 5 38.75 CBRI, CIMFR, CRRI, IGIB and NML  
More than `10 
crore 3 142.26 CEERI, NAL and NPL 
Total 27 194.74  
 
It can be seen from the above table that there was no ECF from nine network projects. Total 
expenditure incurred on these projects was `199.16 crore.  
Audit further observed that out of `194.74 crore stated to have been generated by 18 
projects, amount of `115 crore was not generated from network projects, but from 
sponsored and grant-in-aid projects. Thus, actual ECF from network projects was only 
`79.74 crore.    

Report No. 29 of 2013 
28 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Further, it was seen that targets for generation of ECF were given in only nine projects. The 
achievement of these nine projects is given in Table 13: 
Table 13: Achievements in terms of generation of ECF from 
nine projects where targets were set 
      (Amount in ` crore) 
Name of Project Nodal 
laboratory 
Amount of 
ECF 
proposed to 
be generated 
Amount of 
ECF 
generated 
Shortfall Percentage  
of shortfall 
Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI 9.5 9.5 0 0 
Developing capabilities & 
facilities for Micro-
electromechanical systems 
(MEMS) and sensors 
CEERI 15 10.5 4.5 30 
Positioning Indian 
nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics in a global 
platform 
CFTRI 2 0 2 100 
Medicinal plant chemotypes 
for enhanced marker and 
value added compounds 
CIMAP 2.5 0.21 2.29 92 
Environment friendly leather 
processing technology 
CLRI 40 2.275  37.725 94 
Developing capabilities in 
advanced manufacturing 
technology  
CMERI  16 4 12 75 
New and improved road 
technologies 
CRRI 9 8.1 0.9 10 
Exploration and exploitation 
of microbial wealth of India 
for novel compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH 2.5 0 2.5 100 
Physico-mechanical, electrical 
and electronic standards 
NPL 20.8 16.76 4.04 
 
19 
TOTAL 117.30 51.35 65.95 56 
 
Thus ECF target was achieved in only one project. The shortfall in the remaining eight 
projects was between 10 to 100 per cent.  
CSIR did not offer comments on the observation (November 2013). 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 29 | P a g e  
 
 
 
3.5  Other outcomes 
 
3.5.1  Development of human resources  
According to Para 4.2 of the Guidelines, Task Force was required to submit quarterly 
performance report of network projects to CSIR. One of the parameters for reporting 
significant scientific and technical achievements was human resource development. 
Although no targets were set for development of human resources, the position in terms of 
number of Ph.Ds awarded and number of Project Assistants trained from 27 selected 
network projects was as below: 
Table 14: Number of Ph.Ds awarded from network projects 
Number of 
Ph.Ds awarded 
from a single 
network project 
No. of 
Projects 
from 
which 
Ph.Ds in 
Col.1 
awarded 
Total 
number of 
Ph.Ds. 
Nodal laboratories 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
0 5 0 CCMB, CIMFR, CSIO, CRRI, NPL 
1-20 20 135 
CFTRI, IIIM, IIP, CGCRI, CIMAP, CIMFR, CMERI, CSIR 
(HQ), IICB, IMMT, NIO, CEERI, CLRI, IMTECH CBRI, 
NAL, NCL, NEERI, NML and  SERC 
21-40 1 30 CDRI 
41-60 0 0 - 
61 and above 1 66 IGIB 
Total 27 231  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation 7: 
CSIR may ensure that targets are set in a judicious manner after assessing the available 
resources and associated risks of research, so as to present a realistic picture. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
30 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Table 15: Number of Project Assistants trained from network projects 
Number of 
Project 
Assistants 
trained from a 
single network 
project 
No. of 
Projects in 
which 
Project 
Assistants 
in Col.1 
trained 
Total 
number of 
Project 
Assistants 
Nodal laboratories 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
0 5 0 CDRI, CFTRI, NAL, NCL and NPL 
1-30 13 219 CCMB, IIIM, CGCRI, CIMAP, CIMFR, CMERI, CSIO, 
IMMT, NIO, CEERI, CLRI and NML 
31-60 4 178 CRRI,IIP,IMTECH and SERC 
61-90 1 81 CSIR (HQ) 
91 and above 4 580 CBRI, IGIB, NEERI and IICB 
Total 27 1058  
 
It would be seen from the above data that: 
•  A total of 231 Ph.Ds were awarded and 1058 Project Assistants trained through 
network projects.  
•  No Ph.D was awarded in five projects. 
•  No trained Project Assistant developed in five projects.  
Audit further observed that of 231 Ph.Ds stated to have been produced, in six cases the 
thesis of Ph.D had already been accepted prior to commencement of the projects.   
CSIR did not offer any comment on the issue (November 2013).  
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 31 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Chapter highlights some of the significant audit findings from specific projects, such as 
delays in establishment of infrastructure required for the projects, injudicious 
procurements, inadequate planning, incomplete activities, inadequate co-ordination, etc.   
4.1  Unproductive expenditure in executing a project without requisite 
infrastructure 
CDRI took up (October 2003) a network project titled ‘Animal models and animal substitute 
technologies’ with a sanctioned cost of `33.43 crore. One of the objectives of the project 
was development of internationally acceptable models to study human genes/diseases. 
Development of new drugs involved mandatory pharmacology and toxicology studies, which 
have to be done on internationally acceptable models and guidelines. For this, Good 
Laboratory Practices
21 (GLP) accreditation of its laboratories was a necessary condition.  
The project was completed (March 2007) after incurring an expenditure of `30.56 crore. 
Audit observed that though 41 technologies were developed under the project, none could 
be submitted to international agencies as 
the tests were carried out in facilities of 
CDRI that did not have GLP accreditation. 
Although CDRI had planned (May 2003) to 
set up a world class drug institute (duly GLP 
accredited) through another network 
project during 2004 to 2008, but the project 
on development of animal models and 
animal substitute technologies was already 
completed before the said institute could be developed. The new drug research institute 
was still under development (July 2012). 
Thus, injudicious decision to take up the project without having required GLP accredited 
facilities rendered expenditure of `30.56 crore unproductive from international acceptance 
perspective.   
                                                            
21  Many international regulatory agencies require GLP accreditation from international agencies such as 
Organisation of Economic Co-operation and Development, France. Good Laboratory Practices include 
factors such as proper recording of data, proper maintenance of equipment, proper sample collection and 
preservation, purity of reagents, proper laboratory safety and analytical quality control.  
Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
Chapter 4 –  Audit findings from specific 
 projects 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
32 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that effective use of these models for the ongoing drug development 
programme of CSIR would enable development of new drugs. The reply needs to be viewed 
in the context that for getting international acceptance, the models would need to be re-
developed in GLP accredited laboratory.   
4.2    Unfruitful expenditure due to non-utilisation of equipment 
CRRI undertook (August 2003) a project titled ‘New and improved road technologies’ at a 
sanctioned cost of `23.92 crore.  The project had four
22 activities further sub divided into 12 
components. Audit observed that equipment procured at cost of `14.05 crore remained 
unutilised, as discussed below: 
4.2.1 Under the activity on road materials and construction techniques, CRRI was to 
establish Accelerated Pavement Testing Facility 23 (APTF). CRRI had initially proposed (2002) 
to establish stationery type APTF, but a High Power Expert Committee recommended 
(October 2004) procurement of Mobile type APTF instead of stationary type, for its 
advantages.  
CRRI placed (February 2007) purchase order for 
equipment at a cost of `13.37 crore. The 
equipment was delivered in January 2010 and 
commissioned in April 2010.  In the meantime the 
project was declared as completed (January 
2010). Audit observed that APTF was not 
deployed on site for testing of pavements even as 
of July 2012. 
Thus APTF procured at a cost of `13.37 crore could not be established till closure of the 
project and even beyond, thereby rendering expenditure of `13.37 crore as unfruitful for 
the project. 
CSIR accepted the delay and stated (July 2012) that delay was on account of deployment of 
teams for pre-shipment factory acceptance test and training, re-tendering in selection of 
transporter and creation of infrastructural facilities.   
                                                            
22 (i) Road materials and construction techniques; (ii) Highway system planning and management; (iii) 
Environment and Transport management and (iv) Indigenous development of instrumentation for road 
transport.  
23  APTF is a facility to evaluate performance of a pavement in reduced time duration.  Desired specifications 
could be tested within three to six months as compared to 10 to 20 years in normal conditions.   
Accelerated Pavement Test Facility 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 33 | P a g e  
4.2.2 CRRI installed (August 2006) Advanced Parking Lot Management System (APMS) 
costing `67.90 lakh at NDMC 24 parking lot in Palika Bazar, New Delhi. Audit observed that 
APMS was installed without receiving any formal request from NDMC or any formal 
agreement with NDMC.  
NDMC subsequently requested (March 2009) CRRI to allow it to retain APMS at said parking 
lot free of cost. As CSIR procedure did not allow the transfer of system free of cost, CRRI did 
not agree with the request of NDMC and removed the system from the Palika Bazar parking 
lot. The equipment was taken out but could not be used further and was eventually 
rendered unserviceable.  
Thus, injudicious decision to install APMS at NDMC parking lot without obtaining its consent 
in advance resulted in wasteful expenditure of `67.90 lakh. 
CSIR stated (July 2012) that concerted efforts were made by CRRI to sign MoU with NDMC 
but the same could not be achieved.  
4.3  Poor planning of project leading to incomplete activity 
CSIR took up (April 2004) the network project titled ‘Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new bio-actives and traditional preparations’ at a cost of `39.60 crore. 
One of the main objectives of the project was to develop single molecules as drugs and take 
them to IND
25 state for diseases of interest to India and international community. Major 
components in this regard were collection of single molecules, in vitro26 and in vivo27 tests, 
fractionation, optimisation and regulatory pharmacology and toxicology investigations.  In 
order to carry out these studies, CSIR planned to  create test facilities such as automated 
microscopic facilities, super critical extraction facilities, molecular modelling workstations, 
automated fractionation facilities, in vitro  and in vivo screening facilities, etc. under the 
same project during 2004-05 to 2006-07 at an estimated cost of `23.60 crore.  
The project was completed (March 2008) after incurring expenditure of `32.77 crore. Audit 
observed that though CSIR developed five single molecules for conditions of dementia, 
hypertension, psychosis, cancer and immunostimulatory disease, none could be translated 
to IND stage as essential studies on the single molecules could not be completed due to lack 
of above specialised facilities or expertise.   
                                                            
24  New Delhi Municipal Corporation 
25  IND refers to Investigational New Drug, which is a new drug that is used in a clinical investigation. IND 
program is the means by which approval for clinical trials on the drug is obtained before it is cleared for 
marketing application.  
26  Related to processes taking place outside a living organism e.g. in a test tube 
27  Related to processes taking place within the living organism  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
34 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
The decision to include development of single molecules for IND stage in the network 
project when specialised facilities for conducting the studies were still under development 
reflected deficient planning.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that desired facilities were created and the molecules were under 
different stages of investigations. The reply of CSIR indicated that work was not completed 
as of July 2012, i.e. after more than four years of completion of the project. 
4.4  Failure to take ethical clearance for studies on human subjects 
In case of projects that require tests on human subjects, Government rules 28 stipulate that 
clinical trials on a new drug shall be initiated only after approvals have been obtained from 
the Ethics Committee.  
CCMB undertook an activity under the project titled ‘Asthma and Allergic Disorders 
Mitigation Mission’ to carry out determination of the genetic basis of asthma and study of 
genetic interactions between causative agents and concerned genes with a view to adopting 
predictive measures and develop predictive medicines related to asthmatic and allergic 
disorders.  The activity required collection of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients.  
Audit observed from the project proposal that CCMB did not take clearance from Ethics 
Committee prior to taking up the activity, which was in contravention of Government rules.    
While carrying out studies, CCMB faced problems due to ethical considerations.  The main 
objective of adopting predictive measures and development of predictive medicines for 
asthma and allergic disorders was not achieved, as functional validation of genes could not 
be completed, rendering expenditure of `2.21 crore incurred on the activity as unfruitful.  
CSIR stated (July 2012) that CCMB faced problems with collection of bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid from patients which could not be anticipated while formulating the project proposal. 
The reply of CSIR needs to be viewed in the context that genetic studies and development of 
medicines was a planned objective of the activity.  
4.5  Incomplete activities under projects 
Audit observed that status of completion of activities reported in the consolidated project 
completion reports of two projects was incorrect. In another project, objective of an activity 
was not achieved, reportedly due to deficient manpower, which was a fact already known to 
the laboratory. The cases are discussed below: 
                                                            
28  Para 2 (1) of Drugs and Cosmetics (II Amendment) Rules 1945, which made (January 2005) approval from 
Ethics Committee mandatory  in clinical  trials on human subjects. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 35 | P a g e  
4.5.1 NAL undertook (February 2005) a project titled ‘Developing and sustaining high 
science and technology for national aerospace programme’ at a sanctioned cost of `80.70 
crore. The objective of the project was to undertake 
planned research and technology development for 
national aerospace sector. The project work was divided 
into 48 activities, of which five
29 activities were 
implemented in networking mode along with four 30 
participating laboratories. Audit reviewed all five 
activities that were executed in network mode. Though 
consolidated project completion report declared that only one networked activity viz. 
development of cockpit display systems had not been completed, audit observed that two 
more activities in addition to the above also remained incomplete. The cases are discussed 
below:  
Incomplete activities under project on ‘Developing and sustaining high science and 
technology for national aerospace programme’ 
Development of rolling element bearing standards for aerospace application 
NAL and CMERI jointly  undertook above activity at an estimated cost of `61 lakh with objective of 
developing reliable methodology to measure quality of rolling element bearings in terms of fatigue 
and wear life. CMERI received (August 2007) funds of `30 lakh for procurement of equipment. Due 
to late release of funds, CMERI requested CSIR to carry forward the funds up to September 2008.  
CSIR however did not respond to the request of CMERI. The project activity was closed (March 2008) 
and CMERI surrendered the amount of `30 lakh (March 2008). The Activity Completion Report 
stated that majority of the work experimentation could not be done as CMERI was unable to 
manufacture and integrate the test rig owing to late release of funds.   
CSIR stated (July 2012) that the testimonials of the project required consideration before arriving at 
any conclusion on non-achievement of objectives.  The reply of CSIR was interim and completion 
report of the activity clearly mentioned that the objective had not been achieved.  
Process technology optimisation for aerospace application 
NAL undertook (March 2005) above activity on design, synthesis and characterisation of light weight 
high performance alloys and composites for development of various aerospace components jointly 
with AMPRI at sanctioned cost of `2.01 crore. The project was completed (March 2008) after 
incurring an expenditure of `1.38 crore. Audit observed that die design, development and 
performance evaluation of components was not completed.  
AMPRI stated (January 2012) that due to some practical difficulties, materials development took a 
long time during project implementation leaving no scope to conceive and develop suitable 
component.  CSIR did not offer comments on the issue (November 2013). 
 
                                                            
29 (i) Development of rolling element bearing standards for aerospace applications; (ii) Process technology 
optimisation for aerospace application; (iii) Development of wind tunnel models using time compression 
technologies; (iv) Development of cockpit display systems and (v) Multi instrument monitoring to improve 
prediction- GPS 
30  CMERI, AMPRI, CSIO and NPL 


Report No. 29 of 2013 
36 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
4.5.2 With a view to exploring secondary raw material and energy resources and 
development of innovative construction technologies for sustainable development of 
building sector, CBRI undertook a project titled ‘Developing New Building Construction 
Materials’ along with 11
31 participating laboratories at a sanctioned cost of `23 crore. The 
project was completed (March 2007) with expenditure of `19.34 crore. 
Work under the project was divided into 36 activities. Audit observed that though 
consolidated project completion report stated that all activities were successfully 
completed, five activities actually remained incomplete, as discussed below: 
Incomplete activities under project ‘Developing New Building Construction Materials’ 
Bulk utilisation of industrial solid wastes for production of aggregates and cement clinker 
The above activity was taken up jointly by CBRI and IMMT. The activity involved evaluation of raw 
materials like fly ash, pond ash, bottom ash and mill reject coal of thermal plant and process 
optimisation on five kg scale followed by up scaling to 50 kg scale and commissioning of pilot facility 
of 100 kg per batch. Audit observed that the activity could not be completed as quantity of samples 
produced by IMMT was only 35kg which was not sufficient.   
Development of corrosion resistant coating system for reinforcing steel rebar 
The activity was carried out by CECRI. It involved development of corrosion resistant coating system 
for protection of steel reinforcement bars embedded in concrete structures and its evaluation 
through short term and long term field exposure tests. CECRI stated in its activity completion report 
that the objective of long term field exposure tests for assessing the durability of coating could not 
be completed due to unforeseen delay in standardisation and selection of effective coating system. 
Wood substitutes from agro industrial wastes with polymeric binder 
The activity was taken up by NEIST with an objective to develop a technology for making building 
construction material from polymeric and agro-industrial wastes as a substitute for timber. It was 
seen from the activity report that process technology for developing wood substitutes was 
developed at laboratory scale, but pilot scale trials were not done due to non-availability of 
machines required for making bigger samples. 
Cement/Polymer based building boards from bagasse 
The activity was undertaken by CBRI with objectives of developing building boards using bagasse and 
developing door shutter from these building boards. It was seen from the activity report that the 
objective of development of door shutter was not achieved as the activity was foreclosed. 
Development of high performance smart concrete 
The activity was undertaken by CRRI with objectives of developing an alternate for silica fume and 
development of high performance smart concrete. Activity completion report of CRRI stated that the 
latter objective was not achieved due to time and manpower constraints. 
                                                            
31  CGCRI, CIMFR, CECRI, CRRI, IICT, NML, AMPRI, IMMT, IIIM, NIIST and SERC 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 37 | P a g e  
Thus the consolidated project completion reports showed inaccurate account of the status 
of completion of activities in above projects.  
CSIR did not comment on the above issue (November 2013).  
4.5.3 CEERI undertook (January 2004) a project titled ‘Developing capabilities for micro 
electromechanical systems
32 and sensors’ at a sanctioned cost of `31.71 crore. The project 
had six33 activities. Under an activity, CEERI and AMPRI were to develop micro pump, valves, 
cells and micro channels of different kinds and to integrate them to realise a micro total 
analysis system on a chip.  
It was seen from the project completion report that objective of this activity was not 
achieved as AMPRI was unable to develop micro pump, micro valves, reservoirs, mixing and 
PCR channels, reportedly due to death (August 2003) of the activity leader.  
Audit, however, noticed that this fact was known to AMPRI much before the project actually 
commenced (January 2004).   
CSIR stated (July 2012) that systems which were not developed by AMPRI, were not 
required as the analysis of fluids using electrophoresis was successfully done. The reply of 
CSIR was not acceptable because stated objective of the activity was to realise a micro total 
analysis system which was not achieved.   
 
 
 
  
                                                            
32  Micro-electromechanical Systems (MEMS) consist of micro-components, which experience force due to 
physical, chemical or biological phenomena and produce electrical stimuli in response to the respective 
changes caused in their mechanical characteristics. This whole sequence is utilised in making a miniaturised 
sensor. Miniature sensors and actuators are emerging very fast because of their ever increasing 
applications in diverse fields.  
33  Development of Polymer Composite Gas Sensor, Ion Sensitive FET Sensor, MEMS Technologies, µ-heater 
Embedded Gas Sensor, µ-cantilever Beam Array, µ-TAS 
Recommendation 8: 
CSIR may ensure that resources required for a particular project are planned in advance 
and optimally utilised so as to avoid adverse impact on outcome of project. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 39 | P a g e  
 
 
 
 
Network Projects were conceived as part of Tenth Five Year Plan programme of CSIR to be 
taken up and completed during Tenth Plan period (2002-07). CSIR issued guidelines for 
network projects more than two years after beginning of the Tenth Plan. As such, 
applicability of the guidelines to project formulation and preparation of project proposals 
became redundant in most of the projects.  There were delays of 12 to 34 months in 
commencement of the projects which impacted the completion of activities of the network 
projects. Audit also observed shortfall of 45 per cent in meetings of the TF and 56 per cent in 
meetings of the MC, which adversely affected monitoring of the projects.  
Equipment costing `48.73 crore from 15 projects were received/installed/commissioned 
either after completion of the project or at the fag end of the project duration and could not 
be utilised for the projects.   
Project guidelines as well as the guidelines of Ministry of Finance for implementing high 
value projects emphasised the need for including measurable parameters in the project 
proposal. Measurable parameters were not defined in more than 60 per cent of the projects 
examined in audit. In the absence of defined criteria for project performance, extent of 
success of these projects could not be measured. In the few cases in which targets were set, 
actual achievement there against, except for a few noteworthy achievements in 
development of technologies and publication of research papers, was poor.    
Outcome analysis of 27 projects implemented at cost of `621.80 crore revealed that 
projects could not generate commercialisable results in terms of development, transfer and 
return from sale of technologies. Out of 399 technologies developed, 51 technologies were 
transferred and 38 technologies were commercialised during the last 10 years.  The total 
revenue earned through transfer/commercialisation of technologies was only `3.83 crore, 
which was less than one per cent of total expenditure incurred on implementation of the 
projects.   
A fundamental element of network projects was effective networking by the scientists of 
CSIR laboratories in filing joint patents and publishing multi-laboratory and multi-author 
research papers. Out of 264 patents, only 41 patents constituting 16 per cent  were filed 
jointly. Similarly out of 2008 research papers published, only 104 publications were brought 
out jointly.  
Chapter 5 –  Conclusion

Report No. 29 of 2013 
40 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
 
No mechanism for impact assessment of network projects either by CSIR or by external 
agencies was established, even though it was a new initiative, expected to provide a 
learning experience to CSIR.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                               (GURVEEN SIDHU) 
New Delhi Principal Director of Audit, 
Dated: 31 December 2013  Scientific Departments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
New Delhi  (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Dated: 6 January 2014 Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 


Report No. 29 of 2013 
72 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Glossary of names of laboratories of CSIR 
Abbreviation Name of the Laboratory 
CSIR-HQ Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  Headquarters, New Delhi 
AMPRI Advanced Materials and Processes Research Institute, Bhopal 
CBRI Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee 
CCMB Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad 
CDRI Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 
CECRI Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 
CEERI Central Electronics and Engineering Research Institute, Pilani 
CFTRI Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore 
CGCRI Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute, Kolkata 
CIMAP Central Institute of Medicinal and Allied Plants, Lucknow 
CIMFR Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research, Dhanbad  
CLRI Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai 
CMERI Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur 
CMMACS Centre for Mathematical Modeling and Computer Simulation, Bengaluru 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi 
CSIO Central Scientific Instruments Organisation, Chandigarh 
CSMCRI Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar 
IGIB Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi 
IHBT Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, Palampur 
IICB Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata 
IICT Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad 
IIIM Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, Jammu 
IIP Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun 
IITR Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow 
IMTECH Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh 
IMMT Institute of Minerals & Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar 
NAL National Aerospace Laboratories, Bengaluru 
NBRI National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow 
NCL National Chemical Laboratory, Pune 
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 73 | P a g e  
Abbreviation Name of the Laboratory 
NGRI National Geophysical Research Institute, Hyderabad 
NIIST National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
NIO National Institute of Oceanography, Goa 
NISCAIR National Institute of Science Communication and Information Resources,  
New Delhi 
NML National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur 
NEIST North-East Institute of Science and Technology, Jorhat 
NPL National Physical Laboratory , New Delhi 
SERC Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 43 | P a g e  
Appendix I  (Refer Para 1.2)  
List of network projects taken up by CSIR during Tenth Five year Plan 
 Projects selected for examination in the Performance Audit 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Other participating Labs Approved/estimated 
cost  
(` in crore) 
1. Spearheading small civilian aircraft design, 
development & manufacture 
NAL CMERI 297.70
2. Exploration and exploitation of microbial 
wealth of India for novel compounds and 
biotransformation processes 
IMTECH IHBT, IICT, NBRI, NEERI, IGIB, 
NIO, IIIM, NEIST, NIIST, IMMT 
and NCL 
20.47
3. Molecular biology of selected pathogens for 
developing drugs targets 
CDRI IICB, IMMT, CCMB, IGIB, CIMAP 
and IIIM 
24.88
4. Study of mesozoic sediments for 
hydrocarbon exploration 
NGRI NIO 14.90
5. Pollution monitoring mitigation systems and 
devices 
NEERI NGRI, NBRI, IGIB, NEIST, CRRI, 
CIMFR, AMPRI, CGCRI, NPL, 
IITR and CECRI 
14.58
6. Asthmatic and allergic disorders mitigation 
mission 
IICB IGIB, IICT, CCMB, IITR and IIIM 24.49
7. Newer scientific herbal preparations for 
global positioning 
IIIM NBRI, CDRI, CIMAP, IITR, IICB, 
IICT, CFTRI, IHBT and IMMT 
24.90
8. Special electron tube technologies for large 
scale applications 
CEERI CMERI and CGCRI 8.65
9. Comprehensive traditional knowledge 
digital documentation and library 
NISCAIR NBRI, IITR, CIMAP, URDIP, 
IMMT, IIIM, CBRI, CFTRI and 
IHBT 
18.00
10. Environment friendly leather processing 
technology 
CLRI NEERI, NML, NBRI, CSMCRI and 
CGCRI 
18.20
11. Development of specialised aerospace 
materials 
NAL CECRI, CGCRI, NML and NPL 16.87
12. Developing cells & tissue engineering CCMB CIMAP, IHBT, IICB, NBRI, NCL 
and IIIM 
24.50
13. Toxicogenomics of polymorphism in Indian 
population to industrial chemicals for 
development of biomarkers 
IITR IICB, IGIB, CCMB and NEERI 23.49
14. Designing animals and plants as bio-reactors 
for production of proteins & other products 
CIMAP IHBT, NBRI, IICB, NEIST, IICT 
and CFTRI 
19.87
15. Development of catalysis & catalysts NCL IICT, IIP, CIMFR, NEIST, IIIM, 
IICB, NIIST, CSMCRI and IMMT  
23.00
16. Developing green technology for organic 
chemicals 
IICT CIMAP, IHBT,IIIM, NEIST, NIIST, 
NCL, NEERI, CIMFR, CSMCRI, 
IIP, IMMT, IICT and CECRI 
23.78
17. Acquisition of oceanographic research 
vessel  
NIO Nil 226.51
18. Impact of anthropogenic perturbations 
oceanographic atmospheric processes in 
NIO NGRI and NPL 14.01

Report No. 29 of 2013 
44 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Other participating Labs Approved/estimated 
cost  
(` in crore) 
and around India in the context of global 
change 
19. Development of key technologies for 
photonics and opto-electronics 
CGCRI CEERI, CSIO, IICT, NPL and NIIST  33.03
20. Developing capabilities & facilities for 
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
and sensors 
CEERI NCL, NPL, IICT, CECRI, CMERI, 
CCMB, AMPRI, CGCRI 
31.71
21. Coal resource quality assessment for 
specific end uses 
CIMFR NEIST, NML and NCL 13.32
22. Developing new generation fuels & 
lubricants 
IIP NCL, CFRI, IIIM and NIIST 24.06
23. Positioning Indian nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics on global platform 
CFTRI IICT, IHBT, CIMAP, NBRI, IIIM 
and CCMB 
22.40
24. Setting up a world class drug research 
institute (for preparing FR) 
CDRI Nil 176.14
25. Predictive medicine using repeat and single 
nucleotide polymorphisms 
IGIB CCMB, IICB, CDRI, IITR, IGIB 
and IMTECH 
24.47
26. Drug target development using in-silico 
biology 
IGIB IICB, CDRI, IMTECH and IIIM 49.60
27. Animal models and animal substitute 
technologies 
CDRI CCMB, CIMAP, IGIB, IICT, IITR 
and IMTECH 
33.43
28. Developing new building construction 
materials 
CBRI CECRI, CFRI, CGCRI, CRRI, IICT, 
NML, AMPRI, IMMT, NEIST, 
NIIST and SERC 
23.00
29. Mathematical modeling and computer 
simulation 
C-
MMACS 
CBRI, CRRI, NEERI, NIO and 
IMMT  
15.66
30. Technologies standardisation of 
bioresources for and from leather 
CLRI CFTRI, IMTECH and CCMB 3.75
31. Custom tailored special materials CGCRI CMERI, NML, NIO, AMPRI, 
IMMT and NIIST 
24.03
32. Capacity building for coastal placer mineral 
mining 
CIMFR CMERI, NIO, IMMT, AMPRI, 
NIIST and NML 
15.41
33. Upgradation of SI base units, national 
standards of measurements and apex 
calibration facilities 
NPL CFTRI, CIMFR, CMERI, CSIO, IIP, 
IITR, NAL, NEERI, NIO, NML, 
NEIST and SERC 
21.21
34. Developing and sustaining high science & 
technology for national aerospace 
programmes 
NAL CMERI, CSIO, NPL and AMPRI 80.70
35. Development of medicinal plant 
chemotypes for enhanced marker and value 
added compounds 
CIMAP IHBT, IICB, IMMT, IIIM and 
NBRI 
21.66
36. Globally competitive chemicals processes 
and products 
IICT CFRI, CIMAP, CSMCRI, IHBT, IIP, 
NCL, NEERI, IMMT, IIIM and 
NIIST 
16.63
37. Development of novel polymeric materials NCL CSMCRI, NIIST, IICT, IIIM, CLRI, 
IIP, NEIST, CECRI and NPL 
20.00

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 45 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Other participating Labs Approved/estimated 
cost  
(` in crore) 
38. Development of techniques and 
methodologies for exploration, assessment 
and management of ground water in hard 
rock areas 
NGRI IITR, AMPRI and NEERI 24.44
39. Tectonic and oceanic processes along the 
Indian ridge system and backarc basins 
NIO NGRI 23.68
40. Electronics for societal purposes CSIO CBRI, CFTRI, CEERI, CMERI, 
CRRI, NGRI and NPL 
21.14
41. Industrial waste minimisation and clean up NEERI CECRI, CGCRI, CLRI, CMERI, 
CSIO, IGIB, IICT, IIP, IITR, NBRI, 
NCL, NGRI, NML, AMPRI, 
IMMT, NEIST and NIIST 
15.93
42. Quality enhancement of coal for its efficient 
utilisation 
CIMFR NML, IMMT and AMPRI 14.00
43. Natural, nature identical and nature similar 
biomolecules 
CFTRI IGIB, CIMAP, IHBT, IICB, NBRI, 
IIIM, IMMT and NIIST 
22.10
44. Infectious diseases handling, storage and 
research facilities 
CCMB CDRI, IMTECH, IIIM, IGIB and 
IICB 
13.26
45. Design analysis and health assessment of 
special structures including bridges 
SERC CBRI, CMERI, CRRI, NML, CECRI 
and AMPRI 
16.70
46. New and improved road technologies CRRI CBRI, CMERI, IIP and SERC 23.92
47. Establishing National Science Digital Library 
(NSDL) 
NISCAIR Nil 44.54
48. CSIR E-journals consortium  NISCAIR All laboratories 26.90
49. Establishment of genetically modified food 
referal facility 
CFTRI CCMB and IITR 17.15
50. Establishing advanced facility for safety 
evaluation of genetically 
modified/engineered drugs  
CCMB IGIB, CDRI, IMTECH and IITR 22.97
51. Biomineral processing for extraction of 
metal values from ores and concentrates  
IMMT IICB and NML 16.00
52. Developing capabilities in advanced 
manufacturing Technology  
CMERI CGCRI, NML, CSIO, NAL, 
AMPRI, NIIST and SERC 
17.85
53. Technology for engineering critical 
assessment  
NML CBRI, CGCRI, CMERI, CRRI, NAL, 
AMPRI and SERC 
14.98
54. Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new bioactives and 
traditional preparation 
CSIR 
Hqs. 
CBRI, CCMB, CDRI, CIMAP, 
CFTRI, CLRI, IHBT, IGIB, 
CSMCRI, IICB, IICT, IMTECH, 
IITR, NBRI, NCL, NIO, AMPRI, 
IMMT, IIIM, NEIST and NIIST 
39.60
Total 1860.01
 
 
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
46 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Appendix II (Refer Para 2) 
Details of 27 projects selected for audit 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project Nodal 
Lab 
Other participating
Labs 
Number of activities Activities completed
#
 Sanc-
tioned 
cost 
Actual
expr. Total Net-
work 
Mode 
Non-
Net-
work 
Mode 
Fully Partially Not 
achieved 
1. Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI CGCRI, CFRI, CECRI, 
CRRI, IICT, NML, AMPRI, 
IMMT, IIIM, NIIST and 
SERC 
36 30 6 36 Nil Nil 23.00 19.34
2. Developing cells & tissue 
engineering 
CCMB IIIM, NCL, IHBT, IICB, 
CIMAP and NBRI 
 
13 13 Nil 12 Nil 1 24.50 22.59
3. Animal models and 
animal substitute 
technologies 
CDRI IICT, IITR, IGIB, CCMB, 
CIMAP and IMTECH 
 
7 7 Nil 6 1 Nil 33.43 30.56
4. Developing capabilities 
for micro 
electromechanical 
systems and sensors 
CEERI CMERI, CCMB, NPL, 
AMPRI, CGCRI, IICT, 
CECRI and NCL 
6 6 Nil 4 2 Nil 31.71 31.89
5. Positioning Indian 
nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics on 
global platform 
CFTRI IIIM, CIMAP, NBRI, IHBT, 
IICT and CCMB 
6 6 Nil 5 Nil 1 22.40 14.09
6. Development of key 
technologies for 
photonics and opto-
electronics 
CGCRI CEERI, NPL, CSIO, IICT 
and NIIST 
4 4 NIL 4 NIL NIL 33.03 31.93
7. Development of 
medicinal plant 
chemotypes for 
enhanced marker and 
value added compounds 
CIMAP IIIM, IHBT, NBRI, IICB 
and IMMT 
8 8 Nil Nil 8 Nil 21.66 21.66
8. Quality enhancement of 
coal for its efficient 
utilisation 
CIMFR AMPRI, NML and IMMT 3 3 Nil 3 Nil Nil 14.00 7.31
9. Capacity building for 
coastal placer mineral 
mining 
CIMFR CMERI, NIO, NML, 
AMPRI, IMMT and NIIST 
5 5 Nil 5 Nil Nil 15.41 5.29
10. Environment friendly 
leather processing 
technology 
CLRI CGCRI, CSMCRI, NBRI, 
NEERI and NML 
15 15 Nil 15 Nil Nil 18.20 17.44
11. Developing capabilities 
in advanced 
manufacturing 
technology 
CMERI NAL, NML, SERC, CGCRI, 
CSIO, AMPRI and NIIST 
10 10 Nil 8 Nil 2 17.85 16.13
12. New and improved road 
technologies 
 
CRRI CBRI, CMERI, IIP and 
SERC 
 
4 4 Nil 4 Nil Nil 23.92 24.30
13. Electronics for societal 
purposes 
CSIO CRRI, CBRI, CFTRI, CEERI, 
CMERI, NGRI and NPL 
 
 
10 10 Nil 8 1 1 21.14 18.87
14. Discovery, development 
and commercialisation 
of new bioactives and 
traditional preparation 
CSIR-
Hq 
AMPRI, CDRI, CBRI, IICT, 
IICB, IMTECH, IHBT, 
NIIST, NEIST, NIO, IIIM, 
CIMAP, NBRI, NCL, IITR, 
CFTRI, IGIB, CLRI, CCMB, 
IMMT and CSMCRI 
10 10 Nil Not indicated 39.60 32.77
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 47 | P a g e  
 
 
(` in crore) 
Excess 
(-)/ 
Un-
spent 
Balance 
(+) 
Date of 
start 
Date 
of 
finish 
Delay* 
(months) 
Outputs from project
Technologies developed Patents filed and 
granted 
Publications and impact 
factor 
ECF earned
Target Actual Tar-
get 
Actual Tar-
get 
Actual Tar-
get 
Actual
(+)3.66 01-08-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil  10 33 developed, 19 
transferred and 19 
commercialised 
20 19 filed and 
none 
granted 
150 134 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.114 to 2.216 
9.5 9.5
(+)1.91 29-07-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil  3 2 developed, none 
transferred and 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
5 filed and 
none 
granted 
Not 
set 
34 with impact 
factor 3.46 (aver-
age) 
Not 
set 
Nil
(+)2.87 29-10-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil  Nil 41 developed, 
none transferred 
and 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
5 filed and 5 
granted 
Not 
set 
106 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.36 to 6.40 
Not 
set 
Nil
(-)0.18 06-01-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil  Nil 16 developed, 
none transferred 
and 2** 
commercialised 
50 16 filed and 
2 granted 
Not 
set 
76 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.218 to 5.361 
15.0 10.5
(+) 8.31 01-08-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Nil 7 developed, 2 
transferred and 2 
commercialised 
 
60 7 filed and 3
granted 
35 28 with impact 
factor zero 
2 Nil
(+) 1.10 01-08-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Nil 26 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
Nil Not 
set 
55 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.160 to 9.60 
Not 
set 
2
Nil 29-07-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil 20 7 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
 
25 10 filed and 
9 granted 
25 35 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.6 to 2.78 
2.5 0.21
(+) 6.69 06-05-
2004 
30-09-
2007 
6 Nil Nil Not 
set 
1 filed and 
none 
granted*** 
Not 
set 
9 with impact 
factor ranging from 
2.215 to 3.436 
Not 
set 
8.3
(+) 
10.12 
01-04-
2003 
31-03-
2008 
12 Nil 9 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
20 2 filed and 
none 
granted 
40 47 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.29 to 3.22 
Not 
set 
1.66
(+) 0.76 19-01-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Nil 13 developed, 4 
transferred and 2 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
7 filed and 
none 
granted 
Not 
set 
70 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0 to 4.054 
40 2.275
(+) 1.72 16-01-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Nil 6 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
12 2 filed and 
none 
granted 
25 44 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.22 to 2.86 
16 4.01
(-) 0.38 01-08-
2003 
January 
2010 
34 36 21 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
7 1 filed and 
none 
granted 
Not 
set 
31 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.449 to 2.411 
9 8.1
(+) 2.27 01-08-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil 30**** 11 developed, 1 
transferred and 
none 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
7 filed and 4 
granted 
Not 
set 
11 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0 to 0.387 
Not 
set 
Nil
(+) 6.83 01-04-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Nil 2 developed, 1 
transferred and 
none 
commercialised 
 
 
50 29 filed and 
28 granted 
Not 
set 
33 with impact 
factor ranging from 
0.702 to 9.771 
Not 
set 
Nil
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
48 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project Nodal 
Lab 
Other participating
Labs 
Number of activities Activities completed
#
 Sanc-
tioned 
cost 
Actual
expr. Total Net-
work 
Mode 
Non-
Net-
work 
Mode 
Fully Partially Not 
achieved 
15. Asthma and allergic 
disorders mitigation 
mission 
IICB IICT, IGIB, IIIM, IITR
and CCMB 
6 6 Nil 5 Nil 1 24.49 23.77
16. Newer scientific herbal 
preparations for global 
positioning 
IIIM NBRI, CDRI, CIMAP, 
IITR, IICB, IICT, IHBT, 
IMMT and CFTRI 
10 10 Nil 10 Nil Nil 24.90 21.98
17. Developing new 
generation fuels & 
lubricants 
IIP CIMFR, NCL, IIIM and 
NIIST 
5 5 Nil Nil 5 Nil 24.06 22.52
18. Drug target development 
using in silico biology 
 
IGIB IICB, IIIM, IMTECH and 
CDRI 
15 15 Nil 15 Nil Nil 49.60 48.62
 
 
 
19. Exploration of microbial 
wealth of India for novel 
compounds and bio-
transformation process 
IMTECH IIIM, IHBT, IGIB, NBRI, 
NEIST, IMMT, NEERI, 
NIO, NCL, IICT and 
NIIST 
2 2 Nil 2 Nil Nil 20.47 20.53
20. Bio-mineral processing 
for extraction of metal 
values from 
ores/concentrates/wastes 
IMMT IICB and NML 6 6 Nil 5 1 Nil 16.00 14.73
21. Developing and sustaining 
high science & technology 
for national aerospace 
programmes 
 
NAL CMERI, AMPRI, CSIO 
and NPL 
48 5 43 42 Nil 6 80.70 77.79
22. Development of catalysis 
and catalysts 
NCL IIP, IICT, CSMCRI, 
CFRI, IICB, IMMT, IIIM, 
NEIST and NIIST 
6 6 Nil 2 4 Nil 23.00 23.00
23. Industrial waste 
minimisation and clean 
up 
NEERI CECRI, CGCRI, CLRI, 
CSIO, CMERI, IGIB, 
IICT, IIP, IITR, NBRI, 
NCL, NGRI, NML, 
AMPRI, IMMT, NEIST 
and NIIST 
37 37 Nil 37 Nil Nil 15.93 13.93
24. Impact of anthropogenic 
perturbations
##
 on 
oceanographic-
atmospheric processes in 
and around India in the 
context of global change 
NIO NGRI and NPL 3 3 Nil Nil 3 Nil 14.01 14.00
25. Technology for 
engineering critical 
assessment 
 
NML CBRI, CGCRI, CMERI, 
CRRI, NAL, AMPRI and 
SERC 
6 6 Nil Not indicated 14.98 15.21
26. Upgradation of SI base 
units, national standards 
of measurements and 
apex calibration facilities 
NPL CFTRI, CFRI, CMERI, 
CSIO, IIP, IITR, NAL, 
NEERI, NIO, NML, 
NEIST and SERC 
23 23 Nil 15 4 4 21.21 15.21
27. Design analysis and 
health assessment of 
special structures 
including bridges 
SERC CMERI, CRRI, NML, 
CECRI, AMPRI and 
CBRI 
6 6 Nil Not indicated 16.70 16.34
## Disturbances caused due to human activities   

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 49 | P a g e  
Excess 
(-)/ 
Un-
spent 
Balance 
(+) 
Date 
of 
start 
Date 
of 
finish 
Delay* 
(months) 
Outputs from project
Technologies developed Patents filed and 
granted 
Publications and impact 
factor 
ECF earned
Tar-
get 
Actual Tar-
get 
Actual Tar-
get 
Actual Tar-
get 
Act-
ual 
(+) 0.72 30-07-
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Not 
set 
23 developed and 
none transferred 
and 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
7 filed and 3 
granted 
Not 
set 
38 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0.250 to 
7.205 
Not 
set 
Nil
(+)2.92 01-08-
2003 
30-09-
2010 
42 Not 
set 
5 developed, none 
transferred and 
commercialised 
7 5 filed and 1 
granted 
Not 
set 
24 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0.385 to 
4.044 
Not 
set 
Nil
(+) 1.53 August 
2003 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Not 
set 
21 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
38 filed and 
9 granted 
Not 
set 
22 with zero 
impact factor 
Not 
set 
0.08
(+) 0.98 16-01-
2004 
31-03-
2011 
48 250 62 developed, 
4*****  
transferred and  4 
commercialised 
50 18 filed and 
5 granted 
100 129 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0.668 to 
10.256 
Not 
set 
6.3
(-) 0.06 19-01-
2004 
31-03-
2010 
36 Not 
set 
Nil 20 14 
filed****** 
and none 
granted 
12 69 with impact 
factor zero 
2.5 Nil
(+) 1.27 18-03-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Not 
set 
1 developed, 1 
transferred and 
none 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
Nil Not 
set 
32 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0.350 to 
4.360 
Not 
set 
1.38
(+) 2.91 03-02-
2005 
31-03-
2010 
36 Not 
set 
9 developed, 3 
transferred and 3 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
11*******
filed and 6 
granted 
Not 
set 
145 papers 
published with 
impact factor 
ranging from 
0.3042 to 3.745 
Not 
set 
Nil
Nil 01-08-
2003 
September 
2007 
6 Not 
set 
5 developed, 1 
transferred and 1 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
22 filed and 
4 granted 
Not 
set 
136 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0.313 to 
5.415 
Not 
set 
0.14
(+) 2.00 08-04-
2004 
30-09-
2007 
6 10 41 developed, 3 
transferred and 3 
commercialised 
111 24 filed and 
18 granted 
295 115 with impact 
factor 0.199 to 
20.01 
 
 
Not 
set 
1.89
(+)0.01 17-02-
2004 
31-03-
2008 
12 Not 
set 
Nil Not 
set 
Nil Not 
set 
54 with impact 
factor ranging 
from 0 to 30.028 
 
 
 
Not 
set 
Nil
(+) 0.23 29-03-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Not 
set 
8 developed, 6 
transferred and 
none 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
3 filed and 
none 
granted 
Not 
set 
101 with zero 
impact factor 
Not 
set 
6.5
(+) 6.00 29-03-
2004 
31-03-
2008 
12 Not 
set 
6 developed, 4 
transferred and 
none 
commercialised 
Not 
set 
9 filed and 6 
granted 
Not 
set 
73 papers 
published with 
impact factor 
ranging from 0.09 
to 7.18 
20.80 16.76
(+) 0.36 01-03-
2004 
31-03-
2007 
Nil Not 
set 
24 developed and 
none transferred 
and 
commercialised 
 
5 2 filed and 
none 
granted 
50 357 with zero 
impact factor 
Not 
set 
0.08
*Taking into consideration scheduled date of completion as 31-03-2007. 
** Though no technology was stated to be transferred, the statement of transfer of two technologies is contradictory. 
*** Although no technology was developed from the project, one patent was stated to have been filed, which is contradictory. 
****Although no target was indicated in the project proposal, CSIO stated in reply (December 2012) that 30 technologies were to be developed from the project. 
***** Audit observed that four software were actually developed from a project under another scheme of CSIR and not from network project. 
******Since no technology was developed from the project the statement of filing of 14 patents is contradictory. 
*******This includes 4 copy rights and 7 patents. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
50 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Appendix III (Refer Para 2.2) 
Delay in sanctioning of network projects  
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Laboratory
Date of commencement 
of Tenth Five Year Plan 
Date of sanction 
of network 
project by CSIR 
Delay 
(in 
months)
1 Developing new building construction 
materials 
CBRI April 2002 August 2003 16 
2 Developing cells & tissue engineering CCMB April 2002 July 2003 15 
3 Animal models and animal substitute 
technologies 
CDRI April 2002 October 2003 18 
4 Developing capabilities & facilities for micro-
electromechanical systems (MEMS) and 
sensors 
CEERI April 2002 January 2004 21 
5 Quality enhancement of coal for its efficient 
utilisation 
CIMFR April 2002 May 2004 25 
6 Positioning Indian nutraceuticals and 
neutrigenomics on global platform 
CFTRI April 2002 August 2003 16 
7 Development of key technologies for 
photonics and opto-electronics 
CGCRI April 2002 August 2003 16 
8 Development of medicinal plant chemotypes 
for enhanced marker and value added 
compounds 
CIMAP April 2002 July 2003 15 
9 Environment friendly leather processing 
technology 
CLRI April 2002 January 2004 22 
10 Capacity building for coastal placer mineral 
mining 
CIMFR April 2002 April 2003 12 
11 Developing capabilities in advanced 
manufacturing technology  
CMERI  April 2002 January 2004 21 
12 Electronics for societal purposes CSIO April 2002 August 2003 16 
13 Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new bioactives and 
traditional preparation 
CSIR Hqs.  April 2002 April 2004 24 
14 New and improved road technologies CRRI April 2002 August 2003 16 
15 Drug target development using in-silico 
biology 
IGIB April 2002 January 2004 21 
16 Asthmatic and allergic disorders mitigation 
mission 
IICB April 2002 July 2003 15 
17 Newer scientific herbal preparations for global 
positioning 
IIIM April 2002 August 2003 16 
18 Developing new generation fuels & lubricants IIP April 2002 August 2003 16 
19 Biomineral processing for extraction of metal 
values from ores and concentrates  
IMMT April 2002 March 2004 23 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 51 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Laboratory
Date of commencement 
of Tenth Five Year Plan 
Date of sanction 
of network 
project by CSIR 
Delay 
(in 
months)
20 Exploration and exploitation of microbial 
wealth of India for novel compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH April 2002 January 2004 21 
21 Developing and sustaining high science & 
technology for national aerospace 
programmes 
NAL April 2002 February 2005 34 
22 Impact of anthropogenic perturbations 
oceanographic atmospheric processes in and 
around India in the context of global change 
NIO April 2002 February 2004 22 
23 Development of catalysis & catalysts NCL April 2002 August 2003 16 
24 Industrial waste minimisation and clean up NEERI April 2002 April 2004 24 
25 Technology for engineering critical assessment NML April 2002 March 2004 23 
26 Upgradation of SI base units, national 
standards of measurements and apex 
calibration facilities 
NPL April 2002 March 2004 23 
27 Design, analysis and health assessment of 
special structures including bridges 
SERC April 2002 March 2004 23 
 
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
52 | P a g e  Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan  
Appendix IV (Refer Para 2.2) 
List of projects that were completed beyond scheduled duration of Tenth Five Year Plan 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of project Nodal 
Laboratory 
Scheduled date 
of completion of 
project 
Actual date of 
completion of 
project 
Delay in 
months 
1 Quality enhancement of coal for its 
efficient utilisation 
CIMFR March 2007 September 2007 6 
2 Capacity building for coastal placer mineral 
mining 
CIMFR March 2007 March 2008 12 
3 Electronics for societal purposes CSIO March 2007 September 2007 6 
4 Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new bioactives and 
traditional preparation 
CSIR-Hq March 2007 March 2008 12 
5 New and improved road technologies CRRI March 2007 January 2010 34 
6 Drug target development using in-silico 
biology 
IGIB March 2007 March 2011 48 
7 Newer scientific herbal preparations for 
global positioning 
IIIM March 2007 September 2010 42 
8 Exploration and exploitation of microbial 
wealth of India for novel compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH March 2007 March 2010 36 
9 Developing and sustaining high science & 
technology for national aerospace 
programmes 
NAL March 2007 March 2010 36 
10 Impact of anthropogenic perturbations 
oceanographic atmospheric Processes in 
and around India in the context of  global 
change 
NIO March 2007 March 2008 12 
11 Development of catalysis & catalysts NCL March 2007 September 2007 6 
12 Industrial waste minimisation and clean up NEERI March 2007 September 2007 6 
13 Up-gradation of SI base units, national 
standards of measurements and apex 
calibration facilities 
NPL March 2007 March 2008 12 
 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 53 | P a g e  
Appendix V (Refer Para 2.3.1) 
Statement showing measurable deliverables proposed in 27 selected network projects 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Nodal 
Laboratory 
Targets proposed for the deliverables
No. of 
Technologies 
to be 
developed 
Amount of 
Revenue 
to be 
generated 
through 
sale of 
technology 
No. of 
publications 
to be 
brought out 
No. of 
Patents 
to be 
filed 
Total 
amount 
of ECF to 
be 
earned 
(` in 
crore) 
Value of 
Employment 
generation
(` in crore) 
Value of 
Import 
substitution 
(` in crore) 
Societal/Employment 
benefits to be earned 
(mandays in crore) 
1 Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI 10 No target 150 20 9.50 No target No target No target 
2 Developing cells & tissue 
engineering 
CCMB 3 No target No target No target No target No target No target No target 
3 Animal models and animal 
substitute technologies 
CDRI No targets set
4 Developing capabilities & facilities 
for micro-electromechanical 
systems (MEMS) and sensors 
CEERI No target No target No target 50 15 No target No target No target 
5 Quality enhancement of coal for its 
efficient utilisation 
CIMFR No targets set
6 Positioning Indian nutraceuticals 
and neutrigenomics on global 
platform 
CFTRI No target No target 35 60 2 12.50 27 0.11 
7 Development of key technologies 
for photonics and opto-electronics 
CGCRI No targets set
8 Development of medicinal plant 
chemotypes for enhanced marker 
and value added compounds 
CIMAP 20 No target 25 25 2.50 13.52 38 0.12 
9 Environment friendly leather 
processing technology 
CLRI No target No target No target No target 40 No target No target No target 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 54 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Nodal 
Laboratory 
Targets proposed for the deliverables
No. of 
Technologies 
to be 
developed 
Amount of 
Revenue 
to be 
generated 
through 
sale of 
technology 
No. of 
publications 
to be 
brought out 
No. of 
Patents 
to be 
filed 
Total 
amount 
of ECF to 
be 
earned 
(` in 
crore) 
Value of 
Employment 
generation
(` in crore) 
Value of 
Import 
substitution 
(` in crore) 
Societal/Employment 
benefits to be earned 
(mandays in crore) 
10 Capacity building for coastal placer 
mineral mining 
CIMFR No target No target 40 20 No target No target No target No target 
11 Developing capabilities in 
advanced manufacturing 
technology  
CMERI No target No target 25 12 16 No target No target No target 
12 Electronics for societal purposes CSIO 30 No target No target No target No target No target No target No target 
13 Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new 
bioactives and traditional 
preparation 
CSIR Hqs. No target No target No target 50 No target No target No target No target 
14 New and improved road 
technologies 
CRRI 36 No target No target 7 9 No target No target No target 
15 Drug target development using in-
silico biology 
IGIB 250 10 100 50 No target No target No target No target 
16 Asthmatic and allergic disorders 
mitigation mission 
IICB No targets set
17 Newer scientific herbal 
preparations for global positioning 
IIIM No target No target No target 7 No target No target No target No target 
18 Developing new generation fuels & 
lubricants 
IIP No targets set
19 Biomineral processing for 
extraction of metal values from 
ores and concentrates  
IMMT No targets set

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 55 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project Nodal 
Laboratory 
Targets proposed for the deliverables
No. of 
Technologies 
to be 
developed 
Amount of 
Revenue 
to be 
generated 
through 
sale of 
technology 
No. of 
publications 
to be 
brought out 
No. of 
Patents 
to be 
filed 
Total 
amount 
of ECF to 
be 
earned 
(` in 
crore) 
Value of 
Employment 
generation
(` in crore) 
Value of 
Import 
substitution 
(` in crore) 
Societal/Employment 
benefits to be earned 
(mandays in crore) 
20 Exploration and exploitation of 
microbial wealth of India for novel 
compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH No target No target 12 20 2.50 2 23 0.12 
21 Developing and sustaining high 
science & technology for national 
aerospace programmes 
NAL No targets set
22 Impact of anthropogenic 
perturbations oceanographic 
atmospheric processes in and 
around India in the context of 
global change 
NIO No targets set
23 Development of catalysis & 
catalysts 
NCL No targets set
24 Industrial waste minimisation and 
clean up 
NEERI 10 No target 295 111 No target No target No target No target 
25 Technology for engineering critical 
assessment  
NML No targets set
26 Upgradation of SI base units, 
national standards of 
measurements and apex 
calibration facilities 
NPL No target No target No target No target 23.40 No target No target No target 
27 Design analysis and health 
assessment of special structures 
including bridges 
SERC No target No target 50 5 No target No target No target No target 
Total 359 10 732 437 119.90 28.02 88 0.35 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 56 | P a g e  
Appendix VI- (Refer Para 2.5) 
List of equipment procured and installed at the fag end /after completion of the project  
 
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
1.  Developing 
capabilities & 
facilities for 
micro-
electromechanical 
systems (MEMS) 
and sensors 
31.89 March 
2007 
1. Deep Reactive 
Ion Etching  
3.15 CEERI September 
2006 
April 2007 July 2007 DRIE system could not be utilised 
during the tenure of the project 
due to delayed sanction and 
allocation of fund by CSIR and also 
due to prolonged purchase 
formalities. CSIR stated in July 2012 
that DRIE was being used regularly 
for ongoing projects. 
2.  Acoustic Imager 
(Manual System) 
0.87 CEERI August 
2004 
April 2007 June 2007 CEERI failed to utilise the 
equipment during the project 
period due to delay in installation 
of the same. The description of the 
commodity as per the purchase 
order was not quoted in the 
application for opening of LC. There 
was delay in taking decision for 
sending a representative to USA for 
pre-dispatch inspection. CSIR 
stated in July 2012 that Acoustic 
Imager was being used regularly for 
ongoing projects 
2.  Development of 
medicinal plant 
chemotypes for 
enhanced marker 
21.66 March 
2007 
3. GLP grade 
extraction unit 
1.24 IIIM February 
2007 
September 
2008 
February 
2010. 
Audit observed that three items of 
equipment procured by CIMAP 
could not be utilised for the project 
activities due to procurement of 4. Autopurification 
system 
1.24 CIMAP September 
2005 
April 2006 February 
2007 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 57 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
and value added 
compounds 
5. Complete 
Automated 
Liquid handling 
System for DNA 
chip 
construction and 
detection 
0.90 CIMAP March 
2005 
November 
2005 
March 2009 equipment after closure of the 
activity in one case and installation 
of equipment after closure/at the 
tail end of the activity in the 
remaining two cases. 
In respect of two 1 of the above 
cases, CSIR stated (July 2012) that 
the absence of major equipments 
did not hamper the developmental 
work which was carried out with 
other existing facilities.   Since the 
entire objective of network 
projects was about pooling of 
resources of various CSIR 
laboratories, the fact that facilities 
were available elsewhere for 
carrying out the work denotes 
faulty decision to procure the 
above equipment under this 
project. The reply of CSIR indicates 
that effectively, procurement of 
above equipment costing `3.38 
crore, was avoidable. 
3.  Developing 
capabilities in 
advanced 
manufacturing 
technology  
16.13 March 
2007 
6. SLS system 2.05 CMERI Not 
available 
Not 
available 
After 
completion of 
the project 
Though the actual date of 
receipt/installation/commissioning 
was not made available, CMERI 
stated in December 2011 that the 
system was procured after 
completion of the project.  CSIR 
stated in July 2012 that as the 
                                                            
1 (i) GLP grade extraction unit and (ii) Automated Liquid handling System for DNA chip construction and detection 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 58 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
machine got damaged during 
transit, the system was procured 
after tenure of the project. 
However, the fact remained that 
activity relating to patient specific 
bio implants could not tried 
through rapid prototyping route 
using selective laser sintering 
process during tenure of the 
project. 
4.  Electronics for 
societal purposes 
18.87 September 
2007 
7. Intelligent 
Electronic Nose 
0.49 CSIO March 
2007 
October 
2007 
February 
2008 
Of 53 items of equipment valuing 
`2.79 crore procured by CSIO for its 
activities under the project, it was 
seen that five items of equipment 
costing `1.21 crore could not be 
utilised for project activities as 
these items were either 
received/installed after completion 
of the project or installed at the tail 
end of completion.  
As the intended technology was 
treated as completed without the 
use of the equipment, the 
expenditure incurred on the 
equipment valued at `1.21 crore 
has resulted in avoidable 
expenditure to that extent. 
CSIR stated in July 2012 that 
equipment mentioned were part of 
the infrastructural facilities which 
were continuously utilised for 
8. Gel Permeation 
Chromatography 
0.26 CSIO March 
2007 
July 2007 August 2007 
9. Multiproduct 
Calibrator 
0.23 CSIO August 
2007 
May 2008 January 2009 
10. Function Tester 
Incircuit 
0.12 CSIO March 
2007 
April 2007 May 2007 
11. Metlab Software 0.11 CSIO October 
2006 
February 
2007 
May 2007 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 59 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
similar nature of R&D work.  
However the fact remained that 
the equipments were not utilised 
for the purpose for which they 
were procured.  
5.  Drug target 
development 
using in-silico 
biology 
48.62 March 
2011 
12. SGI Altix 
ultraviolet 
system 
0.83 IGIB September 
2010 
December 
2010 
March 2011 The system costing ` 82.74 lakh for 
large scale integrative analysis of 
biological data was procured at the 
fag end of the project. CSIR stated 
that the endeavour was to utilise 
the resource available for the 
project most optimally and 
gainfully. The reply of CSIR needed 
to be viewed in light of the fact that 
procurement of equipment at the 
fag end of the project resulted in 
non-utilisation of the item for 
which it was procured. 
13.  Mid range 
server  
0.12 IGIB March 
2011 
August 
2011 
August 2011 Server costing ` 12.27 lakh was not 
utilised in the project due to 
delayed submission of placement 
of order. CSIR stated that the 
endeavour was to utilise the 
resource available for the project 
most optimally and gainfully. The 
reply of CSIR needed to be viewed 
in light of the fact that 
procurement of item at the fag end 
of the project resulted in non-
utilisation of the item for which it 
was procured. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 60 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
14.  Six desk side 
supercomputers 
for analysis of 
high-throughput 
data for gene-
gene 
interactions 
1.16 IGIB February 
2011 
May 2011 May 2011 Placement of purchase order at the 
fag end of a seven year project 
resulted in non-installation of the 
indented items costing ` 116.32 
lakh within the tenure of project. 
CSIR stated that the endeavour was 
to utilise the resource available for 
the project most optimally and 
gainfully. The reply of CSIR needed 
to be viewed in light of the fact 
procurement of item at the fag end 
of the project resulted in non-
utilisation of the item for which it 
was procured. 
6.  Developing new 
generation fuels 
& lubricants 
22.52 March 
2007 
15. C 80 Calvet 
Calorimeter with 
adaptation for 
adsorption 
studies 
0.46 IIP 29.03.06 10.07.06 13.10.06 Audit observed that procurement 
of equipment costing ` 5.32 crore 
was proposed to be made in 2002-
03.  Audit further observed that 
supply orders were issued after two 
years or more and the same were 
received/installed at the tail end or 
after completion of the project. 
CSIR stated in July 2012 that 
progress of the project did not 
16. Host computer 1.23 IIP 24.03.06 29.08.06 25.02.09 
17. Full flow dilution 
tunnel for diesel 
vehicles 
2.21 IIP 29.03.05 02.01.06 25.02.09 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 61 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
18. Dynamic vehicle 
test bed 
1.42 IIP 08.03.06 December 
06 
09.02.07 suffer as the old equipment was 
available.  The new equipment 
were utilised to address future 
requirements.   
However the fact remained that 
the equipment were not utilised for 
the purpose for which they were 
procured. 
 
7.  Bio mineral 
processing for 
extraction of 
metal values from 
ores and 
concentrates  
14.73 March 
2007 
19. Inductively 
Coupled Plasma 
Mass 
Spectrometer 
(ICPMS) 
1.20 IMMT March 
2004 
August 
2004 
September 
2008 
The delay was due to failure to 
arrange pre-requisites for 
installation of the equipment 
immediately after receipt. CSIR 
stated in July 2012 the equipment 
was being used for carrying of R&D 
projects. The fact remained that 
the equipment could not be used 
for the intended purpose in the 
project. 
20.  Upgradation of 
existing ‘X-Pert’ 
x-ray 
Diffractometer 
0.68 IMMT March 
2007 
August 
2007 
March 2008 The delay was due to injudicious 
decision of IMMT to issue work 
order at the fag end of the project 
in March 2007. CSIR stated in July 
2012 the equipment was being 
used for carrying of R&D projects. 
The fact remained that the 
equipment could not be used for 
the intended purpose in the 
project. 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 62 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
21.  CHN Analyser 0.29 IMMT March 
2006 
September 
2006 
December 
2007 
The delay was due to failure of the 
supplier to commission the 
equipment immediately after 
receipt even after repeated 
attempts. CSIR stated in July 2012 
the equipment was being used for 
carrying of R&D projects. The fact 
remained that equipment could not 
be used for the intended purpose 
in the project. 
22.  Transmission 
Electron 
Microscope 
(TEM) 
2.54 IMMT March 
2006 
December 
2006 
June 2008 Repeated defects developed in the 
equipment at the time of 
commissioning, due to which it 
could not be used in the project. 
CSIR stated in July 2012 the 
equipment was being used for 
carrying of R&D projects. The fact 
remained that the equipment was 
not used for the intended purpose 
in the project. 
23.  Potentiostat/ 
Galvanostat 
0.13 IMMT January 
2007 
August 
2007 
January 2008 The delay was due to issue of 
supply order at the fag end of the 
project in January 2007. CSIR stated 
in July 2012 the equipment was 
being used for carrying of R&D 
projects. The fact remained that 
the equipment could not be used 
for the intended purpose in the 
project.  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 63 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
24.  Super Critical 
fluid extraction 
0.36 IMMT January 
2007 
June 2007 October 2007 The delay was due to issue of 
supply order at the fag end of the 
project in January 2007. CSIR stated 
in July 2012 the equipment was 
being used for carrying of R&D 
projects. The fact remained that 
the equipment could not be used 
for the intended purpose in the 
project. 
8.  Developing and 
sustaining high 
science & 
technology for 
national 
aerospace 
programmes 
77.79 March 
2010 
25. High Pressure 
Compressed air 
supply system 
with dryer 
3.67 NAL March 
2008 
October 
2009 
March 2010 Under this project NAL procured 
these equipments under a 
particular activity titled 
“Ramjet/Scramjet Test Facilities” 
which was completed in March 
2008.  On being pointed out NAL 
stated in January 2012 that 
objectives of the project were met 
but after the specified completion 
date.  However NAL did not furnish 
any documentary evidence 
showing achievement of the 
objectives and status of evaluation 
of achievement conducted by the 
MC constituted for this purpose.  
CSIR did not offer any comments in 
July 2012 regarding delay in 
procurement of equipment after 
completion of the project.  
26. High Pressure 
200 bar 
seamless gas 
cylinders of 
2500 l water 
capacity, 
manifold system 
& support 
system 
2.68 NAL Not 
available 
December 
2009 
June 2010 
27. NI Data 
acquisition & 
control system 
0.15 NAL Not 
available 
Not 
available 
August 2008 
28. Exciter, Ignitor, 
Leads and 
Connector 
0.25 NAL Not 
available 
April 2008 May 2008 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 64 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
9.  Upgradation of SI 
base units, 
national 
standards of 
measurements 
and apex 
calibration 
facilities 
15.21 March 
2008 
29. Ion 
Chromatography 
System 
0.46 NPL September 
2007 
December 
2007 
January 2008 Though the project was started in 
March 2004, supply order was 
issued on January 2007 and 
September 2007 after a lapse of 
three years. 
CSIR stated in July 2012 that Ion 
Chromatography System was 
delayed in the process because 
tenders were invited thrice as the 
scientific equipments were 
generally not available on the shelf.  
As regards Gas Chromatographs 
(GCS) System the delay was also 
stated to be due to re inviting of 
tenders. The fact remained that the 
equipment could not be used for 
the intended purpose in the 
project.  
30. Gas 
Chromatographs 
(GCS) System 
0.41 NPL January 
2007 
September 
2007 
February 
2008 
10.  Industrial waste 
minimisation and 
cleanup 
13.93 September 
2007 
31. X-ray defraction 
unit 
0.25 NEERI September 
2006 
July 2007 July 2007 The equipment could not be used 
in the project due to delay in issue 
of supply order. 
11 Quality 
enhancement of 
coal for its 
efficient 
utilisation 
7.31 September 
2007 
32.  Digital contact 
angle and 
surface tension 
analyzer 
0.11 CIMFR March 
2007 
June 2007 January 2008 Issuance of purchase order at the 
fag end of project resulted in delay 
in installation. As a result, the 
equipment could not be used for 
the intended purpose in the 
project. 
12 Design analysis 
and health 
assessment of 
16.34 March 
2007 
33.  Upgradation of 
RS Console 
software 
0.13 SERC October 
2006 
June 2007 July 2007 SERC stated that all the equipment 
purchased were intended to 
strengthen all round R&D 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 65 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
special structures 
including bridges 
34.  Tower Crane 1.65 SERC November 
2006 
February 
2007 
April 2007 capabilities and that all the 
equipment procured had the 
potential for usage in all ongoing 
projects. This indicated that 
equipment were procured for up-
gradation of infrastructure and not 
for network project. The reply of 
SERC is not tenable since CSIR had 
stipulated that the laboratories 
should procure only those 
equipments that were absolutely 
required for carrying out research 
under the network project. CSIR did 
not offer any comments on the 
issue. 
35.  Upgradation of 
Servo controller 
with software 
0.33 SERC Not 
available 
March 
2007 
After July 
2007 
13 Impact of anthro-
pogenic 
perturbations on 
oceano-graphic 
atmospheric 
process 
14.01 March 
2008 
36.  Spectrometer  0.18 NPL March 
2005 
July 2005 December 
2009 
The equipment was commissioned 
after completion of the project in 
March 2008. This resulted in non-
completion of the work under the 
project. CSIR stated in July 2012 
that the spectrometer was being 
used for generation of long-term 
records which was major purpose 
of launching the network project. 
The fact however remained that 
the equipment could not be used 
for the intended purpose for which 
it was procured under the project.  
14 New and 
improved road 
technologies 
24.30 January 
2010 
37.  APTF 13.37 CRRI February 
2007 
January  
2010 
April 2010 CSIR stated (July 2012) that there 
was delay in deployment of terms 
for pre shipment factory 
acceptance test and training, re-

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 66 | P a g e  
Sl. No Title of the Project Actual 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Date of 
completion 
of the 
project 
Sl. 
No. 
of 
items 
Name of the 
equipment 
Cost
(` in 
crore) 
Procured 
by 
Date of issue 
of supply 
order 
Date of 
receipt 
Date of 
commissioning 
Remarks
tendering in selection of 
transporter and creation of 
infrastructural facilities. The fact 
remained that the equipment could 
not be used for the intended 
purpose in the project. 
15 Development of 
key technologies 
for photonics and 
opto-electronics 
31.95 March 2007 38.  FBG/LPG 1.80 CSIO NA NA Not 
commissioned 
upto October 
2007 
CSIR stated (July 2012) that the 
machines were to be procured 
from two different countries with 
integration of two systems at the 
place of one of the companies. 
During the process one of the 
companies was merged with new 
company and completion of various 
formalities took precious time. The 
fact however remained that the 
equipment could not be used for 
the intended purpose for which it 
was procured under the project.  
TOTAL 48.73      
 
 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 67 | P a g e  
Appendix VII (Refer Para 2.6.1) 
Status of meetings of Monitoring Committee and Task Force  
Sl. 
No 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Month of 
sanction by 
CSIR 
Month of issue 
order for 
constitution of 
MC by CSIR 
Month of 
completion of 
the project 
No. of 
meetings 
of MC to 
be 
conducted 
No.  of 
meetings 
of MC 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of MC 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF to 
be 
conducted 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of TF 
1 Developing new building 
construction materials 
CBRI August 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 Not 
available 
- 10 Not 
available 
- 
2 Developing cells & tissue 
engineering 
CCMB July 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 5 0 10 1 90 
3 Animal models and animal 
substitute technologies 
CDRI October 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 2 60 10 1 90 
4 Developing capabilities & facilities 
for micro-electromechanical 
systems (MEMS) and sensors 
CEERI January 2004 January 2005 March 2007 4 4 0 10 5 50 
5 Quality enhancement of coal for its 
efficient utilisation 
CIMFR May 2004 October 2004 September2007 6 5 17 12 Not 
available 
- 
6 Positioning Indian nutraceuticals 
and neutrigenomics on global 
platform 
CFTRI August 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 3 40 10 Not 
available 
- 
7 Development of key technologies 
for photonics and opto-electronics 
CGCRI August 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 2 60 10 5 50 
8 Development of medicinal plant 
chemotypes for enhanced marker 
and value added compounds 
CIMAP July 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 2 60 10 2 80 
9 Environment friendly leather 
processing technology 
CLRI January 2004 October 2004 March 2007 5 4 20 10 8 20 
10 Capacity building for coastal placer 
mineral mining 
CIMFR April 2003 October 2004 March 2008 7 5 29 14 5 64 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 68 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Month of 
sanction by 
CSIR 
Month of issue 
order for 
constitution of 
MC by CSIR 
Month of 
completion of 
the project 
No. of 
meetings 
of MC to 
be 
conducted 
No.  of 
meetings 
of MC 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of MC 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF to 
be 
conducted 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of TF 
11 Developing capabilities in 
advanced manufacturing 
technology  
CMERI January 2004 October 2004 March 2007 5 4 20 10 5 50 
12 Electronics for societal purposes CSIO July 2003 October 2004 September2007 6 Not 
available 
- 12 Not 
available 
- 
13 Discovery, development and 
commercialisation of new 
bioactives and traditional 
preparation 
CSIR-
Hqs. 
April 2004 May 2005 March 2008 5 2 60 14 16 0 
14 New and improved road 
technologies 
CRRI August 2003 October 2004 January 2010 9 6 33 18 9 50 
15 Drug target development using in-
silico biology 
IGIB January 2004 October 2004 March 2011 13 4 69 26 14 46 
16 Asthmatic and allergic disorders 
mitigation mission 
IICB July 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 3 40 10 Not 
available 
- 
17 Newer scientific herbal 
preparations for global positioning 
IIIM August 2003 October 2004 September 
2010 
12 3 75 24 7 71 
18 Developing new generation fuels & 
lubricants 
IIP Not available October 2004 March 2007 5 3 40 10 6 40 
19 Biomineral processing for 
extraction of metal values from 
ores and concentrates  
IMMT March 2004 April 2005 March 2007 4 4 0 10 Not 
available 
- 
20 Exploration and exploitation of 
microbial wealth of India for novel 
compounds and biotransformation 
process 
IMTECH January 2004 November 2004 March 2007 10 2 80 22 Not 
available 
- 
21 Developing and sustaining high 
science & technology for national 
aerospace programmes 
NAL February 2005 October 2004 March 2010 10 Not 
available 
- 22 Not 
available 
- 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 69 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No 
Title of the Project Nodal 
Lab 
Month of 
sanction by 
CSIR 
Month of issue 
order for 
constitution of 
MC by CSIR 
Month of 
completion of 
the project 
No. of 
meetings 
of MC to 
be 
conducted 
No.  of 
meetings 
of MC 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of MC 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF to 
be 
conducted 
No. of 
meetings 
of TF 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
of 
meetings 
of TF 
22 Impact of anthropogenic 
perturbations oceanographic 
atmospheric processes in and 
around India in the context of 
global change 
NIO February 2004 April 2005 March 2008 6 3 50 14 3 79 
23 Development of catalysis & 
catalysts 
NCL August 2003 October 2004 September2007 6 3 50 12 Not 
available 
- 
24 Industrial waste minimisation and 
clean up 
NEERI April 2004 October 2004 September2007 6 6 0 12 Not 
available 
- 
25 Technology for engineering critical 
assessment  
NML March 2004 October 2004 March 2007 5 4 20 10 Not 
available 
- 
26 Upgradation of SI base units, 
national standards of 
measurements and apex 
calibration facilities 
NPL March 2004 October 2004 March 2008 
(Upto 
December 
2007) 
7 1 86 14 3 79 
27 Design analysis and health 
assessment of special structures 
including bridges 
SERC March 2003 October 2004 March 2007 5 5 - 10 5 50 
TOTAL 171 85 356 95  
 
  

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 70 | P a g e  
Appendix VIII (Refer Para 3.1) 
Project wise position of number of technologies developed and commercialised 
Sl. 
No 
Project code Nodal Lab Number of 
techno-
logies 
developed 
Number of 
techno-
logies 
transferred 
as of July 
2012 
Number of 
technologies 
commercialised 
as of July 2012 
Revenue 
generated 
from sale of 
technology  
(` in lakh) 
1 Developing new building construction materials CBRI 33 19 19 1 
2 Developing cells & tissue engineering* CCMB 2 0 0 0 
3 Animal models and animal substitute technologies CDRI 41 0 0 0 
4 Developing capabilities & facilities for micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) and 
sensors 
CEERI 16 0 2 0 
5 Quality enhancement of coal for its efficient utilisation CIMFR 0 0 0 0 
6 Positioning Indian nutraceuticals and neutrigenomics on global platform CFTRI 7 2 2 16 
7 Development of key technologies for photonics and opto-electronics CGCRI 26 1 1 3 
8 Development of medicinal plant chemotypes for enhanced marker and value added 
compounds 
CIMAP 7 1 1 21 
9 Environment friendly leather processing technology CLRI 13 4 2 227.50 
10 Capacity building for coastal placer mineral mining CIMFR 9 1 1 31 
11 Developing capabilities in advanced manufacturing technology  CMERI  6 1 1 2 
12 Electronics for societal purposes CSIO 11 1 0 0.45 
13 Discovery, development and commercialisation of new bioactives and traditional 
preparation 
CSIR-Hq 2 1 0 0 
14 New and improved road technologies CRRI 21 1 1 2 
15 Drug target development using in-silico biology** IGIB 62 0 0 0 
16 Asthmatic and allergic disorders mitigation mission IICB 23 0 0 0 

Report No. 29 of 2013 
Network Projects of CSIR for Tenth Five Year Plan 71 | P a g e  
Sl. 
No 
Project code Nodal Lab Number of 
techno-
logies 
developed 
Number of 
techno-
logies 
transferred 
as of July 
2012 
Number of 
technologies 
commercialised 
as of July 2012 
Revenue 
generated 
from sale of 
technology  
(` in lakh) 
17 Newer scientific herbal preparations for global positioning IIIM 5 0 0 0 
18 Developing new generation fuels & lubricants IIP 21 1 1 8 
19 Biomineral processing for extraction of metal values from ores and concentrates  IMMT 1 1 0 0 
20 Exploration and exploitation of microbial wealth of India for novel compounds and  
biotransformation process 
IMTECH 0 0 0 0 
21 Developing and sustaining high science & technology for national aerospace 
programmes*** 
NAL 9 3 3 0 
22 Impact of anthropogenic perturbations oceanographic atmospheric processes in and 
around India in the context of global change 
NIO 0 0 0 0 
23 Development of catalysis & catalysts NCL 5 1 1 14 
24 Industrial waste minimisation and clean up NEERI 41 3 3 51 
25 Technology for engineering critical assessment  NML 8 6 0 1.7 
26 Upgradation of SI base units, national standards of measurements and apex calibration 
facilities 
NPL 6 4 0 4.56 
27 Design analysis and health assessment of special structures including bridges SERC 24 0 0 0 
Total 399 51 38 383.21 
* CSIR initially (July 2012) stated that revenue of `10.48 crore was earned, which was contradictory as no technology was developed. CSIR later (September 2012) accepted that the 
amount was not generated from this network project.  
** CSIR stated (July 2012) that four software were transferred. Audit observed that these were actually developed from a project titled ‘Development of versatile, portable software 
for Bioinformatics’ under another scheme of CSIR.   
*** CSIR stated (July 2012) that NAL generated revenue of `60.74 crore. Audit however observed that this amount was not realised from network project. 