vii


Overview

OVERVIEW

This Report has seven chapters containing observations of audit on accounting procedures and
financial management, receipts, establishment, material management and execution of works,
implementation of schemes, performance audit as well as other important issues. A synopsis
of the Audit findings is presented in this overview.

Twelve ULBs had incurred excess revenue expenditure of Rs. 39.95 crore and nine ULBs had
incurred excess capital expenditure of Rs. 38.52 crore vis-d-vis the budget provisions during
2006 - 09.

[Paragraph 2.1.1

Four ULBs diverted Rs. 93.60 lakh sanctioned for specific purposes during the years 2006 —
08 depriving the beneficiaries of the intended benefits.

[Paragraph 2.4

Twenty ULBs accumulated a liability of about Rs. 61.55 crore as of March 2008 due to non-

payment of loan in time. The increasing liabilities adversely impact the financial stability of the
ULBs.

[Paragraph 2.5
Cases of theft and misappropriation of materials worth Rs. 6.91 lakh were noticed in Durgapur
and North Dum Dum municipalities.

[Paragraph 2.8
Contai Municipality at source deducted Sales Tax (Rs. 3.08 lakh), Income Tax (Rs. 2.11 lakh)

and Professional Tax (Rs. 3.46 lakh) up to 31 March 2008. But, the municipality did not deposit
the amounts to Government account as of June 2008.

[Paragraph 2.10

Inadmissible remission allowed in property tax resulted in loss of revenue of Rs. 31.17 lakh in
two ULBs.

[Paragraph 3.2

Non-imposition of surcharge on property tax for commercial holdings by 16 ULBs during

October 2001 to March 2009 resulted in loss of revenue of Rs. 2.61 crore.

[Paragraph 3.3.1

Fifteen ULBs collected an amount of Rs. 3.60 crore (47 per cent) during 2008 — 09 on account

of water charge against the total demand of Rs. 7.63 crore leaving an amount of Rs. 4.03 crore
(53 per cent) as outstanding.

[Paragraph 3.4

Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) suffered a loss of revenue of Rs. 35.04 lakh during
2003 - 07 due to non-realization of fees and taxes at prescribed rates (applicable on backlit
advertisement) from three advertising agencies. Further, the KMC showed undue favour to the
agencies by issue of license for five years against the codal provision of one year.

[Paragraph 3.8



In absence of ‘Special Fund’ or due to inadequate contribution to the said fund, four ULBs
accrued a liability of Rs. 1.84 crore towards pension and gratuity as of March 2008.

Paragraph 4.1
Three municipalities did not pay electricity charges amounting to Rs. 7.26 crore and lost rebate
of Rs. 17.49 lakh as of March 2008.
Paragraph 4.3
Dalkhola, Islampur and Khardah municipalities procured materials and equipments worth

Rs. 23.30 lakh, Rs. 17.29 lakh and Rs. 14.53 lakh respectively without inviting open tenders
during January 2006 to March 2008.

Paragraph 5.1

Non-acceptance of the lowest offer by the Haldia Municipality resulted in avoidable expenditure
of Rs. 7.93 lakh on procurement of cement.

Paragraph 5.2

In 12 ULBs unspent funds under Employment Generation in Urban Area Scheme increased
from Rs. 2.46 crore as on 1 April 2006 to Rs. 4.47 crore as on 31 March 2008. Four ULBs spent
Rs. 2.82 crore under the scheme during 2006 - 08 without involving the Ward Committees /
Community Development Societies. The expenditure on wages by three ULBs was far below
40 per cent of the total cost of works during 2007 - 08, implying non-generation of employment
of approximately 13,547 man-days. Three ULBs executed works worth Rs. 32.67 lakh during
2006 — 08 engaging contractors in violation of government guidelines.

[Paragraph 6.1]

In six ULBs a huge amount of Rs. 2.74 crore remained unutilized under National Old Age
Pension Scheme as of March 2008 depriving 5715 intended beneficiaries for the year 2007 —
08. Taherpur Notified Area Authority made unauthorised payment of pension of Rs. 0.82 lakh
under the scheme to seven ineligible beneficiaries below 65 years of age as of March 2008.

[Paragraph 6.2]

Absence of monitoring of the Mid-day-Meal Programme by the Panihati Municipality led to
misappropriation of rice worth Rs. 40.49 lakh.

[Paragraph 6.3.2]

As the construction of remunerative assets was not completed by three ULBs, these assets did

not generate the expected revenue, rendering the entire expenditure of Rs. 3.20 crore unproductive.

[Paragraph 6.4]



Overview

PERFORMANCE AUDIT
MOBILISATION OF PROPERTY TAX

The budget estimates prepared by Asansol, Durgapur, Siliguri and Chandernagore Municipal
Corporations were only 14, 33, 44 and 67 per cent respectively of annual dues which indicated
that the budget exercise was a formality.

The Corporations did not have complete and accurate database of holdings. As a result, they do
not have a complete picture of the scope of own resource and actual trend of realization.

Siliguri Municipal Corporation (SMC) raised only 22 per cent of the demand bills in 2006 — 07
but no bills were raised during 2007 - 09. Asansol Municipal Corporation (AMC) issued demand
bills to 11 to 20 per cent of the assesses in 2007 — 09; while data for 2006 — 07 was not available
in AMC, Chandernagore Municipal Corporation (CMC) and Durgapur Municipal Corporation
(DMC). This resulted in non accountal of considerable amount of dues and non pursuance
thereof.

SMC held back assessment of new holdings since 2004-05 causing loss of Rs.42.31 lakh during
2004-09.

Remission granted in 13887 cases beyond the prescribed limit resulted in loss of revenue of
Rs.2.27 crore in AMC and DMC. AMC and DMC lost Rs.53.67 lakh due to unauthorised rebate
allowed to tax payers on arrears and surcharge. Surcharge was not imposed and recovered though
the holdings were identified as commercial and industrial in nature.

In four municipal corporations there are outstanding dues of Rs.36.79 crore, three to five years
old which are doubtful of recovery.

[Paragraph 7.1]

xi



Chapter I - Introduction

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION

1.1 Background

Municipal Bodies have been accorded constitutional status in the 747 Constitutional
Amendment Act of 1992 and raised to the status of ‘Government’ at the local level.

Article 243W of the Constitution of India envisages that the State Government may,
by law, endow the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be necessary
to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and such law may
contain provisions for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Municipalities,
subject to such conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to (i) the
preparation of plans for economic development and social justice and (ii) the
performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted
to them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.

Out of 127 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in West Bengal, 121 municipalities are
governed according to the provisions of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993.
Kolkata and Howrah Municipal Corporations are governed by the Acts of 1980.
Other four municipal corporations were governed by the Acts! of 1990 and 1994.
With effect from 1 November 2008, all municipal corporations (except Kolkata and
Howrah) have been brought under the West Bengal Municipal Corporation Act,
2006. The municipalities were classified into five groups on the basis of the population
as ascertained in the preceding census for the purpose of application of the provision
of the Act. Each municipality is divided into a number of wards, which is determined.
and notified by the State Government having regard to the population, dwelling
pattern, geographical condition and economic consideration of the respective area.
The minimum number of wards is nine and the maximum number is kept between
15 and 141 depending on the size of the ULB. An elected Councillor represents
each ward.

In 2001 the urban population in West Bengal was 2.25 crore spread over 2060 sq.
km., with a density of 10,915 per sq. km. as against the total population of 8.02
crore. During 1991 to 2001, the urban population increased by 20.20 per cent, which
was lower than the previous decade (29.49 per cent).

1.2 Organizational Structure

The Department of Municipal Affairs is entrusted with the responsibility of providing
legal and administrative support to the ULBs of the State and to implement some
of the development programmes through the municipal bodies. The department is
headed by the Minister-in-Charge. The Secretariat is looking after the various
functions of the Directorate and other organizations, which are related with the
Department.

1. Siliguri, Asansol and Chandernagore by respective Acts of 1990 and Durgapur by the Act

of 1994.



Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

The structure is depicted below :

At the State Level |

Department of Municipal A ffairs |

Directorate of Local Bodies,
Municipal Engineering Directorate, etc.

The Chairman / Mayor, elected by the majority of the Board of Councillors (BOC),
is the executive head of the ULB and presides over the meetings of the Chairman-
in-Council / Mayor-in-Council responsible for governance of the body. The executive
power of a ULB is exercised by the Council. The Chairman presides over the Board
of Councillors. The Chairman-in-Council / Mayor-in-Council, enjoys such power
as is delegated by the Board.

Every ULB having a population of three lakh or more, groups the wards into five
(up to 15 in respect of a municipal corporation) boroughs. Boroughs are constituted
with not less than six contiguous wards and a Borough Committee is also constituted
for each Borough. The Councillors of the respective wards are the members of such
Borough Committee and elect the Chairman (not being a member of Chairman-in-
Council / Mayor-in-Council) from among themselves. The Borough Committee
discharges such functions, as the ULB requires it to discharge. At ward level, the
ULB constitutes Ward Committee under the Chairmanship of the Ward Councillor.

The organizational structure of the governing body of an ULB is as under :

At the ULB level
I
Board of Councillors (BOC)

Chairman / Mayor

Chairman-in-Council/ Mayor-in-Council

I
Boroughs (5 to 15)
Borough Committee

Wards (9 to 141)
Ward Committees

The establishment of ULB is headed by an Executive Officer /Commissioner. Other
officers are also appointed to discharge specific functions of respective area / nature.
Subject to the supervision and control of the Chairman / Mayor, the Executive Officer
/ Commissioner functions as the principal executive of the ULB. The Executive
Officer / Commissioner and the Finance Officer exercise such powers and perform



Chapter I - Introduction

such functions as notified by the State Government from time to time. The structure
of an Urban Local Body is as below :

Executive Officer / Commissioner

Engineer / Chief Municipal | | Chief Municipal खा Secretary Health Officer /
Municipal Engineer Architect & Auditor iC MEA {Municipal | | Chief Municipal
in Chief Town Planner | |(For Corporation)} - Secretary Health Officer

(For Corporation)

13

Powers and Functions

The ULBs exercise their powers and functions in accordance with the provisions
of Article 243W of the Constitution. Some obligatory functions of the ULBs are
as follows:

VV Vv

Vv

vVvwv

v

Vv

Water supply for public and private purpose;

Construction and maintenance of sewage and drainage system;
Collection and disposal of solid waste;

Construction and maintenance of streets, bridges, fly-overs etc.;

Construction and maintenance of public latrines, urinals and similar
conveniences;

Lighting of public streets and other public places;

Construction and maintenance of markets;

Preventing and checking spread of dangerous diseases including immunization;

Town planning and development including preservation of monuments,
places of historical, artistic and other importance; and

Overall administration including survey, removal of encroachment, dangerous
buildings, registration of births and deaths and pollution control of all kinds.

Further, the ULBs may at their discretion provide the services either wholly or
partially out of its property and fund for the following services

VV VV WV

v

Education;

Sanitation;

Relief in the time of famine, flood or earthquake;

Old-age-homes, orphanage;

Public works relating to relief, care of sick, medical service; and

Low-cost dwelling houses for socially backward classes or citizens.

The State Government may impose or transfer any such functions and duties of the
Government to the ULB including those performed by the departments. Such
activities may include employment schemes and programmes, social forestry,



Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

health and family welfare, cottage and small-scale industries, formal and non-formal
education etc.

1.4 Financial Profile

The ULB fund comprises receipts from its own source, grants and assistance from
governments and loans obtained from public financial institutions or nationalized
banks or such other institutions as the State Government may approve. A flow chart
of finances of a ULB is as under :

Sources of finances of ULBs

tears

Tax Taxes on ) (7 (वध (Cental) [ कराए
Sharing Taxes on Trades, | [étetanment nance || implementation
(SF vehicles | Iprofessios| x Estabishment | | Commission} | ofschemes

and rants: Grants
a callings
Property| | Other | | Water | Mutation] | पाली)
Taxes || Taxes | | charge || fees | | 10 0७
The property tax on land and building is the principal source of tax revenue of an
ULB.

The main sources of non-tax revenue of an ULB are plan-sanction fees, mutation
fees and water charges. All collections as permissible under the statute in force,
such as tax and non-tax revenue, are meant for maintenance of administration and
services to the tax payers.

The State Government releases administrative grants to the urban local bodies to
compensate their revenue expenditure. Grants and assistance released by the State
Government and the Central Government are utilised for developmental activities
as specified in the respective schemes or projects.

The loans raised from different sources with prior approval of the State Government
are utilised for execution of various projects / schemes.

1.5 Twelfth Finance Commission Grants

The Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) allotted Rs.393.00 crore for the ULBs of
West Bengal for the five years (2005 — 10) to be paid in ten equal instalments with
the recommendation to provide at least 50 per cent of the grants-in-aid for Solid
Waste Management (SWM). The State Government may assess the requirement of
funding support for data building and maintenance of accounts for each local body
and earmark funds accordingly out of the total allocation. According to the
recommendation, it is mandatory for the State Government to transfer the grants
released by the Government of India to the ULBs within fifteen days of the amount
being credited to the State Accounts.



Chapter I - Introduction

Government of India (GOI) released the grant of Rs. 314.40 crore during the period
2005 — 09 in eight instalments of Rs. 39.30 crore each. The receipt of TFC grants
from the GOI and release to ULBs by the State Government (as of January 2010)

during the said period are shown below :
(Rupees in crore)

Year Approved allocation Receipt from GOI Fund released

An amount of Rs.23.06 lakh was released by the State Government towards interest
for delay in release of the first installment of 2005 — 06.

Test check of records of 25 ULBs revealed that during 2006 - 09, these municipalities
had received a total sum of Rs. 57.28 crore which included Rs. 28.23 crore earmarked
for Solid Waste Management (SWM) and the expenditure incurred on account of
SWM and others during 2006 — 09 are shown below :

Receipt Expenditure
SWM = Others Total SWM. Others Total
(Rupees in crore)

Unit-wise details are given in Appendix - 1A, 1B and 1C.

It is evident from the above table that the release of fund for SWM in respect of
these ULBs fell short by Rs. 0.41 crore out of the total entitlement of Rs. 28.64
crore. However, the ULBs spent only Rs. 20.28 crore being 72 per cent of Rs. 28.23
crore available for SWM.

1.6 Accounting Reforms / Arrangements

Accounting Manual for ULBs in West Bengal (except Kolkata Municipal Corporation)
based on the National Municipal Accounts Manual was prepared in February 2006
for switching over to double entry accounting system. Accordingly, Section 84 of
the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 (effective from 1 October 2006) and Rule 22
(2) of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999 (with effect
from 1 January 2007) were amended for mandatory preparation of Balance Sheet,
Income & Expenditure Account, Receipts & Payments Account and Cash Flow
Statement with effect from the financial year 2006 - 07 for the ULBs in Kolkata
Metropolitan Area and from 2007 — 08 for other ULBs.



Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

1.7. Audit Arrangement

The West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 and the acts governing other Municipal
Corporations envisage that the accounts of such bodies shall be examined and audited.
by an auditor appointed by the State Government. Accordingly, the State Government
in exercise of the power conferred by the Municipal Acts of the State, appointed the
Examiner of Local Accounts (ELA) an officer of the Indian Audit & Accounts
Service as the Auditor for audit of the accounts of the Urban Local Bodies. The
Acts further envisage that the Auditor shall prepare the report on the accounts
examined and shall send such report to the Chairman / Mayor and a copy thereof
to the Director of Local Bodies or such other officers as the State Government may
direct.

1.8 Audit Coverage

Out of 127 ULBs, audit of 50 ULBs (Appendix-2) covering the financial year 2006
— 07 and 2007 - 08 was conducted during June 2008 to March 2009.

1.9 Follow up action on Audit Reports

Reports? of the Examiner of Local Accounts on Urban Local Bodies for the years
2003 — 04, 2004 - 05, 2005 - 06, 2006 - 07 and 2007 — 08 were submitted to the
Government of West Bengal in May 2005, August 2006, July 2007, May 2008 and
October 2009 respectively. A State Level Audit Committee (SLAC) was constituted*
on 23 February 2006 to examine the findings of the Audit Reports on Urban Local
Bodies.

Two meetings were held on 24 April 2008 and 3 September 2010. It was decided
(April 2008) that priority would be given in the matter of submission of replies to
the selected paragraphs by the Department of Municipal Affairs, replies to all other
paragraphs would also had to be submitted by the Department to the Accountant
General so as to facilitate the process of consideration of the Audit Reports by the
SLAC. The number of paragraphs selected for discussion vis-a-vis the status of
discussion are given below :

The reports contained important observations on ‘Accounting Procedures & Financial
Management’, ‘Revenue Receipts / Receipts’, ‘Establishment’, ‘Material Management and
Execution of Works’ and ‘Implementation of Schemes’. The reports included various draft
paragraphs and observations on the ‘Devolution of Functions, Functionaries and Funds to
Urban Local Bodies’, ‘Twelfth Finance Commission Grants’, ‘Heritage buildings and sites
in Kolkata Municipal Corporation’, ‘Internal Control mechanism in Bidhannagar Municipality’,
‘Solid Waste Management’, ‘Car parking projects on PPP basis’, etc.

Comprising the Chief Secretary (Chairman), Principal Secretary / Secretary of the Panchayats
& Rural Development Department (Member), Principal Secretary / Secretary of the Municipal
Affairs Department (Member), Principal Secretary of the Finance Department (Member),
Accountant General (Receipt, Works & Local Bodies Audit), West Bengal (Member) and
Principal Secretary of the Finance (IA) Department (Member-Secretary).
4 Vide Gazette Notification No. 4010-F.B. dated 23 February 2006 of the Finance Department,
Government of West Bengal.



Chapter I - Introduction

No. of No. of paragraphs _No. of paragraphs
Year Typeofthe Selected _discused by the settled by the
paragraph paragraphs SLAC SLAC

1.10 Response to Audit Observations

The Chairman / Mayor is required to comply with the observations contained in the
Inspection Reports (IRs) and rectify the defects and omissions and report their
compliance to ELA within three months from the date of issue of IRs.

The details of IRs and the outstanding paragraphs held under objection as of
September 2009 are given below :

Up to the No. of Inspection No. of outstanding Money Value
period Reports paras (Rupees in crore)

A review of the IRs, which were pending due to non-receipt of replies, revealed
that the Heads of the ULBs, whose records were inspected by ELA, did not send
any reply to a large number of IRs / paragraphs. No Audit Committee Meeting
was held during 2008 - 09. Important findings noticed during the period from
June 2008 to March 2009, as well as matters relating to the period subsequent to
2008-09 (wherever considered necessary) are described in the succeeding chapters.


Chapter II - Accounting Procedures and Financial Management

CHAPTER II

ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

An Urban Local Body (ULB) is required to present the budget estimate before the
Board of Councillors (BOC) for adoption after discussion. Within six months of
the close of a year, a financial statement consisting of the Balance Sheet, Income
and Expenditure Account, Receipts and Payments Account and Fund Flow Statement
has to be prepared in the form and manner prescribed and presented before the Board
of Councillors. The succeeding paragraphs bring out the deficiencies in the system
of accounting noticed during audit of 50 ULBs conducted during the period from
June 2008 to March 2009.

21 Budget Provisions

Rule 27 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999, states
that the departmental heads of a municipality, under the direction of the Member-
in-Charge in the Chairman-in-Council, shall prepare their estimated receipts and
expenditure of the following year in consultation with the Borough Committees or
the Ward Committees, as the case may be, and report the same to the Chairman.
The Accounts Department shall, in consideration of the departmental requirements
and having regard to the probable financial resources, prepare the Draft Annual
Budget Estimate for the following year which shall be finalized by the Chairman
with the help of the officers.

According to Section 82 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, no deficit shall
be shown in the budget estimate so prepared.

After necessary consideration by the Chairman-in-Council, the said draft Annual
Budget Estimate shall be placed before the Board of Councillors at a meeting specially
convened for the purpose as provided under the law.

2.1.1 Budgeting

In 22 ULBs, there were persistent savings in the budget provisions over the last
three years, indicating unrealistic estimates and absence of definite work plans. The
overall budget provision and the expenditure of these ULBs for the years 2006 - 07,
2007 — 08 and 2008 — 09 are given in the following table, while the unit-wise position
is detailed in Appendices 3A, 3B and 3C.

Budget Actual Savings (-) Percentage
Expenditure Excess (+) of

(Rupees in crore) variation



Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

It would be seen from the above table that there were substantial savings in the both
the revenue (21 to 25 per cent) and the capital (37 to 52 per cent) heads during 2006
-09.

Uttarpara — Kotrung and Barasat municipalities stated (October-December 2009)
that the variations between provisions and expenditure were due to shortfall in
revenue collection, delay in receipt of grant from Government and “incorrect
apprehension”. Siliguri Municipal Corporation stated (October 2009) that the reasons
for variation were receipt of funds at the end of the year and shortfall in receipt of
funds. Other ULBs did not furnish any reason for such variation.

As per section 69 (2) of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, no payment of any
sum shall normally be made out of Municipal Fund unless such expenditure is
covered by a current budget grant and a sufficient balance of such budget grant is
available for the purpose.

It was seen that 12 ULBs had incurred excess revenue expenditure of Rs.39.95 crore
and nine ULBs had incurred excess capital expenditure of Rs.38.52 crore vis-a-vis
the budget provisions during 2006 - 09 as shown in Appendices 4A & 4B.

The above expenditure violates the provision of section 69 (3), ibid, which stipulates
that whenever any sum is paid for the purposes not covered by the budget grant, the
matter shall forthwith be communicated to the Chairman-in-Council who shall take
such action under the provisions of the Act, as may appear to it to be feasible and
expedient for covering the amount of such payments. However, no action has been
taken by any ULB to regularize the expenditure by obtaining sanction of the respective
Board of Councillors for the excess of expenditure over the grant.

2.2 Preparation of Annual Accounts

Out of total of 293 Annual Accounts? of 126 ULBs pertaining to the year up to 2008
- 09, 19 ULBs submitted 24 Annual Accounts® till December 2009.

2.3 Observations on accounting software

To expedite the switch over to double entry accounting system, Government of West
Bengal constructed accounting software PUROHISAB and distributed to all the
ULBs, except Kolkata Municipal Corporation. Test check showed that :

. The software has no locking arrangement. Any voucher can be inserted at
a later date even after closing of a particular accounting year. Therefore,
sanctity of accounting figures incorporated in the Annual Financial Statement
as adopted by the Board of Councillors has chances to get vitiated at later
date.

. The exporting of data from this package to another programme like MS —
Word or MS - Excel was not possible. Thus audit fails to take evidence of

its observations.

. The users have no fire proof back up of financial data.

41 for 2006 - 07, 126 for 2007 - 08 and 126 for 2008 - 09
6 For 2006 - 07 by 17 ULBs, 2007 - 08 by six ULBs and 2008 - 09 by one ULB

10


Chapter II - Accounting Procedures and Financial Management

2.3.1. Annual accounts of Municipalities

Twelve Audit Reports on annual accounts in respect of 10 ULBs’ were issued till
December 2009. Main audit observations common to these Annual Accounts
were :

1. Property Tax receivable remaining un-recovered over five years was not
segregated and provided in the accounts.

2. Journal Vouchers were not signed by Competent Authority and were not
supported with primary papers / documents / basis.

3. Advance given to employees / contractors, etc. were not appropriately recorded
to identify period of non-adjustment.

4. No physical verification of cash as well as stock of stores was done.

Drawals of money for various payments were booked as expenditure before
actual disbursement resulting in unaccounted for municipal money in the
hand of cashier.

6. There was absence of internal control. Thus, figures generated by the
functional departments did not tally with that of finance.

2.3.2. Annual accounts of Municipal Corporations

The Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) had submitted its accounts for the year
ending 31 March 2008 on 25 November 2008. The significant audit observations
on the annual accounts of KMC were as follows:

. Section 163 (3) of the KMC Act, 1980 requires publication of the Auditor’s
Reports together with the report of the Municipal Accounts Committee and
the decision of the Corporation thereon. But, the Corporation did not bring
out the said reports for the year 2007 — 08.

न There was understatement of liability of Rs. 10.52 crore and overstatement
of net assets of Rs. 189.75 crore. Consequently the Municipal Fund and
Surplus of Income over Expenditure for the year were overstated to the extent
of Rs. 200.27 crore.

The other five Municipal Corporations, namely, Asansol, Chandernagore, Durgapur,
Howrah and Siliguri had not submitted the annual accounts till December 2009.

2.4 Diversion of funds

Four ULBs diverted Rs. 93.60 lakh sanctioned for specific purposes. This defeated
the very purpose of the grants and deprived the beneficiaries of intended benefits,
as shown below :

7 Bally (06 - 07), Barrackpore (06 — 07 & 07 - 08), Panihati (06 — 07), Naihati (06 - 07),
Gayeshpur (06 ~ 07), Bansberia (06 - 07), Kamarhati (06 — 07), Hooghly — Chinsurah (06
— 07 & 07 - 08), Madhyamgram (06 - 07) and Baranagar (06 - 07).

11


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

व Amount
Sl.No. NameofULB Period EU DOSe at the  Diverted for (Rupees
gran in lakh)
General purpose नल
d t of
a Arambagh | 2006-07 ou Aer a of road and 4.948
लाल ००४1 of
electricity charges material.
Payment of
salary, wages,
Implementation|terminal
2006-08 | oF schemes. छल्मालत5 0 |. 72-43
है office
2. Bishnupur expenses.
National Old Age | Payment of
2006-07 | Pension Scheme. salary. 1.80
Infrastructure of] Construction
3 Dalaielta 24% drainage scheme. | of road. 13.43
Von Clearing the
4. Rampurhat | 2007-08 EAS LEO area of the] 1.00
Schume opment municipality.
Total 93.60

Thus, due to unauthorized utilization of funds for administrative, maintenance and
works not specified under the schemes, the intended objectives could not be achieved.

2.5 Increasing indebtedness

Twenty ULBs did not repay outstanding loan and interest accrued thereon resulting
in accumulation of huge liability amounting to Rs.61.55 crore as of March 2008 as
shown in the Appendix - 5.

According to Section 72 (3) of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, sinking funds
were to be created for each loan for debt servicing. Non compliance with the Act,
has created additional charge on revenue fund of the ULBs.

2.6 Non adjustment of advances

In terms of Rule 189 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance & Accounting) Rules,
1999, different accounts in the advance ledger shall be balanced quarterly and signed
by the Executive Officer, Finance Officer or any other authorized officer, who shall
also satisfy himself that steps were being taken to recover or adjust the advances
outstanding for more than three months.

It was observed that advances aggregating Rs.3.71 crore granted by nine ULBs to
chairmen, councillors, employees, contractors and organizations for execution of

There was huge amount of outstanding electricity charge to the tune of Rs. 71.77 lakh
(excluding late payment surcharge).

12


Chapter II - Accounting Procedures and Financial Management

works remained unadjusted till March 2008 (Appendix — 6). This is indicative of
weak internal control mechanism. As a result, the extent of execution of works and
benefits derived could not be ensured in audit.

2.7. Loss of interest on Provident Fund

Provident Fund subscriptions are required to be credited to the fund account in the
treasury within 15 days of the next month to avoid loss of interest. The subscription
towards Provident Fund was collected by nine ULBs by deduction at source but not
remitted into the treasury within the stipulated date. The delay in remittance resulted
in loss of interest of Rs.96.83 lakh accrued (Appendix — 7) during the intervening
period, thereby creating an additional burden on the ULBs as the same was not
payable by the Government. Further four ULBs did not deposit Provident Fund
subscriptions of Rs.1.93 crore? into the treasury. The loss on interest could not be
computed in absence of detailed information regarding delay in remittance of
subscriptions.

2.8 Loss of materials due to theft, misappropriation etc.

Cases of theft and misappropriation of materials were noticed in the following two
ULBs as shown below :

Amount
(Rupees in lakh)

Name of ULB Period Particulai

It was observed that Durgapur Municipal Corporation reported the matter of theft
of DI pipes to the Police authority in June 2008.

North Dum Dum Municipality confirmed the facts and figures and stated (July 2008)
that the matter would be placed before the Chairman-in-Council (CIC) after thorough
investigation for necessary action. Disciplinary action would be taken accordingly.

2.9 Poor monitoring of Property Tax collection
The position of current demand, collection and outstanding property tax (including

service charge on Central Government properties) in respect of 23 ULBs during
2006 — 09 is detailed below :

° Bhadreshwar: Rs.12.70 lakh, Chandernagore: Rs.53.67 lakh, Kanchrapara: Rs.38.99 lakh
and Ranaghat: Rs.87.55 lakh

13


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

(Rupees in crore)

बे Demand Collection Total Percentage
Year outstanding of

Arrear Current Total Arrear Current Total 06 collection

Unit-wise details are given in Appendix — 8A, 8B and 8C.

It was observed that on an average only 33 per cent of the total demand was collected
during 2006 -09 thereby further raising the arrear demand at the close of the each
year. The collection out of current demand was around 50 per cent, resulting in
increase in the arrears. Only three ULBs could collect upto 50 per cent or more of
the total dues (property tax) during the period. Other reasons for accumulation of
huge tax arrear were non payment of property tax / service charge by the Government
holdings, litigated properties, closed and sick industries.

Section 147 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 provides that any tax levied
under the Act may be recovered in accordance with the following procedure :

(a) by presenting a bill, or

(0). by serving a demand notice, or

(c) by distraint and sale of a defaulter’s movable property, or

(9)... by attachment and sale of a defaulter’s immovable property, or

(e) by attachment of rent due in respect of land or building, or

(f) as a public demand under the Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913.

Section 149 of the Act provides that when a property tax becomes due on any land
or building, the Chairman shall cause to be presented to the owner or the occupier
thereof a bill for the amount due. As per section 150 (2) such tax shall be payable
in quarterly instalments and every such instalment shall be deemed to be due in the
first day of the quarter in respect of which it is payable.

The procedures prescribed under section 147 were not followed properly by the
ULBs to ensure prompt recovery of municipal dues. Reasons for the difference of
Rs.1.26 crore and Rs.0.18 crore in the closing balance of the outstanding dues in
March 2007 and March 2008 and the opening balance of the arrear demands in April
2007 and April 2008 respectively, were not furnished by the concerned ULBs.

2.10 Non remittance of Government dues

As per provisions, tax deducted at source shall be credited to the Government account
in the succeeding month. It was, however, seen that Contai Municipality deducted
at source Sales Tax (Rs.3.08 lakh), Income Tax (Rs.2.11 lakh) and Professional Tax
(Rs.3.46 lakh) up to 31 March 2008. The Municipality did not deposit the amounts
to Government account as of 24 June 2008. This was a gross violation of Government
norms and the Municipality had been made liable to pay the penalties for non-
remittance of dues at the cost of Municipal revenues.

14


Chapter IT - Accounting Procedures and Financial Management

2.11 Deficiencies in maintenance of Cash Book

Test check of records ०2510 ULBs, revealed several deficiencies in the maintenance
of Cash Book. The number of pages of the Cash Books, entries of transaction and.
correctness were not authenticated. Pages were left blank in between. The transactions
were not recorded on the day of occurrence. The daily cash balances were not
computed and certified. The monthly closing cash balances were not reconciled.
No physical verification of closing balances was made. As a result, actual book
balances were not ascertainable.

2.12 Non-maintenance of basic records

One or more prescribed basic records viz. Work Register, Investment Register, Loans
Register, Register of Un-paid Bills, Self Cheque Register, Deposit Ledger, Asset
Register, Register of Tools and Plant, Register of Civil Suits, Demand and Collection
Register of different revenue, Appropriation Register, Remission Register, Mutation
Register, Assessment Register, Stamp Register, Register of Security Deposit, Register
of Adjustment, Register of Lands, Register of Disbursement of cash drawn on
cheques, Annual Financial Statement, Prosecution Register, Scheme Register, Advance
Ledger, etc. were not being maintained by 20 ULBs 11 test checked.

2.13 Internal Audit

In terms of Section 91 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, the State Government
may by rules provide for internal audit of the day to day accounts of a Municipality
in such manner as it thinks fit.

Rule 24 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999
stipulates that the Chairman-in-Council (CIC) of the Municipality shall cause a
checking of accounts of the Municipal Fund, at least once in every month. In course
of such checking, the officer authorized in this behalf shall identify the errors,
irregularities and illegalities, if any, in the matter of maintenance of accounts and
make notes of the same. The CIC shall also cause the preparation of report on
checking of accounts of the Municipal Fund for every quarters of financial year
which shall be placed before the Municipal Accounts Committee and the Director
of Local Bodies, for examination and report.

10 Maheshtala, Dalkhola, Rampurhat, Memari, Bally, Beldanga, Rajpur-Sonarpur, South Dum

Dum, Chadrakona, Raniganj, Bansberia, Arambagh, Uluberia, Kharar, Islampur, Jamuria,
Kamarhati, Siliguri, Nalhati, Jangipur, Raghunathpur, Khardah, Kanchrapara, Baranagar and
Taherpur.

Maheshtala, Dalkhola, Bishnupur, Rampurhat, Barasat, Taherpur, Contai, Bally, South Dum
Dum, Arambagh, Gobardanga, Uluberia, Kharar, Islampur, Jamuria, Nalhati, Budge Budge,
Raghunathpur, Khardah and Kanchrapara.

15


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

It was noticed that 26 12 ULBs did not conduct any internal audit during the period
2006 — 08 while 11 3 ULBs conducted internal audit during this period.

2.14 Conclusion

There was lack of budgetary control and absence of reliable budget formulation.
Although the ULBs dealt with substantial sums, a full fledged accounts wing with
skilled staff continued to be lacking in most of the ULBs to ensure proper budget
preparation and accuracy in accounts. Most of the ULBs failed to present accounts
in time. Increasing liability on unpaid loan, non adjustment of huge advances, loss
of interest on provident fund and irregular maintenance of cash book indicated
inadequate internal control and monitoring to ensure proper accounting of substantial
public funds spent by the ULBs. Non preparation of balance sheet was indicative
of lack of transparency of assets and liabilities in the management of public funds
besides non implementation of the provisions of Acts.

Cases of theft and misappropriation of materials worth Rs. 6.91 lakh were noticed
in Durgapur Municipal Corporation and North Dum Dum Municipality.

2.15 Recommendations

To bring about more transparency to the financial transactions of ULBs it is
recommended to :

० Strengthen Management Information System (MIS) for oversight by the
BOC and other statutory committees.

. Incur expenditure according to budget estimates.

न Strengthen internal control in the ULBs.

e Ensure timely preparation of annual accounts.

e Remit Government dues in time and fix responsibility in case of default.

. Report and take action on all cases of embezzlement, theft, etc. in accordance

with the Municipal laws.

Maheshtala, Dalkhola, Bishnupur, Rampurhat, Kharagpur, Uttarpara-Kotrung, Chadrakona,
Chakdaha, Raniganj, Bansberia, Arambagh, Gobardanga, Kharar, Birnagar, Kulti, Islampur,
Jamuria, Nalhati, Jangipur, Raiganj, Raghunathpur, Nabadwip, Beldanga, Haldia, Contai and
Baduria.

North Dum Dum, Rajpur-Sonarpur, Uluberia, Panihati, Memari, Chandernagore, Kamarhati,
Budge Budge, Khardah, Barrackpore and Kanchrapara.

16


Chapter III - Receipts

CHAPTER IIT

RECEIPTS

To strengthen the financial capability of ULBs the State Government statutorily
empowered such bodies for imposition and collection of taxes and non-tax levies.
The State Government also shared taxes and levies collected by it with the ULBs
and also provided grants-in-aid under various Plan and Non-plan Heads. Tax and
non-tax revenue levied by the ULBs as per provision of the Act (own fund), revenue
share (assigned revenue) by the State Government, grants and contributions are the
resources of the ULBs. The Municipal Corporation / Board of Councillors (BOC)
of the Municipalities have the power to levy property tax on lands and buildings,
tax on advertisements, tax on cart and carriages, toll on ferry, bridge and heavy truck,
fee on congregations, fee on tourists, other fees, charges, etc.

The deficiencies in management of resources noticed in course of test check on 50
ULBs during audit are described in the succeeding paragraphs.

3.1 Budget estimates and actuals of own fund

The receipt of a ULB comprises Own Fund and State Government grants in the
shape of shared taxes and administrative grant. Own Fund comprises receipts
generated mainly from property tax. The variations between budget estimates and
actual receipts from own source of 24 ULBs during the years 2006 — 07, 2007 — 08
and 2008 — 09 are given below (unit wise position is detailed in Appendix - 9):

(Rupees in crore)

Budget Actual Variations Percentage
Estimates receipts _ {Increase (+) / Shortfall (-)} of realisation

The reasons for the shortfall vis-a-vis budget estimates were non-assessment of the
previous dues and failure to prepare action plans for collection of property tax and
other receipts. In seven out of 24 ULBs the tax collection was less than 80 per cent
of the budget estimate during 2008-09 while Bally, Bansberia and Jangipur
municipalities showed steady growth of revenue collection. Collection of Memari
Municipality exceeded the budget estimate during all the three years. Though the
overall realization was 90 per cent during 2006 - 08, it however, declined in
2008 - 09.

3.2 Remission in property tax beyond permissible limit

In terms of Section 111 (4) of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993 any person who
is dissatisfied with the decision on annual valuation of his property as entered in the
assessment list, may prefer an application for review before the Board of Councillors
(BOC) within a period of two months from the date of presentation of bill for payment
of tax.

17


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

Section 112 (1) of the Act stipulates that every application presented as above shall
be heard and determined by a Review Committee. The Review Committee may
reduce the valuation of any land or building. However, such reduction shall not be
more than 25 per cent of the annual valuation of such land or building except in the
case of gross arithmetical or technical mistake.

Test check of records revealed that in contravention of the above provision, the
Review Committee in Raiganj and South Dum Dum municipalities allowed remission
beyond the permissible limit without recording any reason for such reduction. This
resulted in loss of municipal revenue amounting to Rs.31.17 lakh!4,

3.3. Non/ under imposition of surcharge

3.3.1 65 per Section 97 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, a surcharge of
not less than 20 per cent and not more than 50 per cent of the total property tax
imposed on a holding shall be levied as the BOC may, from time to time decide, if
such holding is wholly or in part used for commercial, industrial or such other non-
residential purposes. The rate of surcharge shall form part of property tax for the
purpose of recovery.

In violation of the above provisions, 16 ULBs did not impose any surcharge on
property tax for commercial holdings during October 2001 to March 2009. Computed
at the minimum rate of 20 per cent, the loss of revenue amounts to Rs.2.61 crore
(Appendix - 10). Though the matter was pointed out in the earlier Reports of the
Examiner of Local Accounts for the years ending 31 March 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007
and 2008, no corrective measures were taken.

3.3.2 Kamarhati Municipality imposed surcharge at the rate of 15 per cent on
annual property tax of Rs.40.27 lakh of 334 commercial holdings and collected.
Rs.6.04 lakh during 2007-08. The rate imposed for surcharge was lower than the
minimum rate of 20 per cent fixed by Government and the Municipality sustained.
a loss of revenue of Rs.2.01 lakh during 2007-08.

3.4 Outstanding water charge

In terms of Section 226 (1) of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, it shall be the
duty of every municipality to supply potable water for the domestic use of inhabitants.
The supply of water for domestic and non-domestic uses may be charged at such
scale of fee or price as may be prescribed. The water charge ranging from Rs.15
to Rs.150 per month for supply of water to domestic and non-domestic consumers
was to be fixed on the basis of property tax and ferrule! size.

Test check of records of the following 15 ULBs revealed that an amount of Rs.3.60
crore (47 per cent) was collected on this account during 2008-09 against the total
demand of Rs.7.63 crore leaving an amount of Rs.4.03 crore (53 per cent) as
outstanding :

14 Raiganj: Rs.28.56 lakh in 48 holdings during July 2004 to December 2008.

South Dum Dum: Rs.2.61 lakh in 82 holdings during April 2007 to March 2008.

15 A device placed on a water pipe to allow fixed quantum of water to flow through it.

18


Chapter III - Receipts

(Rupees in lakh)

Demand ‘ollection Outstanding

Nine ULBs!8 did not furnish any reason for accumulation of arrears and the replies
furnished by six! ULBs were not tenable. The poor collection of revenue affected
the capacity of the ULBs to provide adequate services to their tax payers.

Six ULBs namely, Bally, Barasat, Gobardanga, Nalhati, Rajpur-Sonarpur and
Uttarpara-Kotrung municipalities did not collect or impose any water charge during
the period 2006 — 09.

३3.5. Non realisation of rent / lease money

In 18 ULBs, the arrears in realisation of rent / salami 20/ lease money, etc. from
stalls, shops, market / commercial complexes amounted to Rs.3.34 crore as detailed
in Appendix — 11.

Delays in realisation of rent, salami, lease money, etc. reduced the revenue of these
ULBs to that extent, thereby widening the resource gap. It also indicates that the
internal control mechanism in the ULBs was poor.

16 The Kharagpur Municipality incurred an expenditure of Rs. 365.47 lakh on maintenance of

water supply works (like, maintenance of pump-house, electricity charges, wages, repair of
pipe lines, etc.) during 2006 — 08 against the water charges of Rs. 40.34 lakh collected during
the period.

The Memari Municipality incurred an expenditure of Rs. 13.59 lakh on maintenance of water
supply works (like, maintenance of pump-house, electricity charges, wages, repair of pipe
lines, etc.) during 2006 — 08 against the water charges of Rs. 10.70 lakh collected during the
period.

Bansberia, Baranagar, Barrackpore, Budge Budge, Chakdaha, Haldia, Katwa, Memari and
North Dum Dum.

Beldanga, Kamarhati, Kharagpur, Khirpai, Raniganj and Siliguri.

One time premium payable by leasee or tenant.

19


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

3.6 Collection of penalty for unauthorised construction

In terms of Sec 218 of the West Bengal Municipal Act, 1993, if the construction of
any building has been commenced without obtaining sanction or permission under
the law or has been completed otherwise than in accordance with the particulars on
which such sanction was based or in violation of any condition lawfully given or
any alteration or addition completed in breach of any provision of the Municipal
Act, the Board of Councillors may make an order directing such construction to be
demolished or altered upon such order. It shall be the duty of the owner to cause
such demolition or alteration to the satisfaction of the BOC. In default, such
construction may be demolished or altered by the BOC at the expense of the said
owner.

Test check of records of Khardah Municipality revealed that in violation of the said
provision of the Act, an amount of Rs.9.61 lakh was collected as dropping charge
/ fine for regularization of unauthorized construction during 2005 — 2008. This may
encourage major deviations in the construction, detrimental to the interest of the
general public.

The Municipality stated (June 2008) that the dropping charges were imposed to
compel the people to abide by the Municipal laws and the said charges helped to
augment the Municipal Revenue.

The reply is not tenable as augmentation of revenue without observing any prescribed
norms cannot be the objective of any ULB.

3.7 Recovery of misappropriated receipts at the instance of audit

3.7.1 As per Rule 79 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting)
Rules, 1999, all collections made by the collection clerk shall be entered in daily
collection challan and credited to the cashier’s cash book on the very day of collection.
In terms of Rule 69, ibid, the Accountant shall verify total collections of any month
as per his cash book with the cumulative total of collections as worked out in the
challans for the last working day of the month and if both figures agree he shall put
his signature in the appropriate place on the body of the challan. Otherwise any
discrepancy should be reconciled immediately.

Test check of miscellaneous receipts of three municipalities revealed that staff
members did not deposit / record (in the cashier’s cash book) an amount of Rs.0.32
lakh collected during April 2006 to February 2009. On this being pointed out by
audit the concerned persons deposited these amounts during 2008-09 as detailed in
the table below:

(In rupees)

Name ofULB _ Source of collection Period of collection Date of deposit Amount



Chapter III - Receipts

3.7.2 In terms of Rule 221, ibid, all moneys received on account of the Councillors
shall be remitted intact to the treasury as often as can be conveniently managed and
shall on no account be appropriated towards expenditure. In terms of Rule 223 and
224, ibid, the details of each remittance classified according to the nature of receipt
head will appear in the cashier’s cash book. The Finance Officer in his absence the
officer authorised for the purpose should check and initial against the total of the
remittance.

Scrutiny of records of Islampur Municipality revealed that an amount of Rs.7077
collected by the cash section during 8 May 2007 to 5 February 2008 was not traceable.
On being pointed out by audit the amount was deposited on 16 June 2008.

Non / short deposit of public fund within the stipulated time limit amounts to
temporary embezzlement, besides reflect the absence of necessary checks to be
exercised by the officials in terms of municipal rules.

3.8 Unauthorised exemption resulted in loss of revenue

Non realization of fees and taxes at prescribed rates applicable on backlit
advertisement led to loss of revenue of Rs. 35.04 lakh and issuance of
license for five years against the codal provision of one year rendered
undue favour to the agencies.

Section 203 (3) of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC) Act, 1980, stipulates
that the Municipal Commissioner shall, after making such inspection as may be
necessary and within thirty days of the receipt of the application, grant, refuse, renew
or cancel a license, as the case may be, on payment of such fees as may be determined
by the Corporation by regulations or as the budget estimate shall state under sub-
section (3) of section 131 of the Act. Section 203 (5) stipulates that every license
shall be for a period of one year. Section 204 (1) stipulates that every person who
erects, exhibits, fixes or retains upon or over any land, building, wall hoarding,
frame, post, kiosk or structure any advertisement or, displays any advertisement to
public view in any manner whatsoever, visible from a public street or public place
shall pay for every advertisement, a tax calculated at such rate as the Corporation
may determine by regulations or as the budget estimate shall state under section (3)
of section 131 of the Act. Accordingly, KMC brought out schedule of rates of fees
and tax for each year. The schedule of rates stipulated cent percent surcharge on
the license fee and on the tax on backlit advertisement for the years 2003-04, 2004-
05 and 2006-07 and enhanced rates for 2005-06.

Records revealed that the Municipal Secretary, KMC had issued (September 2003)
license to three advertising agencies for five years namely Pioneer Publicity
Corporation, Karukrit Publicity Pvt. Ltd. and Enkon Pvt. Ltd. for display of
advertisement measuring 200 square feet each with backlit facility on 120 passenger
sheds at different bus stop. The licenses were granted for five years (upto August
2008) violated section 203 (5) of the Act which stipulated issuance of licence for a
period of one year only.

In spite of the fact that the licences were issued for advertisement with backlit facility,
KMC did not collect fees and taxes at the enhanced rates as prescribed in

21


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

the schedules of the respective years upto 2006 - 07. While granting licences, the
Municipal Secretary exempted the agencies from paying fees and taxes at enhanced.
rates. Thus, the Corporation realized Rs.35.04 lakh only as against the total dues of
Rs.70.08 lakh from the agencies. This resulted in loss of revenue to the extent of
Rs.35.04 lakh during 2003 - 07 due to violation of the provision of Act, ibid, and
schedule of rates extending favour to the advertisement agencies.

KMC could not furnish any written delegation authorizing Municipal Secretary to
sign the licenses on advertisement issued as above as well as records showing details
of revenue collected from the advertising agencies.

The matter was referred to the Corporation and the Government in April 2010; their
replies had not been received (February 2011).

3.9 Conclusion

Taxes, rents and charges for service are the main source of Municipal Fund which
ensures continuance of services to the tax payers. Test check of records revealed
inadmissible remission of property tax of Rs.31.17 lakh by two ULBs, non/ under
imposition of minimum surcharge of Rs.2.61 crore on commercial buildings by 16
ULBs, short realisation of water charges of Rs.4.03 crore by 15 ULBs and non
realisation of rent / lease money of Rs.3.34 crore by 18 ULBs. Non recovery of
lease money also indicated non observance of provisions of the Acts. Non realization
of fees and taxes by the KMC at prescribed rates applicable on backlit advertisement
led to loss of revenue of Rs. 35.04 lakh. Lack of monitoring over collection of
property tax, water charges, fees and other charges causing accumulation of dues,
adversely affected the capacity of ULBs to provide services to their tax payers.

Arbitrary remission / under-assessment of taxes, inadequate supervision and monitoring
have reduced the mobilization of own sources of revenue.

3.10 Recommendations

. Maintenance of a comprehensive data base for all tax payers, licensees and
tenants.

. Prompt issue of demand notices and revision of taxes at regular intervals.

. Prompt collection of revenues and persuasion of outstanding dues.

. Identification of parking, advertisement spaces and other areas of revenue.

22


Chapter IV - Establishment

CHAPTER IV

ESTABLISHMENT

Each ULB has its municipal establishment for the smooth running of day to day
activities. The Board of Councilors of a ULB, with the prior approval of the State
Government, may create posts of officers and other employees and fix the salary
and allowances to be paid out of the Municipal Fund. The ULB may also provide
for pension, gratuity, incentive, bonus and reward for its employees as per their
entitlement.

Test check of records of 50 municipalities revealed several irregularities which are
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs,

4.1 Accumulation of outstanding liability of Rs.1.84 crore towards pension
and gratuity

As per Government Circular dated 5 May 1982 municipalities should create ‘Special

Fund’ for payment of retirement / terminal benefits. Contai, Bhadreswar and Ranaghat

municipalities did not create this ‘Special Fund’.

Test check of records of the following four municipalities revealed that due to non-
creation of ‘Special Fund’ for payment of terminal benefits or inadequate contribution
to the said fund, the municipalities could not pay the dues to the retired personnel.
This resulted in accumulation of outstanding liability of Rs. 1.84 crore as of March
2008 as shown below:

(Rupees in lakh)

Amount of

Sl. Name of the

No. ULB Liability on account of

Thus, the above municipalities failed to discharge their obligatory responsibility and
deprived the retired employees of their legitimate dues.

4.2 Liability towards outstanding water charges

Scrutiny of records revealed that Municipal Authorities of Budge Budge Municipality
had a huge liability of Rs.8.86 crore as of February 2008 towards outstanding water
supply bill of Kolkata Metropolitan Water & Sanitation Authority.

4.3 Non-recovery / non-payment / delay in payment of electricity charges

Bally and Uttarpara-Kotrung municipalities paid Rs.7.54 lakh and Rs.8.45 lakh
respectively during 2006-2008 for electricity charges in respect of municipal staff
quarters but did not recover the same from the occupants till the close of the year
2007-08.

23


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

The following three ULBs did not pay electricity charges amounting to Rs.7.26 crore
and lost rebate to the tune of Rs.17.49 lakh as of March 2008 :

(Rupees in lakh)

jo. Name of the Period Amount due Loss of rebate

ULB

Bhadreswar and Kharagpur municipalities stated that the respective dues were not
paid due to scarcity of fund.

Arambagh Municipality had accumulated liability of Rs.71.77 lakh on account of
electricity charges as of June 2008. As a result, the West Bengal State Electricity
Board imposed late payment surcharge of Rs.7.74 lakh on the ULB.

Further, Budge Budge Municipality had a liability of Rs.1.30 crore on account of
electricity charges as of February 2008.

4.4 Conclusion

Contai, Bhadreswar and Ranaghat municipalities did not create ‘Special Fund’
for payment of terminal benefits to the retired personnel. Further, Rampurhat,
Nabadwip, Contai and Bally municipalities accumulated outstanding liability
of Rs.1.84 crore on this account as of March 2008. The non compliance with
the provisions had adverse implication on the assured social security of the
employees.

Budge Budge Municipality had a huge liability of Rs.8.86 crore as of February 2008
towards outstanding water supply bill.

Bansberia, Bhadreswar and Kharagpur municipalities did not pay electricity charges
of Rs.7.26 crore and lost rebate to the tune of Rs.17.49 lakh as of March 2008.

4.5 Recommendations

° The provisions regarding the maintenance of separate fund for terminal
benefits of the retired local government personnel should be strictly adhered.
to so that the delay in payment of retirement benefits is completely eliminated.

° The ULBs should pay charge of water and electricity to the suppliers in time
to maintain uninterrupted services to the rate payers.

24


Chapter V - Material Management and Execution of Works

CHAPTER V

MATERIAL MANAGEMENT AND EXECUTION OF WORKS

ULBs are responsible for execution of developmental works in their respective areas
substantially out of Government grants. Therefore, transparency in financial
transactions as per provision of the Act as well as financial procedure, are of utmost
importance.

The following deviations were noticed during the test check of 50 ULBs.

5.1 Procurement of material / equipment worth Rs. 55.12 lakh without
inviting tender

In terms of Rule 158 of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules,
1999, open competitive tenders shall be called for from the public whenever the
estimated cost of general works exceed the stipulated financial limit of Rs. 5.00 lakh
(other than plumbing and electrical materials). However, Dalkhola, Islampur and
Khardah municipalities procured materials and equipments worth Rs. 23.30 lakh,
Rs. 17.29 lakh and Rs. 14.53 lakh respectively without inviting open tenders during
January 2006 to March 2008.

5.2 Avoidable expenditure on procurement

Non-acceptance of lowest offer resulted in avoidable expenditure of
Rs.7.93 lakh on procurement of cement.

Integrated Housing & Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) was launched in
December 2005 to provide adequate shelter and basic infrastructure facilities to the
slum dwellers of identified urban areas. The State Government laid down (March
2007) procedures for implementation of the scheme. It was stipulated that the
materials should be procured, as far as practicable, directly from the authorized
manufacturers or West Bengal Essential Commodity Supply Corporation (WBECSC)
as per demand of the situation.

For execution of various schemes under the programme, Haldia Municipality invited
quotations for supply of 2807 MT of cement in September 2007. Three companies
submitted their rates which ranged from Rs. 3,720 to Rs. 4,000 per MT for supply
of portland slag cement conforming to specification IS 455 : 1989.

The Municipality awarded (October 2007) the work to the highest bidder for supply
of cement at the rate of Rs. 4,000 per MT. The Municipality did not record any
reason for non-acceptance of the lowest rate of Rs. 3,720 per MT and purchased
2832.50 MT of cement valued at Rs.1.13 crore.

By declining to the lowest offer, the Municipality paid an extra amount of Rs. 280
per MT. This resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 7.93 lakh on procurement of
2832.50 MT of cement.

The Municipality stated (April 2010) that the cost of cement which was higher than
the other brands, gave satisfactory results in many occasions on different projects.
Also, the constant pressure from the beneficiaries compelled them to

25


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

use the said cement which led to avoidable expenditure of Rs. 7.93 lakh. The
Municipality further stated (October 2010) that the municipal authority was not
aware of the quality of other two products, the costs of which were lower than the
selected brand. The Municipal Affairs Department suggested (October 2010) to the
Municipality to furnish reply concentrating upon the points of non-invitation of open
tender and non-acceptance of the lowest rate.

The reply of the Municipality had not been received (February 2011).
5.3. Conclusion

ULBs did not furnish justified reasons to the audit observations regarding award of
work without tendering process as per provision of the West Bengal Municipal Act,
1993,

Non-acceptance of lowest offer by the Haldia Municipality resulted in avoidable
expenditure of Rs.7.93 lakh on procurement of cement.

5.4 Recommendations

° For transparency in financial transactions prescribed procurement procedure
should be adopted in respect of all purchases.

26


Chapter VI - Implementation of Schemes

CHAPTER VI

IMPLEMENTATION OF SCEHMES

Urban Local Bodies implement various Central and State sponsored schemes. Test
audit of 50 ULBs audited during the year revealed non-compliance with the norms
during implementation of the schemes as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

6.1. Employment Generation in Urban Area Scheme (EGS)

The Government of West Bengal launched Employment Generation Scheme (EGS)
in September 2005 for employment generation as well as improvement and
maintenance of civic infrastructure in urban areas by direct engagement of urban
poor without involvement of contractors. The works under this scheme have to be
done directly by the ULBs either through Ward Committees or through Community
Development Societies (CDS) with the overall objective of ensuring creation of
wage employment for the members of the CDS and urban poor. The works under
the scheme were to be identified by the Ward Committees / CDS.

6.1.1 Poor utilisation of EGS Grants

Test check of records revealed that in 12 ULBs unspent funds increased from
Rs.2.46 crore as on 1 April 2006 to Rs.4.47 crore as on 31 March 2008. This
indicates inability of the ULBs to create more man-days under the scheme:

Utilisation of EGS grants during the year 2006 - 08

Year: 2006 - 07

Sl Nameofthe Opening
No. ULB Balance

(Rupees in lakh)

Closing Percentage of
Balance expenditure

Receipt Total Payment

27


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

Year: 2007 - 08 (Rupees in lakh)
1. Kharar 15.76 15.13 | 30.89 16.47 14.42 53
2. __|_Taherpur 12.40 15.15 | 2755[ 6.46 | 21.09 23
3. Barrackpore 46.28 39.49 | 85.77 36.89 48.88 43
* | Rajpur -

Sonarpur 86.93 79.88 | 166.81 47.96 118.85 29
5. Ranaghat -0.98 30.09 | 29.11 27.15 | _ 1.96 | 93
| 6. | Birnagar -0.03 20.06 | 20.03 11.03 | 9.00 | 55
7.__| Raghunathpur 18.87 15.06 | 33.93 4.85 29.08 14
| 8. | Khirpai 14.71 15.74 | 30.45 5.88 24.57 19
| 9. | Arambagh 27.42 31.01 58.43 31.25 27.18 53
|10. | Gobardanga 33.54 25.38 | 58.92 4.62 5430[ 8 |
11. South

Dim Damn 84.89 69.58 | 154.47 78.28 76.19 51
12. Dalkhola 21.28 21.08 | 42.36 20.94 21.42 49

Total 361.07 377.65 | 738.72 291.78 446.94 [4

6.1.2 Non-involvement of Community Development Societies (CDS)

As per the guidelines issued by the State Government, the works under EGS
would have to be done directly by the ULBs either through Ward Committees
(WC) or through Community Development Societies (CDS). Records indicated
that four?! ULBs spent Rs.2.82 crore under the scheme during 2006 — 08
without involving the Ward Committees / Community Development Societies
(CDS).

6.1.3 Non-adherence to wage—material ratio

6.1.3.1 Test check of works executed during 2007 - 08 by three ULBs revealed
that contrary to the scheme guidelines the expenditure on wages was far below
40 per cent of the total cost of works as detailed below. This resulted in
non - generation of employment of approximately 13,547 man-days”” on an average
during the year :

Name of the U

Birnagar

Arambagh

Dalkhola
Total

The wage-material ratio in six ULBs, viz., Gobardanga, Jangipur, Kamarhati,
Kharar, Raghunathpur and South Dum Dum could not be ascertained due to
improper maintenance / non-maintenance of detailed records of man-days
generated and the details of materials consumed in the respective works.

6.1.3.2 As per para 7 of the guidelines, the ULBs shall have to submit to the
Municipal Affairs Department one set of vetted estimates of individual work
accompanied by the recommendation of the WCs and the Board of Councillors’
resolution. It was observed that four ULBs, viz. Barrackpore, Jangipur, South
Dum Dum, and Taherpur did not submit vetted estimates of individual works
to the department. There were no records in the ULBs to indicate that the department
called for it while sanctioning further fund for this purpose.

2 Barrackpore (Rs. 50.61 lakh), Ranaghat (Rs. 61.60 lakh), South Dum Dum (Rs. 132.32
lakh) and Dalkhola (Rs. 37.84 lakh).

22 Wage rate has been considered at Rs. 75 and computed accordingly.

28


Chapter VI - Implementation of Schemes

6.1.4 Non-maintenance of stock registers and list of urban poor

As per para 10 of the guidelines, ULBs should maintain registers for stock of
material, quantum of work done and complete list of identified urban poor /
CDS members eligible to participate as wage earners in the scheme. Test check
revealed that seven ULBs viz., Barasat, Barrackpore, Gobardanga, Kharar,
Ranaghat, Raghunathpur and Taherpur did not maintain various records like
registers for stock of material, quantum of work done and identified list of urban
poor / CDS members.

In absence of the above records, Audit could not verify the eligibility of the
beneficiaries and whether equal opportunity was extended to the urban poor / CDS
members.

6.1.5 Works executed engaging contractors - Rs. 32.67 lakh

Test check of records revealed that three ULBs, viz., Bhadreswar, Khirpai and
Taherpur executed works worth Rs. 32.67 lakh”? during 2006 - 08 engaging
contractors in violation of government guidelines. As a result, it could not be
ensured in audit if the urban poor of the respective ULBs were actually extended
the benefit of employment.

6.2 National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS)

National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS) is a social assistance programme
under National Social Assistance Programme for poor households. The share
of contribution of the Central and State Governments is 50:50 with effect from
1 April 2006. The age of the beneficiary for NOAPS shall be 65 years or higher
and the beneficiary must be a destitute having little or no regular means of
subsistence. The monthly entitlement of pension under the scheme is Rs.400
with effect from 1 April 2006.

6.2.1 Underutilization of fund of Rs. 2.74 crore deprived 5715 beneficiaries

Scrutiny of records of six municipalities revealed that a huge amount of
Rs. 2.74 crore remained unutilized as of March 2008 depriving 5715 intended
beneficiaries for the year 2007 — 08 as detailed below :

(Rupees in lakh)

Ra 20% 0| ७४४९ हमर Receipt Total Expenditure

23 Bhadreswar (Rs. 3.52 lakh), Khirpai (Rs. 22.00 lakh) and Tahepur (Rs. 7.15 lakh).
4 April to December 2007

29


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

ULBs did not identify actual number of eligible beneficiary for the scheme from
time to time. Delay in payment of pension under the scheme also contributed to
accumulation of unspent fund.

6.2.2 Unauthorised payment to ineligible beneficiaries

Scrutiny of records revealed that Taherpur Notified Area Authority made
unauthorised payment of pension of Rs.0.82 lakh under the scheme to seven
ineligible beneficiaries below 65 years of age as of March 2008. The ULB
stated that age considered as per records (elector’s photo identity card) were not
correct as claimed by the beneficiaries. Accordingly the ULB adopted a resolution
based on doctors’ certificates and forwarded the same to the Sub-Divisional
Office for approval.

6.2.3 Non-submission of Actual Payee’s Receipt

There was unspent Closing Balance of Rs.8.04 crore lying with four?5 Borough
Executive Engineers of Kolkata Municipal Corporation for NOAPS as on 31 March
2008. The Closing Balance stood at Rs.19.97 lakh as on 31 March 2009. KMC did
not furnish the records in support of fresh advance to the above boroughs. They did
not even produce the Actual Payee’s Receipt in support of disbursement to the
beneficiaries. Hence, actual position of the Closing Balance could not be ascertained
in audit.

6.3

id-day-Meal Programme

The National Programme of Nutritional Support to Primary Education, popularly
known as Mid-day-Meal (MDM) Scheme was launched on 15 August 1995 to cover
all the students of primary classes. The Programme is intended to give a boost to
universalisation of primary education, by increasing enrolment, retention and
attendance and simultaneously impacting on nutrition of students in primary classes.
The Central Government assists the ULBs by providing food grains, the actual cost
incurred in transportation, cooking cost, assistance to construct kitchen-cum-store,
assistance for provisioning and replacement of kitchen devices and assistance for
management, monitoring and evaluation.

6.3.1 Loss of food grains under Mid-day-Meal Programme

During the period 2006-08, Bhadreswar Municipality received 2622.49 quintals of
tice under the scheme and issued 2553 quintals to various schools. However, as
against the closing stock of 69.49 quintals of rice as of 31 March 2008, the actual
balance was 23 quintals. The Municipality admitted (May 2008) that 46.49 quintals
of rice worth Rs.0.72 lakh (at the rate of Rs.1545 per quintal) being damaged were
destroyed. They added that the damage occurred due to supply of bad quality of rice
and also bad condition of stores. The Municipality did not fix responsibility for
lifting bad quality of rice (if any) and keeping the stock in bad storing condition.
The loss indicated poor monitoring system on the part of the Municipality.

25 Borough I, III, शा and शा.

30


Chapter VI - Implementation of Schemes

6.3.2 Misappropriation of Mid-day-Meal rice worth Rs. 40.49 lakh

The Municipality and the authorized distributor did not maintain any
accounts of receipt, issue and balance stock of rice since 2006-07. The
Municipality never conducted any physical verification of its stock of rice
kept under the custody of the distributor. Absence of monitoring of the
implementation of the programme by the Municipality led to
misappropriation of Mid-day-Meal rice worth Rs. 40.49 lakh.

The Panihati Municipality, while implementing the programme in its municipal area,
appointed a transporter-distributor who was responsible for lifting rice from godown,
distributing the same to the schools on monthly basis and maintaining the accounts
of stock of rice.

A test check (October - November 2009) of the records of the Municipality and the
authorized distributor revealed that they did not maintain any accounts of receipt,
issue and balance stock of rice since 2006-07. The Municipality did not ever obtain
any report regarding lifting, issue and balance of rice from the distributor. The
Municipality never conducted any physical verification of its stock of rice kept under
the custody of the distributor. In absence of any record regarding day to day stock
balances, the opening stock balance of rice lying with the distributor as on April
2006 could not be ascertained.

Ascrutiny of delivery / lifting orders and receipted challans furnished by the schools
for the period from April 2006 to 15 September 2009 revealed that the authorised
distributor lifted 447.82 tonnes of rice against which the schools received only 104.75
tonnes of rice till 7 September 2009. Thus, there was a closing balance of rice to
the tune of 343.07 tonnes with the authorised distributor as of 15 September 2009
excluding opening stock as of 1 April 2006, if any.

The Municipality instructed (August / September 2009) the agent to submit accounts
of lifting of rice and its distribution to the schools. The distributor did not respond
till October 2009. However, at the instance of Audit, the Municipality conducted
a joint physical verification of the stock on 3 November 2009 in presence of Audit
and found 81 tonnes of rice available with the distributor as against the actual balance
of 343.07 tonnes. This resulted in a shortfall of 262.07 tonnes of rice valued at
Rs.40.49 lakh at the prevailing rate of Rs.15450 per tonne. Thus, Municipality’s
failure to monitor the implementation of the programme facilitated misappropriation
of rice worth Rs.40.49 lakh. The Municipality did not initiate any action against the
distributor for misappropriation of such huge quantity of rice meant for the students.

The Municipality confirmed (October 2010) that a good quantity of food grains had.
not been properly utilised due to gross negligence of the distributor. The Municipal
Affairs Department observed (October 2010) that the misappropriation was done
by the distributor appointed by the Municipality. The Department advised that a
notice immediately be served upon the distributor to show cause as to why his
distributorship would not be cancelled and penal action would not be ated against
him. The distributor should be compelled to make good of the loss within specified
time fixed in the show cause notice. If not complied with, FIR should be lodged
against him.

The Municipality directed (6 November 2010) the distributor to show cause within
seven days (from the date of receipt of the notice) as to why his distributorship
should not be cancelled and penal action would not be initiated against him.

31


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

6.3.3. Recovery of food grains at the instance of audit

Test check of records of Nabadwip Municipality revealed that the opening stock of
rice as of 1 April 2006 was 526.37 quintals. The Municipality received 5688.65
quintals of rice under the Mid-day-Meal Scheme and distributed 5373.86 quintals
of rice up to 17 November 2008. Thus as per stock register maintained by the
Municipality, the closing stock of rice as of 17 November 2008 was 841.16 quintals.
However, a joint physical verification of stock conducted (26 November 2008) by
the municipal representative and the audit team (in the presence of the Chairman)
found only 628 quintals of rice comprising 200 quintals of rice in bad condition.
The balance of 213.16 quintals of rice could not be traced. The rice worth Rs.3.09
lakh (at the rate of Rs.1545 per quintal) lying unattended in the municipal godown
spoiled in absence of proper monitoring and disposal (first come first serve)
mechanism. The shortage of 213.16 quintals of rice detected during audit was stated
(January 2010) to have been recovered from the contractor dealing in municipal
stock.

6.4 Unproductive expenditure on works - Rs. 3.20 crore

Three municipalities incurred an expenditure of Rs.3.20 crore for construction of
remunerative assets like commercial complexes / market. Scrutiny of records
revealed that the expenditure remained unproductive due to delay in completion of
the works, as shown below :

(Rupees in lakh)

5 Expenditure incurred
Nameof Particulars of ९1000 atus with कि
ULB works nm Source of Amount

completion fund

6.5 Conclusion

The poor utilisation of funds by ULBs indicated inadequate attention to the Government
objectives and policies, for providing basic amenities and services.

Non compliance with the Government guidelines frustrated the objective of the
scheme and deprived targeted beneficiaries from the intended benefits.

The ULBs did not furnish reasons as to why construction works of market complexes
were started without the provision of adequate fund and clear site for construction.

32


Chapter VI - Implementation of Schemes

6.6

Recommendations

Adequate evaluation of the schemes should be made to avoid accumulation
of fund.

Schemes should be implemented as per guidelines recommended by the
Government from time to time.

Adequate controls need to be put in place to prevent irregular execution
/ payment of the scheme / money.

Regular monitoring mechanism should be in place for lifting appropriate
quality of rice, safe storage and first come first serve disposal to avoid
loss.

Before starting construction work, fund arrangement must be ensured to
complete the work in time.

Non completion of developmental work for long, deprive the beneficiaries
as well as cause blockade of grant fund.

33


Chapter VII - Performance Audit

CHAPTER VII

'ORMANCE AUDIT

7.1 Mobilisation of Property Tax

HIGHLIGHTS

The budget estimates prepared by Asansol, Durgapur, Siliguri and
Chandernagore Municipal Corporations were only 14, 33, 44 and 67 per
cent respectively of annual dues which indicated that the budget exercise
was a mere formality.

(Paragraph 7.1.5)

The Corporations did not maintain conclusive and sustained database. As
a result, they do not have a complete picture of the scope of own resource
and actual trend of realization.

(Paragraph 7.1.6)

Siliguri Municipal Corporation held back assessment of new holdings since
2004-05 causing loss of Rs.42.31 lakh during 2004-09.

(Paragraph 7.1.7.1)

The poor built-up capacity of the West Bengal Valuation Board causing
delay in revision and the lacunae in the Acts restricting collection of revised
tax retrospectively resulted in huge loss of revenue caused due to delay in
revision.

(Paragraph 7.1.7.2)

Remission granted in 13887 cases beyond the prescribed limit resulted in
loss of revenue of Rs.2.27 crore in two corporations disapproving the sanctity
of valuation done by the West Bengal Valuation Board.

(Paragraph 7.1.7.3)

Asansol and Durgapur Municipal Corporations lost Rs.53.67 lakh due to
unauthorised rebate allowed to the tax payers on arrears and surcharge.

(Paragraph 7.1.9.1)

Surcharge was not imposed and recovered though the holdings were identified
as commercial and industrial in nature.

(Paragraph 7.1.9.2)

The huge outstanding dues of Rs.36.79 crore lying unmoved for three to five
years have become doubtful of recovery.

(Paragraph 7.1.10)

35


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

7.1.1 Introduction

The revenue of a municipal corporation comprises share of taxes and grants from
the State Government & Central Government and revenue generated from its own
sources namely property tax, advertisement tax, enlistment fees for trades and
profession and plan sanction fees etc. Property tax is the main source of the
corporation’s own revenue comprising 6 to 30 per cent of the total revenue.

The revenue department dealing in property tax, licence fees and other levies is
supervised by the Commissioner/ Chief Executive Officer. Property tax is assessed
initially by the respective Corporation and finally by the West Bengal Valuation
Board. It is collected by Tax Collectors on regular pay roll of the Municipal
Corporations or appointed on commission basis and can also be deposited by the
assesses.

A review covering four municipal corporations namely Asansol, Chandernagore,

Durgapur and Siliguri has been taken up in this context to see how effective these
local bodies have been in mobilization of property tax to augment their own resources.

71.2 Audit objectives
The main audit objective was to evaluate performance of the municipal corporations

in assessment and collection of property tax, with specific focus on the following
aspects:

° Whether complete and updated records were maintained by the corporations.
° Whether assessment was done properly.
° Whether taxes were collected efficiently.

7.1.3 Audit criteria

The audit criteria used for evaluating the performance of the corporations in assessment
and collection of property tax were as under:

° Provisions in the corporation Acts and financial Rules.
. Other relevant Acts, Rules and Government orders/notifications.
° Resolutions of the respective Board of Councillors (BOC).

7.1.4 Audit coverage

The review was conducted during November 2009 to February 2010 in four municipal
corporations namely Asansol (AMC), Siliguri (SMC), Durgapur (DMC) and
Chandernagore (CMC) covering the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09.

AUDIT FINDINGS
7.1.5 Budgeting

Budgeting for receipts generated from their own resources by the corporations need
to be accurate as it is the basic instrument of planning for allocation of

36


Chapter VII - Performance Audit

expenditure for providing services to the tax payers. The budget estimate for property
tax should include current demand and arrear dues. Analysis of budget estimates for
the year 2006-07 to 2008-09 showed that there were wide variations between the
annual dues, budget estimates and actual receipts as shown below:

(Rupees in crore)

Municip: ५, Annual Budget a Actual
Corporati Year dues estimate Percentage receipt

In Asansol Municipal Corporation, the budget estimate was on an average only 14
per cent of the annual dues. This was 33 per cent in Durgapur, 44 per cent in Siliguri
and 67 per cent in Chandernagore. The unrealistically low budget estimates prepared.
on the basis of the previous year’s figure indicate that the budget exercise was a
mere formality. The actual receipts were also very low thus affecting the quality of
services offered to the tax payers.

7.1.6 Poor maintenance of data base

The municipal corporations could not provide basic records regarding number of
holdings borough-wise. No survey in this regard was conducted by the corporations.
SMC had different figures at its borough office and central office.

The corporations are to maintain demand register for property tax. The records have
to be updated periodically and summary statements have to be prepared
monthly/quarterly/annually of realization against the dues.

The Demand and Collection registers up to March 2006 maintained manually by
AMC were not complete and in proper form. The computerised data base (April
2006) also failed to reflect correct dues because the data base was created without
thorough scrutiny of the manual records.

CMC had computerized data base on property tax but while switching over to a new
software in April 2007 they lost the old data. The corporation had no back-up and
thus could not retrieve the data. The new software also did not function properly.
Therefore, demand and collection for the years 2006-07 to 2007-08 could not be
generated till December 2009.

The municipal corporations did not maintain complete and accurate database. As a
result, they do not have a complete picture of defaulting tax payers and actual

37


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

realization leaving no scope for gap analysis and remedial measures for effective
realization of revenue.

7.1.7 Assessment of tax

In terms of respective corporation Acts as well as the provision under Section 128
(1) of the Municipal Corporation Act, 2006 when a new building has been constructed
or a new holding has been created, the Corporation may at any time cause the annual
valuation of such buildings or holdings, and assess the property tax on an interim
basis pending final assessment by the West Bengal Valuation Board.

7.1.7.1 Interim assessment

Asansol, Chandernagore and Durgapur Municipal Corporations assessed 2186, 2315
and 4223 holdings respectively during 2006-09. All interim assessments made by
the Corporations were required to be forwarded to the West Bengal Valuation Board
for scrutiny and approval. However, none of the corporations sent these to the West
Bengal Valuation Board for final approval.

The Siliguri Municipal Corporation did not assess any holdings since April 2004.
Scrutiny of records revealed that the West Bengal Valuation Board in April 2004
directed the corporation not to take up interim assessment as the Board would shortly
take up revision of property tax. Accordingly SMC held back all interim assessments
in contravention of Section 113(1) of the Siliguri Municipal Corporation Act, 1990.
Records indicated that the number of assesses increased annually by about 2015 and
the prevailing average demand of property tax per holding was Rs.140. The increase
in the number of holdings was thus 10075 by the end of 2008-09. Non-assessment
of these new holdings caused loss of revenue of Rs.42.31 lakh during 2004-09 to
Siliguri Municipal Corporation.

7.1.7.2 General revision

As per the provision of the Acts, the corporations shall cause a general revision of
valuation of all holdings every six years (five years”* from November 2008). Such
assessment would take effect from the beginning of the quarter immediately following
its publication.

The general revision of annual valuation was last notified in April 1997 in Asansol
and Siliguri Municipal Corporations. The revision was next due in April 2003. The
BOC of Siliguri Municipal Corporation resolved (January 2002) for the revision and
the State Government by notification entrusted (March 2003) the work to the West
Bengal Valuation Board. The Board took up the work in June 2003 but the general
revision of valuation was not completed till January 2010 due to lack of co-ordination
between the Board and the corporation.

AMC resolved for the revision in November 2002 but approached the Government
only in November 2004. In response to the Government notification of January
2005, the Valuation Board took up the work but only 70 per cent of survey was
completed till September 2009. No further development was on record till January
2010.

26 Section 122 (2) of the West Bengal Municipal Corporation Act, 2006

38


Chapter VII - Performance Audit

As per the relevant Act / Acts, the corporations can collect revised taxes from the
quarter following the publication of the revised assessment list. They are thus
restricted from collecting the revised tax from the date it is due for revision. There
is also no provision for enhancement of the rate of taxation by a minimum amount
pending finalization of general revision. Thus the inordinate delay in finalization
of general revision of annual valuation led to huge loss of revenue to AMC and
CMC.

7.1.7.3 Unauthorised reduction in valuation

In terms of prevailing Acts and Section 125 of W.B. Municipal Corporation Act,
2006 any person who is dissatisfied with the assessment as appearing in the assessment
list may prefer an application for review before the corporation within a period of
one month from the date of service of the written notice showing the assessment or
within three months from the date of publication of the assessment list.

Section 126 ibid provides that where the Review Committee reduces the valuation
of any land or building, such reduction shall not be more than 25 per cent of the
annual valuation of such land or building, except in the case of gross arithmetical
or technical mistake and the Review Committee shall in every such case, record in
writing the reasons for such reduction.

It was seen in audit that remission petitions submitted beyond the validity date were
accepted by the Corporations. They allowed remission beyond the ceiling of 25 per
cent of annual valuation. No reasons were on record for such remission. AMC while
considering 14111 cases, granted remission beyond 25 per cent in 11408 cases
resulting in unauthorised waver of property tax of Rs.52.70 lakh during 2006-09.
Similarly, out of 5197 cases, DMC granted remission exceeding 25 per cent in 2479
cases involving loss of Rs.173.82 lakh on property tax. Thus, the valuation done by
the West Bengal Valuation Board was rendered meaningless.

Chandernagore and Siliguri Municipal Corporations did not furnish the details of
remission granted exceeding 25 per cent and therefore the extent of loss could not
be ascertained.

7.1.7.4 Under assessment

A test check of seven multi-storied buildings in AMC revealed that occupancy
certificate was issued only in respect of three buildings. Out of total completed floor
area of 257867 sq.ft, the Corporation assessed annual valuation for 139067 sq.ft.
only.

The non-assessment of 118801 sq. ft. of these buildings resulted in loss of revenue
of Rs.3.16 lakh per annum.

7.1.8 Collection

The shortfall in receipts as evident from the following table was due to lacunae in
the system of collection of revenue in the municipal corporations as discussed in the
subsequent paragraphs.

39


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

(Rupees in crore)

Annual D है a नि Percentage
एयर collection
2006-07 38.53 15
Asansol 2007-08 39.27 E 19
2008-09 38.39 मर 14
2006-07 1.92 15 | 60 |
Chandernagore|_2007-08 2.15 : 72
2008-09 2.22 152 | 68 |
2006-07 26.12 7.02 27
Durgapur 2007-08 24.13 7.29 30
2008-09 25.60 7.74 30
2006-07 15.45 3.70 24
Siliguri 2007-08 16.81 4.06 24
2008-09 17.12 3.76 22
7.1.8.1 Raising demand
In terms of Section 158 of the W.B. Municipal Corporation Act, 2006 when any tax
has become due, the Commissioner shall cause to be presented to the person liable
for the payment thereof, a bill of the amount due. Section 137 stipulates that the
property tax on any land or building shall be paid in quarterly installments. Scrutiny

of records of the corporations revealed that they did not issue demand bills to all the
tax-payers as shown below:

६६९७५९६ Demand
10. of assesses earner Percentage

2006-07 Not available Ls]
Asansol 2007-08 54509 10842 20
2008-09 56925 6388 11
2006-07 36489 Notavailable |_ - |
Chandernagore| 2007-08 37245 33425 [90s
2008-09 38054 33535 88
2006-07 Not available [ |
Durgapur 2007-08 56100 48659 87
2008-09 58723 46060 78
2006-07 86980 18876 22
Siliguri 2007-08 86980 Nil [ - |
2008-09 86980 Nil [| = |

As shown above SMC raised only 22 per cent of the demand bills in 2006-07 but
no bills were raised during 2007-09. AMC issued demand bills to 11 to 20 per cent
of the assesses in 2007-09; while data for 2006-07 was not available in AMC, CMC.
and DMC. This resulted in non accountal of considerable amount of dues and non
pursuance thereof.

40


Chapter VII - Performance Audit

7.1.8.2 Performance of the tax collectors

Tax is collected through collection centres in Asansol and Durgapur municipal
corporations. Chandernagore and Siliguri municipal corporations collect tax through
tax collectors (collecting sarkars) and central office.

As per Rule 34(2) of the West Bengal Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules,
1999 each collecting sarkar should collect 80 per cent of the Current Demand and
30 per cent of the arrear. The position of collection of tax by collecting sarkars in
CMC and SMC is given below:

(Rupees in crore)

Municipal Year Arrear Current Target for Collection Percentage
Corporation Demand Demand collection py collector of shortfall

The achievement of the collecting sarkars fell short by a maximum of 53 per cent
in Chandernagore and 49 per cent in Siliguri. Despite the poor collection in consecutive
years, the corporations did not take any measure for improvement after analysis of
the factors responsible. The poor performance in realization of property tax was
mainly due to absence of periodical monitoring over raising demands and pursuasion
of recovery.

7.1.9 Levy of rebates, surcharge and interest
7.1.9.1 Allowance of rebate

If any amount due is paid on or before the date prescribed by the Corporation, a
rebate of five per cent”’ of such amount shall be allowed. Thus rebate can not be
allowed on arrear tax. But scrutiny of receipt particulars of property tax in AMC
revealed that in contravention of the above provision the corporation allowed rebate
of Rs.22.76 lakh during 2006-09 on the arrear of Rs.6.91 crore. Similarly, such
rebate to the extent of Rs.16.03 lakh was allowed on arrear tax of Rs.5.81 crore in
DMC during 2006-09.

The commercial and industrial holdings are not entitled to any rebate allowed for
residential purposes. A test check of 94 cases of commercial and industrial holdings
under seven wards”* in DMC revealed that rebate was allowed, during the years
2007-08 and 2008-09 although these were not used exclusively for residential
purpose. Loss of revenue in such cases was assessed to Rs.14.88 lakh during the
years, 2007 to 2009.

7.1.9.2 Surcharge on non-domestic holdings

The municipal corporations are authorized by the Acts to impose surcharge at rates
not exceeding 50 per cent of the total property tax imposed on a holding if it

ar Section 157 of the West Bengal Municipal Corporation Act, 2006.

28 Ward No. 29, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37 and 38.

4l


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

is used wholly or partly for non-residential purposes and the corporation shall from
time to time decide the rate of surcharge which shall form part of property tax for
the purpose of recovery. No minimum rate of surcharge is specified.

AMC identified 2054 holdings as commercial/industrial in nature but no surcharge
was imposed on any such holdings during the period of review.

The Assessment Department of CMC had identified 1338 commercial and industrial
holdings. A test check of records of Borough V revealed that surcharge was imposed
only on eight holdings against 154 holdings identified during the year 2008-09. The
non-imposition of surcharge on 146 holdings led to loss of Rs.23000 per annum. In
DMC, 473 holdings were identified as commercial / industrial holdings whose
property tax was Rs.806.64 lakh; but no surcharge was imposed on any such holding
during 2006-09. BOC did not take any resolution to fix the rate of surcharge.

In SMC such surcharge was levied at the rate of 10 per cent on 8010 such holdings.
7.1.10 Accumulation of arrears

The demand (including arrear), collection, arrear and percentage of outstanding dues
to total demand for the years 2006-09 are given in Appendix-12.

It may be seen that the annual accumulated arrear moved between 81 and 86 per
cent in Asansol, between 76 and 78 per cent in Siliguri and between 70 and 73 per
cent in Durgapur. The position in Chandernagore was better as it ranged between
28 and 40 per cent. AMC and SMC did not analyse the mounting outstanding dues
age-wise. However, audit scrutiny revealed that arrears of Rs.19.59 crore and Rs.7.35
crore remained unmoved for more than three years in AMC and SMC respectively.
In CMC arrear dues of property tax of Rs.31 lakh remained unmoved for more than
5 years. DMC recorded Rs.9.54 crore remaining unmoved for more than 3 years.

Scrutiny further revealed that 1558 commercial and Government establishments
with annual demand of Rs.1000 and above defaulted to the extent of Rs.14.00 crore
in AMC. This indicated that AMC was not proactive in respect of big holdings for
realization of the large outstanding balances. The records of Borough II in SMC
revealed that 55 holdings having tax dues of more than Rs.0.25 lakh each defaulted
to the extent of Rs.68.91 lakh as on 31 March 2009. Further, the Corporation failed
to trace out the owners of 40 buildings resulting in non-realization of Rs.35.95 lakh.

The relevant municipal laws have enough provisions for collection of dues including
confiscating property. However, the corporations did not undertake any drive to
reduce the arrears nor did they have any monitoring system to pursue the defaulters.
Thus, the huge outstanding dues of Rs.36.79 crore have become doubtful of recovery.

7.1.11 Non existence of system of reconciliation

Raising demand for tax/fees/other charges, collection thereof and the arrears remaining
outstanding were recorded by the functional departments. The Accounts Department
of the respective corporation maintained their accounts based on the data fed by the
functional departments. Scrutiny revealed that figures recorded in Accounts Department
were lower than those recorded by the functional department. The figures fell short
by Rs. 32.06 lakh and Rs. 167.92 lakh in 2006-07 and 2008-09 in AMC. The
variations was between Rs. 0.91 crore and Rs. 4.64 crore in DMC during 2006-09.

42


Chapter VII - Performance Audit

The Accounts Department of the corporations did not periodically reconcile the
figures with the functional departments as required under Rule 69 of the West Bengal
Municipal (Finance and Accounting) Rules, 1999. The absence of reconciliation
may lead to evasion of taxes and misappropriation of funds.

7.112 Lack of inter departmental coordination

Section 131 of the Municipal Corporation Act, 2006 requires that transfer of title
of any building /land liable to pay property tax was to be notified to the Commissioner.
Section 282 provides that every person should obtain Occupancy Certificate from
the Commissioner after notifying completion of construction. However, there is no
evidence that the Corporations conducted any periodical survey/inspection to bring
prospective tax payers in the tax net. The assessment of new holdings was made on
the basis of applications received. There was no system of linking such application
to sanctioned plan. As per records made available, the position in respect of sanctioned
plan and issue of occupancy certificate (OC) were as follows:

Municipal
Corporation

No. of OC
issued

Period No. of plan sanctioned

Out of 18074 sanctioned plans, occupancy certificates were issued only for 318 units
in Siliguri with the scope of assessment. The lack of co-ordination between the
building and the assessment departments left these prospective holdings outside the
purview of assessment with consequent loss of revenue. Similarly the assessors also
did not obtain data from the licensing department of the corporation to identify non-
residential holdings and impose surcharge. Thus, huge non-residential holdings
evading surcharge remained untapped.

7.1.13 Conclusion

The municipal corporations did not undertake any survey to find out the total
assessable holdings. Comprehensive basic records were not maintained and updated.
to assess scope of own source of revenue and actual collection. The absence of
interdepartmental co-ordination among the Building, the Revenue and Licensing
departments either delayed the mutation or led to non-mutation of new tenement /
holdings with consequent loss of revenue. The corporations also violated the provisions
of the Acts thus forfeiting their legitimate dues.

43


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

7.1.14 Recommendations

Total number of holdings has to be ensured through extensive and periodical
survey.
Demand notices need to be issued in advance and accounted for as

receivables. Day to day accounting must be kept updated with adjustment
against receivables.

Government may consider introduction of area-wise property tax per unit
with necessary amendment to the Act to avoid long delays in general revision.
Government may also consider amendment to the Act prescribing the

minimum enhancement in tax from due date of general revision in case
it is delayed and protect collection of arrears arising from revision.

Safeguards provided in the Acts need to be enforced without deviation
to prevent undue remission, rebate and under assessment.

Holdings and their nature are to be cross checked with building planning
and license department to ensure delay/evasion of assessment.

Awareness among the tax payers has to be raised so that they pay their
dues.

The audit observations were discussed in a meeting (11 October 2010) with the
Municipal Affairs Department in presence of representatives of the respective
Municipal Corporations. It was resolved that specific replies must be sent by the
concerned ULBs within 31 October 2010 positively to the Director of Local Bodies
(DLB) through concerned Joint DLBs. The Joint DLBs of Jalpaiguri and Burdwan
Divisions were asked to follow up for the reply covering the respective points /
topics as mentioned in the meeting.

The replies of the Municipal Corporations and the Government had not been received

(February 2011).
Kolkata (Kailash Ram )
The Examiner of Local Accounts
West Bengal
Mayehsa taory
Kolkata (A Roychoudhury )
The Accountant General

(Receipt, Works and Local Bodies Audit)
West Bengal

44


Appendices

APPENDIX - 1A
Receipt and utilisation of TFC grants for the year 2006 - 07

(vide para:1.5; page: 5)

Receipt Expenditure
Name of the ULB SWM Others Total SWM Others Total
(Rupees in lakh) (Rupees in lakh)

1. | Memari 10.16 | 10.16 20.32 | 2.67 3.72 6.39
2. | Barrackpore 27.14 | 27.14 | 54.28 | 15.14 | 11.39} 26.53
3. | Budge Budge 8.25 | 24.75 33.00 7.80 | 25.34 | 33.14
4. | Maheshtala 73.80 | 74.23 | 148.03 | 26.83 | 56.55 | 83.38
5. | Siliguri 110.27 | 110.27 | 220.54 | 41.31 | 101.45 | 142.76
| 6. | Jangipur 10.85 | 18.16 29.01 | 10.84 | 18.15 28.99
7. | South Dum Dum | 51.90 | 52.20 | 104.10 | 17.66 | 56.24 | 73.90
| 8. | Chandrakona 12.04 7.30 | 19.34 | 12.04 7.30 | 19.34
| 9. | Uttarpara-Kotrung| 24.92 | 24.92 49.84 | 4.68 | 10.93 15.61
10. | Raiganj 49.26 | 49.56 | 98.82 | 19.94 | 48.96 | 68.90
11. | Haldia 32.42 | 32.63 65.05 | 47.57 | 18.00] 65.57
12. | Durgapur 80.04 | 80.50 | 160.54 | 31.88 | 99.40 | 131.28
13. | Arambagh 15.80 | 26.31 | 42.11 | 15.30 | 28.24 | 43.54
| 14. | Katwa 9.72 | 16.29 26.01 | 18.91 14.05 32.96
15.| North Dum Dum | 35.30 | 35.29 | 70.59 | 1.00 | 27.00 | 28.00
| 16. | Dalkhola 16.63 | 16.66 | 33.26] 5.10 | 14.87 | 19.97
17. | Nabadwip 20.75 | 20.75 41.50 | of 17.64 17.64
18. | Bansberia 22.87 | 22.73 | 45.60 | 16.76 | 29.36 | 46.12
| 19. | Contai 8.91 14.92 23.83 | 13.35 | 14.22 27.57
20. | Khardah 19.99 | 19.99 39.98 | 18.01 | 21.97 | 39.98
21. | Barasat 44.40 | 44.40 | 88.80 | 47.52 | 73.04 | 120.56
22. | Kamarhati | 41.66 | | 41.90 | 83.56 | 19.71 | 52.09 | 71.80
23. | Uluberia 81.29 | 81.29 | 162.58 | 81.29 | 81.29 | 162.58
24. | Raghunathpur 12.18] 12.18 | 24.36] 6.54 mz, 6.54
25. | Beldanga 4.30 7.20 11.50 | | 5.65 5.65

Total 824.85 | 871.70 [1696.55 | 481.85 | 836.85 |1318.70

45


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 1B
Receipt and utilisation of TFC grants for the year 2007 — 08

(vide para:1.5; page: 5)

Receipt Expenditure

Name of the ULB SWM Others Total SWM Others _— Total

(Rupees in lakh) (Rupees in lakh)
[1] Memari 10.16} 10.16) 20.32} 2.69 | 11.20 13.89

2. | Barrackpore 27.14 | 27.14 54.28 | 13.27 | 30.40] 43.67

3. | Budge Budge 16.50 | 16.50 33.00 | 0 | 15.14 15.14

4. | Maheshtala 73.80 | 73.80 | 147.60] 74.25 | 138.16 | 212.41
5. | Siliguri 106.44 | 110.27 | 216.71 |135.79 | 70.85 | 206.64

| 6. | Jangipur 14.47 | 14.47 28.94 | 14.45 14.48 28.93

7. | South Dum Dum | 51.90 | 51.90 | 103.80 | 37.62 | 35.75 | 73.37

| 8. | Chandrakona | 9.64 | 9.63 19.27 9.64 | 9.64 | 19.28

| 9. | Uttarpara-Kotrung | 24.85 | 24.85 49.70 | 17.72 | 56.51 74.23

[ 10. | Raiganj 49.27 | 49.26 | 98.53] 45.41 | 24.69] 70.10
11. | Haldia 32.42 | 32.43 64.85 | 50.23 10.62 60.85
12. | Durgapur 48.60 | 80.03 | 128.63 | 60.45 | 73.21 | 133.66
13. | Arambagh 21.05 | 21.06 42.11 | 14.53 9.85 24.38
14. | Katwa 12.96 | 12.96 25.92 | 15.59 6.95 22.54
15. | North Dum Dum | 35.30 | 35.29 | 70.59 | 27.03 8.73 | 35.76
16. | Dalkhola 16.63 | 16.63 33.26 | 10.83 | 22.58 33.41
17. | Nabadwip 20.75 | 20.75 41.50 | 47.72 | 17.40 | 65.12
| 18. | Bansberia 22.73 | 22.73 45.46 | 26.83 6.88 | 33.71
| 19. | Contai 11.87 11.87 23.74 | 1.80 | 11.07 12.87
20. | Khardah | 19.99 | | 19.99 | 39.98 | 20.08 | 16.51 36.59
21. | Barasat 44.40 | 44.40 88.80 | 41.14 | 28.67 | 69.81
22. | Kamarhati 41.66 | 41.66 83.32 | 18.97 | 25.00 | 43.97
23. | Uluberia 80.54 | 80.53 | 161.07] 50.59 | 80.53 | 131.12
24. | Raghunathpur 12.18 | 12.18 24.36 3.02 7.85 10.87
25. | Beldanga 5.73 5.73 11.46 | 14.28 6.01 20.29
Total 810.98 | 846.22 |1657.20 | 753.93 | 738.68 |1492.61

46


Appendices

APPENDIX - 1C
Receipt and utilisation of TFC grants for the year 2008 - 09

(vide para:1.5; page: 5)

Receipt Expenditure

Name of the ULB SWM Others Total SWM ~ Others Total

(Rupees in lakh) (Rupees in lakh)

1. | Memari 15.21| 15.21 30.42 5.43 | 21.27} 26.70

2. | Barrackpore 40.63] 40.63} 81.26] 32.76 5.39| 38.15

3. | Budge Budge 16.45) 16.45 32.90 | 0] 5.67 5.67

4. | Maheshtala 112.07} 112.07] 224.14 [of 99.65| 99.65

5. | Siliguri 165.06} 165.06 | 330.12] 161.92 | 174.78] 336.70

| 6. | Jangipur 21.65} 21.65 43.30) 21.65 | 20.65} 42.30

7. | South Dum Dum | 51.82] 51.82| 103.64] 80.01 | 68.23} 148.24

| 8. | Chandrakona 14.42} 14.42] 28.84] 10.05 12.35] 22.40

| 9. | Uttarpara-Kotrung} 24.81] 24.81 49.62] 33.78 | 28.15} 61.93

10. | Raiganj 73.74| 73.74| 147.48| 45.24 | 63.25| 108.49
11. | Haldia 48.54| 48.54] 97.08| 60.81 | 37.48] 98.29
12. | Durgapur 119.79| 119.79 | 239.58 | 63.02 | 86.17| 149.19
13. | Arambagh 31.51] 31.52] 63.03] 12.94 | 47.10| 60.04
14. | Katwa 19.41| 19.41 38.82| 13.02 11.48| 24.50
15. | North Dum Dum 35.24) 35.24] 70.48] 20.29} 26.55] 46.84
16. | Dalkhola 24.90| 24.90] 49.80] 24.88 | 10.57| 35.45
17. | Nabadwip 31.06] 31.06] 62.12| 31.03} 36.97] 68.00
18. | Bansberia 22.69| 22.69| 45.38| 17.28 | 18.57| 35.85
19. | Contai 17.77| 17.77| 35.54| 17.64 8.53| 26.17
20. | Khardah 29.92| 29.92| 59.84| 32.54| 30.71] 63.25
21. | Barasat 66.46| 66.46 | 132.92| 39.22 | 56.07| 95.29
22. | Kamarhati 62.36| 62.36| 124.72| 45.53 | 28.96| 74.49
23. | Uluberia 120.55| 120.55 | 241.10 | of 119.55| 119.55
24, | Raghunathpur 12.18) 12.14] 24.32] 22.60] 27.11} 49.71
25.| Beldanga 8.58 8.58 17.16 0.65 0.62 1.27
Total 1186.82 | 1186.79 | 2373.61 | 792.29 |1045.83 | 1838.12

47


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 2
Name of ULBs

(vide para:1.8; page: 6)

Period of iod of
९ U
N e of the ULB ‘Audit Name of Audit

[1 | Arambagh 2006 — 08 Kanchrapara 2006 - 08
2. | Asansol 2007 - 08 27. | Katwa 2006 - 08
3. | Baduria 2006 - 08 28. | Kharagpur 2006 — 08
4. | Bally 2007 — 08 29. | Kharar 2006 — 08
5. | Bansberia 2006 — 08 30. | _Khardah 2006 — 08
| 6. | Baranagar 2007 — 08 31. | Khirpai 2006 — 08
7. | Barasat 2007 - 08 32. | Kulti 2007 - 08
| 8. | Barrackpore 2006 — 08 33. | Maheshtala 2006 - 08
[ 9. | Beldanga 2006 — 08 34. | Memari 2006 — 08
[ 10. | Bhadreswar 2006 — 08 35. | Nabadwip 2006 — 08
11. | Birnagar 2006 — 08 36. | Naihati 2007 - 08
12. | Bishnupur 2006 — 08 37. | Nalhati 2006 — 08
13. | Budge Budge 2006 — 08 38. | North Dum Dum 2007 - 08
14. | Chakdaha 2006 — 08 39. | Panihati 2007 — 08
15. | Chandernagore | 2007 - 08 40. | Raghunathpur 2006 - 08
16. | Chandrakona 2006 — 08 41. | Raiganj 2006 — 08
17. | Contai 2006 — 08 42. | Rajpur—Sonarpur | 2006 - 08
[ 18. | Dalkhola 2006 — 08 43. | Rampurhat 2006 — 08
| 19. | Durgapur 2007 - 08 44. | Ranaghat 2006 — 08
20. | Gobardanga 2006 — 08 45. | Raniganj 2007 - 08
21. | Haldia 2006 - 08 46. | Siliguri 2007 - 08
22. | Islampur 2006 — 08 47. | South Dum Dum 2007 - 08
23, | Jamuria 2006 - 08 48. | Taherpur 2006 - 08
24. | Jangipur 2006 - 08 49. | Uluberia 2006 - 08
25. | Kamarhati 2007 - 08 50. | Uttarpara - Kotrung | 2006 - 08

48


Appendices

APPENDIX - 3A

Statement showing budget provisions and actual expenditure
for the year 2006 - 07

(vide para:2.1.1; page: 9)

(Rupees in lakh)
Revenue (including schemes) Capital (other than schemes)
Nameof Budget Actual (-) Savings PeTe™**E° Budget actual _(-) Savings Percentage
ULB Provision expenditure (+) Excess ination Provision expenditure (+ EXCESS titivation
1, | Bansberia 757.56] 688.75 | (-) 68.81 a1 63.25} 5.86 | (11.39 82
2. | Baranagar | 1624.00 | 1691.16 | 0) 67.16 | _104 | 294.00) 100.36 | (-) 193.64 34
3. | Barasat 1088.45 | 1071.08 | (17.37 [98 | 50.50 sim | (03.21 162
[4 | Barrackpore | 673.79| 518.52 | (-) 155.27 77 | 295.00] 295.00 Nil [100 |
5. | Beldanga 125.79 103.81 } (21.98 83 | 23648] 66.63 | (-) 169.85 28
[6 | Budge Budge} 823.60 752.04 O71.56 91 [of [| Nil Nil
7. | Chakdaha 215.77] 200.70 | () 15.07 93 | 373.60] 293.91 | (79.69 79
[ & | Gobardanga | 1040.88 190.57 | ()850.31 [as | [of [oo | Nil Nil
| 9 | Haldia 1946.42 1398.13 | (-) 548.29 72 | 3032.21 1328.38 | (-) 1703.83 [|
[ 10. | Jangipur 269.65 407.33 | (+) 137.68 isi | 196.40 [| () 196.40 Nil
| 1. | Kamarhati_ | 2216.02| 1675.63 | (-) 540.39 16 [of [oo | Nil Nil
12. | Kharagpur 600.08 585.01 (15.07 97 256.00 172.84 (-) 83.16 | & |
13. | Knitoai | 115.79 88.65 | ()27.14 77 | 153.00] 63.38 | (89.62 4
14. | Katwa 527.40] 394.26 | (-) 133.14 7s | 305.22| 142.45 | (162.77 47
15. | Memari | 123.80 [1s | (-) 32.34 74 94.87 110.84 (4) 15.97, 7
| ७] North 1022.16 | 1759.57 | (+) 737.41 1m | 567.24] 114.96 |) 452.28 20
Dum Dum
17, | Panihati 1970.17] 1199.45 | (-) 770.72 61 30.00} 2257 (743 15
| 1s. | Raniganj 1008.36] 690.29 | (-) 318.07 | & | [9 | || Nil Nil
|| Rajpur 2731.80] 1491.15 }(-) 1240.65 55 20.00 |... 24.86 |. (+) 4.86 124
= Sonarpur
20. | Siliguri 2653.80] 1948.55 | (-) 705.25 73 | 2873.50] 1324.68 | () 1548.82 | $& |
21. | South 3009.90} 1862.28 | (-) 1147.62 62 | 825.15] 1309.18 | (+) 484.03 159
Dum Dum
22. | Uttarpara 730.50] 656.73 | (-) 73.77 | | 394.50} 163.27 | (-) 231.23 41
~Kotrung
Total 25275.69 | 19465. | (5810.57 77 [10060.92 | 5666.88 | (-) 4394.04 | ss |

49



Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 3B

Statement showing budget provisions and actual expenditure
for the year 2007 — 08

(vide para:2.1.1; page: 9)

(Rupees in lakh)
Revenue (including schemes) Capital (other than schemes)
Nameof Budget Actual) Sa Percentage pigset Actual) Savings Pereentage
ULB Provision expenditure (+) Excess Provision expenditure (+) ९:

ia. | Bansberia 765.23, 712.33 | (-)52.90 93 | 2562.72] 139.41 | (-)2423.31 | os |
2. | Baranagar 2031.18 1945.76 (-) 85.42 96 1189.00 338.84 (-) 850.16 28
3. | Barasat 1324.67} 1013.15 | (-) 311.52 16 37.00 31.53 (05.47 | & |
4. | Barrackpore | 924.04 761.19 | (-) 162.85 82 | 61886] 724.00 | (+) 105.14 17
5. | Beldanga 172.51 156.58 | (-) 15.93 [9 | 286.25] 132.71 | (-) 153.54 46
[ «६ | Budge Budge] 869.84 68.26 | (1.58 [100 | | __॥/| [| Nil Nil
7. | Chakdaha 248.47 252.45 | (+) 3.98 102 | 619.41] 1178.69 | (+) 559.28 [190]
| | Gobardanga | 920.89 416.21 | (-) 504.68 45 | || | || Nil Nil
| 9. | Haldia 3869.79 | 2983.22 | (-) 886.57 77 | 2610.50] 570.37 | (-) 2040.13 22
[ 10 | Jangipur 302.93 465.32 | (+) 162.39 154 | 507.22 [| (507.22 Nil
11. | Kamarhati | 3315.41] — 2130.86 | (-) 1184.55 | «| | || | "| Nil Nil
12. | Kharagpur 591.86 748.68 | (+) 156.82 126 | 288.64] 201.83 | () 86.81 70
13. | Khirpai 139.00 111.96 | ()27.04 [si | 128.90] 10.7 |) 18.73 85
14. | Katwa 1873.05 850.63 | (-) 1022.42 45 | 919.49] 549.91 | ()369.58 | & |
| 15. | Memari 173.06 200.17 | (+) 27.11 [us | 1.12] 138.75 | (4) 137.63 12388
| ७] North 1057.32 | 1588.34 | (+) 531.02 150 | 481.76] 160.30 | (-) 321.46 33

Dum Dum
17. | Panihati 2133.72 | 1886.41 | (-) 247.31 88 50.00 38.83 | QUT 78
18. | Raniganj 1294.10 847.95 | (-) 446.15 | & | | __॥/| [| Nil Nil
|» | Rajpur 3995.97 | 1875.28 | (-) 2120.69 47 30.00 38.12 (0) 8.12 127

~ Sonarpur
20. | Siliguri 3207.71] 2500.80 | (-) 706.91 78 | 7225.85] 3208.03 | (-) 4017.82 44
21. | South 3470.39 1853.73 | (-) 1616.66 53 1003.11 1423.89 | (+) 420.78 142

Dum Dum

Uttarpara 551.05 691.37 | (+) 140.32 125 | 798.50] 262.80 | (-) 535.70 33

—Kotrung

Total [33232.19 | 24860.65 | (-) 8371.54 75 | 19358.33] 9248.18 |(-) 10110.15 | # |



Appendices

APPENDIX - 3C

Statement showing budget provisions and actual expenditure
for the year 2008 — 09

(vide para:2.1.1; page: 9)

(Rupees in lakh)

Reyenue (including schemes) Capital (other than schemes)

eof Budget —Actual__—(-) Sav cea Budget Actual) S: Renee
Provision expenditure (4) Excess rneation Provision expenditure EXCESS ination

a. | Bansberia | 748.31] 976.55 | (4) 228.24 131 | 1069.12] 630.75 | 438.37 59
2, | Baranagar | 221279 — 1922.69 | ()290.10 87 | 2580.22] 346.06 | (2234.16 3
| 3. | Barasat 1369.25] 1781.98 | (412.73 130 | 3.00| 33.68 | 268] 109 |
4. | Barrackpore | 93522] 8725 | @sz97] 9 | 76870| 59.9 | (176.76 7
5. | Beldanga 230.99] 149.36 | 81.63 6s | 335.70) 82.5 | (252.75 25
[6 | Budge Budge} 1142.23] 1234.67 | (492.44 [108 | [of | | |_| Nil
7. | Chakdaha | 30336] 30531 | G95 101 | 107030] 92479 | 01551 | & |
| 8. | Gobardanga | 16689 | 51571 [115326 31 | _०| 0|[ ३ | Nil
[ 9. | प्रथा 2096.48 | 2234.72 | (3) 138.24 107 | 3583.63] 1976.53 | (-) 1607.10 55
10. | Jangipur 401.02 |. 529.5 | 6) 128.73 132 | 473.94 [| (0473.94 Nil
11. | Kamarhati | 5675.98 | 2659.89 [(-) 3016.09 a {of oo | Nil Nil
12. | Kharagpur | 72657] 960.52 | (4) 233.95 132 | 32484] 233.98 | (90.86 72
13. | Khispai 341.47| 181.68 | (159.79 33 | 175.00] 130.79 | 44.21 75
14, | Katwa 1628.62 | 463.19 |(-) 1165.43 28 | 391.60] 168.19 | (22341 43
15. | Memari 323.97] 482.05 | (+) 158.08 149 | 51.50 | 85.24 | (-)426.26 17
16. | North 1795.00 | 1622.71 | (172.29 | | 20981] 17537 | (3444 84

Dum Dum
17. | Panihati 1604.17 | 2239.17 | 635.00 140 | 3460] 77.08 | 42.48 223
18. | Ranigani | 1424.97 | 1091.15 | ()333.82 || of as | (01448 | |
19. | Rajpur 3359.78] 3030.01 | ©) 329.77 | | 534.50] 600.14 |.) 65.64 112

= Sonarpur
20. | Siliguri 3995.96 | 2675.11 (0 1320.85 67 | 7543.64] 3789.20 | (3754.44 50
21. | 3998.08 | 2344.56 | (2) 1653.52 59 | 955.19] 2781.74 [() 1826.55 291

Dum Dum
22. | Uttarpara 74530 |... 68823 | (057.0 92 | 45250] 586.26 | (४) 133.76 130

= Kotrung

Total 3672849 | 28966.26 | (-) 7762.23 79 |21045.79] 1329.17 | (7816.62 | «|

51


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 4A

Statement showing excess of expenditure over budget provision under
revenue section

(vide para : 2.1.1; page : 10)

Budget Actual
Name of rovision expenditure
ULB (Rupees in crore)

1 Bansberia 2008 — 09 7.48 9.77 2.29
2. | Baranagar 2006 - 07 16.24 16.91 0.67
3._| Barasat 2008 — 09 13.69 17.82 4.13
4. Budge Budge 2008 — 09 11.42 12.35 0.93
5. | Chakdaha 2007 - 08 2.48 2.52 | 0.04 |
2008 — 09 3.03 3.05 0.02
[ 6. | Haldia 2008 — 09 20.96 22.35 1.39
2006 - 07 2.70 4.07 1.37
7. | Jangipur 2007 - 08 3.03 4.65 1.62
2008 — 09 4.01 5.30 1.29
| ६ | सका 2007 - 08 5.92 7.49 1.57
2008 — 09 7.27 9.61 2.34
. 2007 — 08 1.73 2.00 0.27

|» | Memari
2008 — 09 3.24 4.82 1.58
|| North Dum 2006 - 07 10.22 17.60 7.38
2007 - 08 10.57 15.88 5.31
11. | Panihati 2008 - 09 16.04 22.39 6.35
12. | Uttarpara-Kotrung 2007 - 08 5.51 6.91 1.40
Total 145.54 185.49 | 3995 |

52


Appendices

APPENDIX - 4B

Statement showing excess of expenditure over budget provision under
capital section

(vide para : 2.1.1; page : 10)

Budget Actual
Name of si expenditure

ULB

53


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 5

Statement showing outstanding loans of ULBs

(vide para: 2.5; page: 12)

SL Principal Interest usc!
No. Name of ULB Source of loan liability
है (Rupees in lakh)
1. | Arambagh March 2008] Central & State Government 48.48 2.71 122.19
2. | Budge Budge | March 2008] Pena, Bank, Buge Budge 40.50} 1450 55.00
CUDP III
3. | Uluberia March 2008 8° Plan 450.97 | 696.51 | 1147.48
Govt. for setting up
Aluminium Industry
[ 4. | Khardah March 2008] State Government & others 197.95 449.59 647.54
5. | Kharagpur March 2008 | State Government 16.26 48.09 64.35
| 6. | North Dum Dum | March 2008 | CUDP TIT, 8" Plan 293.35 1035.83 1329.18
7. | Kahchrapara March 2008 | State Government 109.58 109.58
| 8. | Birnagar March 2008 Central Goverment 28.95 100.87 129.82
५ | Contai March 2008] HUDCO, Balageria Central | 157.39 | 15.49 | 172.81
Co-operative Bank
10, | Ranaghat March 2008 | UBI, Ranaghat 5.87 5.87
11. | Katwa March 2008] IDSMT loan 47.33 28.29 75.62
par State Bank of India, Naihati a
12. | Naihati March 2008 | Branch 2.46 Nil 2.46
13. | Chandrakona March 2008 | [DSMT loan 4.93 30.57 35.50
14. | Chakdaha March 2008} State (PHE), Central IDSMT 20.36 20.36
15. | Bansberia March 2008) CUDP III & 8" Plan 301.68 487.41 789.09
16. | Raniganj March 2008 | IDSMT loan 16.67 431 20.98
Different sources other than
17. | Durgapur March 2008 Central & State Governments 950.00 12.63 962.63
18. | Asansol March 2008 | LIC of India 122.23 256.16 378.39
19. | Baduria March 2008 | HUDCO 45.35 0.39 45.74
20. | Chandernagore | March 2008 | Hooghly Coop. Bank 40.00 Nil 40.00
Total 6154.59

54


Appendices

APPENDIX - 6
Statement showing outstanding advances

(vide para: 2.6; page: 13)

(Rupees in lakh)

ne of UL! रहिए Particulars of advance/Remarks
Advance

Advance paid to supervisors and others for execution
1. | Arambagh March 2008 748 | Sfworks.

. Advance paid to different persons and institutions
2. Baduria March 2008 33.36 | for execution of schemes and programmes (like
Mid-day-Meal, construction of school room, etc.)

Advance paid to employees, Ex-Councillor,

3. | Beldanga March 2008 14.77 | Councillor, retired personnel and others.

The amount included advance of Rs. 1.68 lakh given
4, Contai March 2008 115.82 | to three Councillors (during 1991 to 2001) and ad-
interim payment of Rs. 95.34 lakh made to 22
contractors (during 1975 to 2003).

Advance paid to Ex-Chairman, Ex-Vice Chairman,

5. Islampur March 2008 11.67 | Councillors, employees, etc. for execution of different
works, etc.
(६ | Jamuria March 2008 3.23 | Advance paid to supervisors and others for execution
. है of works.
1, Maheshtala March 2008 114.77 हा paid to employees and others for execution

Festival advance, recoverable amount from the

hots beneficiaries of HUDCO loan, advance to public
| Nee MEA CH works, permanent advance, advance against schemes,
etc.
|» | Ramputhat March 2008 5.49 | Advance given to employees and others for different
works, etc.
Total 370.92

55


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 7

Statement showing liability due to loss of interest on delayed deposit of Provident
Fund money into the Treasury

(vide para: 2.7; page: 13)

(Rupees in lakh)

SI. Loss of Interest
due to delay in deposit

No. Name of ULB

56


Appendices

APPENDIX - 8A

Statement showing demand and collection of property tax for the year 2006 - 07

Name of U
N

(vide para: 2.9; page: 14)

Demand

(Rupees in lakh)

e

Arrear Current — Arre: Nn Arrear — Current

| 1. | Bally 509.10 | 524.04} 147.09 | 194.53 33 362.01 | 329.51
2. Bansberia 356.99 | 112.96 | 6.0 | 60.81 14 350.89 52.15
3. | Baranagar 800.18 | 329.31 | 107.82 | 153.78 23 692.36 | 175.53
4. Barasat 280.83 | 107.59] 28.47 46.05 19 252.36] 61.54
5. | Barrackpore 37.03 | 154.24} 11.59 | 137.37 78 25.44) 16.87
| «6. | Beldanga 74.89 | 19.28] 4.02 7.30 12 70.87} 11.98
7. | Budge Budge 410.00 | 433.00] 20.00] 140.00 | 9 | 390.00 | 293.00
[ 8. | Chakdaha 107.89 | 49.63] 21.83] 24.38 29 86.06} 25.25
(9 | Gobardanga 85.93 | 32.93] 13.31 | 606] 16 72.62) 26.87
| 10. | Haldia 698.48 [2149.37] 36.05 | 870.75 32 662.43 |1278.62
11. | Jangipur 55.79 | 29.59 7.38 | 10.88 21 48.41] 18.71
12. | Kamarhati 350.17 | 303.31 | 90.91 | 215.72 47 259.26| 87.59
13. | Kharagpur 203.87 | 92.98] 34.28 | 45.45 27 169.59} 47.53
14. | Khirpai 3.70 4.04 2.16 2.75 wal 0.94 1.29
15. | Katwa 54.48 33.49 15.98 27.93 50 38.50 5.56
16. | Memari 30.26 28.15 12.52 22.18 59 17.74 5.97
17. | Nalhati 9.08 11.23 2.94 4.62 37 6.14 [601]
18. | North Dum Dum 231.19} 126.53 81.11 [91.10] [| 150.08 35.43
[ 19. | Raniganj 51.95 | 105.35 26.73 79.99 | « | 25.22 25.36
20. | Rajpur-Sonarpur 180.86 | 193.41} 55.97] 140.56 53 124,89] 52.85
21. | Siliguri 666.93 | 425.52} 103.87 | 255.87 33 563.06 | 169.65
22. | South Dum Dum 884.00 | 470.75 | 245.87 | 296.38 | 40 | 638.13 | 174.37
23. | Uttarpara-Kotrung 254.33 | 133.72} 39.84] 89.71 33 214.49) 44.01
Total 6337.93 |5870.42 |1116.44 | 2924.17 33 5221.49 [2946.25 |

37


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 8B
Statement showing demand and collection of property tax for the year 2007 - 08

(vide para: 2.9; page: 14)

(Rupees in lakh)

Demand

Bally 384.48 | 448.65] 182.48] 240.61 51 202.00] 208.04
Bansberia 402.96 | 112.96 8.11] 60.93 13 394.85} 52.03
Baranagar 867.89 | 302.70} 126.10] 146.70 23 741.79} 156.00
Barasat 317.06] 111.20) 33.07] 46.88 | 19 | 283,99 | 64.32
Barrackpore 42.31) 158.58] 15.00] 143.61 79 27.31) 14.97
Beldanga 71.22) 16.55 3.05 6.63 10 68.17 9.92
Budge Budge 683.00] 667.00) 130.00) 312.00 33 553.00} 355.00
Chakdaha 111.32} 49.63] 11.71] 25.02 23 | 99.61 | 24.61
Gobardanga 99.49) 32.93 6.42 5.97 | 9 | 93.07} 26.96
10. | Haldia 1914.18 |2788.90 | 406.62 | 924.04 28 1507.56 | 1864.86
(11. | Jangipur 67.05} 32.49] 12.66] 15.92 29 54.39] 16.57
12. | Kamarhati 346.28 | 306.32] 55.48] 211.89 41 290.80} 94.43
13. | Kharagpur 217.12) 93.03] 32.19] 49.76 26 184.93} 43.27
14. | Khirpai 2.22 4.04 0.54 2.78 53 1.68 1.26
15. | Katwa 43.86] 33.94] 10.28] 28.93 50 33.58 5.01
16. | Memari 23.71) 23.46 4.58] 19.93 52 19.13 3.53
17. | Nalhati 12.76] 12.13 3.66 4.19 32 9.10 7.94
18. | North Dum Dum 185.51] 170.49] 62.44 | 125.20 53 123.07} 45.29
19. | Raniganj 190.88] 108.52] 114.71 83.56 | 66 | 76.17| 24.96
20. | Rajpur-Sonarpur 188.06 | 211.84] 38.38] 150.19 47 149.68] 61.65
21. | Siliguri 772.71 | 425.52] 132.70] 261.86 33 640.01} 163.66
22. | South Dum Dum 812.50} 510.29] 316.72] 357.65 51 495.78 | 152.64
23. | Uttarpara-Kotrung | 285.16] 134.73] 19.08] 89.52 26 266.08) 45.21
Total 8041.73 [6755.90 |1725.98 | 3313.77 34 6315.75 |3442.13

58


Appendices

APPENDIX - 8९

Statement showing demand and collection of property tax for the year 2008 - 09

Name of ULB
N

(vide para: 2.9; page: 14)

Demand

Arrear

Current

(Rupees in lakh)

Arrear

1. | Bally 410.40 | 448.65] 184.51] 218.99 47 225.89 | 229.66
2. | Bansberia 446.89 | 112.96 8.51] 60.90 12 438.38 | 52.06
3. | Baranagar 897.79 | 292.16} 120.42} 165.11 24 777.37 | 127.05
4. | Barasat 343.58 | 113.07] 33.99] 65.85 22 309.59 | 47.22
5. | Barrackpore 42.28 | 166.56} 9.54] 150.80 71 32.74] 15.76
| 6. | Beldanga 78.10) 16.55 3.39 6.72 व १03॥॥ 9.83
7. | Budge Budge 908.00 | 498.00} 42.00] 150.00 14 866.00 | 348.00
| 8. | Chakdaha 124.22} 44.68 | 15.66] 25.54 24 108.56 | 19.14
| > | Gobardanga 120.04} 32.93 8.97 5.97 10 111.07} 26.9
10. | Haldia 3372.42 |2787.25 | 648.35 | 1234.15 31 2724.07 | 1553.10
11. | Jangipur 70.91] 31.59] 13.20] 17.98 30 57.71] 13.61
12. | Kamarhati 371.13 | 307.46] 48.32 | 226.19 40 322.81 | 81.27
13. | Kharagpur 228.20} 93.87] 18.29 44.64 20 209.91 49.23
14, | Khirpai 2.94 4.04] 0.24 2.57 | 40 | 2.70 1.47
15. | Katwa 38.22 | 34.27 9.44] 28.23 52 28.78 | 6.04 |
16. | Memari 22.65 | 25.95 2.92 | 19.13 45 19.73 6.82
17. | Nalhati 17.04 | 12.16] 3.21 3.69 24 13.83 8.47
18. | North Dum Dum 168.36 | 170.95} 36.50] 124.94 48 131.86 | 46.01
[ 19. | Raniganj 101.13 | 109.00} 34.22] 94.15 | 6 | | 66.91 | 14.85
20. | Rajpur-Sonarpur 211.33 | 232.90} 55.06 | 167.10 50 156.27 | 65.80
21. | Siliguri 803.67 | 425.52} 111.08 | 266.07 31 692.59 | 159.45
22. | SouthDumDum | 652.42 | 608.87] 312.90] 391.85 56 339.52 | 217.02
23. | Uttarpara-Kotrung | 308.52] 133.93] 20.67] 88.45 25 287.85 | 45.48

Total 9740.24 |6703.32 |1741.39 | 3559.02 | 2 | 7998.85 |3144.30

59


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 9

Statement showing Budget Estimate, Actual Realisation and Percentage of
Realisation from Own Source during the period 2006 - 09

(vide para 3.1; page: 17)
(Rupees in lakh)
Budget Estimate i Percentage of

Realisation
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09

Sl. Name of

No. ULB

1. [Bally 1272.45] 908.27] 772.61] 880.23] 921.20] 937.37] 69 | 10 | 121
2, |Bansberia 216.17] 286.73] 278.33] 150.76[ 297.17| 2557| 701 101 | 106 |
3. |Baranagar 697.00] 790.62] 885.91 688.85| 691.41] 735.14] 99 | 87 83
[ 4. [Barasat 471.35] 564.67| 593.80[ 385.59] 440.29] 470.21] 82 | 78 9
5. [Barrackpore 414.32[ 563.00|_762.34[ 674.40[ 505.34[ 645.08] 163 [90] 85
| 6. [Beldanga 2630 28.29[  32.57[ 189 27.13] 2919 2] 96] 90 |
7, [Budge Budge 310.88[ 299.18] 318.86] 215.79[ 373.23] 262.80[ 69 | 125 82
[ 8. |Chakdaha 142.21] 152.86| 251.51] 160.92] 13432] 200.83] 13 | 88] 80 |
[ 9. [Gobardanga 39.08| 42.73[ 78% 27.78| 46.04] अत 71 [ 10s | 44
10. [Haldia 1983.20] 2103.21] 4145.10 1245.57] 1973.44] 254338] 63 | 94] छा
11 [Jangipur 109.67| 107.60[_120.30[ __75.39[ 109.30[ 158.54] 69 [ 102 | 132
12. Kamarhati 762.74[ 896.17[ 985.69| 768.48] 777.41| 808.28[ 101 | 87 82
13.[Kharagpur 302.15| 271.09[ 471.69] 188.58] 209.77| 18055| 62 | 77[ 38
14] Khitpai 21.39[ 26.50] 29.97] 26.47| 26.95[ खा 124 [ 102 [83
15.[Katwa) 165.13| 200.18[ 282.96] 159.04] 92.38] 102.60] 96[ 46] 36
16|[Memari | 68.51 7229] 93.09 101.86 202.52 170.98[ 149 | 280 | 184 |
17, Nalhati 52.01] 52.45] Nill 43.73) 47.43] 70.65] 84 |» | aplabe
18[North Dum Dum | 530.66] 612.02| 612.15[ 506.11| 568.49] 636.04] 95 [93 [104 |
19,|Panihati 689.52| 747.00] 868.62] 949.92] 738.76| 1505.63] 138 | 99 | __ 173
20.[Raniganj 271.86| 301.65] 253.97|_220.12[363.67[_248.49[_ 81 | 121 | 98 |
21{Rajpur-Sonarpur_[_ 432.00[ 768.27| 699.40] 920.66] 60572| 936.29] 213 [79 | 134
22,| Siliguri 1767.80] 2153.80] 2148.25] 1439.16] 1298.24] 1349.17] 81 | 60 | 63
23,[South Dum Dum | 2021.19] 2413.08] 3436.78 1750.30] 2613.97| 3558.27| 87 | 108 | 104 |
24|Uttarpara-Kotrung| _351.50| 470.60| 848.15] 271.86] 304.36] 334.83] 77 | 65 39

Total 1319.09] 14832.26[18971.01] 11870.47| 1368.54] 16239.69| 90 | % | 86 |



Appendices

APPENDIX - 10
Statement showing loss of revenue due to non imposition of surcharge
(vide para: 3.3.1; page : 18)
(Rupees in lakh)

Name of No.ofcommercial/ Yoarty Annual Period

Tax surcharge

1. | Arambagh [| 4 । 16.14 | 3.23 | April 2006 to March 2008 | 6.46
| 2.| Barasat 83 12.88 | 2.58 | April 2002 to March 2009 [ 18.06 |
3. | Barrackpore | Not available 43.76 | 8.75 | April 2006 to March 2007 | 8.75
45,32 | 9.06 | April 2007 to March 2008 | 9.06 |

4. | Chandrakona 407 2.30 | 0.46 | April 2003 to March 2007 |_1.84
5. | Gobardanga 155 2.40 | 0.48 | July 2004 to March 2008 | 1.80 |
| «.| Islampur 2221 6.77 | 1.35 | October 2005 to March 2008 | 3.38
7.| Jamuria 1346 34.88 | 6.98 | April 2006 to March 2008 | 13.96
| 8. | Jangipur 1325 3.92 | 0.78 | July 2006 to March 2008 | 1.37
| 9.| Katwa [1106 | 15,33 3.07 | October 2001 to March 2008 | 19,93
10. | Kulti 124 20.81 | 4.16 | April 2007 to March 2008 | 4.16
antl eesti 8167 310.05 | 62.01 | April 2006 to March 2007 | 62.01
8356 326.10 | 65.22 | April 2007 to March 2008 | 65.22

19, [coms | 238 8.34 | 1.67 | April 2006 to March 2007 | 1.67
238 8.23 | 1.65 | April 2007 to March 2008 | _ 1.65

13.| Naihati 1952 13.82 | 2.76 | July 2003 to March 2008 | 13.11
is. No 88 63.25 | 12.65 | April 2007 to March 2008 | 12.65
15.| Panihati 225 56.45 | 11.29 | April 2007 to March 2008 | 11.29
16.) Raiganj 527 4.76 | 0.95 | July 2004 to December 2008 | 4.28
Total [260.65 |

61


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 11

Statement showing non realization of rent / salami / lease money etc. from stalls
/ shops / market / commercial complex etc.

(vide para: 3.5; page : 19)

(Rupees in lakh)

Name of the ULB ‘As on Rent / salami /lease mon:
realised from stalls / sho

| 1. | Baduria March 2008 | 70८ |
2, Barasat March 2008 27.02
3 Beldanga February 2009 0.92
4. Bhadreswar March 2008 13.82
5. Chandernagore August 2008 38.40
| 6. | Islampur March 2008 4.43
7. Jamuria March 2008 29.70
| 8. | Jangipur June 2008 0.82
| 9. | Kharagpur March 2008 7.05
10. Kharar March 2008 1.87
ll. | Memari March 2008 3.36
12. | Naihati March 2008 2.54
13. | North Dum Dum March 2008 1.00
14, | Panihati March 2008 150.67
15. | Rampurhat March 2008 8.29
16. Siliguri March 2008 29.28
17. Uluberia October 2008 3.85
18. Uttarpara - Kotrung | March 2008 10.63

Total 334.29

62


Appendices

APPENDIX - 12

Statement showing accumulation of arrear

(vide para: 7.1.10; page 42)

(Rupees in crore)

Municipal Yea वि 5 ०३० 5
Corporation ear Demand Collection Arrear Percentage

63


Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2009

APPENDIX - 13

GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS

AMC Asansol Municipal Corporation

BOC Board of Councillors

BPL Below Poverty Line

CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India

CDS Community Development Society

CIC Chairman-in-Council

CMFA Controller of Municipal Finances and Accounts
CUDP Calcutta Urban Development Programme

CVB Central Valuation Board

DMC Durgapur Municipal Corporation

DWCUA Development of Women and Children in Urban Area
EFC Eleventh Finance Commission

ELA Examiner of Local Accounts

HUDCO Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited
IDSMT Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns
IRs Inspection Reports

IT Income Tax

KEIP Kolkata Environmental Improvement Project

KMC Kolkata Municipal Corporation

KMDA Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority

MAD Municipal Affairs Department

MARC Municipal Administrative Reforms Committee
MED Municipal Engineering Directorate

MPC Metropolitan Planning Committee

MPLAD Member of Parliament Local Area Development
NHC Neighbourhood Committee

NOAPS National Old Age Pension Scheme

PHED Public Health and Engineering Department

PT Professional Tax

[PWD _| Public Works Department

SAE Sub Assistant Engineer

SDC Slum Development Committee

SFC State Finance Commission

SMC Siliguri Municipal Corporation

ST Sales Tax

SWM Solid Waste Management

TFC Twelfth Finance Commission

ULB Urban Local Body

WBECSC West Bengal Essential Commodity Supply Corporation
WC Ward Committee

64