Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
on 
 
 
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS – 
WORKSHOPS, SHEDS AND PRODUCTION UNITS 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on_____________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
No. 23 of 2014 
(Performance Audit) 
  

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  i 
  CONTENTS  
 
 Paragraph Pages 
Preface  iii 
List of Abbreviations   iv - v 
Executive summary  vi 
Major Audit Findings  vii-ix 
Gist of recommendations   x 
CHAPTER 1 -  Introduction 
Organisation Setup  1.1 1 
Audit Objectives  1.2 2 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.3 2 
Scope and Audit Methodology 1.4 2 
Acknowledgement 1.5 3 
CHAPTER 2 -  Prevention and Control  of Pollution 
Statutory Compliance 2.1 4 
Monitoring Pollution 2.2 7 
ISO Certification 2.3 15 
CHAPTER 3 -  Conservation of Resources 
Conservation of  Energy 3.1 17 
Conservation of  Water 3.2 25 
CHAPTER 4 - Waste Management 
Management of Hazardous Waste  4.1 27 
Disposal of Used  Batteries 4.2 33 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  ii 
CHAPTER 5 -  Health and Safety 
Ventilation and Lighting  5.1 35 
Healthcare Facilities 5.2 36 
Maintenance of Medical Records 5.3 37 
Occupational Safety 5.4 37 
CHAPTER 6 – Conclusions and Recommendations  
Conclusions 6.1 40 
Recommendations 6.2 41 
APPENDIX   
Organisation Chart Appendix I 43 
Statement showing details of Workshops, sheds and 
productions units selected for sample study 
Appendix II 44 
Statement showing details of Workshops, sheds and 
productions units selected from all Zonal Railways  
Appendix III 45-47 
Conditions of SPCB for granting of renewal of CFO Appendix IV 48-50 
Statement showing  Workshops, sheds and productions units 
where air pollutions control equipments were not provided  
Appendix V 51 
Statement showing accidents and causalities in Workshops, 
Sheds and Production Units  
Appendix VI 52 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  iii 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2013 has been prepared for submission to 
the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
 
This Report of the Comptro ller and Auditor General of India contains the results 
of performance audit of Environment Management in Indian Railways – 
Workshops, Sheds and Production Units in 2007-2012. 
 
The instances mentioned in this Report ar e those, which came to the notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2012-13 as well as those which came to the 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
matters relating to the period subsequent to 2012-13 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from Ministry of Railways 
at each stage of the audit process.  
 
. 
 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  iv 
 
Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
ADV Advisor  KZJ Kazipet 
AGC Agra Cantt LJN Lucknow (NE) 
AJJ Arrakkonam LGD Lallaguda 
BBS Bhubneshwar LTT Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 
BBQ Basin Bridge Jn ME  Mechanical Engineering 
BGKT Bhagat Ki Kothi MEMU Ma inline Electric Multiple Unit 
BKSC Bokaro Steel City MFT Mettuguda 
BPL Bhopal MR Metro Railways  
BNDM Bondamunda MLY Maula Ali 
CE Chief Engineer  MYS Mysore 
CEE Chief Electrical Engineer  NR Northern Railway 
Chg Coaching NCR North Central Railway 
CFL Compact Fluorescent Lamp NER North Eastern Railway 
COS Controller of  Stores NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
CPME Chief Motive Power Engineer /Diesel  NWR North Western Railway 
CPO  Chief Personnel Officer PER Perumbur 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board PON Pandu 
CR Central Railway  PTJ Podanur 
CRSE Chief Rolling Stock Engineer  PU Production Unit 
CRW Carriage Repair Shop RB Railway Board 
CRWS Coach Rehabilitation Workshop  ROH Routine Over Haul 
DME Director Mechanical Engineering  RPU Railway Production Units 
DEMU Diesel Electric Multiple Unit RYP Rayanapad 
Dev Development  RSK Rail Spring Karkhana 
DLS Diesel Loco Shed RWH Rain Water Harvesting 
ECoR East Coast Railway SR Southern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway SCR South Central Railway 
ED Erode SER South Eastern Railway 
EDME Executive Director Mechanical 
Engineering  
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
ER Eastern Railway SPJ Samastipur 
ELS Electric Loco Sh ed STLI Sithouli 
ERS Ernakulam SECR South East Central Railway 
ET Itarsi SWR South Western Railway 
ETP Effluent Treatment Plant  Tr Training  
Fr Freight  TNP TONDIARPET 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  v 
EMU Electric Multiple Unit TBM Tambaram 
EWS Electrical Workshop UBL Hubli  
GOC Ponmlai Golden Rock VSKP Vishakhapatnam 
GY Gooty WCR West Central Railway 
JHS Jhansi WD Washing Depot 
HPMV High Pressure Mercury Vapour  WR Western Railway 
IR Indian Railways W Works 
ISO International Organisation for 
Standardization  
WRS Waris Eleganj 
KJM Krishnarajapuram WRP Water Recycling Plant 
KGP Kharagpur WS Workshops 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  vi 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
1. Environment Management in In dian Railways -Workshops, 
sheds and Production units 
Parliamentary Standing Committee (1997-98)  in their Fourteenth Report on 
Modernisation and Capacity Utilisatio n of workshops in Indian Railways 
observed that working conditions in workshops posed hazards to the health of 
workers. The Committee recommended effo rts to be made to improve working 
conditions and to create new facilitie s so that smoke emission and sewage 
disposal would confirm to environment requirements.  
In Indian Railways (IR), there are 432 workshops/ sheds and six production units. 
Operation and maintenance of these units cause air, water and noise pollution 
and generate significant waste. Being a bul k consumer of energy, these units   
have the potential to conserve energy by adopting energy efficient measures.  
There was also a high risk of non-compliance with statutory provisions relating to 
control of pollution and waste management and with the instructions/guidelines 
issued from time to time by Railway Board (RB). 
This report presents the results of the review of “Environment Management in 
Workshops, Sheds and Production units” which was taken up as a second phase 
of the audit exercise to assess the performance of IR in addressing the 
environmental impact of its operations and maintenance activities at workshops, 
sheds and production units. 
It was observed that RB had issued guidelines and instructions on pollution 
control, waste management and energy conservation. It was also noticed that 
some progress had been made by workshops, sheds and production units on these 
issues. The important deficiencies noticed in environment management are 
elaborated below. 
Statutory obligation to obtain Consent to Establish (CTE) and Consent for 
Operation(CFO) was not adhered to by 88 per cent (CTE) and 68 per cent (CFO) 
of the workshops and sheds test checked . Absence of effective monitoring of the 
Zonal Railways and the RB resulted in non-compliance with the conditions 
specified while granting consent. Monitoring  of air quality and noise pollution in 
workshops and sheds along with the provision of pollution control equipment  was 
inadequate. In addition, existing pollution control equipment was not maintained 
in working condition.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  vii 
 Effluent Treatment Plants (ETP) were eith er not installed or wherever installed, 
quality of discharge was not monitored leading to improper disposal of ETP 
sludge in open area. The progress on implementation of RB's 
instructions/guidelines on Water Recycling Plant (WRP) and Rain Water 
Harvesting (RWH) was insignificant. 
Initiatives of workshops and sheds to generate electricity from solar energy were 
partial. In the absence of concrete action plan and monitoring at RB level, 
significant progress in the field of energy   audit and implementation of their 
recommendations was not observed.  
There was a lack of proper disposal of wastes coupled with partial maintenance 
and submission of records/returns and handling of hazardous wastes. The 
procedures adopted by the workshops and sheds for disposal of wastes were not 
environment friendly. Manifest system was also not followed in 128 out of 138 
workshops and sheds test checked 
Periodical inspections by Medical Officers of the workshops, sheds and 
production units to ensure the health and safety of the employees were not 
complied with even though health units were attached to 89 per cent of the 
workshops and sheds. Deficiencies were  observed in maintenance of medical 
records relating to preventive medical examination of workers. In all, 10,420 
accidents occurred during 2007-12 and of them, 51 per cent of the accidents 
occurred in 12 workshops and 18 sheds across Central, Eastern and Northern 
Railways. 
2.       Major Audit Findings 
2.1     Prevention and Control of Pollution 
¾ Statutory provisions of obtaining Consent to Establish were not 
followed in 88 per cent of the units test checked and in 68 per cent of 
the units Consent for Operation was not obtained. Periodical renewal 
of consent under Air Act and Water Act was not obtained in 15 units 
and 16 units respectively.                                                  (Para 2.1.1) 
 
¾ Conditions attached with consent remained largely unfulfilled in 11 
workshops and nine sheds out of 23 workshops and 21 sheds (45 per 
cent) which were granted Consent for Operation.   
  (Para 2.1.3) 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  viii 
¾ Air pollution control equipments such as wet scrubber, fume 
extractors, dust collectors etc. were not provided in 30 workshops 
and 65 sheds (69 per cent). Control equipments were not in working 
condition in production units such as CLW/Chittaranjan and 
DLW/Varanasi. Out of 23 workshops and 21 sheds which obtained 
Consent for Operation, only seven workshops and six sheds 
conducted air quality check. In thre e workshops and three sheds, the 
shortfall in conducting air quality check ranged between 25 and 99 
per cent.       (Para 2.2.1 and 2.2.2)  
   
¾ Initiatives of IR in maintaining noise level check were inadequate. 
Noise level was beyond the tolerance limit in 387 out of the 1,105 
locations where the quality of noise was monitored. Out of 30 
workshops and 60 sheds having DG se t, stack height was found less 
than the prescribed height in seven workshops and seventeen sheds. 
Acoustic enclosures for noise reduction in DG sets were provided 
only in 22 workshops and 37 sheds checked (66 per cent). 
               (Para 2.2.3 and 2.2.4)  
 
¾ There were no specific instructions/guidelines for installation of ETP 
at workshops, sheds and production units. ETP was not available in 
26 workshops and 57 sheds (60 per cent of the units test checked). In 
20 workshops and 33 sheds wher e ETP was provided, sources of 
effluents were not connected to the ETP in six workshops and two 
sheds. Quality of discharge was m onitored only in seven workshops 
and eight sheds. ETP sludge was disposed off in open area leading to 
contamination of  ground water.  
(Para 2.2.5) 
2.2     Conservation of Resources 
 
¾ There is no system in place at the RB level to monitor or initiate 
corrective action on the shortfall in achieving targets related to 
conservation of energy by the Zonal Railways. Efforts of Workshops 
and sheds to conduct energy audit and implement their 
recommendations were slow and inadequate resulting in non-
achievement of projected savings. Initiatives of workshops and sheds 
to generate and use solar energy were insignificant. There was no 
system to quantify savings due to implementation of energy 
conservation measures.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  ix 
                              (Para 3. 1, 3.1.1 and 3.1.2)  
¾ Despite clear instructions by RB , recycling of water through WRP 
was provided only in one depot. RWH system was not provided in 39 
workshops and 73 sheds over 13 Zonal Railways. In three Zonal 
Railways, RWH was provided in five workshops and three sheds. 
              (Para 3.2.1 and 3.2.2)  
2.3     Waste Management 
¾ Authorization from the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) for 
handling hazardous wastes was obtained by only 15 workshops and 
17 sheds (23 per cent). Complete records of hazardous wastes were 
not maintained in 13 workshops and 12 sheds out of 32 (78 per cent) 
workshops and sheds test checked. Only nine workshops and three 
sheds submitted the requisite return regarding handling of hazardous 
wastes.                    (Para 4.1.1and 4.1.3) 
 
¾ Environment Impact Assessment was conducted only in two 
workshops and two sheds out of 15 workshops and 17 sheds 
authorised for handling hazardous waste.  
(Para 4.1.5) 
                 
¾  Statutory provisions  relating to maintenance of records, submission 
of returns to SPCBs, handling and disposal of used batteries were not 
complied.                                                                              (Para 4.2) 
2.4     Health and Safety     
¾ Layout plan of the workshops and sheds was not approved by the 
Director/Inspector of Factories in respect of 23 workshops and 47 
sheds .                     (Para 5.1)  
 
¾ Periodical inspection by doctors was carried out only in nine 
workshops and nine sheds (13 per cent) over eight Zonal Railways . 
Monitoring of implementation of the recommended safety measures 
was done only in 10 workshops and 7 sheds (12 per cent) over seven 
Zonal Railways.                                                            (Para   5.2)  

Environment Management in Indian Railways 
 
Report No. 23  of 2014 
  x 
3.   Gist of Recommendations 
• Mechanical Directorate of RB needs to establish a system of effective 
monitoring to ensure compliance with  the statutory obligations relating 
to air, water and noise pollution in workshops, sheds and production 
units. Provision of control equipm ent and keeping them in working 
condition needs to be given due importance; 
 
• Workshops, sheds and production units need to take effective steps for 
proper disposal of ETP sludge as per the guidelines issued by the 
SPCB/CPCB in order to prevent contamination of ground water; 
 
• All workshops, sheds and production units need to frame a well defined 
target for implementing energy conservation measures. Electrical 
Directorate of RB needs to closely monitor the achievement of target and 
analyse the impact of shortfall in achieving target. 
 
•  A time bound action plan needs to be drawn for harnessing renewable 
energy such as wind and solar energy so as to achieve the 2020 vision of 
IR; 
 
• Mechanical Directorate of RB need to effectively ensure that its 
instructions on setting up of Water Recycling Plants  and Rain Water 
Harvesting structures are complied in a time bound manner; 
 
•  Mechanical Directorate and Stores Directorate of RB needs to establish 
a monitoring mechanism for strict observance of statutory provisions 
regarding proper accounting, handling and disposal of hazardous 
wastes; 
 
• Health Directorate of RB needs to  ensure maintenance of medical 
records of the workers of all workshops, sheds and production units. 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 1 
  
 
 
Parliamentary Standing Committee (1997-98) in their Fourteenth Report on 
Modernisation and Capacity Utilisation of Workshops in Indian Railways (IR) 
observed that the working conditions in some of the workshops were very 
pathetic and hazardous to the health of the workers. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommended that conscientious efforts are required to be made to 
improve the prevalent working conditions .  The Committee also recommended 
that new facilities should be created so that smoke emission and sewage 
discharge/disposal standard would confirm to environmental requirements.  
A review of the management of environment at stations, trains and tracks was 
undertaken and audit findings were included in the Audit Report No.21 of 2012-
13. The present review focuses on the performance of Workshops
1, Sheds and 
Production Units (PUs) in the management of the environmental impact due to 
its operations and maintenance activities.  
1.1 Organization  Setup 
At Railway Board (RB) level, there are two Directorates viz. Mechanical 
Engineering2  (ME) and Mechanical Engineering (PU and W) for overseeing the 
activities of Workshops, Sheds and PUs. Each directorate is headed by an 
Additional Member reporting directly to the Member Mechanical who is overall 
in charge of these two Directorates.    
At the Zonal Level, Chief Mechanical Engineer (CME) is the head of workshops 
including coaching depots and sheds.  
All the PUs of IR directly report to Mechanical Directorate (PU and 
W)/Electrical Directorate of the RB. PUs are headed by General Manager and 
assisted by Principal Officers responsible for overall functioning of departments 
such as mechanical, stores, electrical, personnel etc.  Organisation setup of 
Workshops, Sheds and PUs are shown in the Appendix – I. 
                                                            
1 Including Coaching Depots. 
2 Responsible for all issues relating to coaching stock, wagons, locomotives, fuels and safety. 
Chapter 1    Introduction  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 2 
1.2  Audit Objectives   
The Review was conducted to verify whether: 
I. The laws, rules and regulations relating to prevention and control of air, 
water and noise pollution were complied by the workshops, sheds and 
PUs; 
II. The resources were managed effectively by optimizing the use of 
renewable sources of energy; 
III. The disposal of wastes generated at the workshops, sheds and PUs were 
managed in compliance with laws, rules and regulations; and  
IV. The health and safety of workers was monitored as per the requirements 
of Indian Factories Act 1948 and in a ccordance with the provisions laid 
down in the Manuals of Indian Railways. 
1.3    Sources of Audit Criteria 
The review was based on parameters prescribed under various Acts, Rules, 
Regulations and Notifications 3 issued by the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests for control of pollution in air and water and also by the Central/State 
Pollution Control Boards. Guidelines and instructions issued by the IR from time 
to time were taken into consideratio n while assessing the performance of 
workshops, sheds and PUs in addressing environmental concerns. 
1.4    Scope and Audit Methodology  
Audit examined the measures taken by IR during 2007-12 for prevention and 
control of air, water and noise pollution, conservation of resources such as 
energy and water including the use of renewable energy. Audit also examined 
the management and disposal of hazardous and other wastes, occupational health 
and safety of employees in workshops, sheds and PUs. 
In Indian Railways, there are 66 workshops
4, 366 sheds 5 and six PUs as on 31 
March 2013. A sample of 49 workshops, 89 sheds (including Coaching and 
                                                            
3 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, The Air (Pre vention and control of Pollution) Act, 1981, The 
Water (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act, 1974,  The Water (Prevention and control of Pollution) 
Cess Act, 1977, The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Controls) Rules, 2000, Hazardous Wastes 
(Management, Handling and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008 issued by the Government of India 
in the Ministry of Environment and Forest. 
4 41 Mechanical Workshops, 10 S&T Workshops and 15 Engineering Workshops including Bridge 
5 64 Diesel Loco Sheds, 30 Electrical Loco Sheds, 30 EMU/DEMU/MEMU Car Shed,94 Wagon Depot and 
148 Coaching Depots. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 3 
Wagon Depot) and six PUs (selected units) as mentioned in the Appendix – II  
and III were selected for detailed examination.  
The Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conference (October 2012) 
with the concerned executives of the RB and respective Head of Departments at 
the Zonal and Production Unit level wherei n the audit objectives, scope of study 
and methodology were discussed. Records of all the 17 Zonal Railways (ZRs) 
relevant to the scope of this performance review were examined to verify the 
extent of statutory compliance of State and Central Pollution Control Boards 
including the status of implementation of the instructions/guidelines issued from 
time to time by the RB. Records relating to monitoring at the RB level regarding 
statutory compliance of the ZRs in dealing with the environmental issues at 
workshops sheds and PUs were also examined.   
In addition to obtaining feedback from the workers through survey questionnaire, 
joint inspection was also conducted with Railway officials at Workshops, Sheds 
and PUs.   
The Draft Review Report was issued to RB in September 2013. The audit 
findings were discussed in an Exit Conference held in November 2013 with the 
concerned Executives at the RB. Similar Exit Conferences were also held by the 
Principal Directors of Audit in the zones with the concerned Head of the 
departments at the Zonal levels. The views of the RB on the audit findings have 
been incorporated in the report. 
1.5   Acknowledgement 
The co-operation extended by the ZRs and also by RB in conducting this 
Performance Audit is acknowledged. 
 
 
  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pollution refers to introduction of contaminants in to a natural environment that 
causes instability, disorder, harm or di scomfort to the ecosystem. The growing 
concerns on the adverse impact of pollution in the environment resulted in 
legislative enactments
6 at the national level to protect the environment. 
Workshops, sheds and production units in Indian Railways (IR) conduct various 
maintenance and production activities. Pollution issues arise mainly while 
performing various activities including Smith
7, Foundry8, Furnace, Welding etc. 
The initiatives of workshops, sheds and PUs in controlling pollution have 
significant impact in tackling environmental challenges of the country.   
2.1   Statutory Compliance  
 
2.1.1   Consent to Establish and Operation  
As per section 21 of the Air (Preventi on and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, no 
person shall except with the previous consent of the State Pollution Control 
Board (SPCB), establish or operate any industrial plant in an air pollution control 
area. Sections 24, 25 and 26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974 provide that no person shall knowingly cause or permit flow of any 
poisonous, toxic or polluting matter into any stream, well, sewer and land 
without treating it.  
Scrutiny of records relating to Consen t to Establish (CTE) and Consent for 
Operation (CFO) obtained by the selected units from the State Pollution Control 
Boards revealed the following position:                
                                                            
6 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, The Air (Prevent ion and control of Pollution) Act, 1981, The Water 
(Prevention and control of Pollution) Act, 1974, The Wa ter (Prevention and control of Pollution) Cess Act, 
1977 and the Noise Pollution (Regulation and Controls) Rules, 2000   
7 Working on metal such as shaping of metallic objects by heating or hammering 
8 Casting of metallic objects 
Chapter 2       Prevention and Control 
of   Pollution 
Audit Objective 1 
To verify whether the workshops, shed s and PUs complied with the existing 
laws, rules and regulations relating to prevention and control of air, water 
and noise pollution 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 5 
I. Consent to Establish under Air and Water Act was not obtained in 40 
workshops and 82 sheds (88 per cent).  The three ZRs (CR, ER and NER) 
were of the view that CTE was not obtained as the workshops were 
established prior to enactment of the Act.   Contention of the ZRs was, 
however, not in line with the provisions of Section 21 of the Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act 1981 and Sections 25 and 26 of Water Act 
which stipulates that the industries th at started functioning prior to the 
commencement of the Acts, must obtain CTE within three months of the 
commencement of the Act;   
II. Consent for Operation under Air and Water Act was not obtained in 26 
workshops and 68 sheds (68 per cent ) across all ZRs. In respect of 
remaining 23 workshops and 21 sheds where consent was obtained, 
periodical renewal of Consent for Operation under Air Act and Water Act 
was not obtained in 11 workshops & four sheds and 11 workshops & five 
sheds respectively.       
III. WBPCB had not granted CFO to Liluah Workshop (ER) in spite of expiry 
of earlier consent in December 2011 as the workshop did not obtain CTE for 
commissioning new infrastructure and machinery. Environmental clearance 
for the new activities/expansion/modern ization had also not been obtained 
from MoEF under Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) notification 2006 
as amended from time to time.                                                         
IV. Out of six PUs, though CFO was obta ined by all units, CTE under Air and 
Water Act was obtained only by two PUs
9. CFO obtained by DLW/Varanasi 
was not renewed (under Air Act) beyond 2010 due to failure in making 
provision for acoustic enclosure of DG Sets. CFO under Water Act was also 
not renewed beyond 2011 by CLW/Chittaranjan due to non compliance with 
the WBPCBs directives for rectification of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP). 
On this being pointed out by Audit (September 2013), CLW authority 
obtained CFO in April 2014 with re trospective effect with the same 
stipulations which implied that the STP plant was not rectified till grant of 
CFO in April 2014. Further, there was no provision in Air
 (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act 1981 for obtaining CFO with retrospective effect. 
RB in their reply (November 2013) stated that CFO and CTE was not taken 
for Sheds/Depots as they are not covered under Factory Act. Contention of 
RB was, however, not acceptable as Section 21 of the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act 1981 stipulates  that any industrial plant in an air 
                                                            
9 ICF, Perambur/Chennai (SR) and CLW Chittaranjan (RPU) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 6 
pollution area requires previous consent from the concerned SPCB. 
Moreover, it was seen in audit that out of test checked units, 23 
workshops/21 sheds obtained CFO and nine workshops/seven sheds 
obtained CTE from the concerned Pollution Control Boards.  
Thus, the statutory provisions in obtaining CFO were not adhered by 26 
workshops & 68 sheds and 40 workshops & 82 sheds in obtaining CTE. There 
were also lapses in renewal of CFO and CTE in respect of 68 per cent and 88 per 
cent of the workshops and sheds test checked.  
2.1.2 Environmental Statement  
Rule 14 of The Environment (Protection) Rules 1986 provides that every 
organisation carrying on an industry, operation or process requiring consent 
under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 or under Air 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 or both should submit to the 
concerned Pollution Control Boards an Environmental Statement in Form V 10 
every financial year on or before the 30th September.  
Accordingly, 23 workshops and 21 sheds which obtained Consent for Operation 
(CFO) under Air and Water Act 11 were required to submit Environmental 
statements of which only three workshops and three sheds 12 (14 per cent ) 
submitted the statement to the concerned SPCBs during the review period. All 
PUs submitted the Environmental Statement in Form V to the concerned 
Pollution Control Boards.   
Reply of RB for non-submission of the Environmental Statement was not 
received. (June 2014).                                                                                          
2.1.3   Compliance of Consent and Renewal Conditions 
SPCB lay down certain instructions and conditions at the time of granting CFO 
and its periodical renewal of authorization under Air and Water Act as 
mentioned in the Appendix IV . Review of the extent of compliance of the 
conditions by the selected units for the period 2007-12 revealed the following: 
                                                            
10 The statement discloses water and raw material consumption, pollutants discharged to the environment 
and quantum of solid wastes and hazardous wastes generated by the units. 
11 Air Act and Water Act refers to Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
12 Workshops (WRS/RYP/SR, WS/GOC,SR and  RS K/STLI/NCR) and sheds ( Diesel loco shed 
/BGKT/NWR , DLS/GY/SCR, Diesel loco shed /New Katni/WCR) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 7 
I. Out of 23 workshops and 21 sheds in  nine ZRs 13 where CFO was 
obtained, conditions of SPCB at the time of renewal were complied in 
only eleven workshops  and nine sheds;      
II. Non-compliance with the instructions/prescribed standards of SPCB was 
also observed in PUs as mentioned below: 
a. Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) for treatment of waste water was 
not renovated and prior permission for installation of new 
machines as instructed by SPCB in May 2010 was not obtained 
(CLW/Chittaranjan);   
b. Acoustic barrier was not provided and emission levels were not 
monitored (DLW/Varanasi); and   
c. RWF/Yelahanka/SWR did not comply with the standards 
specified by the SPCB regarding avoidance of fugitive emission, 
operation of Arc Furnace, storage of furnace slag etc. An 
agreement was executed (June 2012) with a firm for conducting 
feasibility study for providing secondary fume extraction system. 
The report was submitted in March 2013 and an amount of  ` 0.11 
crore was paid to the firm. But the fume extraction system has not 
been installed (June 2014). Regarding disposal of slag, RWF 
authority approached the Univer sity of Agricultural Science, 
Bangalore and the final decision in this regard is yet (June 2014) 
to be taken.  
Reply of RB on the Audit findings was not received (June 2014). 
Thus, the workshops, sheds and PUs failed in complying with the 
guidelines/instructions of renewal of consent in 45 per cent  of the units test 
checked. Non-compliance of the statutory obligations by the ZRs indicated 
weakness in the existing system of monitoring both at the Zonal and RB level.  
2.2    Monitoring Pollution 
2.2.1   Air Pollution Control Equipment  
In terms of Section 22 (5) of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)Act 1981, 
every person to whom consent has been granted shall, inter-alia provide for 
control equipment of such specifications  as the State Pollution Control Board 
                                                            
13 NCR, CR, ER, ECOR, SCR, SR, SWR, WCR and WR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 8 
may approve in this behalf. It was also stipulated that the control equipment shall 
be kept at all times in good condition.  
Examination of records in selected units revealed the following issues:  
I. Air pollution control equipment were not provided in 30 workshops and 
65 sheds (69 per cent) as detailed in Appendix V. 
II. In the remaining 19 workshops and 24 sheds, pollution control equipment 
were provided. Incinerator installed at Diesel Loco Shed/ Kharagpur 
(SER) for controlling air pollution rema ined idle since July 2010 due to 
non-availability of facility for checking emissions.  
III. The position of six PUs  are as follows:  
• At DMW/Patiala, RWF/Yelahanka and ICF/Perambur all the air pollution 
control devices/equipment provided were found to be in working order; 
  At RCF, Kapurthala, all stacks, Chimneys and Fume extractors 14 were 
in working condition except two stacks and three filters of one dust 
collector;  
• At DLW (Loco Frame Shop)/ Varanasi, two out of five fume extractors
15 
were not in working condition; and 
• Fume Extractor installed in 2004 at a cost of `0.46 crore at CLW 16/ 
Chittaranjan was not in working condition since November 2010. 
The Reply of RB for not providing polluti on control equipment in 30 workshops 
and 65 sheds is awaited (June 2014).  
2.2.2 Air Quality Monitoring 
As per the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (24 hours average), the 
concentration of Particulate Matter (PM 10) for industrial and residential area is 
100 micro gm per cubic metre and the prescribed limit for oxides of Sulphur and 
Nitrogen is 80 micro gm per cubic metre.  
The records relating to the adverse impact on the quality of air due to non-
provision of pollution control equipment was examined for the period 2011-12 in 
                                                            
14  27 Fume Extractors, 6 Dust Collectors and 76 stack/Chimneys provided in RCF.  
15 Welding Fume Extractor is a pollution control machine used to clean welding fumes generated in the 
workshops, sheds and PUs which contain fluoride, and metals or oxides of metals. In addition, hazardous 
gases namely carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, or ozone may also be present during welding. There is 
also a risk of asphyxiation when shielding gases such as argon are used, particularly in an enclosed or 
confined space.  
16 Melting shop with Electric Arc Furnace 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 9 
23 workshops and 21 sheds that obtained consent for operation under Air and 
Water Act. Scrutiny revealed the following:   
I. Only seven workshops and six sheds over seven ZRs 17 had conducted the 
ambient air quality check as per periodicity prescribed by the SPCB; 
II. In three workshops and three sheds over five ZRs 18, the shortfall in 
conducting ambient air check as prescribed by the SPCB ranged from 25 
to 99 per cent. Out of these six workshops and sheds, in one workshop 
and one shed, (CRWS/Bhopal/WCR and DLS/BNDM/SER) air pollution 
control equipment were not provided; 
III. In four workshops and four sheds 19 air quality check was not conducted. 
Audit also observed that in two workshops and two sheds 20 pollution 
control equipment had not been provided;  
IV. In the remaining eight workshops and nine sheds, air quality check was 
not carried out as the number of air quality check to be conducted was not 
prescribed by the SPCB at the time of granting consent for operation 
and/or at the time of renewal. Of them, in five workshops and five sheds 
21, air pollution control equipment were also not provided; 
V. Air quality as stipulated in the consen t for operation was monitored in all 
PUs22. All parameters of air quality were within the tolerance limit except 
at DLW/Varanasi, where two out of five fume extractors 23 were not in 
working condition as mentioned in sub-para 2.2.1 (iii) and  Particulate 
Matter exceeded the tolerance limits by 150 to 375 per cent during 2009-
12.  
In the absence of adequate provision of pollution control devices and monitoring, 
the required quality of air could not be examined. Adverse impact on quality of 
air due to non-provision of pollution control equipment was not monitored by the 
concerned authorities at the Zonal and RB level. 
                                                            
17CR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, SWR and  WCR 
18 CR, SER, SR, NCR  and WCR 
19 CRW/BBS (ECoR), Kancharapara Workshop (ER) , WRS/Raipur (SECR), DLS/ERS (SR), CW/PER 
(SR), EMD Loco Shed/UBL (SWR), DLS/KJM (SWR) and ELS/ET (WCR) 
20 CRW/BBS/ECoR, Kanchapara WS (ER), DLS/ERS/SR, DLS/ET (WCR) 
21 C&W Workshop, Liluah, Jamalpur Workshop, Bar dhaman Diesel Shed (ER), Mechanical Workshop, 
Gorakhpur, Mechanical Workshop, Izzatnagar, Locosh ed, IZN (NER), Diesel Loco Shed, Ludhiana, 
Ferozpur Division (NR), NG Diesel Loco shed/Motib agh at Nagpur (SECR), Central Workshop / Mysore 
(SWR), Diesel Loco Shed Vatva (WR). 
22 In CLW, as data was not available in shop Nos.8,16,23 and 25, it could not be stated whether the air 
quality was within the permissible limits in these shops.
   
23 Welding Fume Extractor is a pollution control machine used to clean welding fumes generated in the 
workshops, sheds and PUs which contain fluoride, and metals or oxides of metals. In addition, hazardous 
gases namely carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, or ozone may also be present during welding. There is 
also a risk of asphyxiation when shielding gases such as argon are used, particularly in an enclosed or 
confined space.  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 10 
RB stated (November 2013) that the quality of air in all diesel sheds were being 
regularly monitored by the concerned SPCBs. However the fact remained that 
the ambient air quality check was not conducted in 12 workshops and 13 sheds.   
2.2.3    Controlling Noise Pollution from DG Sets 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) prescribed ‘Systems and procedures for 
compliance with noise limits for diesel ge nerator sets’.  As per these standards, 
users shall make efforts to bring down noise levels of Diesel Generator (DG) 
sets, within the ambient noise requirement by adopting adequate control 
measures such as provision of standard acoustic enclosures, suitable exhaust 
muffler and stack with minimum prescribed height 24 above the building.  For 
installation of DG sets, ‘No Objection Certificate’ (NOC) is required to be 
obtained from Regional Inspectorial Organisation of the concerned State 
Electricity Board.   
Scrutiny of records in selected units revealed that DG sets were provided in 30 
workshops and 60 sheds and in six PUs. Assessment of the adequacy of 
measures taken by the selected units to control the noise level from DG sets 
revealed the following:  
I. In seven workshops and seventeen sheds over eight ZRs 25, the prescribed 
stack height of DG sets was not maintained; 
II. Sound level monitoring of DG sets was not done in 30 workshops and 52 
sheds (91 per cent ). In the balance eight sheds 26 over four ZRs (NCR, 
NWR, SCR and WCR), monitoring of sound level was done.  
III. Acoustic enclosures for noise reduction in DG sets were provided only in 
22 workshops and 37 sheds. 
IV.  Only three  workshops and five sheds 27 had obtained “No Objection 
Certificate (NOC)” from Regional Inspectorial Organisation for operation 
of DG sets.;                                              
                                                            
24 Central Pollution Control Board prescribed minimum stack height for different range of generators. For 
generator of 50KVA capacity, prescribed height is th e height of the building plus 1.5m. The additional 
height above the building will be increased by 0.5m for every 50KVA increase in capacity of DG Set. 
25 CR, ECR, NCR, NER, SCR, SECR, SER and WR. 
26 DEMU shed (AGC), ELS (JHS), DLS shed (BGKT), DS (Abu Road), DLS (GY), DLS (Itarsi),DLS (New 
Katni Jn), Coaching Depot (Habibgunj).   
27 JHS/WS, RSK/STLI (NCR), CD/LJN (NER), DL S/Ludhiana (NR), DLS/BGKT (NWR), WRS/RYP, 
DLS/GY (SCR), WS/GOC (SR). 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 11 
V. All the six PUs did not obtain ‘NOC’ from Regional Inspectorial 
Organisation for operation of DG sets. The noise levels exceeded the 
tolerance limits
28 at DLW/Varanasi 29 and CLW/Chittaranjan. The height 
of all 76 stack/chimney at RCF/ Kapurthala ranged from 13 to 20 meters 
which was less than 30 meters prescribed by CPCB.  
Reply of RB for not providing adequate noise control measures is awaited (June 
2014).  
Thus, the ZRs failed to adhere to the standards prescribed for controlling noise 
pollution from DG sets. There was lack of established system in the workshops 
and sheds for monitoring noise level prescribed by the SPCBs.  
2.2.4   Noise level Monitoring 
Schedule to rules 3(1) & 4(1) of Noise Pollution (Regulation and Controls) Rules 
2000 prescribed that noise level in industrial area should not exceed 75 dB 
during day time and 70 dB during night time.  The main sources of noise 
pollution at workshops and sheds are Diesel Generator (DG) sets heavy 
machineries etc. While granting CFO, SPCBs generally specify the frequency at 
which noise level check is to be conducted during a particular period. 
Scrutiny of records to assess the extent of compliance with the prescribed 
standards for the period 2011-12 in selected units revealed the following:  
I. While granting CFO under Air Act, SPCBs prescribed the frequency of 
noise level checks in respect of six workshops and eight sheds over four 
ZRs30. In three workshops and three sheds over three ZRs 31, noise quality 
checks were not conducted as per prescribed frequency. The resultant 
shortfall ranged between 92 and 100 per cent;   
II. During the entire review period 2007-12, noise level checks were 
conducted at 1105 locations in 13 workshops and 14 sheds over 10 ZRs 32. 
The noise level was within the prescrib ed limits only in one workshop and 
four sheds. In the remaining 12 workshops and 10 sheds, the noise level 
exceeded the limits in 387 locations. 
                                                            
28 The noise limit for DG Sets up to 1000KVA is 75dB(A) as per Environment (Protection) Rules,1986 
29 in 17 out of 20 noise level tests 
30 SCR, SR, SWR and WCR 
31 DLS/KZJ(SCR),EWS/AJJ,DLS/ERS,C&W/PER,W&C/GOC(SR),ELS/Itarsi (WCR) 
32 CR, ER, NCR, NFR, NR, SCR, SER, SR, SWR, WCR and WR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 12 
III. SPCB did not specify the frequency of noise level checks in 17 workshops 
and 13 sheds.  Consequently, while six workshops and six sheds carried out 
noise level checks, eleven workshops and seven sheds did not carry out the 
checks; 
IV. Audit observed that there was no established system of monitoring 
compliance of instructions/stipulations of SPCBs either at the RB level or 
at the ZRs level; and  
V.  Audit scrutiny of records revealed that noise level was checked as per the 
frequency prescribed by the SPCBs and the noise level was observed 
within the permissible limit in all PUs. Eco- friendly noiseless generator 
was available in all PUs except RCF/Kapurtala. 
RB stated (November 2013) that all diesel sheds were being regularly monitored 
by the concerned SPCBs/CPCB for quality level of noise. Contention of RB is 
not acceptable as there was not only shortfall with reference to prescribed 
frequency of checks, but noise quality checks were also not conducted in eleven 
workshops and seven sheds.  
2.2.5   Water Pollution  
Water pollution occurs when pollutants are discharged directly or indirectly into 
water bodies without any treatment or removal of harmful compounds. Section 
24 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 provides that no 
person shall knowingly cause or permit flow of any poisonous, noxious or 
polluting matter into any stream. Section 25 provides that no person shall, 
without the previous consent of the SPCB establish any industry, operation or 
process which is likely to discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well 
or sewer or on land.  
As per special condition attached to CFO under Water (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1974, since the activities in workshops and sheds generate 
effluents such as waste oil, chemicals, sludge, waste grease etc., which pollute 
the environment, provision of Effluent  Treatment Plant (ETP) is, therefore, 
necessary for treatment of effluents before discharging into sewers/water bodies. 
The sludge from the ETP should be dried in sludge drying bed and the drained 
liquid should be taken to equalisation tank. The dried sludge should be disposed 
off through agencies authorized by the Pollution Control Boards. 
Review of the status of installation of Effluent Treatment Plants and disposal of 
ETP sludge in selected units revealed the following: 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 13 
I. Though the instructions of RB (June 2009) exist for installation of ETP at 
all major stations of IR, the same does not exist specifically for workshops, 
sheds and PUs; 
II. Out of selected workshops and sheds, ETP was not available in 83 
workshops and sheds
33 (60 per cent). In two sheds 34 ETP was not required 
as no effluents were generated in these sheds;                                                                  
III. In the remaining 20 workshops and 
33 sheds where ETP was provided, 
the sources of effluents were not 
connected to the ETP in six 
workshops and two sheds
35. 
During 2011-12, only seven 
workshops and eight sheds over 
nine ZRs 36  conducted analysis of 
sample of sewage or trade effluent before and after treatment; 
IV. All the six PUs were provided with ETP. Analysis of the liquid waste 
discharged through ETP was being carried out in all PUs. However, at 
CLW/Chittaranjan only paint shop was connected to the ETP and the 
effluents generated in other shops
37 were being disposed off untreated.  
V. In DLS/TNP (SR), oil skimmer was not in working condition. The effluent 
generated from the loco cleaning bay mixed with oil was being discharged 
into the pond located nearby without treatment. Effluent treatment facility 
sanctioned in 2005-06 at a cost of
 ` 23.34 lakh was not provided till 
September 2012. The delay was attributed to time taken in finalization of 
tender.  
VI. While granting CFO to Bardhaman Diesel Shed (ER), West Bengal 
Pollution Control Board stipulated provision of alternate power source for 
running the ETP during power failure. Audit observed that the provision of 
alternate power source was not made in the shed for running ETP during 
power failure which would have resulted  in discharge of untreated liquid 
effluents to the municipal drainage system during power failure.  
                                                            
33 26 workshops and 57 sheds 
34 MEMU Car Shed/Ambala(NR) and Wagon Depot/Ambala(NR) 
35 Parel Workshop, Matunga Workshop, Bhusawal Wagon Depot (CR), CWS/LGD (SCR), Mechanical 
Workshop/KGP (SER), CRW/BPL (WCR), Loco, Carriage and Wagon Workshop, Dahod and Coaching 
Depot/ Bandra Terminus (WR). 
36 ER, NER, NR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SER, WR, NCR 
37  Heavy Machine Shop, Electric Loco  Bogie, Traction Motor Manufact uring, Melting and Sand Plant 
Shop.  
Effluent let out to nearby pond at DLS/TNP/SR


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 14 
VII. In Diesel shed /Andal (ER), ETP was commissioned in March 2012 after a 
period of five years since issue of purchase order in March 2007.    
VIII. Deficiencies were also observed in treatment and disposal of ETP sludge. 
Some instances are  mentioned below: 
a. In Matunga Workshop (CR), the sludge drying bed was not being 
used and sludge was disposed off along with  the garbage directly; 
b. In CW/PER, S&T/PTJ and WS/GOC, ETP sludge was not being 
tested through the agencies/labor atories authorised by SPCB and it 
was kept in covered sheds as hazardous waste;   
c. At Jamalpur Workshop/ER, sludge 
was dumped in the ETP complex and 
not disposed off since 2006. 
Similarly, at DLS/ERS, sludge was 
accumulated in an open space within 
the workshop premises;  
d.  In Loco Shed Vatva (WR) oil sludge from ETP was discharged in 
the open ground; and 
e. At ICF/Perambur, ETP 2.57 MT of sludge was not disposed off 
within the prescribed period of ninety days (April 2014). 
RB stated (November 2013) that no water pollution/hazardous effluents are 
generated in four signal workshops
38 and therefore, Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act 1974 does not apply to these workshops. RB further 
stated that the S&T Workshops at CR, ER, NR and NER had been advised to 
take cognizance of statutory body recommendation and to take appropriate action 
on priority to comply with applicable statutory obligations. The reply of RB was 
only for some signal workshops which do not cause water pollution and generate 
hazardous effluents. The reply did not address the issues highlighted by audit in 
respect of other workshops and sheds.  
In the absence of any specific instructions of the RB, ZRs did not initiate 
necessary measures to provide ETP in 60 per cent (26 workshops and 57 sheds 
out of selected units) of the workshops and sheds test checked. The performance 
of ETP to assess the quality of discharge was also not monitored in 13 
workshops and 25 sheds. ETP sludge was improperly disposed off in an open 
area without proper treatment. 
                                                            
38  S&T WS/Pandu (NEFR), Signal WS/Kharagpur(S ER), Signal WS/Ajmer(NWR) and Signal 
WS/Sabarmati (WR) 
Oil Sludge of ETP spreading in 
surrounding area in DLS, Vatva (WR) 


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 15 
2.3 ISO  Certification 
Workshops and sheds obtain ISO 14001 and ISO 18001 certification to 
demonstrate their commitment to environment, health and safety.  While ISO 
14001 establishes standards, guidelines, and policies governing environmental 
management by certified organizations, the ISO 18001 Occupational Health and 
Safety System (OHSAS) aim at providing a framework for a safe and healthy 
working environment.  Obtaining ISO 14001 and 18001 certification is 
recognition of observance of due procedures relating to environment and 
OHSAS. In the Chief Mechanical Engineer's conferences (January/February 
2000), ZRs were advised to seek help from appropriate consultants on the 
measures to be undertaken to meet the requirements of the SPCBs as well as the 
stipulations of ISO 14001. Surveillance Audit is conducted at the time of renewal 
of validity of ISO certification.  
Scrutiny of records relating to issue of ISO certifications, renewal of certification 
and surveillance audit in selected units revealed the following issues:-  
I. ISO 14001 accredition was obtained only by 12 workshops and 19 sheds 
(22 per cent) over 12 ZRs
39  and surveillance audit was conducted in ten 
workshops and 14 sheds (17 per cent ).  ISO surveillance audit team, 
however, suggested corrective actions for four workshops and eight sheds. 
Of them, two workshops and six sheds 40 have fully complied with the 
suggestions. Surveillance audit was not conducted in two workshops and 
five sheds41. Two workshops and seven sheds did not renew the validity of 
accreditation.                  
II. All PUs were accredited with ISO 14001 and the corrective action 
suggested by the surveillance audit teams was complied with.    
III. Out of 12 workshops and 19 sheds that obtained ISO 14001 accredition, 
ISO 18001 accreditation was obtained by six workshops and nine sheds (11 
per cent) across eight ZRs 42. Diesel Shed/Abu Road (NWR) has obtained 
ISO 18001 accreditation only. 
IV. Surveillance audit for ISO 18001 was conducted in six workshops and six 
sheds. In two workshops and three sheds, corrective action was suggested. 
                                                            
39 CR, ECR, ER, NCR, NFR, NR, SCR, SER, SR, SWR, WCR and WR 
40 WS/Jagadhari, WD/Ambala (NR), DLS/Kharagpur (S ER), CRW/Bhopal, DLS/Itarsi, DLS/New katni Jn. 
ELS/Itarsi (WCR), DLS/Ratlam (WR) 
41 Matunga workshop, DLS/Kalyan (CR) DLS/L udhiana (NR) DLS/BNDM (SER), CWS/MYS (SWR) 
Electric loco shed/Vadodara (WR), RSK/STLI (NCR) 
42 CR, ECR, NCR, NFR, NR,SR, WCR and WR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 16 
Of them, one workshop and two sheds 43 had fully complied with the 
suggestions/instructions. Surveillanc e audit was not conducted by ISO 
accredited agencies in four sheds 44.  The validity of the accredition was 
renewed by six workshops and seven sheds and not renewed by DLS/Abu 
Road (NWR), DLS/ELS/Itarsi (WCR), ELS/Itarsi; and 
V. All PUs were accredited 45 with ISO 18001 and surveillance audit was 
conducted periodically and corrective actions suggested by the ISO audit 
team were carried out. 
The progress of obtaining ISO certification was not significant as only 31 and 16 
workshops/sheds obtained ISO 14001 and ISO 18001 respectively. The 
implementation of corrective action suggested by surveillance audit team was 
partially complied by Pune DLS/CR in case of ISO 14001 and ISO 18001. In 
two workshops and one shed
46, implementation of ISO 14001 was partial and in 
respect of one workshop47 ISO 18001 implementation was partial. 
  
                                                            
43 WS/Jagadhari (NR), ELS/Itarsi (WCR) and  DLS/Ratlam(WR) 
44 DLS/Abu Road (NWR), DLS/Itarsi (WCR), ELS/Vadodhara (WR), RSK/STLI (NCR) 
45 Renewal of accreditation was valid up to March 2013(ICF) and up to May 2013(RWF/Yelahanka)  
46  Mechanical WS Dibrugarh/NEFR, C&W Perumbur , ELS/ED (SR) 
47  Bridge WS/Jalandhar Cantt./NR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indian Railway (IR) is the single larges t user of both energy and water in the 
country. Conservation of energy and water is essential to avoid wastage. Efforts 
should be made to reduce energy consumption through adoption of energy-
efficient measures
.  Ground water being a scarce resource should be used 
optimally. Various measures are being adopted for conservation of water by 
recycling waste water, provision of water treatment plant, rain water harvesting 
and monitoring wastages of water.   In IR, the expenditure on energy constitutes 
a major portion of their working expend iture. Majority of the workshops sheds 
and PUs utilize ground water for their activities. The measures adopted by IR for 
conservation of energy and water are discussed below.  
3.1 Conservation of Energy 
In May and August 2008, RB advised all the ZRs to fix targets for energy 
conservation through use of energy efficient devices and also to identify sources 
of energy wastage. Accordingly, 11 areas for conservation of electrical energy 
were identified by Audit for this review.  Review of performance of the selected 
units in achieving target relating to various energy conservation measures 
revealed the following: 
I. Targets fixed by the ZRs for implementing various energy conservation 
measures within a definite time frame were not uniform in all the ZRs. In 
some workshops and sheds etc. no targets were fixed.   
 
II. Achievement of selected units  test checked in respect of implementation 
of energy consumption measures is indicated in the table below: 
 
 
 
Chapter 3          Conservation of Resources 
Audit Objective 2 
To verify whether the resources were effectively managed by optimizing 
the use of renewable sources of energy
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 18 
Table 1: Achievement of target on various energy conservation measures 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of works No. of Workshops and Sheds where 
target was fixed 
Number of 
Workshops 
and Sheds 
where no 
target was 
fixed 
Total Target 
Achieved 
 
Target Not 
Achieved 
 
1.  Provision of CFL Lighting 75 48 27 48  
(WS-14) 
(Sh -  12) 
(CD-1) 
63 
(WS-18) 
(Sh – 34) 
(CD-11) 
2. Provision of T5 FL lights  97 24 73 49 
(WS-26) 
(Sh -  38) 
(CD-9) 
41 
(WS-16) 
(Sh -  18) 
(CD-7) 
3. Replacement of 90 watt Ceiling Fans 
with 60 watt fans 
90 50 40 50 
(WS-16) 
(Sh -  19) 
(CD-5) 
48 
(WS-32) 
(Sh -  8) 
(CD-8) 
4. Replacement of electronic fan 
regulators  
90 38 52 51 
(WS-15) 
(Sh -  32) 
(CD-5) 
48 
(WS-21) 
(Sh -  16) 
(CD-11) 
5. Provision of electronic ballast  82 32 50 52 
(WS-15) 
(Sh -  28) 
(CD-7) 
56 
(WS-20) 
(Sh -  26) 
(CD-10) 
6. Replacement of HPMV lamps  69 29 40 53 
(WS-14) 
(Sh -  21) 
(CD-5) 
69  
(WS-26) 
(Sh -  28) 
(CD-15) 
7. Automatic Power Factor Correction 
Panels  
59 46 13 54 
(WS-3) 
(Sh -  7) 
(CD-3) 
79  
(WS-32) 
(Sh -  35) 
(CD-12) 
8. Provision of Timer Switches  62 41 21 55 
(WS-7) 
(Sh -  13) 
(CD-1) 
76 
(WS-30) 
(Sh -  34) 
(CD-12) 
9. Provision of energy savers 56 35 18 17 57 
(WS-6) 
(Sh -  8) 
(CD- 3) 
103 
(WS-33) 
(Sh -  52) 
(CD-18) 
10. Provision of occupancy sensors  for 
light control 
30 11 19 58 
(WS-07) 
(Sh – 10) 
(CD- 2) 
108 
(WS-27) 
(Sh – 61) 
(CD-20) 
                                                            
48 CR, ECOR, ER, NCR, NER, NR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SER, WCR and WR 
49 All ZRs except NEFR. 
50 All ZRs except SWR 
51 CR, ECOR, ECR, ER, NCR, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SER, WCR and WR 
52 CR, ECOR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SER, WCR and  WR 
53 CR, ECOR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, WCR and WR 
54 ECOR, ECR, ER, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, SWR, WCR and WR 
55 CR, ECOR, ER, NCR, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, WCR and WR 
56 For pumps, lighting circuits, air conditioning circuits and machines in workshops and sheds 
57 CR, ECR, NCR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SER, SWR, WCR and WR 
58 CR, ECOR, ER, NCR, NER, NFR, NWR, SCR, SWR, WCR and WR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 19 
11. Use of variable voltage variable 
frequency in cranes, lifts and escalators 
23 8 15 59 
(WS-08) 
(Sh – 07) 
(CD-nil) 
115 
(WS-36) 
(Sh – 58) 
(CD-21) 
 WS represents workshops,  Sh represents Sheds. CD represents coaching depot.  
 
 
  
Figure: Achievement of targets on various energy conservation measures 
 
The position tabulated above indicated that targets relating to provision of T5 FL 
lights, replacement of electronic fan regulators and provision of electronic ballast 
were not achieved by 58-75 per cent of workshop/sheds. The workshops and 
sheds where no target was fixed ranged between 30 per cent and 83 per cent. The 
reasons for not setting any target were not available on record. 
III. Out of 22 Coaching Depot (CD) test checked, target for six energy 
conservation measures, as indicated against serial number 6 to 11 of the 
table 1, was not fixed by 12 to 21 workshop/sheds. In respect of 
remaining five areas of energy conservation measures mentioned against 
                                                            
59 CR, NFR, NWR, SCR, WCR and WR 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
N
O
.
O
F
W
O
R
K
S
H
O
P
S
ACHEIVEMENT OF TARGETS ON VARIOUS ENERGY CONSERVATION 
MEASURES
TARGET
ACHIEVEMENT

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 20 
serial number 1 to 5 of the table above , target was not achieved by five 
to nine CDs60 ; 
 
IV. There was no system in place in RB to monitor reports received from 
ZRs regarding energy conservation measures and to initiate corrective 
actions; and 
 
V. There is no system in place either at the field level or at RB level to 
quantify the financial impact of energy saving or opportunity cost of 
shortfall in achieving the targets.  
Performance of the six production units in achieving the target for use of energy 
efficient fittings revealed that  except RWF/Yelahanka (SWR), the 
implementation of various energy measures in the remaining five PUs were only 
partial. The areas where the PUs did not achieve the target are furnished below: 
Table 2:  Achievement of target on various energy conservation  
  measures by production units  
Sl 
No Target in respect of Target not achieved 
by 
1 Use of automatic power factor correction panels in 
HT/LT substations 
CLW, DMW 
2 Replacement of old 90 watt ceiling fans by 60 watt 
ceiling fans 
CLW, RCF,DMW 
3 Use of electronic fan regulator in place of 
conventional fan regulators 
CLW,DLW, DMW 
4 Use of occupancy sensors in officers chambers and 
conference rooms 
CLW, DMW 
5 Provision of T5 FL light in place of T-12 FTL 
fittings  
DLW, ICF, DMW 
6 Timer Switches in mast towers  DLW, DMW 
7 Replacement of CFL lighting in place of 60/40 
Watt incandescent lamps 
 ICF, DMW 
8 Replacement of electronic ballast in place of 
conventional ballast in FTL circuits  
ICF, DMW 
9 Provision of energy savers for pumps, lighting 
circuits,airconditioning circuits and machines. 
ICF, DMW 
                                                            
60 Except for provision of CFL lighting where only one coaching depot could not achieved  the target 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 21 
RB stated (December 2013) that they had been issuing policy guidelines to ZRs 
from time to time for implementing energy efficiency measures. RB also stated 
that IR achieved overall saving in energy consumption by one per cent despite 
increase in connected load by about 4-5 percent.  
Audit, however, observed that in respect of four areas which involve high energy 
consumption viz. provision of electronic ballast, replacement of HPMV lamps, 
Automatic Power Factor Correction Panels and provision of Timer Switches, no 
target was fixed in respect of 41 per cent to 57 per cent of the workshop/sheds 
test checked. In PUs where substantial electrical energy is consumed, 
implementation of energy consumption measure was partial. The financial 
impact of non-implementation of energy conservation measures and shortfall in 
achieving the target was not evaluated either at the Zonal level or at the RB level. 
Though there is a system of awarding recognition for achieving target for 
conservation of energy, no punitive action was being taken against defaulters. 
There was also lack of adequate monitoring both at the Zonal and RB level of 
implementation of guidelines issued by the RB for energy conservation. 
3.1.1 Renewable Energy 
Solar energy is one of the growing sources of alternative renewable source of 
energy which converts sunlight directly  into electricity. Similarly, power 
generation through wind is one of the most rapidly growing cost effective and 
environment friendly renewable energy technologies. “IR Vision 2020 
statement” (December 2009) inter-alia envisaged use of at least 10 per cent of 
the required energy from renewable sources for reducing carbon foot print. In the 
budget proposal 2011-12, Minister for Railways announced setting up of 720 
MW capacity Wind Mill Plants in five states 61.  However, there were no specific 
guidelines/instructions from the RB in this regard. Some ZRs, however, took 
initiatives for utilizing solar and wind power as an alternative source of energy as 
discussed in subsequent paragraphs.  
Scrutiny of records relating to use of renewable sources of energy at selected 
units revealed the following: 
I. Indian Railways had planned 62 to set up a total of 168 MW capacity wind 
mill plants across the country through capital funding and joint venture route. 
A new company, Railway Energy Management Company, was also set up 
(August 2013) to expedite harnessing green energy but the locations for 
                                                            
61 Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal 
62  Vide Pink Book item No.228 of 2010-11 (10.5 MW), 505 of 2010-11 (10.5 MW) 578 of 2012-13 
(72MW), 640 of 2013-14(75MW) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 22 
installation of wind mill plants are, however, yet (June 2014) to be identified 
and no detailed action plan has so far been formulated  in this regard; 
 
 
II. At ICF/Perambur (Chennai) 10 MW 
capacity
63 wind  mill plants were 
installed (March 2009) and 6.25 crore 
units of power was generated during the 
period 2009-12; 
 
 
 
III. Eighty three solar plants were installed in nine workshops and four sheds 
(nine per cent) over eight ZRs64. Audit  observed that the saving in energy 
of  88075 kwh was assessed only in respect of six workshops and two sheds 
over five ZRs 65. In respect of workshops 
and sheds in the remaining three ZRs, 
savings achieved as a result of use of solar 
plants could not be verified as the same 
was not assessed by the ZRs.  RB stated 
(December 2013) that the centralized 
monitoring of energy saving due to solar 
energy plant of higher capacity had been 
planned through development of web 
based monitoring system as per Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE) guidelines. Audit, however, observed that the web based monitoring 
system has not been implemented till June 2014. 
 
IV. Out of six PUs, nine solar plants were installed in three PUs
66.  
Electrical Directorate of Ministry of Railways (RB)  stated (December 2013) that 
the wind mills are provided at locations such as  Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Odisha, Gujarat and West Bengal having rich 
wind density and subject to availability  of funds. Similar view was also 
expressed in respect of solar panel on the plea that the progress of solar panel 
depends upon feasibility/direction of sunlight on rooftop and other associate 
parameters. Scrutiny of records, however, revealed that though the states and the 
                                                            
63 Windmill can generate power upto 10MW per hour depending upon the flow of wind and grid condition 
64 ER, NCR, NER, NR, SR, SWR, WCR, and WR 
65 ER, NCR, SR, SWR, and WCR 
66 ICF/Perambur/Chennai (Three), RWF/Yelahanka/SWR (Four) and DMW/Patiala (Two) 
Engineering Workshop,  Arakkonam  (SR) 


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 23 
ZRs (NWR and SR) had been identified, no exercise was carried out to identify 
the exact locations of wind mill plants and solar panels. 
Thus, the absence of any specific guidelines/instructions of the Electrical 
Directorate of Ministry of Railways (RB)  led to inadequate initiative at the ZRs 
level for tapping wind and solar energy. Despite proposal in budget, the progress 
of installation of wind mill and solar plants was insignificant and was also not in 
commensurate with the policies envisaged in the Vision 2020 for use of 10 per 
cent of the energy requirement from renewable sources.   
3.1.2 Energy Audit 
Energy Conservation Act, 2001 classifies IR as an energy intensive industry.  
Ministry of Power in consultation with Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) 67 
notified (March 2007) workshops and PUs of Indian Railways as energy 
intensive establishment and specified Ra ilways as ‘Designated Consumer’ (DC). 
Notification further specifies that every DC shall have to employ an Energy 
Manager who is to be certified by BEE and every DC has to get the energy audit 
done periodically as specified by regulation by an accredited energy auditor for 
which BEE conducts the certification examination. 
Energy audit encompasses verification, monitoring and analysis of use of energy, 
including submission of recommendations for improving energy efficiency along 
with cost benefit analysis and action plan to reduce energy consumption.   
Scrutiny of records relating to energy audit in selected units revealed the 
following: 
I. Only 18 workshops and 10 sheds (20 per cent ) over 13 ZRs
68 
conducted energy audit during the review period and in eight 
workshops over eight ZRs 
69 the recommendations of energy audit 
team were fully implemented . In the remaining 10 workshops and 10 
sheds, recommendations were par tially implemented. Though the 
energy audit report was being sent to RB, the monitoring of the 
progress of implementation of recommendations of energy audit was 
not being done at the RB level; 
                                                            
67  The Government of India set up Bureau of Ener gy Efficiency (BEE) on 1st March 2002 under the 
provisions of the Energy Conservation Act, 2001. BEE co-ordinates with designated consumers, designated 
agencies and other organizations and recognize, identify and utilize the existing resources and infrastructure, 
in performing the functions assigned to it under the Energy Conservation Act.  
68 CR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SECR, SR, WCR and WR 
69 CR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, SCR, SR and WCR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 24 
II. Some instances are mentioned belo w where implementation of the 
recommendations would have resulted in financial savings as 
assessed by the ZRs:  
a. In CWS/LGD/SCR, 13 recommendations of the energy auditor 
were not implemented though the expected savings was `0.14 
crore per annum as against one time investment of  `0.34 crore on 
the ground that the investment was more than the saving.  
b. In the Manmad workshop/CR,  22 recommendations were not 
implemented since 2009  due to paucity of funds which could 
have saved energy worth `1.25 crore70 during the period 2009-14 
by investing ` 0.91 crore.                                   
c. In the Mechanical workshop/Dibrugarh (NEFR), the 
recommendation of energy auditor regarding replacement of 
existing distilled water plant with solar distilled water plant with 
anticipated savings of ` 3.6 lakh per annum was not complied 
with due to paucity of funds.  Similarly, in the Engineering 
workshop/Bongaigaon (NEFR), three recommendations of energy 
audit team with an annual anticipated savings of `2.78 lakh per 
annum were also not implemented during 2008-13;                                           
d. In NWR, the recommendations of the energy audit team which 
projected an annual savings of `12.86 lakh were not implemented 
in five workshops and sheds 71 due to paucity of funds and non-
availability of materials. 
III.  Out of six PUs, energy audit was conducted only in one PU 
(CLW/Chittaranjan).  
ZRs opined that the energy audit recommendations, which were not  
economically feasible, were not implemented. Analysis of the economic 
feasibility in support of the actions of the ZRs for not implementing 
recommendations of the energy audit was not placed on record.                                               
Electrical Directorate of RB stated (D ecember 2013) that due to similar layout 
and pattern of energy consumption, the findings of one/two energy audit of  
                                                            
70  ` 0.25 crore per annum 
71 DSL shed/BGKT, DSL shed/Abu road, CWS/Ajmer, Diesel Loco and wagon workshop/Ajmer, Signal 
workshop/Ajmer 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 25 
similar type of asset is generally sufficient to make action plan for energy 
conservation efforts. It was also stated that the implementation of 
recommendations of energy audit depends upon its cost benefit analysis and the 
availability of funds. Scrutiny of records in the RB revealed that though the ZRs 
send energy audit reports to the RB, no action plan for energy conservation was 
framed for units based on the recommendations of Energy Audit of identical 
units. There exists no system at the RB  level to monitor follow up action taken 
by the ZRs for implementation of recommendation of energy audit. The slow 
progress of implementation of recommendations of energy audit indicates lack of 
urgency of IR towards conservation of energy even though BEE classified IR as 
energy intensive industry.  
3.2 Conservation of Water 
Ground water is the primary source of water for the activities of workshops, 
sheds and PUs.  Performance of selected units in implementation of water 
conservation measures revealed the following: 
 
3.2.1   Water Recycling Plant 
RB instructed  (July/August 2006) the ZRs to provide Water Recycling Plant 
(WRP), especially at such locations (s tations/sheds) where water is scarce in 
comparison to its demand.  
Scrutiny of records relating to the implementation of RB's instruction on 
installation of WRP revealed the following: 
i. No exercise was carried out either at  the Zonal Railway level (except in 
WCR and SR) or at the RB level to identify requirement of WRP in 
workshops, sheds and PUs;  
ii. There was no monitoring at the RB level to ensure compliance of its 
instructions on installation of WRP  
iii. At coaching depot / Jabalpur (WCR), WRP with a recycling capacity of 
600 kilo liters per day was provided. 
iv. In view of the heavy consumption 72 of water for cleaning purposes, 
Southern Railway Administration proposed (2004-05) “Augmentation of 
water supply arrangement by installation of recycling plant and electronic 
monitoring system” at  Coaching Depot/ Basin Bridge at an estimated 
cost of ` 3.50 crore. Though WRP was set up in December 2009, the 
                                                            
72 Coaching Depot/ Basin Bridge requires 1800 KL of water for washing 500 coaches daily 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 26 
same, remained idle as no over head tank for storage of recycled water 
was constructed. Fresh water was being used for washing coaches despite 
having incurred expenditure of ` 2.82 crore on installation of recycling 
plant. 
Thus, there was lack of adequate efforts on the part of workshops, sheds and PUs 
to identify the requirement of WRP. Insignificant progress in making provision 
of WRP indicates the low priority attached to conservation of water despite clear 
instructions of RB. Moreover, RB did not monitor compliance of its own 
instructions. 
Reply of RB was received only for S&T workshops from S&T directorate where 
the requirement of WRP is not necessary. No reply was given by other 
directorates of RB.  
3.2.2 Rain Water Harvesting 
Rain water harvesting (RWH) is the accumulation and storage of rainwater at 
surface or in sub-surface aquifers fo r reuse before it reaches the aquifer 73.  In 
February 2005, RB issued instructions to all zones to implement RWH in 
Railway establishments.  
Scrutiny of records of selected units revealed the following: 
I. RWH system was not available in 39 workshops and 73 sheds over 13 
ZRs74; and 
II. In three ZRs (SR,SWR and CR), out of ten selected workshops and 16 
sheds, RWH was available only in five workshops and three sheds75;and 
III. Out of six PUs, RWH system was available at three units 
(RWF/Yelahanka, ICF/Chennai and RCF/Kapurthala). 
Thus, the achievement in making provision of RWH in workshops and sheds was 
very insignificant.  There was no monitoring at the RB of implementation of its 
instructions for making provision of RWH. This resulted in inadequate initiative 
on the part of ZRs towards conservation of water.  
                                                            
73 An aquifer is an underground layer of water-bearing permeable rock or unconsolidated materials (gravel, 
sand, or silt) from which groundwater can be extracted using a water well. 
74 ECR, ECoR, ER, NCR, NEFR, NER, NR, SCR, SECR, WR, WCR, SER and NWR (information not 
available) 
75 SR(5),SWR(2) and CR(1) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 27 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The waste generated in workshops, sheds, depots and PUs are generally 
hazardous wastes. Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 200876 issued by the Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) defines Hazardous Waste as any waste which by reason of any of 
its physical, chemical, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive 
characteristics causes danger or is likely to cause danger to health or 
environment, whether alone or when in contact with other wastes or substances.  
Hazardous wastes such as oil, chemical sludge, ETP sludge, paint flakes etc. 
generated by the workshops/sheds and PUs are required to be segregated from 
other wastes and stored properly before final disposal as per the procedures laid 
down by the SPCB/CPCB.   
4.1    Management of Hazardous Waste   
4.1.1  Authorisation for Handling Hazardous Waste 
In terms of Rule 5 (1) of Hazardou s Wastes (Management, Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008, Workshops, sheds and PUs are required 
to obtain authorization from the SPCBs for handling hazardous wastes. Renewal 
of authorization for handling hazardous wastes is to be applied 60 days in 
advance of the expiry of authorization. 
Scrutiny of records of selected units relating to authorization by SPCBs for 
handling hazardous wastes revealed the following: 
I. Authorization for handling hazardous waste was obtained in 15 
workshops and 17 sheds (23 per cent). In two sheds
77 authorization for 
                                                            
76 Government of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forest 
77 Bardhaman Diesel Shed/ER and Belur Scrap Yard/ER 
    Chapter 4      Waste Management  
Audit Objective 3 
To verify whether waste generated at the workshops, sheds and PUs were 
managed in compliance with laws, rules and regulations  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 28 
handling hazardous wastes was not extended beyond June 2010 due to 
non-submission of Form 478 to SPCB by Bardhaman Diesel Shed/ER and 
in case of Belur Scrap Yard (ER), renewal of authorization from the 
WBPCB is still pending 
II. In six workshops and twelve sheds authorization was not obtained as no 
hazardous waste was generated in these workshops and sheds.   
III. Authorization for handling hazardous waste was not obtained by 28 
workshops and 60 sheds ; and                                                                   
IV. Out of six PUs, DLW/Varanasi had not obtained authorization for 
handling hazardous waste since July 2009. DLW/Varanasi has not  
initiated any action in this regard (June 2014). 
4.1.2   Accumulation and Accounting  
Hazardous Waste, if not disposed of periodically, may cause environmental 
pollution. In terms of Rule 7 of Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008, the occupiers may store the hazardous 
wastes for a period not exceeding ninety days.  
As per Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2008, every organization authorized to handle hazardous 
wastes shall maintain record of hazardous wastes handled by them in Form 3 79. 
Organization authorized to handle hazardous wastes are required to prepare and 
submit to the SPCB, an annual return containing the details specified in Form 4 
on or before the 30th day of June following the financial year to which that return 
relates. 
Instances of accumulation of hazardous wastes generated in Railway workshops, 
sheds and PUs during 2009-12 are detailed below: 
Table 3: Accumulation of hazardous wastes 
Workshop/Sheds/PUs Quantity (MT) Description of wastes 
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur, Chennai 
183.94 Paint flakes, Laser cutting dust, 
Chemical sludge, phosphate 
sludge, used oil etc. 
                                                            
78 Form 4- Form for filing returns regarding handling of hazardous wastes. It indicates the categories of 
wastes generated, details of waste treatment, waste disposal operations etc. 
79 Form 3- Format for maintenance of records of hazardou s wastes at the facility. It records the description, 
method of storage, treatment and disposal, mode of transportation in addition to the details of hazardous 
wastes reused and recycled. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 29 
Chittaranjan Locomotive 
Works, Chittaranjan 
6.1 Hardening salt and sacrificing 
tape 
Mechanical 
workshop/Izzatnagar 
(NER) 
108.00 Scrap, Paint, Sludge from 
Phosphating plant and ETP 
Loco shed/Gonda (NER), 54.00 Filters, gaskets and rubber 
Carriage and Workshops/ 
Perambur (SR) 
9.27 Sludge from ETP, phosphates 
and bosch tank, mud and muck 
mixed with oil and oil/paint 
soaked cotton waste. 
Halisahar Stores Depot, 
Belur Scrap Yard and 
Jamalpur Stores Depot 
(ER) 
Quantity not 
available as the 
records of 
hazardous 
wastes were 
not maintained 
in Form 3 
Lead Acid Battery, Copper 
Arsenical Lamp, Brass, Bronze 
Gun Metal etc. 
Signal Workshop/Howrah 
(ER) 
3.1 Gun metal, empty paint drums, 
aluminum scrap, brass scrap, 
copper wire etc. 
Thus, failure of the ZRs in obtaining authorization for handling hazardous wastes 
from the respective SPCBs and accumu lation of huge quantities of hazardous 
wastes in workshops sheds and PUs indicate violation of provisions which 
prohibits storing of hazardous wastes for a period not exceeding ninety days.  
 4.1.3   Documentation  
Rule 22 of Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2008 provides that the occupier generating hazardous wastes 
and operator of the facility for disposal of hazardous waste shall maintain records 
of such operations in Form 3. Scrutiny of maintenance of records relating to 
hazardous wastes generated during 2009-12 in 15 workshops and 17 sheds and 
six PUs authorized to handle hazardous waste revealed the following: 
 
I. Two workshops and five sheds 80  maintained complete records as 
prescribed in Form 3.  Remaining 13 workshops and 12 sheds (78 per 
cent) did not maintain complete records during the review period. In 
absence of proper maintenance of records, accumulated quantity in respect 
of three Stores depot81 could not be verified in audit.                                                  
                                                            
80CRW/BBS, DLS/New Katni Junction, DLS/GY, DLS/ KZJ, LS/Krishanrajapuram, RSK/STLI and 
WRS/Kota.  
81 Halisahar Stores Depot, Belur Scrap yard and Jamalpur Stores Depot 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 30 
II. Out of 15 workshops and 17 sheds, only nine workshops and three sheds 
submitted annual return in Form 4; 
III. All PUs maintained records in Form 3 and submitted annual return in 
Form 4 except DLW/Varanasi where ne ither records were maintained in 
Form 3 nor the annual return submitted in Form 4 during the period 2007-
12; and                                        
IV. Quantity of waste that could be disposed by the workshops, sheds and PUs 
is endorsed in the original registration certificate.  Actual quantity of waste 
is noted in the pass book issued by the CPCB. However, the same was not 
done in Halisahar Stores Depot/ER despite this being pointed out by the 
WBPCB in June 2006. In NWR, none of the three workshops and five 
sheds were issued registration certificate by the SPCB.  As a result it could 
not be verified whether the quantity disposed off was within the 
authorized limit.                                                  
Thus, the workshops and sheds failed to adhere to the statutory provisions 
regarding maintenance of records rela ting to hazardous wastes. The Zonal 
Railway Administration was not effective in enforcing statutory obligation 
though 78 per cent of the units failed to maintain records as per Form 3.  
4.1.4  Handling and Disposal 
The hazardous waste manifest system is a set of forms, reports, and procedures 
designed to track hazardous waste from the time it leaves the generator where it 
is produced, until it reaches the off-site waste management that will store, treat, 
or dispose of the hazardous waste.  
In terms of Rule 4(2) of Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008, the hazardous waste generated should 
be sent or sold to a recycler or re-processor or re-user registered or authorized by 
the CPCB or should be disposed off in an authorized disposal facility.  
In terms of the Hazardous wastes (Management and Handling) Rules 2008, the 
ZRs disposing hazardous waste shall prepare six copies of the manifest in six 
colour codes. The blue copy
82 of the manifest is required to be returned by the 
recycler/operator to the ZRs after treatment and disposal of waste. Rules also 
provide that the hazardous wastes generators and auctioneers are required to file 
                                                            
82 As per Hazardous Wastes (Management, handling and transboundary movement) Rules, 2008, blue copy 
of the manifest to be returned by the operator of the facility to the occupier after treatment and disposal of 
hazardous materials/wastes. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 31 
annual returns of auction and sale in Form 13 83 latest by 31 st day of January of 
every year to the respective SPCBs. 
Review in Audit of the method of disposal of hazardous waste by selected units 
revealed the following: 
I. The manifest system was followed only in six workshops and four sheds 
over five zones 84 (seven per cent).  Of these, in one workshop and two 
sheds85  the entries in the manifest were filled in partially. Receipt of blue 
copy from the recyclers was mo nitored only in two sheds 86 and as a 
result, proper treatment and disposal of wastes could not be ensured; 
II. Waste oil generated at NCC/VSKP (ECoR) was released directly to the 
open ground. In two workshops and one shed 87,  hazardous waste such as 
condemned rubber gasket, brake blocks, cotton waste soaked with grease 
and oil, oil filters etc. were not disposed of by burning in an incinerator..  
III. In Engineering workshop /Sini (SER), the hazardous wastes such as glue, 
paint, oil soaked cotton waste generated to the tune of 1.5 MT each year 
was being disposed off outside the railway premises;  
IV. In Wagon Repair Shop/RYP (SCR), the hazardous waste like cotton 
waste soaked with grease and oil was used in furnace of smithy shop 
instead of being burnt in an incinerator; 
V. In Bardhaman and Andal Diesel Shed (ER), released battery electrolytes 
were being disposed off through drains instead of handing over the same 
to authorized agencies of SPCBs for proper disposal;   
VI. In Diesel loco shed/Vatva (WR), EMU car shed/Kandivali (WR), 
Coaching depot/Bandra (WR), Electric loco shed/Vadodara (WR), 
Coaching depot/Ahmedabad (WR), oil contaminated cotton cloth 
(45.1MT) was disposed off along with municipal waste without 
segregation and disposal by burning in an incinerator; and   
   
                                                            
83 Form 13 depicts total quantity of wastes auctioned or sold during a particular year. The wastes include 
Non-ferrous Metal Wastes, used oil and waste oil. 
84 SECR, SER, SWR, WCR and NCR 
85 CWS/Mysore (SWR), RSK/STLI (NCR) and DLS/Itarsi (WCR) 
86 DLS/Nagpur (SECR) and DLS/Itarsi (WCR) 
87Mechanical workshop/New Bongaigon (NFR), EMU car shed/MLY (SCR) and Engineering 
workshop/Sabarmati (WR) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 32 
VII. All PUs except DLW (for waste oil) followed the procedure while selling 
hazardous waste and submitted the Annual Returns to SPCB in Form 3. 
However, ICF (Perambur /Chennai) did not monitor the receipt of blue 
copy from the recyclers to ensure proper treatment and disposal of 
hazardous wastes.  
Thus, the procedures adopted by the Workshops and Sheds for disposal of wastes 
were not environment friendly. Out of the selected units, manifest system was 
not followed in 43 workshops and 89 sheds.  
  4.1.5  Environment Impact Assessment  
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) is an important management tool for 
ensuring optimal use of natural resources for sustainable development. EIA is 
mandatory under the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 for 29 categories of 
developmental activities. It provides that the operator of a facility, occupier or 
any association of occupiers shall undertake EIA of the selected site(s) and shall 
submit the EIA report to the SPCB. After approval of the site or sites, the State 
Government shall acquire the site(s) or inform the occupier or any operator of 
facility, or any association of occupiers to acquire the site(s) for setting up the 
facility for treatment, storage and disposal of hazardous wastes.  
Examination of records of selected units revealed that out of 15 workshops and 
17 sheds and six PUs authorized to handle hazardous waste, EIA was conducted 
in only two workshops and two sheds (13 per cent )88and in one PU 
(RWF/Yelahanka) only. RB did not enforce conducting of EIA.                                               
  4.1.6   Reuse and Re-cycling of Hazardous Waste  
Reuse and recycling is important  to minimize the strain on the environment. The 
protocol for Hazardous Waste Management issued by the CPCB states that the 
hierarchy in efficient management of hazardous waste is to reduce, reuse, 
recycle, re-process and finally dispose of wastes in an eco-friendly manner.  
Scrutiny of records relating to reuse of the hazardous wastes in selected units 
revealed the following: 
                                                            
88 C&W workshop/ Liluah (ER), Central workshop/My sore (SWR), DLS/Itarsi (WCR) and RSK/STLI 
(NCR) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 33 
I. Only one workshop and 16 sheds (12 per cent) in 11 ZRs 89 tested samples 
in laboratory to explore the possibility of reuse of lubricating oil drained 
during maintenance schedule. The oil thus tested was reused in all these 
units except in RSK/STLI (NCR).                                                          
II. In Wagon Repair Workshop/Kota (WCR), waste grease (25.728 MT), 
waste oil (4.27 MT) generated during the period 2009-12 was used in 
furnace.  In Electric loco shed/Itarsi (WCR), used grease (10.90 MT), TFP 
oil (47.0 MT), Suspension oil (25.50 MT) generated during the years 2009-
11 was issued to engineering department for reuse.  In both workshops, 
waste oil was not tested for its suitability before reuse. 
III. In all the six PUs, the waste oil and lubricating oil drained during 
maintenance schedule was not reused. 
Thus, the efforts of the workshops and sheds in reusing wastes were not very 
significant. While only one  workshop and fifteen sheds could reuse wastes oil, 
none of the PUs reused waste oil which in dicates low priority to the need of 
minimizing pollution. 
4.2  Disposal of Used Batteries  
As per the Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules 2001, used batteries are 
required to be sold only to registered recyclers. The Rules provide for 
submission of half-yearly returns in Form VIII90  to SPCBs specifying the details 
pertaining to disposal of used batteries.  It also provides that the responsibility of 
the consumer is to ensure that used batteries are not disposed of in any manner 
other than by depositing it with the dealer, manufacturer, registered recycler, 
reconditioner or at the designated collection centres. 
Out of the selected units, 32 workshops and 70 sheds were using batteries.  
Examination of records relating to compliance with the extant provisions in 
above units revealed the following deficiencies: 
I. Half yearly return was filed by five workshops and three sheds (eight per 
cent) over six ZRs91 only; 
                                                            
89 CR, ECoR, NCR, NFR, NR, NWR, SCR, SER, SWR, WCR and WR 
90 As per Batteries (Management and handling) Rules, 2001, it shall be the responsibility of the bulk 
consumer to file half-yearly return in Form VIII to the SPCB. 
91 ER, NWR, SR, SWR, WCR and WR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 34 
II. 14 workshops and 46 sheds (59 per cent)  across all ZRs did not 
sell/auction the used batteries to the registered recyclers. Used batteries 
were kept in open areas pending disposal; and 
III. Out of six PUs, returns were submitted by only two PUs 
(CLW/Chittaranjan and ICF/Chennai). All PUs, however, sold the used 
batteries only to the registered recyclers;  
RB in their reply (December 2013) stated that the used lead acid batteries were 
being sold/auctioned only to those recyclers who are registered with MoEF. The 
contention of RB is not acceptable in view of the audit findings mentioned at II 
above. Further, the reply of RB is silent on the audit observation regarding open 
storage of used batteries. The storage of used battery in open areas exposed the 
environment to pollution from leakage of spent acid. 
 
 
 
  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health and safety of the employees is an important aspect of an organisation for 
enhancing productivity, minimizing poten tial work-related injuries, illnesses and 
increasing the quality of products or services rendered. Occupational Health and 
Safety (ISO18001) demands adoption of structured approach for identification of 
hazards, their evaluation and control of risks in the organisation.  In addition, the 
Factories Act 1948 also laid various provisions to ensure welfare of workers.  
Audit examined compliance of workshops, sheds and PUs with health and safety 
requirements prescribed under Factories Act and Indian Railway Medical 
Manual.  This chapter highlights the approach of IR in dealing with health and 
safety of employees of workshops, sheds and PUs. 
5.1   Ventilation and Lighting 
A carefully drafted layout plan of workshops, sheds and PUs ensures health and 
safety of workers and prepares an organisation for any disaster. This also ensures 
a clear demarcation of risk areas and facilitates access of emergency services to 
the workers. As per Section 13 of the Factories Act, effective and suitable 
provision shall be made in every factory for securing and maintaining adequate 
ventilation for circulation of fresh air in  every workroom.  Se ction 17 of the Act 
also provides that suitable lighting, natural or artificial, or both should be 
provided in work spots.  
Scrutiny of records of the selected units revealed the following: 
I. Adequate ventilation and lighting was available in all the workshops and 
sheds test checked. However, 23 workshops and 47 sheds in eight ZRs
92 
did not get their layout plan of the workshops and sheds approved by the 
                                                            
92 ECoR, ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NR, SER and SR 
Chapter 5    Health and Safety  
Audit Objective 4 
To verify whether health and safety of workers was as per the requirements 
of Indian Factories Act 1948 and in accordance with the provisions laid 
down in the manuals of Indian Railways. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 36 
Director/Inspector of Factories. Initiative was not taken by the workshops 
to get their layout plan approved (June 2014);  
  
II. In six PUs test checked, layout plan  of the units was approved by the 
Director/Inspector of Factories.  Adequate provision was made for 
ventilation and lighting. 
Thus, though adequate care was taken for proper ventilation and lighting, there 
was lack of initiative on the part of the authorities of workshops and sheds in 
obtaining approval of the layout plan from the competent authority. 
5.2     Healthcare facilities 
 
Indian Railway Medical Manual provides that the Physician/ Medical Officer 93 
should frequently visit the shop in order to acquaint himself / herself with the 
various aspects of the working environment 94, manufacturing processes and 
occupational physiology 95. Recommendations should be made to the Works 
Manager concerned to prevent accidents and diseases likely to emerge from the 
physical and chemical hazards of the working environment and also to ensure 
that the recommended safety measures were in place.  
Scrutiny of records of select ed units relating to periodic al inspections of Doctors 
or Medical Officers and the status of implementation of their recommendations 
revealed the following: 
I. The periodical inspection by doctors was carried out only in nine workshops 
and nine sheds (13 per cent) over eight ZRs
96. Periodic inspection by Doctors 
was not conducted in the remaining 40 workshops and 80 sheds; 
II. Monitoring of implementation of the recommended safety measures was 
done in 10 workshops and 7 sheds (12 per cent) over seven ZRs97 ; 
III. Health Unit (HU) was attached to 46 workshops and 77 sheds across ZRs. In 
the remaining 3 workshops and 12 sheds over five ZRs 98 HU was not 
attached. HU was attached to three99 PUs.                
                                                            
93 Para 1522 (4 and 5) of Indian Railway Medical Manual 
94 temperature, lighting, ventilation, humidity, dust,  fumes, gases, noise, vibration, air pollution and 
sanitation 
95 occurrence of fatigue, shift work, weight carried by the workers, etc 
96 ECR, ER, NER, NCR, NFR, NR, SCR and WCR 
97 ECR, ER, NCR, NER, NFR, NR and SCR 
98 ER, NCR, NR, SECR, SWR 
99 ICF, RWF and DLW. One First Aid Post attached to workshop of CLW unit. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 37 
IV. Out of six PUs, periodic inspection during 2011-12 was carried out only at 
RWF, Yelahanka.  Monitoring of implementation of the recommended safety 
measures (including recommendations made during the previous years) was 
done in two PUs (DLW/Varanasi and RWF/Yelahanka.   
Health Directorate of RB stated (December 2013) that the recommendations to 
prevent accidents and diseases likely to result from physical and chemical 
hazards of the work environment were being made to the Works Manager from 
time to time. RB further added that the extant instructions on the subject had 
been reiterated to the ZRs and PUs. However, the fact remained that the periodic 
inspection by doctors was not conducted in 40 workshops and 80 sheds (87 per 
cent). 
Thus, the instructions laid down in the IR Medical Manual with regard to 
periodic inspections by Medical Officers to ensure the health and safety of the 
employees of the workshops sheds and PUs were not complied with.   
5.3    Maintenance of Medical Records 
Indian Railway Medical Manual 100  provides for proper maintenance of workers 
health record and occupational disability record for future planning, development 
and efficient operation of occupational health services.  
Scrutiny of maintenance of health records of workers in selected units revealed 
that out of 46 workshops and 77 sheds (89 per cent) where health units were 
attached, medical records of workers were maintained in the health units attached 
to 10 workshops and 15 sheds (20 per cent) over seven ZRs101.  HUs attached to 
PUs, maintained medical records of employees.  
Health Directorate of RB stated (December 2013) that the preventive medical 
examination of all the employees was being carried out as per the laid down 
frequency in Indian Railway as per Medical category. It was also stated that 
records were being maintained with the Assistant Medical Officer of the 
employee. Contention of the Health Directorate is not acceptable as only 20 per 
cent of the health units attached to the workshops and sheds maintained medical 
records of workers.  
5.4    Occupational  Safety 
Working environment such as temperature, lighting, ventilation, humidity, dust, 
fumes, gases, noise, vibration, air pollution and sanitation in workshops, sheds 
                                                            
100 Para 1522 (6) of Indian Railway Medical Manual 
101 CR, ECR, NCR, NER, NFR, NR and WCR 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 38 
and PUs have an important bearing on the worker’s health. The primary concern 
to the safety of the workmen should be addressed through use of appropriate 
personal protective equipment (PPE). Section 41 of the Factories Act stipulates 
that PPE are to be provided to workers to safeguard them from the hazards 
involved.  
Audit conducted survey among workers of 30 workshops and 61 sheds over 
eleven ZRs 102 a n d  s i x  P U s .  S u r v e y  r e v e a l e d  t h a t  w h i l e  i n  t h r e e  Z R s ,  t h e  
percentage of employees provided with PPE was less than 43 per cent, it ranged 
between 43 and 62 per cent  i n  f o u r  Z R s .  I n  t h e  r e m a i n i n g  f o u r  Z R s ,  t h e  
percentage of employees provided with PPE was between 78 and 97  per cent.  
Regarding use of PPE, more than 80 per cent of the employees of workshops and 
sheds across seven ZRs 103 stated that they were using PPE. During joint 
inspection with the Railway officials, fo llowing deficiencies were, observed in 
four ZRs: 
I. None of the workers at Car shed/TBM 
(SR) were wearing PPE.  In SR, most 
of the employees of EWS/AJJ, 
DLS/TNP and CD/BBQ were also not 
wearing safety gadgets. 
II.  In CRW/BBS (ECoR), some of the 
workers were not wearing any safety 
gadgets provided to them.  
III. Though the workers of Signal Workshop/KGP/SER stated in the survey 
questionnaire that they use PPE, spot verification revealed that the workers 
were not using PPE.  
IV. In NFR, workers at Diesel Shed/New Guwahati were not using the PPE. 
Scrutiny of records relating to acci dents during 2007-12 in selected units 
revealed that: 
• There were 10,420 accidents occurred in 16 ZRs (Appendix VI) . Of 
them, 5339 accidents (51 per cent ) occurred in 12 workshops and 18 
sheds over three ZRs (CR, ER and NR).  
                                                            
102 ECOR, ER, ECR, NFR, SCR, SER, SWR, WCR, WR, SECR and NCR 
103 ER,NEFR,SCR,SER,SWR and WCR 
Working without PPE EWS/AJJ (SR)


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 39 
• Workshops which registered high number of accidents were 
Kanchrapara/ER (1098 accidents), Jagadhari/NR (943 accidents) 
Jamalpur/ER (807 accidents) and Parel/CR (602 accidents).  
•  9747 employees were injured across all ZRs. Of them, 4119 employees 
(42 per cent) were injured in eight workshops and 12 sheds over CR and 
ER.  
• Out of 49 deaths, 11 occurred in WR.  In PUs, 775 accidents occurred 
resulting in death of five workers104 and injury to 773 workers. 
Thus, the safety of workers was compromised due to non supply of PPE and 
monitoring its use by workers. Though the number of accidents during the 
review period showed a decreasing trend, instances of death and injuries were 
high particularly in four zones (CR, ER, NR and WR) which indicated 
deficiencies in workshops, sheds and PUs in complying with provisions related 
to the safety of workers. 
  
                                                            
104 ICF (3), RCF (1)  and CLW (1) 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 40 
 
 
 
6.1  Conclusions 
It was observed that RB had issued guidelines and instructions on pollution 
control, waste management and energy conservation. It was also noticed that 
some progress had been made by workshops, sheds and production units on these 
issues. The important deficiencies noticed in environment management are 
elaborated below. 
Statutory obligation of obtaining Consent to Establish (CTE) and Consent for 
Operation (CFO) from the State Pollution Control Boards was not complied by 
88 per cent (CTE) and 68 per cent (CFO) of the  workshops and sheds test 
checked. Weakness in the existing system of monitoring by RB resulted in 
shortfall in compliance with the conditions specified while granting consent. 
Monitoring of air quality in workshops and sheds along with the provision of 
pollution control equipment was inadequate. Pollution control equipment were 
also not kept in working condition. St andards prescribed for controlling noise 
pollution for DG sets were not adhered to.  
Adequate measures were not adopted to treat the effluents before discharging 
them into the environment. Effluent treatment plants were either not installed or 
wherever installed, quality of discha rge was not monitored. ETP sludge was 
improperly accumulated in open area without proper treatment or by disposing 
them through agencies authorized by the SPCBs/CPCB. 
ISO Certification was obtained by only 22 per cent of the units test checked. 
Despite a series of instructions/guidelines from the RB for conservation of 
resources- both energy and water, the progress of their implementation was slow.  
Regarding use of renewable sources of energy, IR has not formulated a detailed 
action plan for identification of exact locations for installing wind mill and solar 
plants. Efforts of workshops and sheds to generate electricity from the solar 
energy and conservation of water by making provision of   water recycling plant 
and rain water harvesting were insignificant. At the present rate of progress, IR 
will be unable to achieve it s 2020 vision of meeting 10 per cent of its energy 
requirements from renewable sources. In absence of any concrete action plan, 
Chapter 6    Conclusions and Recommendations  
 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 41 
efforts of IR to conduct energy audit and implement their recommendations were 
also not adequate.  
Deficiencies were observed in disposal of wastes generated in the workshops, 
sheds and production units. Statutory guidelines on maintenance and submission 
of records/returns and handling of hazardous wastes were followed only 
partially. Reuse of waste oil was observed only in a few workshops and sheds. 
None of the PUs reused waste oil.   
The instructions laid down in the Indian  Railways Medical Manual with regard 
to periodic inspections of the workshops, sheds and PUs by Medical Officers 
were not complied with even though  health units were attached to 89 per cent of 
the workshops and sheds. While the number of accidents showed a decreasing 
trend, instances of fatalities and injuries were high in four zones. 
6.2 Recommendations 
• Mechanical Directorate of RB needs to establish a system of effective 
monitoring to ensure compliance with  the statutory obligations relating 
to air, water and noise pollution in workshops, sheds and production 
units. Provision of control equipment and keeping them in working 
condition needs to be given due importance; 
• Workshops, sheds and production units need to take effective steps for 
proper disposal of ETP sludge as per the guidelines issued by the 
SPCB/CPCB in order to prevent contamination of ground water; 
• All workshops, sheds and production units need to frame a well defined 
target for implementing energy conservation measures. Electrical 
Directorate of RB needs to closely monitor the achievement of target 
and analyse the impact of shortfall in achieving target. 
•  A time bound action plan needs to  be drawn for harnessing renewable 
energy such as wind and solar energy so as to achieve the 2020 vision 
of IR; 
• Mechanical Directorate of RB need to effectively ensure that its 
instructions on setting up of Water Recycling Plants  and Rain Water 
Harvesting structures are complied in a time bound manner; 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 42 
•  Mechanical Directorate and Stor es Directorate of RB needs to 
establish a monitoring mechanism for strict observance of statutory 
provisions regarding proper accounting, handling and disposal of 
hazardous wastes; 
• Health Directorate of RB needs to ensure maintenance of medical 
records of the workers of all workshops, sheds and production units.  
 
 
 
 
                                                               (SUMAN SAXENA) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned         
 
 
 
 
 
 
   (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
New Delhi                       Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Dated: 
 
  


Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 43 
Appendix I (Ref Para 1.1) 
Organization Chart  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
*Including Coaching Depots 
 
 
Headquarter level 
Zonal Rly level 
Production Units Level 
Headquarter level 
Member (Mechanical) 
Zonal Level 
CWE CRSE
Production Units 
Additional Member (ME)*
Additional Member (PU & W) 
Chief Mechanical Engineer 
ADV (ME)
 EDME (W) 
EDME (Dev) 
 DME (PU) 
EDME (Chg) 
 EDME (Fr) 
EDME (Tr) 
CMPE (D) CME /Plg 
CEE CME 
General Manager 
CE CPO COS 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 44 
Appendix II (Ref Para 1.4) 
 
Statement showing details of workshops, sheds and PUs selected  
for sample study 
 
  
Sl. 
No. Description 
Total 
No. of 
Units 
Criteria for selection of units 
No. of 
units  
selected 
1 Workshops-
Mechanical 
41 50 per cent  subject to a minimum of 
two workshops. 
30 
2 Signal and 
Telecommunication 
Workshop 
10 One workshop in each Zone. 10 
3 Engineering 
Workshops 
15 One workshop in each Zone. 9 
4 Sheds 94 Two Diesel Loco Sheds and one 
Electrical Loco Shed. 
43 
5 EMU/MEMU/ DEMU 
Car Sheds 
30 One Car shed. 12 
6 Coaching and Wagon 
Depots  
242 Two Major Depots – one coaching 
depot and one wagon depot.  If there is 
no wagon depot, two major coaching 
depot. 
34 
7 
 
PUs 6 All the six PUs were selected. In each 
Production Unit, 25  per cent  of the 
Manufacturing Shops subject to 
minimum five shops.  
6 
TOTAL 438  144 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 45 
Appendix III (Ref Para 1.4) 
Statement showing details of worksh ops, sheds and PUs selected from 
all ZRs   
 
 Diesel Loco Sheds 
 Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Shed 
1 ECOR Vishakapatnam 
2 ECR Mugalsarai 
3 Samastipur 
4 CR Kalyan 
5 Pune 
6 ER Bardhaman  
7 Andal 
8 NCR Jhansi 
9 Gwalior 
10 NFR Siliguri 
11 New Guwahati 
12 NER Gonda 
13  Izzatnagar 
14 NR Alambagh, Lucknow  
15 Ludhiana  
16 NWR Bhagat Ki Kothi 
17  Abu Road 
18 SCR Gooty 
19 Kazipet 
20 SECR Raipur 
21 Motibagh at Nagpur 
22 SER Bondamunda 
23  Kharagpur 
24 SR Tondiarpet 
25 Ernakulam 
26 SWR  Hubli 
27  Krishnarajapuram 
28 WCR  Itarsi 
29  New Katni Junction. 
30 WR Ratlam 
31 Vatva 
Mechanical Workshops 
 Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the 
Workshop 
1 ECOR Bhubneshwar 
2 ECR Samastipur 
3 CR Matunga 
4 Parel 
5 ER Liluah 
6 Kanchrapara  
7 Jamalpur  
8 NCR Jhansi 
9 Sithouli 
10 NFR New Bongaigaon  
11  Dibrugarh 
12 NER Gorakhpur 
13  Izzatnagar 
14 NR Charbagh, Lucknow 
15 Jagadhari 
16 NWR Carriage Workshop, 
Ajmer  
17 Diesel Loco & Wagon 
Workshop, Ajmer 
18 SCR Rayanapadu 
19 Lallaguda 
20 SECR Motibagh at Nagpur 
21 Raipur 
22 SER  Kharagpur
23 SR Perambur 
24 PONMLAI GLD 
RCK  
25 SWR Hubli   
26  Mysore 
27 WCR  Kota 
28 Bhopal 
29 WR  Lower Parel 
30  Dahod. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 46 
 
  
Coaching Depots 
   Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Depot 
 1 ECOR Vishakapatnam 
2 ECR Rajendra Nagar  
3 CR Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus  
4 ER  Chitpur 
5 NCR Allahabad 
6 Gwalior 
7 NFR New Jalpaiguri 
8 NER Lucknow 
9 NER Chhapra 
10 NR Moradabad  
11 NWR  Jodhpur 
12 NWR Bikaner 
13 NWR Jaipur 
14 SCR Hyderabad 
15 SECR Bilaspur 
16 SER Tatanagar 
17 SR Basin Bridge Jn 
18 SWR Bangalore 
19 WCR Habibganj 
20 WCR Jabalpur 
21 WR Bandra Terminus 
22 WR Ahmedabad (BG) 
Wagon Depots 
Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Depot 
1 ECOR Vishakapatnam 
2 ECR Mughal Sarai 
3 CR Bhusaval 
4 ER Andal 
5 NFR New Jalpaiguri 
6 NR  Ambala Division 
7 SCR Ramgundam 
8 SECR Bhilai 
9 SER Bokaro Steel City 
10 SR Tiruchchirappal 
11 SWR  Hospet 
12 WCR New Katni Junction 
EMU car shed 
Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Workshop 
1 ECR  Jhajha 
2 CR Kurla  
3 ER  Bandel 
4 NCR Agra Cantt 
5 NER Chappra Kacheri 
6 NFR Siliguri  
7 NR  Saharanpur 
8 SCR Maula Ali 
9 SECR Bhilai 
10 SER Tikiapara 
11 SR Tambaram 
12 WR Kandivali. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 47 
Engineering Workshop 
Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the 
Workshop 
1 CR Manmad 
2 NCR Allahabad 
3 NFR Bongaigaon 
4 NER Gorakhpur  Cantt 
5 NR  Jalandhar Cantt. 
6 SCR Lallaguda 
7 SER  Sini 
8 SR Arakkonam 
9 WR  Sabarmati. 
10 SWR Bangalore 
 
PUs 
Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Unit 
1 NR Diesel Modernization 
Works, Patiala 
2 Rail Coach Factory, 
Kapurthala 
3 SR Integral Coach Factory , 
Perumbur, Chennai 
4 SWR Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka, Bangalore  
5  
RPU and 
Metro 
Railways 
Diesel Locomotive Works, 
Varanasi 
6 Chittaranjan Locomotive 
Works, Chittaranjan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S&T Workshops 
  Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Workshop 
1 CR Byculla  
2 ER  Howrah 
3 NER Gorakhpur  Cantt 
4 NFR Pandu 
5 NR Ghaziabad 
6 NWR Ajmer  
7 SCR Mettuguda 
8 SER  Kharagpur 
9 SR Podanur 
10 WR Sabarmati. 
Electric Loco Sheds 
Sl 
No. 
Zone Name of the Shed 
1 ECOR Vishakapatnam 
2 ECR Mugalsarai 
3 CR Ajni 
4 ER Howrah 
5 NCR Jhansi 
6 NR  Ludhiana 
7 SCR Lallaguda 
8 SECR Bhilai 
9 SER Tatanagar 
10 SR Erode 
11 WCR Itarsi 
12 WR Vadodara 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 48 
Appendix IV(Ref Para 2.1.3) 
Conditions of SPCB for granting of renewal of CFO 
Consent is valid for maintenance of wagons @ 400 FWU / month and coaches 
@ 212 VU / month 
Daily discharge of mixed effluents should not exceed 2408 KL and should be 
discharged to North Tank through 4 outlets. 
Any alteration in the existing system or place of discharge or introduction of 
new outlet should be informed to the Board and prior permission for the same 
to be obtained. 
Railway should provide comprehensive facility for treatment of industrial liquid 
waste and domestic liquid waste and operate and maintain the same so that the 
quality of final effluent conforms to the prescribed standard:   pH - 5.5 to 9.0; 
TSS - upto 100 mg/l; BOD - upto 30 mg/l; COD - upto 250 mg/l; Oil and 
grease - upto 10 mg/l. Analysis of discharged effluent to be done monthly. 
Daily water consumption should not exceed 326 KL for domestic purpose and 
2350 KL for processing whereby water gets polluted and the pollutants are 
easily bio degradable. 
The Railway Administration should regularly submit to the SPCB the returns of 
water consumption in the prescribed form Form I on or before 5th of every 
calendar month and pay the cess. 
The Railway Administration should install suitable device for measuring the 
volume of water consumed for different purposes giving correct result. 
All the stacks connected to various sources of emissions must be designated by 
numbers and must be painted / displayed to facilitate identification. 
The Railway Administration should install comprehensive control system 
consisting of pollution control equipment as is warranted with reference to 
generation of air emissions and operate and maintain the same continuously so 
as to achieve the level of pollutants to the Standard. 
The Railway Administration should provide ports in the stacks and other 
necessary permanent facilities such as ladder, platform etc. for monitoring / 
sampling the air emissions. 
The monthly fuel consumption should be limited to i) Hard Coke - 400 kg., 
Coal - 5 kgs. 
The Railway Administration should take adequate measures for control of noise 
levels from its own sources within the premises within the standard limit  of 75 
dB (A) in day time and 70 dB (A) in night time. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 49 
The Railway Administration should provide for an alternate electric power 
source sufficient to operate all pollution control facilities installed by the 
Railway to maintain compliance with the terms and conditions of the consent. 
In absence of such an alternate electric power source, the Railway 
Administration should stop, reduce or otherwise control production to abide by 
the terms and conditions of the Consent regarding pollution level. 
The Railway Administration should install a separate energy meter showing the 
consumption of energy for operation of pollution control devices. 
The Railway Administration should ensure that fugitive emissions from the 
activity are controlled so as to maintain clean and safe environment in and 
around the factory premises. 
The Railway Administration should provide drainage system for conveying 
industrial and domestic liquid waste, storm-water drain should be kept separate 
from drainage system meant for industrial and domestic liquid waste. 
The Railway Administration should analyze the samples of hazardous 
wastes/lactates from the laboratory recognised of the concerned Pollution Board 
and ensured that they should conform to the limits stipulated. The test report 
should be sent to the Board. 
The Railway Administration should provide adequate and safe facility for 
collection of air, wastewater and solid waste samples by the State Board's staff 
as well as State Board's authorised agencies. 
The Railway Administration should subm it to the State Board by the 30th 
September every year the Environmental Statement Report for the financial 
year ending 31 March of the current year in the prescribed Form V. 
The Railway Administration should furnish to the State Board all information 
in respect of quality, quantity, rate of discharge, place of discharge of liquid 
effluent and air emissions. 
The Railway Administration should have to make registration for the use of 
groundwater with Central Ground water Authority. 
The Railway Administration should make an application to the State Board in 
the prescribed form for renewal of the consent at least 60 days before the date 
of expiry of the previous consent. 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 50 
The Railway Administration should not make any alteration, modification, 
expansion in the existing manufacturing process and equipment as well as the 
pollution control system without prior approval of the Board. 
The Railway Administration should comply with the conditions as laid down in 
the Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemical Rules, 1989 and 
Hazardous Wastes (Management & Handling) Rules, 1989. 
 
  

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 51 
Appendix V (Ref Para 2.2.1) 
Statement showing workshops, sheds and PUs where air pollution control 
equipment were not provided 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of 
shops/sheds 
provided 
with Air 
pollution 
control 
equipment 
Name of the workshops/sheds 
provided with Air pollution 
control equipment 
No. of 
shops/sheds 
not provided 
with Air 
pollution 
control 
equipment 
CR 4 (WS/Parel & Matunga, 
DLS/Kalyan & Pune) 
6 
WR 5 CRW/Lower parel, DLS/Vatva, 
Ratlam, Loco carriage and wagon 
workshop/Dahod, EMU 
WS/Kandiveli), 
5 
SR 3 
 
(EWS/AJJ, CW/PER, WS/GOC ) 
1 (WD/TPGY – Not required) 
6 
SER 3 (EWS/Sini, DLS/KGP, WS/KGP) 6 
SWR 3 (CRS/Hubli, Loco shed/Hubli, 
KJM) 
3 
WCR 1 WRS/Kota 7 
SECR 2 (WRS/Raipur, DLS/Raipur) 6 
ECR 2 (DLS/Mugalsarai and Samastipur) 5 
NWR 1 (DLS/Bhagat Ki Kothi) 7 
ECoR, ER, 
NER, NR, 
SCR 
Nil  44 
14 24  95 
 

Environment Management in Indian Railways  
Report No. 23  of 2014 52 
Appendix VI (Ref Para 5.4) 
Statement showing accidents and causalities in workshops, sheds and  
PUs 
A. ZRs 
Zone No. of units 
test checked 
No. of 
Accidents 
No. of 
casualties 
No. of 
employees 
injured 
CR 10 1635 4 1632 
ECOR 5 186 0 186 
ECR 7 18 1 17 
ER 10 2489 7 2487 
NCR 9 129 7 117 
NER 9 566 2 564 
NFR 9 48 0 48 
NR 10 1215 1 614 
NWR 8 577 2 577 
SCR 10 561 2 560 
SECR 8 612 3 611 
SER 9 349 3 349 
SR 10 587 5 582 
SWR 6 244 1 243 
WCR 8 798 0 784 
WR 10 406 11 376 
Total 138 10420 49 9747 
B. PUs 
Name of  
the PU 
No. of accidents occurred 
during the review period 
No. of employees injured 
during the review period 
CLW 9 8 
DLW 5 5 
ICF 460 462 
RWF 78 78 
RCF 161 158 
DMW 62 62 
C. Yearwise summary of  accidents and causalitie s in workshops, sheds 
and PUs 
Year No. of 
Accidents 
No. of 
casualties No. of employees injured 
2007-08 2271 5 2052 
2008-09 2284 4 2129 
2009-10 2107 13 2038 
2010-11 1955 8 1883 
2011-12 1803 19 1645 
 10420 49 9747 