PREFACE
This Report for the year 2007-08 and 2008-09 deals with the results

of दी of the accounts of Panchayat Raj Institutions in the State
Of SIKKIM,

This report has been prepared for submission to the Government
of Sikkim In accordance with the terms of Technical Guidance and
Support of the quait of accounts of Panchayats Raj Institutions by
the Comptroller and’ Auaiior General of Inala under Section 20{1)
of Comptroller and Auditor General's DPC.Act 1977,

Ihe cases mentioned in the report are among those which came
fo notice mainly in course of qualit of accounts of Zilla Panchayats
and Gram Panchayats for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09.

The purpose of this report is to give overviews of the functioning of
Pris in the State of Sikkim and to ataw the atrention of the executive
Deparment and PRIs for remedial actions and’ improvement
wherever NECESSALY.



OVERVIEW

This report contains three chapters. The opening chapter contains an overview
of the Panchayat Raj Institution in the State and deficiencies in the accounting
procedures. Chapter 2 consists of performance audit on National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme and Chapter 3 contains Audit paras.

1. An overview of Panchayat Raj Institut

Despite the provisions for collection of taxes, the GPs had not initiated any
steps to identify the areas for levying of taxes nor collected any revenue except
Lunchok Kamery GP which had levied the above fees and taxes and realized
revenue meriting appreciation.

(Paragraph 1.6.1)

Absence of sound basis for transfer of funds to the PRIs by the departments
constrained the PRIs to gauge the extent of fund availability with them in any
particular year restricting them to make any plan with foreseeable certainty. The
planning at the PRI level was therefore totally on ad-hoc basis

(Paragraph 1.8)

Planning process duly reflecting the needs and aspiration of people at grassroots
through Gram Planning Forum ( GPF ), value addition at BDOs and DDO level
and final consolidation by District Planning Committee (DPC) after obtaining
technical expertise from DTSC was non-functional despite formation of GPF,
DPC, DTSC, etc.

(Paragraph 1.9)

2. National Rural Employmen arantee Scheme

Atotal of 1.13 lakh rural households registered, 0.79 lakh demanded employment
and 0.75 lakh households received employment with the total fund involvement
of 56.53 crore during 2006-09 on execution of 1869 works.

(Paragraph- 2.1.7.1)

The State Government formulated rules for carrying out the provisions of
the NREG Act as late as June 2006 and did not prescribe the time frame for
proposing, scrutinising and approving REGS works by GP, Block and District
levels as of March 2009.

(Paragraph- 2.1.9.1)



Technical Insepction Report of 4 > fal, Sikkim for the year

The State Government constituted (June 2006) State Rural Employment
Guarantee Commission recording a delay of nine months and designated
(October 2007) Secretary, RMDD as State Rural Employment Guarantee
Commissioner after a delay of 16 months. This led to non- preparation of list
of preferred works; Annual Reports for submission to the State Legislature;
absence of review, monitoring and redressal mechanism; etc.

(Paragraph- 2.1.9.2)

While Technical Assistants were appointed, full-time dedicated Programme
Officers and dedicated Gram Rozgar Sevaks were appointed belatedly in
December 2008 and panel of Accredited Engineers for assisting with the
estimation and measurement of work were also not constituted nor was the
Technical Resource Support Group at State / District level set up as of March
2009.

(Paragraph- 2.1.9.4)

While the District Perspective Plan was not prepared except by North district,
annual plans were not prepared by any of the GPs indicating lack of participation
or inadequate participation by Gram Sabhas and Gram Panchayats in the
planning process.

(Paragraph- 2.1.10)

The Government did not prepare (i) separate District-wise Schedules of Rates
specifically for NREGS works, (ii) exhaustive and detailed list of tasks required
for undertaking works under REGS in different geomorphological conditions,
and (iii) the productivity norms for the District Schedule of Rates for each
locale in such a way that seven hours of normal work earns minimum wages
on a piece rate basis. This led to uneven distribution of manpower requirement.

(Paragraph- 2.1.12.3)

Payment of wages to workers was delayed from one day to four months in 76
cases amounting to%45.90 lakhs. Compensation for delayed payment of wages
were not paid to workers.

(Paragraph-2.1.12.4 )

It was noticed that social audit of the scheme was not conducted during 2006-

07 and 2007-08. It started only from 2008-09. Non-conduct of social audit

strikes at the root of the demand-driven bottom-up approach of NREGS
(Paragraph- 2.1.14)


Despite recurring expenditure of € 13.31 lakh towards maintenance ( २ 11.73
lakh) and lease rent (71.58 lakh) of the herbal gardens during the period
2004-05 to 2008-09, no production were generated leading to infructuous
expenditure of €37 lakh on it creation.

(Paragraph 3.1)

The action of the GPU to sanction and release loan to SHGs was not only
against the norms but also did not lead to any fruitful utilization of funds as
the activities undertaken by the SHGs were not yielding any result. The loan
was also not refunded by the SHGs despite undertaking to refund within 12
months.
(Paragraph 3.2)

Diversion of fund from Developmental grants was not only irregular but also
in effect compromised the development envisaged in the executive committee
meeting of North ZP especially in the arena of micro sector as evident from
their annual action plans of the district.

(Paragraph 3.3)

Even after incurring expenditure of हैं 3.25 lakh none of the pickle production
unit were established let alone productivity and income generation of 3.18
lakh per annum as envisaged in the project report.

(Paragraph 3.4)

GPs issued 201.56 qtl rice (valuing हैं 2.52 lakh at FCI rate and हैं 1.78 lakh at
subsidised rate) to the suppliers in lieu of material supplied. This was not only
unauthorized as per SGRY guidelines but also led to a diversion of rice from
wage component to material component and loss to GPs of € 0.74 lakh
(Paragraph 3.5)

The implementation of BRGF fund by West district ZP was characterized by
absence of fair competition and wide publicity involving हैं 2.65 crore. The
works were not completed despite release of funds of %1.54 crore by RMDD
— the progress ranging between 60 and 75 per cent as of September 2009.
(Paragraph 3.6)


CHAPTER - |

AN OVERVIEW OF THE
PANCHAYAT RAJ INSTITUTIONS

1.1 Introduction

The Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993 in keeping with 73 amendment of the Constitution
was enacted to establish a two tier Panchayat Raj Institution (PRI) system at
village and district levels in the state. The system comprises elected bodies- Gram
Panchayats (GPs) at village level and Zilla Panchayats (ZPs) at district level. As
per 2001 census, the total population of the state was 5.41 lakh of which rural
population constituted 4.81 lakh (88.90 per cent). The Act extended to whole of
Sikkim except 12 small towns. As of March 2009, there were 4 ZPs' and 163 GPs
in the state

Besides functioning as units of local self government, the PRIs also aim to promote
participation of people and effective implementation of various developmental
programmes in the rural areas. The GPs and ZPs have accordingly been assigned
with the overall supervision, coordination and implementation of developmental
schemes at village and district levels and preparation of plans for areas of their
jurisdictions.

1.2 Organizational structure of the PRIs
Rural Management & Development Department (RMDD) is the overall in-charge

for effective functioning of the PRIs in the State. The organogram given below
depicts the organizational structure of the department and the PRIs:

‘North, East, South and West



At State Level

Y

Secretary, Rural Management and
Development Department

|
Director Panchayat

At District level

,

Zilla Panchayat elected body District Collector
headed by a Zilla Adhakshya (Sachiva)

At Village level

$..........

Elected Body headed Block Development
by President Officer



1.3 Powers, functions and duties vested with the PRIs

The broad details of powers, functions and duties vested with the PRIs as per the
Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993 are as under:

Zilla Panchayat &
Gram Panchayat

Section 69 and Section 34 of
Sikkim Panchayat Act 1993
(Amended 1995)

Preparation of budget and Annual Action Plan,
implementation of schemes for economic
development and social justice and collection
of revenue for development works.

Gram Sabha

Section 11 of Sikkim
Panchayat Act 1993
(Amended 2005)

Approval of works/development _ plans,
identification of beneficiaries for extending
benefits of social sector schemes.

District planning
Committee

GP level Social Audit
cum Vigilance Committee

Section 127 of Sikkim
Panchayat Act 1993
(Amended 1995)

Notification no.29/
RMDD/2008 dated: 12 Feb
2008

Consolidation of plans prepared by the
panchayats into the draft district plan of the
district.

Compulsory inspection of works as per
estimate and in a qualitative manner and
submission of completion certificate before
passing the bills.

Gram planning Forum

State Government

District Technical
Support Committee

GP Disaster
Management Committee

No.50/RMDD/P.
dated: 19.08.2006

No. 35(2)97-98/38/RDD/
P(I) dated: 13.05.1998

No.51/RMDD/2004
dated:19.08.2006

'No.35(110)05-06/
RM&DD/P/35
dated:24.01.06

Preparation of Annual Plan, prioritizing the
works and monitoring of all works being
implemented by GP.

Sanction of grants, approval of budget, audit
of accounts, allocation of property, transfer of
assets, fixation and regulation of rates of taxes
and fees.

Technical support for preparation of GP, ZP
and draft district plans. Preparation of district
perspectives for each of the sector and timely
submission to GP/ZP.

Preparation of disaster
preparedness plan.

mitigation and

Block Development
Officers

No.627/RM&DD dated:
12.1.2007

Overall smooth functioning of GPs within
their Jurisdiction.



1.4 Audit arrangement for PRIs

Sikkim Gram Panchayat (Financial) Rule, 2004 and Sikkim Zilla Panchayat
(Financial) Rule, 2001 provide for proper maintenance of accounts for the GPs
and ZPs respectively. As per provision of the Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993 the State
Government is required to appoint Auditor for audit of the accounts of ZP and GP.
This Act was amended (October 2004) and the C&AG has been entrusted the audit
of accounts of PRIs over and above the audit by State Government. In keeping with
the recommendations of Eleventh Finance Commission and guidelines issued by
Ministry of Finance, C& AG has been entrusted with the task of exercising technical
guidance and supervision over audit of PRIs with effect from 2005-06 in addition to
any other authority vested with audit of PRIs. Accordingly, audit of the GP is being
conducted triennially and ZPs annually by the office of the Accountant General since
May 2003 as per the methodology and procedure enshrined in Auditing Standards
and the Guidelines issued by C&AG from time to time. The State Government,
however, has not carried out internal audit of PRIs during the years 2007-09,

1.5 Funding and parking of funds

The PRIs are solely funded by the Government through grants- in -aid from Central
and State Governments for general administration as well as development activities.
Funds are initially reflected in the State budget against the outlay of various
administrative departments under grants-in-aid. Individual departments thereafter
transfer the funds to Sachiva, Zilla Panchayats for Zilla Panchayat and District
Development Officer for GPs as grants-in-aid. The ZPs and GPs, in turn, park their
funds in the savings account maintained with the nationalized banks.

Allocation to PRIs by the State Government during 2004-05 to 2008-09 is shown

below:
Table-1.1
(Rupees in Crore)

Total expenditure A Percentage
of State (Revenue &
Capital

2004-05 1,195.92 13.10
2006-07 1,300.69 21.53

2008-09 1,992.34 38.90



Tt would be noticed that the fund allocation to the PRIs ranged between 1.10 to 2.84
per cent of total expenditure of the State Government as against the stipulation to
release 10 per cent of the funds to PRIs by each Department which is depicted in
the graph below:

2000

1800

1600

1400

1200

1000

4

13.10

2004-05

——State Budget ——PRI allocation

21.86

2005-06

1300.69

21.53

2006-07

1562.34

2007-08

38.90,

2008-09

120

100

80

60

40

20



1.6 Source of Receipts

The broad source of receipts for the period from 2004-05 to 2008-09 are given
below:

Table-1.2
(Rupees in lakh)

Central State Grants Direction & Total Fund Grand Total
Grant to (Development Administration transferred
GPs Fund) from other
Departments

GP zP

1,236.09

7,082.00 | 1,341.43
(Source: Figures furnished by Rural Management & Development Department, Government of Sikkim)

The broad source of receipts during the year 2004-05 to 2008-09 from, Twelfth
Finance Commission, Swarna Jayanti Gram Rojgar Yojana National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme, Backward Region Grant Fund, State grant, etc are
shown in the table as well as the pie chart below

Table-1.3
(Rupees in crore.)

Percentage
contribution of
total receipts

NREGA

Twelfth Finance
Commission (TFC)
Swarna Jayanti a
Gram Rojgar Yojana
(SGRY)
State Grants
(Development
Fund)

Direction &
Administration
(D&A)

Fund transferred
from other Deptt.
Total receipt 41.87

8.17 8.17 4

168.64 210.51 [10



Source of Receipts

BRGF
1%

SGRY
4%

TFC
5%

e
7%

NREGA
24%

Other Deptt
19%
—_—_—— ee

1.6.1 Non-levy of taxes

Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993 (u/s 39 (1) and 40 (1) envisaged levy of taxes, rates,
and fees on the subject mentioned at clause (a) to (i) of Rule 40 by the ZPs subject
to the rates fixed by the State Government. Similarly, GP may also levy taxes, rates
and fees with the approval of State Government on the subject mentioned at clause
(a) to (k) of section 77(1) of Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993

As per Second State Finance Commission’s recommendations, GPs were entitled
to levy taxes such as (i) Dhuri Khajana* for RCC building at 50 per annum, Other
houses at%20 per annum and Temporary huts at =5 per annum; (ii) user charges of
%1 per tap from the user of water tap; (iii) water cess from user of irrigation at
%25 per year for holding up to 5 acre, ₹ 50 per year for 5 to 8 acre, = 100 per year
for above 8 acre; (iv) fee for construction of house within panchayat at % 50 for
pucca house/ RCC, %10 for temporary house/huts; (v) fee for the occupation of
hat areas under rural marketing centre from seller /grocery sellers. It was however
noticed that despite the above provisions, the GPs had not initiated any steps to
identify the areas for levying of taxes nor collected any revenue except Lunchok
Kamery GP which had levied the above fees and taxes and realized revenue
meriting appreciation. It was also noticed that control mechanism for levy and its
collection by the PRIs were not prescribed to facilitate timely initiation of the levy
and collection procedure despite recommendation (September 2003) by the Second
State Finance Commission.

*Land Revenue



Technical Insepction Report of Accountant General, Sikkim for tr

1.7 Allocation and Utilisation of State Finance Commission (SFC)
grants

The 73" Constitutional amendment provides for appointment of a Finance
Commission by the State Government to review the financial position of the
Panchayats and recommend the (i) sharing pattern of the net proceeds of taxes,
duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State between the State and the Panchayats,
(ii) taxes, duties, tolls and fees may be assigned to the Panchayats; and (iii) grants-in-
aid to the Panchayats. The report of the Commission together with a memorandum
of action on it was to be laid before the State legislature.

In pursuance of Article 2436) of the constitution (Seventy Third) Amendment Act,
1992 the State Government constituted the First State Finance Commission in 1998
and the Second State Finance Commission (SSFC) in 2003. The SSFC submitted
its recommendations to Government during February 2006. Among accepted
recommendations, the following were not complied:

OQ User charges etc were not levied by the PRIs to augment their resources as
pointed out in para 1.6.1

Q One per cent of tax amounting to®5.70 crore for the period 2006-07 to 2008-

09 was not transferred to PRI although accepted by the Government as per the
recommendation of 2™ State Finance Comission as shown below:

Table-1.4

(Rupees in crore)

Tax receipt Tax Transferred

2006-07 173.18
2007-08 197.85
2008-09 199.19
Total 570.22

1.8 Sectoral Analysis

Mention was made in the ATIR (para 1.9) for the year 2005-07 regarding non
maintenance of information on budget provision, release of fund and expenditure
incurred under Plan and Non Plan on important sectors like education, health,
nutrition, social forestry, solid waste management, sanitation, water and housing
etc by Rural Management & Development Department. The above position still
persists restricting audit in analyzing the progress of work done under these
important sectors



Audit however attempted to consolidate information on these based on available
data and noticed that release of funds by various departments to the PRIs were not
based on any sound rationale but as per their own discretion as would be noticed
from following details.

Table-1.5
Sector-wise total expenditure vis-a-vis allocation to PRIs

(Rupees in crore)

Sector 2007-08 2008.

Alloca: Nctal/AllsGa= Total
tionto [exp छत exp.
PRI PRI

Agriculture
& allied

services

| HRDD |
Health

RMDD

Total

Absence of sound basis for transfer of funds to the PRIs by the departments con-
strained the PRIs to gauge the extent of fund availability with them in any particular
year restricting them to make any plan with foreseeable certainty. The planning at
the PRI level was therefore totally on ad-hoc basis

1.9 District Planning Committee

The 74 Amendment Act, 1992 of Constitution provides for the constitution of
District Planning Committee (DPC) to consolidate the plans prepared by the
Panchayat into the Draft Development plan for the district. The amendment
also envisages active involvement of the people (beneficiaries / user group) in
formulation of District Plan and implementation of scheme/maintenance of assets
created.

Keeping in view the above provision, DPC was constituted in all the four districts
w.e.f. 25 September 2003 with the Adhyaksha, Zilla Panchayat as the Chairman and
the MPs, MLAs, and others as members with stipulation to consolidate and forward
the development plan as recommended by the DPC to the State Government for
consideration, approval and implementation.



Annual Plans were neither submitted by the GPs nor sought by the ZP and thus the
consolidated district plan could not be prepared by the ZP except for Backward
Region Grant Fund (BRGF) plan for 2009-10. Thus, the planning process for
development duly reflecting the aspirations of the people at the grass root levels as
envisaged in the 74th amendment was compromised.
Similarly, the District Technical Support Committee (DTSC) constituted (2008)
with the District Collector as chairperson and the entire district level Heads of
offices as ex-officio members for preparation of sector-wise perspectives plan for
GP and ZP had neither prepared district perspective plan nor provided any technical
inputs to the GP and ZP for formulation of plans as envisaged. DPC also had not
taken any initiative for availing the benefits of expertise of DTSC

Thus, planning process duly reflecting the needs and aspiration of people at grassroots
through Gram Planning Forum, value addition at Block Development Officers and
District Development Officers level and final consolidation by DPC after obtaining
technical expertise from DTSC remained inoperative despite formation of Gram
Planning Forum, DPC, DTSC, etc. This needs to be immediately revitalized and
made functional and operative to avail the benefit of planned development.

1.10 Assets Management

The Sikkim Panchayat Act, 1993 (under Section 130) envisages upon the PRI
to maintain records for movable and immovable properties through maintaining
Assets Register. Despite pointed out in the ATIR for the year 2005-07, there is no
centralized system for accountal of value of assets created by the PRI. Out of 33 PRIs,
test checked, 23 PRIs did not maintain moveable and immovable Assets registers
duly reflecting moveable and immoveable properties (Appendix — I). Thus, year
wise position of value of assets created could not be ascertained in audit. Further
there was no record to establish the accountal of transferred assets and liabilities.
Despite codal provision and observations made by audit for physical verification of
assets, the PRIs were yet to introduce the system. Further, register of all immovable
government property including land and building within the jurisdiction of PRIs
were not maintained by any of the GPs test checked in Audit although mandated as
per the Government notification (July 2003). As a result, consolidated information
on the assets created / acquired was not available with the PRIs so as to ensure their
safe custody and timely maintenance



1.11 Internal control Mechanism

Itis imperative on the part of GPs and ZPs to put in place an effective internal control
mechanism for financial and budgetary management to ensure proper utilization of
funds. Audit however noticed that the PRIs were not attaching adequate importance
to this aspect as evidenced from the following:

1.11.1 Non-submission of budget estimates

Sikkim Panchayat Manual, 1993 (u/s 46) read with government notification (May
1998) envisaged preparation of budget by the GPs and checking of such budget
estimates by the District Planning Officer (DPO).

It was noticed that neither the GPs had prepared their budget estimates as envisaged
nor the DPO insisted the PRIs for submission of budget estimates to check the
same and suggest corrective measures for optimal utilization of funds. Various
departments of the State Government although required to transfer 10 per cent of
the developmental funds to the PRIs had transferred very small amount of funds
ranging between 1 and 2 per cent of the funds during the period 2007-09 as would
be noticed from the figures mentioned in Table- 1.1 at para 1.5. Not only the funds
were not released in full but were released at the fag end of the financial years. In
absence of indication of quantum of funds likely to be received by the PRIs from
various departments and the time frame for its receipts constrained the PRIs to
prepare an effective plan with any degree of certainty.

1.11.2 Maintenance of Accounts

Sikkim Gram Panchayat Financial Rules 2004 [rule 7(1) & (2)] stipulated
maintenance of various records such as (i) Cash Book, (ii) Monthly receipt and
payment accounts, (iii) annual receipt and payment accounts, (iv) Monthly
reconciliation statement, (v) Inventory register for moveable assets, (vi) Inventory
register for immoveable assets, (vii) Advance Register, (viii) Dead stock Register,
(ix) Stock Register, etc for proper depiction of accounts of the Gram Panchayat
Funds.

Scrutiny of records in 61 GPs (Appendix- 17) revealed that the basic records and
registers as indicated above were not maintained properly as evidenced from
following:

Q Maintenance of cash books in 61 GPUs disclosed that (i) cash book balances
were not certified in any of the GPUs by the President of the GPUs; (ii) details
of the closing balances were not mentioned in case of 40 GPUs; (iii) none of
the GPUs had reconciled the cash book balances with the balances maintained
by the Banks.



Technical Ins untant General, Sikkim for tr ' 2007-08 -

1 Advance registers were not maintained and thus neither the position of
outstanding advances could be ascertained nor were the delays in adjustment
of outstanding advances depicted in the accounts

OQ Data base formats as suggested in the Simplified Accounting Formats were
also not initiated by any of the GPs and the ZPs.

Q Database formats on finances of PRIs and Simplified Accounting formats for
PRI prescribed by C&AG were not adopted by any of the GPs and ZPs.

Q 18 GPUs could not produce payees acknowledgement receipt for ₹ 15.88 lakh
pertaining to 18 payees for the period 2005-06 and 2008-09 indicating that
record management was poor.

1.12 Internal audit

There is no system of internal audit of GPs. The Accountant General, Sikkim
conducts audit. The compliance report on the observations issued by Audit is to
be sent within three months. Details of inspection reports issued by Accountant
General (Audit), as on 31 March 2009 and awaiting settlement are given in Table
No.1.6

Table-1.6
Position of settlement of outstanding audit paragraphs during 2005-09

IR issued Paragraph Paragraph
seliled outstanding

786 | 37 | 549
67 [| 20 1 09 '
| 586 | 72 |
|=



ee
CHAPTER-II

PERFORMANCE AUDIT

2.1 National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)

The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (NREGA), guaranteeing 100
days of employment in a year to the rural households, was initially (February 2006)

implemented in North district and later extended to other three districts. Performance

review of NREGA disclosed that the State Government provided employment to
52,006 (99%) rural households, appropriately maintained Application Registration
Register in all the GP duly attaching the photographs of applicants, ete.

It however lacked in timely formulation of rules and constitution of SEGC, appointed
full-time dedicated Programme Officers and Gram Rozgar Sevaks belatedly, panel
of Accredited Engineers for assisting in estimation and measurement of works not
constituted, etc. While the District Perspective Plan was prepared by North district
alone that too was not revised as per the requirement of SREGS, annual planning
process was not put in place leading to haphazard selection of work at Block level
without considering labour budget. Execution of works was lax as administrative
approval and technical sanction of works was not obtained in advance, worksite
facilities (adequate drinking water, stores, créche, etc) were only partially provided,

wages-material ratio of 60:40 was not maintained; workers were neither paid the
wages on time nor were paid compensation; etc. Separate district-wise Schedules
of Rates (DSRs) specifically for NREGS works, exhaustive and detailed list of
tasks required for undertaking works under REGS in different geomorphological
conditions, etc were not prepared by the State Government leading to uneven
distribution of manpower requirement. Monitoring of scheme required further

strengthening as State-level inspection of works was not conducted, district level
officials did not conduct mandatory 10 per cent inspection of the works and that of
block level officials did not conduct 100 per cent inspection of the works.



Technical Insepction Report of Accountant General for the year

Atotal of 1.13 lakh rural households registered, 0.79 lakh demanded employment
and 0.75 lakh households received employment with the total fund involvement
of %56.53 crore during 2006-09 on execution of 1,869 works.

Paragraph- 2.1.7.1

The State Government formulated rules for carrying out the provisions of
the NREG Act as late as June 2006 and did not prescribe the time frame for
proposing, scrutinising and approving REGS works by GP, Block and District
levels as of March 2009

Paragraph- 2.1.9.1

The State Government constituted (June 2006) State Rural Employment
Guarantee Commission recording a delay of nine months and designated
(October 2007) Secretary, RM&DD as State Rural Employment Guarantee
Commissioner after a delay of 16 months. This led to non- preparation of list
of preferred works; Annual Reports for submission to the State Legislature;
absence of review, monitoring and redressal mechanism; etc.

Paragraph- 2.1.9.2

While Technical Assistants were appointed, full-time dedicated Programme
Officers and dedicated Gram Rozgar Sevaks were appointed belatedly in
December 2008 and panel of Accredited Engineers for assisting with the
estimation and measurement of work were also not constituted nor was the
Technical Resource Support Group at State / District level set up as of March
2009.

Paragraph- 2.1.9.4

While the District Perspective Plan was not prepared except by North district,
annual plans were not prepared by any of the GPs indicating lack of participation
or inadequate participation by Gram Sabhas and Gram Panchayats in the
planning process

Paragraph- 2.1.10

The Government did not prepare (i) separate District-wise Schedules of Rates
specifically for NREGS works, (ii) exhaustive and detailed list of tasks required
for undertaking works under REGS in different geomorphological conditions,
and (iii) the productivity norms for the District Schedule of Rates for each
locale in such a way that seven hours of normal work earns minimum wages
on a piece rate basis. This led to uneven distribution of manpower requirement.

Paragraph- 2.1.12.3


Payment of wages to workers was delayed from one day to four months in 76
cases amounting to 745.90 lakhs. Compensation for delayed payment of wages
were not paid to workers.

Paragraph-2.1.12.4

Tt was noticed that social audit of the scheme was not conducted during 2006-

07 and 2007-08. It started only from 2008-09. Non-conduct of social audit

strikes at the root of the demand-driven bottom-up approach of NREGS.
Paragraph 2.1.14

The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (NREGA) is a centrally
sponsored scheme which guarantees 100 days of employment in a year to rural
household whose adult members are willing to do unskilled manual work. The
basic objective of the Act is to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by
providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment on demand. The Act
requires every State to formulate a State Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(REGS), which should conform to the minimum features specified under the Act.
According to the Act, rural households have a right to register themselves with the
local Gram Panchayats (GPs), and seek employment. Work is to be provided within
15 days from the date of demand, failing which the State Government will have
to pay unemployment allowance at the stipulated rates. The scheme was initially
implemented (February 2006) in North district of the State and later extended to
other three districts (South- April 2007; East -April 2007; and West- September
2008)

The organizational structure for implementation of NREGA in the State is as
follows:

State Rural Employment Guarantee Commissioner
(Secretary, Rural Management & Development Department)

District Programme Coordinators(4)
(District Development Officer)

Programme Officer
(Block Development Officer)



Technical In:

Functions & Responsibilities

Village |Gram Sabha Recommendation, monitoring & Supervision and Social audit of works

Gram Planning of works, registering households, issuing Jobcards allocating
Panchayat employments, and implementation of scheme.

Block |Programme Scrutinising the proposals submitted by GPs for technical feasibility,
officer ensuring execution of works as schedule, payment of wages to labour
engaged and social audits.

District | Zilla Finalisation of district plan and monitoring &Supervision of SREGS
Panchayat in district.
Distict Consolidation of plans prepared for inclusion in shelf of projects,
Programme according approval and coordinating and supervising the performance:
Coordinator of programme Officers and conducting periodical inspection of works:
in progress.

State |State Advising the State Government regarding the implementation
Employment | of the scheme, determining the preferred works, reviewing the
Guarantee monitoring and redressal mechanism and preparation of annual
Council report to be laid before legislature.

State Rural Overall supervision & monitoring of the implementation of the
Employment | scheme in the state and to empanel reputed agencies to carry out
Guarantee impact assessment of the scheme.

Commissioner

2.1.3 Funding Pattern

The Government of India (GOI) has established a fund called the National
Employment Guarantee Fund, from which grants are released directly to Districts.
Revolving funds are to be set up under REGS at the District, Block and Gram
Panchayat levels, with separate bank accounts being opened for such funds at each
level

At the State level, funds released by GOI are parked at State Rural Development
Agency and subsequently transferred to NREGS account and thereafter allocated to
District Development Officers for onward transmission to the PRIs through Block
Development Officers.



2.1.4 Audit Objectives
The main audit objectives for the Performance Audit were to assess whether

Effective preparatory steps for planning, implementation and monitoring/
evaluation of outcomes were taken by the State Government;

The procedures for preparing perspective and annual plan at different levels for
estimating the likely demand for work, and preparing a shelf of projects were
adequate and effective;

There was an effective process for registration of households, allotment of job
cards, and allocation of employment in compliance with the guidelines;

NREGA works were properly planned and executed in compliance with the Act
and the guidelines, durable assets were created and properly accounted for;

Wages and unemployment allowance were paid in accordance with the Act
and the guidelines, and the intended objective of providing 100 days of annual
employment at the specified wage rates was effectively achieved;

Funds released for NREGA were accounted for, and utilized in compliance with
the guidelines;

There was an adequate and effective mechanism at different levels for monitoring
and evaluation of NREGA outcomes; and

There was an adequate and effective mechanism for social audit and grievance
redressal.

2.1.5 Audit Criteria

The main sources of audit criteria for the performance audit were the following:

The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (NREGA), and
notifications issued thereunder;

NREGA Operational Guidelines (2006); and

Circulars and letters issued by the Ministry and the State Government.



Technical | I of Acc tant General, Sikkim for the year

2.1.6 Audit Scope, Sampling and Methodology

Audit Scope

The scope of audit extended to all the four districts of the State covering a period
of 1 to 3 years from February 2006 to March 2009. Field audit of the relevant
records of the nodal department (Rural Management & Development Department)
and District, Block and Panchayat level offices was conducted initially between
February and April 2009. Subsequently, in order to assess the improvement in
maintenance of records as a result of the performance audit, a limited scrutiny
of record maintenance for one month during November — December 2009 was
conducted covering 28 GPs in 4 districts from within the original audit sample.

Audit Sampling

In each districts, 25 per cent of the blocks were chosen, in each block four Gram
Panchayats (GPs) were chosen, and in each selected GP, four works (preferably
three completed and one ongoing) were selected for detailed examination. Thus,
records relating to four districts, six blocks within the sampled districts, and 24
GPs in the sampled blocks were selected on stratified random sampling method for
detailed examination. Assets created under the scheme was also verified at random
in test checked GPs and interviews with two beneficiaries on an average were
conducted in each of the 24 selected GPs.

Details of the selected blocks and GPs are given in Appendix —III.

Audit Methodology

The performance audit commenced with an entry conference with the Department
in February 2009, wherein the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria
were explained. After the conclusion of field audit, an exit conference was held with
the Department headed by Additional Secretary (NREGS) in January 2010, where
the draft audit findings and recommendations were discussed at length. In addition,
exit conferences were also held in January 2010 with the DDOs where the district
specific findings were discussed. The draft performance audit report was issued to
the Department in January 2010, their response is awaited (October 2010).



2.1.7 Physical and Financial Performance

2.1.7.1 Physical Performance

During the year 2006-09, 1.13 lakh rural households had registered under the
scheme and 0.79 lakh households had demanded employment under the scheme, of
which 0.75 lakh households received employment. District -wise details of physical

performance reported by Department are given below:

Status of implementation of NREGS in Sikkim

Status 2007-08 2008-09

Districts under NREGA | North North, East and North, East,
South South and West

No. of Blocks 4 jis sd

No. of Gram Panchayats _|23 110 163

No. of Job cards Issued 4,498 30,907 77,112

Household Demanded 4,179 21,773 52,554

Households Employed 4,107 (98%) 19,664 (90%) 52,006 (99%)

Persondays Generated 2,42,000 8,59,738 26,33,591

No. of Works Taken ॥| 159 514 1,196

No. of Works Completed _| 103 (65%) 201 (39%) 564 (47 %)

No. of Works Ongoing 56 313 632

Total Funds Available 4.56 Crore 14.32 Crore 47.63 Crore

Total Expenditure 2.75 Crore 12.34 Crore 41.44 Crore.

2.1.7.2

Status of various categories of work taken up under NREGS for the
period 2006-07 to 2008-09 is shown below:

Nature of Works taken up

South [Total

% of Total

Rural Connectivity 77 | 101 | 266 52
Flood Control and Protection/ Water 102 26 3 131 25
Conservation and Water Harvesting
Drought Proofing/ Land Development | 14 14 2 30 | 6 |
Micro Irrigation Works / Provision of | 36 13 3 52 10
Irrigation Facility in Private Land
Renovation of Traditional Water 2 7 26 35 7
Bodies/ Any other activity approved
by MoRD

Total 242 137 135 514 | 100 |



Graphical representation of various types of works undertaken by NREGS is
given below:

Other activity

>

Rural Conectivity

52%

Micro Irrigation
10%

Drought
Profing
6%

Flood Control
25%

Audit also noticed that detailed list stating sector-wise number of completed
projects, percentage of completion of ongoing projects etc were neither maintained
at the PRIs level nor the Block, District and the administrative Department level.

2.1.7.3 Financial Performance

The total financial assistance provided by the Gol to the State up to 31 March 2009
and State share including Misc receipt was रैं 59.99 crore (Central Share of %55.73
crore, State Share of % 2.90 crore and Miscellaneous Receipts of % 1.36 crore).
Of this, the State Governments utilized ¥55.91 crore (93 per cent), as detailed in
Appendix-IV.



2.1.8 Fund Management

2.1 8.1 General

The Gol releases funds through the National Employment Guarantee Fund
directly to districts. State Governments are required to set up revolving funds at
the District, Block and GP levels. State share of funds should be released within
15 days of the release of the Central funds. The State Government should design
a complete Financial Management System for the transfer and use of funds, for
ensuring transparency and accountability. Separate bank accounts for funds under
the Scheme should be opened at the District, Block and GP levels. After utilizing 60
per cent of the earlier funds released, the DPC may apply for the next installment,
along with Utilisation Certificate (UC), certificate regarding receipt of State Share
etc. Similarly, the PO will be eligible for the next installment after utilizing 60 per
cent of available funds. Likewise, after 60 per cent of the allocation given to a GP
has been spent, the GP may apply to the PO for release of additional funds, with a
statement of work-wise expenditure and the report of the Vigilance and Monitoring
Committee (VMC) approved by the Gram Sabha. Monthly squaring of accounts —
verifying that all money released under NREGA is accounted for under (a) bank
balance (b) advances (c) expenditure vouchers — should be introduced.

Audit noticed the following:

Q The State share was not released within 15 days of the release of the central
share — the delay ranged between 20 and 25 days.

Q While demanding additional funds all 28 GPs (4 district) did not furnish the
report of the VMC duly approved by the Gram Sabha.

QO) All 28 test checked GPs (4 districts) had spent funds on REGS without obtaining
administrative approval and technical sanction:

Q Monthly squaring of accounts under three heads viz. Money held in bank
accounts at various levels, advances to implementing or payment agencies, and
vouchers of actual expenses was not done by all test checked GPs (4 districts).

1 Cash Books were not maintained in prescribed form as the entries made in CB
were not attested by PO; Receipt in form of interest and miscellaneous were
not shown on receipt side of CB; payment such as bank commission etc were
not shown on expenditure side of CB; monthly reconciliation with Bank was
not done to check the actual cash balance; separate account in cash book were
not kept for Work expenses and Administrative expenses; and Receipt entry
in cash book were not done on the date of credit made in the account by bank.



Q Flow of fund to GP and block were not smooth and was rather a complicated and
time consuming one.

ज MR bill was to be certified by PO (BDO) who was not able to inspect the work
frequently and hence his certificate on MR bill was meaningless and happening
to pass the sole responsibility of Panchayat to PO in case of any default. The
process was also causing delay in payment of MR. Further, at DDO level material
purchase were made or decided whereas DDO was not aware of quantity and
period of material requirement. It was PO who in the right position to decide and
supply material as per the need. This resulted in delay in completion of work.

1 The balance fund of % 79.80 lakh in SGRY account was not transferred by
5 GPs (out of 15 GPs checked) to NREGS as of September 2009 against the
norms stipulated in the NREGS guidelines. Instead, the GPs incurred the
amount between April 2008 and April 2009 which was irregular and indicative
of absence of proper financial management.

2.1.9 Resource support and framing of rules

2.1.9.1 Framing of Rules and Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (REGS)

The Act envisaged upon the State Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Act. The Rules, inter - alia, were to determine the grievance
redressal mechanism at the block level and the district level and procedure to
be followed in such matter, lay down the terms and conditions to determine the
eligibility for unemployment allowance, and provide for the manner of maintaining
books of account of employment of labourer and the expenditure. Further,
NREGA Operational Guidelines stipulated prescription of time frame by the State
Government for proposing, scrutinizing, and approving REGS works by GP, block
and district levels.

Audit noticed that the State Government formulated rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Act as late as June 2006 and did not prescribe the time frame
for proposing, scrutinising and approving REGS works by GP, Block and District
levels as of March 2009

In the absence of defined time frames at GP, Block and District levels for proposing,



scrutinizing and approving REGS works, there might be difficulty in ensuring a
shelf of projects in advance, which could adversely impact provision of employment
on demand.

2.1.9.2. State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGQ) and Employment
Guarantee Commissioner (EGC)

The Act stipulates (i) setting up of a State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC)
for deciding on the “preferred works” under REGS and preparation of Annual
Report on REGS for presentation to the State Legislature; and (ii) designate an
officer, not below the rank of a Commissioner, as the State Rural Employment
Guarantee Commissioner for fulfilment of the objectives of the Act.

The State Government constituted SEGC as late as June 2006 recording a delay of
nine months after enactment of the NREG Act. Similarly, Secretary, RMDD was
designated as State Rural Employment Guarantee Commissioner during October
2007 by the State Government recording a delay of 16 months from formation
(June 2006) of SREGS and the first meeting was held in May 2008.

Delayed setting up of SREGC led to non- preparation of (i) list of “preferred works”
to be implemented under the Scheme; (ii) Annual Reports for submission to the
State Legislature; (iii) absence of review, monitoring and redressal mechanism and
non monitoring of implementation of SREGS; and (iv) non- conducting of district
wise studies.

2.1.9.3 Preparation of Annual Plan & Labour Budget

Guidelines envisaged that the annual planning process for the next financial year
should be completed by the December end every year, including approval of the
plan by the Zilla Panchayat. The District Programme Coordinator shall prepare a
labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of the anticipative
demand for unskilled manual work in the district, which shall be the basis for the
planning. |

No steps were taken by the Zilla Panchayat towards preparation of annual planning
process in time. In test check of South District annual planning process for 2008-
09 was done as late as February 2009 i.e. after a gap of 14 months when work
were taken up by Block level on random selection basis without considering labour
budget resulted in pending liability for next financial year.



2.1.9.4 Resource support

NREGA, its Operational Guidelines and other circulars issued by the Ministry inter
-alia envisaged appointment of (i) full-time dedicated Programme Officer (PO), not
below the rank of Block Development Officer (BDO), in each Block, with necessary
supporting staff for facilitating implementation of the Scheme at Block level;
(ii) “Employment Guarantee Assistant” (EGAs) or “Gram Rozgar Sevak” (GRSs)
in each GP; (iii) technical assistant for every 10 Gram Panchayats; (iv) panels of
accredited engineers at the District and Block levels for the purpose of assisting
with the estimation and measurement of works; and (v) Technical Resource
Support Groups at the State and District levels to assist in the planning, designing,
monitoring, evaluation and quality audit of various initiatives.

Audit noticed that while Technical Assistants were appointed, full-time dedicated
Programme Officers (POs) in 24 test checked blocks and dedicated Gram Rozgar
Sevaks in 28 test checked GPs were appointed after December 2008. The existing
Block Development Officers (BDOs) were appointed as POs and given the additional
charge of the Scheme. A panel of Accredited Engineers for the purpose of assisting
with the estimation and measurement of work were also neither constituted nor
was the Technical Resource Support Group at State / District level set up as of
March 2009. Thus, absence of suitable manpower affected the monitoring of the
implementation of the scheme as envisaged in the NREGS guidelines.

2.1.10 Perspective and Annual Plan

2.1.10.1 District Perspective Plan (DPP)

The NREGA Operational Guidelines stipulate the preparation of a five year District
Perspective Plan (DPP) to facilitate advance planning and provide a development
perspective for the District. The aim is to identify the types of REGS works to be
encouraged in the district, and the potential linkages between these works and long
term employment generation and sustained development. Accordingly, the State
Government also reiterated (June 2006) for preparation of five year Perspective
Plan by each district duly incorporating the estimate for the need of the employment
and the kind of works that can be taken up to meet the need through a participatory
process of planning that has the Gram Sabha as its basic unit. Then planning should



have the bench marking and key indicators for success. The notification further

stipulated that for the plan prepared under National Food for Work Programme
(NFFWP) should be revised to suit the requirement of NREGA.

Audit scrutiny revealed that although the Department claimed that the DPP had
been prepared, no such plans could be seen during the audit. Only North district
had prepared DPP under NFFWP at a cost of = 7.30 lakh which however was not
revised as per the requirement of State Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme.

2.1.10.2 Annual Plans

The Annual Plan is a working plan that identifies the activities to be taken up on
priority basis in a year. This Annual Plan should indicate the existing demand for
work, demand in the previous year, works taken up in the previous year, ongoing
works, proposed costs, likely costs and proposed implementing agencies. The
District Planning Committee would scrutinize the plan proposals of all GPs, and
consolidate them into a District Plan proposal with a blockwise shelf of projects
(arranged GP-wise).

Scrutiny of records in 28 GPs? revealed that annual plans were not prepared
by any of the GPs. In absence of documented Annual Plans, there would be no
shelf of projects for timely approval, thus adversely affecting the ability to meet
demand for employment. Lack of participation or inadequate participation by
Gram Sabhas, and Gram Panchayats in the planning process vitiated the process of
people’s participation, transparency and accountability, and also adversely affects
the creation of productive assets benefiting the local community.

2.1.11 Registration and Issue of Job Cards

NREGA Operational Guidelines enjoins upon rural households to register themselves
and obtain a job card before demanding employment under REGS. The process of
verification should be completed and the Job cards issued within a fortnight of
receipt of the application. Door-to-door survey may also be undertaken to identify
persons willing to register under the Act.

3 GPs ( 8- East; 4 - North; and 8 each in South and West District).



Scrutiny of records revealed that an introductory Gram Sabha meeting as required
under the NREG Act was belatedly convened in 28 GPs test checked in Audit
recording a delay of 75 to 150 days and consequent delay in execution of work

Door-to-door survey to identify persons willing to register was also not conducted
in any of the 28 GPs nor the job cards were issued within 15 days of application
for registration in case of 24 GPs. Job cards neither indicated telephone number of
DPC, PO and other grievance redressal authority nor information on right to work

was printed on the back side of job card as required under NREGS guidelines.

2.1.12 Execution of Works

2.1.12.1 General

NREG Act and Operational Guidelines stipulates obtaining of administrative and
technical sanction for all works in advance by December of the previous year;
provision of worksite facilities (medical aid, drinking water, shade, créche, etc);
wage material costs in the ratio 60:40; etc.

Audit scrutiny in 28 GPs revealed that the NREGS fund was spent mainly towards
rural connectivity through construction of Cement Concrete Footpath, Jhora training
works, bench terracing, minor irrigation etc. as shown below:

Footpaths aid in rural connectivity - CCFP in Village road to aid in rural connectivity at
Ralang GPU, South Sikkim Jarong, South Sikkim



Terracing of barren land to improve cultivable
areas

Minor Irrigation Channel to increase productivity Developing rocky wasteland to improve
of land at Aritar GPU in East Sikkim productivity of land in Makha GPU,
East Sikkim

Scrutiny of works expenditure revealed that the wages-material ratio of 60:40 was
neither maintained at the district level nor the block level (28 GPs). Administrative
approval and technical sanction of works was not obtained in advance in any of the
28 GPs in the State; and worksite facilities such as adequate drinking water, stores,
créche, etc. were only partially provided in all the districts in the State.

2.1.12.2 Non deployment of labour to convert material cost to labour cost

Works taken up under NREGS such as CC footpath, Jhora trainning were capital
intensive. Audit analysis of cost involvement for the execution of works revealed
that the Block Development Office purchased stone chips for use in the works
amounting to € 25.16 lakhs involving 16 per cent of total expenditure on materials.
Instead of procuring stone chips, the Block Development Officers could have
procured stone and used the manpower for converting it into stone chips which
could have generated employment for the villagers

Recommendation

State Government should ensure compliance with the 60:40 ratio of wages:
material costs.



2.1.12.3 District Schedule of Rates

The NREGA operational guidelines stipulate preparation of District Schedules
of Rates (DSRs) for each district, exhaustive and detailed list of tasks required
for undertaking works under REGS in different geomorphological conditions;
description of daily work requirements to facilitate the fulfillment of productivity
norms.
Audit noticed that the Government did not prepare (i) separate District-wise
Schedules of Rates (DSRs) specifically for NREGS works, (ii) exhaustive and
detailed list of tasks required for undertaking works under REGS in different
geomorphological conditions, and (iii) the productivity norms for the District
Schedule of Rates (DSRs) for each locale in such a way that seven hours of normal
work earns minimum wages on a piece rate basis. This led to uneven distribution
of manpower requirement. The works were hampered due to delay in supply of
materials as the fund were utilized to meet the cost of wage payment as the mandays
required in the work were increased due to engagement of lesser efficient and
inexperienced workers. In order to meet the cost, non-stock material such as stone
were extracted from work site ignoring the direction of Forest where it is clearly
mentioned that stone should be quarried from quarry side and not from any other
place.

2.1.12.4 Payment of wages

Every person working under REGS is entitled to wages at the minimum wage rate
fixed by the State Government which should be paid on time. In case of delay
beyond 15 days, compensation as per the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act,
1936 should be given to the workers.

Audit noticed that in all GPs test checked in Audit, workers were neither paid
wages on time i.e. within a fortnight of execution of work nor compensation was
paid to them. The delay in payment of wages ranged between one day and four
months in 76 cases amounting to ₹ 45.90 lakhs. Delay in payment of wages was
not only against the guidelines but also defeated the scheme objective of providing
livelihood security.



2.1.12.5 Unemployment Allowance

Under NREGA, the State Government is required to provide employment to a
registered applicant within 15 days of demand, failing which unemployment
allowance at stipulated rates is payable from State Government funds.

Dated receipt of applications for demand for work were not shown in any of the 28
test checked GPs as a result delay if any in providing employment to them within
15 days could not be worked out. Employment registers were not maintained as
enshrined in the guidelines (paragraph 8.8.1) in any of the 28 GPs or in the Block
offices to indicate the number of days for which employment were provided to

households

2.1.13 Record Maintenance and Reports

2.1.13.1 Maintenance of Registers at GP and Block Levels

Maintenance of records under NREGA is critical to ensure verifiable compliance
with the legal guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand and payment of
unemployment allowance. The NREGA Operational Guidelines have specified
details of records and registers to be maintained at different levels such as

(i) Application Registration Register to record applications/ requests for registration
of households; (ii) Job Card Register to record details of job cards issued to
households; (iii) Employment Register to record details of employment demanded,
employment allotted and employment actually taken up by each households;
(iv) Asset Register to record all works sanctioned, executed and completed;

(v) Muster Rolls for recording attendance and payment of wages for individual
works; (vi) MR Issue/ Receipt Registers for issue and receipt of Muster Rolls (from
the PO to the GP/ implementing agency); and (vii) complaint Register for recording
details of complaints made, and action taken

Audit noticed that the Application Registration Register was maintained in all the
28 GPs in the State, the photographs of applicants were found attached to the job
cards, as per the job card register. However, the Job Card Register and Employment
Register were not maintained properly. While the job card register did not contain
details of the members of household who have been issued job cards; Employment



Register did not indicate the details of employment demanded, employment allotted
and employment actually taken up, dated receipts of applications for demand for
work were not given to the applicants. The applications for employment did not
have the job card registration number, date from which employment was required,
and the number of days of employment required The Asset Registers were either
not maintained or were maintained partially.

Similarly at Block level also employment Register was not maintained/ prepared in
7 test checked block offices in the State (4 districts).

2.1.13.2 Reports

The NREGA Operational Guidelines require that procedures be framed to ensure
that data on work requested and allotted by the PO and GP are properly maintained
and information on employment allotments shared between the PO and GP on a
weekly basis.

In all 7 test checked blocks of State (4 districts) information on employment
allotments was shared between the PO and GP on monthly basis instead of weekly
basis.

2.1.14 Social Audits, Transparency and Grievance Redressal

NREGA gives a central role to “social audits” as a means of continuous public
vigilance. The Guidelines indicate two types of social audit of (i) Periodic assemblies
inthe Gram Sabha for scrutinizing details of projects (which is referred to as “Social
Audit Forum”); and (ii) Social audit as a continuous process of public vigilance
involving potential beneficiaries and other stakeholders, which covers verification
of 11 stages of implementation right from registration of families to evaluation and
the Social Audit Forum. Updated data on demand received, registration, number
of job cards issued, list of people who demanded and had been given/ not given
employment, funds received and spent, payments made, works sanctioned and
works started, cost of works and details of expenditure on it, duration of work,
person-days generated, reports of local communities and copies of muster roll
should be made available in a predesigned format outside offices of all agencies
involved in implementing REGS. Social Audit Forums must be held twice a year at
the Gram Sabha level for all works done in the preceding year.

Audit noticed following:

Q In all 28 test checked GPs in the State (4 districts), a Gram Sabha once in every
six months to conduct a Social Audit Forum was not held



QO The updated data on demand received, registration, number of job cards issued,
list of people who demanded and been given/ not given employment, funds
received and spent, payments made, works sanctioned and works started, cost of
works and details of expenditure on it, duration of work, person-days generated,
reports of local communities and copies of muster rolls were not made public
in all 28 test checked GPs in the State (4 districts).

Q The POs were required to convene the social audit at Gram Sabhas. It was
however noticed that social audit of the scheme was not conducted during 2006-
07 & 2007-08 . It started only from 2008-09. Non-conduct of social audit strikes
at the root of the demand-driven bottom-up approach of NREGS.

2.1.15 Monitoring

NREGA Operational Guidelines stipulate the following procedures for monitoring
and reporting:

1 Block-level officials shall inspect 100 per cent of works every year, District-
level officials 10 per cent of works, and State level officials 2 per cent of works.

Q Financial audit of all districts is mandatory.

Q) District Internal Audit Cells shall be constituted to scrutinize the reports of the
Gram Sabhas.



Audit noticed following:
Q

Q

State-level inspection of works was not conducted, or documented in respect of
the State (4 Districts.). 2

In 4 districts in the State, the district level officials did not conduct 10 per cent
inspection of the works.

In 7 test checked blocks in the State 4 districts), the block level officials did not
conduct 100 per cent inspection of the works.

Financial audit was not carried out in 4 districts in the State.
In all district, District Internal Audit Cells were not constituted.

Both State and District Quality Monitors had not been designated by the State
Government.

The Government of Sikkim had not issued instructions to constitute District
Internal Audit Cells and conduct financial audit periodically.

The Government of Sikkim had now initiated the process of designating District
and State level Quality Monitors.



CHAPTER - Ill

AUDIT FINDINGS - DRAFT PARAGRAPH

3.1 Infructuous expenditure on setting up of Herbal garden and
Smriti Van

Despite recurring expenditure of & 13.31 lakh towards maintenance (% 11.73
lakh) and lease rent (¥ 1.58 lakh) of the herbal gardens during the period 2004-
05 to 2008-09, no production were generated leading to infructuous expenditure
of 37 lakh on its creation.

The State Government (Rural Management & Development Department) approved
(2003-04) establishment of herbal gardens in each of the GPs and accordingly
earmarked हैं lakh for the purpose of setting up of herbal gardens in each of GPs
out of sectoral grant of £10 lakh. The objective of herbal gardens were utilization
of medicinal herbs for village public and to meet the sustainable need of the local
traditional fold healer being practiced in the village.

Accordingly, herbal gardens were set up (2004-05) in each GPs involving a total cost
of 2166 lakh with the technical expertise and supervision of the Forest Department.
According to the type of medicinal plants planted in the gardens, the production
would commence after 3 to 4 years of plantation and would generate product to
meet the objectives.
Audit check (September
2008 to January 2009)
of 37 GPs (as detailed in
Appendix-V) involving
three* districts revealed
that while in 50 per cent
cases herbal gardens
were created in the
private land holdings
on 3 to 5 years lease
basis, no production
was generated from the

§
=
Se
७0 55
छः bo
5
Bs
$3
28
aS
ce
Os
S~
ee,
gS
Sas
= 8
33
S§
sa
Q

‘East (22 GPs), West (10 GPs) and South (5 GPs).



herbal gardens as yet even after five years of creation of herbal gardens as shown
in the photograph below:

Defunct Herbal Garden of Upper Fambong Gram Panchayat Unit under Daramdin BAC



This was despite the fact that recurring expenditure of %13.31 lakh towards
maintenance ( 11.73 lakh) and lease rent (1.58 lakh) of the herbal gardens were
incurred by the GPs during the period 2004-05 to 2007-08. Besides, 22 GPs in East
district incurred ₹ 2.88 lakh towards procurement of stationery from the inbuilt
component of four per cent contingency in the sanctioned estimate of the herbal
garden against the provision of Sikkim Public Works Code as the contingency
provision was meant for watch and ward and other unforeseen expenditure in
connection with the work.

Audit analysis revealed that the herbal gardens failed to generate yield in absence
of proper maintenance, herbal gardens in 50 per cent cases were created in private
land holding on lease basis for three years without any documentary evidence,
which was abandoned after expiry of lease period, and soil testing not carried out to
ensure suitability of the available land for the herbal gardens

Thus, not only the recurring expenditure of %13.31 lakh on maintenance of 37
herbal gardens were unfruitful even the capital cost of रैं37 lakh on creation of these
gardens were infructuous.

The matter was reported to the department (August 2009). No reply received (May
2010).

3.2 Unauthorised release of loan to Self-Help Group and non-
realisation thereof

The action of the Gram Panchayats to sanction and release loan to Self Help
Groups (SHGs) was not only against the norms but also did not lead to any fruitful
utilization of funds as the activities undertaken by the SHGs were not yielding
any result. The loan was also not refunded by the SHGs despite undertaking to
refund within 12 months.

Under Micro Plan 2006-07, State Government sanctioned 210 lakh to each of the
GPs towards Developmental Fund duly earmarking allocations for various sectors
such as Infrastructure (35%), productive sector (35%), Social sector (20%) an
Administration and miscellaneous (10%) for the GPUs not implementing Total
Sanitation Programme (TSC). Similarly, GPs implementing TSC programme, while
50 per cent of the Micro-plan was to be incurred towards TSC programme and
remaining 50 per cent was to be utilized towards Infrastructure (15%), productive
sector (15%), Social sector (10%) and Administration and miscellaneous sector
(10%) sector. The instructions (April 2006) of the Government (Rural Management
& Development Department) for the GPs not implementing TSC programme,
earmarked allocation of 15% of the Productive sectors were to be utilized towards



operation and maintenance of old schemes/ programmes such as Smriti Van, herbal
garden with a view to sustain the already established and existing infrastructure
The guidelines specifically forbade taking up of new schemes/ programmes out of
this allocation.

Audit scrutiny revealed that out of the Productive sector allocations of =30 lakh,
= 17.58 lakh was incurred by 11 GPs towards releasing loans to the Self Help
Groups for undertaking variety of trades for income generation such as piggery/
Goatry/Poultry/ Diary unit (21SHGs 6.21 lakh), Ginger/Chilly (66 SHG - 8.47
lakh), Potato (2 SHG - %0.30 lakh) and Gin-Floriculture/Traditional item/Paper
production (8 SHG - ₹ 2.60 lakh) as detailed in Appendix -VI. This was released
after taking a resolution in the respective gram sabha with stipulation to realize the
loan after twelve months of release.

Audit analysis revealed that the grant of loans to the SHGs was not only in violation
of the directions issued by the State Government on utilization of micro plan but
neither any condition for repayment/penalty was included in project report nor any
agreement drawn. The loan was also not refunded by the SHGs even after a lapse
of 3 years as of December 2009. The Gram Panchayat had not kept any trace of the
functioning or the otherwise of the SHGs after releasing loan to them. No semblance
of monitoring of the schemes by the SHGs was evident from the records. Although
the loans were ostensibly given based on the viability of the project proposals
submitted by the SHGs, the checking at GP level was lax as none of the SHGs were
engaged in the trade and had not even refunded the loan of &16.58 lakh.
Notwithstanding the fact that a number of schemes/ programme especially smriti
van, herbal garden etc were established and were in need of maintenance, the GP
ignored these activities and chose to incur the fund towards releasing loan to SHGs
which was not followed by regular monitoring. The action of the GP was thus not
only against the norms but also did not lead to any fruitful utilization of funds as the
activities undertaken by the SHGs were not yielding any result. The loan was also
not refunded by the SHGs despite undertaking to refund within 12 months.

3.3 Diversion of fund from Development grants

Diversion of fund from Developmental grants was not only irregular but also
in effect compromised the development envisaged in the executive committee
meeting of North ZP especially in the arena of micro sector as evident from their
annual action plans of the district.

The State Government through Rural Management & Development Department
provided for Micro plan funds to each of the GPs and ZPs with the objective of
bringing about development in various sector through Creation of Assets, Rural



enterprise for income generation/supplementation, Skill up-gradation programmes,
etc. Accordingly, a total of %2 crore was released by the Rural Management
Development Department to 4 ZP of East, West, South and North districts during
the period 2005-06.

Audit noticed that out of 50 lakh granted by RMD Departmentto ZP of North district
during 2005-06, the ZP diverted (December 2006) ₹ 6.08 lakh towards procuring
a vehicle (Bolero) for the use of Zilla Adhyaksha. The above amount was in fact
diverted from earmarked fund of infrastructure development in Rural enterprise for
income generation/supplementation sector by the Adhyaksha, ZP on the plea that
there was no need to develop or carry out any work in infrastructure sector. This
was however misleading as in the subsequent year, ZP in its executive committee
meeting decided (2007-08) for developing and execution of works relating to
infrastructure under rural enterprise for income generation/supplementation sector
and also incurred € 4.83 lakh towards interpretation centre at Pentok, Mangan
Thus, the diversion was not only irregular but also in effect compromised the
development envisaged in the executive committee meeting of North ZP especially
in the arena of micro sector as evident from their annual action plans of the district.

3.4 Unfruitful expenditure of 3.18 lakh on establishment of pickle
production unit

Even after incurring expenditure of हैं 3.25 lakh none of the pickle production
unit were established let alone productivity and income generation of २3.18 lakh
per annum as envisaged in the project report.

The North ZP decided to establish pickle production unit in Zongu at an estimated
cost of रैं 3.25 lakh with an objective to make the youth self reliant and self
employed

On approval of ZP, the pickle production unit was established in one GPUs (Zongu)
between May 2007 to June 2007 at a cost of ¥2.60 lakh. Besides, 36 people
from one GP were also imparted training by technical experts from Sikkim Food
Preservation Factory, Singtam and Community Food and Nutrition Extension Unit,
Arithang Gangtok between May 2007 and June 2007 involving a cost of = 0.65
lakh.

Audit noticed that the objective of establishment of pickle production unit was not
achieved even after incurring रैं 3.25 lakh as none of the unit was functional as of
June 2009

It was noticed during audit (February 2009) that the ZP had not devised any
modality for operationalisation of unit as no committee was formed to run and



manage the unit, no backward forward linkages were established to enable them
procure good quality raw materials at economical rates and market their finished
products, monitoring mechanism to ensure that the trainees adopted the trade as
their vocation, etc.

Selection process for identification of suitable candidates for training was also
faulty as interest of the candidates in the trade, their aptitude for taking up the pickle
production as their venture etc was not ensured.

Thus, even after incurring expenditure of ¢3.25 lakh none of the production unit
was established let alone productivity and income generation of %3.18 lakh per
annum as envisaged in the project report.

3.5 Unauthorized payment of food grains to suppliers under SGRY

GPs issued 201.56 qtl rice (valuing रैं 2.52 lakh at FCI rate and हें 1.78 lakh at
subsidised rate) to the suppliers in lieu of material supplied. This was not only
unauthorized as per SGRY guidelines but also led to a diversion of rice from
wage component to material component and loss to GPs of हैं 0.74 lakh.

SGRY guidelines (para 6.1.5) stipulated execution of labour intensive works with
a view to provide wage employment and also allotment of rice to the beneficiaries
at subsidized rate under wage component to protect the real wage of workers and
improving the nutritional standard of the families of the rural poor. For execution
of works under SGRY, the State Government through Rural Management &
Development Department fixed labour and material component ratio to 60: 40
Scrutiny of records of six GPUs under West district revealed that out of 10,612 qtl
of rice allotted (2005-06) by Rural Management and Development Department for
issue to the beneficiaries under wage component of SGRY, the GPs issued 201.56
qtl rice (valuing = 2.52° lakh at FCI rate and ₹ 1.78 lakh® at subsidised rate) to
the suppliers in lieu of material supplied. This was not only unauthorized as per
guidelines but also led to a diversion of rice from wage component to material
component and loss to GPs of ₹0.74 lakh’.

5%1250 per qtl. X 201.56 qtl. of rice issued = 2.52 lakh
© 885 per qntl X 201.56 qntl of rice issued = $1.78 lakh.
"Difference between 5 and 6 >रैं 0.74 lakh



3.6 Irregular implementation of Backward Region Grant Fund

The implementation of BRGF fund by West district ZP was characterized by
absence of fair competition and wide publicity involving %2.65 crore. The
works were not completed despite release of funds of 1.54 crore by RMDD —
the progress ranging between 60 and 75 per cent as of September 2009.

The Backward Regions Grant Fund (BRGF) is designed to redress regional
imbalances in development. The fund aims to supplement and converge existing
developmental inflows into identified districts, so as to (i) bridge critical gaps in local
infrastructure and other development requirements that are not being adequately
met through existing inflows; (ii) strengthen Panchayat and Municipality level
governance with capacity building to facilitate participatory planning, decision
making, implementation and monitoring; (iii) provide professional support to local
bodies for planning, implementation and monitoring their plans; (iv) improve the
performance and delivery of critical functions assigned to Panchayats.
Government of India created BRGF fund by replacing Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana.
A total of 111 districts identified by the States concerned were approved by GOI for
implementation of BRGF. Accordingly, for the state of Sikkim, North district was
selected for implementation of BRGF.

A total of 12.97 crore was sanctioned (June 2007) by GOI to the State Government.
ZP (West) was allotted (2007-08) ₹ 2.86 crore towards construction of steel foot
bridges (8), of which ₹ 1.54 crore was released (March 2008) after deducting 1.32
crore by RMDD for supply of bridge parts. According to the RMDD instruction
(April 2008) execution of schemes was to be done through tendering procedure as
per government norms and materials for bridge parts (including GI pipes) were to
be collected from departmental stores concerned. As on 31 March 2009, a total of
% 20.58 lakh was incurred towards construction of eight SFBs leaving an unspent
balance of & 2.65 crore (incl material cost).

Audit analysis revealed that the action of the State Government (Rural Management
& Development Department) to release funds to all the four districts Zilla Panchayat
(ZPs) was essentially unauthorized diversion of BRGF fund meant for North district
to all the four districts that too without obtaining prior approval of the GOI.
Analysis of expenditure incurred by West district ZP revealed that a short tender
notice was invited (4 November 2008) by the ZP allowing only six days (10
November 2008) to participate in the tender process. Another four days was only
allowed for quoting the rates, thus restricting the scope of fair competition and wide
publicity. The publicity was not only given very limited time for the contractors to



Technical Insepction Report of Accountar

participate but the tender notice was not displayed at public places and no publicity
through local papers were attempted. While the ZP could not furnish details and
relevant documents pertaining to seven works, records relating to one work in
respect of ‘Construction of Foot Bridge at Chojo over Runum Khola’ revealed that
tender documents were procured by only three contractors and none of them had
even enclosed bills of quantities and the rate offered by them. In absence of which
it is not clear how the minimum rates as reflected in the comparative statement
was arrived at for the work order issued. Scrutiny of tender form vis-a-vis various
other papers submitted from time to time by the successful bidder revealed that
the signature of the contractor was not uniform in any of the documents as was
evidenced from the documents such as tender form, measurement book, labour
clearance certificate, request for self - purchase of material, etc. Two different
signatures in the same documents are indicative of slip shod works by ZP official
The implementation of BRGF fund by West district ZP was thus characterized by
absence of fair competition and wide publicity besides non-furnishing of documents
relating to seven works involving % 2.65 crore. The works were not completed
despite release of funds of £1.54 crore by RMDD -— the progress ranging between
60 and 75 per cent as of September 2009 despite incurring an expenditure of 2.52
crore on payment of bills to the contractors ( 1.20 crore) and material cost (= 1.32
crore).

Gangtok (Dinesh Bhagata)
The Accountant General ( Audit), Sikkim



80-LO/IF BSUOAY
80-LO/PE TReUsueyY They

80-LO/EE deseq
“ON 0104 ADSA/ON '81 4891० SUIPN

101५0 ISSA
80-LO/SV अथप्पात्त &५७०्त
60-80//2८ uaydueyony9 आप

60-80/LE eyyed PMY

80-LO/9V Suipsury Aeysig
60:80/ ६ Suogkeyouren अ०पाश्ञ्र
“ON 0106 ॥0०//० 'ह1 491० >0प०प

10180 1503

(OL) 0100 ‘equelejex)
YAISIOIY SLISSV JO JONVNVINIVI NON 40 INAWALVIS
1- XIGN3ddV

o
3
9
f=



8 60-80/€9 yodueyg Ben, ¢
8 60-80/9S WRIT POUT डर
9 80-L0/r1 SusweiziIN Suowey €
UL 60-80/6b Sueyysuessy Zz
9 80-/0/ ८ एकाप3 SUIqiog T

"ON Dibd ID@AsON 'त। ५91० ewON

10180 UNOS

8 60-80/1 weyedueny wiysury 01
6 60-80/01 Byjryssueyy wryosury, a
6 60-80/L9 epsuly 1qey 3
6 60-80/79 Suosuo0y voy L
I 60-80/99 SueyyeAyH ०्गा 9
L 60-80/LS Sunyoey, दर
6 60-80/19 BSN हप्रठ्ठा 5
L 60-80/79 SuoASuLy, €
or 60-80/89 TekSdiyg A
8 60-80/8S Suosusyg T

"ON Dibd IDEAsON 'त। ५91० OwON

10॥90 ULON



9 60-80/8€ अगणा Suopyey 6
L 80-L0/Sr yeruny Aaey 8
8 80-L0/87 eyyefAosueryy 1[su0y L
। 9 60-80//2 प्रपप्णपुआप) yey 9
L 60-80/LE BIpeg PMNY दर
| L 60-80/६६ प्रप०5 950४प७ a
8 60-80/8 eiepAaueqns eyye|wield €
L ६ 80-/0/छः Inpuieg Suopey, Zz
6 80-/0/67 uayodajoq T
L 60-80/91 Sueyjweypeysy, tems 0
6 6080/11 Boy 6
| 9 80-/0/८ KozSury wessy 8
8 80-L0/0$ eyyesunpng 5
| I 60-80/ ६ Suoqhoyouen youuey 9
9 80-/0/#? Tueyy Aoyoed S
| 9 80-/0/8 uidiey, yoousyy >
9 60-80/6 ‘AoBury जराप्णढ €
9 80-L0/01 uepueg ise Z
| 9 60-80/9% urepurg 15०५ T

“ON Bibg १1० -/ (० कि. है। 4931० SUWIPN

(Z'LL') 0/00 :900/9/9/90/) 12190 [७०3
5000230 4O JONVNALNIVA NON 4७ LNAWSIVIS
Il — XIGN4ddV



60-80/S€ Toyoelny

60-80/S I WR}IZEN Wee 0
‘ON 0104 ADEA/ON A’ 491० SWON

| 6 9| 80-/0/#६£ | ureusueyy Huey | Fs
8| 80-/0/8८ | हणापु०णाठ Surzhen | €
8| 30-LO/EE | dereq| 2
L 80-LO/LE uedoysey #गग्पापा, I
‘ON Did 4DeA/'ON 'ह। 491० SWON
101५0 ISOM,
5 60-80/6८ Suopey, 77 Te
9 80-LO/E Buo keg 0¢
9 80-LO/L Teyy हद
5 80-/0/ हपाकाष्प eyury, Td
v 80-LO/Pr yeyoueyy प्गाएए 5 lz
9 60-80/Z1 Pqauig 9Z
9 80-L0/6 wrepueg [equeQ SZ
5 80-/0/द# हपष्पराएप) $b
6 60-80/9€ ureyysuex OYW Z
9 80-/0/9 BzeL ZZ
8
9



10)
ec
£
3
3
(oI
xe)
=
fey
a
©
foc
S
o
हम
G
०

L 60-80/8¢ youry Suepeury OI
५ 60-80/1 weyeduen wiysury SI
9 80-L0/r1 yoSurg 1405-प्पणात tI
9 60-80/€1 Suopsury youieg. €l
L 60-80/01 Tyssueyy uryosury ZI
8 60-80/L9 epsury 1qey Il
8 60-80/79 Suosuoy us 01
6 60-80/99 SueyyekD oop 6
9 60-80/LS sunyoey 8
g 60-80/SS uoyor’y] L
L 60-80/19 e5eN Suooy, 9
L 60-80/€ wre kayg youRN दर
9 60-:80/79 SUOASUTL, 5
8 60-80/S9 ae kSdiyg €
L 60-80/09 sueyysunyo Zz
6 60-80/6S Suojwny, Suosuoy 1

‘ON Dibd

IDO\/ON 'ते।

dO JO ०0५०७

401५0 ULON



L 80-/0/91 Sueyyjoy owsury 01
६ 80-LO/L1 TW], 6
8 80-LO/61 TeXOL yeAeureg g
v 80-L0/Z% ‘Kedyog oosury ZL
L 80-LO/TI Suesuey Suessuex 9
L 60-80/€9 yodureyg en ¢
9 60-80/9५ WRITS POU, डर
v 80-LO/r1 SuowviziIN SuoweY €
L 60-80/6r Sueyjsuessy Z
“ 80-LO/IZ eqny) SuIqiog T
‘ON Did ADeAON "Al ५91० ०५५० ON 18

400५0 ७५॥105



Suiprysel |

wesueyy tie y |

हएए1००) |

Sueisuoyy Sueywy |

wosyny,,

Sueyysue,

पथ

yizsunT Sunpies |

efuly woyssury

SurysyeAy ISOM ct

pur Aoy

अथप्पात्त Aoymey

eyuey

Suiqieg Suny

yOpUeN एशाणुए

अग्पशुर जाएएड़

Sueyjeuy

Azur] wessy
49 Bo ewoNn

seq qT

JOUIsIG 1० SON

yoysuey

3990 ५००६8 JO SUION

(9'L'Z 0/00 /900५9/9/90)
SORIN JO flony SOUDWUOJed 40] ५०॥०9|99 9100105

III- XIGNAddV


een]

see]

ress] wwe
Suodwen Suopsury

xc ae] CET

५9 5० ०0५० 90110 4००३ 1० EID) JOUYsIg JO 50५०१



eoup|pg

BuisojD

einjipuedxy

IPJOL

jdisoel ‘Osi

310५8 ००015

109
0५०1 puny

soup|pg
Bulusdo

५8 %811 E1655 81 9//%9 €6'SEI 0L'067 €8'TLSS ZLOLL TOL
60 81 67'8L 8६966 0#६६ 0S'E1 80 ५568 07175 1०७
#5६011|_ 95 ६कह 01/1५1 8५५ 19°68 #02८6६1| 4862 प॥105 |
52091 SLOLET 00 8/#1 478 1/. 65 ६8५६1 | 6015५ qseq|
५9 & 80 185 ६८४9 810 88%६ 67 LSb ह्घ्व्दा qUON 60-8007
८862 ८८ ६1६ #9 &६ छ्क्क 00५ 10%6८ TIN qinos
6015 दा 86६ IZ 6# 29% 0098 #501६ TIN qseq
ध्घ्व्दा 28 ६४ 5८965 TIN TIN LTLL 86 815 qUON 80-/00८
86 815 68 192 28 08/ TIN TIN 28 08/ TIN qUON 10-9007

(६१३० ut saadny)

(SLL Z 0/00 90019/9/90/)
SOAUN YAGNA NOILISOd GNN4 ONIMOHS LNAWALVLS

Al-XIGNAddV



अथप्पात्त
0000५ 5 000001 #00८ ५ 80-/0/9% #गण्तत €1
0000५ 5 00000 ६ 70-६002 L 60-80/ZI [2१575 दा
0000८ 0009६ 00000 ८ 700८ 1 80-/0/0५ | ध्पजशुव्प्शशा$ I
- - 000‘00'T 7002 || 80-LO/EE dereq 01
eiepAoueqng
SITTE 00007 00000 ६ 700८ 9 60:80/80 vyye[wiosd 6
° 000५ 00000 ६ 7002 || 60-80/[[ 159त्त 8
Suoquoyouen
fk ie 00000 ६ 900८ ‘a 60:80/ ६ journey,
0000५ - 00000 ६ 70-६002 z 60-80/EE | Hues AeSueyD
0५/ टा हर 00000 ६ a a 80-LO/LY qd Suny
eiepAajeyd.
000°00'T - 00000 ६ ५0-700८ I 60-80/L0 weysury
fi p 000°00'T 700८2 I 80-LO/tr Sueyyeun
- - 000‘00°T #70-६002८ || 80-/0/क& | गाएएए४६ 5700४],
0000५ ६ 00000 ६ हर v 80-LO/6r ueyodejeq

(2 ७) 1४०० (2 u)

>>प०पग्रपाणष 4५७4 espe] 1809 प०॥००13.. ५०॥०7७19 Jo IDEA “ON 0100 ॥०90/ /०प Ul

(L'€ 0100 :90५9/9/90)
sIONpaId AUD 80॥019098 JOU UDA |॥5 DUD ५90109 |OAUSH JO 19॥ BuMOUs JUSWUAIOIS
A- XIQNAddV



£
3
9
=
5
2

000 00 I

000 00 ६

100८

60-80/SE

5 5 000 001 ५0-7002८ ६ 80-L007/ZZ | Aeydogeezsurq 9
oowsues

हा रु 000001 #00८ I 80-L0/07 Suoqey Sz

LOE rl 5 000 001 7007 I 80-L007/81] ryduren veg ve
suyeyoyy

3 : 000°00'L 1007 I 80-L0/91 oowsury घ्ट

000 001 5 000 00६ #0-500८ v 60-8002/6 | AeASurq आप्या$ ट्ट
WR}IZEN,

0000५ कर 00000 ६ 7007 5 60-8002/SI wepepy 1Z
अथणा,

हर 2 000°00°¢ ५0-700८ € 60-8007/8€ Suopyey 0ट

000 001 a 00000 ६ ५0-7002 v 60-8002/Lr equy 6l
Suoydueyonyd

000°08 ° 000°00°¢ ५0-700८ ६ 60-800८//८ yey 81
Suvsury

3 i 000001 7002 I 80-L0/I1 SunoAsuey LI

ueyoeinyd

91

00009

(2 ०) jsoo
SOUDUS}UID

4५००1 espe]

000°00'I
000°00'I
(2 u)

18०० ७०॥०००७3

90-7002

७०॥०७३० Jo IDSA

“ON Dibg

60-80/0#7

80-८0#7

ADEA /ON UI

Aezury uruing
yeyoeyy
FUMES

UN 3० SLUDN



000°00‘69 [BIOL

a ५टट0६ 000 001 I 80-LO/IE Aoysuex iis

000s - 000°00'I 5 I 80-L0/8E Sueyjesoy, 9६

0000५ ft 000‘00'I $0-7007 I 80-L0/0P SurpryseL ५६
0 प्पाप्‌)

3 2 000°00'L 7007 € 80-LO/SZ SuvAsuig ve

il ह 000 001 700८ ५ 80-/0/82 5परापुछु४४०0 ६६
४४.

- - 000°00'I 700८ I 80-LO/97 woyosury ZE

000५ 000 001 #0-500८ I 80-LO/ZE wosyny 1६
dorzsuny

00001 Fi 000°00'I 7002 I 80-/0/८ Suopieg 0६

- 000५ 000 001 ५0-700८ ६ 80-/0/7६ | weusueyy trey 6ट

i i 00000 ६ 700८ ट 80-/0/9% | 5एपा5प४/ oyy 87
vypyeyAosuey)

006 ६9 ° 00000 ट #0-६00८ ट 80-/0/8# एठिप्रण्त्त lz

(2 ०) 1४००

399५0039|५॥०॥७

4५००1 espe]

(2 u)

18०० ७०॥०००७3

७०॥०७३० Jo IDSA “ON Dibg

ABSA /ON Al

{Un Jo SLUION



01-60/६
01-60/]
01-60/८

01-60/8

01-60/6

हपष्ठप्गाञ्रष्,

Suywey
Suopjng

01-60/r

01-60/9

Suod
Ot:
Suopel,
Bue
न्पाग्गाप>

01-60/५

ynquiny

प्ण्ण Jo jo
‘ON 4 ON

uoyonpoid uN ए०॥०००७०
Jedog/Wwe}! joUCY AlpIp MOD YIIWAdINOd Jojoes
॥001॥1/9॥॥190013 णगणगणव [9/190 019 /जि०09/995818 eAYONPOld

(syp0] un 5०००) (Z'§ 0100 ‘eOuEIEJEe))
UDO] USAIH ANO!S ISH ॥95 10 19॥ BuIMOYs JUSUUSLO}S

lA -XIpueddy

01-60/2

प०णप००्त