PREFACE

This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor
under Article 151 of the Constitution.

The Report sets out the results of audit under various sections of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 in respect of financial assistance
given to Urban Local Bodies and Panchayat Raj Institutions.

Matters arising from the Finance and Appropriation Accounts for
the year 2009-10 together with other points arising out of audit of
transactions of the Government of Tamil Nadu are included in
separate volumes of the Report (Civil) of 2009-10.

The Report containing the observations arising out of audit of
Statutory Corporations, Boards and Government Companies and the
Report containing such observations on revenue receipts are
presented separately.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to
notice in the course of test check of accounts of Urban Local Bodies
and Panchayat Raj Institutions during the year 2009-10 as well as
those which had come to notice in earlier years but could not be
dealt with in previous Reports on the Government of Tamil Nadu.
Matters relating to the period subsequent to March 2010 have also
been included wherever considered necessary.



RVIEW

This Report contains six chapters. The first and the fourth chapter contain a
summary of finances and financial reporting of Urban Local Bodies and
Panchayat Raj Institutions respectively. The second chapter contains two
performance audit reviews on Urban Local Bodies. The third chapter contains
thirteen paragraphs based on the audit of financial transactions of the Urban
Local Bodies. The fifth chapter contains a performance audit review on
Panchayat Raj Institutions and sixth chapter contains a paragraph based on
the audit of financial transactions of Panchayat Raj Institutions. A synopsis of
the findings contained in the performance reviews and paragraphs is presented
in this overview.

I Accounts and finances of Urban Local Bodies

A review of finances of Urban Local Bodies revealed that there was steady
increase in the overall receipts and expenditure during 2007-08 to 2009-10.
Assigned revenue declined in 2009-10 compared to 2008-09. There was
increase in outstanding loans at the end of March 2010 compared to last year.
There were arrears in finalisation of accounts by the Urban Local Bodies and
there were also arrears in audit of accounts by the Director of Local Fund Audit
(DLFA) due to non-submission of annual accounts after rectification as
suggested by DLFA. As of January 2011, Audit was completed by DLFA only
in seven municipalities and 48 town panchayats for the year 2009-10.

(Paragraphs 1.1 to 1.12)

vii Performance reviews - Urban Local Bodies
1 Running of Educational Institutions by Chennai City Municipal
Corporation

Chennai City Municipal Corporation runs 281 schools from Primary to Higher
secondary level catering to the needs of 1.07 lakh students with an aim to meet
the educational needs of the poor. For the purpose of capital and maintenance
expenditure, the Corporation has an Elementary Education Fund, credited with
the proceeds of Education tax. The schools were required to be maintained
with all necessary basic amenities and to provide a hygienic environment to the
students and staff.

Performance review revealed that only 47 to 53 per cent of Elementary
Education Fund was utilized during 2005-09 and € 35.05 crore was diverted to
other works not authorized under Elementary Education Fund. Dilapidated
buildings were not taken up for maintenance/reconstruction and the schools
continued to operate in the dilapidated buildings. None of the school buildings
had a license for public safety under the Tamil Nadu Public Buildings
(Licensing) Act, 1965. Further, the fire extinguishers provided were not
refilled for more than two to three years. The Corporation school students
could not utilize the uniforms issued by the Government during 2005-10 under
free supply scheme, as they were different from the uniform adopted by the
Corporation. None of the 17 short term vocational courses offered by the four
community colleges run by the Corporation were recognized by Directorate
General of Employment & Training/National Council for Vocational Training.

(Paragraph 2.1)

vii



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2070

2 Implementation of accepted recommendations of Third State
Finance Commission in Urban Local Bodies

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) constituted Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 as per Article 243 (I) and 243 (Y) of
the Constitution of India to analyse the financial position of local bodies and to
make recommendations for the award period 2007-2012. TSFC submitted its
report in September 2006. Performance Audit on implementation of accepted
recommendations of Third State Finance Commission in Urban Local Bodies
revealed that an amount of % 8.31 crore towards Cable TV tax for the period
from 2003-04 to 2007-08 was not assigned to 475 Urban Local Bodies as of
November 2010. Surcharge on Stamp Duty of % 668.40 crore for the period
from April 2007 to March 2010 was assigned to 642 Urban Local Bodies
belatedly with delay ranging between one to nineteen months. Urban Local
Bodies did not levy the minimum property tax for the years 2007-08, 2008-09
and 2009-10 for want of orders from the Government resulting in loss of
revenue of % 86.94 lakh in 79 test checked Urban Local Bodies. Reforms
recommended by the TSFC are yet to be implemented. State Government
failed to implement majority of the accepted recommendations as of November
2010, though High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary was formed in May 2007 and did not meet even once to monitor the
implementation of accepted recommendations of TSFC, thus defeating the
objective of TSFC.

(Paragraph 2.2)
आप Audit of transactions in Urban Local Bodies
Failure to include the additional rooms constructed by a Hotel for property tax
assessment and adoption of flat tariff for calculation of property tax by Chennai

City Municipal Corporation resulted in short collection of property tax by
₹ 1.37 crore.

(Paragraph 3.1.1)

Failure of Devakottai Municipality to adopt correct rate of Property Tax
resulted in loss of revenue of € 60.74 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.1.2)

Award of lease for bus entry fee collection by Tiruvannamalai Municipality
without assessing the number of buses entering the bus stand resulted in a
revenue loss of € 55.21 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.1.3)

Failure of Kancheepuram Municipality to renew the bank guarantee provided
by a contractor towards mobilization advance resulted in a 1055
of & 33.82 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.1.4)

Failure of Mannachanallur Town Panchayat to collect water meter maintenance
charges for domestic water supply connections resulted in a revenue loss of
₹ 16.04 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.1.5)

viii



Overview

Failure of Tirunelveli City Municipal Corporation to implement the amended
by-law for underground drainage scheme resulted in non-realisation of revenue
of 10.79 lakh towards monthly charges.

(Paragraph 3.1.6)

Failure of Manavalakurichi Town Panchayat to obtain prior approval from
Town and Country Planning Department before commencing the construction
of bus stand resulted in unfruitful expenditure of € 47 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.2.1)

Failure of Krishnagiri and Mayiladuthurai Municipalities to utilize the newly
constructed modernized slaughter house resulted in unfruitful expenditure of
₹ 37.35 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.2.2)

Failure of Nagapattinam Municipality to explore the possibility of maintaining
Solar Street Lights before installation resulted in wasteful expenditure of
₹ 20.40 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.2.3)

Failure to install bio-mass gasifiers and to ensure availability of qualified
manpower to operate them by Nagapattinam Municipality resulted in an
unfruitful expenditure of ¥ 13.07 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.2.4)

Failure of Namakkal Municipality to collect Service Tax from tenants of
immovable property during June 2007 to March 2009 led to an avoidable
expenditure of € 17.73 lakh on payment of Service Tax.

(Paragraph 3.3.1)

Failure of Dindigul Municipality to adhere to the contract agreement resulted in
unintended benefit of 11.76 lakh to the contractor.

(Paragraph 3.4.1)

Failure of Colachel Municipality to conduct demand survey before construction
of shops resulted in unproductive investment of € 30.41 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.5.1)

वाट Accounts and finances of Panchayat Raj Institutions

A review of finances of Panchayat Raj Institutions revealed that the
expenditure is more than the receipts from 2007-08 to 2009-10. Computers
purchased at a cost of € 51.64 crore and distributed to PRIs for maintenance of
accounts and data base had not been utilised for the intended purpose. As of
December 2010, nine Panchayat Unions and 14 District Panchayats are yet to
finalise their accounts for 2008-09 and all the 385 Panchayat Unions and 29
District Panchayats are yet to finalise their accounts for year 2009-10. Audit is
in arrears in 336 Panchayat Unions (87 per cent) and in 14 District Panchayats
(48 per cent) for the year 2008-09. Audit of 853 Village Panchayats for
2008-09 and 2,523 Village Panchayats for the year 2009-10 are also in arrears.

(Paragraphs 4.1 to 4.12)



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

1५ Performance reviews - Panchayat Raj Institutions

1 Implementation of accepted recommendations of Third State
Finance Commission in Panchayat Raj Institutions

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) constituted Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 as per Article 243 (I) and 243 (Y) of
the Constitution of India to analyse the financial position of local bodies and to
make recommendations for the award period 2007-2012. TSFC submitted its
report in September 2006. Performance Audit on implementation of accepted
recommendations of Third State Finance Commission in Panchayat Raj
Institutions revealed that an amount of हैं 76 lakh relating to Tax on Cable
Television for the period from 2003-04 to 2008-09 (upto June 2008) was not
assigned to the PRIs in six districts as of November 2010. Mines and mineral
fees of = 89.97 crore due to Village Panchayats in 21 districts for the period
from April 2007 to March 2010 were adjusted after a delay of one to 26
months. Excess allocation to Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund resulted in short
assignment of State Finance Commission devolution grant to Village
Panchayats to the extent of € 111.46 crore. Self Help Groups and Social Audit
have not been involved at Village Panchayats level.

(Paragraph 5.1)
VI Audit of transactions in Panchayat Raj Institutions
Failure of the District Collector to follow the guidelines of Swarnajayanti
Grama Swarojgar Yojana and poor monitoring resulted in unfruitful

expenditure and blocking of funds to the tune of € 95.85 lakh in construction of
a Training Centre.

(Paragraph 6.1.1)



CHAPTER I

SEC IN ‘A’
AN OVERVIEW OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES

1.1 Background

The 74" constitutional amendment gave constitutional status to Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) and established a system of uniform structure, regular election,
regular flow of funds through Finance Commission etc. As a follow up, the
States are required to entrust these bodies with such powers, functions and
responsibilities so as to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government.

Consequent to the 747 amendment of the Constitution, the Government of
Tamil Nadu amended the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920 for
transferring the powers and responsibilities to ULBs in order to implement
schemes for economic development and social justice including those in
relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.

1.2 State profile

The comparative demographic and developmental picture of the State is given
in Table 1.1 below. Tamil Nadu is the second most urbanised state in India.
The urban population of the State as per the 2001 census was 2.59 crore
constituting 42 per cent of the total State population (6.24 crore).

Table 1.1: Important statistics of the State

Unit State value National value

Sq.

N

Rank amongst

in

Numbers

1,000 males

(Source : Thirteenth Finance Commission and Census 2001)



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

1.2.1 Classification of Urban Local Bodies

The Municipalities and Town Panchayats are classified into different grades by
the Government of Tamil Nadu based on their own revenue and State Finance
Commission Grants, as given in Table 1.2.

Table 1.2: Income wise classification of ULBs

of ULB Grade Annual income Number

First grade

[Second grade _|

Total

(Source : Policy Note 2009-10 of Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department)

Organisational structure of ULBs

An Organisational structure of ULBs in Tamil Nadu is given below:

Principal Secretary, Municipal
Administration and Water Supply
Department

Commissioner, Chennai City Commissioner of Municipal Director of Town Panchayats
Municipal Corporation Administration (Administrative Control)
(Administrative Control) (Administrative Control)

Seven Regional Directors of

oners of other
nussioness ५ oun Municipal Administration

Elected Corporation

Nine Municipal
Council

Corporations

Assistant Directors of

District C Town Panchayats

‘orporation
Councils

Executive

Elected Municipal Commissioners of
Councils Municipalities

(Source : Directorate of Municipal Administration)



Chapter 1 - An Overview of Urban Local Bodies

1.4 _ Devolution of functions, functionaries and funds

Twelve out of 18 functions enlisted in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution
have been devolved to the Town Panchayats. Commissioner of Municipal
Administration (CMA) stated (June 2010) that 17 functions (except Fire
Service) have been devolved to municipalities and municipal corporations. In
Chennai City Municipal Corporation, only 13 functions have so far been
devolved and the function of water supply is handled by Chennai Metropolitan
Water Supply and Sewerage Board. As of March 2010, functionaries are
however yet to be transferred to the ULBs to carry out the devolved functions.
This is bound to have a negative impact on the performance of ULBs in these
areas.

Government reported that plan and non-plan discretionary grants were being
transferred to ULBs in addition to successive State Finance Commission
grants. These earmarked grants were intended for specific functions such as
water supply, roads, public health, street lighting, sanitation, etc., entrusted to
ULBs. The ULBs were also empowered to revise and levy local taxes such as
Property/House Tax, Profession Tax based on the recommendations of the
State Finance Commissions (SFCs), as accepted by the Government and as per
the Local Bodies Acts.

Based on the recommendations of the High Power Committee, State
Government enhanced (February 2009) the powers of CMA in respect of
Municipal Corporations other than Chennai to sanction estimates exceeding
र₹ One Crore but not exceeding हैं Five Crore.

1

Decentr:

ed planning
1.5.1 Standing Committees

ULBs shall constitute standing committees to perform the assigned functions.
The political constitution of the committees is given in Table 1.3 below:

Table 1.3: Political constitution of the Standing Committees

Category of

Standing Committees

Chairman (elected
among the members)

Chairman.
As per Section 241(1) of Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 State Government

constituted a District Planning Committee (DPC) in 28 districts in November
1997. The DPC consists of the following members:

. The Chairman of the District Panchayat;
. The Mayor of the City Municipal Corporation in the district;
. The Collector of the District and



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

. such number of persons, not less than four-fifth of the total number of
members of the Committee, as may be specified by the Government,
elected in the prescribed manner from amongst the members of the
District Panchayats/Town Panchayats and Councillors of the Municipal
Corporations and Municipal Councils in the district, in proportion to the
ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in
the district.

The role and responsibility of the DPC is to consolidate the plans prepared by
the District Panchayats, Panchayat Union Councils, Village Panchayats, Town
Panchayats, Municipal Councils and the Municipal Corporations in the district
and prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.

At present, the Annual Plans prepared at the apex level are only consolidated
and adopted as District plans. No separate inputs are received from the ULBs.
Requirements at the grass root level were thus not completely reflected in the
District plans.

1.6 Financial profile

1.6.1 Funds flow to ULBs

The major resource base of ULBs consists of State Finance Commission (SFC)
grants, Central Finance Commission (CFC) grants, Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS) Grants, Own Revenue and Assigned Revenue and Loans.

Table 1.4: Funds flow mechanism in ULBs

Corporations Municipalities Town Panchayats

Nature of Funds

Assessees and Assessces Assessees:
and users and users
State State
Government Government

| cor | [cor |
State State
Government Government
GOI/SG/ GOI/SG/
Financial Financial
Institution Institution Institution

1.6.2. Funds Flow Arrangements in flag ship schemes

The funds flow arrangements in flag ship schemes relating to ULBs are given
in Table 1.5.

Table 1.5: Fund flow arrangements in flagship schemes

Scheme Fund flow

Jawaharlal
Nehru National

Urban Renewal
Mission
(JNNURM)



Chapter 1 - An Overview of Urban Local Bodies

see Jayanti

Shahari Rozgar
Yojana (SISRY)

Table 1.6 below shows the details of receipts and expenditure of ULBs for the
period 2005-06 to 2009-10.
Table 1.6 : Details of receipts and expenditure of ULBs
@ in crore)
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10

Total Receipts 4,992

Total Expenditure 2,630 2,585 3,201

(Source: Details furnished by the Commissioner of Chennai City Municipal Corporation in
October 2010, March 2011 and May 2011; Commissioner of Municipal
Administration in December 2010 and Director of Town Panchayats in March 2011)

The percentage of expenditure/savings compared to Total Receipts for the
period 2005-06 to 2009-10 is as given in Table 1.7:

Table 1.7 : Percentage of expenditure/savings

2009-10
| 61 | 44 41
34 34
22 19

While the Capital Expenditure over the years ranged from 18 to 39 per cent of
the Total Receipts, Revenue Expenditure ranged from 34 to 61 per cent. The
savings was 5 to 48 per cent of the Total Receipts. ULBs failed to utilize these
savings towards Capital Expenditure for creating additional infrastructure.

1

Accounting frame

Accrual-based system of accounting is being followed in all Municipal
Corporations and Municipalities as per the orders of the Government of Tamil
Nadu with effect from 2000-01 and in all Town Panchayats with effect from
2002-03.

Au

As per the Government Order issued in August 1992, audit of ULBs had been
entrusted to Director of Local Fund Audit (DLFA). He is to certify the
correctness of accounts, assess internal control system and report cases of loss,
theft and fraud to auditees and to the State Government. Further, Principal
Accountant General (PAG) provides technical guidance to DLFA on a



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

continuing basis regarding audit of accounts of the ULBs in terms of
Government of Tamil Nadu’s order of March 2003.

The PAG audits the ULBs under Section 14 (2) of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

Audit Reports upto the year 1995-96 were discussed by the Committee on
Public Accounts (PAC) and recommendations were issued. As of June 2011,
there were 106 recommendations relating to 1985-86 to 1995-96 of the
Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department pending final
settlement, which inter-alia consisted of paragraphs relating to ULBs. CAG’s
Audit Report on ULBs presented in State Legislature for the years 2003-04 to
2008-09 have not been taken up for discussion by PAC.

1.8.1 Audit of ULBs by Principal Accountant General (Civil Audit)

Audit of ULBs through test check of records are followed-up through
Inspection Reports issued to the Commissioner of Municipal Administration
with copies to ULBs concerned. Government had issued general orders in
April 1967 fixing a time limit of four weeks for prompt response by the
authorities for all such paragraphs included in the Inspection Reports issued by
Audit.

As of December 2010, 4,278 paragraphs relating to 681 Inspection Reports
were not settled for want of satisfactory replies.



Chapter 1 - An Overview of Urban Local Bodies

1.9 Introduction

Financial reporting in the ULBs is a key element of accountability. The
matters relating to drawal of funds, form of bills, incurring of expenditure,
maintenance of accounts, rendering of accounts by the ULBs are governed by
respective ULB Acts. A chart depicting various sources of revenues of ULBs
is given in Appendix 1.1.

1.10 Accounts maintained by Urban Local Bodies

The following accounts are prepared on accrual basis by adopting Double
Entry Accounting System (DEAS) as prescribed under Tamil Nadu Accounting
Manual for ULBs in Tamil Nadu by all the Municipalities, nine Municipal
Corporations (excluding Chennai) and all Town Panchayats:

> Revenue Fund and Capital Fund
> Water Supply and Drainage Fund (except Town Panchayats)
> Elementary Education Fund (except Town Panchayats)

The Chennai City Municipal Corporation maintains (i) a General Fund
comprising both Revenue and Capital Funds and (ii) an Elementary Education
Fund. The cash balance of each of the above funds is maintained in a separate
bank account.

The figures in this Chapter are compiled from the details furnished by the
ULBs. However in the absence of data compiled from the audited account of
the ULBs by the Department/Government, the accuracy of these figures could
not be authenticated and the data are provisional subject to audit by DLFA.

1.11 __ Financial Reporting Is

1.11.1 Budget

Budget is the most important tool for financial planning, accountability and
control. As per the respective Acts of the ULBs, budget proposals containing
detailed estimates of income and expenditure expected during the ensuing year
were to be prepared by the respective standing committees of ULBs after
considering the estimates and proposals submitted by the executive authorities
of ULBs every year. After considering the proposals, the Finance, Audit and
Planning Committee was to prepare the budget showing the income and
expenditure of the respective ULBs for the ensuing year and to place it before
the governing body every year.



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

1.11.2 Position of outstanding loans

The position of outstanding loans as of March 2010, is given in Table 1.8.

Table 1.8: Position of outstanding loans in ULBs as of March 2010

@in crore)

Category of ULB Position of consolidated loan

Chennai City Municipal Corporation

Other Municipal Corporations

450.13
Municipalities 517.44
Town Panchayats 274.77

(Source: Details furnished by Commissioner of Chennai City Municipal Corporation (April
2011), CMA (December 2010) and Director of Town Panchayats (March 2011))

* The variation between the closing balance for the year ended 31 March 2009 and the opening
balance for the year 2009-10 is due to reconciliation of dues with the accounts of financial
institutions as reported by CMA in December 2010.

** The variation between closing balance for 2008-09 and opening balance for 2009-10 is due
to non finalization of audit by DLFA as reported by DTP in March 2011.

1.11.3 Arrears in Accounts

While accepting the Third State Finance Commission (TSFC)
recommendation, the State Government stated that the accounts will be
finalised within three months after the end of the financial year. Though due
date of submission of accounts to DLFA by Municipal Corporations is 30"
June; Municipalities is 157 May and for Town Panchayats is 30" April, the
position of non-submission of accounts by ULBs to DLFA from 2008-09 as of
January 2011 is given in Table 1.9.

Table 1.9 : Position of non-submission of accounts of ULBs

Number of ULBs not submitted
Category of ULB accounts relating to

(Source: Details furnished by DLFA in March 2011)

The pendency in preparation of accounts of ULBs and the eventual delay in the
audit of their accounts would result in continued existence of deficiencies in
the accounts and the respective council could not analyse the true and correct
picture of the financial position of the ULBs in time.

1.11.4 Arrears in Audit

Audit of accounts of all ULBs was completed by DLFA up to 2006-07.
Position of arrears in completion of audit of ULBs, as of January 2011, as
reported by DLFA in March 2011 is given in Table 1.10.



Category of ULB

Chapter 1 - An Overview of Urban Local Bodies

Table 1.10 : Position of non-completion of audit of ULBs

2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Number of units Number of units Number of units
Total
number

8 (2007-08)

10 (2008-09)
10 (2009-10)

150 (2007-08)
148 (2008-09)
148 (2009-10)

561
(Source: Details furnished by DLFA in March 2011)

Although the due date of submission of accounts for Municipal Corporations is
30" June, for Municipalities 15" May and for Town Panchayats is 30" April,
audit of only seven Municipalities and 48 Town Panchayats for the year
2009-10 was completed as of January 2011. The main reason attributed (March
2011) by DLFA for the arrears was due to non-submission of annual accounts
returned by the DLFA to the ULBs for rectification of accounts.

DLFA reported (April 2011) that the number of paragraphs relating to
Municipal Corporations, Municipalities and Town Panchayats included in their
Inspection Reports (IRs) issued upto 2007-08 that were pending settlement as
of March 2010 aggregated to 3,17,099 paragraphs. The year-wise break-up
details are given in Appendix 1.2. The details of inspection paragraphs issued
during 2008-09 are yet to be compiled by DLFA and made available to
Audit.Based on the recommendations of TSFC, a District High Level
Committee (DHLC) for settling the pending paragraphs of DLFA relating to
Municipal Corporations and a State High Level Committee for monitoring the
functions of DHLC was formed in 2007. A district committee for settling
pending paragraphs was already in existence.

The CMA stated (April 2011) that 3,554 paragraphs relating to six Municipal
Corporations (Coimbatore, Madurai, Salem, Tirunelveli, Tiruppur and
Thoothukudi) and 2,327 paragraphs relating to Municipalities were settled
during 2010-11 in the DHLC meetings.

The DTP stated (April 2011) that 51 DHLC meetings and three State High
Level Committee meetings were conducted between January 2008 and
February 2011 and 2,480 audit objections relating to Town Panchayats were
settled in those meetings.

1.12 _Concel n

Transfer of functionaries to ULBs to carry out devolved functions have not
been made by the Government. Due to non-preparation of accounts in time by
ULBs, true and correct picture of their financial position could not be analysed
in time. DLFA could not complete the audit due to non-submission of annual
accounts returned by him to ULBs for rectification of accounts. As of January
2011, Audit has been completed only in seven municipalities and 48 town
panchayats for the year 2009-10 while Audit of 141 Municipalities and 513
Town Panchayats are yet to be completed for the year 2009-10.

9


ER Il

PERFORMANCE REVIEWS
(URBAN LOCAL BODIES)

This Chapter presents two performance reviews dealing with (i) Running of
Educational Institutions by Chennai City Municipal Corporation and (ii)
Implementation of accepted recommendations of Third State Finance
Commission in Urban Local Bodies.

MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION AND
WATER SUPPLY DEPARTMENT

2.1. Running of Educational Institutio by Chennai City

Executive Summary

Chennai City Municipal Corporation runs 281 schools from Primary to Higher
secondary level catering to the needs of 1.07 lakh students with an aim to meet
the educational needs of the poor. For the purpose of capital and maintenance
expenditure of schools, the Corporation has an Elementary Education Fund,
credited with the proceeds of Education tax. The schools are required to be
maintained with all necessary basic amenities and to provide a hygienic
environment to the students and staff.

Performance review of running of educational institutions by the Chennai City
Municipal Corporation revealed that only 47 to 53 per cent of Elementary
Education Fund was utilized during 2005-09 and % 35.05 crore was diverted to
other works not authorized under Elementary Education Fund. Dilapidated
buildings were not taken up for maintenance/reconstruction and the schools
continued to operate in the dilapidated buildings. None of the school buildings
had a license for public safety under the Tamil Nadu Public Buildings
(Licensing) Act, 1965. Further, the fire extinguishers provided were not
refilled for more than two to three years. The Corporation school students
could not utilize the uniforms issued by the Government during 2005-10 under
free supply scheme, as they were different from the uniform adopted by the
Corporation. None of the 17 short term vocational courses offered by the four
community colleges run by the Corporation were recognized by Directorate
General of Employment and Training/National Council for Vocational
Training.

2.1.1 Introduction

Chennai City Municipal Corporation (Corporation) maintains 281 schools
(119 Primary, 95 Middle, 37 High and 30 Higher Secondary schools) besides
30 Kinder Garten schools attached with primary and middle schools. Apart
from this, it also runs four Community Colleges, one Industrial Training
Institute (ITI) for vocational courses and one special school for children with



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Muscular Dystrophy. Corporation apportions 2.5 per cent of the annual value
of the property, collected as education tax and credits the amount to
Elementary Education Fund (EEF) for utilization towards capital and
maintenance works of the schools maintained by the Corporation.

2.1.2 Organisational Setup

The role and responsibilities of officials in respect of schools run by
Corporation is given below:

= control of Chennai City Municipal Corporation

Administrative head of the Corporation and the appointing
authority for teaching staff of Corporation schools

Head of the Education Department and responsible for posting
of teachers in schools, deployment of staff, overall monitoring
and supervision of Education Department

Discharges the functions of Chief Educational Officer of the
District, who directly supervises the functions of all Assistant
Educational Officers

Responsible for control and monitoring all High/Higher
Secondary, Middle and Primary schools and noon-meal
activities

Responsible for coordinating the activities of all the
Primary/Middle schools in their respective Zones with that of
Education Department

2.1.3 Audit Objectives

The objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether

Budgeting and planning were proper and funds utilized judiciously,
civil works were executed according to the proposals/needs,

basic amenities have been provided in schools and statutory safety
norms were adhered,

man power for imparting quality education is adequate and effectively
utilized,

implementation of welfare schemes had the desired impact and

VV VV WV

> performance and activities of institutions were effectively monitored.

2.1.4 Audit Criteria

Audit findings were bench marked against the following criteria:

> The Tamil Nadu Elementary Education Act, 1920.



Poor utilization of EEF
for capital and
maintenance works and
diversion of EEF to
other works

ee Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

> The Tamil Nadu Educational Rules.
> The Tamil Nadu Educational code.

> Orders, guidelines/circulars etc., issued by Government/Corporation.

2.1.5 Scope and methodology of Audit

The performance audit was conducted between October 2010 and February
2011 covering the period from 2005-06 to 2009-10 based on stratified
sampling. Details of schools selected are given in Appendix 2.1. Records of
79 schools (35 primary, 29 middle, 10 high and 5 higher secondary), one
community college and one ITI were test checked. Details were also collected
from 159 primary/middle/high/higher secondary schools through survey
questionnaires/Audit Slips. Entry conference with Commissioner, Chennai
City Municipal Corporation was held on 1 December 2010. The findings were
discussed with Commissioner, Chennai City Municipal Corporation in an exit
conference on 2 February 2011. Exit conference was held with
Commissioner, Chennai City Municipal Corporation on behalf of Government
on 28 April 2011.

assess whether budgeting and planning were proper

and funds utilized judiciously

2.1.6 Finance

2.1.6.1 Poor planning of expenditure

Corporation apportions 2.5 per cent of the annual value of the property
collected as education tax along with property tax and credits the amount to
EEF for utilization towards capital and maintenance works of educational
institutions. The receipt and utilization out of the EEF for the years 2005-10
were as given in Appendix 2.2.

The percentage of expenditure out of the EEF during 2005-09 ranged between
47 and 53 only, which was mainly due to non-execution of
618' works of the priority building works’ proposed by the Education
Department for the needy schools. Further, in violation of Government
guidelines (November 2005), Corporation diverted % 35.05 crore during
2008-09 for roads/street lights. Government stated (April 2011) that the
amount was utilized to lay roads leading to the schools. The reply was not
tenable as EEF should be utilized only for capital and maintenance works of
schools and Corporation provides funds separately in the budget every year for
laying and maintenance of roads.

Includes priority works not taken up during previous years.
Construction of new class rooms/toilets/dining halls/labs etc.



Non-execution of
priority works
due to lack of
co-ordination

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

2.1.6.2 Shortfall in maintenance expenditure

As per the guidelines issued by the State Government (March 1999), an

amount not exceeding 25 per cent of EEF collected was to be spent for

maintenance of school buildings every year. Education tax collected and

utilized for maintenance during 2005-06 to 2009-10 were as given in the

Table: 2.1 below:

Table 2.1 : Education Tax collected and utilized for maintenance of school buildings
@ in crore)

Year —_ Budget Estimate for Amount to be Amount Percentage
lection of provided for actually spent _ of utilisation
maintenance
(25 per cent of

Total

(Source : Details furnished by Chennai City Municipal Corporation)

It was seen from the above table that the annual expenditure incurred by
Corporation for maintenance of school buildings every year ranged between
five to eight per cent only against the permitted percentage of 25 during the
years 2005-10, though there was need for civil works in number of schools as
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

Recommendation 1: Corporation should prepare a realistic budget for
EEF and utilize it only for capital/maintenance works of schools without
any diversion.

the proposals/needs

2.1.7 Construction and Maintenance of school buildings

Corporation schools every year forward their requirements of additional
classrooms/new buildings/Nutritious Noon Meal Programme (NNMP) sheds/
toilets to the Education Department. The Education Department consolidates
these requests and prepares a priority list of works for that particular year and
forwards the same to the Buildings Department for execution. However,
Buildings Department took up the work only on case to case basis, as they had
to cater to the needs of all other departments of Corporation also.

During 2005-10, Education Department forwarded 697 priority works to the
Buildings Department for execution. Out of this, the Buildings Department
took up only 79 works during 2005-10 and left 618 works unattended for more
than two to five years. Education Department, neither had any record of the
number of works taken up for construction and number of buildings handed



Non-execution of
priority works
leading to
functioning of
schools in
dilapidated
buildings

Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

over to schools after completion nor did it follow-up/coordinate with the
Buildings Department for early completion of the works. The Corporation
also did not explore the possibilities of taking up the works through other
agencies as funds were available for taking up the works.

2.1.7.1 Non-execution of deserving works

Corporation did not
execute civil works in
seven® test checked
schools which deserved
utmost attention as these
schools were functioning
in dilapidated buildings
with 1,505 students for
period ranging from two
to five years, despite
being included in the
priority list for
construction prepared by
Education Department.
Assistant Commissioner/Buildings Department/ Assistant Elementary
Educational Officer instructed three* of these schools to shift to a safe building
(September 2005 and August 2007). During this period, there were instances
of roof collapse, electric shocks due to damaged wiring, school operating in a
single room with no toilets, lack of water facility, roof leakage, overcrowding
of class rooms as other class rooms were unusable, etc.

> roof —

<

Out of these seven schools, two* schools were shifted (September 2008) to
another school (CPS, VOC play ground), thereby forcing all the three schools
to operate in single premises and one® school was shifted (August 2010) to the
nearby Higher Secondary school. The remaining four schools continued to
operate in the old buildings, despite availability of sufficient fund in EEF and
land for construction as Buildings Department did not include these buildings
for execution as stated in Paragraph 2.1.7. Government stated (April 2011)
that necessary action has been initiated to take up construction/maintenance
works in respect of the above schools and would be completed on war footing
basis.

3 CPS-Alwarpet, CMS-Coronation Nagar, CPS-Strahans Road (Tamil), CPS-Strahans
Road (Telugu), CPS-Moore Market, CPS-Chinna Kodungaiyur and CPS-Chinna
Babu Street.

‘ CPS-Alwarpet , CPS-Strahans Road (Tamil) and CPS-Strahans Road (Telugu).

s CPS-Strahans Road (Tamil) and CPS-Strahans Road (Telugu).

6 CPS-Alwarpet.



Short comings in
providing basic
amenities in
Corporation
schools

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

2.1.7.2 Non-execution of maintenance works

The school buildings are to
be structurally sound and
fulfill requisite safety
norms. They should be
provided with necessary
amenities, impervious
ceiling, good lighting and
ventilation arrangement.
Corporation has been
divided into 10 Zones for
better administration and
Zonal Officers of the
respective Zones were responsible for maintenance of Corporation schools.
The maintenance works were to be taken up based on the requests received
from the schools and field inspection reports submitted by various field level
officers. Though sufficient funds under EEF were available for maintenance
of schools and repeated requests were made by the schools, the Zonal Officers
did not take up the work for reasons not on record. The Superintending
Engineer, Buildings Department also did not exercise any control in this
regard. In nine test checked schools (Appendix 2.3), works such as roof
leaking, rewiring of electrical lines, relaying of flooring, reconstruction of
NNMP sheds and replacement of thatched and AC roof were not executed.

CPS, Cooks road

Recommendation 2: Periodical maintenance of school buildings should be
taken up and necessary steps should be taken for construction of new
buildings for schools operating in old/dilapidated buildings based on the
periodical field inspection reports.

Audit Objective 3: To assess whether basic amenities have been provided in
schools and statutory safety norms were adhered

2.1.8 Basic amenities

The Manual for Secondary and Higher Secondary schools provides that
schools should be pedagogic and meet the sanitary/hygienic requirements with
suitable and adequate latrines/urinals for students and staff separately for men
and women with a playground. Further school building should be structurally
sound, suitable and admit sufficient air/light. Provision of pure drinking
water, play ground and required number of toilets and urinals are some of the
basic amenities to be provided for running a school. Shortcomings noticed in
this regard in the Corporation schools were as discussed below:

2.1.81 Non-provision of purified drinking water

The Commissioner of Municipal Administration had issued (November 2005)
guidelines for utilization of EEF to provide drinking water facilities preferably
with Reverse Osmosis (RO) System to the schools. Audit noticed that in 29



Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

out of 79 sample schools (37 per cent), provision for purified drinking water
was not made and students were consuming water from open sources such as
water pumps, well and water supplied through lorries etc. Government stated
(April 2011) that RO plants were installed so far in 27 high/higher secondary
schools and in respect of another 24 schools, RO plant installation would be
installed in the coming academic year. The fact remained that since
November 2005 only 27 schools out of 281 had been provided with purified
drinking water facilities.

2.1.8.2 Non-availability of play grounds and non-maintenance of
available play grounds

The Manual for High/Higher Secondary schools stipulates that provision of
land should be made for play ground besides the school building. Audit
noticed that 34 per cent’ of high/higher secondary schools from which details
were obtained, did not have play grounds.

Play grounds of three other schools* were not maintained or used by private
parties for parking and washing their vehicles, thereby depriving the students
of these schools the opportunities for recreational and sports activities.
Government stated (April 2011) that Education Department of Corporation is
taking earnest effort to identify adjoining unused lands to be used as play
grounds for schools.

14 out of 41 high/higher secondary schools.
8 CMS-Kamaraj Colony, CHSS-Nesapakkam and CMS-MK Amman Koil Street.



Corporation failed
to ensure the
safety of students
by not following
statutory safety
norms

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

2.1.8.3 Sanitation

Education Department of Government of Tamil Nadu has prescribed norms
for provision of flush out latrine in schools at one per 25 girls and one per 50
boys and urinals at six per 100 boys. However, out of 79 sample schools,
seven schools did not have
Unhygienic Toilet - CPS, MGR Nagar required number of _ toilet
facilities and in 18 schools no
urinals were provided. Further,
in respect of eight schools
toilets and urinals were not
maintained properly for want of
water facilities, damaged and
unusable toilets and non-
execution of repair works
resulting in non-adherence of
Government norms and
depriving the basic amenities to the students of these schools. During Exit
Conference (February 2011), Commissioner stated that these issues would be
solved in a phased manner. The fact remains that inspite of availability of
sufficient fund, the Corporation has not been able to provide basic amenities in
schools.

2.1.9 Safety and Security measures

The Tamil Nadu Public Buildings (Licensing) Act, 1965 provides for
inspection and licensing to ensure the structural stability of the buildings.
Further, as fire hazard in public buildings is one of the most common
occurrence which is life threatening, fire extinguishers were installed and
maintained in these buildings. A test check of schools revealed the following:

2.1.9.1 Building licences

The Tamil Nadu Public Buildings (Licensing) Act, 1965 stipulates that public
buildings like schools shall be used only under a valid license obtained from
competent authority. However, none of the Corporation schools had obtained
license from competent authority. On this being pointed out, Superintending
Engineer, Buildings Department stated (December 2010) that the practice of
obtaining such a license was not followed as far as Corporation schools are
concerned. Government stated (April 2011) that school buildings were
Government buildings and were exempted from obtaining such licence. The
reply is not tenable as the Act clearly stipulates that schools had to be certified
by competent authority as they were frequented by public.

2.1.9.2 Fire extinguishers
The fire extinguishers installed in Corporation schools were to be refilled

periodically and kept in working condition. Audit noticed that 26 out of 79
(33 per cent) sample schools, the fire extinguishers were not refilled for a



Excess teachers
were not
redeployed
leading to
engagement of
unqualified
teachers

Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

period ranging from two to three years. In two schools’ no fire extinguishers
were installed. As fire and collapse of old building could be life threatening
accidents, the above statutory norms have to be strictly adhered to. By
flouting the above norms, Corporation failed to ensure the safety of the school
children. Government stated (April 2011) that fire extinguishers were filled
periodically. The reply suppresses the facts stated by Headmasters of
respective sample schools that fire extinguishers were not filled up
periodically.

Recommendation 3: Basic amenities should be provided in all schools by
the Corporation on priority basis.

Audit Objective 4: To assess whether man power for imparting quality
education is adequate and effectively utilized

2.1.10 Man power management

The Tamil Nadu Education rules stipulate that there should be a teacher for
every standard and every section of a standard irrespective of student strength
in addition to the Headmaster. School Education department in December
1997 fixed the teacher pupil ratio as 1:40 for all primary, middle and high
schools. In respect of primary and middle schools one of the teachers shall be
in the grade of Headmaster. In respect of high/higher secondary school, one
Headmaster shall be in addition to teachers. Non-adherence to the above
instructions were as discussed below:

2.1101 Surplus/Shortage of Teachers

Government recommended (June 2000) merger of low strength schools with
nearby schools for optimum utilisation of man power due to poor student
strength in some of the Corporation schools. Further, as the Corporation did
not have an overall database of the teachers, it was suggested to assess the
excess/shortage of teachers with respect to student strength and redeploy them
to needy schools. However, Corporation did not take effective steps and
allowed the Headmasters of schools with shortage of teachers to employ 799
teachers during 2005-2010 on consolidated pay based on their requirement
without the concurrence/approval of Commissioner/Educational Officer of
Corporation. The expenditure of € 1.81 crore on this account was initially met
out from Parent Teacher Association (PTA) funds and later recouped by
Corporation. A scrutiny of such employments revealed the following.

(i) An analysis of the teacher pupil ratio in Corporation schools revealed
that while 44 schools had 265 Secondary Grade teachers in excess, 23 schools
had a shortage of 45 Secondary Grade teachers for over a period ranging from
two to five years. In absence of redeployment of teachers, Headmasters of
five'’ schools employed 21 Secondary Grade teachers and Corporation

° CPS-RV Nagar and CMS-Sanjevarayan Koil Street.

10 CHSS-Koyambedu, CHSS-MGR Nagar, CHSS Bunder Garden, CHS-Ganesapuram
and CHS-Jafferkhanpet.



Poor management
of manpower
resulted in
operation of
schools with single
teacher

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

incurred an avoidable expenditure of हैं 2.35 lakh in this regard during
2005-10. It was further noticed that seven out of the 21 teachers employed did
not possess the requisite qualification" for Secondary Grade teacher.

(ii) Similarly, 45 Graduate/Post Graduate teachers appointed in eight’?
high/higher secondary schools during 2005-10 did not possess a degree in
teaching and a Bachelor/Masters degree in the respective subject as
prescribed. As the Headmasters were given a free hand to employ teachers
without the approval/concurrence of the Commissioner/Educational Officer of
Corporation, this situation was allowed to continue year after year
compromising the quality of education imparted and हैं 5.28 lakh was incurred
towards the pay of unqualified teachers. Government stated (April 2011) that
appointment of casual teachers on ad-hoc basis would be dispensed with from
the ensuing year.

2.1.10.2 Schools with low student strength coupled with shortage in
manpower

Corporation did not merge schools with low student strength with nearby
schools for effective utilization of manpower as recommended by the
Government. An analysis of schools based on teacher student ratio revealed
that seven’? sample schools were functioning with low strength of students
ranging from 42 to 100'*. Non-merger of schools coupled with shortage of
manpower as discussed in Paragraph 2.1.10.1 above, resulted in a peculiar
situation wherein a single teacher handled students of different classes by
accommodating them in the same class rooms in eight of the sample schools.
One particular school (CPS, Anjaneya Nagar), which conducts classes from I
to V (students strength of 67) in both Tamil and Telugu Medium with a
sanctioned strength of eight teachers, was being operated by a single teacher
(Telugu) during 2009-10. During Exit conference (February 2011),
Commissioner assured that they would analyse such situations and take
remedial action.

2.1.10.3 Non-appointment of clerks

Though Chennai City Municipal Corporation has a sanctioned strength of 47
posts for secretarial assistance in high/higher secondary schools, only 19 posts
were filled up. Out of this, only 14 posts were utlised for schools. In absence
of clerks, these additional works were being taken care of by the teaching
staff/Headmasters in addition to periodical election and survey duties thrusted
upon them which would have an adverse impact in discharging their academic
duties. Government stated (April 2011) that filling up of vacancies is being
closely followed.

Recommendation 4: Redeployment of excess teachers and merger of
schools with low strength should be done effectively as ordered by
Government in June 2000 for optimum utilization of available manpower
and to avoid employment of unqualified teachers.

Certificate/Diploma in Teacher Education.

2 CHSS-Virugambakkam, CGHSS-Nungambakkam, CHSS-Maduvinkarai,
CHS-Somaiyya Raja Street, © CHSS-MGR Nagar, CHS-Jafferkhanpet,
CHSS-Koyambedu and CHSS-Patel Nagar.

8 CUGMS-Angappa Street, CMS-Gokulam, CMS-KK Lane, Choolai, CMS-Vasantha

Garden, CMS-Narasingapuram, CMS-Tana Street and CMS-Damodarapuram.

Schools with five classes with less than 40 students in each class,

20


Failure of the
Corporation to
co-ordinate with
Government
resulted in non-
achievement of
objectives of
welfare schemes

ee Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

Audit Objective 5: To assess whether implementation of welfare schemes
had the desired impact

2.1.11 Implementation of welfare schemes
21.111 Free supply of Uniform

Government provides free supply of one set of uniform" to the Class I to VIII
students of Corporation schools every year. Scrutiny of records revealed the
following:

(i) As Corporation follows different type of uniform’ from the one
supplied by the Government, the students of Corporation schools could not
utilize uniforms supplied by Government and had to purchase uniforms at
their own cost during 2005-10. Corporation did not take up this issue with
Government till 2008-09 and Corporation school students continued to receive
the free uniform supplied by Government, which were not used by them
depriving the benefit of free uniform. During 2009-10 alone, 50,641 students
in Class I to VIII were forced to spend on new uniform as they could not use
the free uniform supplied by Government.

(ii) Corporation introduced (September 2009) its own scheme of free
supply of one set of school uniforms to all the 1.05 lakh Corporation school
students belonging to Class I to XII from 2009-10 at a cost of € 2.12 crore.
Order for the supply of uniform was issued in October 2009 and supply was
made only between January 2010 and April 2010, almost at the end of
academic year. Corporation did not co-ordinate with Government for free
supply of uniform to its 50,641 students of Class I to VIII during 2009-10 to
limit its expenditure under its own scheme to Class IX to XII students alone.
Failure of the Corporation in this regard and belated supply of free uniform
under its own scheme, defeated the very objective of providing free uniform.

Government endorsed (April 2011) the reply of the Corporation that in the
year 2009-10 the Government changed the colour of the school uniform as
blue shirt with white stripes/navy blue pant for boys and blue tops with white
stripes/navy blue chudidhars for girls. The reply was not tenable as the
uniform material ordered by Government for the same year was white
shirt/khaki pants for boys and white shirts/blue half skirts for girls.

2.1.11.2 Nutritious Noon Meal Programme

Government provides nutritious meal under NNMP to school children in the
age group of five to 15 years studying in Government/Government aided/local
body schools from Classes I to X. The scrutiny of records relating to
implementation of the scheme in Corporation schools revealed the following
deficiencies:

1s Boys-white shirt/khaki pants and Girls-while shirt/blue skirt.

Boys-blue shirt with white stripes/navy blue pant and Girls-blue tops with white
stripes/navy blue chudidhar.

21


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

(a) Non-extension of NNMP to Class IX and X students

Eight’ High/Higher secondary schools were wrongly categorized as middle
schools by the Corporation for allotting the noon meal provided by the
Government. As a result, during the audit period of 2005-10, noon meal in
these schools were provided only up to Class VIII students and though
eligible, 1,952 Class IX and X students were deprived of the benefits of the
scheme. Government stated (April 2011) that in respect of seven schools there
was no additional requirements and in respect of one school which was
recently upgraded, proposal has been sent for revision of strength. This reply
is not tenable as in the proposals for NNMP, all the eight schools were still
classified only as middle schools thereby restricting the benefits up to Class
VIII students only.

(b) Delay in providing gas connection to noon meal kitchens

Government released (December 2008) an amount of हैं 10 lakh to the
Corporation towards purchase of gas stoves, construction of kitchen platform
etc., to cover 50 Corporation schools in order to modernize noon meal
kitchens and to avoid environmental pollution caused by usage of fire wood.
Though all the 50 schools were supplied (January 2010) gas stoves at a cost of
₹ 5.55 lakh, they were put to use only in 10 schools as the work of providing
kitchen platforms were not yet completed (January 2011) in the remaining 40
schools. Non-provision of kitchen platform by Corporation inspite of
availability of fund defeated the objective of providing pollution free kitchen.
Government stated (April 2011) that kitchen shed renovation/modification
works were under progress and would be completed soon.

Recommendation 5: Corporation should co-ordinate with Government to

ensure 100 per cent achievement of benefits for its school students under
welfare schemes implemented by Government.

Audit Objective

institutions were effectively monitored

2.1.12 Performance of Schools and decline in student strength

During 2005-10, the academic performances of Corporation schools were on
par/better than the Government schools in Chennai. The pass percentage were
as shown in Table 2.2.

" CHS-Rangarajapuram, CHS-Kilpauk, CHS$-Koyambedu, CHSS-Virugambakkam,
CHS-Jafferkhanpet, CHSS-Velacherry, CHSS-Kolathur and CHS-TV Samy Street.

22


ee 10/0/27 I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

Table 2.2 : Comparison of pass percentage

2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10

Instead of
improving schools
to bring down
drop out ratio,
Corporation
refused to issue
TCs to outgoing
students

Short term
vocational courses
were not
recognised by
DGET/ NCVT

(Source : Details furnished by the Chief Educational Officer, Chennai)

The above table reveals that the students of Corporation schools have done
better than Government school except Class XII in 2007-08 and 2008-09 and
Class X in 2008-09, where the results were marginally lower. This clearly
indicated that the performances of the students of Corporation schools would
further improve, if they were provided with better facilities as discussed in the
preceding paragraphs. However failure of the Corporation to overcome these
shortcomings had resulted in decline of student strength ranging from 17 to 46
per cent in 140 primary, middle, high and higher secondary schools over the
period of five years (2005-10).

In order to show that there was no drop out in Corporation area, Deputy
Commissioner instructed (January 2010) the Headmasters not to issue
Transfer Certificates (TC) to the respective parents of students belonging to
Class V and Class VIII for the academic year 2009-10. Based on this
instruction, all the primary and middle schools handed over the TCs of Class
V and Class VIII students to nearby middle, high or higher secondary schools
run by Corporation. As a result, the students were forced to continue their
studies in the Corporation schools itself, even if their parents desired to switch
over to other schools with different education stream. On this being pointed
out, Government stated (April 2011) that Headmasters were instructed to issue
TC, if applied for, without any delay.

2.1.13 Functioning of Community Colleges

The Corporation runs four community colleges which conducts 17 short term
(three months) vocational courses such as Computer Software, Nursing
Assistant, Information Technology and Enabled Services, Hospitality etc.
During 2005-10, 1,763 students were trained in these colleges at an
expenditure of = 28.77 lakh. Despite orders (February 2001) of Secretary,
Higher Education to get approval from National Council for Vocational
Training (NCVT)/Director General of Employment and Training (DGET) for
courses offered by the Corporation, it continued to conduct the courses
without recognition. Further, as the courses offered by ITI run by Corporation
were duly recognized by DGET/NCVT, courses offered by Community
Colleges should also be approved by them. During exit conference (February
2011), Commissioner stated that action would be taken to get necessary
approvals.

23


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

2.1.14 Internal Audit

The Local Fund Audit being the statutory auditors of Corporation, was yet to
take up the audit of Education Department for the years 2008-10 and audit of
the elementary education portion for the years 2005-08 was not completed.

2.1.15 Inspection

The inspection of the schools was carried out by the Assistant Educational
Officers and Educational Officers by visiting the schools. They in turn submit
their inspection report to the Educational Officer of the Corporation. However,
it was seen that no data base exists with Education Department regarding their
visits, reports thereon and remedial measures taken if any. Further it was
evident that Educational Officer of the Corporation did not take suitable action
on the report of the inspecting officials which led to shortfall in the
maintenance of buildings as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. Apart
from this, in respect of 17 sample schools (22 per cent), the post of
Headmaster was not filled up over a period of one to five years indicating lack
of overall supervision and control.

Recommendation 6: Corporation should take necessary action to get the
approval of DGET/NCVT for courses offered in community colleges and
should act upon the field inspection reports and fill up the vacancies in
the post of Headmasters for better administration of schools.

24


Implementation o ted recommendations of Third State

Finance Comm n in Urban Local Bodies

Executive summary

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) cons Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 as per Article 243 (I) and 243 (Y) of
the Constitution of India to analyse the financial position of local bodies and
to make recommendations for the award period 2007-2012. TSFC submitted
its report in September 2006. Performance audit on implementation of
accepted recommendations of Third State Finance Commission in Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs) revealed that an amount of € 8.31 crore towards Cable
TV tax for the period from 2003-04 to 2007-08 was not assigned to 475 ULBs
as of November 2010. Surcharge on Stamp Duty of % 668.40 crore for the
period from April 2007 to March 2010 was assigned to 642 ULBs belatedly
with delay ranging between one to nineteen months. ULBs did not levy the
minimum property tax for the years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 for want
of orders from the Government resulting in loss of revenue of € 86.94 lakh in
79 test checked ULBs. Reforms recommended by the TSFC are yet to be
implemented. State Government failed to implement majority of the accepted
recommendations as of November 2010, though High Level Committee under
the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary was formed in May 2007. Moreover,
the High Level Committee did not meet even once to monitor the
implementation of accepted recommendations of TSFC, thus defeating the
objective of TSFC.

2.2.1 Introduction

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) constituted Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 to analyse the financial position of
local bodies and to make recommendations on (a) distribution and
determination of taxes, duties, tolls, fees and grants-in-aid to local bodies,
(b) possible new avenues for tapping resources in local bodies considering the
tax structure, (c) present system of accountability of local bodies in utilization
of the resources raised/received from Government and the adequacy of audit
and (d) parallel control/functions of line departments/parastatal agencies over
local bodies for the award period 2007-2012.

TSFC submitted its report to the State Government in September 2006 with
306 recommendations. The State Government accepted 90 in full, 72 in
part/in principle and negated 89. The remaining were pending with
Government/ High Level Committee.

Government released funds in two way packages viz., Pool A and Pool B.
Under Pool A, the departments concerned assigned the revenue to ULBs
through the District Collector/District level officers. Under Pool B, devolution
grant was shared between Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) and ULBs in the
ratio of 58:42 for the years from 2007-08 to 2009-10.

25


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

TSFC recommended (i) the procedure to be followed for the release of
assigned/shared revenue to ULBs, (ii) the modalities to be followed for the
collection of property tax, user charges, profession tax, cable TV tax etc,
(iii) the device for allocating the State’s own tax revenue and the time frame
for release of devolution grants to ULBs, (iv) the time frame for finalization
and submission of annual accounts to Local Fund Audit and settlement of long
pending paragraphs and (v) monitoring mechanism to watch the
implementation of the recommendations.

Action Taken Report was placed on the floor of the Legislative Assembly in
May 2007. Administrative departments concerned were to issue orders and
monitor implementation of the recommendations of TSFC.

2.2.2. Organisational Setup

The role and responsibilities of officials in respect of implementation of the
recommendations of the TSFC were as given below:

oe for preparation of draft Action
Taken Report for approval of Cabinet
Committee.

Responsible for approving the Action Taken
Report to be placed on the floor of the
Assembly

Responsible for issue of Government orders
and monitoring the implementation of
accepted recommendations of the TSFC.

Monitoring the implementation of the
accepted recommendations of the TSFC.

2.2.3 Audit Objectives

The audit objectives were to ascertain whether

> funds transfer based on accepted TSFC recommendations was
effective,
> efficiency and effectiveness in strengthening the resource base and

controlling erosion were as recommended by TSFC,

26


ee Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

> the tax reforms recommended by the TSFC were implemented and

> the monitoring mechanism in implementing the accepted
recommendations of TSFC was effective.

2.2.4 Audit Criteria

Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria:

> Accepted recommendations of TSFC.

> Explanatory memorandum on the action taken on the
recommendations of TSFC and

> Government Orders and Department Circulars/instructions on
implementation of recommendation of TSFC.

2.2.5 Scope and Methodology of Audit

The Performance Audit was conducted between July 2010 and November
2010 covering SFC grants including assigned revenue for the years from
2007-08 to 2009-10. The records in the offices of Finance, Municipal
Administration and Water Supply (MAWS), Commercial Taxes, Registration
and Industries (Geology and Mining), and their district/regional level offices
were test-checked during the course of audit. Records of 122 out of 719 ULBs
selected on the basis of stratified sampling (Appendix 2.4) were test checked.
The findings were discussed with Commissioner of Municipal Administration
(CMA) on 21 February 2011 and with Director of Town Panchayats (DTP) on
24 January 2011. Exit conference was held with CMA and DTP on behalf of
Government on 28 April 2011 and points were discussed.

TSFC recommendations were effective

2.2.6 Resource base
Assigned/Shared Revenue
Accepted recommendations on assigned/shared revenue were as follows:

>» Arrears of devolution grants due to ULBs shall be released in three
annual instalments and the excess devolution made to PRIs shall also
be deducted in three instalments with 1 April 2007 as the date for
arriving at cumulative arrears or surplus.

> Cable TV tax proceeds realized from 2003-2006 shall be passed on to
the respective ULBs till the Act was amended.

> Three per cent of the Surcharge on Stamp Duty (SSD) collected shall
be retained by the Government instead of five per cent.

> SSD should be adjusted by 15" of the next month by District Registrar
in respect of ULBs.

27


Cable TV tax
amounting to

& 8.31 crore was
not assigned to
475 ULBs

Surcharge on
Stamp Duty
amounting to

% 2.96 crore was
short assigned to
89 municipalities

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

> The sharable income from mines and minerals shall be adjusted on a
quarterly basis in the same financial year to avoid obtaining
Government orders for lapsed appropriation.

Tt was noticed during the review that there were cases of non release, short
release and delayed release of assigned revenue even though Government
accepted the recommendations of TSFC on assigned/shared revenue as given
below:

2.2.6.1 Non-release of arrears of devolution

Audit noticed that there was arrears of devolution due to ULBs during
1997-2006 amounting to = 285.30 crore and the MAWS Department did not
take effective steps to release the arrears till November 2010. Inspite of
Government’s acceptance to release the arrears in three annual instalments,
ULBs could not get the devolution arrears as recommended by the TSFC.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that the Government
released devolution arrears of = 194 crore by way of funding for Special
Roads Programme 2010-11. The reply is not tenable as the devolution grant is
the amount which is legitimately due to the ULBs and State Government
cannot insist ULBs to utilize the devolution grant for the Government’s
programme.

2.2.6.2 Non-assignment of Cable TV Tax

Even though Government accepted the recommendation that whatever Cable
TV tax collected shall be passed on to the ULBs till the Act was amended,
Audit noticed that Cable TV tax amounting to % 8.31 crore for the period from
2003-04 to 2007-08 was remitted to Government account by Commercial
Taxes Department instead of assigning to 475 ULBs in 17 test checked
districts as of November 2010 due to non-receipt of orders from the
Government. Thus, non-issue of Government Order for releasing the amount
resulted in deprival of legitimate share of revenue to the respective ULBs.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that the matter is under
consideration of the Government.

2.2.6.3 Short assignment of Surcharge on Stamp Duty

It was noticed that हैं 2.96 crore out of € 143.46 crore collected towards SSD
was short assigned to 89 municipalities as of November 2010 (including 18
test checked municipalities) in 17 out of 24 test checked districts for the period
between April 2007 and December 2008 by the District Registrars due to
retention of collection charges at five per cent instead of at three per cent as
instructed by the Government on TSFC recommendations. District Registrars
of Registration Department replied that due to belated receipt of orders from
Government (September 2008) there was short assignment. The reply is not
tenable as the District Registrars could have got the matter clarified from their
administrative department i.e., Registration Department for payment of the
balance amount to the local bodies. The administrative department also did
not instruct the district officers to release the balance amount as ordered by

28


Surcharge on
Stamp Duty
amounting to

₹ 668.40 crore was
assigned belatedly
to 642 ULBs

ee Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

Finance Department in September 2008. This resulted in non receipt of the
legitimate revenue to the local bodies even after the issue of orders by the
Finance Department.

2.2.6.4 Delayed assignment of Surcharge on Stamp Duty

Surcharge on Stamp Duty of = 668.40 crore for the period between April 2007
and March 2010 was assigned to 642 ULBs belatedly with delay ranging
between one to 19 months. District Registrars of Registration Department
replied (July 2010 - November 2010) that delay was due to shortage of man
power and heavy workload.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that the procedure for
release of SSD was simplified and the funds have been pooled at state level.
50 per cent of the pooled amount has been placed at the disposal of CMA/DTP
and the balance amount will be released as contribution to Tamil Nadu Urban
Road Infrastructure Fund. The reply is not tenable as State Government
cannot insist the ULBs to utilize the devolution grant for the Government’s
programme.

2.2.6.5 Delay in assignment of mines and mineral fees

Audit noticed that mines and mineral fees of = 7.37 crore due to ULBs for the
years 2007-08 to 2009-10 were adjusted after a delay of one to 10 months.
The Assistant Directors/Deputy Directors of Geology and Mining replied that
delay was due to shortage of manpower and heavy workload.

Reply is not tenable as the administrative department i.e., Industries (Geology
and Mining) did not initiate any action to implement the accepted
recommendations of the TSFC to adjust the sharable income from mines and
minerals on quarterly basis.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that the matter is under
consideration of the Government.

Recommendation 1: Administrative Departments should issue orders for
implementing the accepted recommendations of TSFC.

Audit Objective 2: To assess whether the efficiency and effectiveness in
strengthening the resource base and controlling erosion were as
recommended by the TSFC

2.2.7 Tax Revenue

Accepted Recommendations of TSFC on Tax revenue were as follows:
> Collection of property tax on Central Public Sector Undertakings other
than Central Government properties.

> Levy minimum property tax at the rate of € 25, € 40 and & 50 per half
year for Town Panchayats, Municipalities and Municipal Corporations
respectively from the year 2007-08.

Vv

Collection of track rent from the cable operators.

29


Minimum
property tax was
not levied
resulting in loss of
revenue of

₹ 86.94 lakh

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

2.2.7.1 Non-levy of property tax

Non-issue of order by the Government resulted in non-levy of property tax on
Central Public Sector Undertakings, including Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
as of November 2010. Hence ULBs could not tap the revenue even after
recommendation of the TSFC.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that action is being taken to
collect property tax on Central Public Sector Undertakings.

2.2.7.2 Non-levy of minimum property tax

MAWS Department did not issue Government Order for implementing levy of
minimum property tax in Town Panchayats, Municipalities and Municipal
Corporations from the year 2007-08. Hence, ULBs did not levy the minimum
property tax for the years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10 resulting in loss of
revenue of % 86.94 lakh in 79 test checked ULBs.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that the matter is under
consideration of the Government.

2.2.7.3 Non-collection of track rent on television cables

Government had withdrawn only the Cable TV tax from April 2008.
However, Audit scrutiny revealed that 76 test checked ULBs did not collect
track rent also from the Cable TV operators till November 2010 resulting in
loss of revenue of € 1.95 crore.

During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA/DTP stated that some
Municipalities/Town Panchayats are collecting track rent on Cable TV and
optic fibre cables. They also stated that circulars were issued to all the
Municipalities/Town Panchayats to collect track rent.

Recommendation 2: ULBs should tap the resource to improve its resource
base based on the accepted recommendations of TSFC.

Audit Objective 3: To assess whether the tax reforms recommended by the
TSFC for strengthening the resource base were implemented

2.2.8 Reforms

Accepted recommendations of TSFC on tax reforms were as follows:

> Collection of tax dues through computer fitted mobile vans and mobile
phones, roping in Nationalised Banks for collection of tax and payment
of tax through credit/debit card system.

> To introduce e-governance in all Municipal Corporations,
Municipalities and Town Panchayats in tax administration in a phased
manner to make the programme a citizen friendly.

> To link Planning/Building permission wing and Revenue wing through
computerization for levy of tax automatically on expiry of building
licence period.

30


ee Chapter I= Performance Reviews (Urban Local Bodies)

2.2.8.1 Collection of tax through modern system

Audit scrutiny in test checked ULBs revealed that collection of tax through
computer fitted van and cell phones or through credit/debit card system was
not implemented. Nationalised banks were not roped in for collection of tax in
Municipalities. During Exit conference (April 2011), CMA stated that online
payment facilities had been created in Municipal Corporations. Further
Chennai City Municipal Corporation is making an attempt to collect property
tax through mobile phone and Automated Teller Machine (ATM). Action was
also being taken to tie up with State Bank of India to collect Property Tax in
Municipalities.

2.2.8.2 E-governance and computer linkage

Audit scrutiny revealed that e-governance was not introduced in the test
checked Municipal Corporations, Municipalities and Town Panchayats in tax
administration to make the programme a citizen friendly. There was no
linkage of Planning/Building permission wing and Revenue wing through
computerization for levy of tax automatically on expiry of building licence
period.

CMA replied (April 2011) that linkage through computerization has not been
made between Planning/Building permission wing with the revenue wing.
The CMA further stated that various standalone application modules need to
be augmented to align themselves with objectives of National e-governance
plan for which a web based application software was under preparation. The
technology proposed to be used is centralized architecture of data storage and
integrated applications including Planning/Building permission wing and the
Revenue wing. The fact remains that the reform recommended by the TSFC is
yet to be implemented by the Government.

Recommendation 3: Reforms for resource base recommended by the
TSFC should be implemented as early as possible to achieve the desired
objective.

implementing the accepted recommendations of TSFC was effective

2.2.9 Monitoring Mechanism

Accepted recommendations for monitoring mechanism were:

> Decision on all recommendations made by TSFC shall be taken at the
earliest without undue delay.

2.2.9.1 Monitoring by High Level Committee

Government empowered (December 2005) the High Level Committee'*
already in existence in the State to approve the projects undertaken under
" Headed by the Chief Secretary , Secretaries of Finance, Rural Development and

Panchayat Raj and Municipal Administration and Water Supply Departments as
members.

31


High Level
Committee
formed in May
2007 did not meet
even once to
monitor the
implementation of
accepted
recommendations
of TSFC

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Twelfth Central Finance Commission devolutions. Government further gave
detailed guidelines regarding approval of projects, quantification of targets,
monitoring both physical and financial targets, etc.

Government empowered (May 2007) the same High Level Committee to
oversee the implementation of the decisions taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the TSFC and the follow up action thereon. However,
Government while empowering the High Level Committee did not give any
detailed guidelines listing out the functions to be undertaken by the Committee
as given for overseeing implementation of Twelfth Central Finance
Commission recommendations. Due to absence of such guidelines, the High
Level Committee did not monitor the implementation of the accepted TSFC
recommendations at all as detailed below:

On seeking information relating to meetings of High Level Committee,
Finance Department stated (May 2011) that the Action Taken Report on the
recommendations of TSFC has been communicated to the departments
concerned for implementation and the same are being implemented by the
departments after issue of orders in consultation with Finance Department.
Hence, convening of High Level Committee meetings may not arise at this
juncture. The reply is not tenable as Government in May 2007 stated that the
implementation of the decisions taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the TSFC and the follow up action taken shall be
monitored by the High Level Committee headed by the Chief Secretary on
half yearly basis. However, it did not meet even on a single occasion to
monitor the implementation of the accepted recommendations of TSFC
resulting in deficiencies as pointed out in the preceding paragraphs.

Recommendation 4: High Level Committee should meet every six months
as ordered by Government and monitor the implementation of the
accepted recommendations of the TSFC.

32


CHA

RIT

AUDIT OF TRANSACTIONS
(URBAN LOCAL BODIES)

Audit of transactions in the Municipal Administration and Water Supply
Department in the Secretariat, two Municipal Corporations, nine Municipalities
and two Town Panchayats brought out several instances of lapses in
management of resources and failures in the observance of norms of regularity,
propriety and economy. These have been presented in the succeeding
paragraphs.

MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION AND WATER SUPPLY
DEPARTMENT

CHENNAI CITY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION

3.1.1 Loss of revenue due to wrong assessment of Property Tax

Failure to include the additional rooms constructed by a Hotel for
property tax assessment and adoption of flat tariff for calculation of
property tax by Chennai City Municipal Corporation resulted in short
collection of property tax by हैं 1.37 crore.

The Property Tax for the Lemon Tree Hotel, a Class ‘A’ Hotel, within Chennai
City Municipal Corporation (Corporation) limits was levied at 12.40 per cent
of Annual Value' under Section 100 of the Chennai City Municipal
Corporation Act 1919 (Act). The Hotel started its commercial operation from
January 2009. Scrutiny of the property tax assessment records pertaining to the
hotel revealed that the hotel had obtained (August 2008) planning permit from
Corporation to construct ground plus nine floors comprising 44 rooms for
lodging purposes. However, the building was completed with ground plus 10
floors comprising 108 rooms and the hotel requested (January 2009) the
Corporation to consider 44 rooms only for assessment of property tax. The
Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority is yet to issue the Completion
Certificate for the building.

The Assistant Revenue Officer, who assessed (January 2009) the hotel for
property tax, though noticed that the hotel had an additional floor deviating
from the approved building plan, did not ensure the availability of completion
certificate with the hotel. He also did not verify the number of rooms actually
constructed. The form prescribed for assessment of property tax did not
provide the provision for filling up the number of rooms constructed by hotel

Annual value = (Number of rooms x Room tariff x 365 days x 20 per cent) +
estimated income per year from commercial operations (restaurant/bar/conference
hall) x 91 per cent.



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

and there is no provision in the Act for periodical inspection to verify the
additions made subsequent to the initial assessment made by the Corporation.
The number of rooms actually constructed should have been verified as the
property tax was to be assessed based on the number of rooms let out by the
hotel. However, the property tax was assessed considering only 44 rooms at a
flat tariff rate of 4,500 as declared by the Hotel, even though 108 rooms were
let out at different tariff rates (¥ 2,900 to हैं 10,000). This had resulted in short
collection of = 1.37 crore being the difference between the actual property tax
to be collected and tax collected by the Corporation during the period 2008-09
to 2010-11.

The matter was referred to Government in November 2010; Government stated
(December 2010) that Chennai City Municipal Corporation is taking all the
actions as per the Act against the unauthorised construction and that property
tax was levied based on the rent collected from number of rooms actually
available at the time of assessment and the hotel would have increased the
number of rooms at a later stage with different tariff rates. It further stated, a
provisional notice indicating revised property tax has been served (November
2010) to the hotel for the period from 2008-09 onwards and hence there was no
revenue loss. The reply is not tenable, as the return filed by the hotel with the
Commercial Taxes Department for the year 2009-10 clearly indicates that it
had 108 rooms at the time of commencement of its commercial operations.

Thus non-verification of rooms constructed by the hotel for commercial
operations by the Corporation at the time of assessment led to short collection
of Property Tax to the tune of € 1.37 crore.

DEVAKOTTAI MUNICIPALITY

3.1.2 Loss of revenue due to incorrect computation of Property Tax

Failure of Devakottai Municipality to adopt correct rate of Property Tax
resulted in loss of revenue of f 60.74 lakh.

Under Section 81 of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920
Devakottai Municipality (Municipality) fixed (October 1990) the rate of
Property Tax as 16 per cent on the annual value of the property. In addition,
under Section 12(1) of the Madras Public Libraries Act, 1948, Library Cess at
the rate of 10 per cent was also levied by the Municipality in the form of
surcharge on Property Tax. Scrutiny of the records relating to collection of
property tax by the Municipality revealed the following:

The Municipality computerized the collection of Property Tax during 2002-03
and adopted Property Tax as 14.6 per cent on annual value of the property plus
Library Cess at 10 per cent on the Property Tax instead of 16 per cent as
Property Tax plus 10 per cent as Library Cess on the Property Tax while
feeding the data in the system. The Revenue Inspector of Municipality
incharge of tax collection did not validate the correctness of the data fed into
the system before implementing computerisation of Property Tax. Director of
Local Fund Audit (DLFA) also did not point out the short collection of revenue
due to incorrect percentage fed into the computer for collection of Property
Tax. This led to short collection of Property Tax of = 60.74 lakh

34



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

during 2002-10. Further, this also led to short collection of Library Cess by
% 6.07 lakh during the same period, as Library Cess was levied as a percentage
on Property Tax actually collected.

The matter was referred to Government in October 2010; Government stated
(February 2011) that necessary corrections were effected in the system from
July 2010 and assured to take action against the officials* responsible for short
collection during 2002-10. It further stated that the Municipality had adopted a
resolution not to collect the short levy of Library Cess from the public.
However, the fact remains that due to absence of proper internal control
mechanism, there is a loss of revenue of € 60.74 lakh to the Municipality.

TIRUVANNAMALAI MUNICIPALITY

3.1.3 Loss of revenue due to imprudent award of lease

Award of lease for bus entry fee collection by Tiruvannamalai
Municipality without assessing the number of buses entering the bus stand
resulted in a revenue loss of € 55.21 lakh.

Tiruvannamalai Municipality (Municipality) awarded the lease for bus entry
fee collection to the highest bidder through public auction every year, based on
the previous three years’ average. The lease period was increased from one
year to three years from 2009-10 and during the three year period, lease rate
would be hiked by five per cent over the previous year’s lease rate.

Scrutiny of the records relating to the award of lease revealed that the
Municipality did not follow the best practice in fixing the reserve price for
auction by either assessing the number of buses entering the bus stand per day
on its own or to get these details from the Tamil Nadu State Transport
Corporation, Tiruvannamalai Region (TNSTC). Without following this best
practice, the Municipality simply fixed the reserve price by calculating the
average of three years’ lease amount. Thus the actual amount of revenue
realised by the Municipality per annum through the lease fell short by 39 to 43
per cent during the years 2007-11, when compared to the number of buses
entering the bus stand’ resulting in a revenue loss of € 55.21 lakh*.

The matter was referred to Government in January 2011; Government stated
(April 2011) that the number of buses entering the bus stand per day were only
300 as per the details furnished by the District Bus Owners Association during
April 2004. Further, it was stated that every year the lease was higher than the
previous year’s lease and as the same was approved by the Municipal Council,
there was no revenue loss. The reply is not tenable as TNSTC had stated that
during 2007-11 an average of 612 buses plied through the bus stand. Further,
the number (300 buses per day) furnished in the reply related to

2 Commissioner, Revenue Inspector and Assistants concerned.

3 2,446 buses for the period 2007-11 as furnished by TNSTC.

‘ Amount to be collected = 2,446 buses x & 15 x 365 days = 133.92 lakh
(2007-08 - 576;2008-09 - 617;2009-10 - 621;2010-11 - 632)
Less : Amount collected through auction =& 78.71 lakh
Revenue Loss =& 55.21 lakh

35



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

old period (April 2004). Thus, the imprudent award of lease by the
Municipality, without adopting any scientific method for fixing reserve price
resulted in a revenue loss of = 55.21 lakh during 2007-11.
KANCHEEPURAM MUNICIPALITY

3.1.4 Loss due to non-renewal of Bank Guarantee

Failure of Kancheepuram Municipality to renew the bank guarantee
provided by a contractor towards mobilization advance resulted in a loss
of f 33.82 lakh.

Based on the administrative sanction accorded by the Government in August
2004 and technical sanction given (May 2005) by the Superintending Engineer
of the Office of the Director of Municipal Administration, Kancheepuram
Municipality (Municipality) awarded (November 2005) the work of ‘Extension
and rehabilitation of underground sewerage system’ at a cost of € 10.06 crore
and entered into an agreement with a contractor in December 2005. The work
was to be completed by May 2007. As per the agreement conditions, the
contractor provided two bank guarantees for % 50.28 lakh each, one towards
performance guarantee valid till June 2008 covering the defects liability period
of one year and another towards mobilization advance valid till January 2007.
However, the guarantee towards mobilization advance was to remain effective
until the advance payment was fully recovered.

In February 2006, the Municipality provided % 50.25 lakh as mobilization
advance to the contractor. As of January 2007, = 10.10 lakh towards
mobilization advance and & 6.33 lakh towards Security Deposit were recovered
from two interim payments in June 2006 and January 2007. However, while
making the second interim payment in January 2007, the Municipality failed to
get the bank guarantee towards mobilization advance renewed and allowed the
same to expire in January 2007. In the meantime, the contractor had stopped
the work in January 2007, demanding cost escalation on account of men and
material. As this was not acceptable to the Municipality, the contract was
terminated in February 2008 without recovering the balance mobilization
advance of 40.15 lakh, as no other bill was due to him and the bank guarantee
had also expired. The Commissioner of the Municipality should have adjusted
the balance mobilization advance by invoking the performance bank guarantee
for € 50.28 lakh which was valid till June 2008. However, he failed to do so
and the same was also allowed to expire in June 2008. Further by allowing the
performance bank guarantee to expire, the Municipality also lost the
opportunity to make good the loss in case of any defects that might have
cropped up with respect to the works completed until the foreclosure of
contract. Thus, the failure to renew and invoke the bank guarantees resulted in
a loss of = 33.82 lakh (₹ 40.15 lakh - हैं 6.33 lakh withheld as Security Deposit)
to the Municipality.

The matter was referred to Government in January 2011; Government stated
(May 2011) that bank had been addressed twice in June 2007 and March 2008
not to release both the bank guarantees until consent was given by the

36



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

Commissioner. Government also claimed that the bank guarantee for
mobilisation advance was kept outstanding by the bank until December 2007
on the request of the Municipality and the fault of the bank in allowing the
bank guarantees to expire despite such request had put the Municipality in this
precarious situation. The reply is not tenable, as the Municipality failed to
recover the mobilization advance before June 2008 upto which the guarantee
was in force resulting in a loss of € 33.82 lakh to the Municipality.

MANNACHANALLUR TOWN PANCHAYAT

3.1.5 Loss of revenue due to non-collection of maintenance charges

Failure of Mannachanallur Town Panchayat to collect water meter
maintenance charges for domestic water supply connections resulted in a
revenue loss of = 16.04 lakh.

Under Section 132A of the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Act, 1920, the
Mannachanallur Town Panchayat (Town Panchayat) amended its
by-law relating to water supply charges and the same was published in the
District Gazette (April 2001). According to the amended by-law, the owner or
occupier of the premises shall pay along with metered charges for water
supplied, meter rent and maintenance charges at = 10 per month in case meter
is supplied by the Town Panchayat or at हैं 5 per month in case meter is
purchased by the owner, as the case may be from July 2001.

Scrutiny of the records relating to collection of water charges by Town
Panchayat revealed that water meters were fixed at owner’s cost and
maintained by the Town Panchayat. However, it was noticed that the Town
Panchayat collected only the water usage charges as per the meter readings and
did not collect the meter maintenance charges at & 5 per month per connection
since July 2001. As of March 2010, the Town Panchayat had 3,208 domestic
water supply connections and its failure to collect meter maintenance charges
resulted in a revenue loss of = 16.04 lakh during July 2001 - October 2010.
The Director of Local Fund Audit also did not point out this lapse in its audit
reports.

The matter was referred to Government in January 2011; Government stated
(April 2011) that necessary instructions were issued to the Executive Officer of
the Town Panchayat to collect the water meter maintenance charges for the
period 2001-11 at the earliest under the supervision of Assistant Director of
Town Panchayats.

TIRUNELVELI CITY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION

3.1.6 Non-realisation of revenue due to non-collection of monthly charges

Failure of Tirunelveli City Municipal Corporation to implement the
amended by-law for underground drainage scheme resulted in non-
realisation of revenue of = 10.79 lakh towards monthly charges.

Tirunelveli City Municipal Corporation (Corporation) implemented two
underground drainage schemes during the years 1989 and 2007 at a cost of
₹ 1.13 crore and % 52.01 crore respectively covering different wards of the
Corporation.

37



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

For meeting the operational and maintenance expenditure for the new scheme
implemented in 2007, the Corporation council resolved in January 2008 to
collect monthly charges at the rate of 40 for residential connections. The
by-law was amended by the Corporation in June 2009 to collect the monthly
charges at the rate of % 40 for the existing residential connections taken under
the 1989 scheme also. The amended by-law came into force from September
2009. The Corporation had given 1,498 residential connections under the 1989
scheme as of February 2011.

On scrutiny of records, it was noticed that the Corporation had collected
monthly charges of € 40 per residential connection only for the connections
given under the new scheme inspite of the amended by-law providing levy and
collection of monthly charges for both old and new connections.

Thus, failure of the Corporation to implement the provisions of the amended
by-law resulted in non-realisation of revenue of € 10.79 [ता for the period
from September 2009 to February 2011.

The matter was referred to the Government in March 2011; Government stated
(March 2011) that demands were issued from the date of effect of the by-law
for all the connections under the old scheme and action is being taken to collect
the arrear amount and the same would be watched through Demand Register.

3.2 Unfruitful/Wasteful expenditure

MANAVALAKURICHI TOWN PANCHAYAT

3.2.1 Unfruitful expenditure on construction of new bus stand

Failure of Manavalakurichi Town Panchayat to obtain prior approval
from Town and Country Planning Department before commencing
construction of bus stand resulted in unfruitful expenditure of € 47 lakh.

As per provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 Government of
India notified (February 1991) areas falling under Coastal Regulation Zone
(CRZ) for regulating developmental activities in the Coastal stretches within
500 meters of high tide line on the landward side. According to the
notification, no new construction shall be permitted in the Coastal Regulation
Zone-I° (CRZ-I) except projects relating to Department of Atomic Energy,
exploration and extraction of oil and natural gas and facilities that are essential
for activities permissible under CRZ-I.

Manavalakurichi Town Panchayat (Town Panchayat) acquired land (August
2006) on lease from M/s Indian Rare Earths Limited for a period of 30 years on

5 1,498 connections x हैं 40 per month x 18 months = & 10.79 lakh.

Areas that are ecologically sensitive and important, such as national parks/marine
parks, sanctuaries, reserve forests, wildlife habitats, mangroves, corals/coral reefs,
areas close to breeding and spawning grounds of fish and other marine life, areas of
outstanding natural beauty/historic/heritage areas, areas rich in genetic diversity, areas
likely to be inundated due to rise in sea level consequent upon global warming and
such other areas as may be declared by the Central Government or the authorities
concerned at the State/Union Territory level from time to time and Area between Low
Tide Line and the High Tide Line.

38



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

a yearly rent of % 1,000/- for construction of a bus stand. Based on the
administrative sanction given by the District Collector and Zonal Assistant
Director of Town Panchayat and technical sanction given by the Assistant
Executive Engineer (AEE) of Zonal Office, the Town Panchayat commenced
(January 2007) construction of bus stand with facilities such as cement
concrete pavement, public toilets, waiting shed etc., The Town Panchayat,
after commencement of the work requested (March 2008) the Town and
Country Planning Department (TCPD) to accord approval for the plan for
constructing the bus stand. TCPD did not accord (April 2008) approval stating
that the proposed land was in the prohibited CRZ-I area. The TCPD also
referred (September 2009) the matter to Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board
for ratification. Approval was not received so far (August 2010). Audit
observed that District Collector, Zonal Assistant Director of Town Panchayats
and AEE have given Administrative sanction/Technical sanction as a routine
manner without verifying the fact whether land in question can be approved for
the work undertaken without any legal hurdle. Thus, the bus stand constructed
at a cost of € 47 lakh was not put to use.

The matter was referred to the Government in January 2011; Government
stated (April 2011) that the civil works were executed only as a temporary
arrangement and the work regarding pucca bus stand would be taken up only
after getting the approval from State Coastal Management Authority, which
was being pursued. The reply is not tenable as the bus stand already
constructed meets all the requirements of a Class ‘D’ bus stand such as
passenger waiting shed, lighting and drinking water facilities, toilets etc.
according to Tamil Nadu Motor Vehicles Rules. Thus, failure of the Town
Panchayat to obtain environment clearance before commencing the
construction of bus stand resulted in unfruitful expenditure of = 47 lakh.

KRISHANAGIRI AND MAYILADUTHURAI MUNICIPALITIES

3.2.2, Unfruitful expenditure on construction of modernized slaughter
houses

Failure of Krishnagiri and Mayiladuthurai Municipalities to utilize the
newly constructed modernized slaughter house resulted in unfruitful
expenditure of € 37.35 lakh.

Based on Supreme Court of India’s orders issued in 2000 to avoid slaughtering
of animals in public places, Government of Tamil Nadu sanctioned हैं. 10 lakh
each to Krishnagiri Municipality (September 2006) and Mayiladuthurai
Municipality (May 2007) for construction of modern slaughter house and for
modernizing the existing slaughter house respectively and instructed to meet
the balance expenditure from their own fund. As of April 2011, both the
slaughter houses constructed were not put to use. Scrutiny of the records
revealed the following:

(a) Krishnagiri Municipality

Based on the Administrative sanction of the Commissioner of Municipal
Administration (March 2007), the work order for construction was awarded in
July 2007. Due to public protest, the site for construction of the slaughter
house was changed (August 2007) to another location and the work was
completed (March 2009) at a cost of € 17.24 lakh. Audit observed that though

39



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

the Municipality experienced public protest at the first site, it did not take any
steps to get the public opinion in the second site before construction of
slaughter house. Thus, when slaughter house was opened in December 2009, it
functioned only for few days and thereafter remained closed due to public
agitation and was not put to use. Government stated (May 2011) that
appropriate action would be taken to open the slaughter house after convincing
the public as no other site was available. The reply of the Government is not
tenable, as the Municipality should have taken public into confidence before
commencing the construction of slaughter house at the second site as it had
experienced public protest for constructing slaughter house at the site initially
selected.

(b) Mayiladuthurai Municipality

Based on the technical sanction for the work accorded by the Regional
Executive Engineer (September 2007), construction of modernized slaughter
house was awarded in October 2007. The work was completed in February
2009 at a cost of € 20.11 lakh. However, it was not put into use as of April
2011 and the municipality continued to lease out the old existing slaughter
house. Further, the reasons for constructing new modernized slaughter house
instead of modernizing the existing slaughter house was not on records. When
the matter was referred to Government in February 2011, it replied (April
2011) that auction for new slaughter house was not conducted as Tamil Nadu
Pollution Control Board (TNPCB) gave its consent only in March 2010.
Government further stated as the old slaughtering house was in dilapidated
condition, it would not be leased out in the next financial year and from April
2011 the new slaughter house would be put to use. This reply is not tenable, as
the Municipality on obtaining consent from TNPCB in March 2010 could have
shifted the operation from the old slaughter house to the new slaughter house
without waiting for the expiry of lease period of old slaughter house. Further,
the TNPCB consent was also expired in September 2010 itself as it was valid
for six months only and no further action was taken to renew the consent.

Thus, the failure of Krishnagiri Municipality to take public into confidence
before commencement of construction of slaughter house and non-shifting of
old slaughter house to the newly constructed one by Mayiladuthurai
Municipality as soon as consent of the TNPCB was received resulted in non-
implementation of Supreme Court of India’s orders even after spending
% 37.35 lakh on construction of these two modernized slaughter houses.

NAGAPATTINAM MUNICIPALITY

3.2.3. Wasteful expenditure in installation of Solar Street Lights

Failure of Nagapattinam Municipality to explore the possibility of
maintaining Solar Street Lights before installation resulted in wasteful
expenditure of € 20.40 lakh.

Government of Tamil Nadu accorded (November 2005) sanction for
installation of 68 Solar Street Lights (SSLs) at a cost of € 20.40 lakh under
Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) in Nagapattinam municipal area.

40



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

The Municipal Council, Nagapattinam resolved (June 2006) to install 68 SSLs
at an estimated cost of = 20.40 lakh. The work order was issued in September
2007 for = 18.67 lakh. Six more SSLs were installed out of the savings
amount of € 1.73 lakh. The work was completed in June 2008 at a cost of
& 20.40 lakh.

On scrutiny of records, it was noticed that the SSLs functioned only for a
period of two months and the municipality replaced the SSLs with tube lights,
as SSLs were affected by salinity of sea breeze, lack of trained man power to
maintain the solar lamps of special nature which required constant maintenance
of batteries, lights, photovoltaic cells and heavy maintenance expenditure.
Audit observed that the viability of maintaining the special nature SSLs in the
long run should have been explored before their installation. Failure to do so
resulted in wasteful expenditure of € 20.40 lakh.

The matter was referred to Government in March 2011; Government which
endorsed the reply of Commissioner of Municipal Administration stated (May
2011) that the SSLs were not working after one year due to theft of batteries
and other spare parts. The reply is not tenable as test check by Audit revealed
that most of the SSLs were intact but were not in working condition due to
non-maintenance which was also confirmed by the Commissioner of the
Nagapattinam Municipality and the fact remains that = 20.40 lakh spent on
installation of SSLs became wasteful.

NAGAPATTINAM MUNICIPALITY

3.2.4 Unfruitful expenditure on installation of Bio-mass Gasifiers

Failure to install bio-mass gasifiers and to ensure availability of qualified
manpower to operate them by Nagapattinam Municipality resulted in
unfruitful expenditure of = 13.07 lakh.

Based on the approval by the State Level Steering Committee and
administrative sanction accorded by the District Collector in August 2005, the
Nagapattinam Municipality (Municipality) resolved (November 2005) to install
bio-mass gasifiers at three locations’ of its water supply system, with an aim to
reduce electricity consumption charges, utilizing % 31.80 lakh released
(September 2005) by the Government. The Municipality invited (September
2005) tenders for construction of the sheds to install gasifiers and for
supply/commission of three bio-mass gasifiers (two 11 KWe and one 40 KWe
gasifier). The Municipality placed orders (October 2005) with a firm only for
two 11 KWe gasifiers (¥ 4.01 lakh each). The firm had stipulated that all the
necessary civil/foundation works should be kept ready by the Municipality for
erection and commission of the gasifiers by the firm.

The Municipality awarded (October 2005) the work of construction of sheds in
three locations at a cost of € 5.85 lakh to another contractor, with a condition to
complete the work within 30 days. The Municipality, though awarded the
contract for construction of sheds, failed to follow up the work and the

Karuppur (11 KWe gasifier), Eravancheri (11 KWe gasifier) and Solomon Park
(40 KWe gasifier).

41



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

contractor did not complete the work until January 2007. Meanwhile, the firm
supplied the gasifiers in April 2006 and a payment of हैं 7.22 lakh being
90 per cent cost was made (May 2006) by the Municipality. As the civil works
were not completed, the firm did not erect the gasifiers. Even after completion
of the civil works in March 2007, the Municipality neither made arrangements*
to facilitate the installation of gasifiers nor contacted the firm for the same.
The guarantee period of 15 months for the gasifiers expired in June 2007. It
was further noticed that without installing the gasifiers, the Municipality had
furnished (August 2008) utilization certificate and completion report to the
District Collector and refunded (December 2007) ₹ै 17.57 lakh released for 40
KWe gasifier, as the rates quoted by the tenderers were higher and not
competitive. As of March 2011, the expenditure of = 13.07 lakh incurred on
the purchase of two gasifiers and construction of three sheds remained
unfruitful as they were kept idle for four years.

The matter was referred to Government in March 2011; Government
stated (May 2011) that bio-mass gasifers were not put to use due to lack of
qualified technical staff to handle them. It further stated that sheds constructed
for housing the bio-mass gasifiers were being utilised as store rooms and hence
the infrastructure created could not be stated as unfruitful. The reply of the
Government is not tenable, as the decision to install bio-mass gasifiers without
qualified technical staff to handle them reflects poor planning and bio-mass
gasifiers were not installed due to delayed execution of civil works. Moreover,
the reply was silent about further action to install and utilize the bio-mass
gasifiers. Thus, the failure of the Municipality to install the gasifiers defeated
the very objective of reducing electricity charges during 2006-11 besides
unfruitful expenditure of € 13.07 lakh. Further, the worthiness of the gasifiers
was also doubtful as they were kept idle for a long time with expired warranty.

3.3 Avoidable expenditure

NAMAKKAL MUNICIPALITY

3.3.1 Avoidable expenditure on payment of Service Tax

Failure of Namakkal Municipality to collect Service Tax from tenants of
immovable property during June 2007 to March 2009 led to avoidable
expenditure of € 17.73 lakh on payment of Service Tax.

Under Section 65 of Finance Act, 1994 ‘renting of immovable property’ such
as renting, letting, leasing, licensing or other similar arrangements of
immovable property for use in the course or furtherance of business or
commerce was brought into Service Tax net with effect from 1 June 2007. The
existing service provider must register with Central Excise Department (CED)
within a period of 30 days from the date of new levy and pay Service Tax, after
collecting Service Tax from the service recipient.

‘ Electrical field cabling and power connections, fabrication of suitable ladder and

platform for the gasifier, chain pulley block/jib cranes for operational convenience
and maintenance of gasifier etc.

42



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

Namakkal Municipality (Municipality) issues licenses through public auction
for collection of fees from immovable properties such as daily/weekly markets,
public toilets, slaughter house, parking lots (bus/car/two-wheeler/cycle). Apart
from this, it also rents out shops to private parties. The Municipality, however,
did not register itself as a service provider with CED for Service Tax on or
before 30 June 2007 as required. Only at the instance of CED, the
Municipality got registered (February 2009) and paid हैं 17.73 lakh (March
2009) as Service Tax against % 1.56 crore collected by way of license fees/rent
from June 2007 to March 2009 which clearly indicates that the Municipality
was not aware of service tax until being informed by CED. However, no
Service Tax was actually collected from lease holders/tenants during this
period, even though the orders for issue of license were bound by Central/State
Government rules issued from time to time.

The matter was referred to Government in February 2011; Government stated
(April 2011) that the auction for the period 2007-08 has been finalised during
2006-07 itself and hence no condition for Service Tax collection was added as
the letter from CED was received only in February 2009. It further stated that
steps have been taken to collect the Service Tax from the old lease holders.
This reply is not tenable as the lease holders for the period 2007-09 were bound
by Central/State Government rules issued from time to time and the
Municipality could have collected Service Tax from them had it been aware of
service tax then. Audit also observes that it was the duty of the Administrative
Department to issue a circular to the local bodies whenever such Act/Rule
affecting the functioning of local bodies is introduced. Thus, the failure of the
Municipality to make itself familiar with the Acts introduced by GOI and to
collect Service Tax from the lease holders/tenants resulted in avoidable
expenditure of = 17.73 lakh towards payment of Service Tax.

3.4 Unintended benefit to contractor
DINDIGUL MUNICIPALITY

3.4.1 Non-adherence of contract agreement

Failure of Dindigul Municipality to adhere to the contract agreement
resulted in unintended benefit of € 11.76 lakh to the contractor.

Government of Tamil Nadu sanctioned (September 2005) Under Ground
Sewerage Scheme to Dindigul Municipality (Municipality) at an estimated cost
of % 23.76 crore. Technical sanction for executing the above work under two
packages’ was given by the Superintending Engineer of Office of the
Commissioner of Municipal Administration in January 2006.

The work for Package I was awarded (August 2007) for हैं 10.90 crore which
was more than 30.08 per cent over the estimated cost and included 1.5 per cent
for insurance coverage and agreement was entered in October 2007. Ninety
nine per cent of the work was completed and & 10.74 crore was paid for the
work as of February 2011.

Package I : & 8.40 crore and Package वा : ₹ 12.80 crore.

43



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Clause 13 of General Conditions of Agreement stipulates that the contractor
should provide insurance cover from the commencement of the work to the end
of defects liability period" to cover contractor’s risk such as loss or damage to
the works, plant and machinery, loss of damage to equipment and personal
injury or death. The clause also provides that policies and certificate for
insurance should be delivered by the contractor to the Municipal Engineer for
his approval before the commencement of the work and if the contractor did
not provide policies and certificates required, the municipality may effect the
insurance which the contractor should have provided and recover the premium
paid from the payments due to the contractor.

Audit noticed that the contractor did not provide insurance cover for the works
as per the conditions of the agreement. The Municipality should have insisted
on the insurance or should have taken insurance and recovered the premium
paid from the contractor before commencement of the work as per the
agreement. The Municipality neither insisted for insurance nor recovered the
premium from the contractor resulting in unintended benefit to the contractor to
the tune of F 12.90 lakh.

The matter was referred to Government in March 2011; Government stated
(April 2011) that the contractor had now provided risk insurance as per the
agreement. However, it was noticed from the copy of contractor’s policy
schedule furnished by the Commissioner of Municipal Administration in
March 2011 that the period of insurance was from 24.3.2011 to 30.9.2011 for
₹ 1.14 lakh. The reply is not tenable as the conditions of the agreement
stipulates that the contractor should provide insurance from the commencement
of the work to the end of the defects liability period i.e. 365 days from the date
of certification of completion of work, which was not followed. As the amount
of insurance has been taken only for € 1.14 lakh, the Municipality should have
recovered the balance amount of हैं 11.76 lakh from the contractor as the
amount has been included in the tender cost. Non-recovery of € 11.76 lakh
resulted in unintended benefit to the contractor.

3. Idle investment

COLACHEL MUNICIPALITY

3.5.1 Idle investment due to non-leasing out of shops

Failure of Colachel Municipality to conduct demand survey before
construction of shops resulted in unproductive investment of € 30.41 lakh.

Based on the recommendations of State Level Sanctioning Committee,
Government of India sanctioned (December 2004) projects to Colachel
Municipality (Municipality) under Integrated Development of Small and
Medium Towns Scheme for the year 2004-05 for construction of two shopping
complexes with the objective of improving the financial position of the
municipality. The Municipality constructed (November 2007) two shopping
complexes comprising 64 shops at daily market and 32 shops at market site
near bus stand at a cost of € 57.70 lakh and हैं 22 lakh respectively.

10 365 days from the date of certification of completion of work.

44



Chapter Ill - Audit of Transactions (Urban Local Bodies)

The municipal council fixed (August 2007) deposit amount of हैं 20,000 and
₹ 10,000 and monthly rent of € 650 and & 450 per shop for the shops in ground
floor and first floor respectively. However, the Municipality could not lease
out 14 out of 64 shops at daily market and eight out of 32 shops at the market
site near bus stand even after conducting several auctions as nobody came
forward to participate in the auction. Further, six shops leased out at daily
market and 10 shops leased out at market site near bus stand between
November 2007 and July 2008 were not occupied by the lessees and rent was
also not received by the Municipality so far (August 2010).

Thus, the failure of the Municipality to conduct demand survey before
construction of shops resulted in unproductive investment of € 30.41 lakh"
being the proportionate cost of construction of 22 shops not leased out and 16
shops leased out but rent not received, besides non-achievement of the
objective of improving the financial position of the Municipality.

The matter was referred to Government in January 2011; Government stated
(April 2011) that as it is proposed to provide yard in Colachel seashore, a
number of business activities would take place in the town when this port is
opened and at that time the shops would be leased out for higher rate. This
reply is not tenable as proposal of a port at Colachel is at very nascent stage
and the Government is expecting the feasibility report from the consultant as
stated by it in the Policy Note 2010-11 for Highways and Minor Ports
Department. Thus, construction of shops in anticipation of a port which is yet
to take shape and failure to assess the actual requirement had resulted in idle
investment of € 30.41 lakh.

Proportionate cost of shops not leased out: Daily Market - हैं 57.70 lakh/64 x 14 =
& 12.62 lakh; Market site near Bus Stand - & 22 lakh/32 x 8 = @ 5.50 lakh; Shops
leased out but rent not collected: Daily Market — & 57.70 lakh/64 x 6 = & 5.41 lakh;
Market site near Bus Stand — & 22 lakh/32 x 10 = 6.88 lakh; Total: ₹ 30.41 lakh.

45


CHAPTER IV

ERVIEW OF PANCHAYAT RAJ INS'

4.1 Background

The 73% constitutional amendment gave constitutional status to Panchayat Raj
Institutions (PRIs) and established a system of uniform structure, regular
election, regular flow of funds through Finance Commission etc. As a follow
up, the States are required to entrust these PRIs with such powers, functions
and responsibilities so as to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government.

Consequent to the 73" amendment of the Constitution, the Government of
Tamil Nadu enacted the Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994. Under this Act a
three tier system of PRIs viz., Village Panchayats at the village level,
Panchayat Unions or Block Panchayats at the intermediary level and District
Panchayats at the apex level were established.

4.2 519९ profile

The comparative demographic and developmental picture of the State is given
in Table 4.1 below:
Table 4.1: Important statistics of the State

Rank amongst

State value National value ‘all States

1028.61

4.2.1 Classification of Panchayat Raj Institutions

The classification of Village Panchayats based on their own income during
2009-10 are given in Table 4.2.

AT


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Table 4.2: Income-wise classification of Village Panchayats

Income range per annum Number of Village Panchayats

Upto & 50,000

Between & 50,000 and & one lakh
Between हैं जाल lakh and @ five lakh
Between हैं 1५6 lakh and हैं 10 lakh
Between हैं 10 lakh and हैं 25 lakh
Between हैं 25 lakh and हैं 50 lakh
Between हैं 50 lakh and @ one crore
Between ¥ one crore and हैं crore
Above हैं crore

12,618* 12,618*

(Source: Policy Note of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj Department for 2010-11)

* Two new Village Panchayats, Indira Nagar and Perumathur in Kurinjipadi Panchayat Union of

Cuddalore District formed in August 2008 are yet to be classified under the income range.

4.3 Organisational structure of PRIs

An organogram of PRIs is as given below:

Principal Secretary, Rural Development

and Panchayat Raj Department

Commissioner, Rural
Development and Panchayat Raj

District Collector

Secretar
District Panchayat

Panchayat Union Council — Block Development

Chairman (Elected Representative) Officer

Block Development Officer

Village Panchayat President- i (Village Panchayats)

Executive Authorit
(Elected Representative)

48


Chapter IV — An Overview of Panchayat Raj Institutions

4.4 Status of devolution of functions, functionaries and funds

Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 prescribes various powers and functions to
Village Panchayats and Panchayat Unions under Sections 110, 111 and 112.

Pursuant to its commitment to devolve greater powers and responsibilities to
PRIs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and based on the announcement made
in the Legislative Assembly on 11 August 2006, State Government ordered
(January 2007) the constitution of the Third High Level Committee with the
Minister for Rural Development as the Chairman along with select District
Panchayat Chairpersons, Panchayat Union Chairpersons and Village
Panchayat Presidents besides certain subject experts as members. The
Committee was required to study the duties, functions and powers already
entrusted to the PRIs and ULBs and make recommendations for further
devolution of the same in order to make them more effective.

The Committee presented its report to Government in December 2007 and
submitted a total of 99 recommendations, categorised under 39 subjects.
Government stated (November 2010) that several new initiatives have been
undertaken to strengthen the functioning of PRIs such as provision of separate
vehicles for Panchayat Union Chairpersons, making the implementation of
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS)
works a mandatory duty for the Village Panchayat Presidents and devolution
of powers in respect of Social Welfare Education and Revenue Departments
and amendments made in the Town Panchayats Act, 1994 reconstituting the
appointment committee of Panchayat Union, increased devolution of SFC
grant to PRIs.

4

Decentralised plannin:

4.5.1 Standing Committees

PRIs shall constitute Standing Committees to perform the assigned functions.

The political constitution of the committees is given in Table 4.3 below:
Table 4.3: Political constitution of the Standing Committees

Category

of PRIs Committees

Executive

Chairman and Members of

the Council

As per Section 241 (1) of Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994, State
Government constituted a DPC in 28 districts in November 1997. The role
and responsibility of DPCs are already mentioned in Paragraph 1.5.1 of this
report. As stated in Paragraph 1.5.1 of this report, the Annual Plans prepared
at the apex level are only consolidated and adopted as District plans. No
separate inputs are received from the PRIs. Requirements at the grass root
level were thus not completely reflected in the District plans.

49


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

4.6 Financial profile

4.6.1 Fund flow to PRIs

The major resource base of PRIs consists of State Finance Commission (SFC)
grants, Central Finance Commission (CFC) grants, Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS) Grants, Own Revenue and Assigned Revenue and Loans.

Table 4.4: Fund flow mechanism in PRIs

Panchayat Union Village Panchayats

Nature of Fund

State
Government

Financial
Institution

4.6.2. Source of receipts

Among the three tiers, Village Panchayats alone have the power to levy taxes.
The other source of receipts for Village Panchayats and Panchayat Unions are
non-tax revenue, assigned revenue from State Government and grants given
by State Government for various purposes and State and Central Finance
Commissions grants.

Details of Receipts and Expenditure of PRIs during 2005-10 as furnished by
the Director of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj (DRDPR) are shown in
Table 4.5. However, the accuracy of these figures could not be authenticated
in the absence of data compiled from the audited accounts of PRIs by the
department/Government.

Table 4.5: Details of Receipts and expenditure of PRIs

@ in crore)
2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10

.08 2,920.00

Total Receipts 2,529.

Total Expenditure 2,337.02 2,560.65 2,732.29 3,084.45 3,516.02

The expenditure is more than the receipt for the year 2007-08 to 2009-10 as
the details of grants of SFC and CFC only were made available by DRDPR.
The details of other scheme grants routed through DRDA were not
available.

50


Chapter IV — An Overview of Panchayat Raj Institutions

Account framework

4.7.1 Accounts and database formats

State Government issued orders (April 2004) to adopt the accounts format
prescribed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India with effect from
1 April 2004 in all PRIs. The Commissioner of Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj (CRDPR) was also directed by the State Government to create
the database in PRIs in consultation with National Informatics Centre (NIC)
which would develop software for adoption of the formats.

Government of India released हैं 60.73 crore! during 2003-06 for maintenance
of accounts and database. Government of Tamil Nadu also allocated
% 9.08 crore as a matching grant. Of this, the State Government released
₹ 60.32 crore and 13,074 computers costing = 51.64 crore were purchased
during the period between March 2004 and February 2006 and distributed to
PRIs to maintain accounts and database of finances.

The Government stated (May 2009) that though a software for accounts
maintenance in the Village Panchayats called Panchayat Raj Institutions
Accounts Software (PRIA Soft) was developed by NIC, it could not be used
due to the change of accounting system of Village Panchayats as per
Government order issued in August 2007 wherein the method of accounting
and the four* types of accounts to be maintained in each Village Panchayat
was stipulated.

CRDPR stated (March 2011) that PRIA Soft was complicated and could be
handled only by qualified accounting personnel with enough knowledge in
commerce or computer applications. Further, the CRDPR stated that the
present accounting system of cash based single entry system was sufficient
and migration to double entry system would involve enormous difficulties and
risks which would put the accounting system of PRIs in total disarray apart
from causing considerable delay in preparation and finalisation of Village
Panchayat Account.

Procurement of computers without ensuring its utility was injudicious. The
computers purchased and distributed to PRIs at a cost of € 51.64 crore for
maintenance of accounts and data base had not been utilized for the intended
purpose.

48 A

angements

In accordance with Section 193 of Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994,
Government of Tamil Nadu appointed the following officers as Auditors for
PRIs as given in Table 4.6.

% 36.34 crore and हैं 24.39 crore as per the recommendations of Eleventh and Twelfth
Finance Commission respectively.

(1) Village Panchayat Fund Account, (2) Village Panchayat payments of
TNEB/TWAD Board Account, (3) Village Panchayat Scheme Fund Account and
(4) Village Panchayat NREGS Account.

51


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Table 4.6: Audit arrangements for PRIs
pp
Director of Local Fund Audit (DLFA)
DLFA

(i) Deputy Block Development Officer
(DBDO) except audit of scheme accounts

(ii) Assistant Director of Rural Development
(Audit) except audit of scheme accounts

(iii) DLFA for audit of scheme accounts

DLFA is the statutory Auditor for Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats.
Based on the recommendation of Second State Finance Commission (SSFC),
DLFA is conducting only test audit of Village Panchayats including scheme
accounts. The Deputy Block Development Officer audits all the General Fund
accounts of all the Village Panchayats (cent per cent audit) and certifies them
except audit of scheme accounts.

Accounts of District Panchayats and Panchayat Unions are also audited by
Principal Accountant General (Civil Audit) under Section 14 (1) of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of
Service) Act, 1971. Further technical guidance is also provided by the
Principal Accountant General to DLFA regarding audit of District Panchayats
and Panchayat Unions in terms of order of Government of Tamil Nadu issued
in March 2003.

Audit Reports upto the year 1996-97 were discussed by the Committee on
Public Accounts (PAC) and recommendations were issued. As of June 2011,
there were 225 recommendations relating to 1982-83 to 1993-94 of the Rural
Development and Panchayat Raj (RDPR) Department pending final settlement
which inter-alia consisted of paragraphs relating to PRIs. CAG’s Audit
Report on PRIs presented in State Legislature for the year 2000-2001 and for
the years 2005-06 to 2008-09 have not been taken up for discussion by PAC.

4.8.1 Audit of PRIs by Principal Accountant General (Civil Audit)

Audit of PRIs was conducted under Section 14 (1) of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India‘s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act,
1971 in respect of financial assistance given to Panchayat Raj Institutions.
Important irregularities detected by Audit during local audit of PRIs through
test check of records are followed up through Inspection Reports issued to the
CRDPR with copies to the audited PRIs.

Government had issued general orders in April 1967 fixing a time limit of four
weeks for prompt response by the authorities for all such paragraphs included
in the inspection reports issued by Audit. However, as of December 2010,
2,305 paragraphs relating to 474 Inspection Reports were not settled for want
of satisfactory replies.

52


Chapter IV — An Overview of Panchayat Raj Institutions

4. Introduction

Financial reporting in the PRIs is a key element of accountability. The
resource base of PRIs in addition to their own tax/non tax revenue consists of
devolution of funds by State Government, assigned/shared revenue and funds
provided based on the recommendations of Central Finance Commission. A
chart showing the funds flow to PRIs is given in Appendix 4.1.

4.10 Accounts maintained by Panchayat Raj Institutions

According to Tamil Nadu Panchayats Act, 1994 PRIs are required to maintain
various types of accounts as detailed in Appendix 4.2.

4.11 Arrears in Audit and Accounts

4.11.1 Audit of PRIs by DLFA

(a) The position of arrears of audit of PRIs as of December 2010 is given
in Table 4.7.

Table 4.7: Position of audit of Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats by DLFA

Audit

number yet to completed
submitted

336 (87)

385 (100)

14 (48)

29 (100)

(Source: Details furnished by DLFA in January 2011)
(Figures in brackets indicate the percentage of audit in arrears)

As seen from the table, out of 385 Panchayat Unions and 29 District
Panchayats, DLFA has completed audit only in 49 Panchayat Unions and 15
District Panchayats for the year 2008-09 and for the year 2009-10 audit is yet
to be completed by DLFA in all the Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats
as the accounts are yet to be submitted by Panchayat Unions and District
Panchayats to DLFA.

(b) The regular audit of Village Panchayats was conducted by the Deputy
Block Development Officers and 22 per cent’ of the total number of Village
Panchayats has to be test checked by the DLFA annually as per Government

Including two per cent of Village Panchayats based on receipts, value of works and
on specific complaints forwarded by Director of Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj.

53


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

orders of November 2002. The position of audit of Village Panchayats, as of
December 2010, is given in Table 4.8.

Table 4.8: Position of audit of Village Panchayats

Category of PRI Total number tobe — Number of Village Panchayats wherein
Audited by DLFA Audit not completed

(Source: Details furnished by DLFA in January 2011)

The number of paragraphs included in the Inspection Reports of DLFA issued
up to 2008-09, pending settlement as of December 2010 in respect of
Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats, aggregated to 24,138 and 308
respectively. Year-wise pendency position reported by DLFA as of January
2011 was as given in Table 4.9.

Table 4.9 : Year-wise pendency details of paragraphs in the IRs of DLFA

Number of paragraphs pending in respect of
Year of IR

4,143
515
613

1,978

5,767
10,156
Total 24,138

(Source: Details furnished by DLFA in February 2011)

State Government appointed State High Level Committee in November 1997
with the Commissioner, RDPR Department as Chairman and DLFA as Deputy
Chairman assisted by three‘ members and District High Level Committee
(DHLC) headed by District Collector as Chairman and Project Officer,
District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) as Deputy Chairman assisted by
three’ members and one Secretary for settlement of outstanding paragraphs.

As reported by DLFA (April 2011), the DHLC conducted 176 meetings during
the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 (upto December 2010) and settled 4,772
paragraphs relating to Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats.

Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer, RDPR Department; Chief
Engineer/Superintending Engineer, Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board
and Chief Engineer (Highways and Rural Works) as members.

Deputy Director, DLFA; Executive Engineer, DRDA; Deputy Director, RDPR
Department as members and PA to District Collector (Audit) as Secretary.

54


Chapter IV — An Overview of Panchayat Raj Institutions

4.12 Conclusion

There was steady increase in receipt from हैं 2,111.51 crore in 2007-08 to
₹ 2,457.13 crore in 2009-10. Computers provided to PRIs at a cost of
% 51.64 crore for maintenance of accounts and data base had not been utilised
for the intended purpose. Nine Panchayat Unions and 14 District Panchayats
were yet to finalise their accounts for the year 2008-09 and all the 385
Panchayat Unions and 29 District Panchayats were yet to finalise their
accounts for the year 2009-10 though they were to finalise their accounts by
30” June.

55


CHAPTER V

PERFORMANCE REVIEW

(PANCHAYAT RAJ INSTITUTIONS)

This Chapter presents one performance review dealing with Implementation of
accepted recommendations of Third State Finance Commission in Panchayat
Raj Institutions.

RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYAT RAJ
DEPARTMENT

Executive summary

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) constituted Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 as per Article 243 (I) and 243 (Y) of
the Constitution of India to analyse the financial position of local bodies and to
make recommendations for the award period 2007-2012. TSFC submitted its
report in September 2006. Performance audit on implementation of accepted
recommendations of Third State Finance Commission in Panchayat Raj
Institutions (PRIs) revealed that an amount of % 76 lakh relating to Tax on
Cable Television for the period from 2003-04 to 2008-09 (upto June 2008) was
not assigned to the PRIs in six districts as of November 2010. Mines and
mineral fees of € 89.97 crore due to Village Panchayats in 21 districts for the
period from April 2007 to March 2010 were adjusted after a delay of one to 26
months. Excess allocation to Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund resulted in short
assignment of State Finance Commission devolution grant to Village
Panchayats to the extent of € 111.46 crore. Self Help Groups and Social Audit
have not been involved at Village Panchayats level. Moreover, the High Level
Committee did not meet even once to monitor the implementation of accepted
recommendations of TSFC, thus defeating the objective of TSFC.

5.1.1 Introduction

Government of Tamil Nadu (GTN) constituted Third State Finance
Commission (TSFC) in December 2004 to analyse the financial position of
local bodies and to make recommendations on (a) distribution and
determination of taxes, duties, tolls, fees and grants-in-aid to local bodies,
(b) possible new avenues for tapping resources in local bodies considering the
tax structure, (c) present system of accountability of local bodies in utilization
of the resources raised/received from Government and the adequacy of audit
and (d) parallel control/functions of line departments/parastatal agencies over
local bodies for the award period 2007-2012.

TSFC submitted its report to the State Government in September 2006 with
306 recommendations. The State Government accepted 90 in full, 72 in

57


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

part/in principle and negated 89. The remaining was pending with
Government/ High Level Committee.

Government released the funds in two way packages viz., Pool A and Pool B.
Under Pool A, the departments concerned assigned the revenue to PRIs
through the District Collector/District level officers. Under Pool B, devolution
grant was shared between PRIs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the ratio of
58:42 for the years from 2007-08 to 2009-10.

TSFC recommended (i) the procedure to be followed for the release of
assigned/shared revenue to PRIs, (ii) the modalities to be followed for the
collection of property tax, user charges, profession tax, cable TV tax etc.,
(iii) the device for allocating the State’s own tax revenue and the time frame
for release of devolution grants to PRIs, (iv) the time frame for finalization and
submission of annual accounts to Local Fund Audit and settlement of long
pending paragraphs and (v) monitoring mechanism to watch the
implementation of the recommendations.

Action Taken Report was placed on the floor of the Legislative Assembly in
May 2007. Administrative departments concerned were to issue orders and
monitor implementation of the recommendations of TSFC.

5.1.2 Organisational Setup

The role and responsibilities of officials in respect of implementation of the
recommendations of the TSFC were as given below:

——— for preparation of draft Action
Taken Report for approval of Cabinet
Committee.

Responsible for approving the Action Taken
Report to be placed on the floor of the
Assembly

Responsible for issue of Government orders
and monitoring the implementation of
accepted recommendations of the TSFC.

Monitoring the implementation of the
accepted recommendations of the TSFC.

5.1.3. Audit Objectives

The audit objectives were to ascertain whether

> Funds transfer based on accepted TSFC recommendations was
effective,

58


Chapter V - Performance Review (Panchayat Raj Institutions)

> Grama Sabha and Self Help Groups were functioning effectively in the
Village Panchayats and

> The monitoring mechanism in implementing the accepted
recommendations of TSFC was effective.

5.1.4 Audit Criteria
Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria:

> Accepted recommendations of TSFC;

» Explanatory memorandum on the action taken on the recommendations
of TSFC and

> Government orders and Department Circulars/instructions on
implementation of recommendation of TSFC.

5.1.5 Scope and Methodology of Audit

The Performance Audit was conducted between July 2010 and November 2010
covering SFC grants including assigned revenue for the years from 2007-08 to
2009-10. The records in the offices of Finance, Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj (RDPR), Commercial Taxes, Registration, Industries (Geology
and Mining), Environment and Forest and Fisheries Departments and its
district/regional level offices were test-checked during the course of audit.
Records of 58 Panchayat Unions out of 385 Panchayat Unions selected on the
basis of stratified sampling were test checked (Appendix 5.1). The findings
were discussed with the Commissioner of Rural Development and Panchayat
Raj on 7 February 2011. Exit conference was held with Commissioner, Rural
Development and Panchayat Raj on 12 May 2011 on behalf of Government.

Audit Objective 1: To assess whether funds transfer based on accepted TSFC
recommendations was effective

5.1.6 Resource base
Assigned/Shared Revenue
Accepted recommendations on assigned/shared revenue were as follows:

> The vertical sharing ratio of devolution between PRIs and ULBs shall
be 58:42. The horizontal sharing ratio among the PRIs
(ie Village Panchayats, Panchayat Unions and District Panchayats)
shall be 60:32:8.

> The entire tax proceeds realized from the Cable TV from 2003-2006
shall be passed on to the respective PRIs in 2007-08.

> The sharable income from mines and minerals to be adjusted on a
quarterly basis in the same financial year.

> At least 25 per cent of proceeds from fishery rental of Public Works
Department (PWD) tanks to be given to the Village Panchayats.

59


Five per cent out of
entire share of PRIs
was deducted from
the Village
Panchayats share
instead of five

per cent of Village
Panchayats share of
60 per cent towards
Infrastructure Gap
Filling Fund

Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

It was noticed during the review that there were non assignment and delayed
assignment revenue in spite of the recommendations of TSFC on
assigned/shared revenue as given below:

5.1.6.1 Excess allocation to Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund (IGFF)

State Government while accepting the recommendation in respect of vertical
sharing and horizontal sharing stated that it shall reserve five per cent out of 60
per cent share of the village panchayats from the State Finance Commission
devolution towards Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund (IGFF). Audit scrutiny
revealed that five per cent out of entire share of PRIs was deducted by the
Government from the Village Panchayats share instead of five per cent of
Village Panchayats share of 60 per cent and credited to IGFF as indicated in
Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Excess allocation to Infrastructure Gap Filling Fund
@ in Crore)

PRIs Share 60 per cent Amount allocated to Amount to be

Q) share of PRIs IGFF allocated to IGFF allocation
(3) (4) 5) (6)
Sper cent of col.(2) Sper cent of col. (3) col. (4) - col. (5)

1,583.59
1,716.44 85.82
1,926.57 103.26*

268.26

Cable TV tax
amounting to = 76
lakh for the period
from 2003-04 to
2008-09 was not
assigned to Village
Panchayats in six
districts

* Amount allocated at 5.36 per cent of the total PRIs share.

From the above table, it can be seen that there was excess deduction from the
State Finance Commission devolution grant to Village Panchayats to the extent
of € 111.46 crore for the period from 2007-08 to 2009-10.

3,709 Village Panchayats had % 75.41 crore as outstanding water charges
payable to Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board while 4,201 Village
Panchayats had हैं 47.93 crore as outstanding electricity charges payable to
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board. Release of entitled devolution grant would have
helped the Village Panchayats in paying their outstanding dues.

During Exit conference (May 2011), Commissioner of Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj (CRDPR) stated that necessary action will be taken to release
the correct amount for the year 2011-2012.

5.1.6.2 Non-assignment of Cable TV Tax

Even though Government accepted the recommendation that whatever Cable
TV tax collected shall be passed on to the PRIs till the Act was amended no
orders were issued in this regard. As a result, amount of & 76 lakh collected as
Cable TV tax for the period from 2003-04 to 2008-09 (upto June 2008) was not
assigned to the Village Panchayats in six districts’ as of November 2010.
Deputy Commissioners of Commercial Taxes Department of the six districts
replied (August 2010 - November 2010) that orders were not received from the

' Coimbatore : हैं 36.97 lakh; Krishnagiri : 2.99 lakh; Pudukkottai : 17.19 lakh;
Thoothukudi : € 1.08 lakh; Tirunelveli : हैं 15.55 lakh and Virudhunagar : हैं 2.22 lakh;
Total : & 76 lakh.

60


Fishery rentals
were not allocated
to Village
Panchayats for
the period 2007-10

Chapter V - Performance Review (Panchayat Raj Institutions)

Commissioner of Commercial Taxes to release the amount. This resulted in
deprival of legitimate share of revenue from Cable TV tax to PRIs.

During Exit conference (May 2011),CRDPR stated that Commissioner of
Commercial Taxes Department had been addressed to release the tax on Cable
TV to the PRIs.

5.1.6.3 Delay in assignment of mines and mineral fees

Audit noticed that mines and mineral fees of = 89.97 crore due to the Village
Panchayats in 21 districts for the period from April 2007 to March 2010 were
adjusted after a delay of one to 26 months. The Assistant Directors/Deputy
Directors of Geology and Mining of the 21 districts replied (July 2010 —
November 2010) that due to administrative reasons, shortage of manpower and
heavy workload the delay had occured. Reply is not tenable as the
administrative department i.e. Industries (Geology and Mining) did not initiate
any action to implement the accepted recommendations of the TSFC to adjust
the sharable income from mines and minerals on quarterly basis and the PRIs
did not get their due share in time.

5.1.6.4 Non-allocation of Fishery rental receipts

Even though Government accepted the recommendation to share the proceeds
of fishery rentals from PWD tanks with local bodies in the ratio of area of
submergence, no orders were issued to share the revenue. As a result, fishery
rental receipts were not credited to the Village Panchayat accounts for the
period 2007-10. Non-issue of Government order to share the revenue of
fishery rentals even after accepting the recommendations of TSFC resulted in
denial of revenue to Village Panchayats.

During Exit conference (May 2011), CRDPR stated that the matter will be
brought to the notice of the Government and action will be taken for allocation
of fishery rentals by the Fisheries Department to the PRIs.

Recommendation 1: Administrative Department should issue Orders for
implementing the accepted recommendations of TSFC.

whether the Grama Sabha and Self Help

Groups were functioning effectively in the Village Panchayats

5.1.7 Grama Sabha and Self Help Groups role in Village Panchayats

Accepted recommendations on Grama Sabha and Self Help Groups were as
follows:

> The documents of Village Panchayats including the details of contracts
awarded and the list of approved contractors etc., to be submitted in
Grama Sabha meetings.

> To involve Self Help Groups in social aspects to improve the living
conditions of rural women folk and highlight the problems of rural
people.



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

5.1.7.1 Non-creation of Social Audit system

Government while accepting the recommendation stated that PRIs shall be
advised suitably. Audit scrutiny revealed that orders/instructions have not been
issued by the Government and the recommendations of TSFC were not
implemented.

During Exit conference (May 2011), CRDPR stated that Social Audit under
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme is being undertaken and
records relating to financial matters, expenditure, public distribution system
etc., are placed before the Grama Sabha for discussion and approval. He
further stated that audit remarks will be considered for taking further necessary
action. There was no documentary proof showing conduct of Social Audit.

5.1.7.2 Non-involvement of Self Help Groups

Audit noticed that PRIs did not conduct mass awareness programmes by
involving Non Government Organisations in creating awareness among the
public regarding powers, functions and responsibilities of Grama Sabha and to
allow them as watch dogs of the local body administration. RDPR Department
did not initiate action to implement the recommendation of TSFC which was
accepted by the Government. Non-involvement of Self Help Groups in
implementation of the development programmes in Village Panchayats
defeated the objective of the recommendations of TSFC.

During Exit conference (May 2011),CRDPR stated that Self Help Groups are
informed well in advance about the conduct of Grama Sabha by the Village
Panchayats and they are participating in the debate during the Grama Sabha
meetings.

Recommendation 2: The Administrative Department i.e Rural
Development and Panchayat Raj Department should issue necessary
orders for implementing the recommendations of TSFC.

Audit Objective To ascertain whether the monitoring mechanism in
implementing the accepted recommendations of TSFC was effective

5.1.8 Monitoring Mechanism

Accepted recommendations for monitoring mechanism were:

> Decision on all recommendations made by TSFC shall be taken at the
earliest without undue delay.

5.1.81 Monitoring by High Level Committee

Government empowered (December 2005) the High Level Committee? already
in existence in the State to approve the projects undertaken under Twelfth
Central Finance Commission devolutions. Government further gave detailed

Headed by the Chief Secretary, Secretaries of Finance, Rural Development and
Panchayat Raj and Municipal Administration and Water Supply Departments as
members.

62


High Level Committee
formed in May 2007
did not meet even once
to monitor the implemen-
tation of accepted
recommendations of
TSFC

Chapter V - Performance Review (Panchayat Raj Institutions)

guidelines regarding approval of projects, quantification of targets, monitoring
both physical and financial targets, etc.

Government empowered (May 2007) the same High Level Committee to
oversee the implementation of the decisions taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the TSFC and the follow up action thereon. However,
Government while empowering the High Level Committee did not give any
detailed guidelines listing out the functions to be undertaken by the Committee
as given for overseeing implementation of Twelfth Central Finance
Commission recommendations. Due to absence of such guidelines, the High
Level Committee did not monitor the implementation of the accepted TSFC
recommendations at all as detailed below:

On seeking information relating to meetings of High Level Committee, Finance
Department stated (May 2011) that the Action Taken Report on the
recommendations of TSFC has been communicated to the departments
concerned for implementation and the same are being implemented by the
departments after issue of orders in consultation with Finance Department.
Hence, convening of High Level Committee meetings may not arise at this
juncture. The reply is not tenable as Government in May 2007 stated that the
implementation of the decisions taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the TSFC and the follow up action taken shall be
monitored by the High Level Committee headed by the Chief Secretary on half
yearly basis. However, it did not meet even on a single occasion to monitor the
implementation of the accepted recommendations of TSFC resulting in
deficiencies as pointed out in the preceding paragraphs.

Recommendation 3: High Level Committee should meet every six months
as ordered by Government and monitor the implementation of the
recommendations of TSFC.

63


CHAPTER VI

AUDIT
(PANCHAYAT RAJ INSTIT
Audit of transactions in Madurai West Panchayat Union brought an instance

of unfruitful expenditure towards construction of a training centre for Self
Help Groups.

RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PANCHAYAT RAJ DEPARTMENT

MADURAI WEST PANCHAYAT UNION

6.1.1 Unfruitful expenditure on Training Centre for Self Help Groups

Failure of the District Collector to follow the guidelines of Swarnajayanti
Grama Swarojgar Yojana and poor monitoring resulted in unfruitful
expenditure and blocking of funds to the tune of हैं 95.85 lakh in
construction of a Training Centre.

Under Infrastructure component of Swarnajayanti Grama Swarojgar Yojana
(SGSY), a Government of India scheme, the District Rural Development
Agency (DRDA), Madurai proposed (November 2003) construction of a
Training Centre at a cost of 1.22 crore for imparting training to Self Help
Groups. Based on the administrative approval of the District Collector,
Madurai, the work was entrusted (February 2004) to District Building Centre
(DBC), Madurai and an amount of % 34 lakh was released by DRDA in March
2004. As of December 2004, the DBC had incurred an expenditure of
हैँ 18.98 lakh towards construction of Training Centre.

In December 2004, the District Collector cancelled the work order to DBC due
to slow progress of work as it was not capable of executing works involving
higher technicalities. The District Collector entrusted (December 2004) the
work to Block Development Officer, Madurai West Panchayat Union (PU)
and released a sum of हैं 73.57' lakh to PU during 2004-07 towards
construction of Training Centre. As of November 2008, the PU had
completed the civil works at a cost of € 45.16 lakh except conference hall,
restaurant, provision of generator set etc. Thereafter, the PU stopped the work
citing cost escalation as the work was entrusted to it based on 2004-05 rates,
even though it had a balance of € 31.71 lakh as of May 2010 including interest
earned.

Scrutiny of the records revealed the following:

(i) Director of Rural Development (DRD) had instructed in January 2003
itself not to entrust works involving higher technicalities to DBC. The District
Collector while awarding the work to DBC in February 2004 failed to take

' ₹ 12.09 lakh (September 2004), हैं 8.72 lakh (December 2004), हैं 39 lakh (February 2005)

and हैं 13.76 lakh (October 2006).

65



Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

notice of it. Further, the District Collector also failed to fix a specific time
frame to complete the work, as provided in the guidelines of SGSY, while
awarding the work to the DBC and PU.

(ii) The SGSY guidelines provided for monitoring the progress of work on
quarterly basis. The District Collector as a monitoring authority should have
instructed the PU to continue the work to the extent of funds available and
co-ordinated with DRDA, the implementing agency, to get necessary funds to
complete the work. Audit observed that monitoring authority had failed in this
regard which was evident from the fact that the work remained incomplete for
more than two years after incurring an expenditure of f 64.14 lakh.

(iii) | The Training Centre at Madurai was a new infrastructure constructed
utilising SGSY funds, while the SGSY guidelines clearly stipulates that
responsibility of providing such an infrastructure lies with the State
Government and SGSY funds should be primarily utilized only to bridge small
gaps in infrastructure and not for creation of an altogether non-existent
infrastructure in the area.

Thus, the failure of the District Collector to follow SGSY
guidelines/instructions of DRD scrupulously and lapses in monitoring the
progress of work resulted in unfruitful expenditure of हैं 64.14 lakh and
blocking up of = 31.71 lakh for more than two years. Further, the objective of
imparting training to the Self Help Groups in a conducive environment
proposed as early as November 2003 was not achieved. When the matter was
referred (December 2010), Government stated (February 2011) that revised
estimate has been prepared to complete the balance works.

he

Chennai (K. VIJAYAKUMARAN)
The Accountant General
Local Bodies (Audit and Accounts)
Tamil Nadu
Countersigned.

|.

New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

66


Lo

soumoyos squeiy शपथ
७ प्रग्गथ्ञपथपप्रभूवष्पा्‌ STUD SSTUILOD,
JURID '>परष्पात [ष्यप०) 2०एश्पाप्‌ गथ$

Ana
durayg uo o8zeyong
aNUdAgY Xe

ONUDASY
31

pouaissy

anuaady [P10],

soIpog [ए२०गु पर्व] Jo onudAa. Jo >>या0
(६ 08eq ‘6°[ Ydeaseseg :999.10J9y)
[1 xipuoddy


89

कह ToL
ve6'b1
6६६६8
P16 PI

966%01 ह्क्ा

668%
vel's
ts'y

159°%6 STZ LOL'8Z
syedeyoueg — $01
Leah ७७०].
$ए०पषउ००10:3 [एक[जुण्णा्‌

ए[> sydeasesied yipne jo _०पृणा ए्‌

0102 YALA 1६ UO 5४ 1ए०ए०)>5 SuIpuad 5गृए० घ्व॒ [२०१ ण्शवण] ० 3
(6 ग्हए्व fp LTT Ydeaseseg :99ua19J0y)

ZI xipueddy

06 You [€ papua awa ayl 4of (Saipog [0207]) Laoday Npny


eerie

Appendix 2.1

(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.5; Page 13)

Primary Schools (35)

CPS, INDRA NAGAR,

CPS, STRAHANS ROAD (TELUGU)
CPS, ERUKKENCHERRY

CPS, SANKARAPURAM

CPS, VARATHARAJAPET

CPS, SLATERPURAM

CPS, WASHERMENPET (URUDU)
CPS, NOCHIKUPPAM

CPS, NESAPPAKAM

CPS, ALWARPET

CPS, NADUVAKKARAI

CPS, CHINNABABU STREET
CPS, SRINIVASA NAGAR

CPS, THARAMANI

CPS, BAZAAR ROAD

CPS, CB ROAD

CPS, STRAHANS ROAD (TAMIL)
CPS, NEW MARKET FARM

CPS, PALAVOYAL

CPS, SEMBIAM (TELUGU)

CPS, MM STREET, 6TH LANE.
CPS, ANJANEYAR NAGAR

CPS, NSK NAGAR

CPS, PATEL NAGAR

CPS, ESWARANKOIL STREET
CPS, UTHAYASURIYAN NAGAR
CPS, MOOR MARKET

CPS, CHINNAKODUNGIYUR.
CPS, UTHAYAM NAGAR,

CPS, PULIUR I (NSK SALAI)
CPS, GIRIAPPA ROAD

CPS, CHELLAPPA STREET

CPS, RANGARAJAPURAM

CPS, KAPPALPOLUR

CPS, THIRUVALLUVAR NAGAR

List of test checked schools

Middle Schools (29)

CMS, 3, AP ROAD

CMS, DAMODARAPURAM.

CMS, RANGANATHAPURAM
CUGPS, CHERIAN NAGAR

CMS, PUDUMANAIKKUPAM,
CMS, SEVEN WELLS

CMS, MGR NAGAR II

CMS, DURAI STREET

CMS, 72, AP ROAD

CMS, KAMARAJ COLONY

CMS, PRAKASAM ROAD

CMS, MK AMMAN KOIL STREET
CMS, GPW COLONY

CMS, MH ROAD (GIRLS)

CMS, GOKULAM

CMS, BUDDHA STREET

CMS, CORNATION NAGAR

CMS, NARASINGAPURAM

CMS, GANDHI GRAMAM

CMS, ANGAPPA STREET (URUDU)
CMS, KK LANE

CMS, 130, AMMAN KOIL STREET
CMS, MADUMA NAGAR

CMS, MCNICHOLS ROAD

CMS, RANGASAYEE

CMS, 1A, MODEL SCHOOL ROAD
CMS, TANA STREET

CMS, VELACHERRY

CMS, VASANTHA GARDEN.

High Schools (10)

CHS, SOMAIARAJA STREET
CHS, IRUSAPPA STREET
CHS, KAMARAJ AVENUE
CHS, CHINTHADRIPET
CHS, WALTAX ROAD

CHS, GANESAPURAM

CHS, SP SANATHI
(RANGARAJAPURAM)

CHS, MPT COLONY
CHS, VP KOIL STREET
CHS, MGR NAGAR

Higher Secondary Schools (5)

CHSS, MH ROAD

CHSS, ROTLER STREET

CHSS, NUNGAMBAKKAM (GIRLS)
CHSS, NESAPAKKAM

CHSS, LLOYDS ROAD

69


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010 | Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Appendix 2.2
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.6.1; Page 13)

Receipts and expenditure out of Elementary Education Fund during 2005-10

@ in crore)

Budget Estimates Expenditure ercentage of
of Receipts

(Source : Details furnished by Chennai City Municipal Corporation)

70


EEE eeid'ices

Appendix 2.3
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.7.2; Page 16)

Details of schools where maintenance works were not taken up

vations to be done

CMS, GPW Colony
CMS, Gokulam

CPS, Cooks Road

CHS, Chinthadripet

CPS, Cochin House
CMS, Santhome
CMS, M.K. Amman Koil Street

CBHSS, Gangadeeshwarar Koil Street

CPS, T.V. Koil Street

71


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010 | Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010

Appendix 2.4
(Paragraph 2.2.5; Page 27)
List of test checked Urban Local Bodies

Corporations (3)

Chennai Coimbatore Thiruchirappalli

Municipalities (28)

Kurichi Nallur Pollachi Palani
Kasipalayam Periasemur Surampatty Veerappanchatram
Anakaputhur Madurantagam Inam Karur Thanthoni
Hosur Krishnagiri Anaiyur Pallipalayam
Ariyalur Narasingapuram | Udagamandalam Coonoor
Thiruvannamalai Puliyangudi Kadayanallur Poonamallee
Vandavasi Villupuram Aruppukkottai Srivilliputhur
Town Panchayats (91)

Dhali Karumathampatti | Pallapalayam Veerakeralam
Vellakinar Zamin Uthukuli Ammainaickanur Batlagundu
Neikkarapatti Oddanchatram Sithayankottai Anthiyur
Appakudal Avalpoondurai Bhavanisagar 8 7 Agraharam
Chennasamudram | Chennimalai Chithode Jambai
Kanchikoil Kangayam Kembanaickenpalayam | Kodumudi
Kolathupalayam Lakkampatti Modakkurichi Mulanur
Nallampatti Nerinjipettai Pasur Sivagiri
Suriyampalayam Vadugapatti Thiruporur Alur
Anjugramam Kilkulam Killiyur Kadayal
Kulasekarapuram | Mandaikadu Mulagumudu Thiruparappu
Aravakurichi Krishnarayapuram | Marudur Nangavaram
Palayajayamkonda- | Pallapatti Puliyur Punjai Pugalur
Cholapuram

Punjai TNPL (Karur) Uppidamangalam Bargur
Thottakurichi

Denkanikottai Kaveripattinam Kelamangalam Mathagiri
Nagojanahalli Uthangarai A Vellalapatti Paravai
Kilvelur Kurumbalur Udayarpalayam Gangavalli
Papanasam Thiruppanandal Thevaram Vadugapatti
Veerapandi Adikaratti Chengam Athur
Perungulam Vilathikulam Lalgudi Pullambadi
Courtallam Nanguneri Thirukarungudi Veeravanallur
Naravarikuppam Thirumazhisai Kaveripakkam Thimiri
Vilapakkam Chettiarpatti Mamsapuram

72


ee epprrrnidices endices

Centrally
Sponsored
‘Schemes

Appendix 4.1
(Reference: Paragraph 4.9; Page 53)

Funds flow chart to Panchayat Raj Institutions

Central
Finance

Commission
Grants

ता ~

Assigned Revenue,
Statutory Grants and
Ad hoc Grants

73


Audit Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010 | Report (Local Bodies) for the year ended 31 March 2010
Appendix 4.2

(Reference: Paragraph 4.10; Page 53)

Types of Accounts maintained by Panchayat Raj Institutions

(०) Village Panchayats
(i) Village Panchayat Fund Account

Village Panchayat payments to TNEB and/or TWAD Board Account

Village Panchayat Scheme Fund Account

(iv) Village Panchayat National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS) Account

(b) Panchayat Unions

(i) General Fund Account - LF - I
(ii) Education Fund Account - LF - III
(iii) | Nutritious Meal Fund Account
(iv) | Scheme Account

(v) Provident Fund ‘T’ Deposit Account

Besides the above, two more accounts are also maintained according to necessity viz.,
> Village Panchayat Consolidated Fund Account

> NABARD (10 per cent) Account
(० District Panchayats

(i) General Fund Account

(ii) Scheme Fund Account

74


eerie

pe Name of Panchay

Appendix 5.1

(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.5; Page 59)

List of test checked Panchayat Unions

Thondamuthur Munchirai Kodumudi
Kammapuram Thuckalay Thiruporur
Keerapalayam Thally Usilampatti
Vriddhachalam Uthangarai Thirumarugal
Nilakottai Kallikudi Vedaranyam
Vedasandur Madurai (West) Erumapatty
Puduchatram Viralimalai Mallasamudram
Veppanthattai Mudukalathur Namagiripettai
Manamelkudi Attur Vilathikulam
Thirumayam Mac. Choultry Manikandam
Tiruppanandal Kannangudi Musiri
Thiruvaiyyaru Thanjavur Pullampadi
Periakulam Karungulam Uppiliyapuram
Cheyyar Kayathar Alankulam
Keelapavoor Pappakudi K V Kuppam
Puzhal Radhapuram Nemili
Sholavaram Mulanur Thimiri
Katpadi Uthukuli Thiruppathur
Vallam Vanur Kanai

Srivilliputhur

75