www.agker.cag.gov.in 
REPORT OF THE 
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
on 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
for the year ended March 2018 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 2 of the year 2019 

 
 
 

Table of contents 
 
(i) 
CONTENTS 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
PREFACE  v 
CHAPTER – I   
INTRODUCTION 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational structure of the Office of the Accountant 
General (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit), Kerala 
1.4 3 
Planning and conduct of Audit 1.5 3 
Significant audit observations 1.6 3 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 1.7 7 
CHAPTER – II   
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Quality control measures in maintenance of roads by 
Public Works Department 2 9 
CHAPTER – III   
COMPLIANCE AUDIT  
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of Agency for Development of Aquaculture 
Kerala (ADAK) 3.1 33 
Irregular payment of compensation to fishermen 3.2 43 
CO-OPERATION DEPARTMENT  
Short collection of Audit Fee from Co-operative Societies 3.3 45 
Non-remittance of dividend due to the Government by Co-
operative Societies  3.4 46 
Infructuous expenditure on Floating Triveni Supermarket 
Project 3.5 48 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Excess payment of ₹99.72 lakh to a contractor due to 
under-recovery of the cost of bitumen used in a work 3.6 50 
Overpayment on account of fictitious level measurements 3.7 52 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
(ii) 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
and incorrect calculations 
Departmental lapse in the management of securities from 
contractors 3.8 54 
Avoidable expenditure due to delay in finalisation of 
tenders 3.9 56 
Idling of bridges for want of approach roads 3.10 57 
Violation of agreement conditions and the provisions of 
revised PWD Manual 3.11 59 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
Implementation of Projects in Coastal Regulatory Zone 
(CRZ) areas 3.12 60 
 
  

Table of contents 
 
(iii) 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 
No. 
Description Page 
1.1 Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) 
as on 30 June 2018 65 
2.1 Control Tests and their minimum frequency 66 
3.1 Promotion of Rice cum Shrimp farming in Kaipad Lands - 
2013-14 - Consolidated details of beneficiary survey 72 
3.2 Promotion of Rice cum Shrimp Farming in Kaipad Lands  - 
2014-15 - Details of beneficiaries and status of farming  74 
3.3 Difference in the rate of Dividend paid to Government and 
other members 75 
3.4 Details of expenditure incurred on purchase of floating 
Trivenis 79 
3.5 Calculation of overpayment made to contractor on account 
of fictitious/incorrect level measurements 80 
3.6 List of works in which Securities were inadequate 81 
3.7 List of works in which Security was not adjusted against 
pending bill of other works 82 
3.8 List of works in which Securities were released before due 
date 85 
3.9 List of works in which validity of Bank Guarantee expired 
before completion of work 88 
3.10 List of works in which validity of Bank Guarantee (Security 
Deposit) expired before completion of DLP of the work 90 
3.11 Repair works arranged at Depart mental cost soon after the 
DLP/Validity of SG 92 
3.12 Repair works arranged soon after the DLP  93 
3.13 Inadmissible payment to contractors – details of works 94 
 
 Glossary of Abbreviations 99 
 
 

 

 
(v) 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2018 is prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Kerala under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and compliance  
audits of the Departments of Gov ernment of Kerala under the Economic Services 
including Departments of Public Works, Fisheries and Co-operation.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are those  which came to notice in the course 
of test audit of records during the year 2017 -18 as well as those which came to notice 
in earlier years but could not be reported in previous Audit Reports. Instances relating 
to the period subsequent to 2017-18 are also included wherever necessary. 
The Audit is conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards  issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
 
1 
 
CHAPTER I  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG ) relates to 
matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and activities and 
compliance audit of Government Departments and Autonomous Bodies under the 
Economic Sector. 
Compliance audit refers to the examination of transactions relating to  expenditure of 
the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions of the Constitution of India, 
applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders and instructions issued by the 
competent authorities are being complied with. On the other hand, p erformance audit, 
in addition to compliance audit, also includes examination of whether the objectives 
of the programme/activity/  department are achieved economically, efficiently and 
effectively. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State Legislature, 
the important results of audit. Auditing Standards require that the materiality level for 
reporting should be commensurate with the nature, volume and magnitude of  the 
transactions. The findings of Audit are expected to ena ble the Executive to take 
corrective actions and to frame policies and directives that would lead to improved 
financial management of the organisations, thus contributing to better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit, provides a 
synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in  the implementation of 
selected schemes, the significant audit observations made during compliance audit 
and follow-up on the previous Audit Reports.  
1.2 Profile of units under audit jurisdiction 
The Accountant General (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit), Kerala conducts audit 
of 10 Departments and 16 1 Autonomous Bodies under the Economic Sector in the 
State. The Departments are headed by Additional Chief Secretaries/Pri ncipal 
Secretaries/Secretaries, who are assisted by Directors/ Commissioners/Chief 
Engineers and subordinate officers under them. The position of expenditure incurred 
by the Government during the year 2017 -18 in comparison with preceding year is 
given in Table 1.1. 
  
 
1Including (i) ‘Command Area Development Authority’, wound up with effect from 31 /03/2017 but 
the accounts of which for the years 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 are yet to be finalised and (ii) the Kerala 
State Sericulture Co-operative Federation Limited. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
2 
Table 1.1 Comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government  
(₹ in crore) 
Disbursements 
2016-17 2017-18 Percentage 
(+) Excess 
(-) Deficit Plan Non-plan Total Plan Non-plan Total 
Revenue Expenditure 
General Services 181.39 41,013.94 41,195.33 418.30 45,105.47 45,523.77 (+)10.50 
Social Services 9,773.34 23,991.38 33,764.72 12,425.84 23,450.43 35,876.27 (+)06.25 
Economic 
Services 
3,537.62 7,117.73 10,655.35 3,337.60 8,013.48 11,351.08 (+)06.53 
Grants-in-aid and 
Contributions 
--- 5,480.91 5,480.91 --- 7,197.23 7,197.23 (+)31.31 
Total 13,492.35 77,603.96 91,096.31 16,181.74 83,766.61 99,948.35 (+)09.72 
Capital Expenditure 
Capital outlay 8,945.65 1,180.30 10,125.95 7,993.68 755.19 8,748.87 (-)13.60 
Loans and 
advances 
Disbursed 
375.25 785.04 1,160.29 1,380.82 159.77 1,540.59 (+)32.78 
Repayment of 
public debt  
--- --- 7,706.01   13,132.10 (+)70.41 
Contingency Fund -- -- ---   --- --- 
Public Account 
disbursements 
-- -- 1,79,910.43   2,07,174.17 (+)15.15 
Total 9,320.90 1,965.34 1,98,902.68 9,374.50 914.96 2,30,595.73 (+)15.93 
Grand Total 22,813.25 79,569.30 2,89,998.99 25,556.24 84,681.57 3,30,544.08 (+)13.98 
Source: Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March 2018 
(State Finances) 
 
1.3 Authority for Audit 
C&AG’s authority for audit is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution 
of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions 
of Service) Act, 1971[C&AG’s (DPC) Act)]. C&AG conducts the audit of 
expenditure of the departments of the Government of Kerala under Section 13 2 of the 
C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole auditor in respect of one Autonomous Body3 
in the Economic Sector, which is audited under Sections 19(3) 4 and 20(1) 5 of the 
C&AG's (DPC) Act. Besides, C&AG also conducts audit of 15 other Autonomous 
 
2 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolidated Fund of the State (ii) all transactions relating  to the 
Contingency Fund and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss  accounts, 
balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts. 
3 Command Area Development Authority.  
4 Audit of the accounts of Corporations established by law made by the State Legisl ature on the request 
of the Governor. 
5Audit of accounts of any  body or authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms and  
conditions as may be agreed upon between the C&AG and the Government. 

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
 
3 
 
Bodies in the Economic Sector under Section 14 6 & 15 of C&AG's (DPC) Act, which 
are substantially funded by the Government. Principles and methodologies for various 
audits are prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit and 
Accounts, 2007 issued by the C&AG. 
1.4 Organisational structure of the Office of the Accountant General   
(Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Kerala 
Under the directions of the C&AG, the Accountant General (E&RSA), Kerala 
conducts the audit of Government Departments/Offices/Autonomous Bodies/ 
Institutions under the Economic and Revenue Sector which are sprea d all over the 
State. The Accountant General (E&RSA) is assisted by three Group Officers.  
1.5 Planning and conduct of Audit 
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of 
the Government based on the expenditure incur red, criticality/complexity of 
activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls 
and concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered in this 
exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided.  
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports (IRs) containing audit 
findings are issued to the heads of the offices. The departments are requested to 
furnish replies to the audit findings within four weeks f rom the date of receipt of the 
IRs. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or further action 
for compliance is advised. The important audit observations arising out of these IRs 
are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor 
of the State under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for being presented to the 
State Legislature.  
During the year 2017 -18, the Economic Sector Audit Wing utilised 2 ,812 party days 
to carry out audit of 231 units.  
1.6 Significant audit observations 
In the last few years, Audit reported on several significant deficiencies in the 
implementation of various programmes/activities as well as on the quality of internal 
controls in selected departments  through performance audits, which impact the 
success of programmes and functioning of the departments. Similarly, deficiencies 
noticed during the compliance audit of government departments/organisations were 
also reported upon.  
 
6 Audit of all (i) receipts and expenditure of a body/ authority substantially financed by grants or  loans 
from the Consolidated Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any  body or authority 
where the grants or loans to such body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of the  State in a 
financial year is not less than rupees one crore. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
4 
The present report contains findings of one per formance audit and 12 compliance 
audit paragraphs. The significant audit observations are discussed below: 
1.6.1 Performance audit of programme/department 
 
1.6.1.1 Quality control measures in maintenance of roads by Public Works 
Department 
The Performance Audit was conducted to examine whether the system for 
implementing quality control measures was efficient during the execution of works 
and whether the quality control measures adopted in the maintenance of roads, 
including road and traffic safety, were ad equate and effective. The Audit findings are 
grouped under (i) Quality Control,  (ii) Quality Assurance  and (iii) Maintenance , 
including road safety. 
Audit noticed that the mandatory quality control tests envisaged in the PWD Manual 
were not included in the tender and contract documents. Divisional Offices/Quality 
Control Labs and the office of the Chief Engineer (Designs) which controlled the 
Quality Control wing did not have a panel of the approved labs. The Government of 
Kerala circumvented the Quality control tests stipulated by the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH) by restricting the cost of works. Works with large 
estimates were split up into smaller amounting works in order to avoid quality control 
tests.  
Audit test checked 282 works. It was found that field laboratories mandatory for 
works costing more than rupees two crore were not set up by contractors at the site of 
85 works. Further, 119 works costing ₹366.09 crore did not have mandatory first -tier 
quality control tests compris ing of 37 tests and 106 works were subjected to four to 
nine tests only. Second tier tests were conducted only in 85 works costing ₹495.32 
crore. Non-adoption of approved job mix formula affected the quality of road works. 
The departmental supervision of works was inadequate. In eight out of nine ongoing 
works verified by Audit , the contractors did not deploy qualified engineering 
personnel at the works sites. The Department lacked proper monitoring mechanism to 
ensure that quality control tests were conducted during execution of works.  
The Department did not carry out road maintenance works as prescribed in the PWD 
Manual, Indian Road Congress ( IRC)/MoRTH s pecifications and the QC Manual. 
The Roads Divisions did not maintain road chart of important roads. The maintenance 
and renewal works of roads were not being prioritised as envisaged in the PWD 
Manual. The PWD Roads wing did not have a mechanism for the t imely detection 
and rectification of defects of roads. Audit observed that lapses in arranging periodic 
renewal works resulted in severe damage to the carriageway , causing distress to the  
road users. Unsuitable methods were used in maintenance works. 
  

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
 
5 
 
Road drainages and shoulder berm were not maintained properly which affected the 
quality of many roads. Lapses in the restoration of roads after carrying out trenching 
works damaged the road surface, creating discomfort to road users.  
(Chapter 2) 
1.6.2 Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
1.6.2.1 Functioning of Agency for Development of Aquaculture Kerala  
The Agency for Development of Aquaculture, Kerala (the Agency) is an autonomous 
body functioning under the Department of Fisheries with the objective to promote  
aquaculture and other related activities. The Compliance Audit was conducted to 
examine whether the programmes were implemented according to the existing 
regulations and guidelines; and whether the financial management of the Agency w as 
effective. 
Audit n oticed that the hatchery and farms functioning under the Agency did not 
comply with the regulatory requirements stipulated in the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority Act, 2005. The Agency failed to adhere to the guidelines issued by Coastal 
Aquaculture Authority  (CAA) for culturing of Whiteleg shrimp ( Litopenaeus 
vannamei). This contributed to the failure of two crops of Whiteleg shrimp cultivated 
in the farm at Poyya. The Agency implemented the project ’Promotion of Rice cum 
Shrimp Farming in Kaipad Lands ’ in the years 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 with the 
objectives of enhancing overall productivity of the wet land ecosystem, promotion of 
sustainable aquaculture practices, sustaining of paddy cultivation  and increasing the 
per capita income of farmers. The project, however, failed due to non -adherence to 
the project guidelines, though a subsidy of ₹1.22 c rore was paid to the beneficiary 
groups. 
Audit noticed that the Agency did not stock feeds under the recommended storage 
conditions and that bulk purchase of feed resulted in retention and usage of time 
expired feed. The three Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) Laboratories run by the 
Agency for assisting the farmers in shrimp seed tests did not have CAA recognition , 
defeating the standardization initiatives of CAA . The Agency farmed genetically 
improved fishes without adhering to the safeguards recommended by the Kerala State 
Bio-diversity Board (KSBB) raising potential risk to bio-diversity. 
The Agency retained unuti lised government grants in its bank accounts violating 
government instructions to retain the same in Treasury Savings Bank Accounts. It 
was also noticed that the Agency submitted utilization certificates to the Government 
without actually utilising the grants given by the Government.  
Audit observed that the finalization and audit of annual accounts of the Agency was 
in arrears from the year 2014 -15 onwards. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 
(2014-16) in its 66 th Report (July 2014) expressed displeasure at the slackness shown 
by the Agency in preparing the Annual Reports and Accounts and recommended for 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
6 
disciplinary action against the officials concerned . The Agency did not maintain the 
basic accounting records.  
(Paragraph 3.1) 
1.6.2.2 Other Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
• Department paid an amount of ₹88.8 0 lakh to a select group of 74 owners of 
illicit china nets disregarding the fact that  they were already paid 
compensation of ₹92.5 lakh and were not eligible for the second payment. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
• Departmental lapse in enforcing the provisions of the Kerala Co -operative 
Societies Act, 1969 regarding audit fees resulted in non-collection/short 
collection of audit fee of ₹16.69 crore.  
(Paragraph 3.3) 
• Ineffective internal control system of the Co-operation Department led to non-
remittance/short remittance of dividend of ₹95.44 lakh by Co-operative 
Societies to the Government. 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
• Lack of prudence and total disregard of rules on Survey and Registration of 
boats made ₹1.8 2 crore spent on the purchase of nine ferro cement hulled 
boats by the Kerala State Co -operative Consumers’ Federation Ltd. , 
infructuous.  
(Paragraph 3.5) 
• Failure to recover the cost of bitumen from the work bills at the rates included 
in the revised estimate resulted in excess payment of ₹99.72 lakh to the 
contractor. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
• Incorrect calculation of volume of work by the Department based on fictitious 
level measurement quantities resulted in inadmissible payment of ₹1.54 crore 
to the contractor. 
(Paragraph 3.7) 
• Failure of the Department in the management of securities from contractors 
resulted in extension of undue favour amounting to ₹15.73 crore to 
contractors, besides placing of avoidable financial burden of ₹1.34 crore on 
the Government. 
 (Paragraph 3.8) 
• Non-finalisation of tender by  the Department within the prescribed firm 
period resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹3.17 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.9) 

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
 
7 
 
• Construction of three bridge s without approach/access roads resulted in their 
idling, making ₹20.38 crore spent on their construction unfruitful. 
(Paragraph 3.10) 
• Reimbursement of the cost of bitumen at market rates violating the provisions 
of the PWD Manual and agreement conditions resulted in inadmissible 
payment of ₹12.89 crore to the contractors on 65 road works. 
(Paragraph 3.11) 
• Due to the non –adherence to the CRZ notification in implementation of 
projects by the Department of Tourism, the project proponent, there was loss 
of Government of India assistance to the tune of ₹9.55 crore in respect of two 
projects and irregular expendi ture of ₹8.97 crore in respect of three projects 
out of six projects examined. 
(Paragraph 3.12) 
1.7 Lack of responsiveness of  Government to Audit 
 
1.7.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit Objections/Inspection 
Reports (IRs) issued by the State Government in 2010 provides for prompt response 
by the Executive to the IRs issued by the Accountant General (AG) to ensure action 
for recti fication in compliance with the prescribed rules and procedures and 
accountability for the deficiencies, lapses etc., noticed during the inspection. The 
Heads of Offices and next higher authorities are required to comply with the 
observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and promptly 
report their compliance to the AG within four weeks of receipt of the IRs. Half-yearly 
reports of pending IRs are being sent to the Secretaries of the Departments concerned 
to facilitate monitoring of audit observations. 
As on 30 June 2018, 472 IRs containing 1,932 paragraphs were outstanding against 
PWD (Roads and Bridges), Irrigation, Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare and Forests & 
Wildlife Departments. Year -wise details of IRs and paragraphs outstandin g are 
detailed in Appendix 1.1. 
A review of the IRs pending due to non -receipt of replies in respect of these four 
departments revealed that the Heads of offices did not furnish even the initial replies 
in respect of 47 IRs containing 276 paragraphs. 
1.7.2 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
During the year 2017 -18, six Audit Committee Meetings were held wherein 124 out 
of 824 IR paragraphs pertaining to the period between 2009-10 and 2015-16 relating 
to departments of Public Works (Roads and Bridges), Water Resources (Irrigation), 
Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Food, Civil Supplies & Consumer affairs were 
settled. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
8 
1.7.3 Response of departments to the draft paragraphs 
Twelve Draft Paragraphs and a Performance Audit paragraph were forwarded demi-
officially to the Additional Chief Secretaries /Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the 
departments concerned between December 2018 and February 2019 with a request to 
furnish their responses within the time limit. The Government rep lies in respect o f 
Performance Audit and two compliance Audit paragraphs are awaited.  The replies 
received are suitably incorporated in this Report.  
1.7.4 Follow-up action on Audit Reports 
The Finance Department issued (January 2001) instructions to all administrative 
departments of the Government that they should submit Statements of Action Taken 
Notes on audit paragraphs included in the Audit Reports directly to the Legislature 
Secretariat with copies thereof to the Audit Office within two months of their being 
laid on the table of the Legislature. 
Five out of the 10 departments did not submit Statements of Action Taken Notes for 
10 paragraphs for the periods from 2012 -13 to 2015 -16, even a s of January 2019. 
Action Taken Notes on audit paragraphs were due from the Departments of Water 
Resources (four), Public Works, Fisheries & Ports (two each) , Agriculture & 
Farmers’ Welfare and Forests & Wildlife (one each). 
1.7.5 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Accounts Committee 
There were 15 paragraphs relating to 10 Departments pertaining to the period  from 
2012-13 to 2015 -16 pending discussion by the Public Accounts Committee as of 
January 2019. Pending audit paragraphs include one from Transp ort, Coastal 
Shipping & Inland navigation; two each from Public Works, Fisheries & Ports , 
Forests & Wildlife; three paragraphs from Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare and five 
from Water Resources departments. 

Chapter II 
Performance Audit 

 

Chapter II - Performance Audit
9 
 CHAPTER II 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
2. Quality control measures in maintenance of roads by Public Works 
Department 
2.1 Introduction 
The public roads in Kerala are maintained by the Public Works Department (PWD), 
Local Bodies, Irrigation Department, Kerala State Electricity Board  Limited, Forest 
and Wildlife Department, Railways , etc. PWD roads constitute 15 per cent  of the 
total road network in the State and carr y nearly 80 per cent of the total road traffi c. 
The Roads wing and National Highways (NH) wing of  the State PWD undertake the 
maintenance and quality control measures of the roads. 
The Government of Kerala (GoK) introduced a three -tier quality monitoring system 1 
under clauses 2401 and 2406 of the Kerala PWD Manual, revised edition 2012 (PWD 
Manual). Subsequently, for achieving the desired level of quality in public works as 
envisaged in the PWD Manual, GoK also set up2 a Quality Control (QC) wing in the 
Department with effect from  01 October 2013  and established testing laboratories in 
all the districts. Quality Contr ol test results in accordance with relevant 
codes/standards were made mandatory for passing work bills of all works costing 
more than ₹15 lakh. The Quality Control tests are to be carried out with reference to 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) specifications ( Appendix 
2.1). 
In order to enable the engineers and supervisory staff to check the different activities 
of construction with reference to the qua lity aspects and to ensure that the standards 
envisaged were achieved, GoK issued (July 2015 3) an exclusive manual named  the 
Kerala PWD Quality Control Manual (QC Manual) incorporat ing provisions for 
enhancing road safety. Every officer of the PWD entrusted with the execution of 
public works is expected to follow the guidelines strictly in the discharge of duties. 
Further, the PWD also issued 4 PWD Quality Control Laboratory Manual (Laboratory 
Manual) in July 2015 for guiding the engineers and t echnical staff of the Quality 
Control Laboratories (QC Labs) and the field engineers on the procedures for 
conducting quality control tests. 
It is the responsibility of the State PWD to maintain the traffic worth iness of the road 
networks throughout the ye ar. The State has varying climatic conditions and 
1The first tier quality control tests are to be conducted by the contractor at his own cost, the second tier tests by the 
QC wing on random basis during execution of works and the third-tier tests to be done by technical experts after 
completion of the project 
2In terms of G.O (MS) No. 79/PWD/2013 dated 28/09/2013 
3Vide G.O (Rt) No. 1339/2015/PWD dated 10/09/2015 
4Vide G.O(Rt) No. 1346/2015/PWD dated 11/09/2015 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
10 
geographical patterns. There are high ranges and plains with varying  temperature 
between 10°Celsius and 40°Celsius. The State also witnesses two rainy seasons viz . 
Southwest monsoon (June - September) and N ortheast monsoon (October - 
November). These factors necessitate appropriate quality control measures for proper 
maintenance of roads.  
The Quality Control wing is headed by Chief Engineer (Design) who is assisted by 
Director (Investigation and Quality Control) under whom there are three regional 
laboratories and 11 district laboratories. All the laboratories have the same function. 
2.2 Audit Objectives  
To examine whether, 
➢ the system for implementing quality control measures was efficient during  the 
execution of works; and 
➢ the quality control measures adopted in the maintenance of roads, including 
road safety, were adequate and effective. 
2.3 Audit criteria  
The audit criteria were derived from:  
➢ Kerala PWD Manual, Revised Edition, 2012 
➢ Kerala PWD Quality Control Manual, 2015  
➢ Kerala PWD Quality Control Laboratory Manual, 2015 
➢ MoRTH/Indian Road Congress (IRC) specifications 
➢ Orders/Circulars/Instructions issued by GoK and PWD 
2.4 Scope and methodology of Audit  
The Performance Audit was conducted from June to October 2018 and covered the 
period from 2015-16 to 2017-18.  
The sampling of units consisted of four 5 Roads6 Divisions out of the 16 Divisions, 
selected on the basis of stratified random sampling method and two7 NH Divisions 
out of eight divisions , selected using simple random sampling method. Six out of the 
14 QC Labs related to the selected Roads and NH Divisions  were also taken in to the 
selected sample. Audit scrutinised records relating to 282 road works costing ₹790.77 
crore, of which 92 works cost more than rupees two crore each , 133 works  cost 
between ₹15 lakh and two crore and 57 works cost  ₹15 lakh each or less. Audit also  
 
5Thiruvananthapuram, Idukki, Palakkad and Kozhikode 
6CE R&B is bifurcated into two separate offices of CE Roads and CE Bridges. The scope of the PA is 
limited to Roads wing only 
7Alappuzha and Muvattupuzha 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
11 
conducted 77 Joint Physical Verifications (JPV) of road sites including nine on-going 
works, along with officials of the PWD for assessing the effectiveness of the quality 
control measures in the maintenance of roads, including safety aspects.  
In addition to these, Audit also covered offices of the PWD in the Government 
Secretariat, offices of Chief Engineers of Roads, National Highways, Designs and 
other related offices. An entry conference was held on 31 May 2018 in which the 
audit objectives, audit criteria, scope and methodology were discussed with the 
representatives of the Government/Department. The exit conference with the 
representatives of the Government/Department was held on 08 February 2019 to 
discuss the audit findings. The Government has not furnished reply despite several 
reminders (September 2019). 
2.5 Audit findings  
To keep the road network traffic worthy throughout the year, the quality of roads is to 
be ensured through Quality Assurance and Quality Control measures. This also 
includes adoption of appropriate methods for the execution and maintenance of road 
works.  
There are three tiers of quality control tests. The first tier tests consisting of 37 types 
of tests are to be conducted by the contractor at his cost, either at the field lab or at an 
approved lab (for works costing ₹15 lakh or more). The second tier tests consisting of 
the same tests as in the first tier are to be conducted by the Quality Control Wing. The 
third tier (for works costing rupees five crore or more) is a review of the first and 
second tier tests, to be conducted by technical experts. 
The audit findings are grouped under three categories, namely (i) Quality Control, (ii) 
Quality Assurance and (iii) Maintenance, including road safety.  
2.5.1 Quality Control  
Quality control encompasses the observation technique and activities used to verify 
that the products delivered are of acceptable quality and that they are complete and 
correct. It aims to identify defects in the finished products.  
According to the PWD Manual and the QC Manual, quality control measures mainly 
consist of the conduct of first tier quality control tests at the cost of the contractor, 
setting up of field laboratory, conduct of second tier tests by the Quality Control wing 
of PWD, ensuring quality control during the execution and proper monitoring.  
According to the MoRTH specifications, 37 types of quality control tests are required 
to be conducted for construction of roads, depending on the item of work and the 
quantity of work executed. Audit observed the following lapses in this regard: 
2.5.1.1 Inadequacy of quality control tests in works costing above ₹15 lakh 
First tier Quality Control tests are mandatory for all road works having estimated cost 
of more than ₹15 lakh. Out of the 282 works test checked, in 225 such works costing 
₹784.73 crore, Audit noticed the following: 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
12 
 In 99 works costing ₹355.13 crore, the first-tier tests conducted were limited to 
only four tests consisting of sieve analysis, gradation of aggregate, bitumen 
content and compressive strength of concrete. 
 In seven works costing ₹63.51 crore, in addition to the above, tests such as 
California Bearing Ratio (CBR) value, elongation and flakiness index, water 
absorption test, core density and specific gravity and spread rate of bitumen were 
also conducted. The balance 119 works costing ₹366.09 crore did not have any of 
the first-tier quality control tests. 
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected road divisions and the audit 
observation is of a nature that may reflect in other works not covered in test audit, 
Department may, therefore, like to internally examine the position in rest of the 
works with a view to ensure that requirements of quality control, as prescribed, are 
being met. The Department should take necessary remedial measures and also fix 
responsibility for the lapses in all such cases. 
In the exit conference the Department stated that directives would be issued to 
enforce the first-tier quality control tests strictly in all works. 
2.5.1.2 Non-establishment of field laboratory for works costing more than 
rupees two crore  
According to the Government Circular8, contractors shall establish a field laboratory 
at the project site if the estimated cost of the project is above rupees two crore. As per 
the MoRTH specification 901.2, the contractor's laboratory shall be manned by 
qualified Materials Engineer/Civil Engineer assisted by experienced technicians and 
the set-up should be got approved by the PWD Engineer. 
If the quality control tests are done in the field laboratory, the test results shall be 
signed by the Overseer/Assistant Engineer supervising the work and by the 
contractor. A copy of the test results shall be forwarded by the Assistant Engineer to 
the Assistant Executive Engineer/Executive Engineer for review.  
Audit noticed that out of the 282 works test checked, the cost of 92 works exceeded 
the limit of rupees two crore; but field laboratories were set up by the contractors 
only in seven works costing ₹101.69 crore. There was no evidence of setting up of 
field laboratories by the contractors in respect of 85 works9 costing ₹611.85crore.  
In the seven cases where field laboratories were set up, the required number of tests 
was not conducted and the required number of samples was not tested.  
 
                                                 
8 No. 23631/G2/2013/PWD dated 1/11/2013 
9 Seven out of eight such works in NH Division, Alappuzha, 16 out of 17 works in NH Division, 
Muvattupuzha, 20 out of 21 works in Roads Division, Thiruvananthapuram; 11 out of 15 works in 
Roads Division, Kozhikode; 18 works in Roads Division, Idukki and 13 works in Roads Division, 
Palakkad 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
13 
Failure in setting up of field laboratories and non-conduct of the required tests is a 
compromise on the quality of works and an undue favour to the contractors to the 
extent of the expenses involved in the setting up of field laboratories, their manning 
and the cost of quality control tests.  
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected road divisions and the audit 
observation is of a nature that may reflect in other works not covered in test audit, 
Department may, therefore, like to internally examine the position in rest of the 
works with a view to ensure that requirements of quality control, as prescribed, are 
being met. The Department should take necessary remedial measures and also fix 
responsibility for the lapses in all such cases. 
2.5.1.3 Shortcomings in the conduct of second tier quality control tests  
The Quality Control Wing is authorised to inspect and conduct Quality tests in all 
projects undertaken by the PWD including maintenance and repair works, 
irrespective of the estimated cost. Quality control tests as per IRC/MoRTH 
specifications/QC Manual are to be conducted depending on the item of work and the 
quantity of work executed.  
Audit test checked 282 works and observed the following: 
 Second tier tests were conducted only in 85 works costing ₹495.32 crore. 
 In the entire works test checked, it was also noticed that the QC Labs conducted 
mostly four types of tests, viz. gradation of aggregates, binder content, sieve 
analysis and compressive strength of cement concrete. Other essential tests like 
assessing of viscosity using bitumen viscometer and assessing of dry density of 
the compacted layer using modified proctor compaction apparatus were not 
conducted even though the QC Labs had the required equipment.  
This left the equipment idle and the quality tests conducted by the QC Labs 
inadequate. Inadequacy of tests affected the life expectancy of roads.   
JPV revealed the following issues: 
 In the Bituminous Concrete sample taken10 during the JPV in Alappuzha district, 
bitumen content was found to be more than the tolerance limit given in the job 
mix formula. Excess bitumen content caused bleeding of bitumen making the 
road slippery. 
 Bituminous concrete surfacing in another road work11 under NH Division, 
Alappuzha was done without consolidation which created voids in the road and 
exposed the aggregates.  
                                                 
10IRQP from Chainage 0/000 km to 428/000 km in NH 66 in Alappuzha district 
11CRF 2016-17 Improvements to Channavaly–Thiruvizha–Thuruthankavala-Kayippuram Road in 
Alappuzha district 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
14 
 In another road work 12 in Kozhikode district, the road surface close to a culvert
sank due to improper compaction of sub base. Audit noticed that quality control
test to ascertain the density of the compacted layer was not done in the work.
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected road divisions and the audit 
observation is of a nature that may reflect in other works not covered in test audit, 
Department may, therefore, like to internally examine the position in rest of the 
works with a view to ensure that requirements of quality control, as prescribed, are 
being met. The Department should take necessary remedial measures and also fix 
responsibility for the lapses in all such cases. 
2.5.1.4 Lapses in quality control during execution of works 
 Absence of proper job mix formula affecting the quality of road
Job mix formula is the end result of a successful mix design of recommended mixture 
aggregate and bitumen binder arrived at after various tests on materials. Its correct 
application ensures the life of the road. 
The contractor is to submit the job mix formula before the commencement of work, 
after ensuring that it is based on a correct and truly representative sample of the 
materials that will actually be used in the work and that the mixture and its different 
ingredients satisfy the physical strength requirements. All the Bituminous Macadam 
(BM) and Bituminous Concrete (BC) works on roads shall be done by adopting job 
mix formula. A test check of 88 BM and BC works revealed the following:  
 Job mix formula of 15 works out of 48 works
subjected to second tier quality control tests
by QC Labs varied from the approved
formula.
 Bitumen VG 30 was used for laying BC
overlay in two works in place of Natural
Rubber Modified Bitumen specified for the
works.
 JPV of two works in Idukki 13 and
Thiruvananthapuram14 districts revealed that
the surface of the roads was damaged at
many locations within the Defect Liability
Period (DLP). It was noticed that instead of submitting job mix formula suitable
for these works, the contractors adopted job mix formula of other works.
There was no evidence in the records to show that rectification works were carried 
out. 
12Name of road: Cherooppa - Kuttikadavu Road 
13NABARD RIDF- XXI improvements of Marika – Kolani Road 
14Peroorkada - Manikanteswaram – Nettayam Road 
Picture 1: Aggregates s tripped off the 
BC surface of a road in 
Thiruvananthapuram district (photo 
taken on 04/10/2018) 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
15 
In the exit conference the Department confirmed that each work should have separate 
job mix formula and that adoption of job mix formula of other works affected the 
quality of work. 
 Non-maintenance of proper temperature of bitumen 
As per MoRTH specifications, temperature of bitumen mix varies from 80°Celsius to 
175°Celsius depending upon the grade of bitumen, stages of work, location of work 
and item of work.  
Audit observed that 
 In six works executed under three Divisions15, the Quality Control wing found the 
temperature of the bitumen mix used to be lower than the minimum temperature 
required.  
In a meeting (August 2018) held with contractors in the presence of Executive 
Engineer, Roads Division, Idukki, the contractors admitted that they used small 
mixing machines and carriage auto rickshaws to mix and carry the bitumen mix to the 
work sites and that due to the lower atmospheric temperature of Idukki district, the 
minimum temperature of bitumen mix could not be maintained. This reflected 
adversely on the quality of the roads.  
There was no evidence in the records to show that any rectification work was carried 
out. 
In the exit conference, the Department accepted the audit observations and stated that 
the issue in Idukki district would be solved in future as more road works would be 
executed using BM and BC. 
 Non conduct of Roughness Index tests  
BM and BC were introduced in road works to improve the riding quality of roads. 
Failure to adhere to the specifications on mixing, laying and compaction of 
bituminous surface affects the riding quality. In order to assess the riding quality of 
the road, the contractors are to conduct Roughness Index Tests after completion of 
BC layer. 
Audit noticed that out of 79 (13 NH and 66 Roads works) completed works of BM 
and BC, roughness index test was conducted only in six NH works.  
No test was conducted in the 66 works costing ₹352 crore executed under Roads 
wing due to which the Department was unable to assess whether the specifications for 
mixing, laying and compaction of bituminous surface were correctly followed. 
                                                 
15Roads Divisions, at Thiruvananthapuram and Palakkad and NH Division, Muvattupuzha 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
16 
In the exit conference, the Department stated that direction would be issued to 
conduct the tests henceforth at the contractor’s cost. The Department need to ensure 
that the directions issued are followed by all concerned.  
 Non-conduct of third party tests wherever required 
As per QC Manual 2015, third party test is carried out by an independent laboratory 
other than that of the contractor or the Department. This is required when certain 
specific tests cannot be carried out with the facilities available in the laboratory of the 
contractor or the Department. 
Audit noticed that none of the six QC Labs selected for audit had the facility for 
conducting quality control tests of road safety items like road marking paints, sign 
boards, retro reflective sign boards, crash barriers, road studs, delineators, etc.  Audit 
also noticed that first tier quality control tests of road safety items were not conducted 
in 55 completed works test checked. The Department should have insisted on 
conducting third party quality control tests in such cases. Instances of early damage to 
road safety items were noticed during JPV under three quality control Sub 
Divisions16. 
In the exit conference the Department stated that the result of quality control test of 
items shall be called for before paying work bills in future. 
 Non deployment of qualified personnel by contractors at work sites  
According to Section 2102 of the PWD Manual, in the case of works costing more 
than rupees two lakh, the contractor shall engage engineering personnel to ensure 
effective supervision. 
JPV of the nine on-going works showed that engineering personnel of the contractor 
were not present during the execution of eight works.  Audit also noticed the 
following lapses in quality control due lack of supervision: 
 At a worksite17 on the Thrissur-Shoranur Road where side drains were under 
construction, there was no supervision either by the Department or by the 
contractor. As a result, cement concrete in the ratio of 1:2:4 was used instead of 
adopting design mix of M20 grade as agreed in the contract.  
 At the site of another road work18 on NH 49, in the absence of supervision the 
contractor executed 20 mm thick open graded chipping carpet using only one 
layer of six mm aggregates instead of using two layers of 12mm and six mm 
aggregates. Skipping of one layer of 12mm affected the quality of work.  
                                                 
16Kozhikode, Alappuzha and Thiruvananthapuram 
17PR. work 2017-18 improvements to Kodungallur - Shoranur Road using cement concrete drain at 
chainage km 42/600 
18Near Puthencruez Police Station in Ernakualm on NH 85 Madurai – Kochi Road 2018-19 urgent 
patch repair from chainage km 202/000 to 274/000 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
17 
The Department may look into other similar cases and take action to rectify the 
defects. Responsibility for the lapses may be fixed on the officials concerned. 
During the exit conference the Department agreed that qualified personnel of the 
contractor should be present at work sites and assured their presence at the work sites 
in future. Non -ensuring of supervision by qualified person s affected the quality of 
work adversely and benefitted the contractor. 
Recommendation No. 1: The Department may strengthen the quality control  
mechanism by ensuring compliance with the provisions of quality control/PWD 
Manuals and MoRTH specifications by the contractors.  
2.5.2  Quality Assurance  
According to the QC Manual, quality assurance is the planned and systematic 
activities implemented in a quality system so that quality requirements for a 
product/service will be fulfilled. Quality Assurance consists of inclusion of 
mandatory quality control tests in the contracts, intimatio n of works to QC Labs for 
the conduct of second tier quality control tests, identifying and empanelling  of 
approved laboratories for quality control tests, supervision and monitoring of work by 
the Department. The lapses in this regard noticed by Audit are  narrated in the 
following paras: 
2.5.2.1 Non-inclusion of list of mandatory quality control tests in the tender 
and contract documents 
According to Section 2103 of the PWD Manual, a list of mandatory tests should be 
prepared and attached with the tender documents. T his would help to ensure quality 
control in the works, as contract conditions are legally binding on both the contractor 
and the Department. Audit observed that the tendering authorities did not incorporate 
the list of quality control tests and their frequency in the tender documents. 
In the exit conference, the Chief Engineer (Roads) stated that the second phase of the 
Project Information and Cost Estimation  (PRICE) software scheduled to  be 
introduced in April 2019 would contain a provision for including the list of 
mandatory quality control tests in the tender and contract documents.  
2.5.2.2 Non-intimation of works  
According to the QC Manual, the agreement authority shall forward a cop y of the 
contract documents to the Assistant Executive Engineer of the concerned QC Lab 
within 10 days of executing the agreement. The Assistant Executive Engineer -in-
charge of the work shall ensure that the date of commencement of each item of work 
is intimated to the QC Lab in a timely manner so that the second  tier quality control 
tests can be arranged by the QC Lab.  
Audit observed that the four selected Roads divis ions executed 2 ,557 works during 
the period covered in audit, but agreement copy of only 683 works (26.71 per cent) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
18 
were received in the respective QC Labs. Roads Division, Thiruvananthapuram 
which executed 971 work agreements did not send any contract doc ument to the QC 
Lab. Out of 279 agreements intimated by two divisions 19, 27 works were received in 
the respective QC Labs after completion of the works. As a result, those works 
escaped from the ambit of second tier quality control tests. Further, Audit also 
noticed that the Quality Control Wing did not have a mechanism to monitor timely 
receipt of contract details from the agreement executing authorities.  
JPVs conducted by Audit revealed that the status of nine on -going works was not 
intimated to the concerned QC Labs.  
During the exit conference, the Chief Engineer (Design s) accepted the audit finding 
and assured that the issue would be addressed on implementation of the second phase 
of PRICE software which would include a module for monitoring the execut ion and 
progress of works. 
2.5.2.3 Absence of approved QC Labs to conduct first tier QC tests 
According to the PWD Manual, all works executed by the PWD shall be tested in 
laboratories approved by PWD and the expense thereof shall be borne by the 
contractor. In case of  any difference between the results of the first and second tier 
tests or when certain specific tests cannot be carried out with the facilities available in 
the laboratory of the Contractor/Department or when the results are suspected  to be 
manipulated, third party testing is to be carried out in another approved laboratory.  
Audit noticed that the Department did not identify or empanel any approved 
laboratory and that neither  the selected divisions and QC Labs nor the office of the 
Chief Engineer (Designs) which controls the Quality Control  wing had a panel of 
approved laboratories. As a result, the contractors depended on other sources for 
conducting first tier quality control tests. The correctness of those test results was not 
verifiable as those agencies were not liable to provide the details to PWD.  
Audit found that the Department did not take quality control seriously even after six 
years of implementing the revised PWD Manual 2012. 
During the exit conference , the Department stat ed that a proposal to consider all 
Government/Government aided Engineering Colleges as approved labs would be 
submitted to the Government soon. This is indicative of the fact that the very basis of 
quality control which is the first tier quality control tests was neither ascertained 
affirmatively in the contract condition, nor was the requirement of quality control  
considered as an integral part of the road works.  The roads so constructed were thus, 
devoid of the important quality control assurance and for such lapses responsibilities 
need to be fixed on the officials responsible. 
19Roads Divisions, Palakkad and Kozhikode 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
19 
2.5.2.4 Absence of periodic training on quality control 
According to para 313.8 of the PWD Manual, periodic training on quality control 
shall be given to the field off icers to familiarize themselves with the various quality 
control measures. 
Audit noticed that this was not being followed by the Department as shown below: 
• During 2016 -17 no training was conducted by the QC Labs in 
Thiruvananthapuram, Idukki and Alappuzha districts. 
• The list of officials not trained in quality control as furnished by the Department 
consisted of 343 technical staff, including Executive Engineers, Assistant 
Executive Engineers, Assistant Engineers and Overseers who supervise and 
monitor works in the field. 
In the exit conference, the Department stated that training was an important aspect in 
strengthening quality assurance of works  and that training would be conducted at 
regular intervals in future.  
2.5.2.5 Circumventing the requirement of quality control tests by restricting 
the cost of works 
➢ Splitting up of works to escape the first tier quality control tests 
According to the PWD Manual, all works executed by the PWD shall be tested in 
PWD approved laboratories and the expenses thereon borne by the contractor. But, as 
per QC Manual, 2015 first tier quality control tests are mandatory only for works 
costing more than  ₹15 lakh. Executive Engineer has the financial power to issue 
Technical Sanction to works costing up to ₹50 lakh and execute contracts of such 
works. 
Audit noticed that 28 works relating to five Divisions having a total value of ₹8.16 
crore were split into 63 small works of ₹15 lakh each or l ess. By doing so, those 
works which were arranged on continuous stretches of roads during the period 2015 -
16 to 2017-18 escaped from the ambit of first tier quality control tests.  
During the exit conference , the Department accepted that it was not a good practice 
as it would affect the quality and economy of the works.  
➢ Necessity of quality checks by QC Labs (Tier II tests) at work sites 
without prior intimation 
According to QC Manual, the progress of all works being carried out is to be 
intimated to the QC Lab s. Th e Department did  not compl y with the requirement . 
Further, officials of the Quality Control wing visited the work sites after giving prior 
intimation. This made the contractors and the field  staff vigilant and the quality 
control tests conducted on those occasions always produced satisfactory results. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
20 
 JPVs conducted unannounced at nine on-going works revealed the following: 
• In s even works , MoRTH specifications  
were not observed.  
• One work 20 in Ernakulam district, 
reported as completed on 31 May 2018 
was still going on at the time of visit.  
• In Palakkad district , the poor quality of 
a cement concrete struc ture in a work 21 
gave it a honey comb like appearance. 
The retaining wall of the road 
constructed was not stable. 
• The cement concreting of side drain going on  at the site of a work 22 in Thrissur 
district was not intimated to the QC Lab.  The findings of the JPV were at 
variance with those observed by the Quality Control wing during their pre -
intimated quality checks, as mentioned in Table 2.2 below:  
Table 2.2 
Observations on quality control aspects in pre -intimated and un-intimated visits 
conducted by the Quality Control wing at a work site 
Components of 
cement 
concrete work 
Observations made by QC 
wing during the pre -intimated 
visits to the work sites 
Observation made during the JPV 
on 24/09/2018 without intimation 
Cement 
 
Major branded OPC grade 
cement was used. 
The properties of the brand of PPC 
grade cement being used were 
neither known nor tested for quality 
by QC Labs. 
Vibrator  Vibrators were used. Vibrator was not used. 
Mixer 
 
Cement concrete mixed in a 
mixer for two to three minutes 
for homogeneous combination. 
Cement concrete was mixed for less 
than two minutes. 
Aggregates 
 
Aggregates of different grades 
were kept in different heaps. 
Aggregates were kept in one heap. 
Supervision 
 
Technical staffs of both the 
department and the contractor 
were present at the work site. 
No technical staff were present at 
site. 
The Department may look into other similar cases and take action to rectify the 
defects. Responsibility for the lapses may be fixed on the officials concerned. 
 
20MLA ADS 2016-17- Improvements to Keezhillam - Manari Road by providing BM and BC between Chainage 
0/000 km to 2/000 km 
21Para – Karattukalam Road in Palakkad district 
22RP work 2017 -18 improvements to Kodungallur – Shoranur Road with cement concrete drain at Chainage 
42/600 km 
Picture 2 : Improperly constructed retaining 
wall of a road leaning inward in a work in 
Palakkad district (photo taken on 29/09/2018) 

Chapter II - Performance Audit
21 
2.5.2.6 Lapses in supervision at work sites 
Supervision is the act of monitoring an activity and making certain that everything is 
done correctly.  
➢ Inadequate supervision by departmental staff 
According to Section 2103 of the PWD Manual, every work has to be properly 
supervised to ensure that it is carried out in accordance with the required 
specifications. The Overseer having control of a work shall be responsible for 
maintaining the quality of all items of work. Certain important items of work shall be 
supervised by the Assistant Engineer/Assistant Executive Engineer. 
During JPV Audit came across four on-going works which did not have departmental 
supervision.  
• At one work  site23 where a
departmental Overseer was present, the
construction of an Irish drain using
cement concrete mix of M20 grade was
carried out without using  a vibrator to
ensure that the mix was free of air
bubbles and was even.
• In road works, the uniform  application
of tack coat (bitumen) on the entire
surface is essential to ensure the
bonding of a new layer with the
existing surface. In a road work in
Ernakulam distr ict24, the aggregates
were spread without applying bitumen
uniformly on the entire surface of the
road even though the Overseer of the Department was present at the site.
• Prime coat is a coat of bitumen emulsion required to be applied on a non -
bituminous l ayer before spreading a bituminous layer over it , for proper
bonding. This item was included in the work schedule of the contract, but the
Overseer at the work site was not aware of it. As a result, the work was
executed without doing the item. This lapse caused the aggregates to come off
the surface and revert the road to its damaged condition. Leaving the loose
aggregates on the road caused accidents to two wheelers.
23At Challikkal in Palakkad –Perinthalmanna Road 
24Deposit work  2017-18, restoration work in Puthencruez - Brahmapuram Roadfrom Puthencruez 
junction, Pannikuzhy OH tank to Karimugal near Community Hall 
Picture 3: New bituminous layer laid on 
non-bituminous surface without clearing 
the loose soil and applying prime coat for 
bonding caused  peeling off of the new 
layer (photo taken on 14/09/2018) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
22 
Audit observed that the checklists mentioned in Appendices III to VI 25 of the QC 
Manual for concrete pour monitoring, earth work monitoring, non -bituminous sub 
base/base layers and bituminous layer which were to be prepared by the technical 
staff, especially the Overseer supervising the work, were not prepared. The 
Department attributed the lapse to the heavy workload being faced by the staff during 
working seasons. 
The response of the Department is not acceptable as this indicated  failure in the 
optimum utilisation of available manpower.  The Department may look into such 
cases and take remedial action. Responsibility for the lapses may be fixed on the 
officials concerned. 
2.5.2.7 Absence of monitoring mechanism 
The lapses in quality assurance measures mentioned above could have been 
addressed through proper monitoring. Lapses were noticed in monitoring also as 
narrated below: 
➢ Non-review of quality control activities by  Superintending Engineers and 
Director (Investigation and Quality Control)  
Review by higher officials is necessary to monitor and check any lapse/deficiency in 
the quality control system. As per the Government Circular 26 the Director , 
Investigation and Quality Control (I&QC) shall conduct quarterly review of quality 
control activities and submit recommendations to the Chief Engineer (Design s). The 
Superintending Engineer shall also conduct quarterly review of implementation of the 
two tier quality control system and forward reports to the Government under 
intimation to the Chief Engineers and the Director (I&QC). The Chief Engineer’s 
Committee shall give timely instructions for effective implementation of the quality 
control system in the Department.  
Audit noticed that the five  selected Circle offices and the Director (I&QC) did not 
conduct quarterly review of quality control activities and submit recommendations to 
the Chief Engineer (Designs). 
Non-compliance with the Government instructions on review and  monitoring of 
quality control activities by higher authorities weakened the quality control 
mechanism. 
In the exit conference , the Department stated that the second phase of PRICE 
software scheduled to be implemented in April 2019 would enable review and 
monitoring of quality control measures more effectively. 
25 These appendices contain various information of an item of work executed so that quality of work 
can be ensured through many parameters 
26 No.10434/C3/2014/PWD (May 2014) 

Chapter II - Performance Audit
23 
➢ Payment of work bills without ensuring check list for quality control 
monitoring 
According to  section 2214 of PWD Manual 2012, the work bill submitted for 
payment shall be accompanied by quality control test results.  Checklists for 
monitoring quality control 27 are to be furnished along with the work bills for making 
payment to the contractor. They are a summary of the first and second tier quality 
control tests conducted on various items of work and materials. It helps the divisional 
authorities to take appropriate action before making payments.  
Audit noticed that none of the work bills of 282 works test checked were 
accompanied by check lists. Bills payments amounting to ₹595.23 crore were made 
without ensuring conduct of quality control tests. 
The Department, during the exit conference assured that steps would be taken to 
ensure attachment of the checklists along with each work bill in future. The above 
lapses points to the fact that the Departmental officials did not give any importance to 
quality control. 
➢ Daily/weekly/monthly reports of quality control tests not prepared 
According to section 903.1 of MoRTH specifications, testing frequencies are to be set 
forth28 and daily, weekly, monthly reports on test results shall be prepared  by 
departmental officials . The reports should indicate the location of sampling and 
testing, deviation from the specified values for materials and works and remedial 
action taken  by the Contractor for removal of defective work. The Engineer shall 
certify the test record stating that the tests were done in his presence and as per the 
methodology prescribed.   
Audit noticed that none of the six divisions test checked prepared such reports , which 
indicated lapses in conducting the prescribed tests. 
➢ Non conduct of tier three tests 
As per PWD/QC Manual, third tier quality control tests (Technical Audit) for projects 
costing more than rupees five crore shall be conducted by an external agency/expert 
empanelled for the purpose within six months of the completion of a project. All tests 
carried out in the first and second tier shall be reviewed during the technical audit. 
Audit observed that, out of the 28 2 works test checked, 33 works costing ₹448.95 
crore were of more than rupees five  crore, but none of the works was  subjected to 
Technical Audit as envisaged, which resulted  in non -review of the quality control 
measures in those works. 
27 Summary of quality control tests done and action taken on failed items  prepared in Appendix I/II of Quality 
Control Manual 
28 Targets and achievements in respect of quality control tests 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
24 
During the exit conference, the Department stated that tier three tests would be 
ensured in works arranged through Kerala Infrastructure Investment Fund Board 
(KIIFB) fund. The Department should ensure that not only the works arranged 
through KIIFB but also all works costing more than rupees five crore are subjected to 
tier three tests.  
Recommendation No.2: The Department may include a list of mandatory first 
tier quality control tests in the bid documents, ensure intimation of works to 
Quality Control wing and impart adequate training on quality control to the 
field staff. 
2.5.3  Maintenance Strategy, including Road Safety 
The maintenance of roads is an elaborate activity. It comprises maintenance of basic 
records as well as maintenance of structures including their inspection at prescribed 
intervals. The basic objectives of maintenance are to afford riding comfort, 
convenience and safety to the public. Even the good quality roads show signs of 
distress over a period of time due to the increasing vehicular traffic, changing climate 
and other reasons. Road maintenance on a regular basis is required to minimise these 
effects and to extend the life of the road. The PWD/Quality Control Manuals and 
IRC/MoRTH specifications describe the maintenance strategy of roads in detail.   
Audit found that the Department did not carry out road maintenance works as 
prescribed in the Manuals and IRC/MoRTH specifications, as narrated below: 
2.5.3.1 Non-maintenance of road chart  
Section 2602.4.2 of the PWD Manual specifies that for each important road a road 
chart shall be maintained in the form given in Appendix 2600H which would give all 
the data about the history of renewal of surface of different sections of the road. This 
would help in the selection of reaches requiring renewal or special attention.  
Audit observed that three out of the four Roads Divisions selected did not maintain a 
road chart. As a result, resurfacing work of many roads was not done for years. At the 
same time in three cases early resurfacing of roads and overlapping of works were 
noticed. 
In the exit conference, the Department stated that the issue of road chart was expected 
to be resolved with the introduction of second phase of PRICE software. 
  

Chapter II - Performance Audit
25 
2.5.3.2 Use of unsuitable methods for maintenance works 
As per Section 3004.1 of MoRTH specification adopted by PWD, the materials 
(particularly patching and overlay materials) used in maintenance operations shall be 
of a standard not less than those specified for the original  
construction. Maintenance treatments required under the contract or instructed by the 
Engineer may include pothole and patch repair, crack -sealing, fog spray, dusting, 
slurry sealing, surface dressing, overlays and specialist repairs. 
Use of unsuitable methods  for road maintenance works compromise s the quality of 
roads and make them accident prone.  
During JPVs irregular methods 29 were seen used for  maintenance works. In addition 
to the above, Audit also found the following lapses in maintenance of roads:  
• Pothole filling was done in two road
works30 using 36  mm metal without
using bitumen binder , in violation of
MoRTH specification.
• As per the contract specification of a
work31 in Kozhikode district, damages
to the road were to be rectified using
Wet Mix Macadam.  Instead, the
rectification work was done using 36
mm metal , violating the contract
condition and MoRTH specification.
29 Such as earth filled potholes, oversized stone used for filling potholes, chipping carpet over BC 
surface and cement concrete used for filling potholes in bituminous road were noticed in 11 Roads 
30 Pre-monsoon works 2018 -19 to Kodungalllur -Shoranur Road and Pre -monsoon works 2018 -19 to 
Cheruthuruthy-Ponnani Road 
31 Flood damage work-Urgent pothole repair in Kattangal  - Mavoor Road between chainage 4/000 km 
to 7/400 km 
Picture 4: Potholes filled with 36 mm aggregates 
without cutting the potholes into regular shape 
(photo taken on 24/09/2018) 
Picture 5: Usage of 36mm aggregate for 
bitumen levelling course in violation of GOK 
stipulation (photo taken on 27/09/2018) 
Picture 6: Detached loose aggregates from 
filled up potholes being cleared by the public 
due to improper method of construction  
(photo taken on 24/09/2018) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
26 
• GoK prohibited (February 2017) the use of 36 mm metal in levelling course 
since it has voids. In a road work 32 in Palakkad District, 36 mm metal was used 
as levelling course disregarding the GoK direction.  
• In Thrissur-Shoranur Road, at Mulloorkara Junction, the local people were seen 
clearing loose 12  mm aggregate s from the road using iron broom. People 
expressed concern over the inferior quality of rectification work done. It was 
stated that there were recurrent  two-wheeler accidents due to skidding over the 
loose aggregates. 
• As per Specification 501.6 of the MoRTH, the wheels of roller machine shall be 
in good working order, to prevent the mix from sticking to the wheels. Only 
sufficient moisture to prevent adhesion between the wheels of the rollers and the 
mix should be used. In a road work 33 in Ernakulam district it was found that 
excess water was being poured on the wheels of the road roller which flowed 
down on the newly laid road surface which could cause early damage to the road. 
• On a visit to the above  road work, it was found that  chipping carpet work was 
going on over an existing bituminous concrete  layer. As per the PWD norms, 
chipping carpet was not to be laid over existing bituminous concrete. 
Besides, a surprise inspection by the technical inspection wing of the Finance 
Department on NH 66 in Alappuzha district revealed rectification works being 
carried out using 36  mm aggregates and premix chipping carpet , instead of BM and 
BC originally used in the work. The Chief Technical Examiner of the inspection wing 
remarked that non usage of standard items not only damaged the new surface but also 
damaged the old bituminous concrete layer. 
The Department may look into other similar cases and take action  to rectify the 
defects. Responsibility for the lapses may be fixed on the officials concerned. 
2.5.3.3 Use of unsuitable items for road overlay works using open graded 
premix chipping carpet 
➢ Violation of MoRTH specification 
MoRTH specifications were adopted in Kerala by PWD in October 2013,  according 
to which, bitumen overlay of Open Graded Premix Chipping Carpet 34 (OGPC) work 
was to be done using graded aggregates35. Audit observed the following violations: 
 
32 Near Puthur junction in Kalmandapam –Kalpathy Road 
33 Near Puthencruez Police Station in NH 49 
34 OGPC is a two centimetre thick  bituminous wearing course laid over old bituminous surface or over  
Water Bound Macadam (WBM) surface , in which two grades of aggregates with binder content are 
spread separately and each time compacted using road roller 
35 Graded aggregate means  using different size of  aggregates so as to have a uniform consistency in 
concrete 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
27 
• Under Roads Division, Idukki, out of 81 works test  checked, 39 OGPC works 
costing ₹26.44 crore were done using 12  mm and 6mm aggregates, instead of 
graded aggregates. 
• Further, a tack coat was to be provided using bitumen emulsion or bitumen 
VG 10 as part of the chippi ng carpet work. Out of 81 works test -checked, in 
24 works VG 30 was used instead of bitumen emulsion/VG 10 which 
undermined the quality of work. During the meeting of contractors arranged 
(August 2018) by the Executive Engineer at the instance of Audit, th e 
contractors confirmed that they used VG 30, pouring it like threads instead of 
spraying it over the entire area.  
Adoption of improper methods of work can reduce the life of the road constructed. 
➢ Violation of GoK direction 
GoK directed (February 2017)  that OGPC shall be replaced with Close Graded 
Premixed Chipping Carpet (CGPC)/Mix Seal Surfacing (MSS). Audit noticed that, 79 
chipping carpet works arranged under Roads Division, Idukki did not adopt 
CGPC/MSS even after issue of the Government direction.  
During the JPV conducted in Idukki district, it was noticed that a 200 metre long  
portion of road  constructed (May 2018) using OGPC instead of CGPC between 
chainage 55/000 km to 56/000 km of  the Thodupuzha–Puliyanmala Road had peeled 
off. 
During the exit conference , the Department stated that CGPC had more life and 
quality than OGPC and confirmed that in Idukki district OGPC was still being used in 
road works as it was cost effective. 
Cost effectiveness should not be allowed to prevail over the quality and life of roads. 
2.5.3.4 Non conduct of timely maintenance 
➢ According to the PWD manual, the Assistant Engineer/Overseer shall inspect 
the roads under his control at least once a month and report on the condition of roads 
for taking preventive mai ntenance. The frequency of this inspection shall be 
increased during the monsoons and calamities.  
Audit found no evidence of routine inspection conducted in any of the four selected 
Roads Divisions. Absence of periodical inspections allowed initial defects like cracks 
to go unnoticed and later to develop into potholes. 
➢ Section 2601.1 of the PWD Manual states that road maintenance is required 
on a regular basis to keep the effect of road distress to a minimum, to extend the life 
of the road and to provide a  high level of service to users. As per section 514.2 of 
MoRTH specification, preventive maintenance measures such as micro surfacing may 
be used as surface sealing treatment to improve skid resistance, surface durability and 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
28 
to seal fine and medium cracks  on an existing pavement surface which is structurally 
sound, but shows signs of premature ageing, aggregate loss, cracks etc. 
JPV conducted in 77 reaches revealed the following: 
• Cracks, the initial symptoms of road 
damage, were seen in  12 road 
reaches in Idukki 36, Ernakulam 37, 
Thrissur38 and Palakkad39 Districts. 
• Potholes/stripping of road surface 
were found in 29 road reaches in 
Thiruvananthapuram40, Alappuzha 41, 
Idukki42, Ernakulam43, Palakkad44 and 
Kozhikode45 Districts.  
 
Failure in rectification of minor cracks and other initial defects in time  leads to 
developing of potholes , causing hardships to road users and increase in the 
maintenance cost.   
In the exit conference , the Department stated that introduction of a separate 
maintenance wing might help in improving maintenance activities of roads in the 
coming years. 
2.5.3.5 Arrangement of work during defect liability period 
A Defect Liability Period (DLP) is a  period of time following the practical 
completion of a work during which the contractor remains liable under contract for 
rectifying any defects which become apparent.  
According to the agreement conditions,  every time th e Engineer gives notice of a 
defect to the Contractor before the end of the DLP, the Contractor shall correct the 
notified defect within the time specified in the notice . If the contractor has not 
corrected the defect within the specified time, the Enginee r will assess the cost for 
correcting the defect and the contractor will pay this amount.  
 
36 At many places between Paramada Junction and Cheruthoni Junct ion in Thodupuzha – Puliyanmala 
Road  
37 Between Manakkakadavu bridge and Pallikkara Junction in Ernakulam – Muvattupuzha Road 
38 Between Vazhakode and Cheruthuruthi in Thrissur – Shoranur Road 
39 Mundur – Koottupatha Road in Palakkad district 
40 Perrorkada – Manikanteswaram – Nettayam Road 
41 Chainage 368/000 to 387/300 km of NH 66 
42 Chainage 2/600,3/300 and 3/400 km of Uppukunnu – Paramada Road 
43 Valayanchirangara – Mannoor Road 
44 Between Koottupatha and Para in Palakkad – Para – Pollachi Road 
45 East Hill – Karaparamba Road in Kozhikode district 
Picture 7: Potholes in front of Taluk 
Hospital, Thuravur in NH 66 


Chapter II - Performance Audit 
29 
Audit noticed that the Department awarded three new works costing ₹31.61 crore 
during the DLP of three 46 existing road works in order to rectify the inferior quality 
of work done. It was also noticed that in respect of another work 47 the Department 
awarded eight new works costing  ₹1.06 crore, immediately after the DLP of the 
work. 
The Department issued notices to contractors of three 48 of the works during the DLP 
of the works for rectification of defects, but they did not comply.  Notice was not 
issued to the contractor in respect of one work.49  
In reply to an audit enquiry, the Superintending Engineer, North Circle, Kozhikode 
stated that the expenditure incurred on rectification of defects of one 50 work would be 
recovered from the contractor concerned. No action was proposed or taken by the 
Department in the other three cases. 
In the exit conference, the Department accepted that new wo rks were not permissible 
during DLP.  However, negligence of the departmental officials enabled the 
contractors to compromise on the quality of works. Further the department did not 
recover the cost of the defective work from the contractors in three works , and 
incurred extra expenditure on correcting defects. Responsibility for lapses may be 
fixed on the officials concerned. 
2.5.3.6 Inadequacy/Absence of drainage  
As per Section 1503.13 and 2407. 19 of the PWD Manual, drains are an integral part 
of roads and must be provided for all roads. They must be permanent structures and 
must be properly maintained, considering the heavy  
 
 
monsoon rains in the State. The main objective of drainage is to prevent early damage 
 
46 One work each under Roads Divisions Palakkad -(A), Kozhikode-(B) and NH Division, Alappuzha-
(C) 
47 Under NH Division, Alappuzha-(D) 
48 Works (A), (C) and (D) 
49 Work (B) 
50 Work (A) 
Picture 9: Lack of side drain caused water 
logging preventing access to bus waiting shed 
in NH 66 
Picture 8: Lack of drainage caused water 
logging and potholes, reducing the width of 
carriageway in NH 66 (photo taken on 
14/08/2018) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
30 
to the pavement due to the entry of excess water and to  
prevent saturation up to a depth of one meter below the top of the sub grade. Strength 
and life of the pavement greatly depends on the moisture present in and below the 
pavement. Per formance and durability of the pavement is inversely proportional to 
the quantum and duration of the presence of moisture in the road structure.  Absence 
of drainage facilities and improper construction of drainages lead to water logging 
and damage of roads. 
Audit noticed lapses in the maintenance of drainages in 18 road reaches  visited 
during JPVs which included issues such as water logging of roads and consequent 
damage of road surface, non -construction of drainage/improper  construction of 
drainage, etc. 
In one instance 51, under Roads Division, Idukki, absence of flood water  drainage 
facility necessitated the reconstruction of a retaining wall and cement concrete drain. 
The Department accepted that absence of proper drainages affected the quality of 
roads and stated that fund shortage was a major concern in maintaining drainages and 
shoulders. 
2.5.3.7 Improper maintenance of shoulder  
According to the PWD Manual , maintenance of shoulder  is an important part of 
maintenance activity so as to facilitate easy access and drainage. Audit noticed that 
the Department did not take periodical action to maintain the shoulder except at the 
time of carrying out resurfacing work.  
During the JPV  of 20 road reache s, Audit noticed lapses in the maintenance of 
shoulders. The lapses consisted of non -maintenance of correct gradient of shoulder 
which blocked the flow of rain water to the drain /caused drop at the edges of the 
roads.  
2.5.3.8 Lapses in road cutting and restoration works 
According to the PWD Manual, for any work involving cutting of the PWD roads, the 
organizations which request permission for cutting the roads themselves shall restore 
the roads to their original condition within a stipulated time, under the supervision of 
PWD.  
Audit noticed the following lapses in this regard. 
• Kerala Water Authority dug a portion of the NH 220 under NH Division,  
Muvattupuzha without the permission of the PWD. The  PWD demanded 
₹2.84 crore which was not remitted by Kerala Water Authority. 
 
51 FD - 2013-14 Construction of retaining wall and CC drain at  eroded portion of Vellathooval - 
Ponmudi Road at km 00/700 and km 01/200 (Agreement No. 316/EE/13-14 dated 19/09/2013) 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
31 
 In Thrippunithura, immediately after completion of a road surfacing work 
using BM and BC by the NH wing of PWD, the Roads wing granted 
permission for digging the road without consulting the NH wing. 
 
In addition to the above, similar lapses were noticed during JPV of restoration works 
in 10 road reaches. The lapses included long delay in restoration of road surface to its 
original condition after road cutting, restoration of road surface using non-compacted 
36mm aggregates instead of bituminous overlay specified by MoRTH, improper 
restoration of road leading to settlement of the restored portion, trenching of hilly 
area roads along the filling side instead of the cutting side and  formation of potholes 
due to unattended pipe leakage. 
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected road divisions and the audit 
observation is of a nature that may reflect in other works not covered in test audit, 
Department may, therefore, like to internally examine the position in rest of the 
works with a view to ensure that requirements of quality control, as prescribed, are 
being met. The Department should take necessary remedial measures and also fix 
responsibility for the lapses in all such cases. 
Recommendation No.3: The Department may strengthen the road maintenance 
system by preparing and maintaining Road Charts and by ensuring that the 
maintenance activities are carried out in compliance with MoRTH and GoK 
stipulations. 
2.6  Conclusions 
Review of the quality control system revealed that the Department was not able to 
implement the quality improvement programme satisfactorily due to the following:  
 The Department did not ensure setting up of field labs, continuous monitoring 
of quality, proper supervision and monitoring of works. Performance of the Quality 
Control wing was poor and the departmental supervision of works was inadequate. 
These lapses defeated the benefits envisaged by the introduction of the quality control 
system and compromised on the riding quality of roads.  
Picture 10: Unattended restoration works after laying of pipelines reduced the width of carriage way(photo taken on 07/09/2018) 
Picture 11: Unattended pipe leakage caused pothole in newly resurfaced road (photo taken on 07/09/2018) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
32 
 The Department failed to include mandatory Quality Control tests in the 
contract documents, to intimate contracts/ progress of work to Quality Control wing 
and to identify and empanel approved labs for conducting quality control tests. The 
Department also diluted the MoRTH specifications for road works. As a result, 
quality assurance of works could not be ensured.  
 The Department did not maintain road charts, did not follow the maintenance 
strategy for timely identification and rectification of defects and did not adopt a 
preventive maintenance strategy. Unsuitable materials and improper methods were 
adopted for road maintenance. This affected the quality and life of roads adversely. 
 The drainage systems of roads were inadequate and were not maintained 
properly. Improper maintenance of shoulder of roads coupled with lapses in road 
cutting and restoration works reduced the life and usability of roads, necessitating 
frequent repairs and maintenance. 
Departmental lapses in ensuring quality assurance and quality control in the 
maintenance of roads resulted in compromising of value for the money spent on the 
sampled 282 works worth ₹790.77 crore examined by Audit. The objective of 
ensuring quality control in road works was thus, defeated due to the lackadaisical 
approach of the Department. As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected 
road divisions and the audit observation is of a nature that may reflect in other works 
not covered in test audit, Department may, therefore, like to internally examine the 
position in rest of the works with a view to ensure that requirements of quality 
control, as prescribed, are being met. The Department should take necessary remedial 
measures and also fix responsibility for the lapses in all such cases. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Compliance Audit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit
33 
CHAPTER III 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT 
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT 
3.1 Functioning of Agency for Development of Aquaculture Kerala 
(ADAK)  
3.1.1 Introduction 
The Agency for Development of Aquaculture, Kerala (the Agency) is an Autonomous 
Body registered (May 1989) under the Travancore -Cochin Literary , Scientific and 
Charitable Societies Registration Act , 1955. It functions under the Department of 
Fisheries. 
The Agency is mandated to promote aquaculture 1 and its related activities in the 
State.  Towards this, it undertakes implementation of various schemes sanctioned by 
the Government. The Agency operates  six aquaculture farms 2 which function as 
model/demonstration farms, a hatchery 3, three PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) 
Laboratories4 and an Aquarium5. 
The Agency is headed by an Executive Director, assisted by a Joint Executive 
Director, and a Deputy Director. Various schemes undertaken by the Agency are 
implemented through its two Regional Offices at Alappuzha and Ernakulam, headed 
by respective Regional Executives.  
The objective of the Audit was to examine whether the programmes were 
implemented according to the existing regulations and guidelines. 
Audit scrutinised the records relating to the Agency in the Department of Fisheries, 
Directorate of Fisheries, Agency Headquarters, regional and field offices of the 
Agency and covered the period from 2013 -14 to 2017-18. Audit also conducted joint 
physical verification (JPV)/beneficiary survey of selected schemes , wherever found 
necessary. 
1  Aquaculture means growing any aquatic animals or plants by collecting and conserving them 
naturally or artificially in restricted circumstances in any private or public water body or in any 
aquatic environment and includes cage culture, pen culture, runni ng water fish culture, ornamental 
fish farming, fish farming in reservoirs 
2 At Eranholi, Kadapuram, Poyya, Njarackal, Edakochi and Ayiramthengu  
3 At Odayam engaged in the production of post larvae Penaeus monodon 
4 Two independent PCR labs at Thevara and North Paravur and one PCR lab attached to Hatchery at 
Odayam 
5 At Neyyar 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
34 
3.1.2 Audit findings 
 
3.1.2.1 Non-compliance with provisions of Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 
2005  
The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA) was established under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 as per the directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in order to 
protect the coastal environment from indiscriminate exploitation. The CAA regulates 
the  coastal aquaculture6 activities through the provisions of the Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority Act, 2005 (the Act).  The Act stipulates mandatory registration of farms 
and adherence to the guidelines/instructions issued by the CAA. 
All the six farms and the hatchery operated by the Agency are located in coastal areas 
and so, come under the purview of the Act. Two of the farms, located at Kadapuram 
and Edakochi, were directly under the Department of Fisheries prior to the year 2016. 
Compliance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder by the 
other four farms and one hatchery which were under the Agency from the beginning 
is given in Table 3.1 below: 
Table 3.1: Status of compliance with CAA registration norms 
Sl 
No. 
Farm/ 
Hatchery 
CAA 
Registration No.  
Activity Registered for Deviation from Registration 
conditions noticed 
1. Odayam 
(Hatchery) 
Not obtained - - 
2. Ayirem 
thengu 
Not obtained - - 
3. Eranholi KL-II-2013 (668) Traditional Farm practice 7 
of fish and shrimp culture 
The registration expired on 7 th 
April 2018 but the farm was yet to 
apply for renewal. 
Different species of fish were 
being cultured following non -
traditional farm practices. 
4. Poyya KL-II-2015 
(1068) 
Traditional Farm practice 
of fish and Shrimp culture 
including 4 hectares for 
Pacific white shrimp  
(Litopenaeus vannamei) 
Contrary to the activity registered 
for, major portion of the farm land 
(24.27 hectares of 39.15 hectares) 
was used for culturing fish  using 
non-traditional farming practice. 
During the years 2015 -16 and 
2016-17 L. Vannamei  was 
cultured. 
5. Njarackal KL-II-2016 
(1271) 
Culture of Penaeus 
monodon 
Instead of culturing Penaeus 
monodon, the farm cultured milk 
fish (Chanoschanos)  
 
6 “Coastal aquaculture” means culturing, under controlled conditions in ponds, pens, enclosures or 
otherwise, in coastal areas, of shrimp, prawn, fish or any other aquatic life in sal ine or brackish 
water; but does not include fresh water aquaculture; (Section 2(1)(c) of The Coastal Aquaculture 
Authority Act, 2005) 
7  In traditional farming, seeds of shrimps and fishe are allowed to enter through tidal water and then 
trapped. After a short duration of growth, they are periodically harvested during full moon and new 
moon periods 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
35 
The Agency, mandated to promote development of aquaculture in the State 
undermined the efforts to promote responsible and sustainable aquaculture through its 
non-compliance with the regulatory requirements. 
Audit also observed that though the farms and the hatchery did not comply with the 
regulatory requirements, the Government sanctioned projects without insisting on the 
compliance with CAA norms.  
The Government replied (September 2019) that the agency init iated/would initiate 
actions to comply with the regulatory requirements. 
Operational issues 
 
3.1.2.2 Non-adherence to guidelines in culturing of White leg shrimp   
White leg shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) is an exotic species of shrimp. As it is 
vulnerable to viral infections that afflict native crustaceans 8, the CAA notified (April 
2009) detailed guidelines for the culture of this species with emphasis on adoption of 
strict bio-security measures. The CAA also issued certain specific “Do’s and Don’ts” 
for its culture, a copy of which was forwarded to the agency by the CAA. 
The guidelines and other instructions inter alia  prohibited the culture of other 
crustacean species within the same farm and discouraged the farming of White leg 
shrimp if the n eighbouring farms cultured non -SPF9 native species.  The depth of 
water in the farm ponds was to be maintained at 1.5 metres.  
The Government accorded (May 2015) administ rative sanction to the project 
‘Revamping of Poyya farm’  at a cost of ₹1.15 crore. The components of the project 
included farming of White leg shrimps and fin fishe s namely, Pompano, Sea bass, 
Grey mullet and Pearl spot. The Agency obtained (July 2015) per mission from the 
CAA for culturing White leg shrimps in four hectares of the farm at Poyya in Thrissur 
district.  
The Agency cultured two crops of SPF white leg shrimp. The first crop seeds were 
stocked (12 January 2016) in two ponds of one hectare each. The culture period of the 
species was 120 days. But the crop was subjected to distress harvest 10 on the 68th day 
as shrimp mortality was noticed. The harvest yielded 365 kg against the target of 
11,200 kg11. In a report submitted (April 2016) to the Director of Fisheries (DoF), the 
 
8 An arthropod of the large, mainly aquatic group Crustacea such as a crab, lobster, shrimp, or barnacle  
9 SPF - ‘Specific Pathogen Free’ is a term used  as a guarantee which denotes free of particular 
pathogens 
10 As decided by the Technical Committee in March 2016 
11 As per Detailed Project Report 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
36 
Executive Director contended that the shortfall was either due to low productivity of 
the ponds or infection of EHP12 for which testing facilities were not available. 
The Agency di d another crop (May 2016) of the same species which also showed 
mortality. The harvest made (June 2016) after 53 days yielded 1 ,400 kilograms of 
shrimp. The dead shrimps were found positive for White Spot Syndrome Virus 
(WSSV). The Deputy Director of Fishe ries opined (September 2016) that the 
outbreak of WSSV might have occurred due to the entry of disease carriers in to the 
culture ponds through clay bunds which were not sufficiently compact , allowing 
minor seepages. Audit observed the following: 
• The Agency maintained the water level in the ponds at one meter instead of 1.5 
meter stipulated by CAA. 
• In contravention to the guidelines, during the same period  the Agency also 
farmed mud crabs , a crustacean species , which are one of the carriers of viral 
pathogens. Introduction of the viral pathogens through crabs which move from 
pond to pond over and through land barriers could not be ruled out.  
Non-adherence to the guidelines issued by the MoA/CAA could also have contributed 
to the failure of both the crops. F urther, it was observed  that in violation of CAA 
registration conditions the agency farmed other fin fishes under the project , which 
also failed to achieve its target. 
The farmers of the State were thus deprived of the benefits that would have accrued 
by successful introduction of the new species through the new technology. 
The Government replied (February 2019) that the guidelines were an advice or good 
management practice which could be altered to suit local conditions. The reply is not 
acceptable as the registration conditions clearly state that the owner shall comply with 
all instructions/conditions issued by the CAA. 
3.1.2.3 Non-achievement of project objectives 
Traditional brackish water paddy -shrimp farming system of Northern Kerala called 
Kaipad farming is an integrated organic farming system . The rice obtained from the 
paddy cultivated in these wetlands is included in the Geographical Indication 13 
Registry as ‘Kaipad Rice’ due to its unique qualities. In Kannur district, out of the 
total area of 2 ,500 hectare of Kaipad land, 1 ,265 hectare has remained fallow for 
years. Revival of the Kaipad lands was a must for preventing damages to the saline 
wetlands, to impr ove the overall productivity of the wetland ecosystem , to promote 
 
12  ‘Entercytozoonhepatopenaei’ (EHP) is an yeast -like fungus belonging to a group called 
“microsporidia”, whic h are obligate intracellular parasites. Microsporidia are ubiquitous pathogens 
and are important components of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems worldwide  
13 As per the provisions of the Geographical Indication of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 
1999 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
37 
sustainable aquaculture practices through integration of agriculture and pisciculture 
and to provide social and economic benefits to rural areas. 
As part of reviving the fallow Kaipad lands, the Agency implemented the project 
‘Promotion of Rice cum Shrimp Farming in Kaipad Lands ’14 (project) in Kannur 
district during the years 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 with a total outlay of ₹5.12 crore 15.  
The project wa s to be implemented in 180 hectare of Kaipad land through 36 16 
beneficiary groups to be selected, each possessing a minimum holding of 5 hectare 
(unit size) of Kaipad land.  The Agency was responsible for the selection of 
beneficiaries, constitution of a monitoring committee and supervision of project 
activities to ensure successful implementation of the project.  
The project, implemented through 32 beneficiary groups against the targeted number 
of 36 groups with a coverage of 160 hectare s was not implemented efficiently . This 
resulted in discontinuation of the project by 23 beneficiaries, though a part subsidy of 
₹1.22 crore17 was disbursed to them, as shown in the Table 3.2. 
Table – 3.2 
‘Project year’ wise number of beneficiaries who discontinued the farming 
activities, amount of subsidy paid to them and reasons for discontinuation 
(₹ in crore) 
Project 
Year 
Number 
of bene- 
ficiaries 
selected 
Number of 
beneficiaries 
discontinued 
the farming 
activity 
Amount of 
subsidy 
provided to the 
discontinued 
beneficiary 
groups (₹) 
Reasons for discontinuation 
2013-14 17 13 0.77 Non-availability of workers, boundary 
disputes, damaged sluice, non -survival of 
shrimp seeds, destruction of crop, inadequacy 
of storage and marketing facilities etc.* 
2014-15 15 10 0.45 Legal issues developed due to improper 
scrutiny of documents etc.** 
Total 32 23 1.22  
*  As conveyed by the beneficiaries in a survey conducted by Audit (Appendix 3.1) 
** As per official records  
A survey of the beneficiary groups of the project year 2013-14 conducted by Audit 
revealed that 13 beneficiary groups discontinued the farming activity after the 2 nd 
year due to reasons mentioned in the Table above.  
 
14 Coastal Inter-tidal wetlands of  north Kerala where the farming of salt tolerant traditional tall paddy 
varieties for agriculture and brackish water species of shrimp and fish are practiced  
15 ₹2.56 crore each for 2013-14 and 2014-15 
16 Eighteen in 2013-14 and 18 in 2014-15 
17 ₹0.77 crore in 2013-14 (given to 13 beneficiaries) +₹0.45 crore in 2014 -15 (given to 10 beneficiaries) 
= ₹1.22 crore 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
38 
Seven beneficiary groups of the project which commenced in 2014 -15 did not even 
start the farming activity, while three groups discontinued farming after the first year 
(Appendix 3. 2). Audit noticed that the Agency did not verify the land lease 
documents furnished by the seven beneficiary groups against the revenue records. As 
a result , the Agency could not detect the false land lease certificates issued by the 
Secretary, Puzhathy Grama Panchayat from where these beneficiary groups leased the 
required land. Consequent legal disputes resulted in non -commencement of farming 
activity by these seven groups.   
In respect of the three beneficiary groups, who discontinued farming, the Agency did 
not take any action to assess the reasons for their discontinuance. . Records produced 
to Audit indicated that the Agency did not set up a monitoring committee during both 
the project years which adversely affected the projects. 
 Thus, the above deficiencies in implementing the projects resulted in non -revival of 
farming in at least 115 hectare of Kaipad land, despite of incurring ₹1.22 crore 
towards subsidy to the 23 beneficiary groups. 
The Government replied (February 2019) that bunds constructed by the beneficiary 
groups would have long term benefits for both paddy and fish culture . The reply was 
not tenable as Audit observed that out of the 23 non-functional beneficiary groups, 
the bunds and sluices of only five groups were intact enabling revival of farming . In 
the remaining cases, either the bunds did not exist or the sluices were damaged.  
The Government also stated that the Agency had no expertise in c hecking the 
authenticity of a revenue document .  The reply was not tenable . The Agency was to 
exercise adequate precaution before releasing government money by ascertaining the 
actual status of the leased land with reference to the revenue records. 
The Age ncy had successfully implemented a similar  project commenced during 
2012-13, leading to the revival of 90 hectare of Kaipad land in Kannur district.  Non-
adherence to project guidelines in the succeeding years resulted in under achievement 
of the project (only 28 per cent) besides depriving the beneficiary groups of the social 
and economic benefits envisaged under the project. 
3.1.2.4 Promotion of farming of exotic species without adequate safeguard 
The Government accorded administrative sanction (June 2014) for the development 
of model fish farms for implementing Innovative Aquaculture Practices by the 
Agency.  A component of the scheme was farming of genetically improved fishes like 
Genetically Improved Farm Tilapia (GIFT)18. 
An expert level meeting (July 2014) of the Kerala State Bio-Diversity Board (KSBB), 
also attended by an official of the Age ncy, observed that as per the Government of 
 
18 Genetically Improved Farm Tilapia (GIFT) is developed  from exotic fish species known as Tilapia 
which are native to Africa and the Middle -east through continuous feeding of hormone 17 α methyl 
testosterone. GIFT is an aggressive omnivore and voracious feeder  

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
39 
India (GoI) guidelines, farming of GIFT was impossible to practice in the State where 
monsoon flooding was a common phenomenon. The species was an aggressive 
omnivore and voracious feeder attaining a weight of 40 0-600 grams in six mon ths. 
The escape of GIFT to the natural water bodies of the State could be suicidal for the 
indigenous fish Etroplus surantensis19  as Tilapia shared the same domain and niche. 
Therefore, KSBB recommended (July 2014) farming of GIFT af ter strict adher ence 
with certain safeguards which included locating of ponds away from natural water 
bodies and providing cemented walls for the ponds. The GoI guidelines also required 
at least one acre of water spread area for GIFT culture. But , the State Government 
lowered (November 2014) the requirement of water spread area to 50 cents citing 
constraints in the availability of land. The Agency implemented the project in five 
selected private farms.   
Audit observed that the recommendations of KSBB were not adhere d to while  
selecting the farms. As a result, the project was implemented in farms having pond 
area of less than 50 cents and in farms located near natural water bodies. The farming 
of GIFT, a non-native genetically altered species, in violation of the regulations was a 
potential risk to bio-diversity.  
The Government stated (February 2019) that the agency implemented the project in 
areas having water spread areas of below 50 cents due to its inability to identify water 
spreads having the required area. 
The reply is not acceptable. If the agency was unable to meet the criteria for farming 
of GIFT, it should have taken up promotion of other species envisaged in the project 
which had no restrictions. 
3.1.2.5 Improper feed management 
The Agency predominantly farm s various types of fin fishes in its farms to 
demonstrate their economic viability.  Neither the CAA nor the Agency prescribed 
any guidelines on the farming of fin fishes. Further, the Agency also did not prescribe 
any procedure for feed stock management. 
Audit observed that the Agency did not have a dedicated feed storage facility in 
three20 of its farms  but the feed was stored either in rooms prone to seepage or in 
semi-open area. The feed, which accounted for around 67 per cent of the operational 
cost (excluding labour) was procured in bulk by the Agency. The manufacturers 
prescribed 90 days  shelf life for feeds from the date of manufacture , when  stored 
under ideal conditions. It was observed that the Agency issued feed for use even afte r 
150 days of its manufacture.  
The Government replied (February 2019) that the Agency ha d many on -going 
projects aimed at improving the infrastructure facilities of the farms including feed 
 
19 Pearl spot – given the status of State Fish 
20 Poyya, Ayiramthengu and Njarackal 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
40 
storage and that on completion of the same , a better feed storage management would 
be possible.  
Issues in Financial Management and Accounts 
3.1.2.6 Irregular retention of Government grants 
As per Government instructions ( between July 1999 and May 2016)21 balances of all 
funds released by the Government to autonomous bodies as grants/loans etc., should 
not be kept in bank accounts but should be remitted back to the Government or kept 
in Treasury Savings Bank Accounts.  The Agency, however,  retained substantial 
amounts received as grant from the Government for implementing various project , as 
mentioned in the Table 3.3 
Table 3.3  
Details of irregular retention of money by the Agency 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of Project Grant 
received
#
(₹) 
Expen- 
diture 
incurred 
(₹) 
Balance 
retained 
(₹) 
Remarks 
1. Promotion of rice 
cum shrimp farming 
in Kaipad lands 
3.30 1.86 1.44 Money was retained in the bank 
account since payment of 
subsidies were not made by the 
Agency due to reasons mentioned 
in para 3.1.2.3 
2. Revamping of Poyya 
Farm 
1.03 0.68 0.35 The project undertaken without 
feasibility study, failed to achieve 
the targeted results and was 
closed after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹68 lakh.22 and the 
balance was retained in bank 
account 
3. Revival of 
Productivity of Pearl 
Spot and Giant 
Prawn on life cycle 
approach in 
Vembanad 
Ecosystem. 
12.70 5.35 7.35@ As per the guidelines, the balance 
amount of ₹ 4.26 crore (excluding 
the committed expenditure)  as of 
30 September 2016 should have 
been surrendered to the 
Government. Instead, the money 
was retained in the Treasury 
Savings Bank account of the 
Agency. 
# Excluding managerial expenses.  
@ Balance as on 30 September 2016 including committed expenditure of ₹3.09 crore. 
21  Circular Nos. 7/99/Fin. dated 21/01/1999, 75/09/Fin dated 29/08/2009 and Govt. order dated 
27/05/2016 
22 Expenditure statement of Farm Manager, Poyya Farm 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
41 
The Government stated (February 2019) that ₹1.44 crore was kept in bank accounts 
as the Farm Manager did not have a TSB account  and that ₹0.35 crore was 
reallocated to other farming activities in Poyya Farm . The amount of ₹7.35 crore was 
retained for meeting committed expenditure. 
The r eply is not acceptable  as instructions of the Government should have been 
followed scrupulously in the abov e cases.  Subsequent allocations should have been 
obtained from the Government, wherever necessary, for meeting further expenditure.  
➢ Unauthorised retention of project savings of ₹1.42 crore  
Article 176 (a) of the Kerala Financial Code states that sanction to an estimate should 
always be regarded as being strictly limited to the precise objects for which the 
estimate was intended. Any anticipated or actual savings in a sanctioned estimate for 
a specified work should not, without the special sanction of a competent authority, be 
applied to any additional work which was not originally contemplated, unless it is 
fairly contingent on the actual execution of the work. 
During the period 2013 -18, the Agency implemented 20 projects sanctioned by the 
Government. The a dministrative sanctions of the projects inter-alia included a 
component for supply of fish/shrimp seeds for the projects.  The Agency undertook 
the supply of fish/seeds for which it was permitted to charge a margin of 10 per cent 
of the cost of seeds procured.  
Scrutiny of the seed sales invoices revealed that against ₹3.34 crore chargeable to the 
projects towards the actual cost of seed (including 10 per cent margin), the Agency 
charged ₹4.76 crore (43 per cent  above), at the estimated rates sanct ioned by the 
Government.  Retention of the resultant savings of ₹1.42 crore by the Agency in 
excess of the limits permitted by the Government was unauthorised. Obtaining of 
surplus grants from the Government and ret ention of savings beyond the permitted 
limits, affected the financial position of the Government adversely to that extent. 
The Government replied (September 2019) that the savings , if any, were mainly 
utilised for improvement of assets of the Agency. 
The reply is not tenable as the administrative sanctions did not envisage the activities 
for which the savings were utilised. 
➢ Submission of U tilisation Certificate without actual utilization of 
Government grants 
According to the  provisions of the Kerala Financial Code, while furnishing 
Utilisation Certificates (UC) of grants received from the Government, the Executive 
Director was required to ensure that the money was actually utilized for the purposes 
for which it was sanctioned  and also mention the details of checks exercised in the 
UCs.  Audit noticed that the UCs submitted by the Executive Director to the Fisheries 
Department in respect of three projects were factually incorrect as shown in the Table 
3.4. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
42 
Table 3.4 
 List of incorrect UCs furnished by Executive Director to the Government 
(₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project Grant received 
from Fisheries 
Department 
Amount 
spent as of 
March 2018 
Amount for 
which UC 
submitted 
1. ‘Promotion of rice cum shrimp farming 
in Kaipad lands’ commenced in 2013-14 
2.00 
 
1.40 2.00 
2. Revival of Productivity of Pearl Spot and 
Giant Prawn on life cycle approach in 
Vembanad Ecosystem. 
12.69 8.89 10.16 
3. Revamping of Poyya farm 1.15 0.67 1.15 
In reply, the Government stated (February 2019) that the UCs were issued treating the 
funds as utilized since the committed liabilities were to be met from the funds 
received.  The reply was not acceptable as provisions of the Kerala Financial Code 
were not adhered to in these cases. 
Submission of inflated UCs prevented the Fisheries Department from assessing the 
actual financial position of the Agency judiciously and releas ing the subsequent 
instalments to the Agency accordingly. 
3.1.2.7 Status of Accounts 
Mention was made in Report No . 3 of the CAG of India for the year ended 1997 
regarding delay in preparation of accounts. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 
(2014-16) in its 66th Report (July 2014) expressed displeasure at the slackness of the 
Agency in preparing the Annual Reports and  Accounts and recommended to take 
disciplinary action against the officials concerned. The Committee also insisted on 
updating the annual accounts immediately.     
Despite this , as of September 2018 the Agency finalised and audited the annual 
accounts up t o the year 2014-15 only. It also did not forward the audited accounts 
for the year 2013-14 to the Finance Secretary and the Registrar as stipulated in the 
rules. Further, Audit also noticed that the Agency did not maintain the registers for 
recording the r eceipt of grants, their disbursement/utilisation, creditors and debtors 
relating to the purchases and sales of seeds.  
The Government in reply (February 2019) admitted the facts and stated that this 
would be complied with, in future. 
3.1.3 Conclusion 
The Agency was mandated to promote aquaculture activities in the State by operating 
model farms and implementing various projects. The farms operated by the agency 
did not function as model farms as they lacked mandatory registration /violated the 
conditions of registration. The Agency failed to demonstrate the economic viability of 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
43 
aquaculture farming. The beneficiary group-oriented projects implemented by the 
agency d id not achieve the targets due to non -compliance with the guidelines and 
deficiency in monitoring. The Agency also failed to abide by the financial regulations 
resulting in retention of Government funds outside the Government account and 
retention of the savings from the  projects as its income.  It failed to maintain the 
accounts up to date, despite instructions from Public Accounts Committee. Thus, the 
Agency was unable to discharge its mandated activities properly. 
3.2 Irregular payment of compensation to fishermen 
 
The Department paid an amount of ₹88.80 lakh to a select group of 74 owners of 
illicit china nets dis regarding the fact that they were already paid compensation 
of ₹92.5 lakh and were not eligible for the second payment. 
The Department of Fisheries established on 1 November 1956 is considered to be one 
of the mo st important , productive and developmental sectors of the State. It 
implements the policy of the Government of Kerala for the socio -economic 
development of fishermen and schemes for increasing infrastructure in the coastal 
area. 
According to Section 4(3) of the Travancore Cochin Fisheries Act 1950 and Rule 8(1) 
of the Kerala Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Rules 2013 , only licensed individuals 
have the right to engage in fishing.  
The Inland Waterways Authority of India declared (February 1993) the waterwa y 
between Kollam and Kottapuram as National Waterway -3. In order to make the 
waterway navigable, it was necessary to remove/shift the fishing nets and stakes 
installed in the channel. The Government sanctioned a compensation of ₹2.5 lakh 23 
(June 2013) per net to the fishermen holding valid licenses for china/stake nets 
installed in the navigation channel , for their removal. The owners of unlicensed 
china/stake nets were also made eligible for the compensation, but at half the rates 
applicable to the license d owners. This was commented in Chapter II of the Audit 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the Economic Sector, 
Government of Kerala, for the year ended March 2015. 
The Department paid compensation amounting to ₹ 13.33 crore to the owners of 
licensed and unlicensed china/stake nets during the period 2013-14 to 2017-18.  
Audit noticed that, in addition to the above payment the Department also paid 
compensation amounting to ₹88.80 lakh to a select group of 74 owners of il licit china 
nets belonging to Kayamkulam area alone, under a special package , based on a 
decision taken in a meeting convened (November 2014) by the Home Minister. The 
meeting took the following decisions:  
(i) Owners of the 74 unlicensed china nets who wished  to avail the compensation 
of ₹1.25 lakh per net declared by the Government were free to avail it. 
 
23 G.O.(Rt) No.38/13/F&PD dated 17/06/2013 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
44 
(ii) For those who did not opt for the compensation, a special employment 
package would be provided to sustain their livelihood. 
The package envisaged purchase of a traditional fishing boat, a net and a 9.9  Yamaha 
engine by each beneficiary unit 24 utilising an assistance of ₹ 1.20 lakh 25 to be paid by 
the Department, along with a contribution of ₹30,000 by each beneficiary unit.  
Contrary to the decisions  taken in the meeting, the Government sanctioned both the 
compensation of ₹1.25 lakh and the special employment package of ₹1.20 lakh to 
each of the 74 beneficiaries. Director of Fisheries disbursed 26 ₹88.80 lakh to the 74 
beneficiaries under the special package.   
Audit noticed the following: 
➢ The decision of the meeting was to extend special employment package to 
those who did not opt for the compensation. Contrary to this the 74 
beneficiaries were paid both  the compensation and the special employment 
package.  
➢ This double benefit was not extended either to the owners of unlicensed china 
nets of other areas or to the owners of licensed china nets. So, the action of the 
Department was discriminatory. 
➢ The Department did not ensure compliance with the conditions of the special 
employment package by the beneficiaries which resulted in its largescale mis-
utilisation.  
➢ A joint survey conducted by Audit along with the departmental officials 
among 28 beneficiaries rev ealed that none of them utilised the assistance as 
envisaged; instead, most of them used it to clear personal debts. 
Thus, the payment of additional benefit of ₹88.8 0 lakh to a select group of 74 owners 
of illicit china/stake nets was not in order and disc riminatory. Besides, the 
Department also failed to ensure proper utilisation of assistance  by the beneficiaries 
under the special package. 
The matter was referred (February 2019) to the Government. In reply , (March 2019) 
the Government accepted that the sp ecial employment package was to be 
implemented for those net owners alone (including two workers) who were not 
willing to accept the compensation of ₹1.25 lakh declared by the Government. 
  
 
24 A unit consisted of the owner and two labourers working the net 
25 Each member of the unit was to be paid ₹40,000 
26 GO(Rt) No. 413/15/F&PD dated 04/06/2015 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
45 
CO-OPERATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.3 Short collection of Audit Fee from Co-operative Societies 
 
Departmental lapse in enforcing the provisions of the Kerala Co -operative 
Societies Act, 1969 regarding audit fees resulted in non -collection/short 
collection of ₹16.69 crore. 
The Co-operation Department is responsible for the disbursement of assistance and 
loans sanctioned by the Government/National Co -operative Development 
Corporation to Co -operative institutions for implementing various schemes, 
monitoring the utilization of funds, recovery of principal/interest on loans etc. In 
addition to this, it also discharges important statutory function s like audit of co -
operatives.  
Section 63 of the Kerala Co-operative Societies Act, 1969 (the Act) stipulates that the 
Director of Co -operative Audit (DCA) has to audit the accounts of all Co -operative 
Societies (Societies) registered with the Registrar of Co -operative Societies (RCS) in 
the State at least once in a year. Sub Section 6 below Section 64 of the Act stipulates 
that the amount of fee for auditing the accounts of Society each year shall be such as 
may be fixed 27 by the DCA in accordance with rules made in this behalf.  Rule 65 of 
the Kerala State Co -operative Societies Rules states that every Co -operative Society 
shall pay audi t fee to the Government within one month of the receipt of the annual 
audit certificate.  
The responsibility for collecting the dues is vested with the RCS who has delegated it 
to the Assistant Registrars of Co -operative Societies (General) at Taluk level.   Sub 
Sections (1) and (2) of Section 79 of the Act stipulate that in the case of non -payment 
of audit fees within the specified period of 30 days, it shall be recoverable in the same 
manner as arrears of public revenue due on land, that is to say, first f rom the property 
of the Society and later from the members, past members or estates of deceased 
members subject to the limit of their liability. If the defaulted Societies fail to remit 
the audit fees, Revenue Recovery (RR) actions are initiated against them.  
As per the records maintained by the RCS (General), there were 15 ,624 Societies in 
Kerala28 as of 31 March 2018, of which 11 ,892 were functioning and 3 ,732 non -
functioning.  
Audit noticed that as on 31  August 2018 an amount of ₹16.69 crore was pending 
collection towards audit fee since the year 1972-73 from 5,396 Societies functioning 
 
27 The audit fee is calculated at the rate of 50 paisa for every ₹100 or part thereof on the working 
capital, the value of sales or the gross income as the case may be, provided that the maximum audit 
fees payable by the Society shall not exceed rupees one lakh, subject to other lower limits in 
specified cases 
28 As furnished by the office of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Kerala 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
46 
under seven29 departments in the State. This included ₹1.76 crore due from 640 profit 
making Societies. Major portion (83.52 per cent) of the pending audit fee related to  
societies functioning under  two departments, viz. , the Co-operation Department 
(₹9.67 crore from 3 ,882 Societies) and the Handlooms and Textiles Department 
(₹4.09 crore from 270 Societies). RCS initiated revenue r ecovery action against 384 
Societies involving ₹1.25 crore, but no amount was recovered from any of them. 
Audit test checked the records maintained by eight 30 offices of Assistant Registrars of 
Co-operative Societies  (ARCS) (General) from five 31  districts and found the 
following: 
➢ Audit Fee Register was not being maintained up to date by seven of the eight 
taluk level offices.  
➢ ARCS (General), Thrissur stated that the data on pending audit fee was 
compiled by collecting the information from the Societies over phone as the 
register was not updated properly. 
➢ This points at the inadequacy of the internal control mechanism of the 
Department. 
The matter was reported (December 2018) to the Government. In reply , (March 
2019), the Government stated that a collection drive was on and that an amount of 
₹6.68 crore was collected during the period from 17  December 2018 to 31December 
2018.  
Audit verified the figures furnished by the Joint Registrars of Co -operative Societies, 
Thrissur (₹1.47 crore) and Thiruvananthapuram (₹59.74 lakh) and found that the 
collection from these districts was overstated by ₹1.02 crore and ₹8.09 lakh 
respectively. This again highlights the inadequacy of internal control. 
3.4 Non-remittance of dividend due to the Government by Co -operative 
Societies 
 
Ineffective internal control system of the Co -operation Department led to non -
remittance/short remittance of dividend amounting to ₹95.44 lakh by Co -
operative Societies to the Government.  
The Kerala Co -operative Societies Act, 1969 provides 32 for payment of dividend to 
members on their paid -up share capital at such rates as may be prescribed 33. The 
dividend becomes due after the date on which the general body meeting passes the 
 
29 The Departments of Co -operation, Khadi & Village Industries, Fisheries, Industries, Handlooms, 
Dairy Development and Coir 
30 Offices of the Assistant Registrars at Kasargod, Hosdurg, Tirur, Perinthalmanna, Thrissur, Cherthal a, 
Ambalapuzha and Kollam 
31 Kasargod,  Malappuram, Thrissur, Alappuzha and Kollam 
32 Sub section 2(a) of Section 56 
33 Not exceeding 25 per cent (as amended in 2010) 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
47 
dividend. The Registrar of Co -operative Societies (RCS) issued (Ju ly 2010) 
instructions to all the District/Taluk level offices of the Department to ensure that 
dividend declared by the Co -operative Societies (Societies) on the Government share 
capital contributions were remitted. 
(a)  As of 31 March 2017 the Government  of Kerala (GoK)  made share capital 
contribution in 3 ,755 Societies. According to the Demand Collection and Balance 
(DCB) Statement prepared by RCS as on 31  December 2018, a total of ₹1.18 crore 
was pending collection from 77 Societies towards dividend on Government shares  
for the period up to 2016-17. 
As reported by the RCS (July 2019) and the Joint Registrar of Co -operative Societies 
(General), Thiruvananthapuram (May 20 19), an amount of ₹76.67 lakh for the said 
period was collected from 16 Societies since 31  December 2018, leaving a balance of 
₹41.61 lakh.   
A test check of the records maintained in the offices of the Assistant Registrars of Co-
operative Societies reveal ed that entries made in the ‘Register of Share capital 
contribution to Co -operative Societies’ containing the details of dividend payable by 
the Societies on Government shares were incomplete and not up to date.  As a result, 
the exact amount of dividend d ue to the Government was not ascertainable from the 
records.  
Audit also noticed that the Department lacked an effective internal audit system. The 
GoK, Finance (IAC A) Department issued (June 2005) instructions 34   to all 
departments to strengthen their internal audit system. The Co-operation Department, 
however, formed 35 an internal audit wing only in December 2017. As intimated 36 
(September 2019) by the RCS no internal audit was conducted in the Department 
before 14 May 2019.    
The Government in its reply (April 2019) accepted that the Register of Share Capital 
Contribution to Co-operative Societies was not being maintained by the field offices 
up-to-date. It was stated that instructions were issued for collectin g institution -wise 
details of outstanding amounts of dividend and to maintain the register up -to-date. 
The Government also clarified that the dividends declared by Societies were not 
taken as demand in the DCB Statements furnished by the Joint Registrars o f Co -
operative Societies. Instead, the amount of dividend remitted by the Societies was 
shown as both demand and collection in the DCB statements. This led to the variation 
between the Departmental figures and the Audit figure. 
(b) Scrutiny of the details of outstanding dividend furnished by the Joint 
Registrars of Co -operative Societies (district level offices) revealed that 23 Societies 
from three 37 districts did not pay dividend to  the Government at the same rates at 
 
34 Circular No.32/2005/Fin dated 10/06/2005 
35 No. Fin.A(1)37247/2017 dated 19/12/2017 
36 No. Fin(1)4961/19 dated 05/09/2019 of Registrar of Co-operative Societies 
37 Pathanamthitta, Ernakulam and Thrissur 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
48 
which they paid it to other members. This deprived the Government of dividend 
amounting to ₹53.83 lakh (Appendix 3.3). 
The absence of an effective internal control mechanism in the Department , thus  
resulted in non -remittance/short-remittance of dividend amounting to ₹95.44 38  lakh 
to the Government by Co-operative Societies. 
3.5 Infructuous expenditure on Floating Triveni Supermarket Project 
 
Lack of prudence and total disregard of rules on Survey and Registration of 
boats made ₹1.82 crore spent on the purchase of nine ferro -cement hulled boats 
by the Kerala State Co-operative Consumers’ Federation Ltd. infructuous. 
The Kerala Sate Co -operatives Consumers’ Federation Ltd. ( CONSUMERFED) 
registered under the Travancor e-Cochin Co-operative Societies Act 1951 is an apex 
body of the consumer Co-operatives in the State of Kerala. CONSUMERFED started 
functioning on 07 October 1965 and its functions involve bulk procurement of 
consumer goods and their supply to affiliated and/or other Co-operative Societies.  
During the period from June 2009 to September 2012 , CONSUMERFED purchased 
seven39  Mobile floating Triveni 40 supermarkets ( floating Triveni) with ferro-cement 
hull at a cost of ₹181.77 lakh and paid an advance of ₹20 lakh for two more. Seven of 
the Trivenis ceased 41  their operation between April 2014 and September 2016. 
CONSUMERFED, therefore,  decided (March 2017) to dispose them of in auction. 
Two attempts (April 2018 and May 2018) to auction them did not evoke any response 
from the public. Finally, four of the seven floating Trivenis were auctioned off 
(March 2019) for a sum of ₹91,658. There was no demand for the balance three.   
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
➢ The first fl oating Triveni was purchased by CONSUMERFED in June 2009 
from M/s Floatels Hospitalities Private Limited, (Floatels) Thiruvananthapuram  at 
a cost of ₹21.50 lakh to make essential commodities available to the people who 
lived in isolated and inaccessible areas surrounded by water in Kuttanad, 
Alappuzha. 
➢  CONSUMERFED placed further orders with Floatels for three more floating 
Trivenis in September 2010 for a total cost of ₹76.5 lakh and another three floating 
Trivenis in October 2011 for a total cost of ₹83.77 lakh. It placed orders for another 
batch of three in September 2012 by paying an advance of ₹20 lakh. 
 
38 ₹41.61 lakh + ₹53.83 lakh = ₹95.44 lakh 
39 Three Trivenis at Alappuzha, two at Kollam, one at Kottayam and one at Ernakulam 
40 Triveni is a brand division of CONSUMERFED under which food & grocery, cosmetics,  household 
items, electrical, textiles etc. are sold through super markets; super store, mega marts etc.  
41 With effect from 08/04/2014, 31/03/2016, 22/06/2016, 07/07/2016 ( three boats) and  30/09/2016 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
49 
➢  Subsequently, CONSUMERFED cancelled (8 January 2014) the order for 
one of the Trivenis included in the last batch,  and did not take delivery of the 
remaining two, though they were constructed (September 2018), as the operation of 
Trivenis was found uneconomical.  
➢ Audit observed that CONSUMERFED introduced the project in Kuttanad 
without even assessing its feasibility  based on  an announcement made by the 
Minister of Co -operation in the Legislative Assembly (July 2008) that 
CONSUMERFED would start a Floating Triveni in Kuttanad. As a result,  most of 
the seven units commissioned  ran on loss from the very beginning for want of 
adequate patronage.  
➢ All t hese vessels were made of ferro -cement hull . The Chief Inspector of 
Boats, Irrigation Department refused (November 2009) to issue Inspection 
Certificate to these vessels as under the Travancore Public Canals and Public 
Ferries Act and Rules, Inspection Certificate could not b e issued for vessels with 
ferro-cement hull.  
➢ In spite of the rejection of inspection certificate for the vessels, 
CONSUMERFED continued to purchase six more ferro -cement hulled vessels and 
paid advance for three more.  
➢ All the seven floating Trivenis ceased activity after being in service for four to 
six years and the vessels whi ch were left unattended thereafter, sank in water or 
were in bad condition as mentioned in Appendix 3.4. It was further noticed that an 
amount of ₹6.47 lakh was spent towards maintenance, lifting of capsized vessels 
and valuation fees.  
Thus, decision of the CONSUMERFED to proceed with procurement of vessels for 
floating supermarkets without feasibility study and Inspection Certificate led to 
unfruitful expenditure of ₹1.88 crore42. 
The Government, in its reply (April 2019) stated that the reason for failure of the 
floating Triveni supermarkets was not inadequate patronage or lack of feasibility study 
but due to fast development of basic infrastructure facilities. It was also stated that at 
the time of purchase of boats and placing of orders for subsequent purchases there was 
no restriction on the registering of boats manufactured using ferro-cement. Further, 
four of the seven floating Trivenis were auctioned off (February 2019) for a total 
amount of ₹0.92 lakh. 
The Government reply is not acceptable. The fact that three of the seven Trivenis 
were making loss from the very beginning and that two  went in to loss after the first 
year of their commissioning supports the audit observation that there was inadequate 
planning and patronage for the project. Further, the Government stand that there was 
no restriction on registering of ferro-cement boats at the time of placing of orders for 
subsequent purchases is not tenable , as CONSUMERFED invited (August 2010) 
 
42 ₹181.77 lakh + ₹6.47 lakh 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
50 
quotations for further supply of such boats  after the Chief Inspector of Boats rejected 
(November 2009) the application for registration of the first boat. 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
 
3.6 Excess payment of ₹99.72 lakh to a contractor due to under -recovery of 
the cost of bitumen used in a work 
 
Failure to recover the cost of bitumen from the work bills at the rates included 
in the revised estimat e resulted in excess payment of ₹99.72 lakh to the 
contractor. 
The Kerala Public Works Department (PWD) is responsible for the design, 
construction and maintenance of all roads and bridges coming under its jurisdiction in 
the State, irrespective of the source of fund. 
The PWD, Government of Kerala ordered (September 2003)  that contractors would 
be required to purchase bitumen and complete the works except in the case of works 
costing up to rupees six lakh (enhanced to ₹15 lakh in Feb ruary 2004) subject to the 
condition that no tender excess would be allowed and only the actual cost of bitumen 
would be reimbursed. 
Audit test checked (August 2018)  373 work files from the six Roads Divisions 43 
under the administrative control of the Superintending Engineer (Roads &  Bridges), 
North Circle, Kozhikode (SE).  It was found that the final bill of one 44 work arranged 
under the PWD Roads Division, Kasaragod completed on 30  March 2013 was  not 
settled.  The work was awarded (February 2011) by SE to a contractor45 at 35 per cent 
above the estimated cost of ₹4.45 crore based on the Schedule of Rates (SoR) of 
2009. Subsequently, items such as Bituminous Macadam (BM) and Bituminous 
concrete (BC) were incorporated as extra items , revising (December 20 11) the 
estimate cost to  ₹11.50 crore.  Later, at the contractor’s request the Government 
approved (March 2012) the rates for the extra items related to BM and BC works as 
per the SoR 2010 and a supplementary agreement was executed for the extra items 
along with 35 per cent tender premium. 
The rate of bituminous items 46 in the original agreement was arrived at by reckoning 
the cost of bitumen as ₹26,260/ Metric Tonne (MT) based on SoR 2009. The rates of 
BM and BC and other connected items in the revised estimate were, however, 
approved reckoning the cost of bitumen as ₹33,189/MT 47 , ₹28,951 /MT 48  and 
 
43 Six Divisions North Circle are at Palakkad, Manjeri, Kozhikode, Kannur, Wayanad & Kasaragod  
44 NABARD-RIDF XV-Improvements to Parappa-Malome Road from km 0/000 to 14/500 
45 Shri.T.A.Abdul Rahiman 
46 Providing bitumen premixed leveling course, Providing 20 mm thick premixed chipping carpet over 
WBM surface and providing 20mm premixed chipping carpet over existing BT surface 
47 Providing, laying and rolling of built up spray grout layer over prepared bas e & Providing and laying 
Bituminous macadam 
48 Providing and applying tack coat with bitumen emulsion 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
51 
₹34,749/MT49 based on SoR 2010. Audit noticed that the Department reimbursed the 
actual purchase cost of bitumen to the contractor. But while making payments to the 
contractor on the work bills, instead of recovering the cost of bitumen as per SoR 
2010, the Department recovered it at the rate of ₹26,260/MT as per SoR 2009. It was 
also seen th at the Department treated the final bill submitted by the contractor for 
₹3.40 crore as part bill thereby trying to create the impression that recoveries, if any, 
required would be made against subsequent claims. 
Thus, failure of the Department to recover the cost of bitumen at the rates included in 
the revised estimate, resulted in excess payment of ₹99.72  lakh to the contractor, as 
given in the table 4.1. 
Table 4.1 
Calculation of short recovery of cost of bitumen on extra items 
Name of the 
bituminous 
item 
Quantity 
of 
bitumen 
used in 
each item 
(in MT) 
Rate of 
bitumen as 
per SoR 2010 
included in 
the revised 
estimate 
(₹ per  MT)    
Rate  at 
which cost of 
bitumen was 
recovered 
from work 
bill (as per 
SoR 2009) (₹ 
per  MT) 
Cost of 
bitumen 
required to be 
recovered 
from work bill 
as per SoR 
2010 (₹) 
Cost of 
bitumen 
actually 
recovered 
from work bill 
(as per SoR 
2009) (₹) 
Short 
recovery (₹) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (2)x(3) (6)= (2)x(4) (7)= (5)-(6) 
Built up spray 
Grout 278.562 33,189 26,260 92,45,194 73,15,038 19,30,156 
Bituminous 
Macadam 399.168 33,189 26,260 1,32,47,987 1,04,82,152 27,65,835 
Bituminous 
Concrete 306.229 34,749 26,260 1,06,41,152 80,41,574 25,99,578 
Tack coat 33.724 28,951 26,260 9,76,344 8,85,592 90,752 
Total    3,41,10,677 2,67,24,356 73,86,321 
Inadmissible amount of tender premium allowed  to contractor due to short deduction of  
cost of bitumen = (₹73,86,321 x 35 per cent) 25,85,212 
Grand Total 99,71,533 
The matter was referred (December 2018) to the Government. The Government in 
reply (May 2019) stated that the excess payment was worked out to ₹95.52 lakh and 
that directions were given to Chief Engineer to take urgent steps to recover the excess 
payment from the contractor. 
  
 
49 Providing and laying Bituminous concrete 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
52 
3.7 Overpayment on account of fictitious level measurements and incorrect 
calculations  
 
Incorrect calculation of volume of work by the Department based on fictitious 
level measurements resulted in inadmissible payment of ₹1.54 crore to the 
contractor.  
According to Clause 113.3 of the MoRTH Specifications 50 for Road and Bridge 
works, the finished thickness of sub -bases, base , bituminous layers and concrete 
courses to be paid on volume basis shall be computed based on level measurements. 
This involves two sets of surface data, namely original ground level (initial level) 
which is taken before starting the work and formation level (final level) which is 
taken after execution of the work. The volume of the filling or cutting work done is 
determined by reckoning the difference between the initial and the final levels.  The 
initial levels and final levels are recorded in the Level Field Book (LF Book) and the 
volume of work is calculated in separate calculation sheets. Finally, the abstract of the 
details are taken to Measurement Book, on the basis of which the final bill of the 
work is prepared for payment to the contractor.   
The Superintending Engineer of NH Sout h Circle, Thiruvananthapuram awarded 
(March 2017) a work 51 to a contractor 52 at a contract amount of ₹31.11 crore, to be 
executed through NH Division, Alappuzha. The work was commenced on 13 March 
2017 and completed on 10 January 2018 at a cost of ₹32.61 c rore. The work also 
involved the following bituminous items: 
(i) Recycling of existing bituminous pavement with cold in place recycling 
method, including rolling and finishing with appropriate roller. 
(ii) Tack coat53 for laying Bituminous Concrete (BC) layer. 
(iii) Laying of 50 mm BC layer as wearing course54 over the tack coat surface.  
Audit noticed that the Department measured and recorded (on 18 May 2017 and 19 
May 2017) the initial levels of the work done in a p ortion of the road between 
chainage 15/410 km to 22/030  km in the LF Book after measuring and recording 
(from 05 May 2017 to 15 May 2017) the final levels, which was practically 
impossible. 
A Joint Physical Verification (JPV) conducted by Audit along with departmental 
officials at nine randomly selected points 55 of the reach (chainage 00/00 km to 22/030 
 
50 Clause 113.3 of Ministry of Road Transport & Highways Specifications for Road and Bridge works 
(Fifth Revision) 
51 ‘Periodical renewal from km 406/00 to 428/00 of NH 66 (old NH 47) in the State of Kerala’       
(involving a length of 22/030 km) 
52 Contractor, M/s EKK Infrastructure Ltd. vide Agreement. No. 6/SENH/SC/16 -17 dated      
08/03/2017 
53 A thin adhesive layer of bitumen applied between two existing bituminous layers for bonding 
54 Wearing course is the top layer of the road surface 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
53 
km excluding the rail over bridge portion) revealed varying thickness of BC between 
30 mm and 61 mm ; the average being 44 mm. But , the Department paid the 
contractor reckoning a uniform thickness of 50 mm. This resulted in excess payment 
of ₹1.29 crore  (Appendix 3.5) to the contractor due to incorrect calculation of 
volume. 
Even taking a uniform thickness of 50  mm, the total volume of BC executed as per 
LF Books was only 10 ,433.227 cum. However, audit noticed that the volume of BC 
executed, as worked out by the Department in the calculation sheets, was 10 ,673.560 
cum56. Reckoning of measurements in excess of those recorded in the LF Books  
resulted in an inadmissible payment of ₹24.75 lakh to the contractor (Appendix 3.5).  
On this being pointed out, the Executive Engineer (EE), NH Division, Alappuzha 
replied (October 2018) that in the recycling process 57 there was no provision for using 
a Paver 58 to make the surface perfectly level and that for correcting the camber 59 of 
the road, the thickness at the centre portion was made thicker than the edges. The 
reply corroborated the findings of the JPV that the thickness of BC was not uniform. 
However, the levels reco rded in the LF Book showed a uniform thickness of 50mm 
on the entire stretch of work executed. 
Thus, adoption of incorrect level measurements and subsequent incorrect calculation 
of the volume of work by the Department resulted in inadmissible payment of ₹1.54 
crore to the contractor (₹24.75 lakh + ₹1.29 crore).  
The matter was referred (December 2018) to the Government. The Government in its 
reply (January 2019) claimed that the thickness of the BC layer executed by the  
Department over the cold milled and recycled layer was exactly 50 mm on the entire 
stretch as recorded in the LF book, as it was done with adequate precision of 
thickness using sensor paver. In the same reply, the Government also admitted that 
the top surface of the cold milled and recycled layer below the BC was not of uniform 
finish as no paver was used. 
The Government reply that the Department had executed BC over the cold milled and 
recycled layer at a uniform thickness of 50 mm is not acceptable as wh en a new BC 
layer is laid using a paver over an undulated surface, it is impossible to ensure 
uniform thickness of the new layer at all locations due to the undulations below it.  
 
55 Chainage 409/100 km (two points), 407/800 km (two points ), 416/100 km, 417/200 km (two points), 
422/000 km, 426/000 km 
56 The total quantity of BC as per level calculation sheet was 10,946.399 cum (from chainage 0/000 km 
to 22/030 km); after excluding the rail over bridge portion the balance quantity was 10,673.560 cum 
57 It is the method of Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) construction where the existing BT surface 
is investigated for the bitumen content, water content and other properties and then required 
additional raw materials for the designed quantities such as fresh aggregates, cement, foamed 
bitumen, water etc. are added and recycled to build the new RAP 
58 A paver is a construction equipment used to lay asphalt on roads flat   
59 Camber indicates slightly convex or arched shape of a road. It is a gradual downward slope from the 
centre to each side to enable water to flow off the road    

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
54 
During the exit meeting (07  June 2019), CE (Roads) stated that the thickness of BC 
over the cold milled and recycled layer would vary.  CE (Roads) also accepted that 
the volume of BC could be calculated by adopting the method of multiplying the tack 
coat area with the thickness of BC, if the thickness of BC was the same t hroughout 
the length of the road. 
3.8 Departmental lapse in the management of securities from contractors 
 
Failure of the Department in the management of securities from contractors 
resulted in extension of undue favour amounting to ₹15.73 crore to contractors, 
besides placing of avoidable financial burden of ₹1.34 crore 60  on the 
Government. 
According to KPWD Manual/Selection Notice of works, the contractors are to furnish 
securities covering the period of completion of work/ Defect Liability Period (DLP). 
The securities can be furnished in the form of bank guarantees, pledging of treasury 
saving accounts and pending bills of other completed works of the contractor.  
A Bank guarantee (BG) is a promise from a bank that the liabilities of a debtor 61 will 
be met in the event of the debtor (contractor) failing to fulfil his/her contractual 
obligations. The liability of the bank under the BG stands completely discharged  or 
extinguished if no claim or demand is made within the agreed date. 
There are 16 Roads Divisions and eight NH Divisions under the PW Department. 
Audit scrutinised 282 works costing ₹790.77 crore, executed under six divisions (four 
Roads Divisions and two NH Divisions  out of the 24 Divisions ) and noticed 
irregularities in 52 works. 
Out of the 52 works, in 49 works costing ₹172.93 crore Audit observed the following 
irregularities which resulted in extending of undue benefit to the contractors: 
➢ Five works showed inadequacy of securities submitted by  the contractors 
amounting to ₹24.38 lakh (Appendix 3.6). 
➢ Securities of 13 works amounting to  ₹5.18 crore ordered to be adjusted from 
pending bills of other works by the agreement executing authorities were not 
adjusted by the respective divisional officers (Appendix 3.7). 
➢ Securities collecte d in 14 works amounting to ₹3.46 crore were released 
prematurely by the divisional officers (Appendix 3.8). 
➢ Bank Guarantees worth ₹6.85 crore kept as security in 24 works were not 
renewed by the divisional officers concerned  before expiry  (Appendix 3.9  and 
3.10). 
 
60 ₹10.77 lakh + ₹31.28 lakh + ₹32.72 lakh + ₹59.22 lakh = ₹133.99 lakh rounded to ₹1.34 crore 
61 In the case of a work undertaken through contracts, the debtor means the contractor for the work  

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
55 
In the remaining three works costing ₹19.74 crore, Audit observed the following 
irregularities which brought additional financial burden of ₹1.34 crore on the 
Government (Appendix 3.11): 
➢ The Department arranged62 repair works costing ₹10.77 lakh to rectify the 
defects developed during the DLP of a work 63 as the contractor concerned did not 
carry out the same. The Department, however, could not reali se the cost from the 
contractor as the validity of the bank guaran tee64 for the work furnished by the 
contractor was not extended to cover the DLP. 
On this being pointed out, the SE replied (October 2018) that necessary direction was 
given to the Executive Engineer to recover the cost from the bills pending payment to 
the contractor. 
➢ In another instance, the contractor did not complete the work65 awarded to 
him even after allowing several extensions of time. The Department, therefore,  
terminated66 (August 2018) the contract at the risk and cost 67 of the contractor. 
However, as the validity of the BG 68 worth ₹64 lakh furnished by the contractor 
was not renewed before its expiry in August 2013, the Department lost the 
opportunity to recover the expenditure on the balan ce work to be executed, to the 
extent of the BG.  
➢ In the third case 69 involving a BG of ₹59.22 lakh70, the contractor completed 
(May, 2013) the work but did not rectify the defects noticed during the DLP  (up 
to 30 May 2016)  despite repeated requests/reminders 71  from departmental 
officials. So, after the DLP the Department arranged necessary rectification works 
at a cost of  ₹106.27 lakh ( Appendix 3 .12). It was noticed that in spite of the 
inaction by the contractor, the Department did not invoke the BG, instead released 
 
62 Agreement No.EE/PL/117 /2017-18 d ated 27/11/2017- Contractor- G. Janardhanan, Palakkad - 
Contract amount ₹10.77 lakh  (First and final bill under preparation) 
63 Work- ‘Improvement by providing BM (50  mm) and BC (25mm) to Vazhakode – Alathur Road 
from 22/648 km to 29/648 km’- Contractors- M/s Kudroli Builders - Contract amount ₹2.89 crore  
64 BG No. 126/2013 -14 dated 12/08/2013, of South Indian Bank, Panaji, Goa for ₹28.95 lakh- Valid 
till 11/11/2015 
65 Budget Work  2009 -10-, Improvements to Upputhara – Kottamala - Wagamon Road, -Agreement 
No. 10/SECCA/2010 -11 dated 25/04/2010 - Contractor  Sri K .C. Antony. Contract amount ₹3.13 
crore 
66 Order No. DIP-2897/09 dated 11/08/2018 
67 In such cases, cost of the balance work is recoverable from the original contractor.  
68 BG 1/2010 dated 19/04/2010 ( ₹31,27,905) and BG 3/2010  dated 25 /04/2010 (₹32,72,260) of South 
Indian Bank, Bharananganam 
69 IRQP from c hainage 444/000 to 462/000km on NH 47 (now NH 66) in the State of Kerala - 
Agreement No. 3/SENH/SC/2012 -13 dated 16 /07/2012, Contractor - M/s Concord Construction, 
Kasaragod - Contract amount ₹13.72 crore 
70  Bank Guarantee No. IBG 45896 dated 20 /09/2013, ₹42,61,000 and  No. IBG 45179 dated 
30/08/2013, ₹16,60,985 of Federal Bank Ltd. Kanhangad 
71 On May 2015, June 2015, July 2015, September 2015, October 2015, November 2015, February 
2016 and last in May 2016 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
56 
it to the contractor. Consequently, the Government had to bear the cost of the 
rectification works to the extent of the BG.  
Departmental failure in the management of securities from contractors, thus resulted 
in undue favours worth ₹15.73 crore to the contractors, besides placing avoidable 
financial burden of ₹1.34 crore 72  on the Government. This also points at the 
inadequacy of the internal controls of the Department. It was observed that the 
responsibility for the lapses was not fixed on the officials concerned. 
The matter was reported to the Government (December 2018). During the exit 
meeting (May 2019), the Department accepted the lapses in internal control and 
stated that such lapses would be eliminated on the introduction of an e -module in the 
second phase of PRICE software. 
3.9 Avoidable expenditure due to delay in finalisation of tenders 
 
Non-finalisation of tender by the Department within the prescribed firm period 
resulted in avoidable expenditure of ₹3.17 crore. 
According to Section 2009.5  of the PWD Manual (Revised Edition) 2012  (the 
Manual), consideration of tenders and decision thereon shall be completed well 
before the date of expiry of the firm period 73 noted in the tender , so that the letter of 
acceptance is issued in writing to the selected bidder before the expiry of the firm 
period which shall not exceed two months in the normal course. If delay in 
finalization of the tender is anticipated, the officer who invited the tender shall get the 
consent of the lowest two bidders for extending the firm period by one month, or 
more as required. All officers concerned with the consideration of tenders shall deal 
with them expeditiously to settle the contract before the expiry of the firm period. 
The Superintending Engineer, PWD (Roads and Bridges),  North Circle, Kozhikode 
(SE) executed agreements for 289 works under Roads Division, Manjeri during the 
period 2015 -16 t o 2017 -18. Audit scrutinised the files of 75 works and found the 
following irregularity in one work. 
The work74 was initially tendered by the SE at an estimated cost of ₹9.16 crore. Only 
two contractors submitted (23 April 2014) bids and the Government app roved75 (16 
October 2014) the lower bid quoted by M/s PMR Construction Company for ₹8.73 
crore, which was 5.92 per cent below the estimate.   
The firm period of the tender expired (22 June 2014) long before the Government 
approved the tender. The contracto r who had already  extended the firm period up to 
 
72 ₹10.77 lakh + ₹31.28 lakh + ₹32.72 lakh + ₹59.22 lakh= ₹133.99 lakh rounded to ₹1.34 crore 
73 The firm period of a tender is the period from the date of opening of the tender to the date up to 
which the offer given in the tender is binding on the bidder. (Sec. 2009.5 of PWD Manual Revised 
2012) 
74 ‘Improvements an d providing BM&BC to Trikkulam  - Theyyala road between 0/000  km to 7/800 
km in Malappuram District’ 
75 GO(Rt)No.1439/2014/PWD dated 16/10/2014 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
57 
31 August 2014 refused to extend it any further.  So, the SE re -tendered (October 
2014) the work. The only bid received was from M/s PMR Construction Company 
who quoted their rates at 49.30 per cent  above the  estimate. The Government 
accepted76 (September 2015) the offer at a reduced rate of 37. 68 per cent  above the 
estimate.  Accordingly, the SE executed (November 2015) the agreement 77 with the 
Contractor who completed the work (27 October 2016) at a total co st of ₹11.90 crore 
(October 2017). 
A scrutiny of the finalisation process of the initial tender by Audit revealed that 
against an admissible period of sixty days, the Department took 17578 days to get the 
lowest bid approved by the Government Tender Committee (GTC). SE forwarded the 
tender proposal to the Chief Engineer ( CE) on 24 April 2014 and the CE forwarded 
the same to the GTC on 20 June 2014, just three days before  the expiry of firm 
period.  
According to the Government of Kerala notification (January 2010) , Local Market 
Rate (LMR) justification is not required for bids which are below the estimate rate. In 
spite of that the Government returned (2 July 2014) the tender recommendation t o the 
CE with the direction to re -submit the same along with LMR justification. This 
further delayed the approval of the tender proposal leading to retender of the work 
and its award at higher rate. 
Thus, failure on the part of the departmental officials t o adhere to their own norms 
regarding finalisation of tender within the firm period led to the re -tendering of the 
work, eventually causing an additional expenditure of ₹3.17 crore to the State 
exchequer.  
The matter was referred (December 2018) to the Government. The Government in its 
reply (July 2019) stated  that delay had occurred in the submission  of the tender 
proposal due to the then prevailing model code of conduct  declared by the Election 
Commission in view of Parliament Election of 2014. 
The reply, attributing the delay on the election is not acceptable as the Department 
caused further delay of nearly three and a half months after the election, which cannot 
be justified.  
3.10 Idling of bridges for want of approach roads  
 
Construction of three bridges without approach/access roads resulted in their 
idling, making ₹20.38 crore spent on their construction unfruitful.  
Section 15.2.2(d) of the PWD Manual (Pre -revised) stipulates t hat the land for 
carrying out works should either have already been acquired or otherwise available or 
steps should have been taken for such acquisition and the proceedings should have 
 
76 GO(Rt)No.1457/2015/PWD dated 30/09/2015 
77 SE(K)234/2015-16 dated 21/11/2015 
78 23/04/2014 to 16/10/2014 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
58 
reached a stage where there is reasonable prospect of land becoming ava ilable before 
the contractor starts the work. In no case should tenders be invited before making sure 
that the land required would be ready for being handed over to the contractor to start 
the work in time.  
The Superintending Engineers (Roads & Bridges) o f North Circle, Kozhikode and 
Central Circle, Aluva arranged 133 bridge works during the period from 01  April 
2013 to 31 March 2018. Audit scrutinised 29 of these works having a contract value 
of ₹202.27 crore and observed the following irregularities in three works79: 
➢ Two80 of these bridge works consisted of the construction of both bridge and 
approach roads while the third work 81 was confined to the construction of bridge 
alone, as land acquisition for the approach roads was not made. 
➢ Construction of the bridges was completed on 31  December 2013, 25 March 
2017 and 14 July 2017 respectively, at a total cost of ₹20.38 82 crore but they have 
not been opened to the public for want of approach/access roads.  
➢ Approach roads were not constructed for Kovilakam Thazham and 
Thazhepalam bridges, while Murikkallu bridge which was constructed along with 
approach roads could not be accessed due to non -completion of the bypass road 
on which the bridge was constructed. 
➢ Defect Liability Period ( DLP) of bridge works is 36 months. All the defects 
that arise during the DLP of a bridge are to be rectified by the contractor at his 
own cost. After the DLP, it becomes the liability of the Department. Audit noticed 
that the DLP of the Thazhepalam bridge expired on 30  December 2016 and that 
of the other two bridges would expire on 24 March 2020 and 13 July 2020.   
➢ An amount of ₹20.38 crore spent on the construction of the three bridges , 
thus, remains unfruitf ul for the past several years without achieving their 
envisaged benefit. 
The matter was referred to the Government (January 2019) and the reply is awaited 
(July 2019). During the exit meeting held on 07  June 2019 the Department concurred 
with the audit observations and stated that land acquisition process for the approach 
roads was under way. 
  
 
79KovilakamThazham bridge across Ramanpuzha river, Thazhepalam bridge across   Tirurpuzhaand 
Murikkallu bridge across Muvattupuzhariver 
80 KovilakamThazhambridge and Murikkallu bridge 
81 Thazhepalam bridge 
82 ₹20.38crore = ₹2.21 crore + ₹14.68 crore + ₹3.49 crore 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
59 
3.11 Violation of agreement conditions and provisions of the revised PWD 
Manual 
 
Reimbursement of the cost of bitumen at market rates violating the provisions of 
the PWD Manual and agreement conditions resulted in inadmissible payment of 
₹12.89 crore to the contractors on account of 65 road works. 
The Superintending Engineer (SE), Roads & Bridges, North Circle, Kozhikode, 
tendered (from April 2012 to March  2014) 484 works for which Technical Sanction 
(TS) was given by the Chief Engineer (Roads & Bridges). The Notice Inviting 
Tenders ( NIT) of these works included the condition that bitumen required for the 
work should be purchased by the bidder. As per the tender schedules of the works the 
cost of departmental materials was ‘Nil’. Therefore, the contractors were to quote the 
tender percentages after reckoning the cost of bitumen also. 
In August 2014, the Al l Kerala Government Contractor’s  Association represented to 
the Government that they incurred huge losses due to the increase in the cost of 
bitumen and that the cost difference of bitumen be reimbursed to them. The Secretary 
to the Government, Public Works Department (PWD) permitted 83 (October 2014)  
reimbursement of the cost difference of bitumen for the above works tendered by SE, 
R&B North Circle, subject to the condition that the total expenditure of such works 
would be limited to the TS amount.  
Audit scrutiny (during May -July 2018) of 137 works out of the 484 works tendered, 
revealed the following: 
➢ The Department paid ₹12.89 crore as cost difference of bitumen to the 
contractors in 65 works (Appendix 3.13). 
➢ According to clause 2104 of the Revised PWD Manual, only those works 
costing up to the TS powers (₹100 lakh) of the SE were eligible for departmental 
supply of bitumen. The Department violated this provision, as all the 65 works for 
which cost difference of bitumen was paid exceeded this limit. 
➢ The Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT) which forms part of the agreement 
executed by the contractors included the condition that bitumen required fo r the 
work should be purchased by the bidder. The contractors were aware of this 
condition while quoting their rates and so had no right to claim cost difference. 
➢ The Finance Department opined (April 2016) that the order  permitting 
reimbursement of the cos t difference of bitumen was an  extension of undue 
benefit to some contractors since the contractors had already agreed to execute the 
works at an agreed amount. 
 
83 G.O.(RT) No.1014/2014/PWD dated 30/10/2014 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
60 
Thus, violation of the provisions of the PWD Manual and the contract conditions by 
the Departme nt itself resulted in inadmissible payment of ₹12.89 crore to the 
contractors. 
The matter was referred to the Government (January 2019) and the reply is awaited 
(July 2019). During the exit meeting (07  June 2019) also, the Department declined to 
comment on the matter. 
TOURISM DEPARTMENT 
 
3.12 Implementation of projects in Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ) areas 
 
Due to the non–adherence to the CRZ notification in implementation of projects 
by the Department of Tourism, the project proponent, there was loss of 
Government of India  assistance to the tune of ₹9.55 crore in respect of two 
projects and irregular expenditure of ₹8.97 crore in respect of t hree projects out 
of six projects examined. 
According to the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification issued (January 2011) 
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), Government of India (GoI), 
construction works in the designated areas of CRZ ca n be undertaken only with the 
prior approval of the MoEF. For obtaining prior approval under CRZ Notification, the 
project proponent shall apply to the State Coastal Zone Management Authority with 
the project layout superimposed on the CRZ map indicating H igh Tidal Lines and 
Low Tidal Lines demarcated by an authorised agency.   
During the period 2011 to 2018, Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala 
(DoT) implemented 28 projects for ₹82.52 crore in areas falling under CRZ. In order 
to assess the complian ce of the DoT with the requirements of CRZ Notifications, 
Audit examined six projects out of the 28 projects.  Audit observations are discussed 
below:  
➢ Although the project proponent was to obtain prior clearance from Kerala 
Coastal Zone Management Authority (KCZMA) as per the CRZ notification, 
DoT, the project proponent, entrusted the implementation of all the six 
projects examined by Audit to various agencies 84 without obtaining prior CRZ 
clearance from KCZMA. The agencies, in turn, awar ded the work to 
contractors without any CRZ clearance. 
  
 
84Kerala Irrigation Infrastructure Development Corporation; District Tourism Promotion Council, 
Malappuram; Inland Navigation Directorate, KITCO Ltd. and Harbour Engineer ing Department. 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
61 
➢ In respect of the projects for development of Kottapuram House Boat 
Terminal and development of Ottumburam beach, DoT did not apply for CRZ 
clearance so far (July 2019).  The reasons for non-submission of application in 
respect of these two projects were not recorded. 
Out of the above two projects, construction works of the project for development 
of Ottumburam beach  was completed incurring an expenditure of ₹1.29 crore. 
Work was yet to start in respe ct of the other project.  As the construction work in 
respect of one project was executed without CRZ clearance, the amount of ₹1.29 
crore incurred became irregular. 
GoK replied (September 2019) that though the executing agency submitted a final 
bill for ₹1.29 crore in respect of the Development of Ottumburam Beach project, 
only ₹1.12 crore was released. The District Tourism Promotion Council has taken 
steps to obtain CRZ clearance for completing the project. In respect of 
‘Development of Kottappuram House Boat Terminal’, the Inland Navigation 
Department, GoK was directed to take steps for obtaining CRZ clearance. 
The reply was not acceptable as the CRZ clearance for the projects were to be 
obtained beforehand. In respect of the above projects, the same not obtained as of 
September 2019, even after incurring expenditure of ₹1.29 crore.  
➢ Out of the four projects 85 for which CRZ clearance was applied, KCZMA 
accorded approval only for two86 projects. In respect of one project87, KCZMA 
denied (July 2018) clearanc e on the ground that the plot area was insufficient 
while in respect of the other project88, KCZMA issued (July 2015) show-cause 
notice for violation of CRZ notification. The DoT incurred an expenditure of 
₹7.68 crore as on March 2019 in respect of these t wo projects. As the 
KCZMA did not issue CRZ clearance for these two projects, the amount of 
₹7.68 crore incurred was irregular.  
GoK replied (September 2019) that the Tourism Department filed an appeal 
before the KCZMA for obtaining CRZ clearance for the p roject at Thalassery 
while in respect of the project at Kayamkulam, GoK replied that the project was 
exempted from CRZ regulations and that the documents in support of the above 
were submitted to KCZMA.   
  
 
85Construction of new building for KITTS training centre at Thalassery, Development of Kappil Beach 
and Boat Club, Development of Payyambalam Beach walkway, Kannur and House boat terminal at 
Kayamkulam. 
86 Development of Kappil Beach and Boat Club and Development of Payyambalam Beach walkway, 
Kannur. 
87 Construction of new building for KITTS training centre at Thalassery.  
88 House boat terminal at Kayamkulam. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 201 8 
 
62 
The reply was not acceptable as the failure of th e DoT to obtain prior CRZ 
clearance necessitated the need for appeal before the KCZMA. These appeals 
were not allowed by the KCZMA as of September 2019. 
In respect of ‘Development of Kappil Beach and Boat Club’ and ‘House boat 
terminal at Kayamkulam’ proje cts, the implementing agenc y 89 proceeded with the 
work on the assumption that the local body would obtain CRZ clearance. But the 
local bodies did not obtain CRZ clearance. GoI  assistance of ₹3.23 crore and ₹7.83 
crore respectively was sanctioned for their implementation. As per the conditions for 
sanction of GoI assistance, the projects were to be completed within 24 and 36 
months respectively. 
GoI released (March 2013) first instalment amounting to ₹1.51 crore in respect of 
these two projects. Release of subsequent instalments was dependent on 
submission of utilisation certificate.  
Due to non –obtaining prior CRZ clearance, the KCZMA stopped the work in 
respect of these two pro jects. Consequently, there was delay in submission of 
utilisation certificate for the amount released and completion of the projects. 
Hence, the subsequent instalments of GoI assistance amounting to ₹9.55 crore 
was not released and the DoT met the expenditure using GoK funds.  
In respect of the project for ‘Development of Kappil Beach and Boat Club’, GoK 
replied (September 2019) that the delay in completion was due to non -availability 
of land and the long span of time required to obtain clearance from KCZMA.  
The reply was not acceptable as the availability of land did not hamper the 
implementation of the project. The stoppage of work by the KCZMA was due to 
non-obtaining prior CRZ clearance. The DoT submitted application for CRZ 
clearance only after stoppage of work by the KCZMA. The CRZ clearance i s still 
awaited. 
  
 
89 Kerala Irrigation Infrastructure Development Corporation. 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit  
 
63 
Thus, due to non–adherence to the CRZ notification in implementation of projects, 
there was loss of GoI assistance to the tune of ₹9.55 crore in respect of two projects 
and irregular expenditure of ₹8.97 crore in respect of three projects out of the six 
projects examined.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thiruvananthapuram,  (S. Sunil Raj) 
The Accountant General 
 (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit) 
 Kerala 
   
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi,  (RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 


 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
  

 

Appendices 
 
 
65 
Appendix – 1.1 
Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) as on 30 June 2018 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.1 - Page: 07) 
 
 
 
  
Year Up to  
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
2018-19 
(Upto 30 
June 2018) 
Total 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (ROADS AND BRIDGES) 
Number of IRs 75 10 15 5 NIL 105 
Number of paragraphs 451 115 128 58 NIL 752 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
NIL NIL 7(53) 3(34) NIL 10(87) 
IRRIGATION DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 64 22 NIL 7 4 97 
Number of paragraphs 188 82 NIL 51 23 344 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
1(2) 4(21) NIL NIL 4(22) 9(45) 
AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS’ WELFARE DEPARTMENT  
Number of IRs 90 48 NIL 03 03 144 
Number of paragraphs 194 102 NIL 28 22 346 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
1(4) 5(15) NIL 3(22) 4(20) 13(61) 
FORESTS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 81 23 19 3 0 126 
Number of paragraphs 261 74 137 18 0 490 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
3(9) 2(7) 9(59) 1(8) NIL 15(83) 
     Total IR 472 
     Total Paras 1,932 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
66 
Appendix – 2.1 
Control Tests and their minimum frequency 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1 - Page: 09) 
 
A. For Sub-Bases and Bases (Excluding Bitumen Bound Bases) 
Sl 
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
1 Granular i) Gradation 
ii) Atterberg limits 
iii) Moisture content prior to 
compaction 
iv) Density of compacted layer 
v) Deleterious constituents 
vi) CBR 
One test per 400 cubic meters 
One test per 400 cubic meters 
One test per 400 cubic meters 
 
One test per 1,000 square meters 
As required 
As required 
2 Lime/Cement 
Stabilised Soil  
Sub-base 
i) Quality of lime/cement 
 
ii) Lime/ Cement content 
iii) Degree of pulverisation 
iv) CBR or Unconfined 
Compressive Strength test on a set 
of 3 specimens 
v) Moisture content prior to 
compaction 
vi) Density of compacted layer 
vii) Deleterious constituents 
One test for each consignment subject to a 
minimum of one test per 5 tonnes 
Regularly, through procedural checks 
Periodically as considered necessary  
As required 
 
 
One set of two tests per 500 square meters 
 
One set of two tests per 500 square meters 
As required 
3 Water Bound 
Macadam 
i) Aggregate Impact Value 
ii) Grading of aggregate 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation indices 
iv) Atterberg limits of binding 
material 
v) Atterberg limits of screenings 
One test per 1,000 cubic meters of aggregate 
One test per 250 cubic meters 
One test per 500 cubic meters of aggregate 
 
One test per 50 cubic meters of binding 
material 
One test per 100 cubic meters of aggregate 
4 Wet Mix 
Macadam 
i)  Aggregate Impact Value 
ii) Grading of aggregate 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
iv) Atterberg limits of portion of 
aggregate passing 425 micron sieve 
v) Density of compacted layer 
One test per 1,000 cubic meters of aggregate 
One test per 200 cubic meters of aggregate 
One test per 500 cubic meters of aggregate 
 
One test per 200 cubic meters of aggregate 
 
One set of three tests per 1,000 square meters 
(Source: Table 900-3: MoRTH specification for Roads and Bridges) 
  

Appendices 
 
 
67 
Appendix 2.1 (Cont’d……) 
B. For Bituminous works and their minimum frequency 
Sl  
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
1 Prime Coat/Tack 
Coat/Fog Spray 
i)  Quality of binder 
 
ii) Binder temperature for 
application 
iii) Rate of spread of Binder 
Number of samples per lot and tests as per 
IS:73, IS:217 and IS:8887 as applicable  
At regular close intervals 
 
Three tests per day 
2 Seal 
Coat/Surface 
Dressing 
i)  Quality of Binder 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value 
or Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
 
iv) Stripping value of 
aggregates (Immersion Tray 
Test) 
v) Water absorption of 
aggregate 
vi) Water sensitivity of mix 
vii) Grading of aggregate 
viii) Soundness (Magnesium 
Sulphate/Sodium Sulphate) 
ix) Polished stone value (not 
applicable for SAM/SAMI) 
x) Temperature of binder in 
boiler, aggregate in dryer 
and mix at the time of 
laying and compaction 
xi) Rate of spread of 
materials 
xii) Percentage of fractured 
faces (When gravel is used) 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.1 
One test per 200 cubic meters of each source 
and whenever there is change in the quality of 
aggregate 
One test per 100 cubic meters of aggregate for 
each source and whenever there is change in 
the quality of aggregate 
One test of each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
 
--do— 
 
--do— 
Two tests per day 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
--do— 
 
At regular intervals 
 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.1 
 
One test per 100 cubic meters of aggregate 
3 Open –graded 
Premix 
Surfacing/Close-
graded Premix 
Surfacing 
i) Quality of binder 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value 
or Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
iv) Stripping value 
v) Water absorption of 
aggregates 
vi) Water Sensitivity of mix 
vii) Grading of aggregates 
viii) Soundness (Magnesium 
Sulphate and Sodium 
Sulphate) 
ix) Polished stone value 
x) Temperature of binder at 
application 
xi) Binder content 
xii) Percentage of fractured 
faces 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.1 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
At regular interval 
 
Two tests per day per plant 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
68 
Appendix 2.1 (Cont’d……) 
Sl  
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
4 Bituminous 
Macadam 
i)  Quality of binder 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value 
or Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
iv) Stripping value 
v) Water absorption of 
aggregates 
vi) Water Sensitivity of mix 
vii) Grading of aggregates 
viii) Soundness (Magnesium 
Sulphate/Sodium Sulphate) 
ix) Percentage of fractured 
faces 
x) Binder content 
xi) Control of temperature 
of binder and aggregate for 
mix and of the mix at the 
time of laying and rolling 
xii) Density of Comp layer 
xiii) Rate of spread of 
Mixed Material 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.1 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
One test per 350 cum for each source 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.3 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
 
One test per 700 square meters area 
At regular intervals 
 
5 Dense 
Bituminous 
Macadam/Bitumi
nous Concrete 
i)  Quality of binder 
 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value/ 
Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
 
iv) Soundness test (Sodium 
or Magnesium Sulphate 
test) 
v) Water absorption of 
aggregates 
vi) Sand equivalent test 
 
vii) Plasticity Index 
 
viii) Polished stone value 
 
ix) Percentage of fractured 
face 
x) Mix grading 
 
 
 
Number of samples per lot and tests as per 
IS:73 or IRC:SP:53, IS:15462 
One test per 350 cubic meters of aggregate for 
each source and whenever there is change in 
the quality of aggregate 
One test per 350 cubic meters of aggregate for 
each source and whenever there is change in 
the quality of aggregate 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
One test per 350 cubic meters of aggregate 
when crushed gravel is used 
One set for individual constituent and mixed 
aggregate from dryer for each 400 tonnes of 
mix subject to minimum of two tests per day 
plant 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
69 
Appendix 2.1 (Cont’d……) 
 
Sl  
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
  xi) Stability and voids 
analysis of mix including 
theoretical maximum 
specific of loose mix. 
xii) Moisture Susceptibility 
of mix (AASHTO T283) 
 
xiii) Temperature of binder 
in boiler, aggregate in dryer 
and mix at the time of 
laying and compaction 
xiv) Binder content 
 
 
xv) Rate of spread of mix 
material 
xvi) Density of Compacted 
layer 
Three tests for stability, flow value, density 
and void contents for each 400 tonnes of mix 
subject to minimum of two tests day per plant 
 
One test for each mix type whenever there is 
change in the quality or source of coarse or 
fine aggregate 
At regular intervals 
 
 
 
One set for each 400  tonnes of mix subject to 
minimum of two tests per day plant  
 
After every 5th truck load 
 
One test per 700 square meters area 
6 Sand Asphalt 
Base course 
i)  Quality of binder 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value 
or Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value  
iii) Sand equivalent test 
iv) Plasticity Index 
v) Mix grading & binder 
content  
vi) Stability of Mix 
vii) Control of temperature 
of binder in boiler, 
aggregate in the dryer and 
mix at the time of laying 
and rolling 
viii) Thickness of layer 
ix) Density of Compacted 
layer  
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2   and 3 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
 
 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
7 Slurry seal and 
Micro surfacing 
i) Quality of Aggregate 
Sand Equivalent Value 
Water Absorption  
Soundness Test 
(Sodium/Magnesium 
Sulphate Test) 
ii) Quality of Emulsion 
iii) Aggregate Moisture 
iv) Aggregate Gradation 
v) Binder Content  
vi) Calibration of Machine  
vii) Quantity of Slurry (By 
weight of aggregate) 
One per source/ site 
 
 
 
 
 
One per lot of 20 t as per IS:8887 
Two per day 
Two per day at site 
Two per lane per km 
Once per Project 
Daily (Travel time of Machine) 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
70 
Appendix 2.1 (Cont’d……) 
 
Sl  
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
8 Stone Matrix 
Asphalt 
i) Quality of binder 
 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value/ 
Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
iv) Soundness Test (Sodium 
and Magnesium Sulphate 
Test) 
v) Water absorption of 
aggregate 
vi) Sand equivalent test 
vii) Plasticity Index 
viii) Polished stone value 
ix) Percent of fractured 
faces 
x) Mix grading 
 
 
 
xi) Air voids and VMA 
analysis of mix including 
theoretical maximum 
specific gravity of loose mix 
xii) Moisture Susceptibility 
of mix (AASHTO T 283) 
 
xiii) Temperature of binder 
in boiler, aggregate in dryer 
and mix at the time of 
laying and compaction 
xiv) Binder content 
 
xv) Rate of spread of mix 
material 
xvi) Density of compacted 
layer 
Number of samples per lot and tests as per 
IS:73 or IRC:SP:53, IS:15462 
One test per 100 cubic meters of aggregate 
 
 
One test per 100 cubic meters of aggregate 
 
One test for each method for each source and 
whenever there is change in the quality of 
aggregate 
One test for each source and whenever there is 
change in the quality of aggregate 
One test for each source 
One test for each source 
One test for each source 
One test per 50 cubic meters of aggregate 
when crushed gravel is used 
One set for individual constituent and mixed 
aggregate from dryer for each 400 tonnes of 
mix subject to minimum of two tests per day 
per plant 
Three tests per day 
 
 
 
One test for each mix type whenever there is 
change in the quality or source of coarse of 
fine aggregate 
At regular intervals 
 
 
 
One set for each 400 tonnes of mix subject to 
minimum of two tests per day per plant  
After every 5th truck load 
 
One test per 250 square meters area 
9 Mastic asphalt i) Quality of binder 
ii) Aggregate Impact Value 
and Los Angeles Abrasion 
Value 
iii) Combined Flakiness and 
Elongation Indices 
iv) Stripping value 
v) Water Sensitivity of mix 
vi) Grading of aggregates 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.2 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
Two tests per day per plant on the individual 
constituent and mixed aggregates from the 
dryer 
 

Appendices 
 
 
71 
Appendix 2.1 (Cont’d……) 
 
Sl  
No 
Type of 
Construction 
Test Frequency (min.) 
  vii) Water absorption of 
aggregates 
viii) Soundness (Magnesium 
Sulphate/Sodium Sulphate) 
ix) Percentage of fractured 
faces 
x) Binder content and 
aggregate grading 
xi) Control of temperature 
of binder and aggregate for 
mixing and of the mix at the 
time of laying and rolling 
xii) Rate of Spread of 
Mixed Material 
xiii) Hardness number 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.5 
 
Same as mentioned under Serial No.3 
 
At regular close intervals 
 
 
 
Regular control through check of layer 
thickness 
Minimum two tests per day 
10 Recycled 
Material Grading 
of aggregate 
 Two tests per day 
11 Cold Mixes  All tests as per S.No.5 
12 Quality of 
Modified Binder 
 Number of samples per lot and tests as per 
IS:15462 
13 Geotextiles  The requirements of Section 700 shall apply 
(Source: Table 900-4 of MoRTH specification for Roads and Bridges) 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
72 
Appendix – 3.1 
Promotion of Rice cum Shrimp farming in Kaipad Lands, 2013-14: 
Consolidated details of beneficiary survey 
(Reference Para 3.1.2.3 (Table 3.2) page 37) 
 Sl 
No 
Name of beneficiary 
group 
Amount of 
subsidy given 
(₹) 
No. of years 
for which 
farming done 
Reasons for 
discontinuation of farming 
Constraints Harvest details 
Rice 
 (Kg) 
Fish 
(₹) 
1 Aiswarya Swayam 
Sahaya Sangam 8,18,997 
Five years Nil 
Crops of two years were 
destroyed. Subsidy was not 
fully released. The facility for 
procuring and selling of rice 
was less. 
82,000 3,78,000 
2 
Samridhi Swayam 
Sahaya Sangam 8,18,997 
3 Nankalam Vayal 
Karshaka Sangam 6,76,644 
Five years Still continuing 
Subsidy was not received fully; 
only initial support was 
received from the Agency 
10,000 4,00,000 
per year 4 Sukrutham Karshaka 
Sangam 6,76,644 
5 Annadayini Activity 
Group 5,91,548 
Fish-2 yrs.        
Rice- 
Continuing 
partially 
Non-availability of 
workers for rice 
farming; machines 
could not be used in the 
fields; less support from 
the Agency 
Based on a Court order, the 
right to harvest fish was vested 
with the Panchayat for four 
months and with Karshaka 
Samithi for eight months.  So, 
the beneficiary groups could not 
harvest.  
Nil Nil 
6 Aarathi Activity 
Group 5,91,548 
7 Aavani Activity 
Group  5,91,548 
8 Kanakasree Activity 
Group 5,91,549 
9 Pulari Activity Group 5,91,548 
10 Punarjani Activity 
Group  5,91,548 

Appendices 
 
 
73 
Appendix 3.1 (Cont’d……) 
Sl  
No 
Name of beneficiary 
group 
Amount of 
subsidy given 
(₹) 
No. of years 
for which 
farming done  
Reasons for 
discontinuation of farming 
Constraints Harvest details 
Rice 
 (Kg) 
Fish  
(₹) 
11 
Dalil Kaipad Nel-
Malsya Ulpadaka 
Samithi 
6,03,050 
One year 
1.   Boundary dispute;   
2. Rice yield was not as 
expected; 
3. Sluice was damaged 
Due to boundary dispute, 
farmers could not enter the area; 
Support from the Agency was 
received only during the first 
year 
1,000 Nil 
12 
Nidoonni Kaipad-1 
Nel-Malsya Ulpadaka 
Samithi 
 6,03,050 
13 
Nidoonni Kaipad-2 
Nel-Malsya Ulpadaka 
Samithi 
6,03,050 
14 Kairali Swasraya 
Sangam 5,06,365 
Two years 
Most of the shrimp 
seeds did not survive; 
Agency did not support 
after the first year. 
Farming was difficult without 
cutting the mangroves which 
covered the area 
4,000 
200 kg 
shrimp  
100 kg 
others 15 Haritha Swasraya 
Sangam  5,06,365 
16 Padappa Nel-Malsya 
Ulpadana Samithi 6,56,396 
Two years 
Paddy Crop was 
destroyed due to non-
opening of Kattampally 
Regulator; the Agency 
was not supportive after 
the first year. 
No 2,000 Nil 
17 Chelerikai Nel-Malsya 
Ulpadana Samithi 6,76,396 
  1,06,95,242      
Source : Departmental Records

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
74 
Appendix – 3.2 
Promotion of Rice cum Shrimp Farming in Kaipad Lands, 2014-15:  
Details of beneficiaries and status of farming 
 (Reference Para 3.1.2.3 page 38) 
Sl 
No 
Name of Beneficiary Group Status of farming as per ADAK records  
1 Adithya Swayam Sahaya 
Sangham, Pinarayi, Eranholi 
No farming activity done 
2 Udayam Swayam Sahaya 
Sangham, Pinarayi 
No farming activity done due to disputes 
between groups 
3 Nanma Swasraya Sangham, 
Mullool 
Farming activity is done 
4 Kandanada Kaipad Swayam 
Padannakkara, Pinarai 
Only Fish farming is conducted 
5 Sreyas Activity Group, Ezhome Farming activity is done 
6 Panneri Panthottam Krishi 
Vikasana Sangham, Panneri, 
Thaliparamba 
Farming activity is done 
7 Navarathna Group, Kayyam, 
Panchalayi 
Only Fish farming is conducted 
8 Pullooppy - I Jalakarshaka 
samithi, Puzhathi 
No farming activity done 
9 Pullooppy - II Jalakarshaka 
samithi, Puzhathi 
No farming activity done 
10 Samrudhi Activity Group, 
Puzhathi 
No farming activity done 
11 Niravu Activity Group, Puzhathi No farming activity done 
12 Kanivu Activity Group, Puzhathi No farming activity done 
13 Kaipad Swayam Sahaya 
Sangham, Puzhathi 
No farming activity done 
14 Edacheri Nelkarshaka Samithi, 
Puzhathi 
No farming activity done 
15 Chittarikka Haritha Swayam 
Sahaya Sangham, Andallur 
No farming activity done 
*Source: Departmental Records  
 
  
 

Appendices 
 
 
75 
Appendix – 3.3 
Difference in the rate of dividend paid to Government and other members 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.4(b) page 48) 
Sl 
 No Name of Society  
Share capital 
contribution of 
Government in 
Societies (₹) 
Percentage of 
Dividend declared 
to 
Amount  of 
dividend 
paid to 
Govt. with 
reference to 
Col (5) (₹) 
Balance 
payable to 
Govt. with 
reference to 
Col (4) (₹) 
Other 
Members Govt. 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
Pathanamthitta District 
1 Vallicode SCB 2016-17 Not Shown 14 3 19,110 70,070 
       Total 19,110 70,070 
Ernakulam District: Kunnathunadu Taluk 
2 Krariyeli SCB Ltd No.E199     
2008-09 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2009-10 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2010-11 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2011-12 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
3 Koovappady SCB Ltd 319     
2011-12 1,00,000 25 3 3,000 22,000 
2012-13 1,00,000 25 3 3,000 22,000 
4 Keezhillam SCB Ltd 3989     
2008-09 2,00,040 10 3 3,001 17,003 
2010-11 2,00,040 15 3 3,001 27,005 
2012-13 2,00,040 15 3 3,001 27,005 
5 Mudakkuzha SCB Ltd 693          
2011-12 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2012-13 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
6 Mamala SCB Ltd 2799        
2011-12 1,00,000 25 3 3,000 22,000 
2012-13 1,00,000 25 3 3,000 22,000 
2012-13 1,00,000 25 3 3,000 22,000 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
76 
Appendix 3.3 (Cont’d……) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
7 Vadavukodu FSCB Ltd No 651         
2011-12 50,000 10 3 1,500 3,500 
2013-14 50,000 10 3 1,500 3,500 
2014-15 50,000 10 3 1,500 3,500 
2015-16 50,000 10 3 1,500 3,500 
2016-17 50,000 10 3 1,500 3,500 
       Total 49,503 3,00,513 
Ernakulam District: Kothamangalam Taluk 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
8 354 Kothamangalam SCB Ltd      
2001-02 2,40,000 10 3 7,200 16,800 
2002-03 2,40,000 10 3 7,200 16,800 
2003-04 2,40,000 10 3 7,200 16,800 
2004-05 2,40,000 10 3 7,200 16,800 
2005-06 3,40,000 15 3 10,200 40,800 
2006-07 3,40,000 15 3 10,200 40,800 
2007-08 3,40,000 20 3 9,700 58,300 
2008-09 3,20,000 20 3 10,200 53,800 
2009-10 3,30,000 20 3 10,682 55,318 
2010-11 3,30,000 20 3 9,900 56,100 
2011-12 3,30,000 25 3 9,900 72,600 
2012-13 3,05,000 25 3 9,253 66,997 
2013-14 2,80,000 25 3 8,628 61,372 
2014-15 2,55,000 25 3 7,900 55,850 
2015-16 2,30,000 25 3 7,150 50,350 
9 1577 Mathirappilly SCB         
1996-97 99,500 12 3 2,985 8,955 
1997-98 99,500 14 3 2,985 10,945 
1998-99 99,500 14.5 3 2,985 11,443 
1999-00 99,500 20 3 2,985 16,915 
2000-01 99,500 20 3 2,985 16,915 
2001-02 99,500 17 3 2,985 13,930 
2002-03 99,500 16 3 2,985 12,935 
2004-05 99,500 20 3 2,985 16,915 
2005-06 99,500 20 3 2,985 16,915 
2007-08 99,500 20 3 2,985 16,915 
2008-09 99,500 25 3 2,985 21,890 

Appendices 
 
 
77 
Appendix 3.3 (Cont’d……) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
10 E-167 Kozhippilly SCB Ltd.          
1975-76 40,000 10 3 1,200 2,800 
1976-77 40,000 10 3 1,200 2,800 
1977-78 50,000 8 3 1,500 2,500 
1979-80 50,000 5 3 1,500 1,000 
1981-82 55,000 5 3 1,650 1,100 
1982-83 55,000 10 3 1,650 3,850 
1983-84 55,000 5 3 1,650 1,100 
1986-87 60,000 10 3 1,800 4,200 
1987-88 60,000 10 3 1,800 4,200 
1988-89 83,000 10 3 2,490 5,810 
1989-90 83,000 10 3 2,490 5,810 
1990-91 83,000 10 3 2,490 5,810 
1991-92 83,000 10 3 2,490 5,810 
1992-93 83,000 10 3 2,490 5,810 
1993-94 73,000 10 3 2,190 5,110 
1994-95 73,000 20 3 2,190 12,410 
1996-97 73,000 10 3 2,190 5,110 
1997-98 73,000 5 3 2,190 1,460 
1998-99 73,000 20 3 2,190 12,410 
1999-00 73,000 20 3 2,190 12,410 
2008-09 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2009-10 1,00,000 15 3 3,000 12,000 
2010-11 1,00,000 20 3 3,000 17,000 
2011-12 2,00,000 25 3 6,000 44,000 
2012-13 2,00,000 25 3 6,000 44,000 
2013-14 2,00,000 25 3 6,000 44,000 
     Total 2,31,888 11,23,670 
Thrissur District 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
11 Killimangalam FSCB – 
2016-17 2,00,000 15 3 6,000 24,000 
12 Pazhuvil S C B Ltd No 
126 – 2016-17 4,40,000 8 3 13,200 22,000 
13 Venginissery SCB Ltd 
No. 528 – 2016-17 1,00,93,500 15 3 3,02,805 12,11,220 
14 Annamanada SCB – 
2016-17 8,80,000 25 3 26,688 1,93,312 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
78 
Appendix 3.3 (Cont’d……) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
15 Karalam SCB – 2016-17 72,90,000 10 3 2,26,125 5,02,875 
16 Karuvannure SCB – 
2016-17 25,90,000 25 3 77,700 5,69,800 
17 Nellayi Parappookkara 
SCB – 2016-17 2,50,000 15 3 7,500 30,000 
18 Vallivattam SCB – 2016-
17 1,90,000 12.5 3 5,700 18,050 
19 West Chalakkudy SCB – 
2016-17 90,000 25 3 3,000 19,500 
20 Kattoor SCB – 2016-17 72,25,000 20 3 3,02,831 11,42,169 
21 Orumanayur SCB Ltd. R 
209 – 2016-17 8,04,600 18 5 49,747 95,081 
22 Punnayoorkulam SCB 
Ltd. P 417 – 2016-17 1,84,500 12 3 5,535 16,605 
23 Guruvayur Vyapari 
Vyavasayi CS – 2016-17 2,00,000 25 3 6,000 44,000 
 Total 10,32,831 38,88,612 
Grant Total 13,33,332 53,82,865 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Appendices 
79 
Appendix 3.4 
Details of expenditure incurred on purchase of floating Trivenis 
(Reference – Paragraph 3.5 – Page 49)  
Boat 
No. 
Purchase Cost 
(₹ in lakhs) 
Date of 
commissioning& 
current location 
Date from 
which super 
market not 
functioning 
Reported 
condition of 
the vessels 
Value 
assessed in 
May 2017 
(₹) 
Expenditure 
incurred on 
repair, 
maintenance, 
etc. (₹) 
1 21.50 07/06/2009 
(Kuttanad 
Triveni) at 
Kainakary 
07/07/2016 Sank in 
water 
(2/2018) 
6,50,000 
2 25.50 01/03/2011 
(Thakazhi Triveni) 
at 
Thrikkunnappuzha 
22/06/2016 Sank in 
water 
(2/2018) 
10,00,000 
3 25.50 20/06/2011 
(Kundara 
Triveni) at 
Sanghakadavu 
07/07/2016 Sank in 
water 
(3/2018) 
10,00,000 
4 25.50 23/07/2011 
at Panangad 
08/04/2014 Boat in very 
bad 
condition 
5,00,000 
5 24.75+12.5% 
tax = 27.84 
19/02/2012 
(Harippad Triveni) 
at Thottupally) 
31/03/2016 Sank in 
water 
(2/2018) 
12,50,000 
6 24.75+12.5% 
tax = 27.84 
29/04/2012 
(Puthupally 
Triveni) at 
Kanjiram 
30/09/2016 Require 
repairs 
12,50,000 
7 24.75+13.5% 
tax = 28.09 
06/06/2012 
(Chavara Triveni) 
at Kulangara 
07/07/2016 Sank in 
water 
(3/2018) 
9,50,000 
181.77 lakh (a) 
8 20 lakh paid 
as advance Boats not taken over - 
- 
- 
- 20,00,000 (b) 9 
10 Order 
cancelled 
- 
Expenditure towards maintenance 4,10,375 (c) 
Expenditure towards lifting of capsized vessel at Takazhi, Alappuzha 1,60,000 (d) 
Fee paid to approved valuer 76,000 (e) 
Grand Total 208.24 lakh (f) 
(f) = (a) + (b) + (c) + (d) + (e) 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
80 
Appendix – 3.5 
Calculation of overpayment made to contractor on account of fictitious/incorrect 
level measurements 
(Reference – Paragraph 3.7 – Page 53)  
A Tack coat area of road surface from chainage 
0/000 km to 22/030 km (excluding bridge 
portion) over which BC was laid and measured 
2,08,664.53 sqm 
B Thickness of BC as per level measurements 
recorded in LF books  
50 mm 
C Volume of BC executed as per LF Books A x B 10,433.227 cum 
D Volume of BC as worked out  by the 
department in calculation sheets for payment 
10,673.560 cum 
E Fictitious volume of BC calculated and 
considered for payment   
D – C 240.333 cum 
F Contract Rate for providing BC ₹10,300/cum 
G Amount paid to contractor on account of 
fictitious quantity of work done 
 E x F ₹24,75,430 
Say ₹24.75 lakh 
H Average thickness of BC noticed during JPV 44 mm 
I Hence, excess thickness of BC B – H 6 mm 
J Excess volume of BC for which payment was 
made to the contractor 
A x I 1,251.99 cum 
K Amount paid to contractor in excess of the 
work actually executed 
J x F ₹1,28,95,497 
Say ₹1.29 crore 
L Total over payment G + K ₹1.54 crore 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Appendices 
81 
Appendix – 3.6 
List of works in which securities were inadequate 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8- page 54) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work in which SD/PG was to be submitted Name of 
Division to 
which the 
work relates 
Amount of 
security 
required 
(in ₹) 
Security 
collected (in 
₹) 
Shortage in 
collection (in 
₹) 
Remarks 
1 
R/P 2015-16 Urgent BT patch repairs and Bit CC in 
Kattappana - Erattayar Road km 1/000 to 2/000 (Agt. 
No.116/EE/2015-16 dated 19/12/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 1,23,100 25,000 98,100 
Contract Value (CV): ₹9,21,680 
13.35 per cent 
Date of Completion (DoC) 
01/02/2016 
2 
O/R 2015-16 Providing 20mm CC to Alakode - 
Karimannoor   Road (Via. Kathipara - Pallithazham) 
km 0/000 to 2/000  (Agt. No. 166/EE/2015-16 dated 
29/02/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 1,23,700 44,400 79,300 
₹17,74,069 
6.97 per cent 
DoC 26/03/2016 
3 
R/P 2015-16 Providing 20mm bit CC in 
Puthupariyaram - Poothakavu Road km 3/000 to 5/160 
(Agt. No. 136/EE/2015-16 dated 08/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 3,66,600 1,12,300 2,54,300 
₹22,45,707 
16.32 per cent 
DoC 01/03/2016 
4 
R/P 2015-16 urgent patch repairs and bit CC to 
Meenmutty – Kuvilettam Road from km 0/000 to 
3/000 (Agt. No.142/EE/15-16 dated 02/02/ 2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 2,58,342 49,000 2,09,342 
₹18,32,819 
14.10 per cent 
DoC 04/03/2016 
5 
RIDF XV - Improvement to Kanjar - Koovappally - 
Chakkikavu - Elaveezhapoonchira - Melukavu – 
Kanjiramkavala Road (Agt. No. 144/SECCA/10-11 
dated 10/03/2011) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
82,97,448 65,00,000 17,97,448 
₹8,29,74,479 
10.00 per cent 
Not completed 
TOTAL 91,69,190 67,30,700 24,38,490 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
82 
Appendix – 3.7 
List of works in which security was not adjusted against pending bill of other works 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8.- page 54) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work for which Security (SD/PG) 
was to be submitted 
Name of Division  
to which the 
work relates 
Name of the work pending bill of which 
was to be adjusted as SD/PG 
Amount required 
to be adjusted as 
SD/PG but not 
adjusted (₹) 
Remarks 
1 Improvements to Vandiperiyar – Spencer 
Junction to Sathram Road km 0/000 to 
13/800 (Agt. No.  30/SECCA/ 2014-15 
dated 10/10/2014) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
‘Improvements to Painav - 
Thannikandam – Peppara - 
Maniyarankudy - Asokakavala Road 
km 0/000 to 14/500’. 
1,34,52,000 ₹13,45,15,592 
10 per cent 
Date of Completion 
(DoC) 14/09/2015 
2 B/W 2013-14 Improvements to 
Ayyappapara - Venmony Road km 0/000 to 
1/800 (Agt. No. 74/SECCA/2014-15 dated 
10/03/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
‘BW 2012-13 improvements to 
Kurumbalamattom – 
Manikunnelpeedika – Vandamattom - 
Pallikavala Road km 0/000 to 1/200’. 
11,52,900 ₹1,52,38,602 
7.57 per cent 
DoC 28/05/2016 
3 Improvements to Ernakulam Thekkady SH 
portion from Parakadavu - Ankanvetty 
Road km 21/600 to 27/400 (Agt. No.  
118/SECCA/2016-17 dated 04/11/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
‘BW 2013-14 improvements to 
Thallakanam – Keerithodu Road km 
0/000 to 3/000’ and ‘B/W 
Narakathanam – Thankamany Road 
km 4/250 to 6/250’. 
3,24,92,100 ₹13,75,04,998 
23.62 per cent 
DoC 30/05/2019 
4 R/P 2015 -16 Providing 20mm CC in 
Elamdesam - Vettimattom Road (Via. 
Kathipara - Pallithazham) km 0/000 to 
2/500 (Agt. No.151/EE/2015 -16 dated 
23/02/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
O/R 2014-15 urgent patch repair to 
Kappaluvenga – Nellathanni Road km 
2/000 to 4/000 
1,64,700 ₹21,94,578 
7.50 per cent 
DoC 26/03/2016 

Appendices 
83 
Appendix 3.7 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work for which Security (SD/PG) 
was to be submitted 
Name of Division  
to which the 
work relates 
Name of the work pending bill of which 
was to be adjusted as SD/PG 
Amount required 
to be adjusted as 
SD/PG but not 
adjusted (₹) 
Remarks 
5 R/P 2015 -16 Providing 20mm CC in 
Thodupuzha - Vadakkemuri Road km 0/100 
to 1/300 (Agt. No. 132/EE/2015 -16 dated 
07/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
R/P 2014-15 Providing 20mm CC in 
Thodupuzha - Vadakkemuri Road km 
0/000 to 1/300 
3,24,400 ₹21,97,166 
14.76 per cent 
DoC 29/02/2016 
6 Restoration for the execution of RAPDRP 
project of KSEB in an around of 
Vattiyoorkaavu area by providing BM&BC 
(Agt. No.EE/82/2016-17) 
DoC – 30/08/2016, DLP – 28/09/2018) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapu
ram 
MLA – ADF- 2014 providing side 
drain and resurfacing of Tutors lane. 
2,10,500 Contract Value 
(CV) ₹42,08,831 
4.86 per cent 
DoC 30/08/2016 
7 Improvements to Nedumangad - Karipoor 
road by providing 50 mm BM&BC 
 (Agt. No. 69/SESC/16-17) DoC – 
26/12/2017, DLP – 23/01/2021 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapu
ram 
Easing curve for Kattakada - Kottoor 
road between km 1/500 to 1/700 
14,66,500 CV 2,93,28,294 
4.89 per cent 
DoC 26/12/2017 
8 RP 2015-16 resurfacing using BM&BC 
between km 5/300 to 5/700 of Mukkam -
Kumaranellur - Koodaranjhi road  
(Agt. No. EE/144/2015-16 dated 
14/03/2016) DoC -25/04/2016, DLP – 
25/05/2018 
Roads Division, 
Kozhikode 
Improvements to Mukkom – 
Cheruvadi - Kavilada road Chainage 
km 0/000 to 5/100 
1,32,350 CV ₹26,46,824 
5.29 per cent 
DoC 25/04/2016 
9 RP 2015-16 junction improvement works 
and providing BM&BC surfacing on 
Malappuram - Theyyappara road from km 
4/400 to 6/700. (Agt. No. EE/28/2016-17 
dated 20/04/2016) 
 DoC – 22/03/2017, DLP -19/04/2019 
Roads Division, 
Kozhikode 
SLTF- 2015 RP renewal BT on PUKC 
road between km 5/500 to 7/000 
1,22,400 CV ₹24,47,010  
4.90 per cent 
DoC 22/03/2017 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
84 
Appendix 3.7 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work for which Security (SD/PG) 
was to be submitted 
Name of Division  
to which the 
work relates 
Name of the work pending bill of which 
was to be adjusted as SD/PG 
Amount required 
to be adjusted as 
SD/PG but not 
adjusted (₹) 
Remarks 
10 Renewal of surface with BM&BC 
between km 0/400 to 0/800 of 
Thiruvambady – Koodaranjhi - 
Koombara- Thollumukkom road 
(Agt. No. 147/2015-16 dated 
14/03/2016) DoC – 25/04/2016, DLP – 
21/05/2018 
Roads 
Division, 
Kozhikode 
Improvements to Mukkom - 
Cheruvady - Kavilada road 
Chainage 0/000 to 5/100 
1,32,150 CV ₹26,48,107 
5.29 per cent 
DoC 25/04/2016 
11 Urgent patch work in Sreekrishnapuram 
– Muriyankanni - Chethallur  road. km
0/000 to 7/000 and km 7/800 to 12/600 
(Agt. No. EE/PL/20/2015-16 dated 
12/06/2015) 
Roads 
Division, 
Palakkad 
RP to Pathiripala – Kongad road 
km 0/000 to 0/500 and 5/400 to  
6/300 
49,350  CV ₹19,81,627 
2.49 per cent 
DoC 26/12/2015 
12 13th FCA-14-15 Pattambi- Amayoor 
road km 10/000 to 11/316. 
(Agt. No.EE/PL/101/2014-15 dated 
15/11/2014) 
Roads 
Division, 
Palakkad 
RP to Pattithara – Puleri road km 
0/000 to 1/900 
87,200 CV ₹17,43,621 
5 per cent 
DoC 30/06/2016 
13 Heavy maintenance to SH 53 Palakkad 
– Perinthalmanna road by providing
BM & BC from km 35/600 to 41/000 
(Agt. No. SE (K) 134/2015-16 dated 
22/09/2015) 
Roads 
Division, 
Palakkad 
Providing BM&BC to Koppam- 
Pengattiri road km 0/000 to 7/400 
20,15,200 CV ₹4,30,03,514 
4.69 per cent  
DoC 24/03/2016 
TOTAL 5,18,01,750 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Appendices 
85 
Appendix – 3.8 
List of works in which securities were released before due date 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8- page 54) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
Division  to 
which the work 
relates 
Date of 
completion 
DLP 
Up to 
Amount of 
security 
(₹) 
Date of release of 
security 
Remarks 
1 Improvements to Peringamala - Kakkamoola 
road km 0/000 to 2/400.  
(Agt. No.163/SESC/2015-16 dated 
08/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapu
ram 
04/10/2017 04/10/2019 4,84,750 Released before 
15/03/2019. Actual 
date not on record. 
Contract Value (CV) 
₹1,93,88,130 
2.50 per cent 
Date of Completion 
(DoC) 04/10/2017 
2 R/P 2015-16 Providing 20mm CC in 
Elamdesam-Vettimattom Road (Via. 
Kathipara - Pallithazham) km 0/000 to 2/500. 
(Agt. No.151/EE/2015-16 dated 23/022016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
26/03/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
55,000 24/05/2016 CV ₹21,94,578 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 26/03/2016 
3 O/R 2015-16 Providing urgent bitumen patch 
works and bit CC works from km 1/000 to 
4/000 in Iruttukanam - Anachal Road.  
(Agt. No.101/EE/2015-16 dated 30/10/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
20/02/2016 Six months from 
date of 
completion 
97,200 24/02/2016 CV ₹19,42,858 
5 per cent 
DoC 20/02/2016 
4 B/W 2014-15 Improvements to Kombodinjal 
North-Kombodinjal South Road km 0/000 to 
0/850.  
(Agt. No.121/EE/2015-16 dated 26/12/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
27/12/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
1,76,900 11/08/2017 CV ₹35,37,751 
5.00 per cent 
DoC 27/12/2016 
5 O/R 2015-16 Providing 20mm CC to 
Alakode - Karimannoor   Road (Via. 
Kathipara - Pallithazham) km 0/000 to 2/000. 
(Agt. No.166/EE/2015-16 dated 29/02/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
26/03/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
44,400 24/05/2016 CV ₹17,74,069 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 26/03/2016 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
86 
Appendix 3.8 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
Division  to 
which the work 
relates 
Date of 
completion 
DLP 
Up to 
Amount of 
security 
(₹) 
Date of release of 
security 
Remarks 
6 F/D 2013-14 Providing 20mm CC to 
Vazhithala - Parakkadavu Road km 2/000 to 
3/000.  (Agt. No.605/EE/2013-14 dated 
27/11/2013) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
28/03/2015 One year from 
date of 
completion 
1,42,700 26/02/2016 CV ₹28,53,186 
5 per cent 
DoC 28/03/2015 
7 O/R 2015-16 Urgent BT patch repairs to 
Karikode - Velliyamattom Road km 0/000 to 
2/000.  
(Agt. No.130/EE/2015-16 dated 07/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
23/02/2016 Six months from 
date of 
completion. 
74,600 29/08/2016 CV ₹14,90,670 
5 per cent 
DoC 23/02/2016 
8 R/P 2015-16 Providing 20mm CC in 
Thodupuzha-Vadakkemuri Road km 0/100 
to 1/300.  
(Agt. No.132/EE/2015-16 dated 07/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
29/02/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
56,000 16/03/2017 CV ₹21,97,166 
2.55 per cent 
DoC 29/02/2016 
9 R/P 2015-16 Providing 20mm bit CC in 
Puthupariyaram - Poothakavu Road km 
3/000 to 5/160.  
(Agt. No.136/EE/2015-16 dated 08/01/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
01/03/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
1,12,300 24/05/2016 CV ₹22,45,707 
5 per cent 
DoC 01/03/2016 
10 R/P 2015-16 Providing 20mm CC to km 
0/000 to 2/000 of Kallar - Mankulam Road.  
(Agt. No.145/EE/2015-16 dated 18/02/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
23/03/2016 One year from 
date of 
completion 
63,000 24/05/2016 CV ₹26,49,699 
 2.38 per cent 
DoC 23/03/2016 
11 2015-16 Construction of retaining wall in 
Muniyara-Vallakadavu Road km 0/000 to 
0/100. (Agt. No.172/EE/2015-16 dated 
04/03/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Idukki 
28/05/2016 18 months from 
date of 
completion 
49,900 16/11/2017 CV ₹9,96,131 
5 per cent 
DoC 28/05/2016 

Appendices 
87 
Appendix 3.8 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
Division  to 
which the work 
relates 
Date of 
completion 
DLP 
Up to 
Amount of 
security 
(₹) 
Date of release of 
security 
Remarks 
12 CRF 2016-17 - Improvements to the road 
connecting from Gandhi Square Mini 
Byepass - Kannankulangara - Puthiyakavu - 
Maradu - Gregorious School in Ernakulam 
District.  (Agt. No.3/SENH/CC/Kochi/17-18 
dated 04/07/2017) 
NH Division, 
Muvattupuzha 
Work due for 
completion 
on 16/05/2018 
was extended 
to 30/11/2018 
2,15,44,500 16/05/2018 
 (BG submitted 
for unbalanced 
bid with validity 
up to 02/10/2018 
was released on 
the direction of 
CE (NH) 
CV ₹9,21,18,261 
2.34 per cent 
DoC not known 
13 Widening the carriage way and 
improvements to Thiruvananthapuram 
Madapathinkadavu road km 7/800 to 25/100. 
(Agt. No.67/SESC/2015-16 dated 8/9/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvanan-
thapuram 
26/05/2016 23/06/2019 1,04,11,800 SE stated that  the 
SD was released 
prematurely  
CV ₹20,82,34,322 
5 per cent 
DoC 26/05/2016 
14 Improvements to resurfacing to Panchikkadu 
-Aruvippuram road in Neyyattinkara 
Municipality.  (Agt. No.130/SESC/2015-16 
dated 25/11/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvanan-
thapuram 
31/08/2018 28/09/2020 12,97,800 SE replied that the 
SD was released 
prematurely due 
to oversight 
CV ₹2,59,54,904 
5 per cent 
DoC 31/08/2018 
TOTAL 3,46,10,850 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
88 
Appendix – 3.9 
List of works in which validity of bank guarantee expired before completion of work 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8 - Page: 54) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of Division  to 
which the work relates 
Date of completion 
of work 
Amount of 
BG 
(₹) 
Date of 
expiry of 
BG 
Remarks 
1 Improvements to PMG Plamoodu road by 
providing BM and BC (Agt. No.229/SESC/ 2016-
17 dated15/02/2017) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
18/12/2017 5,95,300 14/08/2017 Contract Value  
(CV) ₹99,07,733 
6 per cent 
Date of Completion 
(DoC) 18/12/2017 
2 Improvement to Kattuputhussery - Nettayam road 
from km 0/00 to 1/350 in Pallickal Panchayath by 
providing BM and BC 
 (Agt. No.17/SESC/ 2017-18 dated 12/05/2017) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
31/03/2018 1,12,100 09/01/2018 CV ₹1,20,38,902 
0.93 per cent 
DoC 31/03/2018 
3 Improvements to Peringammala Panchayath Office 
junction to Agri farm road from km 0/000 to 6/500. 
(Agt. No.105/SESC/2013-14 dated 3/10/2013) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
29/02/2016 13,09,600 24/11/2015 CV ₹2,52,02,845 
5.20 per cent 
DoC 29/02/2016 
4 BW 2016-17 Improvements to Nedumkandom - 
Cumbummettu Road   
(Agt. No. 66/SECCA/17-18 dated 29/06/2017) 
Roads Division, Idukki Extended up to 
30/12/2018  
62,74,400 27/06/2018 CV ₹3,71,70,683 
16.88 per cent 
DoC 30/12/2018 
5 Improvements to Karikode – Velliyamattom Road 
(Agt. No. 116/SECCA/ 17-18 dated 03/10/2017) 
Roads Division, Idukki ToC of the work was 
extended up to 
31/03/2019  
27,54,400 27/10/2018 CV ₹3,41,24,028 
8.07 per cent 
DoC 31/03/2019 
6 Improvements to Rajakumari South-Rajakumari 
North- Periya canal road km 3/350 to 10/000  
(Agt. No.16/SECCA/16-17 dated 24/05/2016) 
Roads Division, Idukki T.O.C extended upto 
10/05/2018, 
Completed on 
12/04/2019 
57,14,626 19/02/2017 CV ₹2,85,73,130 
20 per cent 
DoC 12/04/2019 

Appendices 
89 
Appendix 3.9 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of Division  to 
which the work relates 
Date of completion 
of work 
Amount of 
BG 
(₹) 
Date of 
expiry of 
BG 
Remarks 
7 BW 16-17 improvements to Mundiyeruma – 
Udumbanchola road km 0/000 to 4/500.  
(Agt. No. 63/SECCA/2017-18 dated 28/06/2017) 
Roads Division, Idukki As on 31 /01/2019, 
the work was in 
progress 
25,18,300 27/06/2018 CV ₹2,22,86,249 
11.30 per cent 
DoC As on 
31/01/2019, the work 
was in progress 
8 CRF 2016-17 improvements to Channaveli – 
Thiruvizha – Thiruthankavala - Kayipuram road in 
Alappuzha  
(Agt. No.1/SENH/SC/2017-18 dated 29/04/2017) 
NH Division, Alappuzha 9/4/2018 59,77,000 21/3/2018 CV ₹9,62,84,000 
6.21 per cent 
DoC 09/04/2018 
9 CRF 2016-17 improvements to Kalarcolde- 
Vadayakkal- Galelileo Jn. Kappu Jn. Viyaripalli- 
Viyasa Jn. Ayyarkoyikal road in Alappuzha Dist. 
(Agt. No.3 SENH/SC/17-18 dated 05/07/2017) 
NH Division, Alappuzha 20/02/2019 2,05,13,000 21/12/2018 CV ₹14,99,56,000 
13.68 per cent 
DoC 20/02/2019 
10 B/W 2013-14 Improvements to   Chembakappara - 
SNDP Padi – Puthiyattupady Road km 0/000 to 
2/000  
(Agt. No. 26/SECCA/2015-16 dated 16/07/2015). 
Roads Division, Idukki 22/05/2017 5,02,000 15/04/2016 CV ₹2,00,72,876 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 22/05/2017 
11 Improvements to Peringammala Panchayath Office 
junction to Agri farm road from km 0/000 to 6/500. 
(Agt. No.105/SESC/2013-14 dated 03/10/2013) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
29/02/2016 25,49,300 24/11/2015 CV ₹2,52,02,845 
10.12 per cent 
DoC 29/02/2016 
12 RIDF XV -Improvement to Kanjar-Koovappally- 
Chakkikavu-Elaveezhapoonchira-Melukavu- 
Kanjiramkavala Road  
(Agt. No.144/SECCA/10-11 dated 10/03/2011) 
Roads Division Idukki Work not completed 65,00,000 validity of 
the BG 
furnished 
was 
expired on 
18/02/2019 
CV ₹8,29,74,479 
7.83 per cent 
DoC Work not 
completed as RIDF 
XV funding stopped 
by NABARD 
TOTAL 5,53,20,026 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
90 
Appendix – 3.10  
List of works in which validity of Bank Guarantee (Security Deposit) expired before completion of DLP of the work  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8 - Page: 54) 
Sl  
No 
Name of work Name of 
Division  to 
which the work 
relates 
Date of 
completion 
of work 
Date up to 
which SD is 
required to be 
valid  
(DLP+28 
days) 
Date on 
which 
validity of 
BG expired 
Amount 
(₹) 
Remarks 
1 Providing JBIC reformation work in km 2/900 to 
3/790 in Nenmanda - Cheekilode road 
(Agt. No.EE/60/2014-15 dated 06/06/2014) 
Roads Division, 
Kozhikkode 
15/12/2014 12/01/2016 31/08/2015 65,500 Contract Value 
(CV) ₹13,09,850 
4.96 per cent 
Date of 
Completion (DoC) 
15/12/2014 
2 Improvements to Kadambattuonam-Elankam 
kshetram-Punnavila road Chainage km 0/000 to 
1/450 (Agt. No.100/SESC/ 2016-17 dated 
25/06/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
23/05/2017 20/06/2019 20/02/2019 2,65,550 CV ₹1,06,20,310 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 23/05/2017 
3 Improvements to Pulloor Mukku-Decent Mukku road  
from km 0/00 to 2/100 (Agt.No.94/SESC/  
TVM/2016-17 dated 23/06/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
23/06/2016 21/07/2019 20/01/2019 2,54,450 CV ₹1,01,76,637 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 23/06/2016 
4 Improvements by providing  BM and BC  to 
Poojapppura  Mudavanmugal Punnackamughal road  
km 0/000 to 1/175 (Agt. No. 80/SESC/2016-17 dated 
07/06/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
28/03/2017 25/04/2019 31/01/2019 3,76,600 CV ₹1,50,63,749 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 28/03/2017 
5 Providing BM and BC to Chappath Thudiyankonam 
road km 0/000 to 1/500 (Agt. No. 141/SESC/15-16 
dated 10/12/2015) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
30/05/2017 27/06/2019 07/07/2018 7,05,100 CV ₹2,82,01,066 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 30/05/2017 
6 Improvement to Balaramapuram Vizhinjam road 
between km 0/000 to 3/300 by providing 50 mm BM 
& 25mm BC  (Agt. No.219/SESC/15-16 dated 
24/02/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
26/08/2017 23/09/2019 31/10/2018  7,89,950 
 
CV ₹3,15,97,582 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 26/08/2017 
 
  

Appendices 
 
 
91 
Appendix 3.10 (Cont’d……) 
Sl  
No 
Name of work Name of 
Division  to 
which the work 
relates 
Date of 
completion 
of work 
Date up to 
which SD is 
required to be 
valid  
(DLP+28 
days) 
Date on 
which 
validity of 
BG expired 
Amount 
(₹) 
Remarks 
7 Improvements to Navaikulam Kattuputhusseri 
Nettayam road from km 3/000 to 15/800.  
(Agt. No.78/SESC/ 2016-17 dated 02/06/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
25/01/2017 22/02/2020 30/05/2018 7,48,600 CV ₹2,99,43,704 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 25/01/2017 
8 Providng BM and BC Vattiyoorkavu-Vellaikadavu 
road.   (Agt. No.144/SESC/ 2016-17 dated 
20/07/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
25/04/2018 23/05/2020 14/03/2019 5,31,850  CV ₹2,12,72,280 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 25/04/2018 
9 B/W 13-14 Improvements to Kattappana - Kumily 
Bye Pass Road from Karimpanpady to Chappathu  
km 0/000 to 2/200  (Agt. No.140/SECCA/2013-14 
dated 19/02/2013) 
Roads division , 
Idukki 
17/07/2014  14/08/2015 10/06/2015 2,00,000 CV ₹1,98,91,548 
1.01 per cent 
DoC 17/07/2014 
10 Improvements to Kilimanoor Adayamon stretch km 
0/000 to 3/000 of Kilimanoor - Kadakkal road. (Agt 
No.76/SESC/16-17 dated  02/06/2016) 
Roads Division, 
Thiruvananthap
uram 
31/05/2017 28/06/2019 31/01/2019 7,47,500 CV ₹2,98,98,809 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 31/05/2017 
11 Improvements to Poonoor Polickal – Kattippara road 
km 0/000 to 8/265 in Kozhikode Dist. 
(Agt No. SE (K) 71/2014-15 dated 18/10/2014) 
Roads Division 
Kozhikode 
28/12/2015 25/01/2018 17/05/2017 73,74,800 CV ₹7,38,54,667 
9.98 per cent 
DoC 28/12/2015 
12 NABARD RIDF-XIX- Improvements to Kappad - 
Thusharagiri Adivaram road 
(Agt No. SE (K) 423/2015-16 dated 22/03/2016)  
Roads Division 
Kozhikode 
29/04/2017 27/05/2019 31/10/2018 11,22,350 CV ₹4,48,92,264 
2.50 per cent 
DoC 29/04/2017 
     TOTAL 1,31,82,250  
*Source: Records furnished by the Department 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
 
 
92 
Appendix – 3.11  
Repair works arranged at Departmental cost soon after the DLP / Validity of SG 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8 - Page: 55) 
Sl No Original Work Division Contract 
Amount 
SG / DLP Details Rectification Work Contract 
Amount 
1 ‘Improvement by providing BM 
(50mm) and BC (25mm) to 
Vazhakode – Alathur Road from km 
22/648 to 29/648’ by M/s Kudroli 
Builders  
Palakkad ₹289 lakh BG No. 126/2013-14 dt 12 August, 
2013, of South Indian Bank, 
Panaji, Goa for ₹28.95 lakh- Valid 
till 11 November, 2015 
Agreement No.EE/PL/117 
/2017-18 dt 27 November, 2017- 
by -G.Janardhanan, Palakkad 
₹10.77 lakh 
2 Budget Work  2009-10-, 
Improvements to Upputhara – 
Kottamala - Wagamon Road, -
Agreement No. 10/SECCA/2010-11 
dated 25/04/2010- Contractor  Sri K.C. 
Antony 
Idukki ₹313 lakh BG 1/2010 dated 19 April, 2010( 
₹31,27,905) and BG 3/2010  dated 
25 April, 2010 (₹32,72,260) of 
South Indian Bank, 
Bharananganam 
The department lost the 
opportunity to recover the 
expenditure on the balance work 
to be executed, to the extent of 
the BG 
 
3 IRQP from Chainage 444/000 to 
462/000 km on NH 47 (now NH 66) in 
the State of Kerala- Agreement No. 
3/SENH/SC/2012-13/ dated 
16/07/2012- by  M/s Concord 
Construction, Kasaragod 
NH ₹1,372 lakh Defects developed during DLP. 
However no rectification carried 
out  despite repeated 
requests/reminders. DLP expired 
on 30/05/2016 
After the DLP the department 
arranged necessary rectification 
works at a cost of ₹106.27 lakh 
(Appendix 3.12) 
₹106.27 lakh 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department 
  

Appendices 
 
 
93 
Appendix – 3.12  
Repair works arranged soon after the DLP 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.8 - Page: 55) 
Sl No Name of work Division 
Date of 
proposal of 
estimate 
Project Cost (in ₹) 
1 
NH 66 16-17 OR Urgent rectification for potholes between km 453/000 to 454/500 (Agt  
No. 12/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 
06/06/2016 
12,64,478 
Date of Completion 
(DoC) 04/08/2016 
2 
NH 66 16-17 Urgent rectification for potholes between km 444/000 to 445/500 (Agt No. 
13/NH/33/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 
06/06/2016 
12,35,730 
DoC 04/08/2016 
3 
NH 66 16-17 O/R for 16-17 urgent rectification for potholes between km 454/500 to 
457/000 (Agt No. 19/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 
18/06/2016 
13,69,032 
DoC 06/07/2016 
4 
NH 66 Urgent rectification for potholes between km 445/000 to 447/000 
(Agt No 18/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 18/06/2016 
13,76,039 
DoC 06/07/2016 
5 
NH 66 O/R Urgent rectification for potholes between km 447/000 to 448/000 (Agt No. 
25/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 25/07/2016 
13,75,098 
DoC 09/08/2016 
6 
NH 66 O/R 16-17 Urgent rectification for potholes between km 448/000 to 449/000 (Agt 
No. 24/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 25/07/2016 
13,40,842 
DoC 28/08/2016 
7 
NH 66 O/R Urgent rectification of potholes between km 458/000 to 459/000 (Agt No. 
1/EE/NH/ALP/18-19) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 
25/07/2016 
13,55,457 
DoC 15/08/2016 
8 
NH 66 Urgent rectification for potholes between km 449/000 to 450/000 
(Agt No. 26/EE/NH/ALP/16-17) 
NH Division 
Alappuzha 25/07/2016 
13,11,779 
DoC 29/07/2016 
 Total 
 
 1,06,28,455 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
94 
Appendix – 3.13   
Inadmissible Payment to Contractors – Details of Works 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.11 - Page: 59) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
PWD 
Roads 
Division 
Name of 
Contractor 
Cost difference 
of bitumen paid 
to the contractor   
(in ₹) 
1 
Budget work 2012 -13 - Improvements and 
Providing BM&BC works to Kozhikode -
Nilambur-Gudallur Road km 92/000 to 101/500 
(Ghat Section) in Malappuram District 
Manjeri M/s.ABM4 
Builders 23,26,800 
2 
Improvements to Koottampara-Ramankuth-
Oruvankuzhi Thondy road km 0/000 to 4/000 in 
Malappuram District 
-do- TAN-B 
Constructions 37,50,847 
3 
Improvements to Pookattiri-Edayoor road between 
km 0/000 to 5/200 in Kottakkal  Legislative 
Assembly Constituency in Malappuram District 
-do- P.Ahmmed Kutty 21,73,332 
4 
Improvements to Koottuparamba -Edaikkal-
Kaniparamba road km 0/000 to 2/600 in 
Malappuram District 
-do- P.T.Hamza 5,88,038 
5 
Improvements to Bidathi-Chirakkattukunnu 
village office road km 0/000 to 3/400 in 
Malappuram District -do- 
M/s Infrahite 
Infrastructure Pvt. 
Ltd. 
13,35,718 
6 
Improvements  and providing 50 mm BM and 25 
mm BC to Vettichira-Kadampuzha-Koottilangadi 
road km 6/800 to 17/400 in Malappuram District    
-do- Malabar Tech 95,97,647 
7 
Improvements to Omanoor -Theendapara-
Olavattor road from km 0/000 to 4/500 in 
Malappuram District    
-do- K.K.Abdul Kareem 9,29,721 
8 
Improvements to Valillapuzha -Elamaram-
Erattamuzhi road km 0/000 to 6/850 in 
Malappuram District    
-do- Abdul Gafoor.K. 21,93,914 
9 
Improvements to Poovathingal-Kallaratti-East 
Vadakkummuri-Vazhikkadavu-Pathanapuram 
road between km 0/000 to 5/000 in Malappuram 
District        
-do- Daybro 
Constructions 38,961 
10 
Budget Work 2012 -13 Improvements and 
providing BM & BC to Maravattom -Kottur-
Kavathikalam road km 3/200 to 5/570 in 
Malappuram District    
-do- Ernad Engineering 
Enterprises 10,49,972 
11 
Budget Work 2012 -13 Providing BM&BC to 
Chappanangadi-Indianoor-Kottakkal road km 
3/630 to 6/660 in Malappuram District 
-do- Vasanth 
Constructions 26,95,444 
12 
Improvements to Cheroor -Kilinikode-Purakani 
road km 0/000 to 4/550 in Malappuram District -do- P.Mohammed 5,61,135 
13 
Improvements to Athanikkal -Velloor-Alakkad-
Thadaparamba-Arimbra road in Malappuram 
District 
-do- Sakeer.K.S. 4,94,938 
 
 

Appendices 
95 
Appendix 3.13 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
PWD 
Roads 
Division 
Name of 
Contractor 
Cost difference 
of bitumen paid 
to the contractor   
(in ₹) 
14 
Budget Work 2012 -13 Providing BM&BC works 
to Manjeri -Olipuzha road between km 9/750 to 
11/350 in Malappuram District 
-do- Malabar Tech 22,95,426 
15 
Providing BM&BC and other improvements to 
Anakkayam-Oruvambram road km 5/750 to 
12/200 in Malappuram District 
-do- M/s.Malabar 
Associates 53,01,447 
16 Providing BM&BC to Manjeri-Kizhissery road 
km 3/800 to 10/200 in Malappuram District -do- Vasanth 
Constructions 49,45,885 
17 
Budget work 2012-13:Providing BM&BC works 
to Manjeri Bye pass road Ist reach (km 0/000 to 
1/350) and  4th reach (0/000 to 1/855) in 
Malappuram District 
-do- Vasanth 
Constructions 33,48,081 
18 
NABARD-Providing BM&BC to Kolathur-
Malappuram road km 10/000 to 16/000  in 
Malappuram District 
-do- M/s PMR 
Constructions  83,19,869 
19 
NABARD RIDF XVIII-Providing BM&BC to 
Athikarathodi-Kuttaloor road km 0/000 to 5/660  
in Malappuram District 
-do- M/s PMR 
Constructions  26,18,886 
20 
Budget Work 2012-13 Providing BM&BC works 
to Pathanapuram-Moorkanad road (1st reach) 
between  km 2/500 to 5/000 in Malappuram 
District  
-do- Malabar Tech 25,66,746 
21 
Budget work 2012-13 Providing BM&BC  works 
to Manjeri-Olipuzha road between km 11/350 to 
12/800  in Malappuram District  
-do- 
M/s PMR 
Construction 
Company 
18,62,600 
22 
NABARD-Improvements to Othayi-Pulliyilpara-
Kizhakkechathalloor Road km 0/00 to 3/200 and 
km 0/00 to 3/00  in Malappuram District 
-do- Malabar Tech 30,56,770 
23 
Improvements and providing BM&BC works to 
Kollamchina-Pukayoor road from km 0/000 to 
3/520 in Malappuram District 
-do- P. Mohammed 29,19,230 
24 
Improvements and providing BM&BC works to 
Kadalundi-Chettiyarmadu road from km 0/000 to 
2/000 in Malappuram District                  
-do- P. Mohammed 21,65,501 
25 
Improvements and providing BM&BC works to 
Mamburam Link road from km 0/000 to 2/000 -do- EKK & Company 23,75,331 
26 
Improvements and providing BM&BC works to 
Tirurangadi-Muttichira road between km 0/000 to 
2/350 in Malappuram District 
-do- P. Mohammed 32,03,528 
27 
Improvements and providing BM&BC works to 
Parappanangadi-Areacode SH road between km 
5/200 to 9/000   in Malappuram District 
-do- 
M/s PMR 
Construction 
Company 
61,95,854 
28 
Providing BM&BC surfacing to Murivazhikkal-
Pachattiri-Pariyapuram-Arikkanchira road in 
Malappuram District 
-do- 
Infrahite 
Infrastructure Pvt. 
Ltd. 
6,08,183 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
96 
Appendix 3.13 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
PWD 
Roads 
Division 
Name of 
Contractor 
Cost difference 
of bitumen paid 
to the contractor   
(in ₹) 
29 
Improvements to Alungal-Mangalam-
Koottayikkadavu road km 0/000 to 3/985 in 
Malappuram District 
-do- M/S Beta 
Constructions 12,78,345 
30 
Providing BM&BC surfacing to BP Angadi-
Mangattiri-Vettom road in Malappuram District -do- M/S Beta 
Constructions 23,50,843 
31 
Providing BM&BC surfacing to Tirur-Edarikkode 
road km 0/000 to 12/345 in Malappuram District    -do- M/s Malabar Tech. 88,32,121 
32 
Budget work 2012-13 - Providing BM&BC works 
to Manjeri-Elankur-Wandoor road km 0/000 to 
2/400 in Malappuram District 
-do- Malabar Plus 
constructions  26,19,904 
33 
Budget work 2012-13 - Improvements and 
providing BM&BC to Vaniyambalam-
Amarambalam road km 0/000 to 5/400 in 
Malappuram District. 
-do- M/s Malabar 
Associates 37,39,034 
34 
NABARD RIDF XVIII- Improvements and 
widening the carriage way of Mathur Banglow 
School-Puliyanoor Moolode Vettikade road from 
km 0/00 to 3/300 in Palakkad District 
 
Palakkad 
M. A. Muhammed 
Shafi 5,11,446 
35 
Improvements and widening the carriage way 
Vandazhy Muslim Palli-Kanthalam road between 
km 0/000-7/000 in Palakkad District 
-do- C Dhileesh 2,00,000 
36 
Improvements to 2nd mile-Monnamkuzhi-
Kulappadam Road km 0/00 to 1/800 in Palakkad 
District 
-do- M. T. Abdul Kabeer 2,73,087 
37 
Improve ments of Mannarkkad Kodathippadi 
Changaleri Nhettarakkadavu road km 0/00 to 5/600 
in Palakkad District 
-do- M/s. TAN-B 
Constructions 13,98,784 
38 
Providing BM & BC to Cheruthuruthy-Perumbilavu 
Road (9/400 to 15/475) Working chainage km 
9/400 to 13/000 in Palakkad Dist. 
-do- T. N. Abdul 
Hameed Khan 4,14,350 
39 
LAC-ADF 2012-13 - Improvements to Vattoli 
Bazar-Thiruvancheripoyil-Kottanada-
Thayyilpeedika-Manjappalam-Parambinthodu-
Vakayad-Naduvannur Road from km 1/200 to 
7/500  
Kozhiko
de VP Biju 11,14,864 
40 Improvements to Anelakkadavu-Bappangadu 
(Koyilandy) road between km 0/000 to 3/680. -do- Anjana 
Constructions 5,64,923 
41 
Improvements and providing BM BC to 
Cheruvattakkadavu-Mallesserythazham road from 
km  0/000 to 2/250 in Kozhikode District 
-do- ULCCS Ltd 12,63,105 
42 
NABARD RIDF XVIII - Improvements to 
Chaliyam-Kadalundikadavu road from km 0/000 to 
3/000 in Kozhikode District 
-do- PMR Construction 
Co. 19,38,699 
43 Providing BM BC to Balussery-Koorachundu road 
between km 0/000 to 5/000.  -do- ULCCS Ltd 20,95,849 
 
  

Appendices 
97 
Appendix 3.13 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
PWD 
Roads 
Division 
Name of 
Contractor 
Cost difference 
of bitumen paid 
to the contractor   
(in ₹) 
44 
LAC-ADF 2012-13 - Improvements to Payyoli 
cheerpu-Puthiyangadi Bundu-Keezhariyur road km 
0/000 to 2/000, 4/000 to 6/200 under Perambra 
Assembly Constituency.  
-do- B. U. Abdul 
Rahiman 5,20,455 
45 Widening and BT to Kallachi Town Villyapalli road 
(Tipu Sulthan Road) in between km 0/000 to 1/200 -do- Ibrahim Haji 2,19,689 
46 
Improvements to Meenmutty-Koorottupara-
Puliyilakkattupady road (Nellipoil to 
Puliyilakkattupady) from km 0/000 to 4/950 
-do- 
PTS Hitech project 
India Private 
limited. 
7,34,433 
47 Improvements to Palath Palolithazham road km 
0/000 to 4/400 -do- K Abdul Hazeez 6,19,201 
48 
Improvements to Koduvally-REC Road BM BC 
(km 1/650 to 4/615) -do- 
PTS Hightech 
Project India Private 
Limited 
8,94,105 
49 
NABARD RIDF XVIII- Improvements to 
Odayanchal Cherupuzha road (Edathodu-
Vellarikundu) km 6/500 to 16/500 in Kasaragod 
District.  
Kasarago
de KSCC Ltd 72,35,360 
50 
Improvements to Pokkundu - Kurumathur- 
Therthala- Therlayikadavu  Road km 0/000 to 7/500 
in Kurumathur and Chengalayi Grama Panchayath 
in Kannur District  
 Kannur V. P. Abdul Khader 10,72,273 
51 
NABARD RIDF XVIII- Improvements to 
Kanhirathinkeezhel- Mathiparamba km 0/000 to 
2/200 in Kannur District 
-do- Joseph 
Velupuzhakkal 6,42,779 
52 
Improvements to Chinakkal- Kattampally- Mayyil- 
Kololam road b/w. km 6/800 to 8/500 (Kambil 
Town) Kannur District. 
-do- Ibrahim Haji 2,06,199 
53 
Improvements to Edanad- Kunhimangalam road km 
0/000 to 13/230 ( Ist reach 0/000 to 3/000, 4/000 to 
5/000, 11/530 to 13/230. 
-do- C. L. Muhammed 
Haneef 6,72,770 
54 NABARD RIDF XVIII- Improvements to 
Chembanthotty-- Puranjan road km 0/000 to 5/700. -do- U Muhamad Kunhi 12,82,941 
55 
Improvements to Punnakadavu- Kunnaru-
Palakkode road km 0/000 to 7/200 in Kannur 
District. 
-do- P.M Mansoor 5,58,131 
56 
Construction of blacktopped road connecting 
Aralam farm Block No.10 to Block No. 13 and 
Kakkuvapalam km 0/000 to 3/570 in Kannur 
District. 
-do- Shameer P 6,15,842 
57 
Construction of road connecting Aralam farm Block 
No.7, Block No. 10 and Block No. 9 (8 km) in 
Kannur.   
-do- Thomas 
Kannamthanathu 14,09,284 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
 
98 
Appendix 3.13 (Cont’d……) 
Sl 
No 
Name of work Name of 
PWD 
Roads 
Division 
Name of 
Contractor 
Cost difference 
of bitumen paid 
to the contractor   
(in ₹) 
58 Improvement to Kakkad- Pallipram- Mundayad 
road km 0/00 to 2/800 in Kannur District -do- S Mohammed 
Harish B 9,76,506 
59 Improvements to Varam - Kadamkode-
Karikkinkadanchira km 0/000 to 3/900  -do- MK Anil Kumar 16,32,422 
60 
Construction of road connecting Block No. 10 
godown Block 12 (Wayanad Tribal Settlement area) 
Kakkuvapalam in Aralam resettlement area. km 
0/00 to 9/00. 
-do- Muhammed Haji K 1,44,976 
61 
Malabar Package-Improvements to 19th Mile 
Pazhassi Dam Garden km 0/00 to 6/270 (BM & 
BC) Balance work from km 5/000 to 6/270                                        
-do- K Moideenkutty 
Hajee 8,13,904 
62 
LAC-ADF Improvements to Kavumannam 
Kalikuni  Parathodeu road in Thariyode Panchayath 
in between km 0/000 to 2/850 In Wayanad District   
 Kalpetta 
UMK Engineering 
and Construction 
Co. 
2,06,040 
63 
Constuction of Niravilpuzha Bridge at km 27/100 of 
Mananathavady Pakramthalam road in Wayanad 
District 
-do- ULCCS Ltd 84,525 
64 
Improvements to Suganthagiri Chennayikavala 
Amba VIth Unit road in between km 0/000 to 8/600 
in Pozhuthana Grama Panchayath in Wayanad 
District  
-do- V.C.Kunhabdulla 1,62,590 
65 
Upgradation of Karimkutty Palookkara 
Maniyamkode Kalpetta road in between km 0/000 
to 8/000 in Wayanad District 
-do- General Manager 
KSCC Ltd 90,086 
   Total 12,89,09,669 
*Source: Records furnished by the Department 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
 
  

 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
99 
Glossary of Abbreviation used in the report 
 
Abbreviation Full Form 
AB Autonomous Body 
ADAK Agency for Development of Aquaculture Kerala 
ARCS Assistant Registrars of  Co-operative Societies 
AS Administrative Sanction 
B/W Budget Work 
BC Bitumen Concrete 
BG Bank Guarantee 
BM Bitumen Maccadam 
CAA Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
CBR California Bearing Ratio 
CE Chief Engineer 
CGPC Close Graded Premixed Chipping Carpet 
CRF Central Road Fund 
CRZ Coastal Regulatory Zone 
CV Contract Value 
DCA Director of Co-operative Audit 
DCB Demand, Collection and Balance 
DLP Defect Liability Period 
DoC Date of Completion 
DoF Director of Fisheries 
DoT Department of Tourism 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
E&RSA Economic & Revenue Sector Audit 
EE Executive Engineer 
EHP Enterocytozoon hepato penaei 
FM Finance Manager 
GIFT Genetically Improved Farm Tilapia 
GoI Government of India 
GoK Government of Kerala 
GTC Government Tender Committee 
HPV Hepatopancreatic Parvo Virus  
I&QC Inspection & Quality Control 
ICAI Institute of Chartered Accountants of  India 
IHHNV Infectious Hypodermal and Hematopoietic Necrosis 
IR Inspection Report 
IRC Indian Road Congress 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2018 
 
100 
Abbreviation Full Form 
IRQP Improvement of Rider Quality Programme 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
KCZMA Kerala Coastal Zone Management Authority 
KITTS Kerala Institute of Tourism and Travel Studies 
KITCO Kerala Industries and Technical Consultancy Organisation 
KSBB Kerala State Biodiversity Board 
LF Book Level Field Book 
LMR Local Market Rate 
LSGD Local Self Government Departments 
MBV Monodon Baculo Virus 
MoA Ministry of Agriculture 
MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MSS Mix Seal Surfacing 
NH National Highway 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
NRMB Natural Rubber Modified Bitumen 
OGPC Open Graded Premix Chipping Carpet 
OPC Ordinary Portland Cement 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PCR Polymerase Chain Reaction  
PG Performance Guarantee 
PPC Portland Pozzolana Cement 
PRICE Project Information and Cost Estimation 
PWD Public Works Department 
QA Quality Assurance 
QC Quality C ontrol 
R&B Roads & Bridges 
RCS Registrar of Co-operative Societies 
RMMS Road Maintenance Management System 
RR Revenue Recovery 
SD Security Deposit 
SE Superintending Engineer 
SoR Schedule of Rates 
SPF Specific Pathogen Free 
TOC Time of Completion 
TS Technical Sanction 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
101 
Abbreviation Full Form 
TSB Treasury Savings Bank 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
VG Viscosity Grade 
WBM Water Bound Macadam 
WSSV White Spot Syndrome Virus  
 

 