 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Performance audit  
of  
Implementation of 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.2 of the year 2020 

i 
Table of Contents  
Paragraph Number Contents Page Number 
 Preface iii 
 Highlights v 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 74th Constitutional Amendment 1 
1.2 Trend of urbanisation in Karnataka 1 
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1 
1.4 Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in 
Karnataka 
2 
Chapter II Audit framework  
2.1 Audit objectives 3 
2.2 Audit criteria 3 
2.3 Audit scope and methodology 3 
2.4 Acknowledgement 4 
2.5 Organisation of audit findings 4 
Chapter III Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA  
3.1 Comparison of State level legislation with 74th 
CAA 
5 
Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their 
functioning 
 
4.1 Actual status of devolution of functions 9 
4.2 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of 
urban local bodies 
13 
4.3 Powers of the State Government over ULBs 21 
4.4 Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urban 
local bodies 
22 
Chapter V Financial resources of Urban local bodies  
5.1 Sources of revenue 29 
5.2 Estimation of requirement of funds / expenditure 38 
5.3 Expenditure of urban local bodies 40 
5.4 Financial powers of urban local bodies 43 
Chapter VI Human Resources of Urban local bodies  
6.1 Limited powers over manpower 45 
6.2 Sufficiency and functioning of staff 48 
6.3 Capacity Building 52 
6.4 Performance management 53 
Chapter VII Conclusion 55 
 Appendices 61 
 Glossary 71 

ii 
List of appendices 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
1.1 Organisation structure with respect to functioning of 
ULBs in the State 
61 
1.2 List of parastatals and their functions 62 
2.1 List of selected ULBs 63 
4.1 Non-implementation of SFC recommendations 64 
5.1 Statement showing the details of revenue sources 
identified by 4th SFC, status of levy and statutory 
provisions 
66 
6.1 Statement showing the number of employees per 
1000 population in test-checked ULBs 
68 
6.2 Statement showing the details of training 
programmes conducted by SIUD, Mysuru 
70 

iii 
Preface  
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been
prepared for submission to the Governor of Karnataka under CAG’s DPC Act, 1971. 
2. The State Government entrusted the audit of Urban Local Bodies except
Notified Area Committees to the Comptroller an d Auditor General of India under 
Section 14(2) of CAG’s DPC Act, 1971 with effect from 2008 -09 and under 
Technical Guidance and Supervision under Section 20(1) with effect from 2011 -12 
onwards. 
3. The Report covering the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 contains the results
of performance audit of ‘Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act’. 
4. Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

v 
Highlights  
Intent of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74th CAA) 
The Constitution of India provided a clear mandate for democratic 
decentralisation through the 74 th Amendment which sought to create an 
institutional framework for ushering in democracy at the grass root level 
through self -governing local bodies in urban areas of the country.  The 74 th 
Constitutional Amendment came into effect on 1 June 1993 and empowe red 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to perform 18 functions listed in the 12th Schedule. 
Why this Performance Audit? 
To ascertain whether the State Government empowered ULBs through the 
creation of a robust institutional framework as well as transfer of functions, 
funds and functionaries. 
Period of audit: 2014-15 to 2018-19 
Sample: 11 functions and 44 ULBs across all tiers. 
What Audit found? 
Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA 
 Statutory amendments, though enacted, were not implemented in letter 
and spirit. 
Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
 Out of the 18 functions to be transferred all except Fire Services, were 
transferred. 
 Though all functions were to be mandatory, the State classified the 
functions as obligatory and discretionary. 
 Actual status of implementation of functions. 
Role of ULBs No. of functions 
Full jurisdiction 3 
No role 2 
Mere implementing agency 3 
Dual role 1 
Minimal role / overlapping 
jurisdictions 
8 


vi 
 
 
 The status of elections and formation of councils was as below: 
Status No. of ULBs 
Elections held and councils formed 63 
Elections held and councils not 
formed 
187 
Elections due but not held 23 
 Tenure of Mayor/President – Mayor had a one-year term and President 
had a term of 21/2 years.  The tenures were not coterminous with the term 
of the Council. This affected long term planning and led to instability at 
the top. 
 Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the City Corporations  
except Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike leading to absence of 
community participation in local governance. 
 District Planning Committee (DPC) was absent in Bagalkote district and 
in 2 9 districts where constituted, they did not function as required.  
Hence, comprehensive District development plan was not prepared. 
 Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) was formed for Bengaluru 
area but there was no development plan. 
 Delays in constitution of State Finance Commissions  (SFC) and delay 
in implementation of  the recommendations led to delays in fiscal 
transfers by State impacting ULBs revenues. 
 The need to seek approval of the District Administration for works to be 
taken up from own sources of ULBs despite prior approval by the 
respective Councils went against the autonomy of ULBs. 
 The existence of parastatals significantly eroded the autonomy of the 
ULBs in the implementation of functions such as urban planning and 
regulation of land use, slum improvement and water supply and 
sanitation. 
 
Financial resources of ULBs   
 ULBs were largely dependent on fiscal transfers, which constituted 
about 63 per cent of their total revenue.  
 There was a shortfall of `15,564 crore in fiscal transfer s during the 
period 2014-15 to 2018-19 vis-a-vis the recommendations of the SFC. 
 Entire allocation of performance grants of `295.20 crore for the year 
2018-19 was yet to be received, the reasons for which were not 
furnished. 
 Assigned revenue for the year 2018-19 was yet to be released. 
 Own revenue of ULBs constituted only 37 per cent of their total revenue. 
The State laws did not provide complete autonomy to ULBs in 
generating their own revenue. 
 Omissions attributable to ULBs such as absence of reliable database, 
non-revision of rates etc., also contributed to lesser revenue generation. 


vii 
 
 Budget exercise was flawed and resulted in preparation of unrealistic 
and unscientific budgets.   
 ULBs had spent on an average about 69 per cent of the funds available 
with them.   
 The State limited the financial a nd administrative powers of ULBs 
which hampered the utilisation of funds. 
 
Human resources of ULBs 
 Powers to assess staff requirement and recruitment of such personnel 
was vested with the State Government. 
 The State also vested with it the powers to regulat e classification, 
method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances, 
initiate disciplinary action on staff of ULBs, transfer staff across ULBs 
or to other Government departments.  
 Population alone was considered as a criterion for determinin g the 
sanctioned strength. This was incorrect and necessitates frequent 
revision with increase in population. 
 The sanctioned strength varied from 2.24 to 5.80 employees per 1,000 
population (2001) to 1.94 to 5.38 employees per 1 ,000 population 
(2011) in the test-checked ULBs. 
 Huge vacancies across all cadres specifically in crucial technical posts 
resulted in absence of adequate manpower affecting delivery of citizen 
services. 
 The executive function was being discharged by  
non-KMAS officers such as Revenue  Officers, Managers, Senior 
Health Inspectors, First Division Assistants in violation of the statutory 
provisions.  On the contrary, KMAS officers were discharging the 
functions of Revenue Officers, Managers and Senior Health Inspectors. 
 C&R Rules provided  for filling up of large number of posts (40 per 
cent) in the cadre of Group A in City Corporations through deputation.  
Posts such as Junior Health Inspector, First Division Assistant, 
Community Organiser were filled up on deputation, though there was 
no such provision. This impacts the accountability of deputed personnel 
to the Governing Council and Chief Executive of ULBs 
 
What Audit recommends 
 The State Government needs to  take decisive action in order 
to translate the vision of achieving decentralisation into 
reality.  Steps need to be taken to ensure that the ULBs enjoy 
an adequate degree of autonomy in respect of the functions 
assigned to them. 


viii 
 In view of the fact that the delimitation has been delayed time
and again by the State Government, the task of delimitation
should be entrusted to the State Election Commission in order
to ensure timely elections.
 Ward Committees should be constituted as per the KMC Act
and should be nurtured and encouraged to function effectively
so that the priorities of citizens are factored into the decisions
of the ULB.
 The full potential of the DPC and MPC mechanism should be
tapped by ensuring that they meet regularly to result in
optimal decision making.
 Delays in constitution and implementation of
recommendations of the SFCs should be avoided.  Further,
the recommendations of SFC relating to devolution as well as
institutional matters should be implemented in toto to the
extent possi ble, taking into account the final purpose of
creating genuine institutions of local governance.
 The Property Tax Board needs to be made functional in order
to provide technical expertise to ULBs.
 There is a need to fully involve the democratically ele cted
ULBs in the Planning, Regulation, Slum development and
Water supply and sanitation functions.
 Limitations on the ability of the ULBs to raise revenues
through sources such as property tax, advertisement tax, solid
waste management cess etc., need to be removed urgently.
 Special efforts need to be made to motivate the ULBs to
prepare their budgets in a scientific manner taking into
account requirements of capital expenditure as well as a
realistic projection of funds expected to be mobilised.
 Delegation of powers relating to works and other expenditure
needs to be revised in order to ensure efficiency.
 Adequate powers over manpower resources should be
delegated to ULBs in matters such as assessment and
recruitment of required staff to ensure availability of qualified
manpower for discharging functions.
 Personnel from KMAS should be deployed in ULBs to the
maximum extent possible.  In particular, it needs to be
ensured that ULBs are headed by persons of sufficient
seniority and calibre.

 
1 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
1.1 74 th  Constitutional Amendment  
The Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 th CAA) which 
came into effect on 1 June 1993, introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities). The 
Act provided a constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  Article 
243W of the CAA authorised the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local 
bodies wi th powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to 
function as institutions of self-government and make provisions for devolution 
of powers and responsibilities.   
The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions to 
be devolved to ULBs as listed in Table 4.1. 
1.2  Trend of urbanisation in Karnataka  
As per census 2011, 2.35 crore (38.67 per cent) out of the total population of 
6.11 crore reside in urban areas.  The growth rate of urban population in the 
decades 2001 -2011 & 2011-20191 was 31.9 per cent  and 25.4 per cent  
respectively. 
Urban Karnataka faces multiple challenges, ranging from public health issues, 
poverty alleviation, waste management, depletion of natural resources etc.  In 
this scenario, ULBs have an important role to play, as most of these issues are 
handled best at the local level. 
1.3  Profile of Urban Local Bodies  
In Karnataka, ULBs are categorised on the basis of population2, geographical 
features3, economic status, local revenue generation and level of employment 
within their jurisdiction. There are 280 ULBs as shown in Table 1.1.  
 
                                                 
1 Projected population in 2019 as per Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Bengaluru 
2 Population of 3,00,000 or more is Municipal Corporation, Population of 50,000 or more but 
less than 3,00,000 is City Municipal Council, Population of 20,000 or more but less than 
50,000 is Town Municipal Council, Population of 10000 or more but less than 20,000 is Town 
Panchayats. Notified Area Committees are administered separately by a Committee.  
3 Madikeri, being a district headquarter was declared as CMC though the population was less 
than 50,000.  Similarly, 10 taluk headquarters were declared as TPs,  though population was 
less than 10,000. 
1
Chapter I
Introduction

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
2 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
1.1: Category-wise ULBs in Karnataka State 
Type of ULB Number of ULBs 
City Corporations (CC) 11 
City Municipal Councils (CMC) 58 
Town Municipal Councils (TMC) 115 
Town Panchayats (TP) 92 
Notified Area Committees (NAC) 04 
Total 280 
Source:  Annual Administration Report 2018-19 of UDD 
The CCs are governed by the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 and 
other ULBs are governed by the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964.  Each 
Corporation/Municipal area has been divided into wards, which are determined 
and notified by the State Government for the purpose of election of Councilors.  
All ULBs except NACs have an elected body comprising Corporators / 
Councilors.   NACs are administered separately by a Committee under the 
control of Deputy Commissioner. 
1.4  Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Karnataka  
The Urban Development Department (UDD), headed by the Additional Chief 
Secretary to the Government, is the nodal department for the governance of all 
ULBs. The Directorate of Municipal Administration (DMA) established in 
December 1984, functions as an interface between the State Government and 
ULBs except Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), which functions 
directly under UDD.  In accordance with the powers conferred under the KMC 
Act, the DMA monitors these ULBs through a network of District Urban 
Development Cells (DUDC) headed by a Project Director who reports to the 
Deputy Commissioner of the concerned dis trict on a day to day basis. The 
organisation structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State is 
indicated in Appendix 1.1.   
In addition to ULBs, the UDD has key parastatal agencies that deliver or 
facilitate urban infrastructure and services such as Karnataka Urban Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (KUWS&DB), Karnataka Urban Infrastructure 
Development Finance Corporation (KUIDFC) , 31 Urban Development 
Authorities (UDA), 52 Town Planning Authorities (TPA), Bengaluru Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB), Bengaluru Development Authority 
(BDA) and Bengaluru Metropolitan Regional Development Authority under its 
control.  The other p arastatals such as Karnataka Slum Development Board 
(KSDB), Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB) and State 
Road Transport Corporations under the departments of Housing, Industries and 
Commerce and Transport respectively  also deliver urban services. The details 
of parastatals and their functions are in Appendix 1.2. 
 
 

 
3 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
2.1  Audit objectives  
The Performance Audit (PA) seeks to ascertain 
➢ Whether provisions of 74 th CAA have been adequately covered in State 
legislations?  
➢ Whether ULBs were empowered by the State Government to discharge 
their functions effectively through the creation of appropriately designed 
institutions/institutional mechanisms and the functioning thereof?  
➢ Whether ULBs have access and powers to raise financial resources 
commensurate with their functions? 
➢ Whether ULBs have powers to mobilise and incentivise human resources 
commensurate with their functions? 
2.2  Audit criteria  
The criteria for the PA were derived from the following: 
✓ Constitutional (74th) Amendment Act, 1992; 
✓ Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (KMC Act); 
✓ Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 (KM Act); 
✓ Karnataka Town & Country Planning Act, 1961; 
✓ Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1983; 
✓ Model Municipal Law, 2003 
✓ The Karnataka Municipalities Accounting and Budgeting Rules, 2006; 
✓ Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organization 
Manual;  
✓ Central/State Finance Commission Reports; 
✓ Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission; and 
✓ State Government orders, notifications, circulars and inst ructions issued 
from time to time. 
2.3  Audit scope  and methodology  
The Performance Audit covering the period April 2014 to March 2019 was 
carried out in two stages from April to November 2019.  Stage –I comprised 
audit of implementation of CAA by the State Government and parastatals and 
Stage–II comprised test -check of 44 ULBs across all tiers and selected  
11 functions.  ULBs were selected through simple random sampling with 
population as per 2011 census as the size measure from each tier of ULBs. The 
2
Chapter II
Audit framework

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
4 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
list of ULBs selected is indicated in Appendix 2.1.   Out of 18 functions 
identified in the 12th Schedule, activities relating to following 11 functions were 
selected for test-check. 
i) Urban planning including town planning;  
ii) Regulation of land-use and construction of building;  
iii) Planning for economic and social development; 
iv) Roads and Bridges; 
v) Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purpose;  
vi) Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management; 
vii) Safeguarding the interests of weaker section of society, including the 
handicapped and mentally retarded; 
viii) Slum improvement and up-gradation; 
ix) Urban poverty alleviation;  
x) Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds; and 
xi) Public amenities including street light ing, parking lots, bus stops and 
public conveniences. 
An Entry Conference was held on 2 April 2019 with the Principal Secretary, 
UDD, in which the audit methodology, scope , objectives and criteria were 
explained.  An Exit Conference was scheduled on 17 Jul y 2020 but it could 
not be held due to key officers of the department having to quarantine 
themselves due to the Corona pandemic. Departmental replies wherever 
received have been factored into the Report. The audit methodology involved 
document analysis and responses to audit queries. 
2.4  Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State 
Government, DMA, KUWS&DB, KUIDFC, KIADB, KSDB, and all the test -
checked ULBs in conducting the performance audit.  Audit also acknowle dges 
the contribution of Janaagraha Centre for Citizenship and Democracy for their 
inputs in the PA. 
2.5  Organisation of audit findings  
The audit observations relating to status of devolution of functions, funds and 
functionaries are presented in the following chapters. 
Chapter III – Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA 
Chapter IV – Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
Chapter V –  Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
Chapter VI – Human resources of Urban local bodies 
Chapter VII - Conclusion 

 
 
5 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
3.1  Comparison of State level legislations with 74 th  CAA  
The 74 th CAA introduced certain provisions relating to municipalities vide 
Articles 243Q to 243ZG.  The State Government vide amendments to the 
KMC/KM Acts introduced provisions corresponding to the CAA provisions as 
indicated in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 74th 
CAA 
Provision of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provision of 
Constitution of India   
Provision of 
KMC/KM Act 
Article 
243Q  
Constitution of Municipalities : It 
provides for constitution of three types 
of municipalities namely a Nagar 
Panchayat for transitional area, a 
Municipal Council for a smaller urban 
area and a Municipal Corporation for a 
larger urban area. 
Section 3 of KMC 
and KM Acts 
Article 
243R  
Composition of Municipalities: All 
the seats in a Municipality shall be 
filled by direct elections and by persons 
with special knowledge in municipal 
administration nominated by 
Government.  The Legislature of a State 
may by law, provide for representation 
to the Municipality , Members of 
Parliament and Legislative Assembly 
whose constituencies lie within the 
municipal area and Members of the 
Council of States and State Legislative 
Council who are registered as electors 
within the city. 
Section 7 of KMC 
Act and Section 
11 of KM Act 
Article 
243S  
Constitution and composition of 
Wards Committee: This provides for 
constitution of Wards Committees in all 
municipalities with a population of 3 
lakh or more 
Section 13 H of 
KMC Act 
Article 
243T  
Reservation of seats: The seats to be 
reserved for Scheduled Caste 
(SC)/Scheduled Tribe (ST) , Women 
and Backward classes for direct 
election. 
Section 7(2),  (3), 
(4) of KMC Act 
and Section 11(2), 
(3), (4)  of KM 
Act 
3
Chapter III
Compliance to
provisions of 74th CAA

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
6 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Article 
243U  
Duration of Municipalities: The 
municipality has a fixed tenure of 5 
years from the date of its first meeting 
and re-election to be held within the six 
months of end of tenure. 
Section 8 of KMC 
Act & Section 18 
of KM Act  
Article 
243V  
Disqualifications for membership: A 
Person shall be disqualified for a 
member of a Municipality- 
• If he is so disqualified by or under 
any law for the time being in force 
for the purposes of elections of the 
Legislature of the State concerned. 
• If he is so disqualified by or under 
any law made by the Legislature of 
the State.  
Section 26 of 
KMC Act & 
Section 16 of KM 
Act 
 
 
 
 
 
Article 
243W 
Powers, authority and 
responsibilities of the Municipalities: 
All municipalities would be 
empowered with such powers as may 
be necessary to enable them to function 
as effective institutions of self -
government. The State Government 
shall entrust  with such powers and 
authority to enable them to carry out the 
responsibilities in relation to the 12 th 
Schedule.  
Section 58 & 59 
of KMC Act & 
Section 87 & 91 
of KM Act. 
Section 11 of 
KMC Act & 
Section 63 of KM 
Act 
Article 
243X  
Power to impose taxes by, and funds 
of the Municipalities: 
• Municipalities would be 
empowered to levy and colle ct the 
taxes, fees, duties etc.  
• Grant-in-aid would be given to the 
Municipalities from the State 
• Constitution of funds for crediting 
and withdrawal of moneys by the 
Municipality  
Chapter X of 
KMC Act and 
Chapter VI of KM 
Act 
Article 
243Y read 
with 
Article 
243I  
Finance Commission: State 
Government shall constitute Finance 
Commission for 
• Review the financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such steps 
that help in boosting the financial 
condition of the Municipal bodies 
• Distributing between the State and 
the Municipalities of the net 
proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls and 
Section 503C of 
KMC Act & 
Section 302B of 
KM Act read with 
Section 267 of 
KPR Act 

Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA 
 
 
7 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
duties that are charged by the State 
Government. 
• Allotting the funds to the municipal 
bodies in the state from the 
consolidated fund of the State. 
Article 
243Z  
Audit of accounts of Municip alities: 
This provides provision for 
maintenance of accounts by the 
Municipalities and the auditing of such 
accounts.  
Section 150 of 
KMC Act Section 
290 of KM Act  
Article 
243ZA 
read with 
Article 
243K  
Elections to the Municipalities: The 
Superintendence, direction and control 
of all procedure of election of the 
Municipalities shall be vested in the 
State Election Commission (SEC) 
Section 308 of 
KPR Act, Section 
55 of KMC Act 
and Section 38 of 
KM Act. 
Article 243 
ZD  
Committee for District Planning:  
• Constitution of District Planning 
Committee at district level. 
• Composition of District Planning 
Committee. 
• Preparation of draft development 
plan and forwarded to the 
Government. 
Section 310 of 
KPR Act, Section 
503A of KMC 
Act and Section 
302A of KM Act. 
Article 
243ZE  
Committee for Metropolitan 
Planning: Provision for constitution of 
Metropolitan Planning Committee  
(MPC) in every Metropolitan area with 
a population of 10 lakhs or more to 
prepare a draft development plan for the 
metropolitan area as a whole. 
Section 503B of 
KMC Act 
Source: KM and KMC Acts 
The above table shows that the statutes complied with the provisions of the 74th 
CAA.  However, compliance to the constitutional provisions by law does not 
guarantee effective decentralisation on ground unless followed by effective 
implementation.  Audit observed that the legal provisions were not backed by 
decisive actions resulting in a situation in which the spirit of the 74 th CAA has 
not fructified.  This was especially true in case of provisions pertaining to the 
devolution of functions and creation of appropriate institutional mechanisms for 
effective decentralisation, which are discussed in the subsequent chapter.  
 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
9 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
4.1   Actual status of devolution of functions  
The 74th CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement 
schemes in relation to 18 subjects specified in the 12 th Schedule.  Each State 
was expected to enact a legislation to implement the amendment.  The State 
Government through amendments to KM / KMC Acts transferred 17 out of 18 
functions to ULBs.  The only function not covered was Fire Services.  Out of 
the 17 functions, 12 were obligatory and 5 were discretionary for CCs, whereas 
it was 11 and 6 respectively for other category of ULBs as indicated in Table 
4.1. 
Audit observed several overlaps in discharge of the functions between ULBs 
and parastatals / government  departments.  Out of 17 functions, ULBs were 
solely responsible for three functions; had no role in two functions; had limited 
role in eight functions; were mere implementing agencies in three functions; 
and in respect of one function, while they were responsible for implementation 
within their jurisdiction, they also functioned as an implementing agency. The 
function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 4.1. 
Chart 4.1: Function-wise role of ULBs 
 
The actual implementation of the devolved functions by the various authorities 
and the overlap in discharge of the functions is detailed in Table 4.1. 
4
Chapter IV
Empowerment of Urban 
local bodies and
their functioning
Solely 
responsible, 3
No role, 2
Limited Role, 8
Implementing 
agency, 3
Dual role, 1

10 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O) 
/ Discretionary 
(D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions where ULB has full jurisdiction 
1 Burials and burial 
grounds; 
cremations,
 
cremation 
grounds (O) 
Construction and O&M of 
crematoriums and burial 
grounds  and electric 
crematoriums 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function 
2 Cattle pounds; 
prevention of 
cruelty to animals 
(O) 
Catching and keeping strays ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function
Sterilisation and anti-rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
3 Regulation of 
slaughter houses 
and tanneries (O) 
Ensuring quality of animals 
and meat 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function 
Disposal of waste 
O & M of slaughter houses 
Functions with no role for ULBs 
4 Urban planning  
including town 
planning 
(O) 
Master Planning / 
Development Plans / Zonal
 
Plans 
Master plans prepared by UDAs/TPAs.  
Members of ULBs and Executive heads are 
nominated to the Planning authority. 
Enforcing master planning 
regulations 
Enforcement is by UDA/TPA. 
Enforcing building bye-
laws and licenses 
ULBs role is limited to issue and renewal of 
building licenses  
Group Housing, 
Development of Industrial
 
areas 
ULBs role is to identify beneficiaries for 
group housing. 
5 Slum 
improvement and 
upgradation (D)  
Identifying beneficiaries ULBs have no role in Slum improvement 
and upgradation
Affordable Housing 
Upgradation 
ULBs as mere implementing agencies 
6 Planning for 
economic and
 
social 
development (O) 
Program implementation 
for economic activities 
ULBs - Implementation of Welfare schemes 
in sectors such as Housing, Employment, 
Health, Education and Basic necessities by 
reserving 34.35% of both the SFC untied 
grants and own revenue of the ULBs.  The 
funds are allocated at 24.10% for SC/ST, 
7.25% for OEWS (Other Economically 
Weaker Sections) and 3% for differently 
abled persons in the ratio of 40:60 between 
individual welfare activities and community 
development. The State Government issues 
the guidelines
 for implementation of these 
schemes. 
Social Welfare Department - Safeguarding 
welfare of SC/ST and other weaker sections 
of the population, implementation of various 
programmes and schemes for the upliftment 
of SC/ST for their socio-economic and 
educational advancement, implementation 
of Special Component Plan and Tribal Sub 
Plan schemes, various scholarships and 
maintenance of hostels.
Policies for social 
development 
Table 4.1: Statement showing the actual status of implementation of functions

7 Safeguarding the 
interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded 
(D) 
Identifying beneficiaries State departments such as Social welfare, 
Tribal welfare, Empowerment of Differently 
abled and senior citizens and parastatal such 
as Rajiv Gandhi Rural Housing Corporation 
were responsible for these functions. ULBs 
were only an implementing arm for central 
and state government schemes.  
Providing tools/benefits 
such as tricycles 
Housing programs 
Scholarships 
8 Urban poverty 
alleviation (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries ULBs – Welfare schemes through SFC and 
own funds 
Department of Skill Development, 
Entrepreneurship and Livelihoods -  Central 
and State Government schemes 
Livelihood and 
employment 
Street vendors 
Function with dual role 
9 Roads and 
bridges (O) 
Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
While ULBs played a significant role in the 
construction and maintenance of roads, 
bridges, drains, flyovers and footpaths 
within the jurisdiction of ULBs, they are 
required to implement projects under the 
State’s Nagarothana scheme.  ULBs lacked 
autonomy in execution of works under 
Nagarothana as the action plans approved 
under this scheme by the Council can be 
taken up only after the approval from 
District and State Committees. These works 
are monitored by the District Commissioner 
through District Urban Development Cell 
(DUDC).
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
Functions with minimal role and / or having overlapping jurisdictions 
with state departments and / or parastatals 
10 Regulation of 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings (O) 
Regulating land use Regulation of land use was primarily vested 
with the Department of Revenue whereas 
construction of buildings was regulated by 
various bodies such as UDAs, BDA, 
Karnataka State Fire and Emergency 
Services and ULBs.  The role of ULBs was 
limited to issue and renewal of building 
licenses and enforcement of building bye-
laws. 
Approving building 
plans/high rises 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
11 Water supply for 
domestic, 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes (O) 
Distribution of water Parastatals were in charge of creation of 
assets. ULBs’ role was restricted to 
operation and maintenance. KUWS&DB is 
involved in O&M for 101 ULBs, which was 
entrusted to it.  
Providing connections 
Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges 
12 Public health, 
sanitation 
conservancy   and 
solid waste 
management (O) 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
ULBs only had limited role in case of public 
health allied responsibilities, as Department 
of Health and Family Welfare played a 
significant role in maintaining hospitals and 
dispensaries. Only BBMP and HDMC had 
maternity homes.  ULBs along with the state 
department undertook immunization / 
vaccination programs. ULBs were also 
Immunisation/Vaccination 
Registration of births and 
deaths  
Cleaning and disinfection 
of localities affected by 
infectious disease  
1  CCs, Belagavi, Hubballi-Dharwad, Kalaburagi and Shivamogga; CMCs, Channapatna, Mandya, 
Ramanagara and Vijayapura; TMCs, Kushalanagara and Robertsonpet. 
Solid waste management responsible for cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by infectious disease, 
solid waste management and control and 
supervision of public markets.
Control and supervision of 
public markets 
13 Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological aspects 
(D) 
Afforestation Forest Department played a significant role 
in the discharge of this function. Only CCs 
undertook afforestation and awareness 
drives along with the Forest Department. 
Protection of the environment and 
promotion of ecological aspects was solely 
vested with the Forest Department
Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water bodies 
etc. 
14 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities such 
as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds (O) 
(D) 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
This function was obligatory for CCs and 
discretionary for other ULBs.   
ULBs - O & M of parks, gardens, 
playgrounds, installation of play and 
gymnasium equipment in parks. 
UDAs - Reservation of not less than 15 per 
cent 
of the total area of the layout for public 
parks and play grounds and an additional 
area of not less than 10 per cent of the total 
area of the layout for civic amenities at the 
time of approval of residential layouts.
Operation and Maintenance 
15 Promotion of 
cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects 
(D) 
Schools and education Schools and education were handled by 
Education Department.  BBMP was the only 
ULB to run schools. ULBs along with the 
State Departments such as Kannada & 
Culture, Archeology and UDAs undertake 
activities allied with public space 
beautification, organizing fairs and festivals.
Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings / 
institutions 
Heritage 
Public space beautification 
16 Vital statistics 
including birth 
and death 
registration (O) 
Coordinating with hospitals 
/ crematoriums etc. for 
obtaining information 
Both ULBs and the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare maintained database of 
births and deaths.  ULBs register and issue 
certificates of birth and death.
Maintaining and updating 
database 
17 Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops 
and public 
conveniences (O) 
Installation and 
maintenance of street lights 
ULBs were in-charge of creation and 
maintenance of parking lots and public 
toilets and maintenance of street lighting. 
The State Road Transport Corporations 
share jurisdicti
on in respect of provision of 
bus shelters.
Creation and maintenance 
of parking lots 
Creation and maintenance 
of public toilets 
Deciding and operating bus 
routes 
Function not devolved 
18 Fire Services Establishing and 
maintaining fire brigades 
This function was vested with Karnataka 
State Fire and Emergency Services 
Department. 
Providing fire NOC / 
approval certificate in 
respect of high rise 
buildings 
Source: KM and KMC Acts, respective Acts of parastatals 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
13 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Recommendation 1: The State Government needs to take decisive 
action in order  to translate the vision of achieving 
decentralisation into reality.  Steps need to be taken to ensure 
that the ULBs enjoy an adequate degree of autonomy in respect 
of the functions assigned to them.  
4.2  Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of urban l ocal  
bodies  
As already discussed above, the State Government transferred 17 functions to 
ULBs.   The discharge of these functions can be effective only when appropriate 
institutions are established and adequately empowered.  The 74th CAA provided 
for establishment of such institutional mechanisms as can be seen from Table 
3.1.  This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanism.  
4.2.1 State Election Commission 
The powers of the State Election Commission (SEC) include superintendence, 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, 
all elections to Panchayats and ULBs. However, the power of delimitation of 
wards, reservation of seats for the council and rotation policy of seats for the 
posts of Mayo r/President, Deputy-Mayor/Vice-Presidents and wards were 
vested with the State Government. This was not in accordance with the 
recommendation of the 2nd Administrative Reforms Commission to entrust the 
task of delimitation and reservation of constituencies to SEC, which was 
accepted by the Government of India.  Three States, Kerala, Maharashtra and 
West Bengal have empowered the SEC to delimit wards. 
Further, the State delayed delimitatio n process, which in turn delayed council 
elections.  This happened in 2009 and 2015 in the case of BBMP.  Though the 
term of the current BBMP council would expire in September 2020 , the State 
had not taken up the delimitation process as of January 2020.   In response to a 
Public Interest Litigation filed by SEC, the High Court had cautioned (February 
2020) the Government regarding imposition of  penalty.  Subsequent to this 
warning the State Government issued (March 2020) the preliminary notification 
and the final notification in June 2020.   
Recommendation 2: In view of the fact that the d elimitation has 
been delayed time and again by the State Government, the task 
of delimitation should be entrusted to the SEC in order to 
ensure timely elections.  
4.2.1.1 Composition of Municipalities 
Article 243R stipulates the composition of Municipalities. As per the KM and 
KMC Acts, the Corporations and Municipalities consist of elected 
Corporators/councilors, nominated Corporators/councilors, Member of 
Legislative Assembly, Member of Legislative Council, Member of Lok Sabha, 
Member of Rajya Sabha representing the constituencies which comprise wholly 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
14 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
or partly the Municipal area.  The nominated members do not have voting 
power.  The Mayor/President is elected from amongs t the Councilors and is 
assisted by the Standing Committees.  The CCs have four Standing Committees4 
and other Municipalities have only one Standing Committee.  The 
Commissioner/Chief Officer is the executive head of ULB.   
4.2.1.2 Reservation of seats 
Article 243T stipulated reservation of seats for SC/ST, Women and Backward 
classes for direct election.  The KMC and KM Acts also provide for allotment 
of reserved seats to different constituencies as per the rotation policy adopted 
by the Government.  As reg ards reservation for women, not more than 50 per 
cent of the seats reserved for each category of persons belonging to SC/ST and 
backward classes and those of the non -reserved seats to be filled by direct 
election in a corporation shall be reserved for women.  
Audit observed that seats reserved for SC, ST, OBC and Women were as per 
prescribed norms and the State Government rotates the seats of Corporators / 
Councillors as per reservation policy for each election.  
4.2.1.3 Status of elections and formation of councils 
The election shall be conducted by SEC as stipulated in KMC (Election and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Rules, 1977 and KM (Election of Councilors) Rules, 
1977.   Elections to ULBs shall be completed before the expiry of their duration.  
In case of d issolution, election shall be held within six months from that date.  
Further, Article 243 U(3)(a) of Constitution of India and provisions of the KMC 
and KM Acts, stipulate a fixed tenure of five years for the 
Corporators/Councilors of ULBs from the date o f first meeting.  The status of 
elections and formation of councils in the ULBs of the State is depicted in  
Table 4.2. 
 Table 4.2: Status of elections and formation of councils in ULBs 
Total No. of ULBs 280 
No. of NACs 4 
Newly formed ULBs (TPs) 3 
Elections held during 2015-16 to 2017-18 and councils formed 58 
Elections due during 2019-20 but not held due to court cases 
regarding reservation policy in respect of wards 
23 
Elections held during August 2018 - January 2020 
Elections held and Councils formed 5 
Elections held but Councils not formed due to court cases 
in respect of the procedures adopted by the Government 
for rotation in reservation for the offices of Mayor / Dy. 
Mayor and President / Vice-President 
187 
 
192 
  Source: Information furnished by SEC/DMA 
                                                 
4 Taxation, finance and appeals; public health, education and social justice; town planning and 
improvement; and accounts 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
15 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
It can be  seen from the above that there were no Councils in 210 (187 + 23) 
ULBs.  In the absence of an elected council, the involvement of elected 
representatives in decision making and implementation which is an essential 
element of democracy is missing.   Further, a ULB without a council cannot be 
held accountable by citizens.  Audit noticed that the State Government 
appointed Administrators5 for these 210 ULBs.  Though the Acts provided for 
constitution of an advisory committee 6 through notification to assist the 
Administrator, this was not done in any of the ULBs.  This affected the 
discharge of functions in matters of policy involving public interest such as 
identification of eligible beneficiaries for welfare schemes, prioritisati on of 
development works etc. 
4.2.2 Mayor/President 
The Mayor/President is the first citizen of the city. The Mayor is elected from 
amongst the elected members of the Council, is empowered to preside over 
every meeting of the Municipality, enjoys the power of inspection, may give 
direction to the Commissioner/Chief Officer (Executive head) with regard to 
implementation of any resolution of the Corporation/Council and may call for 
any record of the Municipality from the Executive head.  The Government shall 
appoint Commissioner/Chief Officer and Council Secretary,  in consultation 
with the Mayor/President. 
The Model Municipal Law 2003 circulated by the Ministry of Urban 
Development, Government of India prescribes that the term of office of the 
Mayor/President s hall be coterminous with the duration of the Municipality.  
The office of the Mayor/President in the Municipality shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, and Women to such extent, and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed.    
In Karnataka, the term of office of Mayor and Deputy Mayor in the case of CCs 
is one year from the date of election while the term of the President and Vice 
President in the case of other ULBs is for a period of thirty months from the 
date of their election.  The offices of Mayor and Deputy Mayor/President and 
Vice-President were reserved and rotated among different categories such as 
SC, ST, Backward Class, Women and General.   Hence, a period of one year for 
a Mayor would be too little for carrying out effecti ve reforms and there exists 
the possibility of change in priorities consequent on change in leadership.   Most 
of the time, the Mayor may not even get to see the projects announced by 
him/her reaching their conclusion.  Hence a longer term is essential.   
A comparison of the tenure and powers of the Mayor in different cities across 
the country revealed the following: 
  
                                                 
5 Sections 99 and 100 of KMC Act and sections 315 and 316 of KM Act.  
6 As per Section 99(6) of KMC Act, an advisory committee shall consist of not less than fifteen 
and not more than twenty-five persons who shall be qualified to become councilors under this 
Act. The provisions of KM Act do not specify any such condition.  

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
16 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Tenure of Mayor  At least 16 cities7 in the country have a mayoral tenure 
of five years’ coterminous with the Council.   
Mode of election  68 out of the above 16 cities have direct elections for 
Mayor. 
Role of Mayor  The Mayor of Kolkata is the Executive Head.  All 
projects have to be approved by the Mayor. The Mayor 
is also the exclusive sanctioning authority; has the 
authority to sign and ap prove bills; and can direct or 
authorise execution of services.  Apart from Kolkata, the 
Mayors of Kochi and Jaipur also approve all the projects 
and have the authority to sign and approve bills.   
Powers over staff  The Mayor of Kochi has the power to suspend any officer 
other than the secretary and other government officers in 
the gazetted rank, after receiving ratification from the 
Council. 
Mayoral powers vary across cities as these provisions are left to State’s 
discretion.  In comparison with  the above  examples, Mayors of cities in 
Karnataka, seem to be on a weaker footing.  
4.2.3  Wards Committee 
The Constitution provides for Wards Committees in all Municipalities with a 
population of three lakh or more.  As per section 13H of KMC Act, Wards 
Committee shall be constituted by all the Corporations.  The term of these 
bodies will be co-terminus with the council.  The Wards committees were to act 
as a bridge between the municipal government and citizens and function as 
institutions of neighbourhood governance and increase proximity between 
elected representatives and citizens and provide a space for citizen participation 
in local level planning.  They were to perform duties such as preparation and 
submission of ward development schemes for allotment of funds, ensure proper 
utilisation of allotted funds, and maintenance of public utilities and safeguarding 
the assets of the corporation.   
Audit observed that the Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the 
CCs except BBMP.  This defeated the objective of facilitating community 
participation in local governance.  The absence of community participation 
would adversely impact prioritisation o f development works, non -monitoring 
of execution of works, utilisation and maintenance of assets created etc.   
Recommendation 3: Ward Committees should  be constituted as per 
the KMC Act and should be nurtured and encouraged to 
function effectively so that  the priorities of citizens are 
factored into the decisions of the ULB.  
                                                 
7  Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Dehradun, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Kanpur, Kolkata, 
Lucknow, Ludhiana, Patna, Raipur, Ranchi, Thiruvananthapuram and Visakhapatnam. 
8  Bhopal, Dehradun, Kanpur, Lucknow, Raipur and Ranchi. 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
17 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
4.2.4 District Planning Committee 
Article 243ZD provides for the constitution of a District Planning Committee 
(DPC) for consolidation of plans prepared by the panchayats and the 
municipalities.  The DPC was to prepare a comprehensive District Development 
Plan (DDP) with regard to matters of common interest between the panchayats 
and the municipalities including spatial planning; sharing of water and other 
physical and natural resources ; integrated development of infrastructure and 
environment conservation and extent and type of available resources, whether 
financial or otherwise.  The DDP was to be forwarded to the State Government 
through the Decentralised Planning and Development Committee (DPDC)9 for 
integration into the State plan.   Further, in accordance to the circular issued 
(April 2001) by the State Government, the DPC was to conduct meetings 
regularly.  Funds for the DPCs were to be mobilised through annual contribution 
from the rural and urban local bodies.   
The DPCs were constituted in all districts except Bagalkote and the DPDC was 
yet to be constituted. Audit observed that though DPCs were constituted, 
meetings were not held regularly and consolidated DDP for the district as  a 
whole was not prepared in any of the 26 districts in which the 44 test -checked 
ULBs were located.  None of the test -checked ULBs had prepared their 
development plans.  E xcept TMC, Kundapura, none of the other test -checked 
ULBs had contributed funds to DPC.  Non-preparation of comprehensive DDP 
by DPC taking into consideration the local needs and matters of common 
interest such as drinking water, roads and sewerage system, solid waste 
management etc., affected the effective implementation of devolved func tions 
by ULBs.   
4.2.5 Metropolitan Planning Committee 
Article 243ZE mandates that there shall be constituted in every Metropolitan 
area10, a Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) to prepare a draft 
development plan for the Metropolitan Region as a whole.  Section 503B of the 
KMC Act, 1976 provides for constitution of MPC to prepare a draft 
development plan for Bengaluru Metropolitan Area. T he Bengaluru 
Metropolitan Planning Committee Rules, 2013 were framed under Section 503 
A and B of the KMC Act, 1976 and notified on 4 January 2014. 
Audit observed that though MPC was constituted during 2014, it was not 
functioning as envisaged.   Since its constitution, the MPC met only thrice (June 
2016, December 2016 and January 2018) despite the stipulation that it ‘sha ll 
meet at least once in three months’. Further, no significant issues regarding 
                                                 
9 As per Section 310 B of the Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act, the Karnataka 
Decentralised Planning and Development Committee has to be constitu ted to review the 
development plan and annual economic plan of local bodies.  The Chief Minister is the 
Chairman and Ministers of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj, Urban Development, 
Finance Department and Planning are the members. 
10 A metropolitan area is defined as an area having a population of one million. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
18 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
comprehensive development of metropolitan area and matters of common 
interest between the local authorities, including coordinated spatial planning of 
the area, sharing of wat er and other physical and natural resources, the 
integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation, were 
discussed.  Consequently, a comprehensive development plan for Bengaluru 
Metropolitan area was not prepared so far. 
Recommendatio n 4: The full potential of the DPC and MPC 
mechanism should be tapped by ensuring that they meet 
regularly to result in optimal decision making.  
4.2.6 State Finance Commission 
Article 243 -I of the Constitution of India makes it mandatory for the State 
Government to constitute a Finance Commission within one year of the 
commencement of the CAA and thereafter on expiry of every five years.  The 
mandate of the State Finance Commission (SFC) is to review the financial 
position of the local bodies and to make re commendations to the Governor for 
devolution of funds.  State Government through amendments in KM and KMC 
Acts provided for constitution of SFC.  
4.2.6.1 Delay in constitution of the State Finance Commission and 
implementation of recommendations 
As per the  constitutional provisions and the Acts, implementation of the 
recommendations of the 6th SFC was due from 2019-20.  However, as on date, 
recommendations of the 4 th SFC were being implemented with effect from  
2018-19 to 2022-23 with a delay of nine years.  This was on account of delays 
in constitution of SFC/implementation of SFC recommendations as detailed in 
Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Statement showing the delay in constitution of SFC and implementation of 
recommendations 
SFC To be 
constituted 
as per 
constitution 
To be 
constituted 
with 
reference to 
previous 
SFCs 
Actually 
constituted 
Delay 
in days 
Date of 
submission 
Date of 
acceptance 
Delay 
in 
days 
Period 
covered 
First By 31 May 
1994 
Not 
applicable 
10.06.1994 10  05.08.1996 31.03.1997 238 1997-98 to 
2001-02 
Second 1999-2000 June 1999 25.10.2000 474 23.12.2002 29.06.2006 1,284 2006-07 to 
2010-11 
Third 2004-05 October 
2005 
28.08.2006 327 December 
2009 
31.10.2011 669 2011-12 to 
2015-16 
Fourth 2009-10 August 2011 21.12.2015 1,600 May 2018 07.12.2018 190 2018-19 to 
2022-23 
Source: SFC Reports and information furnished by UDD 
The delay in constitution of SFCs and implementation of the SFC 
recommendations resulted in devolution of funds to the ULBs on the basis of 
recommendations of the earlier SFCs (2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06 
– 1st SFC; 2016-17 and 2017-18 – 3rd SFC) affecting the financial position of 
the ULBs adversely.  The impact thereof is discussed in paragraph 5.1.1.1.  In 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
19 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
comparison, while Bihar and Tamil Nadu have constituted 6 th SFC, Himachal 
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 
have constituted 5th SFC and in Delhi and Kerala, SFCs have submitted the 5 th 
report. 
4.2.6.2 Response of the State Government to SFC recommendations 
The State Government may accept the recommendations of the SFC in totality 
or with certain modifications .  Audit observed that the State Government 
accepted few of the recommendations with modifications, and action was yet to 
be initiated on other recommendations.  The SFC -wise important  
recommendations and their modifications with reference to transfer of funds are 
given in Table 4.4.   
Table 4.4: SFC-wise important recommendations and their modifications 
SFC Recommendations Modifications 
First Devolution of 5.4 per cent  of the Non -
Loan Gross Own Revenue  Receipts  
(NLGORR) of the State Government to 
ULBs. 
5.4 per cent  of Non Loan Gross Own 
Revenue Receipts ( NLGORR) to be 
passed on in a phased manner i.e. 3.6 per 
cent to 5.40 per cent  over a period five 
years. 
Second Devolution of 8 per cent of the Non-Loan 
Gross Own Revenue Receipts 
(NLGORR) of the State Government to 
ULBs. 
8 per cent of NLNORR to be passed on in 
a phased manner i.e. 6 per cent to 8 per 
cent over a period five years with increase 
of 0.5 per cent each year. 
Third Devolution of 10 per cent  of the Net    
Own Revenue Receipts (NORR) of the 
State Government to ULBs. 
10 per cent of NLNORR to be passed on 
in a phased manner i.e. 8.5 per cent to 10 
per cent  over a period five years with 
increase of 0.5 per cent each year. 
Fourth Devolution of 12 per cent of NLNORR of 
the State to be devolved to ULBs apart 
from BBMP.  
12 per cent of NLNORR to be passed on 
in a phased manner i.e. 10.5 per cent to 12 
per cent  over a period five years with 
increase of 0.5 per cent each year. 
Source: SFC Reports and Government orders 
Besides recommendations relating to devolution, the SFCs have recommended 
several institutional measures that would strengthen ULBs in the long term.  An 
illustrative list of recommendations  where action was yet to be initiated are 
indicated below: 
➢ Regular revision of rules pertaining to the power of expenditure of 
municipalities commensurate with their functional needs; 
➢ Evolving a human resources management policy and this should include 
regular recruitment and training of personnel; 
➢ Integration of urban civil service agencies with elected ULBs; 
➢ The existing urban development authorities including BDA should be 
brought under the respective elected municipal bodies.  Slum 
improvement should also be brought under these bodies; 
➢ Town planning units, where existing, may be transferred to 
municipalities.  Even functions like urban forestry should be entrusted 
to elected municipal bodies; 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
20 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
➢ All decisions relating to service conditions of municipal employees must 
be taken by the respective ULB; 
➢ The practice of appointing unqualified persons as Chief Officers of TPs 
and TMCs should stop; 
➢ Tapping of parking fees as a source of revenue;  
➢ Full cost recovery for water supply and   
➢ Constitution of an Institute  to train city managers/urban specialities in 
management of cities in cooperation with IIMB, IISc, IIT and other 
leading institutions with core competence. 
Implementation of the above recommendations would have contributed 
significantly to the realisation of the objectives of the 74 th CAA.   
Non-implementation was a setback to the process of achieving genuine 
decentralisation. 
The detailed list of recommendations and their compliance by the State 
Government is given in Appendix 4.1. 
Recommendation 5: Delays  in constitution and implementation of 
recommendations of the SFCs should be avoided.  Further the 
recommendations of SFC relating to devolution as well as 
institutional matters should be implemented in toto to the 
extent possible, taking into account the final purpose of 
creating genuine institutions of local governance.  
4.2.7 Property Tax Board 
The 13th Finance Commission mandated constitution of a Property Tax Board 
(Board) on the lines of West Bengal Valuation Board, which was constituted in 
the year 19 80. The Board was to assist all municipalities and municipal 
corporations in the State to put in place an independent and transparent 
procedure for assessing property tax.   Sections 102A to 102Y under Chapter 
IX-A of the KMC Act, inserted vide amendment o f March 2012, provide for 
establishment of the Karnataka Property Tax Board.   
Audit observed that t hough the notification was issued (March 2013) for 
formation of the Property Tax Board, the members have not been appointed till 
date.  Consequently, ULBs l acked technical guidance for assessment and 
revision of property tax.   It was thus evident that the amendment to the KMC 
Act was only a cosmetic exercise to fulfil the conditions for obtaining 
performance grant as per the 13 th CFC award.  Reference is invited to Para 
6.1.26 of Report no.5 of year 2017, which discusses about the constitution of 
Property Tax Board in detail. 
Recommendation 6: The Property Tax Board needs to be made 
functional  in order to provide technical expertise to ULBs.  
 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
21 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
4.3  Powers of  the State Government over ULBs  
Audit observed that the State Government had overriding powers over ULBs, 
which was against the spirit of the constitutional amendment.  A few provisions 
are indicated in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Statement showing the overriding powers of State Government over 
ULBs   
Sl.no. Subject Provision 
1 Power to frame 
Rules 
The State Government may by notification in the Gazette, 
frame rules for the KMC/KM Acts after approval of the 
State Legislature (Section 421 of KMC Act and Section 
323 of KM Act). 
2 Power to cancel 
and suspend a 
resolution or 
decision taken 
by ULBs 
The State Government may cancel a resolution or decision 
taken by ULBs, if the State Government is of the opinion 
that it is not legally passed or in excess of the power 
conferred by KMC and KM Acts, any other law or likely 
to endanger human life, health, public safety or communal 
harmony or in violation of directions issued by 
Government (Section 98 of KMC Act and Section 306 of 
KM Act). 
3 Power to 
dissolve ULBs 
The State Government shall, by notification in the 
Gazette, dissolve the ULBs, if ULBs fail to perform or 
default in the performance of any of the duties imposed on 
them, after giving reasonable opportunity.  The order of 
dissolution of ULBs shall be laid before both the Houses 
of State Legislature with a statement of reasons therefor.  
The State Government may appoint Administrators during 
the period of dissolution of ULBs. (Sections 99 and 100 of 
KMC Act and Sections 315 and 316 of KM Act). 
4 Sanction of bye-
laws by 
Government 
Section 423 of KMC Act and Section 324(1) of KM Act 
empowers the ULBs to make bye -laws.  However, the 
bye-laws made by ULBs are not valid unless and until 
sanctioned by the Government (Section 425 of  KMC Act 
and Section 324(5) of KM Act). 
5 Sanction to 
deposit and 
invest surplus 
funds 
Section 166, 167 of KMC Act and Section 85 of KM Act 
allow municipal council to deposit and invest surplus 
funds but only after prior sanction from the Government. 
6 Sanction to 
borrow money 
Section 154 of KMC Act and Section 86 of KM Act allow 
municipal council and municipal corporations to borrow 
money, but only after prior sanction from the Government.  
7 Lease/sale of 
property 
Section 176 of KMC Act and 72 of KM Act allow the 
municipal councils and municipal corporations to lease or 
sell movable and immovable property belonging to them, 
but with certain restrictions and prior sanction of the 
Government. 
Source: KM and KMC Acts 
 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
22 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
4.3.1 District Urban Development Cell 
District Urban Development Cells (DUDC) under the control of Deputy 
Commissioner (DC) were formed (June 2003) to develop, formulate and 
implement Central and State Government schemes in the Municipality areas in 
co-ordination with ULBs. 
 
The Project D irector, DUDC was the main link between the ULBs and the 
district level government.  The ULBs were preparing action plans for 
development works to be taken up under various funds including municipal 
funds.  These action plans were placed before the respect ive Councils for 
approval.  Subsequently, they were forwarded to the DCs for further approval.  
On approval from the DCs, ULBs invited tenders for execution of works.  The 
system of seeking approval by DUDC after approval by the Council is against 
the intention of the 74 th CAA to provide autonomy to ULBs in the democratic 
framework of the country. 
4.4  Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urban local bodies  
The objective of the 74 th CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functions 
to ULBs.   However, functions such as urban/town planning, regulation of land 
use, water supply & sanitation and slum development continue to be delivered 
by parastatals as already indicated in Table 4.1. These parastatals were 
controlled by the Government and have their o wn governing bodies which do 
not include elected representatives of ULBs.   They were directly accountable 
to the State Government rather than ULBs.  Since most of the parastatals were 
established before the constitutional amendment through notifications and 
governed by the respective Acts, the Government should have amended these 
Acts to comply with the constitutional amendment, thereby making them 
accountable to ULBs.  The system  of assignment of functions to parastatals 
undermines the raison d ’etre of decentralisation viz., accountability to the 
people.   
The role of parastatal s and their impact on the devolved functions in the test -
checked ULBs is discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
4.4.1 Urban Development Authorities - Urban planning and regulation of 
land use 
(i)  The functions of Urban planning and regulation of land use were 
discharged by the Urban Development Authorities (UDAs) and Town Planning 
Authorities (TPAs).  The State Government established 31 UDAs for the 
planned development of major and important urban areas in the State (under the 
Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act, 1987) and 52 TPAs under 
Section 4-C of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning (KTCP) Act, 1961 
for the preparation of Master Plan for ULBs other than those covered under 
UDAs.  TPAs were also responsible for zoning of land use for residential, 
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and o ther 
purposes together with zoning regulations. 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
23 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
In order to comply with the State level mandatory reforms under JnNURM, 
which stipulated implementation of decentralisation measures as envisaged in 
the 74th CAA, the following were to be complied with. 
a) the S tate should ensure meaningful association and engagement of 
ULBs in planning the function of parastatal agencies as well as the 
delivery of services to citizens and  
b) assigning or associating elected ULBs with ‘city planning function’. 
Audit observed that the State Government issued (December 2009) orders for 
devolution of planning functions to ULBs wherein it was stated that 
UDAs/TPAs would continue to prepare master plans and the plans so prepared 
shall be sent to the respective ULBs both at the draft stag e and final stage for 
vetting and comments.  This was in itself not completely consistent with the 
spirit of devolution.  However, even this procedure was not being followed.  The 
UDAs/TPAs were submitting plans directly to Government without the 
comments of ULBs. 
Further, Section 503 -A of KMC Act and 302 -A of KM Act stipulated 
preparation of development plan by CCs and Municipalities every year and 
submission thereof to the DPC constituted under Section 310 of the Karnataka 
Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act, 1993.  As per Section 505 of KMC Act, 
the Corporation shall exercise such power or perform such functions or 
discharge such duties with regard to such land use or development plan with the 
concurrence of the Planning Authority.  Thus, the matters rela ting to land use 
were mainly vested with UDA/TPA. Only the building licenses were issued by 
the CCs/Municipalities in respect of areas coming under the master plan 
approved by the TPAs, whereas in the case of UDAs, building licenses were 
also issued by the UDA, wherever layouts were not handed over to ULBs. 
 
Audit also observed the following in the test-checked ULBs: 
➢ UDAs and TPAs prepared the master plan and development plans in 7 
and 37 ULBs respectively.  No mechanism/protocols were established 
to ensure that these authorities report to the Councils. 
➢ The Standing Committee on Town planning and reforms in CCs and the 
General Standing Committee in other ULBs merely review the issue of 
building licences but do not deliberate on planning related aspects. 
➢ The amount collected towards sanction of layout plans and development 
charges by UDAs/TPAs was not remitted to ULBs.  While the TPAs 
remitted the a mount collected to Government, the UDAs retained the 
amounts. This deprived the ULBs for additional revenue. The State 
Government may consider sharing of revenue by the UDAs/TPAs with 
ULBs just as Jaipur Development Authority pays 15 per cent  of the 
share of land sale revenues generated to Jaipur Municipal Corporation. 
➢ Layouts under the control of these authorities were transferred to ULBs 
for maintenance after development.  Only the roads and parks were 
handed over while Civic Amenity sites were retained by UDAs/TPAs. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
24 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Thus, the ULBs either had no role / or had limited role in discharging urban 
planning and regulat ion of land use functions.  Hence, the transfer of these 
functions were only in letter and not in spirit.  The 1 st SFC had in fact 
recommended that the existing urban development authorities including BDA 
should be brought under the respective elected municipal bodies. 
(ii)  Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (KIADB) was 
established in the year 1966 and was responsible for promoting rapid and 
orderly establishment and development of industries and for providing 
industrial infrastructural facilities and other amenities in Industrial areas in the 
State of Karnataka.   KIADB notified its own zonal regulations, prepared bye -
laws for construction of buildings in industrial areas and collects fees for 
approval of building plans etc.   KIADB had establishe d 153 industrial areas 
consisting of 18,865 units in the State as at the end of March 2018.    
In compliance to the 74 th CAA, the State Government through amendment to 
the KM Act introduced (August 2003) Chapter VIA having Sections 364A to 
364Q with regard to development of Industrial Townships.  In accordance with 
Section 364A, the Governor may by notification specify such area to be an 
Industrial Township and as per Section 364B, for every industrial township there 
shall be an Industrial Township Authorit y (ITA).  Section 364J stipulates the 
ITA shall levy property tax on all buildings and lands situated with the township 
for which the provisions of sections 94 to 115 of KM Act shall mutatis-mutandis 
apply.  Further, 30 percent of the property tax collected by ITA shall be remitted 
to local authority from which the area of Industrial township was carved out. 
The State Government announced (October 2014) the Karnataka Industrial 
Policy 2014-19.  As per para 5.1.7.1 of the Policy, it was proposed to declare 
large industrial areas and estates in Peenya, Mysuru, Bommasandra, Belagavi 
and Hubballi as Industrial Township Areas under Section 364A of the KM Act 
and establish authorities in respective townships as per Section 364B (2) and as 
per para 5.1.7.2, it was proposed to bring in amendments to the KM Act to 
delegate appropriate powers to KIADB to approve the building construction 
plan of the industrial units in the notified industrial areas/estates/townships.  
Further, as per paragraph 5.1.7.4, till the townshi ps are declared, KIADB shall 
collect property tax, cess etc., from all industries and pay it to the concerned 
local authorities with nominal service charge.   
Audit observed that no industrial townships were declared so far though they 
were functional and KIADB was not remitting property tax to the respective 
ULBs.  It is clear from the above that the powers of ULBs with regard to 
approval of building construction pla ns was being discharged by KIADB for 
industrial units without necessary statutory amendments.    The non-remittance 
of property tax by KIADB deprived the ULBs of their rightful revenue.  KIADB 
had property tax dues of `22.91 crore (including penalty) to be paid to HDMC 
as at the end of March 2020, as per the information furnished by the CC11. 
                                                 
11 Information from other test-checked ULBs is awaited. 

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
25 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
4.4.2 Karnataka Slum Development Board - Slum improvement and 
 upgradation 
Slum improvement and upgradation was being carried out by Karnataka Slum 
Development Board (K SDB). The KSDB was constituted in 1975 under the 
provisions of the Karnataka Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act 
1973.   KSDB was responsible for development of notified slums, after which 
they were to be handed over to the ULBs for further upkeep and maintenance.   
The 1 st SFC recommended bringing Slum improvement under the control of 
ULBs but this has not been complied with. 
Consequent to the 74 th CAA, the amended KM and KMC Acts stipulated that 
this function would be a discretionary function of ULBs.  Hence, none of the 
test-checked ULBs undertook this function.  However, they were providing 
services such as water supply, maintaining street lights  and collecting garbage 
in non-notified slums till they were declared by KSDB as notified slums as part 
of their regular functions.  The amendment of the Acts was, thus, merely a 
formality to comply with the constitutional amendment.   
4.4.3 Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board 
(KUWS&DB)– water supply and Under Ground Drainage works (UGD) 
Water supply for domestic, commercial and industrial purposes was an 
obligatory function of ULBs.  The Standing Committee on Town Planning and 
Improvement in CCs and General Standing Committee in other ULBs review 
this function.   
The Government of Karnataka brought out an Urban Drinking Water and 
Sanitation policy (UDWSP), 2002. The main objectives of the policy were to 
ensure demand based universal coverage  of water supply, commercial and 
economical sustainability of the operations and a minimum level of service to 
all citizens.  The ULBs were responsible for water supply and sewerage services 
from water catchments to waste water treatment.  
The State Govern ment entrusted the work of bulk water supply and its 
maintenance to KUWS&DB (Board) (under the KUWS&DB Act, 1973). 
Accordingly, the KMC and KM Acts were also amended.  The Board  was 
responsible for capacity creation and augmentation of Water Supply Schemes  
(WSS) and Under Ground Drainage (UGD) schemes in all ULBs except Bruhat 
Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike. Since inception, the Board had commissioned 
567 WSS and 88 UGD projects across the State incurring an expenditure of 
₹8,357.17 crore up to the end of March 2019. 
The Board prepares a feasibility report for every project taken up and forwards 
it to the local authorities concerned for examination.  The local authorities pass 
a resolution, if the project is found financially viable.  The Board borrows funds 
from financial institutions on government guarantee for execution of capital 
works along with ULB’s contribution.  The repayment of loan was being done 
through SFC funds at the time of allocation of SFC funds each year.  The Board 
had received ₹2 ,858.42 cror e during the period 2014 -19 and had spent 
₹2,528.03 crore.  As of March 2019, an amount of ₹1 ,160.31 crore was 
outstanding as loan in the books of the Board.   

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
26 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The Board may take up O&M of the WSS and UGD projects on the directions 
of the Government.  Currently the Board was entrusted with O&M of 10 WSS.   
4.4.4 Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance 
Corporation – Water supply, UGD and other infrastructure projects 
The situation in ULBs was characterised by a mismatch between responsibilities 
and financing of services, weak capacity etc., all of which led to growing gap 
between demand and supply of civic services.  This situation had not 
encouraged investments and ULBs were not in a position to realise their 
economic potential.   Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and Finance 
Corporation (KUIDFC), which was incorporated as a public limited company 
under the Companies Act, 1956 on 2 Nov 1993, undertook various projects with 
support from external sources such as Asian Development Bank (ADB), World 
Bank etc., centrally sponsored schemes and State Government schemes for 
providing capacity building and investment support to ULBs.  The repayments 
were made out of the funds released by the government out of the SFC grants.  
 
ULBs approach KUID FC with a loan/grant proposal to support its potential 
investment and capacity building program.  Within this context ULBs enter into 
an agreement specifying the terms and conditions of loan and grant, with 
KUIDFC and ULB both being party to loan agreement .  All the projects are 
monitored by Empowered Committee headed by Additional Chief Secretary to 
Government; Principal Secretaries of Urban Development, Planning and 
Finance departments; Director, Town Planning; Director, Municipal 
Administration; Chairman , BWSSB; Commissioner, BBMP; and Managing 
Director, KUIDFC, who is the Member Secretary.  
The Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at KUIDFC hand holds the Project 
Implementation Units functioning at project headquarters.  Project Management 
Consultants (PMCs) are appointed for monitoring and quality assurance.  PMCs 
and ULBs were jointly responsible for preparation of DPRs, checking 
measurement and passing of bills.   The project assets upon completion were to 
be handed over to respective ULBs.   KUIDFC had spent  ₹2,573.27 crore out 
of available fund of ₹4,215.23 crore during the period 2014-2019 under various 
projects.   
The composition of staff of KUIDFC contains both Board and project 
employees. Though KUIDFC was carrying out various infrastructure projects, 
the working strength was less than 50 per cent, both under the project and within 
the Board.  
It is clear from the above two paragraphs that ULBs are wholly dependent on 
the above institutions for creation of necessary infrastructure despite the fact 
that Wa ter supply and UGD were the primary functions of ULBs.  T hough 
ULBs were party to the loans raised by KUWS&DB/KUIDFC for asset creation 
within the jurisdiction of ULBs, neither the loans raised nor the assets created 
by the institutions were reflected in the books of accounts of ULBs.   

 Empowerment of Urban local bodies and their functioning 
 
 
27 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The need to create another parastatal organisation despite the existence of 
KUWS&DB was not clear.   All the ULBs, except 10 (as indicated in Table 
4.1), were responsible for operation and maintenance of the assets created by 
the above institutions.  The role of ULBs in discharging this function was, thus, 
restricted to operation and maintenance. 
Recom mendation 7: There is a need to fully involve the 
democratically elected ULBs in the Planning, Regulation, Slum 
development and Water supply and sanitation functions.  

29 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discharge of any function.  The 
devolved functions can be carried out effectively by ULBs only when they are 
supported with sufficient financial resources . Such financial resources could 
take the form of predictable fiscal transfers or access to own revenue streams 
that are buoyant and commensurate with the expenditure obligations, 
accompanied by appropriate expenditure powers.  Predictable fiscal transfers to 
ULBs need to be ensured through a robust State Finance Commission 
mechanism and compliance with State and Central Finance Commission 
recommendations.  Access to own sources of revenue would include both the 
power to levy and collect from specific revenue streams.  Expenditure powers 
refer to reasonable delegation limits that allow the ULB to utilise their financial 
resources.   
5.1  Sources of revenue  
The details of revenues of ULBs in the State during the period 2014 -15 to 
2018-19 is indicated in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1: Details of revenues of ULBs during the period 2014-15 to 
2018-19 
(` in crore) 
Year Grants Own 
Revenue 
Assigned  
Revenue 
Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of 
own revenue to 
total revenue 
2014-15 1,640.80 1,022.82 1.30 2,664.92 38 
2015-16 2,644.17 1,191.04 1.42 3,836.63 31 
2016-17 2,302.67 1,352.53 9.85 3,665.05 37 
2017-18 2,493.07 1,517.60 18.56 4,029.23 38 
2018-19 2,300.01 1,586.38 23.19 3,909.58 41 
Total 11,380.72 6,670.37 54.32 18,105.41 37 
Source: Information furnished by DMA for 271 ULBs 
5.1.1 Fiscal transfers to urban local bodies 
Funds were devolved to ULBs through transfer by the Central and State 
Government in the form of grants.   As can be seen from the above table, the 
fiscal transfers from Government formed the major portion of the revenue 
(averaging 63 per cent ) of ULBs in the State dur ing the period 2014 -15 to 
2018-19.  Audit further observed that 51 (2015-16) to 81 (2018-19) per cent of 
the grants released were in the form of tied grants for payment of salaries and 
power sector payments and the untied grants ranged between 19 to 49 per cent. 
5
Chapter V
Financial resources
of Urban local bodies

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
30 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
There were, however, certain shortcomings under fiscal transfers as discussed 
below. 
5.1.1.1 State Finance Commission grants 
The major share of financial resources of ULBs comprised grants recommended 
by SFC.  Timely constitution of SFC and accepta nce of its recommendations  
have a bearing on the assured transfer of funds to ULBs. 
❖ Loss of grants 
As already discussed in paragraph 4.2.6.1, there was considerable delay both 
in constitution of SFCs and implementation of SFC recommendations.  The loss 
to ULBs due to delayed constitution and submission of report of 4 th SFC alone 
for the period 2016-17 to 2018-19 is given in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Loss to ULBs for the period 2016-17 to 2018-19 due to delay in 
constitution of 4th SFC 
(` in crore) 
Particulars 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Non-Loan Net Own Revenue 
Receipts (NLNORR) of the State 
88,750 93,607 1,03,602.58 
Allocation as per the 
recommendations of SFC 
(
10.5-12 per cent of NLNORR)
9,318.75                      
(10.5) 
10,296.77                     
(11) 
11,914.30
(11.5) 
Allocation as decided by the 
State Government (
10-10.5  per 
cent of NLNORR) 
8,875.07 
(10) 
9,360.7 
(10) 
10,878.27 
(10.50) 
Loss of grants 443.68 936.07 1,036.03 
Source:  Information furnished by State Government and Finance Accounts 
❖ Short release of funds under SFC 
The details of funds due as per the orders of the State Government and actually 
released to ULBs during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 is given in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Details of grants due and released under SFC during 2014-15 
to 2018-19 
          (` in crore) 
Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total 
Non-Loan 
Net Own 
Revenue 
Receipts 
(NLNORR) 
of the State 
74,870.00 80,905.22 88,750.66 93,607.00 1,03,602.58 
Allocation as 
decided by 
the State 
Government 
(10-10.5   per 
cent of 
NLNORR) 
7,487 8,090 8,875.07 9,360.70 10,878.27 44,691.04 

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
31 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Funds 
actually 
released to 
ULBs 
2,990.77 3,306.81 3,304.30 3,762.74 3,754.40 17,119.02 
Amount 
released to 
parastatal 
agencies 
514.98 1,677.34 2,421.36 3,759.78 3,634.19 12,007.65 
Short release 3,981.25 3,105.85 3,149.41 1,838.18 3,489.68 15,564.37 
Source:  Finance Accounts and figures furnished by Government. 
Audit observed that 
➢ The funds released to ULBs was short of the mandated devolution by an 
extent of 20 per cent (2017-18) to 53 per cent (2014-15). 
➢ The 3rd and 4th SFC recommended that debt servicing should be adjusted 
against individual ULBs allocation.   However, the State Government 
adopted the practice of distributing the debt servicing obligation to all 
ULBs whether they have availed the loan or not.  The State Government 
deducted `12,007.65 crore for the period 2014 -15 to 2018-19 from the 
total amount payable to all ULBs in order to service the borrowings by 
KUWS&DB and KUIDFC on behalf of ULBs.  This resulted  in short 
release of funds to ULBs that had not availed any loan thereby depriving 
them of their complete share of SFC grant. 
The State Government stated (November 2019) that there were no short releases 
to ULBs, as the releases to state owned projects, st ate share against the GoI 
releases, externally aided projects, parastatal agencies and CFC grants were also 
to be considered as share of ULBs for computing the percentage of NLNORR.  
Accordingly, the State Government had released 11.64 per cent, 14.15 per cent, 
15.12 per cent and 12.86 per cent during the years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 
and 2017-18 respectively.   
The reply of the Government was not tenable as SFC grants was a package of 
devolution recommended as share of NLNORR and does not include amounts  
released for implementation of state/central schemes and CFC grants.  The 2nd, 
3rd and 4 th SFCs had also recommended that CFC grants should not be 
considered as devolution as it was not part of NLNORR. 
5.1.1.2 Central Finance Commission grants 
Article 280 (3) (C) of the Constitution mandates the Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) to recommend measures to augment the consolidated Fund 
of a State to supplement the resource of Municipalities based on the 
recommendations of the respective SFCs.  The 13 th Finance Commission and 
14th Finance Commission recommended basic grant and performance grant to 
ULBs as a percentage of divisible pool account. 
Chart 5.1 depicts the allocation and release of CFC grants during the period 
2014-15 to 2018-19. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
32 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Chart 5.1: Allocation and release of CFC grants
Source: Information furnished by DMA/UDD 
It can be seen from the above that there was short release of `19.64 crore and 
`13.30 crore of basic grants and performance grants respectively under 13 th 
Finance Commission during 2014-15, the reasons for which was not furnished 
by the State Government.  The 14 th Finance Commission (FFC) recommended 
a total allocation of `4,685.51 crore under basic grants for the period 2015 -20 
and `1,171.38 crore under performance grants for the period 2016-20.  The State 
received the complete allocation of basic grants of `3,279.89 crore for the period 
2015-16 to 2018-19.  However, there was short receipt of performance grant of 
`3.78 crore for the year 2017 -18 and the entire allocation of `295.20 crore for 
the year 2018 -19 was yet to be received.  The reason for non-receipt was not 
furnished. 
5.1.1.3 Assigned Revenue 
As per Section 140 of KMC Act, 1976, the duty on transfer of immovable 
property shall be levied in the form of a surcharge at the rate of two per cent of 
the duty imposed by the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957, on instruments of sale, 
gift, mortgage, exchange and lease in perpetuity of immovable property situated 
within the limits of a larger urban area.  The entire  amount collected in respect 
of the lands and other properties situated in the urban areas shall be passed on 
to ULBs in the State, in proportion to the population of ULBs by the Inspector 
General of Registration and Commissioner of Stamps (IGR) after deducting 10 
per cent towards collection charges. 
Audit observed that transfer of duty was delayed for the period 2014 -15 to 
2017-18 and the duty for the year 2018-19 was yet to be transferred as indicated 
in Table 5.4. 
352.66
562.08
778.29
899.25
1040.27
333.02
562.08
778.29
899.25
1040.27
240.02
0
229.7
259.94
295.2
226.72
0
229.7
256.16
0
2014 -15 2015 -16 2016 -17 2017 -18 2018 -19
1 3 T H  CFC 1 4 T H  CFC
` IN CRORE
General Basic Grants Allocation General Basic Grants Release
Performance Grants Allocation Performance Grants Release

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
33 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Table 5.4: Statement showing the transfer of duty to ULBs13 
Year Date of transfer Amount (` in crore)  
2014-15 21.12.2017 & 10.12.2018 11.54 
2015-16 12.12.2017 & 26.12.2017 14.19 
2016-17 15.02.2019 12.52 
2017-18 15.02.2019 14.65 
2018-19 Yet to be transferred 
Source: Information furnished by Inspector General of Registration and Commissioner of 
Stamps 
5.1.2 Own revenue of urban local bodies  
ULBs do not have a large independent tax domain. The property tax on land and 
buildings is the mainstay of ULB’s own revenue.  The own non-tax revenue of 
ULBs comprises water charges, rent from commercial establishments, trade 
licences, fee for sanction of plans/mutations, etc.   The State laws revealed that 
while the authority to collect certain taxes like property tax, advertisement tax 
vested with ULBs, powers pertaining to the rates and revision thereof 
(advertisement tax), procedure of collection (prop erty tax), method of 
assessment, exemptions, concessions (property tax, advertisement tax) etc., 
were vested with the State Government.  The ULBs, thus, lacked complete 
autonomy in generating own revenue.  The share of own revenue to total 
revenue of ULBs for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 was only 37 per cent (Table 
5.1).  The constraints / deficiencies in realisation of own revenue in the test -
checked ULBs are discussed below: 
5.1.2.1 Property tax 
The ULBs were empowered to levy property tax every year on all buildings or 
vacant lands or both situated within their jurisdiction under section 103/108A 
of the KMC Act and Section 94 read with Section 108 of the KM Act.  
Self-assessment scheme was intro duced by the Government from 2001 -02 for 
assessment and collection of property tax by owners of the properties.  The 
DMA developed an online property tax calculator through which property 
owners could assess and pay their taxes. 
Audit noticed certain lacun ae in the online calculator as below, which 
constrained augmentation of property tax by ULBs. 
➢ absence of provision for collection of service charges from exempted 
properties; 
➢ absence of provision for calculation of property tax on advertisement 
structures erected on buildings; and 
➢ calculation of tax on vacant land at uniform rates irrespective of whether 
the land was self-occupied or rented and used for commercial purposes 
(for e.g., vacant land was used for developing nurseries) etc. 
Further, a compliance audit on the ‘Collection of property tax in ULBs’ for the 
period from 2013-14 to 2015-16 was conducted in 24 ULBs between April to 
13 This is excluding BBMP. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
34 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
August 2016.  The findings were included in Paragraph 6.1 of the Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) on Local Bodies for the year 
ended March 2016 (Report No.5 of the year 2017).   
The observations noticed during the current audit, which were similar to the 
observations pointed out in the above report are as below: 
➢ Survey of properties was not conduct ed by any of the test -checked 
ULBs.  The Municipal Reforms Cell of DMA had created a database for 
all ULBs based on the GIS survey undertaken by DMA. This survey 
data was not put to use by any of the test -checked ULBs for the period 
test-checked. 
➢ Instead o f adopting the current guidance value, 42 ULBs adopted 
guidance value of 2005-06, CC, Mangaluru adopted 2007-08 value and 
HDMC adopted 2009-10 value.  
➢ Property tax on telecommunication towers was not collected. 
➢ Service charges from exempted properties was not collected except in 
test-checked CCs and CMCs, Bhadravathi and Bidar. 
➢ Property tax on advertisement structures was not collected except in CC, 
Mangaluru. 
➢ Arrears in collection of property tax and improper maintenance of 
Demand, Collection and Balance ( DCB) statements were noticed in all 
the test-checked ULBs.  The accumulated arrears of property tax in 271 
ULBs, as per the information furnished by DMA, as at the end of March 
2019 was `503.09 crores. 
5.1.2.2 Advertisement tax 
Section 103 of KMC Act and Section 94 of KM Act provides for levy of tax on 
advertisement by ULBs.  Further, in accordance with Section 134 of KMC Act, 
the rates of tax 14 to be levied shall be subject to the maxima and minima laid 
down by the Government in this behalf.  Section 324 (1)(l) of KM Act stipulates 
preparation of bye -laws for regulation of advertisements and their display.  
However, as per Section 324 (5), the bye-laws prepared if any, would not have 
effect until it is approved by the State Government.  The above provisions 
restrict the autonomy of ULBs in levy of advertisement tax. 
Audit observed that three15 out of 44 test -checked ULBs had not collected 
advertisement tax during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19.  TMC, Aland had 
collected advertisement tax only during 2018 -19.  However, none of the test -
checked ULBs except TMC, Manvi  had conducted any survey for levy of 
advertisement tax so far.   In the absence of survey, potential earning of revenue 
could not be quantified. 
                                                 
14 Schedule VIII of KMC Act specifies the maximum amount of tax to be levied for various 
types of advertisements. 
15 CMC, Shahabad; TMC, Srinivasapura; and TP, Kamalapura 

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
 
 
35 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 The 4th SFC report states that there was neither a clear database of the actual
number of hoardings put up in the cities nor a proper record of demand 
omcould be realised fr ue thatnthe reveConsequently, .  collection and balance 
tisement tax was not estimated so faradver  
5.1.2.3 Water charges 
As per Section 144 of the KMC Act and Section 139 of KM Act, the 
CCs/Municipalities may fix water rates not exceeding the rates specified in the 
rules in force under Section 421 of KMC Act and Sec tion 323 of KM Act.  
Sections 421 and 323 provide for the Government to make rules by notification 
for carrying out all or any of the purposes of these Acts.  This restricted the 
autonomy of ULBs.  The State Government issued (July 2011) instructions 
stipulating the rates of water charges to be collected.  The rates were to be 
revised once in three years to compensate for the rise in cost of Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M).  Accordingly, revisions were due in 2014-15 and 2017-
18.   
The status of revision of rates of water charges by the test -checked ULBs is 
depicted in Chart 5.2. 
Chart 5.2: Status of revision of water charges in test-checked ULBs 
 
 
While only three ULBs had revised the rates both during 2014-15 and 2017-18, 
Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corporation (HDMC) and CMC, Bidar had 
neither adopted the rates nor revised the water charges since 2011.  Further, the 
revisions carried out were not commensurate with the O&M expenses.  
Comparison of the O&M expenses with the collection of water charges in 4216 
test-checked ULBs showed that the average collection was only 52 per cent of 
the O&M expenses during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 as indicated in Table 
5.5.   
 
                                                 
16 CMCs, Bidar and Channapatna had not furnished the details. 
Neither 
adopted the 
rates nor 
revised  , 2
Rates adopted 
and revised 
only once, 20
Rates adopted 
and revised 
twice, 3

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
36 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Table 5.5: Details of water charges demanded and collected by  
test-checked ULBs 
                                                                                                            (` in crore) 
Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Opening Balance 98.75 120.38 139.40 152.02 176.40 
Demand 97.18 109.09 116.84 119.62 132.59 
Total Demand 195.93 229.47 256.24 271.64 308.98 
Total Collection 75.55 90.07 104.22 95.24 99.83 
Closing Balance 120.38 139.40 152.02 176.40 209.15 
O& M Cost 125.87 168.49 245.99 188.35 188.59 
Collection against 
O&M Cost in per cent 
60 53 42 51 53 
Source: Information furnished by 42 ULBs. 
Moreover, the arrears of water charges to be collected increased from `98.75 
crore in 2013-14 to `209.15 crore in 2018-19 indicating the ineffectiveness  of 
the ULBs in augmenting their own revenue. 
5.1.2.4 Solid Waste management cess 
Section 103B (2) of KMC Act, 1976 provides for levy of solid waste 
management (SWM) cess for the purpose of collection, transportation and 
disposal of solid waste.  There was no such provision under the KM Act, 1964.  
However, as per Chart of Accounts under the Karnataka Municipal Accounting 
Manual (KMAM), the Government as a matter of policy, and with a view to 
keep the town in a better hygienic/sanitary condition i.e., to maintain ‘litter free 
zones’, may direct the municipalities to levy and collect a cess, in the nature of 
revenue income, for this purpose.  Accordingly, DMA had issued (September 
2009) instructions directing all ULBs to collect SWM cess. To facilitate 
collection of SWM cess with greater efficiency, the DMA directed ULBs to 
collect the cess along with property tax through the property tax returns. 
This direction was, however, flawed as SWM cess cannot be collected from 
properties exempt from payment of propert y tax such as places of public 
worship, educational institutions, Government buildings etc., and was not 
recoverable from defaulters in payment of property tax. 
5.1.2.5 Rent from commercial establishments 
The ULBs were empowered to collect rent from the buildings let out to private 
agencies and the rent was to be revised periodically.  Scrutiny of records showed 
that rent amounting to `21.39 crore was in arrears as at the end of March 2019 
in 4317 test-checked ULBs.  The correctness of the demand raised and amount 
collected could not be ensured in the absence of proper DCB registers.   
Audit observed that there was no standard protocol for entering into agreements 
with the tenants stipulating the terms and conditions including revision of rent.   
Agreements were not renewed in 5,544 out of 10,311 cases in 22 out of 44 test-
checked ULBs.  This could be attribut ed to the huge vacancy of 51 per cent in 
                                                 
17 TMC, Harappanahalli did not furnish the information 

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
 
 
37 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
the cadres of Revenue Officers, Assistant Revenue Officers and Revenue 
Inspectors in the test-checked ULBs.  
5.1.2.6 Trade licence 
Section 369 of the KMC Act and Section 256 (a)-Part I of Schedule XIII of KM 
Act specify that trade license fee should be obtained by ULBs from all business 
establishments who intend to carry out any trade in the municipal areas.  While 
the KMC Act bestows the powers on CCs, the provisions of KM Act require 
other categories of ULBs to prepare bye-laws, which are to be approved by the 
Government. 
Scrutiny of the records showed that arrears in collection of trade licence fees of 
`12.01 crore as at the end of March 2019 in 4 218 test-checked ULBs.  This 
indicated that business establishments continued to function without valid 
licences.  No mechanism existed for monitoring the renewal of trade licences 
and there was 40 per cent vacancy in the cadre of  Senior/Junior Health 
Inspectors who were responsible for carrying out this activity.   Failure to renew 
trade licences resulted in an approximate loss of revenue of `3.85 crore19 to the 
test-checked ULBs. 
5.1.2.7 Tapping of various sources of revenue by ULBs 
The 4th SFC had identified 5 sources of tax revenue and 30 sources of non -tax 
revenue such as building plan/licence approval fees, trade licence, rent from 
shops/markets/commercial e stablishments, water charges, parking fee, UGD 
charges, cable laying charges etc., that could be levied by ULBs to augment 
their own resources.  Audit observed that the ULBs were tapping 30 of these 35 
identified sources.  The details of the five sources t hat were not tapped is 
indicated in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Statement showing the revenue sources not tapped by ULBs 
Sl. 
no. 
Source Statutory provision exists or not 
1 Levy of tax on animals 
and dogs 
Yes 
2 Other fees and tolls Yes 
3 Cable laying charges Can be levied subject to preparation of 
byelaws by ULBs and approval from 
Government  
4 Greenery charges No 
5 Dog fee No 
Source: KM and KMC Acts 
As cable laying charges and greenery charges could be a good source of 
revenue, the ULBs should ensure that these charges are levied. 
                                                 
18 CMCs, Bidar and Kollegal did not furnish the information. 
19 In the absence of trade-wise details, the least of the rates was considered in respect of ULBs 
where resolutions were passed.  In ULBs where there were no resolutions, the rate of similar 
ULBs was adopted. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
38 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The details of revenue sources, status of levy and statutory provisions are 
indicated in Appendix 5.1. 
Recommendation 8: Limitations on the ability of the ULBs to raise 
revenues through sources such as property tax, advertisement 
tax, solid waste management cess etc., need to be removed 
urgently.  
 
5.2  Estimation of requirement of funds / expenditure  
In accordance with the provisions20 of KM Act, 1964 and KMC Act, 1976, the 
Commissioner/Chief Officer of each ULB prepares the budget e stimates 
indicating the receipt of funds from various sources and allocates the resources 
to various activities undertaken by it and presents it to the Governing Council 
for approval. After the approval by the Governing Council, ULBs forward the 
budget to the DMA and the Government. 
This shows  that the KM Act, 1964 and the KMC Act, 1976 are not in 
consonance with the provisions of the 74th CAA, as the Constitution provisions 
are silent about the approval of the budget while both the Acts specifically 
mention role of the State Government in sanctioning / modifying the budget.  
However, it was observed that in practice, the Governing Council forwards the 
budget to DMA and the State Government for information. 
5.2.1 Unrealistic budget exercise 
Expenditure estim ation depends on services to be provided by the local 
government and the costs associated with the provision of these services.   It 
should include both the capital and O&M expenditure that the local body will 
have to incur to achieve appropriate service levels.     
(i) During the early 1960s, the Zakaria Committee formulated minimum 
standards of services for different levels of ULBs and estimated the annual 
recurring requirements for each municipal service to be provided by the ULBs.  
The Committee also felt that it was possible to maintain the various services if 
adequate taxes and charges were levied for services provided. 
Since the delivery of municipal services comes with a cost, it was necessary to 
scientifically estimate the cost of each municipal service  to assess the 
requirement and source of funds for efficient delivery.  This was pointed out by 
the 3rd SFC too.  Such an exercise was not undertaken either by ULBs or the 
State Government.  Thus, the budget exercise by ULBs was not based on a 
scientific assessment of the cost that would be incurred in delivery of various 
municipal services as discussed below. 
(ii) The budget was prepared on the basis of expected allocation of funds by 
the Government.  This method of budget preparation suffered from a basic flaw 
as the stipulated date for approval of the budget for ULBs was 15 th January of 
the preceding financial year whereas the State budget was usually placed before 
                                                 
20 Section 287 of KM Act, 1964 and Section 167 to 170 of KMC Act, 1976. 

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
 
 
39 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
the Legislature in the month of March.  The ULBs allocated resources for 
various activities, which would be based on the expected receipt of funds and 
not on the actual receipt of funds.  Any shortfall in receipt of funds would impact 
the execution/implementation of the activities planned.  
Illustrative examples of preparation of unrealistic bud get in each category of 
ULBs is shown in Table 5.7. 
Table 5.7: Statement showing variation in budget in each category of ULB 
(` in lakh) 
Name of the ULB Year 
Receipts Expenditure 
Budget Actuals 
Percentage of 
actuals to 
budget 
Budget Actuals 
Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
CC, Davanagere 2014-15 57,703.78 17,450.73 30 57,821.59 17,758.88 31 
2015-16 65,033.58 19,950.16 31 64,936.77 17,246.72 27 
2016-17 77,767.01 25,328.99 33 78,175.13 23,057.35 29 
2017-18 86,393.97 24,824.81 29 86,680.87 25,840.45 30 
2018-19 30,510.95 23,294.36 76 35,055.00 23,906.63 68 
CMC, 
Doddaballapura 
2014-15 8,884.64 2,063.53 23 9,971.05 1,796.23 18 
2015-16 3,349.38 3,104.63 93 4,198.27 2,359.01 56 
2016-17 3,430.47 2,473.50 72 4,922.64 2,167.31 44 
2017-18 3,765.21 2,385.09 63 5,353.88 2,683.85 50 
2018-19 3,944.29 3,070.68 78 5,326.74 3,465.39 65 
TMC, 
Laxmeshwar 
2014-15 1,933.78 863.94 45 2,026.00 592.30 29 
2015-16 1,579.21 950.85 60 2,095.65 1,070.77 51 
2016-17 1,147.79 1,123.41 98 1,790.18 1,101.54 62 
2017-18 2,191.24 1,266.26 58 2,286.93 1,353.04 59 
2018-19 2,291.99 895.28 39 2,537.60 797.66 31 
TP, Thirthahalli 2014-15 574.35 554.74 97 1,108.08 437.83 40 
2015-16 806.77 548.29 68 1,093.04 404.53 37 
2016-17 794.14 673.68 85 1,410.24 488.65 35 
2017-18 1,058.50 730.26 69 1,891.20 964.03 51 
2018-19 926.83 689.83 74 2,083.45 498.90 24 
Source: Annual accounts of ULBs 
The variation in actual receipts vis-à-vis the budget during the period 2014 -15 
to 2018-19 ranged between 29 to 76 per cent in CC, Davanagere; 23 to 93 per 
cent in CMC, Doddaballapura; 39 to 98 per cent in TMC, Laxmeshwar and 68 
to 97 per cent in TP, Thirthahalli.  The receipts were overestimated in all the 
years except during one year where the actual receipts were in excess of 90 per 
cent.  On the other hand, the expenditure was overestimated by 7 1 per cent on 
an average in CC, Davanagere during 2014 -15 to 201 7-18; by 50 per cent in 
CMC, Doddaballapura during 2015-16 to 2017-18 and by 46 and 37 per cent in 
TMC, Laxmeshwar and  TP, Thirthahalli during 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 
respectively.  Audit noticed that execution of basic infrastructure works such as 
roads, pavements and footpath and road side drains were affected. 
Recommendation 9: Special efforts need to be made to motivate 
the ULBs to prepare their budgets in a scientific manner taking 
into account requirements of capital expenditure as well as a 
realistic projection of funds expected to be mobilised.  
 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
40 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
5.3  Expenditure of urban local bodies  
The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into five major categories such as 
programme expenses, operations and maintenance, general expenses, human 
resource expenses and interest and finance charges.  The details of expenditure 
incurred by ULBs in the State for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 is exhibited in 
Table 5.8. 
Table 5.8: Details of expenditure incurred by ULBs in the State   
(` in crore) 
Year Human 
Resources 
Expenses 
General 
Expenses 
Operation 
and 
Maintenance 
Interest and 
Finance 
Charges 
Programme 
Expenses, 
Grants etc. 
Total 
expenditure 
2014-15 623.30 91.81 1,006.15 49.46 77.18 1,847.91 
2015-16 649.90 102.71 1,355.85 23.71 69.51 2,201.68 
2016-17 703.26 122.98 1,511.75 58.68 81.43 2,478.10 
2017-18 766.27 161.48 1,894.55 68.08 166.49 3,056.88 
2018-19 900.67 172.32 1,714.13 24.52 136.07 2,947.72 
Total  3,643.40 651.32 7,482.43 224.45 530.68 12,532.28 
Source: Information furnished by DMA for 271 ULBs 
The operation and maintenance (O&M) expenses constituted about 60 per cent 
of the total expenditure followed by human resource expenses at 29 per cent.  
The capital expenditure i.e., programme expenses and expenses out of grants 
incurred by ULBs was a mere four21 per cent of the total expenditure.   
5.3.1 Resource-expenditure gap 
The ULBs were able to generate own resources only to the extent of 56 per cent 
of the revenue expenditure during the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19.  A 
comparison of the own revenue to revenue expenditure showed large gaps as 
depicted in Chart 5.3, which needs to be addressed by ULBs.    
Chart 5.3: Resource-expenditure gap in ULBs
 
                                                 
21  This does not include the expenditure incurred by parastatals. 
1022.82 1191.04 1352.53 1517.6 1586.381770.73 2132.17 2396.67
2890.39 2811.64
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19
` in crore
Own Revenue Vs Revenue expenditure
Own revenue Revenue expenditure

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
 
 
41 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
5.3.1.1 Analysis of financial data of urban local bodies 
The Municipal Reforms Cell of DMA furnished ULB -wise details of revenue 
and expenditure for the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19 for 271 ULBs.  This data 
was analysed to study the fiscal autonomy in the ULBs.  The following four 
ratios were considered to establish the fiscal autonomy in ULBs. 
1. Local fiscal autonomy : This is the share of own revenue to the total 
revenue of the ULB. 
2. Local dependency on fiscal transfer : This is the share of Central 
Finance Commission (CFC) and State Finance Commission (SFC) 
grants to the total fiscal revenue of the ULBs.  
3. Coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue sources (self -
reliance): This is the proportion of revenue expenditures that are 
covered through the own revenue sources. 
4. Quality of expenditure: This is the share of O&M expenditure in total 
revenue expenditure. If this ratio is high, the quality of expenditure is 
considered better. 
Local fiscal autonomy and local dependency on fiscal transfer are inversely 
proportional to each other.  Higher the fiscal autonomy lesser is the dependency 
on fiscal transfer. 
The ratio -wise performance of ULBs for the year 2018 -19 is depicted in  
Chart 5.4. 
Chart 5.4: Ratio-wise performance of ULBs for 2018-19 
 
✓ 75 ULBs were dependent on fiscal transfers in excess of 75 per cent of 
their total revenue and in three ULBs, the ratio of own revenue to total 
revenue was higher than 75 per cent. Among the test -checked ULBs, 
CC, Mangaluru, where the share of own revenue was 66 per cent of the 
total revenue was less dependent on fiscal transfers. 
✓ In 26 ULBs, the coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue 
sources was in excess of 75 per cent, of which 11 ULBs had c overage 
equal to or in excess of 100 per cent.  In 28 ULBs, the coverage was less 
than or equal to 25 per cent .  Among the test -checked ULBs, while 
TMC, Kundapura had coverage of 102 per cent, CC, Mangaluru; CMC, 
75 28 17
167
138 104
26
79 140
3 26 10
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Fiscal autonomy Coverage of expenditure Quality of expenditure
Number of ULBS
Per cent
≤ 25 > 25 ≤ 50 > 50 ≤ 75 > 75

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
42 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Ranebennur and TP, Thirthahalli had coverage above 80 per cent and in 
TP, Kamalapura, the coverage was only 22 per cent.  
✓ The quality of expenditure was high (excess of 75 per cent) in 10 ULBs 
and low (less than or equal to 25 per cent) in 17 ULBs. Among the test-
checked ULBs, it was 78 per cent in CC, Mangaluru and it was 26 per 
cent in CMC, Shahabad and TMC, Wadi. 
Thus, it can be seen that CC, Mangaluru was performing better overall among 
the test-checked ULBs.  The other ULBs can explore the possibility of taking 
cues and learning from CC, Mangaluru to improve their performance. 
5.3.2 Extent of utilisation of funds 
A comparison of the total expenditure with total revenue for the period 2014-15 
to 2018 -19 showed that ULBs were able to utilise on an average about  
69 per cent of the available funds each year as depicted in Chart 5.5.   
Chart 5.5: Extent of utilisation of funds
 
The constraints in utilisation of funds could include the following: 
✓ While the CFC guidelines specified the areas for utilisation of funds, the 
guidelines of the State Government governing the allocation and 
utilisation of CFC grants specified the minimum and maximum 
percentage of grants to be allocated and utilised for var ious activities 
such as water supply (min of 15 per cent and max of 30 per cent), UGD 
(min 10 per cent and max 20 per cent), roads (min 10 per cent and max 
15 per cent) etc.  This restricted the autonomy of the ULBs in utilising 
the funds as per their needs.  
✓ The restrictions/limitations on financial and administrative powers of 
ULBs as discussed subsequently in Paragraph 5.4. 
✓ The huge number of vacancies in various cadres, as detailed in the 
Paragraph 6.2.1. 
✓  
69
57
68
76 75
69
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total
Percentage
` in crore
Total Revenue Total expenditure % of expenditure

 Financial resources of Urban local bodies 
 
 
43 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
5.4  Financial powers of urban local bodies  
Fiscal autonomy can be complete only when supported by decentralisation of 
financial and administrative powers.   The decentralisation provides for  
✓ creating an efficient and reliable administration;  
✓ intensify and improve local governance;  
✓ enhances accountability and responsiveness;  
✓ improved capacity of the local people to participate in the decision 
making process, especially with regard to service delivery; and 
✓ increased motivation etc.   
5.4.1 Powers relating to works 
The State Government revised (November 2016) the administrative, technical 
and tender approval powers relating to ULBs for undertaking basic 
infrastructure works.  The administrative approval powers as per the  above 
orders is given in Table 5.9. 
Table 5.9: Statement showing the administrative approval powers for ULBs 
(` in lakh) 
Category 
of ULB 
Commissioner 
/Chief Officer 
Standing 
Committee 
Council DC DMA Government 
CC ≤50  >50 ≤ 100 >100 ≤ 200 >200 ≤ 500 
>500 
 ≤ 1,000 ≥1,000 
CMC ≤15  >15 ≤ 30 >30 ≤ 100 >100 ≤ 500 
TMC ≤5  >5 ≤ 15 >15 ≤ 30 >30 ≤ 500 
TP ≤2  >2 ≤ 10 >10 ≤ 15 >15 ≤ 500 
Source: Government order dated 11 November 2016 
Further, the authorities indicated in the above table had the powers to approve 
tenders as per their administrative powers for tenders involving tender premium 
less than or equal to 5 per cent.   For tender premium greater than 5 per cent but 
less than or equal to 10 per cent, the powers were vested with DMA and for 
tenders up to 1,000 lakhs and beyond 10 per cent, the powers were vested with 
the Government. 
As regards the powers for according technical sanction to estimates, the 
Engineers of CCs, CMCs, TMCs and TPs had powers up to 500 lakh, 50 lakh, 
5 lakh and 5 lakh respectively. 
In comparison, municipal bodies of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan etc., were vested with complete administrative powers. 
5.4.2 Powers relating to other expenditure 
The State Government amended (February 2004) the Karnataka Municipalities 
(Powers of Expenditure) Rules, 1986 wherein expenditure powers w ere 
specified for town and city municipalities.  Review of the expenditure powers 
showed that the municipalities did not have any power to purchase furniture, 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
44 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
vehicles such as car s, van s, jeep s, road roller s, tractor s or other vehicles or 
mechanical equipm ent.  These powers were vested with the Deputy 
Commissioner and DMA.  The municipalities had full powers only for legal 
charges.   Expenditure limits were prescribed for various items, a few of which 
are indicated in Table 5.10.  These limitations have not been revised for more 
than 16 years and are too low considering inflation. 
     Table 5.10: Statement showing the expenditure limits for ULBs 
Sl. 
no. 
Item of expenditure Town 
municipality 
City 
municipality 
1 National celebrations like 
Independence day , 
Republic day etc. 
5,000 in each 
case 
15,000 in 
each case 
2 Tea and light refreshment 
charges at Council and 
Committee meetings 
18,000 per 
annum 
36,000 per 
annum 
3 Major overhauls and 
repairs of vehicle and 
other machinery 
10,000 in 
each case 
50,000 in 
each case 
4 Purchase of stationery 50,000 per 
annum 
1,00,000 per 
annum 
5 Prevention and 
suppression of epidemics 
50,000 per 
annum 
1,50,000 per 
annum 
6 Alleviate distress caused 
by accidental fire or 
floods etc. 
5,000 in each 
case 
20,000 in 
each case 
     Source: Gazette notification dated 3 February 2004 
The restrictions/limitations on the financial powers of ULBs as discussed in the 
above two paragraphs negate the movement towards greater decentralisation.   
Recommendation 1 0: Delegation of powers r elating to works and 
other expenditure needs to be revised in order to ensure 
efficiency.  

 
45 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
6.1  Limited powers over manpower  
Adequate and qualified manpower is a sine qua non  for the empowerment of 
ULBs.   The broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs is depicted in 
Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs 
Sl. 
No. 
Wing/sections Functions 
1. Administration General administration, including meetings of council and 
committees 
2. Revenue Assessment and collection of various taxes, rent, 
advertisements and other property related activities 
3. Accounts Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparation of 
budget etc. 
4. Public health Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management and other 
public health related activities  
5. Engineering Construction / O & M of  roads, drains, buildings, parks, play 
grounds, water supply and street lighting  etc. 
6. Town Planning Town planning activities such as issue of building licences, 
etc.   
7. Welfare Implementation of schemes relating to Social and economic 
development.  
 
The assessment of manpower should be based on the functions undertaken by 
ULBs with a view that majority of the functions which are service oriented have 
to be discharged within a reasonable time period.  This assessm ent could be 
done best by ULBs themselves considering various criteria such as the extent of 
geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, the number 
of properties existing etc.   Audit observed that ULBs neither had the powers to 
assess the staff requirement nor to recruit the required staff.  These powers are 
vested with the State Government.   The State Government assessed the 
requirement of staff based on population alone, as discussed subsequently, and 
without seeking the actual requirement from ULBs. 
 
Further, Section 91A of KMC Act and Section 320 of KM Act allows the State 
Government to transfer any officer or servant of a corporation/municipal 
council to service another corporation/municipal council or local authority or 
any Government department.   The State Government shall lend the services of 
Government officers and employees to ULBs as may be necessary for the 
implementation of any schemes, project or plan assigned t o ULBs.  An appeal 
against any order of ULB imposing penalty or any officer or employee rests 
with the State Government. 
6
Chapter VI
Human Resources
of Urban local bodies

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
46 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Devolution of functionaries  was, thus, rendered ineffective which in turn 
hampered the collection of own revenue, utilisation of devolv ed funds and 
carrying out the functions to the extent of which they were devolved as 
discussed earlier. 
 
6.1.1 Recruitment of staff 
In accordance with the Acts governing ULBs, the State Government regulates 
the classification, method of recruitment, condit ions of service, pay and 
allowance, discipline and conduct of staff and officers of ULBs.  The Karnataka 
Municipalities (Recruitment of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 and the 
Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Common Recruitment of Officers and 
Employees) Rules, 2010, list out the Appointing Authorities for various 
categories of posts as indicated in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Statement showing the appointing authorities for recruitment 
Category of post Authority 
Group A  State Government  
Group B and C 
   
Director of Municipal Administration (DMA) or Officer 
empowered by Government 
Group D  
   
Deputy Commissioner (DC) for City Municipal Councils (CMCs), 
Town Municipal Councils (TMCs) and Town Panchayats (TPs) 
and Municipal Commissioner for City Corporations (CCs)  
Source: Information furnished by DMA 
The recruitment to Group A, B and C posts was done through the Karnataka 
Public Service Commission (KPSC).  The various stages of recruitment through 
KPSC are depicted in Chart 6.1. 
Chart 6.1: Flow chart of recruitment process through KPSC 
 
Analysis of the information furnished by DMA for the period 2014 -15 to  
2018-19 showed the following: 
DMA
Need assessment 
for various 
cadres
UDD
for approval
FD 
for consent
DMA
for forwarding 
to KPSC 
KPSC
for notifying, 
conducting 
examination and 
selection of candidates
DMA
for appointment 
after receipt of 
selection list

 Human resources of Urban local bodies 
 
47 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 • The total time taken commencing from forwarding the proposals to 
KPSC till final appointment of persons ranged between 744 to 1,603 
days for various cadres.   
• There were delays ranging from 3 to 425 days in sending the proposals 
to KPSC by DMA after receipt of consent from UDD.  
• KPSC had taken a total time ranging from 400 to 1,215 days for 
completion of the entire process  starting from notifying to selection of 
candidates and  
• DMA had delayed in appointing the staff after receipt of the selection 
list from KPSC by 162 to 608 days. 
6.1.2 Powers over staff 
The powers to promote officials, initiate disciplinary action, impose  penalties 
etc., in respect of the officials of ULBs, other than on deputation, have also not 
been delegated to ULBs.  The 4 th SFC recommended that ULBs should have 
discretionary powers to recruit the human resources required for functioning.  
Action was yet to be initiated in this regard.  The 2nd ARC also opined that city 
government should have the power to appoint all officials including the 
Commissioner and to hold them to account. 
6.1.3 Improper assessment of requirement of staff 
The State Government notified the Cadre and Recruitment Rules (C&R Rules) 
for Municipalities and Corporations during January 2011 and April 2011 
respectively.  The basis for determining the sanctioned strength for each ULB 
was not furnished to audit.  However, a review of the  C&R Rules prima facie 
showed that population of ULBs alone was considered as criteria for 
determining the sanctioned strength and other criteria such as the extent of 
geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, the number 
of properti es existing etc. was not considered.  The urban population of 
Karnataka, which was 23.58 million as per 2011 census was projected at 29.62 
million as of 2019.     
Analysis showed that the sanctioned strength was not commensurate with the 
population and required revision except in 10 (indicated in blue and red) out of 
the 44 test-checked ULBs where the number of employees per 1,000 population 
was more or less the same22 as per census 2001 and census 2011 as indicated in 
Chart 6.2.    
  
                                                 
22 Difference of less than 0.25 between the ratios for 2001 and 2011 was considered as 
acceptable by audit. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
48 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Chart 6.2: Employees per 1,000 population as per census 2001 and 2011 in 44 test-
checked ULBs 
   
The sanctioned strength varied from 2.24 to 5.80 employees per 1,000 
population (2001) to 1.94 to 5.38 employees per 1,000 population (2011).  The 
details are given in Appendix 6.1. 
Further, the C&R Rules were deficient since they failed to specify function-wise 
requirement of staff.  Function-wise staff assessment, if carried out, would bring 
in more transparency in terms of specifying the roles and responsibilities for 
each position, requirement of skills and qualification for each role etc.   This 
would also prevent any overlap of functions between two persons/posts.  To cite 
an example, there was no sanctioned post of Environment Engineer in TPs and 
the existing Health Inspector was in-charge of solid waste management. 
6.2  Sufficiency and functioning of staff  
6.2.1 Insufficient staff in Urban local bodies 
The discharge of functions would be ineffective with a huge vacancy position.  
Scrutiny of staff position of ULBs in the State revealed vacancies ranging from 
20 per cent (Group D) to 55 per cent (Group C) among the various categories 
as shown in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Statement showing the staff position in ULBs 
Category Sanctioned 
strength 
Working strength Vacancy Percent
age of 
vacancy 
Appointment Deputation Outsource / 
daily wage / 
others 
Total 
Group A 670 206 160 10 376 294 44 
Group B 1,088 750 66 7 823 265 24 
Group C 17,149 5,414 1,027 1,312 7,753 9,396 55 
Group D 37,586 12,735 77 17,249 30,061 7,525 20 
Total 56,493 19,105 1,330 18,578 39,013 17,480 31 
Source: Information furnished by DMA 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
Davangere
HDMC
Kalaburagi
Mangaluru
Arasikere
Bagalakote
Bhadravati
Bidar
Channapatna
Chitradurga
Doddaballapur
Gangavathi
Karwar
Kolar
Kollegal
Koppal
Mandya
Nipani
Ranebennur
Shahbad
Tiptur
Aland
Bailhongal
Bannur
Basavana Bagewadi
Bhatkal
Hangal
Harappanahalli
Kampli
Kundapura
Laxmeshwar
Maddur
Madhugiri
Manvi
Sakleshpur
Sankeshwar
Savanur
Srinivaspura
Vijayapura
Wadi
Hirekerur
Kamalapura
Mudigere
Thirthahalli
Per 1000 population 2001 census (sanctioned strength) Per 1000 population 2011 census (sanctioned strength)

 Human resources of Urban local bodies 
 
49 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 Cadre-wise analysis revealed the following: 
➢ The vacancy was high in crucial posts of Group A in CCs with 92 per 
cent of Technical Assistants (Environment), 80 per cent  of Deputy 
Commissioner (Administration), 30 per cent of Chief Audit Officer and 
50 per cent of Accounts Officer posts being vacant.  This hampered the 
efficient discharge of the devolved functions such as Solid waste 
management, regulation of slaughter ho uses etc.,  besides resulting in 
absence of internal audit and adequate supervision.   
➢ The vacancies in technical posts such as Senior/Junior Health Inspectors 
and Assistant/Junior Engineers which ranged between 22 per cent to 50 
per cent affected the delivery of public health services and development 
works besides resulting in poor utilisation of funds.  The vacancies were 
more in CCs. 
➢ Audit also observed that vacancies to the extent of 65 per cent in the 
cadres of Assistant Revenue Officer/Revenue Inspecto r affected the  
collection of revenue/arrears resulting in lesser realisation of own 
revenue as discussed in paragraph 5.1.2.   
➢ Vacancies of 72 per cent of Accountant posts in CCs affected proper 
accounting and maintenance of basic records.  In contrast, there was 
excess working strength of 44 per cent of Accountants in other ULBs.  
This was due to deputation of Accountants in excess of the sanctioned 
strength.  Though, no provision for deputation to the post of Accountant 
as per the C&R Rules, there were as many as 201 Accountants who were 
on deputation in the ULBs. 
➢ As against the 234 sanctioned posts of Gardener in 40 test -checked 
ULBs, only 128 (55 per cent) were working.  In respect of other 4 ULBs, 
which were TPs, there was no sanctioned post of gardeners though parks 
existed in these TPs.  This affected the regular maintenance of parks. 
The 3rd SFC had identified that day to day development works were affected by 
vacancies and recommended filling up all vacant posts. Though the status of 
manpower was furnished to the DMA by ULBs at regular intervals, no action 
was taken to fill the vacancies.   
Analysis of the working strength in the 3423 test-checked ULBs, in terms of the 
number of employees per 1 ,000 population as per 2019 projected population, 
showed that it ranged between 0.98 and 3.85 as indicated in Chart 6.3.  
  
                                                 
23 As projected population was not available for 10 ULBs, the same was not considered for 
analysis. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
50 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Chart 6.3: Working strength of ULBs in terms of employees per 1,000 population in test-
checked ULBs 
 
While CMCs, Bagalkote and Koppal (indicated in red colour) had less than one 
employee for every 1,000 people, 14 ULBs (dark red colour) had between 1 and 
2 employees, 13 ULBs (blue c olour) had between 2 and 3 employees and 5 
ULBs (gold colour) had more than 3 employees.  Evidently, the ULBs lacked 
adequate manpower to carry out efficient delivery of service. 
Recommendation 11: Adequate powers over manpower resources 
should be delegate d to ULBs in matters such as assessment and 
recruitment of required staff to ensure availability and 
qualified manpower for discharging functions.   
6.2.2 Functioning of the Municipal Commissioner/Chief Officer 
The Commissioner and Chief Officers of ULBs we re Government servants.   
The Municipal Commissioner/Chief Officer was the executive head of the 
Municipality.  As per Section 327(1) of KM Act, a Chief Officer had to be 
appointed by the DMA from among the cadre of Chief Officers of the Karnataka 
Municipal Administrative Service (KMAS).  Further, as per Section 365(1) of 
the KM Act, State Government was not to post non-KMAS officers to posts 
specified for KMAS officers and such appointment was held arbitrary and 
illegal.  The 4th SFC also opined that a municipal commissioner/chief officer of 
ULB should be from the ranks of the trained KMAS cadre and recommended 
that immediate steps should be initiated in this matter. 
Review of the postings of the Municipal Commissioners and Chief Officers in 
all ULBs other than CCs showed that as many as 181 out of 275 persons who 
were not from KMAS were discharging the functions of the Municipal 
Commissioner/Chief Officer as at the end of March 2019 in contravention of 
Section 365(1) of the KM Act.  Audit observed that of the 181 persons, 15 were 
Group B Officers (Environment Engineers, Revenue Officers) and 166 were 
Group C officials (Community Affairs Officers, Managers, Sr. Health 
Inspectors, First Division Assistants etc.).  Discharging the duties of the 
Municipal Commis sioner/Chief Officer by personnel who are neither from 
KMAS nor of a sufficient senior rank could jeopardise the efficacy of service 
delivery by ULBs adversely and is violative of the provisions of Section 365(1) 
of the KM Act. 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Davangere
HDMC
Kalaburagi
Mangaluru
Arasikere
Bagalakote
Bhadravati
Bidar
Channapatna
Chitradurga
Doddaballapur
Gangavathi
Karwar
Kolar
Kollegal
Koppal
Mandya
Ranebennur
Tiptur
Aland
Basavana…
Bhatkal
Hangal
Harappanahalli
Kundapura
Maddur
Madhugiri
Manvi
Sakleshpur
Savanur
Srinivaspura
Hirekerur
Mudigere
Thirthahalli
Per 1000 population 2019 projections (working strength) 

 Human resources of Urban local bodies 
 
51 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
6.2.3 Postings of KMAS officers 
As per the information furnished by DMA, there were 175 KMAS officers as at 
the end of March 2020, who were to be posted exclusively as 
Commissioners/Chief Officers.  Audit, however, noticed that 30 per cent  of 
these officers were working either in parastatals or were on deputation to 
various departments .  Audit also noticed that few of the officers were 
discharging duties of Revenue Officers, Managers, Sr. Health Inspectors in 
ULBs.  The details of posting of these officers are detailed in Table 6.4. 
Table 6.4: Details of posting of KMAS Officers 
Sl. 
no. 
Postings Number 
of officers 
Details 
1 Working 
in ULBs 
79 As Chief Officers/Commissioners 
2 04 As Council/Committee Secretaries 
3 21 As Revenue Officers/Managers/Sr. Health Inspectors 
4 
Working 
at other 
places 
34 In Government departments/parastatals of UDD viz., 
DMA, UDAs, KUIDFC, BMRDA etc. 
5 04 Deputation to State Pollution Board, Collegiate 
Education, Member of Legislative Assembly and 
Nijaguna Ambigara Chowdaiah Nigama 
6 05 In BBMP 
7 
Others 
23 Training 
8 02 Suspension 
9 03 Awaiting posting 
Source: Information furnished by DMA 
The discharge of duties of Revenue Officers, Managers, Sr. Health Inspectors 
by KMAS Officers and that of Chief Officer/Commissioner by non-KMAS 
officers such as  Revenue Officers, Managers, Sr. Health Inspectors etc., as 
stated in the above paragraph besides contravening t he provisions of C&R 
Rules, creates an ironical situation where the KMAS officers, who are recruited 
to function as the executive head of ULBs report to non -KMAS officers.   
Further, deputing KMAS officers to other departments defeats the very 
objective of the having separate Municipal Administrative Service. 
Recommendation 1 2: Personnel from KMAS should be deployed in 
ULBs to the maximum extent possible.  In particular, it needs 
to be ensured that ULBs are headed by persons of sufficient 
seniority and calib re.  
6.2.4 Filling up of posts on deputation  
The C&R Rules prescribed filling up of posts under various cadres through 
modes such as direct recruitment, deputation, promotion etc.   The deputation 
mode was prescribed only for certain posts.  Audit observed that posts under 
Group C such as Junior Health Inspector, Community Organiser, First Division 
Assistant, Second Division Assistant etc., were filled up through deputation 
both in CCs and other ULBs, though there was no provision under the C&R 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
52 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Rules for deputation to these posts.  Further analysis of the sanctioned strength 
revealed that 140 (40 per cent) out of 346 posts of Group A in CCs such as 
Deputy Commissioner, Executive Engineer, Chief Accounts Officer, Assistant 
Executive Engineer, Statistical Officer, Health Officer, Council Secretary etc., 
were earmarked for recruitment either through deputation or outsourcing.   
The provision to fill up large number of posts through deputation especially in 
the cadre of Group A and filling up of Group C posts through deputation despite 
the provisions of C&R Rules impacts effective functioning of ULBs. This also 
impacts the accountability of such personnel to the Governing Council and 
Commissioner/Chief Officer of ULBs as ULBs have no control over them either 
to initiate disciplinary action or to repatriate them to the parent department.  The 
State Government may consider creating exclusive sub municipal services such 
as municipal health service, urban engineering service etc., or contemporary 
contractual p osts such as financial expert, resource mobilisation expert, 
IEC/Documentation expert, Event management expert, social development 
expert etc., which is a best practice being adopted in Madhya Pradesh.  
6.3  Capacity Building  
Capacity building is important for strengthening the capabilities of personnel 
and for equipping them with advanced skills to deliver better services.  The 
training activities for municipal employees were carried out by State Institute 
of Urban Development (SIUD) located at Mysuru.  The SIUD is responsible for 
designing and organising programmes for all cadres of ULBs and also for the 
elected representatives.  The Governing body of SIUD approves the annual 
training action plan for urban functionaries of ULB s.  The DMA nominates 
trainees from various ULBs for the training.  Audit observed that SIUD/DMA 
did not consult ULBs for analysing their training needs. 
During the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19, the SIUD had spent `13.04 crores 
towards training of Elected Representatives, Project Directors of DUDC, 
Municipal Commissioners, Chief Officers and other staff of ULBs.  Check of 
the training slots provided and those actually attended by officers/staff of ULBs 
showed that the utilisation of training slots in 128 out of 194 courses was less 
than 75 per cent.  These 194 courses have been grouped into 15 categories and 
the category -wise details are given in Appendix 6.2.  The SIUD had also 
conducted 125 training programmes for elected representatives during the above 
period.  We noticed that percentage of slots filled up ranged between 33 to 55 
per cent.  Poor utilisation of training facilities resulted in non -acquisition of 
enhanced skills by personnel and poor participation of elected representatives is 
a cause for concern.   
6.3.1 Absence of evaluation  
Training is a continuous process and should be continuously reviewed.  This 
could be done through evaluation.  Evaluation is necessary to ascertain whether 
the desired expectations were met or not and to revise and redefine the course 
to make it more effective.  Audit observed that no mechanism existed to 
evaluate the impact of the training imparted to the staff of ULBs on the  

 Human resources of Urban local bodies 
 
53 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
discharge of functions.  In the absence of evaluation , audit could not ascertain 
whether the training imparted helped the participants in improving their skills 
and whether the course design needed revision.   Evidently, training was a 
routine exercise.  Audit also observed that a database of trained personn el was 
not maintained by the department. 
6.4  Performance management  
Performance management is an essential tool of management and plays an 
important role in developing the competence of employees involved in service 
delivery.  It involves classification of  duties, defining performance standards, 
deployment of right personnel at right place and the capacity of staff to achieve 
their targets.   
 
Audit observed that the C&R Rules made it mandatory for all employees to pass 
Kannada language examination, unless exempted, and service examinations of 
which Municipal and local boards examination, General Law I & II and 
accounts examination was compulsory for all cadres.  The accounts examination 
was classified into Accounts Lower and Accounts Higher.  While it was 
sufficient for cadres such as Second Division Assistant and Horticulture 
Assistant to pass Accounts Lower , it was mandatory for Office Manager, 
Accounts Superintendent, AEE, JE, Environment Engineer, FDA, Work 
Inspector, Health Inspector, Revenue Inspectors etc., to pass Accounts Higher. 
The direct recruits appointed after publishing the C&R Rules were required to 
undergo a basic level computer course as prescribed by DMA and pass the test.    
 
Moreover, if any employee does not pass the service examination prescribed for 
a post, he/she would not be eligible for promotion.  Further, for earning annual 
increment and for confirmation against the substantive vacancy held, the official 
was required to pass the service examinations specified for the cadre to which  
he/she was appointed. 
 
While the above requirements would definitely help in continuous professional 
development, it would be desirable to identify a set of performance indicators 
and performance metrics as indicated below, which can improve the efficiency 
of   
• Revenue collection – setting of monthly targets, incentivisation for 
target achievements etc., thereby minimising the demand and collection 
ratio.  
• Fund management – activity/function-wise and need based allocation of 
funds, periodic review of utilisation of funds etc. 
• Asset management -  identification of created assets, creation of 
database for recording such assets (stock registers), periodic valuation 
and their protection. 
The State Government/ULBs may consider introducing such performance 
indicators. 

55 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
The 74 th Amendment introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities) 
containing Articles 243P to 243ZG in the Constitution.  This 
amendment which came into effect on 1 June 1993 authorised State 
Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions 
of self-government and make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities (Article 243W).   The 12 th Schedule lists out the 18 
functions to be carried out by ULBs. 
Each State had to enact a legislation to implement the 74 th CAA.  The 
ULBs in the State were governed by the KM Act, 1964 and the KMC 
Act, 1976.   The State Government carried out necessary amendments 
to these Acts to comply with the provisions of 74 th CAA.  These 
amendments were, however, not supported by firm ac tion thus, 
defeating the spirit of the constitutional amendment specifically with 
reference to devolution of functions and creation of appropriate 
institutional mechanisms. 
Transfer of functions  - The State Government transferred 17 out of 
the 18 functio ns.  Fire Services was not transferred.  O f the 17 
7
Chapter VII
Conclusion
Whether provisions of 74th CAA have been adequately covered
in State legislations?1
Audit Objective
Whether ULBs were empowered by the State Government to discharge
their functions effectively through the creation of appropriately
designed institutions/institutional mechanisms and the functioning
thereof?
2
Audit Objective

Report No 2 of the year 2020 
 
 
56 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
functions, 12 were obligatory and 5 were discretionary for CCs and it 
was 11 and 6 respectively for CMCs/TMCs/TPs.  Further, ULBs were 
solely responsible for only three functions.  They had no role in two 
functions and had limited role in eight functions.  While the ULBs were 
mere implementing agencies for three functions, they functioned as 
implementing agency under Roads and Bridges besides being 
responsible for implementation of this function within thei r 
jurisdiction.  The discharge of devolved functions was thus, highly 
restricted. 
Formation of Councils - Out of 273 ULBs, elections were not held, 
though due, in 23 ULBs as there were court cases relating to 
reservation policy of the Government in respect  of wards.  In 187 of 
the balance 250 ULBs where elections were held, councils were not 
formed owing to court cases regarding rotation in reservations for the 
offices of the Mayor/Dy. Mayor and President / Vice  President.  
Hence, Administrators were appointed to these 210 ULBs.  This 
rendered the democratic process meaningless. 
Mayoral tenure - In the State, the term of office of Mayor and Deputy 
Mayor in the case of CCs was one year from the date of election while 
the term of the President and Vice President in the case of other ULBs 
was for a period of thirty months from the date of their election.  The 
tenures were not coterminous with the duration of the Municipality.  
The term of Mayor was too little for bringing in stability and to provide 
a long term vision.  The Mayors of cities in Karnataka are on a weak 
footing.  
Committees – Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the 
CCs except BBMP.  Hence, there was no community participation in 
local governance. Though District Planning Committees were 
constituted in 29 out of 30 districts, meetings were not held regularly 
resulting in non-preparation of the consolidated District Development 
Plan involving matters of common interest between the panchayats and 
the municipalities . Metropolitan Plannin g Committee, though 
constituted for Bengaluru area, did not prepare a comprehensive 
development plan. 
State Finance Commission  - There were delays in constitution of 
SFCs ranging from 10 days to 1,606 days (1st to 4th SFC).  Hence, 4th 
SFC was in place instead of 6 th SFC due.  Acceptance and 
implementation of the SFC recommendations were also delayed by 
238 days to 1,284 days.  The State Government had not implemented 
many of the recommendations of SFC and undertook modifications 
of recommendations relating to fiscal devolution.  This was a setback 
to the process of strengthening ULBs. 

Conclusion 
 
 
57 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
District Urban Development Cell  – The action plans of ULBs for 
development works to be taken up under municipal funds were being 
approved by DUDC after ap proval by the Council.  This system 
undermined the autonomy of ULBs. 
Impact of parastatals on ULBs  – The functions of urban/town 
planning, regulation of land use, water supply & sanitation and slum 
development were delivered by parastatals  in the State.  These 
parastatals had their own governing bodies which did not include 
elected representative of ULBs.  The State did not amend the statutes 
so as to make the parastatals accountable to ULBs.  This arrangement 
infringed on the ability of UL Bs to discharge their mandated 
functions and undermined the objective of accountability to the 
people. 
 
The 74th CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the Central and State 
Governments besides empowering them to raise their own revenue.  
The fiscal trans fers constituted about 63 per cent of the revenue of 
ULBs during the period 2014 -15 to 2018 -19.  However, there was 
shortfall in release of the committed funds by the State Government.  
As against `44,691 crore to be released to ULBs as per SFC 
recommendations, only `17,119 crore was released during the period 
2014-15 to 2018 -19.  Grant of `12,007.65 crore  released to 
parastatals to service borrowings on behalf of ULBs was deducted 
from the releases to all ULBs resulting in short release of funds to 
ULBs that had not availed any loan.  The assigned revenue in the 
form of duty on transfer of immovable property was released 
belatedly each year during the period 2014 -18 and it was yet to be 
released for the year 2018-19. 
The share of own revenue to total revenue of ULBs for the period 
2014-15 to 2018 -19 was only 37 per cent . The ULBs lacked 
autonomy in generating their own revenue.  While the authority to 
collect certain taxes like property tax, advertise ment tax vested with 
ULBs, powers pertaining to the rates and revision thereof 
Whether ULBs have access and powers to raise financial 
resources commensurate with their functions?3
Audit Objective

Report No 2 of the year 2020 
 
 
58 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
(advertisement tax), procedure of collection (property tax), method 
of assessment, exemptions, concessions (property tax, advertisement 
tax) etc., vested with the State Government.  The intervention of the 
State Government constrained the ULBs.   Besides, omissions such 
as absence of reliable and complete database of properties, 
deficiencies in maintenance of demand, collection and balance 
registers, non-revision of rates periodi cally though empowered etc., 
hampered the revenue generation of ULBs.   
Budget preparation exercise was flawed and unrealistic .  Scientific 
estimation of cost of each municipal service was not carried out, 
leading to huge variations between estimates and actuals.  ULBs were 
able to generate own resources to the extent of only 56 per cent of 
revenue expenditure and had utilised on an average about 69 per cent 
of the available funds.  The expenditure constraints included limited 
financial and administrative p owers to ULBs, rigid guidelines for 
allocation and utilisation CFC grants by  the State Government and 
huge number of vacancies. 
 
ULBs were not vested with the powers to assess staff requirement 
and recruit staff.  These were vested with the State Government.  
Population alone was considered for assessment of requirement.  
Further, the State had the powers to regulate classification, method 
of recruitment, condition s of service, pay and allowances, initiate 
disciplinary action on staff of ULBs, transfer staff across ULBs or to 
other Government departments. 
The C&R Rules framed by State Government failed to specify 
function wise requir ement of staff.  As a result, there was no 
transparency in terms of specifying the roles and responsibilities for 
each position, requirement of skills and qualification for each role 
etc. 
The ULBs lacked adequate manpower as there were huge vacancies 
across all cadres affecting efficient delivery of services.  Though the 
State Government was aware of the status of manpower, it had not 
Whether ULBs have powers to mobilise and incentivise human 
resources commensurate with their functions?4
Audit Objective

Conclusion 
59 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
taken action to fill up the vacancies.  Further, as many as 181 persons 
who were not from KMAS were discharging the duties of Municipal 
Commissioner/Chief Officer in violation of the statutory provisions.  
On the contrary, 2 1 KMAS officers were discharging duties as 
Revenue Officers/Managers/Sr. Health Inspectors.  This impacts the 
efficacy of service delivery by ULBs.  Capacity building exercise was 
also deficient. 
Bengaluru          (E. P. Nivedita) 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit-I)
 Karnataka 
Countersigned 
New Delhi     (Rajiv Mehrishi) 
The      Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
04.08.2020
05.08.2020

Appendix 
61 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4, Page 2) 
Organisation structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State 
CCs
Elected body headed by Mayor and
assisted by Standing Committees Commissioner
Chief 
Accounts 
Officer
Chief 
Engineer
Revenue 
Officer
Chief 
Development 
Officer
Town 
Planning 
Officer
Chief 
Health 
Officer
State level 
CMCs/TMCs/TPs
Elected body headed by 
President and assisted by 
Standing Committees
Municipal 
Commissioner /   Chief 
Officer
Health Officer Engineer Revenue Officer Accountant
Additional Chief Secretary to 
Government, UDD
Secretary to Government, UDD
Director, Municipal 
Administartion
Director, Town 
Planning
Director, Urban 
Land Transport
Commissioner, BBMP

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
62 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4, Page 2) 
List of parastatals and their functions 
Sl. 
No. 
Parastatal Functions 
1 Karnataka Urban Water 
Supply and Drainage 
Board 
Formed in August 1974. Responsible for providing water supply 
and drainage facilities to all urban areas in the State other than 
Bengaluru city.  It is also responsible for operation and 
maintenance, wherever entrusted with. 
2 Karnataka Urban 
Infrastructure 
Development and Finance 
Corporation 
Established in November 1993.  Responsible to prepare, formulate 
and implement projects, schemes and programmes relating to 
infrastructure development in the urban areas of th e state and 
provide technical and financial consultancy. 
3 Karnataka Slum 
Development Board 
Constituted in July 1975. Responsible for slum improvement / 
clearance / rehabilitation of slum dwellers in the State. 
4 Bengaluru Water Supply 
and Sewerage Board 
Formed in September 1964. Responsible for water supply and 
sewage disposal within the jurisdiction of Bruhat Bengaluru 
Mahanagara Palike area. 
5 Bengaluru Development 
Authority 
Set up in 1976. Responsible for preparation of Comprehensive 
Development Plan  for Bengaluru metropolitan region and 
development of infrastructure, provision of development -related 
sites and services, the housing needs of underprivileged citizens in 
Bengaluru. 
6 Bengaluru Metropolitan 
Region Development 
Authority 
Formed in 2007. Re sponsible for planning, coordinating and 
supervising the proper and orderly development of the areas within 
the Bangalore Metropolitan Region (BMR) which 
comprises Bangalore Urban district,  Bangalore Rural 
district and Ramanagara District. 
7 State Road Transportation 
Corporations (KSRTC, 
NWKRTC, NEKRTC, 
BMTC) 
State Road Corporation was established in August 1961 and was 
later split (February 1997) into four separate corporations.    These 
corporations are responsible for providing quality transport service 
to the travelling public in the State and cities.   
8 Urban Development 
Authorities  
The Urban Development Authorities established in all district 
headquarters, under Karnataka Urban Development Authorities Act 
1987, are responsible for planning and prom oting and securing the 
development of the urban area and for these purposes the 
Authorities shall have the power to acquire, hold, manage and 
dispose of moveable and immovable property, whether within or 
outside the urban area under its jurisdiction, to ca rryout buildings, 
engineering and other operations and generally to do all things 
necessary or expedient for the purpose of such development and for 
purposes incidental thereto.  
9 Town Planning 
Authorities 
The Town Planning Authorities established under Karnataka Town 
and Country Planning Act, 1961 are responsible for preparation of 
master plans for urban and rural settlements, approval for formation 
of layouts, providing technical assistance to various government 
departments/local bodies for orderly deve lopment of cities and 
towns etc. 
10 Karnataka Industrial Area 
Development Board 
Established in the year 1966. Responsible for promoting rapid and 
orderly establishment and development of industries and for 
providing industrial infrastructural facilities and other amenities in 
Industrial areas in Karnataka. 
Source: Information furnished by parastatals 

Appendix 
63 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3, Page 4) 
List of selected ULBs 
Sl. 
No 
Division District Units Selected for Sample 
City 
Corporation 
City Municipal 
Council 
Town Municipal 
Council 
Town 
Panchayat 
1 
Belagavi 
Bagalkote Bagalkote 
2 Belagavi Nippani Sankeshwara, 
Bailhongal 
3 Dharwad Hubballi-
Dharwad 
4 Gadag Lakshmeshwar 
5 Haveri Ranebennur Hangal, 
Savanur 
Hirekerur 
6 Uttara Kannada Karwar Bhatkal 
7 Vijayapura Basavana 
Bagevadi 
8 
Bengaluru 
Bengaluru Rural Doddaballapura Vijayapura 
9 Bengaluru Urban 
10 Chikkaballapura 
11 Chitradurga Chitradurga 
12 Davanagere Davanagere Harappanahalli 
13 Kolar Kolar Srinivasapura 
14 Ramanagara Channapatna 
15 Shivamogga Bhadravathi Thirthahalli 
16 Tumakuru Tiptur Madhugiri 
17 
Kalaburagi 
Ballari Kampli Kamalapura 
18 Bidar Bidar 
19 Kalaburagi Kalaburagi Shahabad Aland, Wadi 
20 Koppal Gangavathi 
Koppal 
21 Raichur Manvi 
22 Yadgir 
23 Mysuru Chamarajanagara Kollegal 
24 Chikkamagaluru Mudigere 
25 Dakshina 
Kannada 
Mangalore 
26 Hassan Arasikere Sakleshpur 
27 Kodagu 
28 Mandya Mandya Maddur, 
29 Mysuru Bannur 
30 Udupi Kundapura 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
64 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.6.2, Page 20) 
Non-implementation of SFC recommendations 
Sl. 
No. 
Recommendations Action taken by Government 
4th SFC 
1 The Rules pertaining to the power of expenditure of the 
Municipalities need to be revised regularly to 
commensurate with their functional needs  
Delegation of powers with respect 
to  functions not revised 
2 The Rules relating to penalties, fines and charges 
provided under the Municipal Acts for control of 
nuisances and for regulatory and enforcement 
functions are very minimal and not revised for decades. 
Rules relating to Penalties, fines 
and charges  not revised  
3 An institute should be set up to train city 
managers/urban specialists in management of cities in 
cooperation with IIMB, IISC, IIT and other leading 
institutions with core competence.   
Yet to be constituted 
4 State Municipal Advisory Committee   may be set up 
to advise the state/department concerned on critical 
issues of municipal affairs.  
State Mun icipal Advisory 
Committee not constituted 
5 It is recommended that the office of the DUDC should 
be encouraged to act as PPP advisory to the ULBs in 
the districts or in other words to start with bigger bodies 
Government yet to issue orders in 
this regard 
3rd SFC 
6 The system of Ombudsman may be introduced in 
Karnataka having jurisdiction over the Panchayat Raj 
Institutions and Urban Local Bodies.  
Not appointed. Lokayukta acts as 
Ombudsman in Karnataka 
7 Alternate sources of energy  may be used for stre et 
lights  (solar energy, wind power)  
Action yet to be taken by ULBs 
8 The Government should give additional grants to 
provide underground drainage to all the urban areas 
Separate fund not given by UGD 
2nd SFC 
9 The State Government should give the in terest part of 
the loan instalments due as subsidy.  This should be 
outside the devolution recommended for Urban Local 
Bodies. The subsidy towards interest should be given 
only to those Institutions who make regular repayment 
of loan instalments.    
Loan repayment included as part of 
devolution.   
10 The Government should evolve a human resources 
management policy and this should include regular 
recruitment and training of personnel. Unqualified and 
lower cadre officials are placed in charge of posts of 
Chief Officers of Town Municipal Councils and Town 
Panchayats. These persons should be replaced by 
qualified persons. 
No HRM policy prescribed. 

Appendix 
 
65 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Source: SFC reports and information furnished by UDD/DMA 
1st SFC 
11 Creation of Common Valuation Authority for both 
urban and rural areas. 
Not created 
12 KUWS&DB sh ould be entrusted with only 
construction and bulk supply of water, and Urban 
Local Bodies should be in charge of distribution and 
collection of water rates.   
KUWSDB is in-charge of O&M in 
some ULBs 
13 Drinking water supply for both rural and urban areas,  
other than for Bangalore, may be entrusted to one 
department at the state level. The KUWS&DB may be 
charged with the responsibility of execution of 
integrated water supply programme 
There are two separate agencies for 
Urban and Rural areas. 
KRW&SA and KUWS&DB 
14 Integration of urban civic service agencies with elected 
Urban Local Bodies 
Not done 
15 The Government may enact one common legislation   
relating to CCs, and Municipalities with the provisions 
of the 74th amendment of the constitution. This may be 
entitled “Karnataka Urban Local Bodies Act”. 
Common Act for CC and 
Municipalities not enacted.  
16 Cesses like library cess, beggary cess, education cess, 
health cess and water cess etc., should be abolished.   
Not abolished 
17 Parking fees for motor vehicles should be charged in 
all commercial areas, as it Is likely to bring in 
considerable revenue in big cities and towns. Further, 
Urban Local Bodies should provide ‘towing services’ 
for stranded vehicles, and charge for the same.   
Action not taken  e ither by 
Government or by ULBs impose 
such fees. 
18 Full cost for water charges should be levied for the 
services rendered to the urban dwellers.  
Full O&M cost not recovered 
19 The existing urban development authorities including 
BDA should be brought u nder the respective elected 
municipal bodies. ‘Slum improvement’ should also be 
brought under these bodies 
Government has not amended 
respective Acts to bring them under 
ULBs, 
20 Town planning units, wherever existing, may be 
transferred to municipalities. Even functions like urban 
forestry should be entrusted to elected municipal 
bodies. 
TPAs not transferred to ULBs 
21 The Commission recommends abolition of the 
Directorate of Municipal Administration.  
DMA not abolished 
22 All decisions relating to ser vice conditions of 
municipal employees may be taken by the respective 
Urban Local Bodies. 
ULBs  doesn’t have any role   
relating to service matters of  ULB 
staff. 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
66 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2.7, Page 38) 
Statement showing the details of revenue sources identified by 4th SFC, 
status of levy and statutory provisions 
Sl. 
No 
Revenue sources Status of levy Provisions as per Act & Rules 
KMC Act KM Act GoK Order & Circular 
Reference 
Tax Revenue 
1 Property Tax Levied Sec-103 b (i) Sec- 94-1 b (i) 
2 Advertisement 
Tax 
Levied Sec-103 b (vi) Sec-94-1 b 
(xiii) 
3 Tax on non-
motorised 
Vehicles 
Levied (only by 
CCs) 
Sec-103 b (v) 
Omitted during 
2003 
4 Boats Levied  (applicable 
to only Coastal 
areas) 
Schedule V 
5 Animals and 
Dogs 
Not Levied Schedule V 
Non-Tax Revenue 
1 Birth and Death 
Certificate Fees 
Levied Karnataka Registration of 
Birth & Death Rule 1999 
(Ann-II) & 
 DMA:MRC:CR-
10:2007-08 Dt. 
06.08.2010 
2 Market Fees Levied Public Markets : 
Sec-369 
Private Markets: 
Sec 372 (2) 
Sec 244 (1) 
3 Shandi fees Levied Sec-137 
4 Bus Stand Fee Levied Sec-348 Sec-138 
5 Building Plan / 
License approval 
fee 
Levied Para No. 3.10.2 of 
Karnataka Municipalities 
Model Building Bye-
laws-2017 
6 Trade License. Levied Sec-2(19) & 369 Sec-256 (a) & 
Part I of Sch. 
XIII 
7 Khata / Mutation 
fee 
Levied As per circular dt. 
30.01.2006 
DMA:SAS/35/2005-06 
8 Rental for Shops 
/Markets, 
Commercial 
complexes 
Levied GO no UDD 509 GEL 
2104 dated 19.1.2015 

Appendix 
67 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
9 Parking Fee. Levied Sec-348 
10 Road Cutting Fee. Levied As per council decision 
11 Town Hall Fee Levied wherever 
Town halls exists 
As per council decision 
12 Ground Rent Levied As per council decision 
13 Greenery charges Not Levied As per council decision 
14 Development 
charges 
Levied by 
UDAs/TPAs 
Rule 37 of the Karnataka 
Town Planning Authority 
Rule 1965 
15 Water Charges. Levied Sec-144 Sec 139 GO UDD/07/UWS 2011  
Dt. 20.07.2011 
16 Betterment Fee Levied Sec 161 As per KTCP Act 
17 Slum Dev. Fee Levied As per KTCP Act 
18 SWM Cess. Levied Sec-103 B 
19 UGD Charges Levied GO UDD/07/UWS 2011  
Dt. 20.07.2011 
20 Auction Fee Occasional As per council decision & 
competitive bidding 
21 UGD connection 
fee 
Levied 
22 Water connection 
fee 
Levied GO UDD/07/UWS 2011  
Dt. 20.07.2011 
23 Mobile Tower Levied Gazette notification dated 
24.2.2016 
24 Cable Laying 
charges 
Not Levied As per council decision 
25 Other Fees & 
Tolls (Boat Ferry, 
Slaughter House 
fee, Cow shed) 
Not Levied  Section 364, 
348 
 Section 324, 
244, 71 
26 Crematoria & 
Burial 
Levied Sec- 393 (1) 
27 Copy Extract Levied As per council decision 
28 Tender Forms Levied As per KTPP Act 
29 Dog Fee Not Levied As per council decision 
30 Penalties Levied Schedule-XI & 
XII 
Sec-107, 
187B, 275, 
370 
Source: KM and KMC Acts;  Government orders and information furnished by ULBs

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
68 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1.3, Page 48) 
Statement showing the number of employees per 1,000 population in test-checked ULBs 
Sl 
No 
Category Name of the 
ULB 
Population 
as per 2001 
census 
Population 
as per 2011 
census 
*Projected
population 
for the year 
2019 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
staff 
(As per 
OVP) 
Per 1,000 
population 
2001 census 
(sanctioned 
strength) 
Per 1,000 
population 
2011 census 
(sanctioned 
strength) 
Per 1,000 
population  
2019 
projections 
(working 
strength) 
1 CC Davanagere 3,64,523 4,34,971 4,89,603 1,725 1,210 4.73 3.97 2.47 
2 CC HDMC 7,86,195 9,43,788 10,85,060 3,794 3,521 4.83 4.02 3.24 
3 CC Kalaburagi 4,30,265 5,43,147 6,29,850 1,725 1,544 4.01 3.18 2.45 
4 CC Mangaluru 4,11,327 4,99,487 6,19,941 1,725 1,208 4.19 3.45 1.95 
5 CMC Arasikere 45,166 53,216 63,075 237 198 5.25 4.45 3.14 
6 CMC Bagalkote 90,988 1,11,933 1,34,085 236 133 2.59 2.11 0.99 
7 CMC Bhadravathi 1,60,662 1,51,102 1,61,751 418 364 2.60 2.77 2.25 
8 CMC Bidar 1,74,257 2,16,020 2,51,684 418 353 2.40 1.94 1.40 
9 CMC Channapatna 63,577 71,942 85,613 236 158 3.71 3.28 1.85 
10 CMC Chitradurga 1,25,170 1,45,853 1,74,999 467 413 3.73 3.20 2.36 
11 CMC Doddaballapura 71,606 93,105 1,30,820 236 273 3.30 2.53 2.09 
12 CMC Gangavathi 1,01,392 1,14,642 1,30,522 300 282 2.96 2.62 2.16 
13 CMC Karwar 75,038 77,139 86,549 385 168 5.13 4.99 1.94 
14 CMC Kolar 1,13,907 1,38,462 1,59,749 418 273 3.67 3.02 1.71 
15 CMC Kollegal 52,607 57,149 78,277 236 162 4.49 4.13 2.07 
16 CMC Koppal 56,160 70,698 90,609 236 89 4.20 3.34 0.98 
17 CMC Mandya 1,31,179 1,37,358 1,47,867 418 271 3.19 3.04 1.83 
18 CMC Nipani 58,081 62,865 NA 236 176 4.06 3.75 
19 CMC Ranebennur 89,618 1,06,406 1,37,646 296 249 3.30 2.78 1.81 
20 CMC Shahbad 50,562 47,582 NA 204 75 4.03 4.29 
21 CMC Tiptur 53,104 59,543 68,326 236 192 4.44 3.96 2.81 
22 TMC Aland 35,245 42,371 49,261 130 85 3.69 3.07 1.73 
23 TMC Bailhongal 43,225 49,182 NA 97 57 2.24 1.97 
24 TMC Bannur 23,239 21,896 NA 97 58 4.17 4.43 
25 TMC Basavana 
Bagewadi 
28,560 33,198 40,087 97 70 3.40 2.92 1.75 
26 TMC Bhatkal 31,774 32,000 52,856 97 92 3.05 3.03 1.74 

Appendix 
69 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
27 TMC Hanagal 25,009 28,159 33,126 103 82 4.12 3.66 2.48 
28 TMC Harappanahalli 41,907 47,039 52,810 138 127 3.29 2.93 2.40 
29 TMC Kampli 35,380 39,307 NA 125 92 3.53 3.18 
30 TMC Kundapura 28,591 30,444 59,846 108 103 3.78 3.55 1.72 
31 TMC Laxmeshwar 33,417 36,754 NA 120 84 3.59 3.26 
32 TMC Maddur 26,521 28,754 37,904 110 103 4.15 3.83 2.72 
33 TMC Madhugiri 26,304 29,159 33,486 122 112 4.64 4.18 3.34 
34 TMC Manvi 37,613 46,465 51,476 97 130 2.58 2.09 2.53 
35 TMC Sakleshpur 23,176 23,352 27,699 92 61 3.97 3.94 2.20 
36 TMC Sankeshwar 32,511 34,637 NA 97 88 2.98 2.80 
37 TMC Savanur 35,563 40,567 46,024 129 76 3.63 3.18 1.65 
38 TMC Srinivasapura 22,959 26,793 31,003 97 71 4.22 3.62 2.29 
39 TMC Vijayapura 29,540 34,866 NA 118 88 3.99 3.38 
40 TMC Wadi 30,012 37,988 NA 124 89 4.13 3.26 
41 TP Hirekerur 15,872 19,191 22,064 62 83 3.91 3.23 3.76 
42 TP Kamalapura 21,830 25,552 NA 66 58 3.02 2.58 
43 TP Mudigere 8,963 9,667 12,636 52 23 5.80 5.38 1.82 
44 TP Thirthahalli 14,808 14,528 15,598 55 60 3.71 3.79 3.85 
* As per Directorate of Economics and Statistics
Source: Information furnished by ULBs

70 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Appendix 6.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.3, Page 52) 
Statement showing the details of training programmes conducted by 
SIUD, Mysuru 
Year Sl. 
no 
Function Name No. of 
Programmes 
conducted 
Nominated Attended Percentage 
Attended 
2014-15 1 Legal & Urban Governance 3 421 275 65 
2 Engineering 15 502 313 62 
3 SWM & Environment 32 1,616 1,324 82 
4 Water & waste water management/SLB 9 499 298 60 
5 Finance Accounts & Administration 7 195 147 75 
6 Welfare Programmes 6 315 233 74 
7 Department of Town and Country Planning 
(DTCP) 
4 167 96 57 
8 Sponsored Programmes 3 80 75 94 
9 Training of Trainers 1 39 30 77 
2015-16 10 Legal & Urban Governance 12 525 258 49 
11 Engineering 12 418 238 57 
12 SWM & Environment 18 1,420 842 59 
13 Water & waste water management 7 332 131 39 
14 Finance Accounts & Administration 1 50 30 60 
15 Welfare Programmes 12 733 569 78 
16 DTCP 5 174 89 51 
17 Sponsored Programmes 8 367 186 51 
2016-17 18 Legal & Urban Governance 2 259 34 13 
19 Engineering 6 417 216 52 
20 SWM & Environment 2 182 85 47 
21 Foundation Course for FDA & Env. Engineer 4 179 170 95 
22 Finance Accounts & Administration 7 230 215 93 
23 Welfare Programmes 34 2,398 2,332 97 
24 Orientation Programme on AMRUT for all 
cadres 
28 1,001 668 67 
25 Sponsored Programmes 8 510 289 57 
26 Training of Trainers 2 99 69 70 
27 Integrated Capacity Building Training for all 
Group-A,B,C cadres 
26 924 624 68 
2017-18 28 Legal & Urban Governance 10 417 297 71 
29 Engineering 1 40 35 88 
30 SWM & Environment 9 803 464 58 
31 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana 3 100 69 69 
32 Finance Accounts & Administration 9 306 245 80 
33 Welfare Programmes 17 2,975 2,876 97 
34 DTCP 4 159 144 91 
35 Orientation for all missions 1 40 14 35 
36 Training of Trainers 18 793 542 68 
2018-19 37 Legal & Urban Governance 9 490 254 52 
38 Engineering 5 235 164 70 
39 SWM & Environment 11 425 261 61 
40 Water & waste water management 5 207 113 55 
41 Finance Accounts & Administration 4 170 103 61 
42 Welfare Programmes 24 636 547 86 
43 DTCP 6 240 136 57 
44 Integrated Capacity Building Training for all 
missions 
37 1,148 875 76 
45 Foundation Course for Junior Engineer, Jr 
Health Inspector, FDA, Bill collector 
4 194 168 87 
Grand Total 451 23,430 17,143 73 
Source: Information furnished by SIUD, Mysuru 

Appendix 
 
 
71 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
Glossary  
 
ADB Asian Development Bank  
AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
AEE Assistant Executive Engineer 
BBMP Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
BDA Bengaluru Development Authority 
BMR Bangalore Metropolitan Region 
BMRDA Bengaluru Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
BMTC Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation 
BWSSB Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Board  
C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
C&R Rules Cadre and Recruitment Rules 
CAA Constitutional Amendment Act 
CC City Corporation 
CFC Central Finance Commission 
CMC City Municipal Council 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DCB Demand, Collection and Balance 
DDP District Development Plan  
DMA Directorate of Municipal Administration  
DPC District Planning Committee  
DPDC Decentralised Planning and Development Committee  
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DUDC District Urban Development Cell  
ESCOMs Electricity Supply Companies 
FAR Floor Area Ratio 
FDA First Division Assistant 
FFC 14th Finance Commission  
GO Government Order 
GOK Government of Karnataka 
HDMC Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corporation 
HRM Human Resource Management 
IGR Inspector General of Registration and Commissioner of Stamps  
IIMB Indian Institute of Management Bangalore 
IISc Indian Institute of Science 
IIT Indian Institute of Technology 
ITA Industrial Township Authority 

Report No.2 of the year 2020 
 
 
72 
 Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
JE Junior Engineer 
JnNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
KIADB Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board  
KM Act Karnataka Municipalities Act 
KMAM Karnataka Municipal Accounting Manual  
KMAS Karnataka Municipal Administrative Service 
KMC Act Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act 
KPR Act Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act 
KPSC Karnataka Public Service Commission  
KRW&SA Karnataka Rural Water Supply  & Sanitation Agency 
KSDB Karnataka Slum Development Board  
KSFES Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services  
KSRTC Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation 
KTCP Karnataka Town and Country Planning 
KTPP Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement  
KUIDFC Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation  
KUWS&DB Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board  
MPC Metropolitan Planning Committee  
MRC Municipal Reform Cell 
NAC Notified Area Committee 
NEKRTC North Eastern Karnataka  Road Transport Corporation 
NLGORR Non-Loan Gross Own Revenue Receipts  
NLNORR Non-Loan Net Own Revenue Receipts 
NORR Net Own Revenue Receipts 
NWKRTC North Western Karnataka  Road Transport Corporation 
OEWS Other Economically Backward Sections 
O&M Operation and maintenance 
OBC Other Backward Class 
PA Performance Audit  
PMC Project Management Consultants  
PMU Project Monitoring Unit  
SC Scheduled Caste 
SEC State Election Commission  
SFC State Finance Commission  
SIUD State Institute of Urban Development  
SLB Service Level Benchmark 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
SWM Solid Waste Management 
TMC Town Municipal Council 
TP Town Panchayat 

Appendix 
 
 
73 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
TPA Town Planning Authorities  
UDA Urban Development Authorities 
UDD Urban Development Department 
UDWSP Urban Drinking Water and Sanitation policy  
UGD Under Ground Drainage 
ULB Urban Local Body 
WSS Water supply Scheme 
 