 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   for the year ended March 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
(Compliance Audit) 
No. 19 of 2019 
 
 

 

Preface 
The Report for the year ended March 2018 has been prepared 
for submission to the President under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India.  
The Report contains significant results of the compliance audit 
of the Ministry of Railways of the Union Government. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came 
to notice in the course of test audit for the period 201 7-18 as 
well as those which came to notice in earlier years, but could 
not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; instances  
relating to the period subsequent to 201 7-18 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.  

 

i 
 
 
Contents 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Abbreviations  v-viii 
Overview  ix-xxviii 
Chapter 1–Introduction 
Audited Entity Profile 1.1 1 
Authority for audit 1.2 4 
Audit Planning  1.3 4 
Reporting 1.4 4 
Structure of the Report  1.5 5 
Response of the Mini stry/Department to 
Provisional Paragraphs 
1.6 6 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit 1.7 6 
Remedial action on Audit Paragraphs included 
in the Audit Reports 
1.8 7 
Chapter 2 – Traffic 
Setting up of Private Freight Terminals in 
Indian Railways 
2.1 12 
Working of Automatic Ticket Vending 
Machines (ATVMs) in Indian Railways 
2.2 30 
Implementation of Train Management System 
in Mumbai suburban system 
2.3 45 
Injudicious conversion of Domestic Container 
Terminal as Container Rail Terminal led to 
loss of revenue 
2.4 54 
Non-recovery of penal interest from the 
Nationalized Banks for delayed payment of 
license fee 
2.5 58 
Loss of revenue due to charging of lower 
freight than Normal Tariff Rate (NTR) of class 
LR1 
2.6 60 
Underloading of caustic soda lye in higher 
volumetric BTPN wagons 
2.7 62 
Non-levy/collection of shunting, demurrage 
and detention charges 
2.8 64 
Loss of revenue due to non -realization of 
empty haulage charges and stabling charges 
for the flat wagons owned by CONCOR 
2.9 66 
Non-realization of staff cost from siding 2.10 68 

ii 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
owners 
Non-levy of siding charges from the siding 
owners 
2.11 71 
Non-levy and short levy of service tax on 
taxable auxiliary services 
2.12 74 
Chapter 3 – Engineering 
Construction and utilization of Limited Height 
Subway (LHS) 
3.1 78 
Payment of Workers Welfare Cess by the 
Railways in compliance of Building and Other 
Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act 
3.2 91 
Short deduction of Jharkhand VAT from the 
contractors on -account bill resulting in 
avoidable liability 
3.3 100 
Construction of sub -standard pit lines leading 
to delay in development of new coaching 
terminal at Mau 
3.4 102 
Discrepancies in maintenance of Works 
Registers of track renewal works in Varanasi 
Division 
3.5 106 
Duplicate payment to contractors due to 
inclusion of labour and machine charges in 
two schedules for procurement of steel and 
execution of work 
3.6 110 
Delays in completion of yard works and non -
achievement of expected benefits 
3.7 112 
Unproductive expenditure due to execution of 
work without prior permission of Commissioner 
of Railway Safety 
3.8 116 
Infructuous expenditure due to failure in 
ensuring full availability of clear site before 
initiating works 
3.9 119 
Failure to augment capacity of Electric Loco 
Shed at Santragachi led to detention of locos 
3.10 122 
Injudicious decision taken in construction of 
third platform/line at Mahanayak Uttam Kumar 
Station of Metro Railway, Kolkata 
3.11 125 
Non-construction of chord lines leading to 
haulage of goods trains via longer route and 
recurring loss of revenue to Railways 
3.12 128 
Irregular payment of water charges to 3.13 131 

iii 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
municipal bodies 
Execution of substandard bridge work by the 
contractor   
3.14 134 
Blocking up of capital due advance 
procurement of electric cables and high 
conductivity rails for Naopara-Barasat metro 
extension project 
3.15 136 
Non-recovery from State 
Governments/Defence Authorities towards 
cost of staff deployed on level crossings 
3.16 139 
Non-realization of license fee for railway land 
licensed to private siding owners 
3.17 141 
Delay in construction of Electric Loco Shed 
(ELS) and consequent cost overrun 
3.18 144 
Failure of Internal Control mechanism resulted 
in non -realization of license fee from 
Hindustan Cables Limited 
3.19 146 
Chapter 4 – Rolling Stock  
Status of Commiss ioning and Utilization of 
Major Machineries and Plants procured by 
COFMOW in Indian Railways 
4.1 150 
Working of Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela 4.2 164 
Infructuous expenditure due to non -
commissioning of cut to length machine 
4.3 180 
Infructuous expenditure on purchase of special 
purpose machine for Bogie Bolster and Bogie 
Frame Welding 
4.4 183 
Chapter 5 – Signalling and Telecommunications 
Implementation of Train Protection Warning 
System (TPWS) in Indian Railways 
5 188 
Chapter 6 – Traction 
Installation and commissioning of Solar Power 
Plants in Indian Railways 
6.1 205 
Non-mixing/ blending of bio-diesel into HSD oil 
by Zonal Railways and non -achievement of 
Environmental objectives 
6.2 214 
Procurement of readymade Traction Motors at 
higher rate 
6.3 216 
Delay in Commissioning of Electric Arc 
Furnace leading to blockage of fund 
6.4 218 

iv 
 
 
Particulars Paragraph Page 
Avoidable extra expenditure due to delay in 
completion of work of Traction Sub Station at 
Limkheda in Ratlam Division 
6.5 219 
Non–segregation of electricity supplied to 
Railway colonies 
6.6 223 
Chapter 7 – Other issues 
Extra expenditure due to procurement of 
stores at higher rates and non -levy of 
liquidated damages 
7.1 226 
Unproductive expenditure due to non -
redeployment of surplus staff of a closed 
Metre Gauge Diesel shed 
7.2 230 
Management of Kumbh Mela, 2019 by the 
Railways 
7.3 232 
Annexure  244-262 
 

v 
 
Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
AFRES  Advanced Financial and Railway Expenditure Management System  
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
ATVM Automatic Ticket Vending Machine  
ARS Automatic Route Setting  
ATM Automated Teller Machine  
ATN Action Taken Note 
AWS Auxiliary Warning System 
ASRS Automatic Storage and Retrieving System 
BOCW Building and Other Construction Workers   
BG Broad Gauge 
CC Carrying Capacity 
CCM Chief Commercial Manager 
CCTV Close Circuit Television 
CEE Chief Electric Engineer 
COFMOW Central Organization  for Modernization of Workshops  
CPE Chief Plant Engineer  
CSTE Chief Signaling and Telecommunication Engineer   
CLW Chittaranjan Locomotive works 
CME Chief Mechanical Engineer 
COM Chief Operations Manager 
CONCOR Container Corporation of India Limited 
COS Controller of Stores 
CR Central Railway 
CRB Chairman Railway Board 
CRIS Centre for Railway Information Systems 
CRS Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CWE Chief Workshop Engineer 
DCT Domestic Container Terminal  
DJB Delhi Jal Board  

vi 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
DLW Diesel Locomotive Works 
DPR Detailed Project Report   
DSP Durgapur Steel Plant  
DRM Divisional Railway Manager 
ECOR East Coast Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ELS Electric Loco Shed 
EPC Engineering Procurement and Construction  
ESP Engineering Scale Plan  
EMU Electric Multiple Unit 
EIMWB Electronic in-motion Weigh Bridge 
ER Eastern Railway 
ETCS European Train Control System 
FA&CAO Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer 
FCI Food Corporation of India  
FOB Foot Over Bridge 
GCC General Conditions of Contract  
GM General Manager  
GSR General and Subsidiary Rules   
HDN High Density Network 
ICF Integral Coach Factory  
ICMS Integrated Coaching Management System 
IPAS Integrated Payroll and Accounting System 
IR Indian Railways 
iMMIS Integrated Material Management Information System 
LC Level Crossings 
LEU Line side Electronic Unit 
LOA Letter of Acceptance 
LHB Linke Hofmann Busch 
LHS Limited Height Subway 
MIS Management Information System 
MoR Ministry of Railways 

vii 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MEMU Mainline Electric Multiple Unit  
MG Meter Gauge 
MR Metro Railway 
MMIS Material Management Information System 
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
M&P Machinery and Plant 
NCR North Central Railway 
NDMC New Delhi Municipal Corporation 
NEFR/NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NHS Normal Height Subway 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NR Northern Railway 
NTES National Train Enquiry System 
NTKM Net Tonne Kilometer 
NWR North Western Railway 
NTR Normal Tariff Rate 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OHE Over Head Electric Equipment 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PCE Principal Chief Engineer  
PFT Private Freight Terminal  
PGT Performance Guarantee Test 
PIS Passenger Information System  
POH Periodic Overhaul 
POL Petroleum, Oils and Lubricants  
PPA Power Purchase Agreement  
PRS Passenger Reservation System 
PTC Proven Test Certificate  
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RDSO Research, Designs and Standards Organization 

viii 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
REL Railtel Enterprises Limited 
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Services Limited 
RKM Route Kilometer 
RLDA Rail Land Development Authority 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
RR Railway Receipt 
RRI Route Relay Interlocking  
RUB Road Under Bridge 
RWF Rail Wheel Factory 
RWP Rail Wheel Plant  
S&T Signaling and Telecommunication 
SCR South Central Railway 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPD Solar Power Developer 
SR Southern Railway 
Sr. DCM Senior Divisional Commercial Manager 
Sr. DOM Senior Divisional Operations Manager 
SWR South Western Railway 
TEU Twenty Foot Equivalent Unit 
TVU Train Vehicle Unit 
TMC Terminal Management Company  
TKM Track Kilometre 
TMS Train Management System 
TPWS Train Protection and Warning System 
TSS Traction Substation 
UTS Unreserved Ticketing System 
UMLC Unmanned Level Crossings  
WAP   Wheel and Axle Plant  
WCR West Central Railway 
WCL  Western Coalfields Limited 
WR Western Railway 
 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
ix 
 
Overview 
The Audit Report consists of audit findings relating to compliance issues 
in respect of the Ministry of Railways and its various field units. The Audit 
Report includes five pan India paragraphs and 40 individual Paragraphs. 
A brief overview of the important audit findings and conclusions is given 
below: 
Para 2.1 Setting up of Private Freight Terminals in Indian Railways 
The  Private Freight Terminals (PFTs) was introduced to policy enhance 
p
Railways share in the overall transport chain through participation of 
rivate s ector. 
terminals. They 
Under the policy, private parties, known as Terminal 
Management Companies (TMCs), come forward to set up freight 
are 
Railways 
required to set up PFTs on their own land and 
develop terminal facilities from where any private customer can book his 
freight traffic. For this facility, they charge Terminal Access Charge. 
are responsible to 
connectivity to railway line
provide logistic facilities to TMCs e.g. 
, 
PFTs were achieved. 
rakes, commercial staff. This review was 
undertaken with a view to assess whether the objectives for setting up of 
Some of the salient audit findings are as follows: 
 121 applications were received for setting up of PFTs since the 
introduction of the policy in 2010. Of these, only 58 PFTs could be set 
up in 13 Zonal Railways. The remaining applications were pending as 
the process of approval was time consuming and there were delays in 
approval by the Railways. Another reason for delay was difficulties in 
land acquisition by TMC.  
earnings
 Railways were not able to achieve substantial improvement in freight 
. Only eight PFTs were able to generate business as projected 
in the Detailed Project Reports.  
 Fifty-eight PFTs were commissioned in 26 Divisions. The share of 
traffic through these PFTs was only 1.82 per cent  to the total traffic 
 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
generated and 1.33 per cent  of the total traffic earnings of these 26 
Divisions. 
 The target for setting up of 100 Private Terminals and generation of 
100 Million Tonnes traffic as envisaged under ‘Mission Hundred’ could 
not be achieved. Shortfall of 41 per cent  in setting up of Private 
Terminal and 71 per cent in generation of freight was noticed against 
the target.. 
 Railways may analyse the reasons for less generation of traffic in 
PFTs, and also assess whether land and other infrastructure for 
provision of logistics facilities could be obtained and set up at a cost 
that would enable PFTs to offer terminal handling and other value 
added services at competitive prices.  In other words, the financial 
viability of setting up a PFT, may be examined.  
 The cost of commercial staff was being borne by TMC. This entailed 
additional expenditure on part of the TMCs. 
 In a number of PFTs, weighbridges were either not installed/ 
commissioned or not found in working condition. This  may cause 
overloading and damage to railway wagons and tracks. 
Audit recommendations 
1. Railway need to re-engineer the scheme with adequate financial 
incentives so that tariff charged by PFTs is competitive vis-a-vis 
that of railway goods sheds and sidings. Railway also need to 
simplify rules and regulations and create a single window 
clearance system for the entire zone. 
2. Railways may explore the feasibility to lease surplus railway land 
for setting up of PFTs, wherever there is difficulty in acquisition 
of land by TMCs.  
 
 
x 
  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xi 
 
 
3. Railways may consider incentivising TMCs by bearing the cost 
for commercial staff deputed at PFTs themselves.  
4. Railways need to enforce the contractual obligation of 
commissioning of electronic in -motion weighbridges at all PFTs. 
Where these have not been provided by the TMCs, Railway 
should explore the feasibility to provide EIMWB on lease/rental 
basis. 
5. Railways should pro -actively interact with TMCs, periodically 
review the freight loading and earnings and address the 
constraints faced.   
Para 2.2 Working of Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) in 
Indian Railways 
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) were introduced by Indian 
Railways in October 2007 to reduce congestion of unreserved class 
passengers and long queuing at the ticket counters.  ATVMs are touch 
screen-based ticketing kiosks operated using Smart Cards. Co-ATVMs 
are cash/smart card o perated ticket vending machines.  These machines 
can be used by passengers themselves to buy unreserved tickets through 
currency/coins as well as smart cards. Single journey tickets, platform 
tickets can be purchased and season tickets can be renewed through 
these vending machines. 
As on 31 March 2018, 38 51 ATVMs and 459 Co -ATVMs (Cash/ Smart 
Card operated ticket vending machines) had been installed over 14 Zonal 
Railways. In ECR and NEFR, no ATVMs/Co -ATVMs were installed. A 
sample of 271 stations, where 9 74 ATVMs and 199 Co-ATVMs were 
installed was selected for detailed study. The review covered the period 
from 2015 -16 to 2017 -18. Audit objective was to assess the extent to 
which these have been able to achieve the objectives for which they were 
installed. Some of the salient audit findings are as follows: 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
 No feasibility study was conducted by the Zonal Railways for 
assessing the requirement of ATVMs/Co-ATVMs at stations.  
 The share of tickets sold through ATVMs/Co-ATVMs was only 16.90 
per cent of the total sale of unreserved tickets at 271 selected stations. 
In selected non-suburban stations, 87 per cent tickets were still sold 
through window counters. At selected sub-urban stations, the sale of 
tickets through window counters was 82 per cent  of the total tickets 
booked. 
 The share of tickets sold through Co-ATVMs was negligible at all 
selected stations. 
 ATVM scheme suffered from frequent failure of machines, lack of 
passenger awareness and other shortcomings. These shortcomings 
would automatically result in sub-optimal use of the machines.  
 Zonal Railways did not effectively take up the matter of 
rectification/repair of ATVMs/Co-ATVMs with the firms.  
 Facilitators (retired railway employees) were appointed to educate 
passengers to purchase tickets themselves. The number of tickets 
sold through facilitators showed an increasing trend. However, number 
of tickets purchased by passengers themselves decreased 
significantly during 2015-16 to 2017-18. 
 Passenger survey conducted by Audit revealed that 32 per  cent  
passengers were not aware of ATVMs. 87 per cent  of passengers 
stated that no awareness program was conducted by Railways. 58 per 
cent of surveyed passengers stated that the facilitators did not educate 
passengers the method of utilizing the ATVMs.  
Audit recommendations 
1. Railways need to undertake surveys/ feasibility studies for 
identification of stations as well as locations for installation of 
ATVMs/Co-ATVMs. 
2. Facilitators appointed at ATVMs/Co-ATVMs may be effectively used to 
educate passengers regarding ease of purchasing tickets through 
xii 
  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xiii 
 
ATVMs/Co-ATVMs. The incentive to facilitators may be linked to the 
number of tickets bought by the passengers themselves. 
3. Downtime for ATVMs/Co -ATVMs may be reduced by ensuring timely 
rectification of defects/problems. 
4. Effective and extensive awareness drives may  be undertaken for 
familiarizing and popularizing use of ATVMs/ Co -ATVMs amongst 
passengers.  
5. Effective utilization of ATVMs requires behavioural changes amongst 
passengers. Railways may plan replacing the booking counters with 
ATVMs/Co-ATVMs in a phased manner on identified stations.   
Para 2.3 Implementation of Train Management System in Mumbai 
suburban system 
Train Management System (TMS) was implemented in CR in 2008 to 
process and display information in real time. TMS was meant to regulate 
train movement though real -time monitoring and to provide timely 
information to the commuters through display boards / announcements at 
all stations.  
Audit observed that TMS was not implemented in all the sections of 
Mumbai Division. This restricted the availability of full benefits of the 
system for the entire Mumbai suburban system of Central Railway. The 
functions such as  recording train movement in train register  and feeding 
of train details in TMS  were being done manually. Collection of 
information by the controller regarding actual departure and display of 
information also continued manually. Inadequate knowledge of Rai lway 
staff in operating the TMS led to  non-compliance of basic input data  and 
the system remained ineffective . The objectives envisaged were not 
achieved despite expenditure of ` 24.23 crore since December 2013. 
Audit recommendations 
1. TMS needs to be implemented on all the suburban sections of 
suburban rail network in Mumbai Division of CR for deriving 
intended benefits. 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
2. Complete information, on real time basis, about movement of 
suburban trains should be made available to commuters waiting 
for the trains on the platforms. 
3. Details of movement of all trains running should be captured to 
generate correct MIS reports. 
4. Punctuality figures should be calculated through TMS to avoid 
manual intervention and possible manipulation of punctuality 
figures. 
5. Annual Maintenance Contract should be entered into timely to 
maintain TMS in proper working condition. 
Para 2.4 Injudicious conversion of Domestic Container Terminal as 
Container Rail Terminal led to loss of revenue 
Para 2.5 Non-recovery of penal interest from the Nationalized Banks 
for delayed payment of license fee 
Zonal Railways failed to incorporate suitable penalty clause in the 
agreement with Nationalized Banks for delayed payment of license fee. 
As a result, 12 Zonal Railway could not recover penal interest of ` 7.81 
crore for the period from 2012-13 to 2017-18. Three Zonal Railways also 
failed to recover the license fee of ` 94 lakhs  for installation of ATMs at 
different categories of railway stations. 
xiv 
  
SR Administration decided to convert CONCOR Domestic Container 
Terminal (DCT) at Salem Market into  Container Rail Terminal (CRT) 
without ensuring the availability of container or cargo storage and stacking 
facility, which was critic al for successful running of CRT.  DCT was 
exclusively used by CONCOR, whereas CRT was meant to be used by all 
container train operators. SR, however, did not assess the demand for 
creating another CRT at Salem Market station, where already a railway 
CRT existed.  After conversion of DCT as CRT, there was no outward 
loading during 2016-17 and 2017 -18. As a result, SR Administration lost 
the opportunity to earn the revenue on account of haulage charges and 
license fee from CONCOR. 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xv 
 
Para 2.8 Non -levy/collection of shunting, demurrage and detention 
charges 
Railway Board’s order of July 2014 stipulated that shunting charges would 
be leviable if a railway locomotive is utilized for load adjustment. Further, 
at the time of load adjustment in case of overloading, demurrage and 
detention charges to be levied. However, East Central Railway (ECR) did 
not levy and realise  shunting charges of ` 8.08 crore from three coal 
sidings for the period February 2014 to March 2018.  ECR also did not 
recover demurrage and detention charges of ` 21.51 crore  from these 
three siding owners. 
2.11  Non-levy of siding charges from the siding owners  
Railway Board prescribed (June 2010) criteria on which sidings were to 
be notified for charging freight on through distance basis (i.e. freight 
charge for distance from originating station to destination point in the 
siding). Bokaro Thermal Power Siding of ECR and Gateway Rail Freight 
Limited siding of NR did not qualify for charging of freight on through 
distance basis. However, ECR and N orthern Railway (N R) did not levy 
siding charges on these two sidings  for the period from July 2013 to 
March 2018. This resulted in loss of ` 19.74 crore.  
Para 3.1 Construction and utilization of Limited Height Subway (LHS) 
South East Central Railway (SECR) constructed 159 LHS at 159 
locations in its three Divisions, Raipur, Bilaspur and Nagpur during 2011 
to 2016.Audit reviewed the work of construction of Limited Height Subway 
(LHS) undertaken by SECR. Some of the salient au dit findings are as 
follows: 
 LHS were constructed without adhering to the prescribed norms, where 
density of train vehicle units ( TVU) was very low. These were also  
constructed at locations very near to diversion  Road Under Bridges/ 
Road Over Bridges ( RUBs/ROBs), and thus were not used.  As such, 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
Railways incurred an expenditure of ` 18.63 crore without any fruitful 
results. 
 Drainage system was either not constructed or partially constructed  in 
many LHS . Proper feasibility study  was not conducted before 
constructing these LHS . This led to water logging  and the  LHS 
remained closed/ were not utilized.  
 Railways assigned the responsibility for maintenance related works to 
respective State Governments . However, the same was not 
acknowledged by the State Governments and the issue remained 
unresolved. 
Audit recommendations 
1. SECR Administration may take steps to make these LHS usable, 
so that the amount invested by Railways is not wasted and safety 
of trains and those crossing the railway track is ensured.  
2. LHS which are under construction/ lying incomplete may be 
completed at the earliest and respective level crossings may be 
closed to avoid accidents.  
3. There is no agreement between State Government and the 
Railways to provide drainage facilities by State Government 
outside the Municipal areas. Railways may initiate action to take 
State Governments on board to commit these costs.  
Para 3.2 Payment of Workers Welfare Cess by the Railways in 
compliance of Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare 
Cess Act 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act and Building 
and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Rules were enacted and 
notified in August 1996 and March 1998 respectively. As an ‘Employer’ it 
was the responsibility of the Railways to ensure that the prescribed share 
(one per cent ) of the cost of construction was set aside and deposited 
with the Worker’s Welfare Boards. Review of works contracts in the Zonal 
Railways, the following was observed: 
xvi 
  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xvii 
 
 Railways deducted and deposited only a part of this amount from the 
contractors in some cases.  
 Cases were also seen where no recovery of Cess was made from the 
contractors.  
 Cess recovered from the contractors was not deposited to the Workers 
Welfare Boards within the stipulated period in all the cases checked. 
 ` 10.24 crore was short recov ered from contractors, ` 2.28 crore 
recovered from contractors was not transferred to the Boards and  
` 12.95 crore was outstanding for payment by Railways to the Boards.  
Audit recommendations 
1. Railways may modify the tender conditions to correctly reflect  
the provisions of the BOCW Act. They may also issue 
instructions to all field formations to recover the Cess in line with 
the BOCW Welfare Cess Act. 
2. Railways may ensure that the Railways fulfill their responsibility 
of remitting the Cess at the prescribed  rate on the cost of 
construction to the Workers Welfare Boards. This should be done 
irrespective of the amount recovered from the contractors, as the 
responsibility to pay Cess entirely lies on the Employer. 
3. Railways may ensure that the Cess recovered fro m the 
contractors is remitted to the Workers Welfare Boards within the 
stipulated time period as per the BOCW Welfare Cess Act. 
4. Railways may ensure that the forms as required are submitted to 
the Workers Welfare Boards by the executives of all the 
concerned Departments. 
Para 3.3 Short deduction of Jharkhand VAT from the contractors on -
account bill resulting in avoidable liability 
With effect from 1 April 2012, Government of Jharkhand revised the rate 
of VAT from two to four per cent . The same was to be deducted in 
advance in respect of works contracts. Construction Organization, East 
Central Railway (ECR) did not deduct VAT at the revised rate in 26 works 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
contracts awarded between December 2012 and April 2017. In 346 
running on-account bills processed for payment, an amount of ` 12.14 
crore was short-recovered from the contractors. Railways now have the 
liability to pay the same to the State Government as and when demanded. 
Para 3.4 Construction of sub -standard pit lines le ading to delay in 
development of new coaching terminal at Mau 
The work of washing pit line at Mau was delayed due to delay in providing 
drawings and permanent way material to the contractor. The contractor 
did not execute the work adhering to Research Designs and Standards 
Organization (RDSO) specifications and the work was foreclosed. The 
work was awarded to another contractor. However, the work was 
completed without addressing the issue of quality and adherence to 
RDSO specifications. The pillars in washing pit developed cracks, when 
the train was placed for maintenance. The expenditure of ` 13.32 crore, 
which was paid to the first contractor became infructuous. Haulage of 
coaches between Mau and Gorakhpur for primary maintenance led to 
avoidable expenditure of ` 3.80 crore, as the coaching terminal was not 
completed at Mau. 
Para 3.7 Delays in completion of yard works and non -achievement of 
expected benefits 
South Eastern Railway executed yard remodelling work in Tatanagar and 
Adityapur Yard to cope up with incremental traffic and to minimize 
detention. The detention in Adityapur Yard improved. However, in 
Tatanagar yard, the situation worsened as the space and other 
constraints were not addressed despite spending ` 21.66 crore. Similarly, 
in SECR, the works undertaken for remodelling of Bhilai Exchange Yard 
and construction of a new Exchange Yard at Maroda remained unfruitful. 
The work could not be completed due to encroachment at the site and 
poor planning. This resulted in blocking of capital of ` 31.15 crore. 
xviii 
  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xix 
 
Para 3.1 1 Injudicious decision taken in construction of third 
platform/line at Mahanayak  Uttam Kumar Station of Metro Railway, 
Kolkata 
Engineering department of Metro Railway/ Kolkata proposed to construct 
third platform/line at Mahanayak Uttam Kumar station. The objective was 
to originate/ terminate train services from/to this station. On examination  
of the proposal , Operating Department stated that the proposed 3rd 
platform had limited utility and would not facilitate truncated train services 
from/to Mahanayak Uttam Kumar station. However, the third platform/line 
was constructed without addressing the limitations pointed out by the 
Operating Department. As such, 3rd platform / line could not be used for 
originating/terminating tra ins as planned and the expenditure of ` 11.27 
crore was rendered unfruitful. 
Para 3.12  Non-construction of chord lines leading to haulage of 
goods trains via longer route and recurring loss of revenue to 
Railways 
Central Railway did not construct chord lines bypassing Panvel station for 
trains coming from Uran and Roha lines to cross over to Panvel -Karjat 
line, though the same was provided in the original detailed estimate. In 
the absence of a chord line, most of t he freight traffic originating from 
Uran and Roha lines was being moved through a 55 kms longer route. 
The situation became worse, when these goods trains were further 
detained at Kalyan goods shed. This led to loss of ` 68.57 crore during 
April 2015 to March 2018. 
Para 3.14 Execution of substandard bridge work by the contractor   
The work for rebuilding of the bridge across the river Ghaghra on 
Chhapra-Aunrihar section of Varanasi Division in North Eastern Railway 
was approved in September 2011. During execution of substructure work 
two wells developed tilts in excess of the permissible limit. However, the 
work was neither declared sub -standard nor the defects r ectified by the 
contractor. Open Web Bridge Girders fabricated for the super -structure 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
also remained unutilized, as the sub-structure work was yet to be 
completed. This led to blocking of capital amounting ` 67.54 crore.  
Para 3.17 Non-realization of license fee for railway land licensed to 
private siding owners 
In December 2010, Railway Board instructed General Manager/ Central 
Railway to launch a drive for signing of all pending License Agreements . 
However, Central Railway did not execute land license agreements in 
respect of 14 sidings and no siding charges were levied and collected. In 
other nine sidings, where agreement was executed, no bills were raised 
by CR. Audit assessed an amount at ` 127.15 crore of license fee 
outstanding for recovery from these 23 sidings till 31 March 2018.  
Para 4.1  Status of Commissioning and Utilization of Major 
Machineries and Plants procured by COFMOW in Indian Railways 
Central Organization for Modernization of Workshops (COFMOW) is 
responsible for modernization of Railway Workshops and Production 
Units. It prepares specification and procured Machinery and Plant for 
Zonal Railways/ Production Units. Audit examined the effective and timely 
installation and commissioning of M&Ps procured by COFMOW . Co-
ordination mechanism between COFMOW and ZRs/PUs as well as 
utilization and performance of procured M&Ps were also analysed. Some 
of the salient audit findings are as follows: 
 There were significant delays in receipt of machines by the 
users/consignee. Only 12.65 per cent (63 out of 498) machines could 
be received by the users within one year from the date of placing 
indents.  
 Railways did not ensure availability of necessary site and 
infrastructure in many cases . As a result, machines could not be 
installed/ commissioned timely.  
  xx 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xxi 
 
 Defects were noticed in a significant number of machines immediately 
after commissioning. In 17.07 per cent  of the machines reviewed, 
defects developed within six months from the date of commissioning. 
 There was lack of diligence on part of Railways to enforce the penal 
clause and the firm s/ suppliers did not honor their responsibility of 
attending to the defects.  A large number of machines were put to use 
after significant delays caused by the firm’s/  supplier’s inability to 
rectify the defects.  
 COFMOW/ Zonal Railway also failed to timely reject the machines as 
a result of which the cost could not be recovered from the suppliers. 
 A large number of machines could not be utilized optimally due to non-
availability of adequate workload. There was shortfall in outturn of the 
newly installed machines with reference to the rated capacity. 
Audit recommendations 
1. The Centralized procurement agency, COFMOW, failed to 
procure/install/commission machines timely. Railways need to 
analyze whether the system of centralize d procurement for major 
machineries and plants is working. 
2. Railways may decentralize the process of procurement of p lant 
and machinery to some selected field offices on a pilot basis. 
Railways may compare costs to assess whether de -centralized 
procurement has price advantage vis-à-vis COFMOW.  
Para 4.2 Working of Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela 
Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela  was established to meet the growing 
demand of wheels for rolling stock in the Railway. The Plant was 
established with a capacity to manufacture 1,00,000 cast steel BOX’N 
wagon wheel discs per annum. RWP has no Axle Shop  and Wheel Set 
Assembly Shop . Loose wheels were dispatched to Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelehanka (RWF) for assembly of wheel sets. 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
Before setting up RWP, the requirement of Indian Railways for loose 
wheels were being fulfilled by the then existing production unit , RWF and 
Durgapur Steel Pla nt. RWF itself was capable of handling production of 
wheels for Indian Railway requirements as a whole. RWP, Bela was 
however set up without adequate justification. During the past three years, 
the quantity for production assigned by the Railway Board to RWP, was 
much less than its installed capacity.  
L&T was awarded the work of setting up of the plant. RWP got the 
Performance Test done through third party instead of the original firm. 
The Plant was declared as Production Unit without issue of Final 
Acceptance Certificate. The plant was declared operational without 
ensuring required Plant and Machinery in proper working condition. As a 
result, by the time production of wheel was started in RWP from 2015-16, 
the warranty of all the machines had expired. 
RWP produced 47,901 wheels during the 2015-16 to 2017-18, but 
consumed all major input material as well as electricity way above the 
prescribed norms. This indicated, inefficiencies in the systems and 
processes being followed by RWP. RWP also did not take adequate 
action to address air, water and land pollution and disposal of hazardous 
waste. 
Audit recommendations  
1. Optimal utilization of capacity of RWP need to be ensured 
keeping in view the expenditure incurred in setting up of the 
plant.  
2. RWP needs to analyse reasons for consuming excess 
quantities of input material (scrap steel, Graphite Mould 
Blanks, Liquid oxygen, LPG) and electricity for production of 
wheels. Corrective action to address the same need to be 
taken. 
xxii 
  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xxiii 
 
3. RWP should take necessary action to  address environmental 
pollution including disposal of hazardous waste as per 
prescribed norms. 
Para 4.3 Infructuous expenditure due to non -commissioning of cut 
to length machine 
Rail Coach Factory (RCF) imported a cut -to-length machine through 
COFMOW in October 2012. The machine was installed in May 2013. 
Thereafter trials were conducted. However, the trials for commissioning 
were not successful as the machines was not capable to cut the coils 
to accuracy set out as per the bid and did not meet the standa rds set in 
the contract. In March 2014, RCF proposed to COFMOW to reject the 
machine. However, COFMOW chose to have protracted 
correspondence with the firm and  did not follow the contractual 
provisions to reject the machine in a timely manner. They lost th e 
opportunity to recover the cost of machine supplied by the firm. There 
is no legal remedy available with the Railways except for encashing the 
bank guarantee. The expenditure of ` 12.05 crore spent on purchase of 
the machine has thus become infructuous. 
Para 4.4 Infructuous expenditure on purchase of special purpose 
machine for Bogie Bolster and Bogie Frame Welding 
Special Purpose Machine for robotic welding of Bogie Bolster and Bogie 
Frames was received in Mechanical Workshop/ Amritsar  (Northern 
Railway) in April 2013. The same was commissioned in March 2015 . 
Audit noticed that the machine was utilized for only 211 working days 
(21.25 per cent) out of available 993 days. The machine was meant for 
robotic welding of the bogie side frame, body bolsters sub-assemblies. 
However, as the input material was not as per the required specification, 
most of the welding work was being performed manually. As a result, 
expenditure of ` 4.81 crore on procurement of the Special Purpose 
Machine was rendered infructuous.  

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
Para 5 Implementation of Train Protection Warning System (TPWS) 
in Indian Railways 
Railways have introduced a new technology, TPWS. The system is meant 
to provide automatic train protection to prevent accidents due to over 
speeding and passing signal at danger. TPWS aims to ensure safety of 
rolling stock, rail infrastructure and passengers  .The system is based on 
European standards of European Train Control System (ETCS). The trials 
for implementation of TPWS on non -suburban and sub -urban sections 
were sanctioned by Railway Board between 1999 to 2005. Nineteen years 
from the sanction, the work on TPWS (ETCS level I) in Delhi – Agra 
section continues to be in trial stage. Railway Boa rd revised the scope of 
the work a number of times. This resulted in increased cost and also 
shifted the timelines for the implementation of the system. Locomotives 
fitted with TPWS, were found in working condition only in 17.15 per cent 
of the total run of the trains during May 2016 to January 2018. The failure 
rate in track side equipment was also significantly high. However, i n 
Chennai Central – Gummidipundi sub-urban section, the overall success 
rate was 70 per cent.  
The trials were being going on for last 12 years in Delhi-Agra section. 
However, the technology/ product envisaged for train protection was yet 
to reach operationalization stage. The success of the trails was not 
assessed/ judged by Railways. However, Railway Board decided to 
implement TPWS in nine High Density Network and nine suburban 
sections in August 2016. Expenditure of ` 136.53 crore incurred on Delhi - 
Agra and Chennai Central - Gummidipundi sections, remained unfruitful. 
Audit further noted that in November 2017, Railway Board has decided to 
implement TPWS under ETCS level II. All the works under ETCS level I 
which were in progress have been put on hold since May 2018. The 
expenditure incurred has now become unfruitful. 
 
 
  xxiv 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xxv 
 
Audit recommendations 
1) Railway Board has decided to implement Automatic Train 
Protection ETCS Level II in Indian Railways. The lessons learnt 
from the trials for implementation of ETCS level I, need to be kept 
in mind during execution of works of TPWS ETCS level II.  
2) TPWS works relating to the new systems (ETCS Level II) should 
be undertaken on a complete section and not in piecemeal parts 
of section (as was done for ETCS level I). This would help in 
comprehensive implementation of the system and achieve 
intended benefit for providing train protection.   
3) Railways need to devise a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), 
clearly defining step -by-step process for undertaking and 
documenting trials for induction of technologies.   
Para 6.1 Installation and commissioning of Sola r Power Plants in 
Indian Railways 
Indian Railways is the single largest consumer of electricity in India, 
consuming about 1.8 crore MWh per year. This is approximately two per 
cent of country’s total power generation. Indian Railways planned to 
contribute to ecological sustainability. It has set for itself a target of 
meeting 10 per cent  of its total energy demand through “Renewable” 
energy sources such as solar power and biomass by year 2020. As part 
of their Solar Mission, Railways have planned (2015 -16) setting up of 
1000 MW solar plants.  
Audit noticed that Railways have been able to implement projects only to 
extent of 22.453 MW out of 295 MW planned till March 2018. No works of 
ground mounted solar plants were commissioned. Audit also noticed non-
compliance of laid down instructions for setting up of solar plants.  
Audit recommendation 
Railways may revisit and fix the target of installation and commissioning of 
solar plants in the Zonal Railways and Production Units on a realistic 
basis. 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
Para 6.2 Non -mixing/ blending of bio -diesel into HSD oil by Zonal 
Railways and non-achievement of Environmental objectives 
Railway Board’s directives for blending/mixing bio -diesel to desired extent 
into HSD oil consumed by Diesel Locomotives was not complied by Zonal 
Railways. This led to avoidable extra expenditure of ` 103.67 crore during 
the period 2015-16 to 2017-18 on consumption of HSD oil. Besides, 
Railways also failed to contribute in efforts towards a cleaner and pollution 
free environment, which was objective of the Railway Board’s decision. 
Para 6.3 Procurement of readymade Traction Motors at higher rate 
Chittranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) purchased Traction Motors from 
trade (market) at higher price as compared to the rates of in-house 
assembling of Traction Motors with readymade procured Rotor and 
Stators. CLW purchased 1647 Traction Motors during the year 2012-13 t o 
2018-19 (up to June 2018 except 2014-15) from market and incurred 
extra expenditure of ` 57.74 crore. 
Para 6.5 Avoidable extra expenditure due to delay in completion of 
work of Traction Sub Station at Limkheda in Ratlam Division 
Western Railway delayed completion of work at Traction Sub-station for 
receiving power supply from Madhya Gujarat Vij Company Limited 
(MGVCL). As a result, they had to pay ` 4.21 crore towards minimum 
guarantee charges and extension charges to MGVCL. Besides, capital 
amounting to ` 12.40 crore was blocked for a period of three years due to 
delay in completion of works. 
Para 7.1  Extra expenditure due to procurement of stores at higher 
rates and non-levy of liquidated damages 
Stores Department of South Eastern Railway purchased various store 
items during 2012 to 2017 at higher rates in comparison to the rate of 
similar items procured almost simultaneously by Eastern Railway. The 
information on rates of procurement by neighbouring Zonal Railways was 
readily available in iMMIS. However, while assessing the reasonableness 
  xxvi 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Overview 
 
xxvii 
 
of quoted rates, the Tender Committee did not take into consideration 
these rates. As a result, South Eastern Railway incurred extra expenditure 
of ` 7.93 crore due to procurement of stores at higher rate . Further, in 51 
Purchase Orders even though full contractual quantity of the material was 
not supplied by the supplier, South Eastern Railway  issued fresh POs at 
higher rates. This entailed extra expenditure of ` 4.49 crore. Of these, in 
23 Purchase Orders the orders were given to the same suppliers at higher 
rates. In addition, liquidated damages of ` 2.35 crore was also not 
imposed on the defaulting contractors. 
Para 7.3 Management of Kumbh Mela, 2019 by Railways  
The Kumbh Mela, 2019 was held between 15  January 2019 and 4 March 
2019 for 49 days. Railways play an integral role in ensuring the smooth 
organisation of the event by actively coordinating with the State 
Government. This included 
 running special trains for dispersal of pilgrims, 
 taking care of sanitation and minimum essential amenities at the 
railway premises, 
 arranging temporary holding in station premises, 
 facilitation in Mela area for Booking & Passenger Information; and 
 ensuring the safety and comfort of pilgrims during the event. 
Railways intimated a figure of 73.66 lakh evacuation of passengers during 
Mela period in Sameeksha Sangosthi of March 2019 held in Railway 
Board. Railways again intimated (August 2019) a figure of 73.41 lakh 
passengers based on the special trains and regular trains run during the 
mela period. Railways carried these passengers through the special and 
regular trains. 
However, as per the records of commercial department, 31.21 lakh tickets 
were sold from Allahabad area (stations of NCR, NR and NER) during the 
mela period.  Even if it is accepted, for arguments sake, that the sale of 
tickets figure may not be total evacuation as there would be ticket sale 
from other stations also for outward journey from Allahabad, ticketles s 

Overview Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
travel during the mela period etc., the gap of over 40 lakh passengers 
seems difficult to explain. 
Audit noted that issues such as running of special trains, works related to 
passenger amenities and safety, medical facilities to passengers, waste 
management at station premises were not adequately addressed by 
Railways. These caused inconvenience to passengers coming for the 
Kumbh Mela. Temporary fencing at vulnerable locations (track & station 
entry point) were not completed. This led to cases of free movement of 
cattle on tracks and passengers trespassing.  
Not addressing the above issues adequately may pose risk for the next 
mega event such as Magh Mela 2020 and Maha Kumbh Mela 2025. It is 
likely that in future the footfall and accumulation of crowd at Allahabad 
would only increase. Therefore, Railways need to address the above 
issues before the Magh Mela 2020.   
  xxviii 

Report No.  19  of 2019 (Railways)  Chapter 1 
 
 1 
Chapter 1 – Introduction 
 
1.1  Audited Entity profile 
Indian Railways is a multi -gauge, multi -traction system with a total route 
length of 68,442 kms (as on 31 March 201 8). Some important statistics 1 
regarding route/track length in Indian Railways are given below: 
Table 1.1 
 Broad 
Gauge 
(1,676 
mm) 
Meter 
Gauge 
(1,000 mm) 
Narrow 
Gauge 
(762/610 
mm) 
Total 
Route Kilometers2 63,491 3,200 1,751  68,442 
Total Track kms (TKM)3 1,17,560 3,775 1,901 1,23,236 
Electrified Route kms (RKM)    29,376 
Indian Railways runs 13,452 passenger trains and 9,141 goods trains every 
day4. During 2017 -18, it carried 22.54 million passengers and 3.19 million 
tonnes freight each day. As on 31 March 2018, Indian Railways had 12.7 1 
lakh work force and maintained the following infrast ructural assets and 
rolling stock: 
Table 1.2 
Infrastructural assets/ Rolling stock Numbers 
Locomotives 11,764  
Coaching Vehicles 71,825 
Freight Wagons 2,79,308 
Stations 7,319 
The Ministry of Railways, is headed by a Union Minister of Railways (a 
Cabinet Minister) and has two Ministers of State for Railways. Railway Board 
which is the apex body of Indian Railways, reports to the Minister for 
Railways. The Board is headed by Chairman Railway Board (CRB) and has 
six members viz. Member (Traffic), Member (Engineering), Member 
(Traction), Member (Rolling Stock), Member (Staff) and Financial 
Commissioner (Railways).  Director General (S&T) and Director General 
(Railway Stores) have been re -designated as Member (S&T) and Member 
(Material Management) in April 2 019. The Board lays down policies on 
                                                           
1 Source – Indian Railways Year Book 2017-18  
2 Distance of each gauge owned by a railway including its worked lines treated as a single 
line 
3 Distance of each gauge owned by a railway including its worked lines treated as a single 
line and the extra distance due to double, treble etc. tracks as also the length of the sidings  
4 Source – Indian Railways Year Book 2017-18 

Chapter 1  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
 2 
operation and maintenance of train services, acquisition, construction and 
maintenance of assets. It monitors implementation of policies and 
instructions across Zonal Railways. Railway Board also regulates pricing of 
both passenger fares and freight tariffs. The Functional Directorates under 
each Member assist and aid in decision -making and monitoring of railway 
operations. 
The organizational structure of Indian Railways as on 31 March 2018 was as 
follows: 
At the field  level, there are 17 Zonal Railways. In addition, there are 
specialized organisations viz.  
 Research Designs and Standards Organization (RDSO) Lucknow  for 
research and standardization;  
 Central Organization for Modernization of Workshops (COFMOW) for 
procurement of specialized machinery;  


Report No.  19  of 2019 (Railways)  Chapter 1 
 
 3 
 Locomotive manufacturing units, Diesel Locomotive Works  at Varanasi, 
Chittaranjan Locomotive Works at Chittaranjan and Diesel Modernization 
Works at Patiala;  
 Coach factories at Kapu rthala, Rae Bareli and Perambur and Wheel and 
Axle Plants at Yelahanka and Bela.  
The details of Zonal Railways with their Headquarters and total route 
kilometers (RKMs) as on 31 March 2018 were as follows: 
Table 1.3 
Zonal Railways Headquarters RKMs 
Central Mumbai 4,115 
Eastern Kolkata 2,723 
East Central Hajipur 4,107 
East Coast Bhubaneshwar 2,757 
Northern New Delhi 7,301 
North Central Allahabad 3,523 
North Eastern Gorakhpur 4,947 
Northeast Frontier Maligaon (Guwahati) 4,136 
North Western Jaipur 5,586 
Southern Chennai 5,081 
South Central Secunderabad 6,229 
South Eastern Kolkata 2,740 
South East Central Bilaspur 2,177 
South Western Hubli 3,524 
Western Mumbai 6,465 
West Central Jabalpur 3,004 
Metro Railway Kolkata 27 
Total 68,442 
Each Zonal Railway is headed by a  General Manager who is assisted by  
Principal Heads of Departments. These include  Operating, Commercial, 
Engineering, Electrical, Mechanical, Stores, Accounts, Signal & 
Telecommunication, Personnel, Safety, Medical etc. departments.  Besides 
the above, ther e are 38 Public Sector Units and two Autonomous Bodies 
(Rail Land Development Authority and C entre for Railway Information 
Systems) under control of Ministry of Railways.  
A fully integrated financial advice and control system exists at Railway Board 
headed by the Financial Commissioner (Railways) . At Zonal level finance 
functions are looked after by Financial Advisers and Chief Accounts Officers 

Chapter 1  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
 4 
(FA&CAOs). The y are responsible for rendering advice and scrutinizing all 
proposals involving expenditure from the pubic exchequer.  
1.2 Authority for audit 
The authority for our audit is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the 
Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) (DPC) Act, 1971. Audit of expenditure 
and receipts of Ministry of Railways and its Autonomous Bodies is conducted 
under Section 13 , Se ction 16 and Section 20 (1) of the CAG’s (DPC) Act  
respectively. Principles and methodology of compliance audit are prescribed 
in the ‘Regulations of Audit and Accounts, 2007’. 
1.3 Audit Planning  
Selection of the units for audit of the Railways is planned on the basis of a 
risk assessment . The risk is assessed based on the level of budgets 
planned, resources allocated and deployed, extent of compliance wit h 
internal controls, scope of delegation of powers, sensitivity and criticality of 
function/ activity, external environment factors, etc. Previous audit findings, 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC)’s recommendations, media reports, 
where relevant, are also co nsidered. Based on such risk assessment, test 
audit of 4,661 entities/ units of the Railways was conducted during 2017-18. 
The Audit Plan focused on selected issues of significant nature in terms of 
policy and its implementation . These included  freight tra ffic, earnings, 
infrastructure development, passenger amenities, asset management, 
material management and safety works. Each study brings out important 
audit findings and conclusions followed by audit recommendations  to help 
improve systems and strengthen internal control mechanism in railways.  
1.4 Reporting 
Audits of selected topics were conducted across the Zonal Railways . 
Relevant records and documents of the field units as well as that of Railway 
Board were reviewed . Appropriate samples from the popul ation were 
selected so as to adequately cover the issues under study. The audit 
findings were issued to the respective Zonal Managements for their 

Report No.  19  of 2019 (Railways)  Chapter 1 
 
 5 
response. Audit findings were either settled or further action for compliance 
was advised depending upon action taken. Important audit observations, not 
having been complied with, were followed up through Draft Paragraphs 
addressed to the General Managers of Zonal Railways . Copies of Draft 
Paragraphs were endorsed to the FA&CAOs and Heads of the Departments 
for r eply within the prescribed period. Selected issues were taken up as 
Provisional Paragraphs and issued to the Ministry of Railways (Railway 
Board) for eliciting their reply before inclusion in Audit Report.  
1.5 Structure of the Report  
This Audit Report comprises results of scrutiny of transactions relating to 
expenditure receipts, assets and liabilities of the units under the c ontrol of 
Ministry of Railways . This  includes examination of the adequacy, legality , 
transparency and effectiveness of the relevant  rules to maintain and ensure 
control mechanism over public expenditure. The effectiveness of the rules to  
safeguard against misuse, waste and losses was also examined.  
The Report contains seven Chapters. Chapter 1 is introductory in nature and 
covers issues of cross -cutting nature. The other six Chapters contain audit 
findings related to important areas of functioning and operations of Indian 
Railways viz., Traffic , Engineering, Rolling Stock, Signalling and 
Telecommunication, Traction and others. The Report presents audit findings 
of significant materiality which are intended to aid the executive in taking 
corrective actions for better  performance and financial management. 
Detailed findings pertaining to all Zonal Railways on the  following subjects 
are presented in this Report:  
1. Setting up of Private Freight Terminals in Indian Railways  
2. Working of Automatic Ticket Vending Machines in Indian Railways 
3. Status of commissioning and utilization of major Plant and 
Machineries procured by Central organisation for  Modernization of 
Workshops in Indian Railways 
4. Implementation of Train Protection Warning System (TPWS) in Indian 
Railways   

Chapter 1  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
 6 
5. Installation and commissioning of Solar Power Plant s in Indian 
Railways 
In addition, 40 individual paragraphs covering audit findin gs of respective 
Zonal Railways are presented in Chapters 2 to 7 of this Report. 
1.6 Response of the Ministry/ Department to Provisional Paragraphs 
A total of 47 Provisional paragraphs were issued to  the Railway Board 5 
between July 2018 and May 2019 and a time of four to six weeks was given 
for furnishing a response to the same.  45 Provisional Paragraphs have been 
included in this Report. As on 30 September 2019, Railway Board's replies 
have been received in respect of 30 Provisional Paragraphs.  Replies 
received have been suitably incorporated in the Audit  Report. Over the past 
two years, responses of Railway Board to 25 to 63 per cent  Provisional 
paragraphs issued were received before finalization of Audit Reports. The 
response of the Ministry thus, could not be incorporated in all the paragraphs 
of the Audit Reports.   
1.7 Recoveries at the instance of Audit 
Audit has pointed out the cases of undercharges /overpayments of ` 193.13 
crore in the various Zonal Railways during the year 2017 -18. This included 
undercharges in realization of freight and other earnings, over payments to 
staff and other agencies, non -recovery of dues of the Railways etc.  During 
the past six years, ` 743.41 crore has been recovered by the Railways at the 
instance of Audit, as detailed below: 
Table 1.4 – Amount recovered at the instance of Audit during 2012-13 to 2017-18 
Year Amount Recovered/ accepted for recovery (` in crore) 
2012-13 98.14 
2013-14 107.70 
2014-15 101.26 
2015-16 80.27 
2016-17 162.91 
2017-18 193.13 
Total 743.41 
During 2017-18, an amount of ` 193.13 crore was accepted for recovery  by 
various Zonal R ailways and other field units. Of this,  ` 132.38 crore was 
                                                           
5 Chairman Railway Board, Members concerned and the Financial Commissioner 

Report No.  19  of 2019 (Railways)  Chapter 1 
 
 7 
recovered and ` 60.75 crore was agreed to be recovered  by the railways . 
Six Zonal Railways accounted for recoveries exceeding ` 10 crore each6. 
Out of ` 193.13 crore, ` 89.58 crore pertained to transactions already 
checked by Account s Department of concern ed Railways. ` 102 crore 
pertained to other than those checked by Account s Department. As a result, 
of further review carried out by Account s Department, another ` 1.55 crore 
was recovered/ agreed to be recovered by the Railways. 
1.8 Remedial action on Audit Paragraphs  included in the Audit 
Reports 
As per the PAC recommendations 7, M inistry/ Departments of the 
Government of India should furnish corrective/ remedial Action Taken Note 
(ATN) on all paragraphs raised in the Audit Reports within four months after 
laying of the Report in the Parliament.  
On audit paragraphs selected by PAC,  discussions/ oral evidence is taken 
by PAC. After the oral evidence, PAC issue Reports containing their 
observations/ recommendations on which action is to be taken by the 
Ministry. The Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on the PAC Reports are 
submitted by the Ministry to the PAC after audit vetting.  
The status of pending ATNs and ATRs as on 30 September 2019 was given 
in Annexure 1.1.  
Some of the important cases, where Ministry of Railways  had made 
appropriate changes and issued instructions during 2017-18 for streamlining 
their internal process are illustrated below:  
Table 1.5 
Para No./ Report 
No. 
Audit Observations 
/Recommendations 
Action taken by Railways 
Para 2.4 of Report 
no.5 of 2018 – 
Incorrect entry of 
train timing of 
Incorrect entry of arrival timing of 
terminating trains at Allahabad 
station led to compromise in 
data integrity. This also resulted 
Ministry of Railways has 
taken (December 2018) 
remedial action in this 
regard. To address the issue 
                                                           
6 NFR (` 38.54 crore), SECR (` 34.01 crore), ECR (` 30.20 crore), NCR (` 23.73 crore), ER 
(` 20.03 crore) and NR (` 15.85 crore). 
7 Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok Sabha) presented to the Parliament on 22 April 1997  

Chapter 1  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
 8 
Table 1.5 
Para No./ Report 
No. 
Audit Observations 
/Recommendations 
Action taken by Railways 
terminating trains 
in ICMS led to 
compromise in 
data integrity 
in providing wrong information to 
the passengers through National 
Train Enquiry System.  
of wrong data feeding and 
consequent discrepancy in 
NTES vis-à-vis actual train 
timing, Railways have 
decided to install data 
loggers at selected locations. 
So far, these have been 
installed at 162 locations.  
Para 2.2 of Report 
No. 24 of 2015 - 
Review on 
‘Liberalized Active 
Retirement 
Scheme for 
Guaranteed 
Employment for 
Safety Staff 
(LARSGESS)’ 
Irregular appointment of 
employees was made through 
the LARSGESS Scheme. 
Recruitment under were done in 
violation of conditions prescribed 
by railways themselves. In 80 
per cent cases appointment was 
made diluting one or more laid 
down conditions. Neither 
approval of Cabinet was taken 
nor DOPT was consulted before 
implementation of the Scheme. 
Central Administrative Tribunals 
(CATs) in their Judgments had 
declared the whole Scheme 
(LARSGESS) as 
unconstitutional, backdoor entry 
for Government job  and illegal . 
Even after decisions of the 
Tribunals. Railway Board added 
new features of the Scheme. 
In wake of judgements of 
Punjab and Haryana High 
Court and Supreme Court of 
India, Ministry of Railways 
revisited the scheme and 
further consulted Ministry of 
Law and Justice. In March 
2019, Ministry of Railways 
decided to terminate  the 
LARSGESS Scheme w.e.f 
27 October 2017.  
Para 4.3 of Report 
No. 14 of 2017 -
Detention of 
periodic hauled 
wagons at Jhansi 
Workshop/NCR  
by using them for 
storage of scrap 
instead of 
carrying freight   
NCR was using  periodic 
overhauled wagons for stora ge 
of scrap wheels/axles instead of 
sending them to open line for 
carrying freight traffic. This led to 
detention of periodic overhauled 
wagons and consequent loss of 
earning capacity of Railways. 
Railway Board vide it letter 
no. 2006/RS(S)/709/1 pt 
dated 3 February 2017  has 
given permission of sale 
through e -auction for 2000 
MT of WTA scrap at the site 
itself. Earlier NCR was  
sending it to RWF/Bangalore 
in wagons. Also, for 
remaining material, contract  
has been entered into for 
sending the material through  
road.  In future, all the WTA 
items will be sent through 

Report No.  19  of 2019 (Railways)  Chapter 1 
 
 9 
Table 1.5 
Para No./ Report 
No. 
Audit Observations 
/Recommendations 
Action taken by Railways 
road to avoid the situation of 
wagon detention.          
Para 2.14 of 
Report No. 5 of 
2018 - Non 
weighment of 
loaded  rakes of 
Food Corporation 
of India (FCI)     
ECoR did not ensure weighment 
of r akes at sidings of FCI in 
Sambalpur Division before 
loading. There were instructions 
of Railway Board to keep a 
check on overloading. The    
weighbridges at four locations 
(Hirakud, Bargarh Road, Khariar 
Road and Mahasamund) had 
become non -functional durin g 
2015-17 and the rakes were not 
being weighed. Non -weighment 
not only encourages overloading 
malpractices but also loss of 
revenue and damage to the 
rolling stock/ track.                 
ECoR has commissioned 
three new weighbridges at 
Lapanga (8 -01-2018), 
Kerjanga (14 -02-2018) and 
Kandel Road (4 -7-2018) to 
cover loading points of 
Sambalpur Division. Railway 
Board issued instructions 
(March 2017 and August 
2018) to Zonal Railways to 
follow the guidelines 
regarding functioning of 
weighbridges and 
weighment o f wagons/rakes 
scrupulously.           
Para 2.3 of Report 
No. 13 of 2016 - 
Irregular award of 
contract  
ECR had awarded five contracts 
of a section to one firm as the 
firm was lowest bidder in all the 
five tenders. The firm had used 
the same financial cre dential for 
all the five tenders. ECR had not 
evaluated the credential of the 
firm in terms of the Railway 
Board’s directives of 12 April 
2001. The credential of the firm 
needed to be evaluated clubbing 
all the contracts of the section. 
Violation of  Railway Boards’ 
directives resulted in non -
completion of contracts  on time  
and undue benefit to the 
contractor through award of all 
split contracts to him. 
Railway Board issued orders 
(17 April 2018) that 
Railways, while sub -
sectioning the work into 
different te nders to expedite 
work, should adhere to the 
provisions of Railway 
Board’s instructions of 12 
April 2001. 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 10 
Chapter 2 - Traffic  
The Traffic Department comprises four streams viz., Commercial, Traffic, 
Coaching and Catering & Tourism. The activities related to these streams 
are performed by the respective Directorates headed by Additional 
Members/ Executive Director in Railway Board under the overall direction 
of Member Traffic. The main responsibilities of these Directorates are as 
follows: 
 Commercial Directorate - marketing, traffic development, quality of 
services provided to customers, regulation of passenger / coaching/ 
freight tariffs, monitoring of collection, accountal and remittance of 
revenues etc.  
 Traffic Directorate - Long-term and short -term planning of 
transportation services, management of train operations, time tabling, 
ensuring availability of rolling stock and safe running of trains.  
 Coaching Directorate - Management of passenger and parcel services  
 Catering & Tourism Directorate  - Activities related to catering and 
tourism. 
At the Z onal level, the Traffic Department has two department s, viz., 
Operating and Commercial. These are headed by Chief Operations 
Manager (COM) and Chief Commercial Manager (CCM) respectively, who 
work under the overall supervision of General Manager of the Zonal 
Railway. At the divisional level, the Operating and Commerci al 
Departments are headed by Senior Divisional Operations Manager 
(Sr.DOM) and Senior Divisional Commercial Manager ( Sr.DCM) 
respectively, who report to  Divisional Railway Manager (DRM) of the 
concerned Division.  
The total traffic operating expenses during the year 2017-18 was  
` 25,189.23 crore8. Total gross traffic receipt during the year was  
                                                           
8 Sub Major Head 3002-3003 (07) - Operating Expenses – Traffic for 2017-18 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 11 
` 1,78,725.31 crore9. During 2017-18, the annual growth rate of 
passenger originating improved by 2.09 per cent10 over the previous year. 
Passenger earnings in 2017-18 were increased by 5.11 per cent 11. In 
2017-18, freight loading increased by 4.75 per cent12. The freight earnings 
increased by 12.19 per cent as compared to the previous year.  
During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers , tenders etc., 982 
offices of the department were audited. This chapter  include pan-India 
audit findings on two topics viz., ‘Private Freight Terminal’ and ‘Automatic 
Ticket Vending Machines ’. In addition, the chapter also includes ten 
individual p aragraphs. These paragraphs hig hlight issues such as  
implementation of Train Management System in Mumbai (Central 
Railway); non-recovery of penal interest from Nationalised Banks; non-
recovery/short recovery of variou s dues/charges including , service tax, 
empty haulage charges, demurrage charges and siding charges. 
                                                           
9 Includes Passenger Earnings ` 48,643.14 crore, Freight Earnings ` 1,17,055.40 crore, 
Other Coaching Earnings ` 4314.43 crore and Sundry Earnings ` 8688.18 crore 
10 As against the projected passenger originating of 8,198 million, Indian Railways 
carried 8285.77 million passengers 
11 ` 46,280.46 crore in 2016-17 and ` 48,643.14 crore in 2017-18 
12 1106.15 million tonne in 2016-17 to 1158.71 million tonne in 2017-18 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 12 
 
2.1 All Zonal Railways: Setting up of Private Freight Terminals in 
Indian Railways 
 
2.1.1 Introduction 
Ministry of Railways has taken initiatives and adopted multipronged 
strategies to enhance freight share of Indian Railways in t he transport 
sector in the recent times. In May 2010, Ministry of Railways introduced a 
policy on setting up of ‘Private Freight Terminals’ (PFTs) . The objective of 
this policy was development of network of freight handling terminals in 
participation with private sector. The policy aimed at  
 diverting high rated finished traffic, so far predominantly moved by 
road, to rail,  
 attain increased rail freight volumes by offering integrated, efficient and 
cost effective logistics and warehousing solutions to users, and 
  to enhance Railways’, share in the overall transport chain. 
Under the policy, private parties known as Terminal Management 
Companies (TMCs) come forward to set up freight terminals . They were 
required to set up PFTs  on their own land either newly a cquired 
(greenfield projects) or on existing private sidings (brownfield projects) . 
They were required to develop terminal facilities from where any private 
customer can book his freight traffic. The commodities which could be 
carried were decided by the T MCs and informed to the railways.  The 
whole investment on developing the infrastructure was done by the TMC . 
Railways were to provide connectivity to the freight terminal and make 
arrangements for movement of the rakes booked. 
Minister of Railways in his B udget speech 2016 -17 announced “Mission 
Hundred”. This mission aimed commissioning of at  least 100 sidings 
(freight terminals) to generate 100 Million Tonnes (MTs) of freight traffic 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 13 
during 2016 to 2018. This was to be achieved through setting up of 
PFTs13 as well as private sidings14. 
Railway Board further revised t he PFT policy a number of times ( April 
2012, January 2015, April 2015 and May 2015) to make the scheme more 
attractive for TMCs. Some of the measures undertaken included:  
 Reduction in application fee from ` 1 crore to `10 lakh (April 2015). 
 Reduction in Security Deposit from `1 crore to `10 lakh . The same  
was to be deposited by the TMC within one month of granting approval 
by Railways for setting up of PFT (April 2015).  
 TMCs were given rights to change their list of authorized users and 
change the list of commodities permitted to be handled at its PFT. 
They were also given the right to fix charges independently for the 
services it offers to rail users (April 2015).  
 Some incentives were given for iron ore or iron ore pellet traffic as well 
as coal traffic originating from PFTs (April 2015). 
 Withdrawal of revenue sharing by TMCs (May 2015). 
In addition, r ecently in December 2018 , TMCs have been allowed an 
incentive @ ` 20 per tonne for all commodities (excluding container traffic) 
loaded/unloaded by them, which railways would pass on to them for the 
freight earned. 
2.1.2 Procedures for setting up of Private Freight Terminals  
With effect from 10 April 2015, Chief Transportation Planning Manager 
(CTPM) is t he approving authority for setting up of PFTs. The procedure 
for setting up PFT is depicted in the flow chart as follows: 
 
 
 
                                                           
13 Private Freight Terminal is a terminal setup/ notified under PFT policy to deal with rail 
based cargo including co ntainers. PFT under this policy would be permitted to book and 
handle all traffic excluding coal and coke under ‘C’ priority. 
14 Private siding is a privately owned freight terminal setup/ notified for single Rail end 
users. 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 14 
 
Flow Chart for the process of setting up of PFTs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The TMC is required to approach Railways to s eek approvals at least 
thrice during the process of setting up of PFT. 
The role of Terminal Management Companies (TMC) includes   
 Developing privately owned freight terminals on the land of PFT 
owner.  
 Developing adequate facilities for handling the antici pated volume of 
traffic at his PFT without causing undue detention. 
 Providing in -motion electronic weigh bridge at a suitable location for 
weighment of incoming and outgoing rakes. 
 Providing rest rooms and staff canteen facilities for crew and guards.  
TMC (Terminal 
Management 
Company) 
Chief Transportation 
and Planning 
Manager (CTPM) 
Submit 
proposal to 
Will put 
up to  
CCM and COM 
for seeking ‘In 
Principal 
Approval’ (IPA) 
 
 
 
 
 
CTPM (03 months and 01-
month time line for 
submission of application by 
TMC in case of Greenfield 
PFT & Brownfield PFT)  
Will grant 
‘IPA’ within 
45 days 
 
If found 
feasible  
CTPM will grant 
approval to Engineering 
Drawings in one month 
and Bridge drawings in 
two months after 
receipt from TMC 
 
 
TMC on 
getting final 
approval  
Construction time of 
01 year for Brownfield 
and 03 year for 
Greenfield PFT for 
TMCs. 
CTPM in one 
month after 
DPR approval 
If found 
feasible 
DPR 
submit by 
TMC to 
If found 
feasible 
 
CTPM will grant 
approval to DPR 
in one month  
TMC submit 
Engineering 
/ Bridge 
Drawing to   
TMC 
executes 
Agreement between 
CCM/FM and TMC 
before commissioning 
of PFT 
PFT ready 
for operation 
CCM issues a commercial notification only 
after Agreement executed between CCM 
and the TMC. 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 15 
The role of Railways includes 
 Providing connectivity to railway line with the PFT line through railway 
land on payment of license fee.  
 Providing connectivity with a station on railway network, such station 
will be termed as serving station for the PFT. 
 Providing rakes and locomotives as and when indented by the TMC. 
 Posting of Railway commercial staff at PFT to carry out commercial 
functions relating to booking and delivery of cargo . The cost of 
commercial staff would be recovered from the TMC.  
2.1.3 Audit objectives 
This review was undertaken with a view to assess whether the objectives 
for setting up of PFTs were achieved. Audit also assessed whether 
Railways have fulfilled their responsibilities/  obligations to facilitate timely 
setting up of PFTs and are monitoring the operations of PFTs effectively. 
2.1.4 Audit scope and methodology  
The review covered a period of three years from 2015 -16 to 2017 -18. 
Audit examined records at Railway Board to review the PFT p olicy. Audit 
also examined records at Zonal and Divisional level to check compliance 
to laid down procedure by Zonal Railways. Inspection Notes of Railway 
officials and other relevant records pertaining to PFTs were also 
reviewed. Audit teams also carried out field visits and joint inspections of 
PFTs.  
As of Marc h 2018, 58 PFTs (29 Brownfield15 and 29 Greenfield16) have 
been notified on 13 17 Zonal Railways. All PFTs were selected for detailed 
examination. 
                                                           
15 Brownfield PFTs: CR-6, ER-1, ECR-1, ECoR-2, NR-6, NCR-2, NWR-1, SCR-2, SER-1, 
SECR-5, WR-2 
16 Greenfield PFTs: CR-1, ER-1, ECR-1, ECoR-2, NR-6, NER-2, NWR-2, SCR-4, SER-2, 
SECR-1, WR-5, WCR-2 
17 CR-7, ER-2, ECR-2, ECoR -4, NR-12, NCR -2, NER - 2, NWR - 3, SCR - 6, SER - 3, 
SECR - 6, WR - 7 and WCR - 2 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 16 
Entry and Exit Conferences were held in all concerned Zonal Railways. 
Exit Conference was also held at Railway Bo ard. They also responded to 
the audit recommendations on the subject . Their responses have been 
suitably incorporated in the Report. 
2.1.5 Audit Criteria 
Main sources for audit criteria were policy guidelines issued by Railway 
Board from time to time . Relevant provisions of various codes and 
manuals of Indian Railways were also referred to. 
Audit findings 
2.1.6 Setting up of Private Freight Terminals 
As per the laid down policy, the eligible TMCs are required to submit an 
application along with prescribed fee for setti ng up of Greenfield/ 
Brownfield PFT. The application should be submitted along with the 
feasibility report of the proposed PFT, projections of anticipated business 
and the list of authorized users of the PFT. Railway Administration checks 
the operational f easibility of  the proposal for setting up a Greenfield/ 
Brownfield PFT . Railways grant ‘In -Principle Approval’ within 45 days of 
submission of the application . Thereafter, Zonal Railway and the TMC 
should abide by the time schedules fixed for grant of fina l approval by 
CTPM. Completion time of one year is allowed for Brownfield PFTs and 
three years for Greenfield PFTs, which starts after final approval is 
granted by the CTPM. 
As of March 2018, 58 PFTs were set up over 13 Zonal Railways as 
against 121 proposals received by 16 Zonal Railways. Zonal Railway wise 
proposals received and PFTs commissioned as on 31 March 2018 can be 
seen from the Graph 2.1 below: 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 17 
 
Audit noticed that  
 In NFR, SR and SWR, not a single PFT was commissioned despite 
the receipt of eight applications. 
 Of 63 proposals pending, 29 proposals were received prior to 2014-15, 
more than three years back. 
 Three18 Zones could not finalize more than 50 per cent proposals. 
 Only four 19 Greenfield PFTs and two 20 Brownfield PFTs were set up 
within the prescribed time frames set for construction of terminals after 
final approval by the railways. 
 In respect of 52 PFTs commissioned (25 Greenfield and 27 Brownfield 
PFTs), there was delays up to 1221 days in grant of approvals. The 
average delay in granting ap provals by the Railways was 242 days in 
these 52 cases.  
 In 23 Greenfield PFTs and 10 Brownfield PFTs, the delay was more 
than 100 days in grant of final approvals. Of these, in 12 Greenfield 
                                                           
18 ECoR-2, NWR-2 and SECR-1 PFT 
19ER-M/s Palogix Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd/ Durgapur, ECoR - M/sContainer Corporation of 
India Ltd   & M/s Paradip International Cargo Terminal Pvt.  Ltd., SCR -M/s Anaparthi 
Warehousing Complex Pvt. Ltd./Anaparthi  PFT  
20 ECR-M/s Khalari Cement Ltd. (KCL) PFT and ECoR- M/s Jindal Stainless Ltd.  PFT 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 18 
PFTs21 and three Brownfield 22 PFTs, the delay was more than one 
year. 
Audit also reviewed 63 pending proposals and analyzed the reasons for 
their non-finalization. Audit observed that  
 TMCs are required to approach Railways three times for getting in -
principal approval, approval of DPR, and approval for ESP.  
 There were delays in granting approval of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR), Engineering Scale Plan (ESP) and also final approval by 
various Zonal Railways.  
 Delays in finalization of applicable land license fee by Railways also 
contributed to the delays in many cases. The process was also delayed 
due to delayed submission of DPR (in 14 PFTs) and ESP (in 11 PFTs) 
by TMCs after getting in -principal approval from the Railways in some 
cases.  
 In three PFTs, failure of TMCs to acquire land for construction of PFTs 
was the main reason for delay.   
Thus, the pace of setting up of PFT was very slow. Railways need to 
ensure timely approval of proposals submitted by the TMCs. In case, 
where there are problems in acquisition of land by TMCs, Railways 
may explore the feasibility to l ease surplus railway land to TMCs for 
setting up PFTs on license fee payment basis.  
Annexure 2.1  
Railway Board in their reply stated (26  March 2019) that continuous 
efforts have been made to ensure timely approval for construction of 
PFTs. Four interactive sessions have been conducted with stakeholder s 
at Railway Board to discuss the problems faced by them during 
December 2017 to August 2018. Reasons for delays in approval and 
construction of PFTs were also ascertained during the interaction. 
                                                           
21 CR-1, ECR-1, NR-3, NER-2, SCR-1, SER-2, SECR-1 & WR-1 
22 CR-1, NR-1 and WR-1 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 19 
Further, a c ommittee including representative from PFT operators wa s 
formed to go into the gamut of policy and implementation issues of PFTs. 
The revised policy for simplifying procedures and single window clearance 
system was in the final stages.  
As regards leasing surplus railway land for setting up of PFTs, Railway 
Board stated that restriction was imposed (March 2011) by Cabinet 
Secretariat on transfer, alienation or leasing of Government land to private 
parties. Audit observed that the instructions of Cabinet Secretariat did not 
restrict transfer, alienation or leasing of Government land to private 
parties, but required approval before doing so.  
After the Exit Conference (30 April 2019) , Railway Board stated (May 
2019) that railway land can be given to private pa rties on license basis for 
the activities in connection with railway working. These activities related to 
commercial plots, steel yards, siding, city booking agencies 23. They 
further stated that if a need arises where leasing of railway land to pr ivate 
party is inescapable for  activities connected with Railways’ core working, 
the same can be explored . Approval of competent authority for the same 
would be sought with proper justifiable reasons.  
2.1.7 Achievement vis-à-vis projected business 
As per the PFT policy 24, TMCs are required to submit projection of 
anticipated business volumes along with  details after commissioning of 
the PFTs. 
Audit reviewed the records of 58 commissioned PFTs to analy se the 
actual business against projection made by the respective TMCs. Against 
75,800 rakes (loading and unloading), only 48,157 rakes were handled by 
these 58 PFTs, leaving a shortfall of 36 per cent. Audit noticed that in only 
four25 Zonal Railways, the overall projected business was achieved. In 
                                                           
23 Railway Board’ policy no.2005/LML/18/8 dated 10-02-2005 
24 Railway Board’s Master circular No.2011/TC (FM)/14/14 dated 02/01/2015  
25 ECR, NR, NCR and NWR 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 20 
nine26 Zonal Railways there was  shortfall in overall projected business 
ranging from 20 per cent to 94 per cent. Of these, in nine PFTs 27 of four 
Zonal Railways the shortfall against the projected business was more 
than 75 per cent.  
Annexure 2.2 
(i) Non-achievement of targets set under ‘Mission Hundred’ 
Hon’ble Minister of Railways in his Budget speech 2016 -17 had 
announced ‘Mission Hundred’. He stated that there were more than 400 
proposals under various stages of approvals . It was targeted that in the 
next two years (2016 -18) at least 100 sidings (Private Terminals) would 
be commissioned to generate 100 Million Tonnes (MTs) of freight traffic. It 
was stated t hat the momentum for development of more terminals will 
continue and all assistance shall continue to be provided to the terminal 
developers for this purpose28. The goal was to have 100 Private 
Terminals on Indian Railways by the end of 2017-18.   
Railway Board directed 29 Zonal Railways to ensure completion/ 
commissioning of PFTs/ Private sidings identified by them for targeted 
completion, within the stipulated timeline (March 2018). Audit observed 
that Zonal Railways could achieve setting up of 67 private terminals only. 
Further, as against the target generation of 100 Million Tonnes (MTs) of 
freight traffic, only 29.40 per cent (29.393 Million Tonnes) was achieved 
during this period. Audit noticed that  
 Against 11 3 Private Terminals (7 8 Private Sidings and 35 PFTs) 
identified, 67 Private Terminals (42 Private Sidings and 25 PFTs) were 
commissioned.  
 No private terminal was commissioned  by ER and WCR though one 
and two were identified respectively.  
                                                           
26 CR, ER, ECoR, NER, SER, SCR, SECR, WR and WCR 
27 ECoR-2 (MAIL & CCJS), SER -2 (GFCJ & GFMK), SECR -3 (MIVB, MVIS & MMBD) 
and WCR-2 (KIHC & KPFP) PFTs. 
28 Business Plan 2017-18 
29 May 2016 and July 2016 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 21 
 SCR (6) and SECR (11) commissioned all the identified private 
terminals.  
Annexure 2.3 
(ii) Share of freight loading and earnings through PFTs   
The share of freight loading and earnings through 58 PFTs commissioned 
in 26 Divisions with reference to the total freight earnings of those 
Divisions can be seen in the graph below:  
As can be seen,  loading/ earnings from PFTs commissioned has 
increased over the past three years (2015 -16 to 2017 -18)30. However, 
share of loading through 58 PFTs commissioned was only 1.82 per cent 
to the total traffic generated by the 26 divisions, where PFTs have been 
commissioned. Similarly, earnings share through these 58 PFTs were 
only 1.33 per cent to the total traffic earnings of 26 Divisions. On the other 
hand, contribution of PFTs to the gross earnings of concerned Divisions 
was significant on two Zonal Railways . These were NWR and NER at 43 
per cent  and 22 per cent  respectively during the review period. These 
PFTs mainly carried container traffic and other goods such as 
automobiles. 
                                                           
30 earnings from 33 PFTs notified till March 2016  - ` 915 crore on 23 Divisions increased 
to ` 1660 crore from 58 PFTs notified till March 2018 on 26 Divisions 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 22 
Thus, overall increase in freight loading and earnings therefrom did not 
materialize. In six 31 Zonal Railways , where six to 12 PFTs had been 
commissioned till March 2018, the earnings from PFTs were significantly 
low. It ranged between 0.46 per cent and 4.50 per cent of the gross freight 
earnings of the respective Divisions.  
Annexures 2.4 and 2.5 
During test check, audit noted that in five Zonal Railways (NER, ECoR, 
CR, SER and ER) covering nine PFTs, booking made through PFTs was 
less than that of nearby goods sheds. These goods sheds and PFTs 
handle commodities like container traffic, coal, fertilizer, cement, food 
grains etc. Goods sheds are located near railway stations.  
 
In spite of proximity to railway stations and close access to rail network, 
which should have enabled the PFTs to garner more traffic, customers 
opted for goods sheds in comparison to PFTs. 
 
Railways may analyse the reasons for less generation of traffic in PFTs, 
and also assess whether land and other infrastructure for provision of 
logistics facilities could be obtained and set up at a cost that would enable 
PFTs to offer terminal handling and other value added services at 
competitive prices.  In other words, the f inancial viability of setting up a 
PFT, may be examined. 
Railways may also explore the possibility to lease surplus railway land for 
setting up of PFTs wherever there is difficulty in acquisition of land by 
Terminal Management Companies. 
Thus, Railway Administration was not able to ensure substantial 
improvement in fr eight as many TMCs could not achieve  the 
projected volume of traffic. The share of traffic generated as well as 
earnings through PFTs remained insignificant as compared to the 
total freight earnings of the respective divisions.  
                                                           
31 CR, NR, SCR, SECR, WCR and WR 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 23 
(iii) Commodity wise freight loading by PFTs  
Audit reviewed the traffic loaded of various commodities by the 58 PFTs 
commissioned in 13 Zonal Railways. Details of commodities loaded by 
these PFTs during the period 2015 -16 to 2017 -18 are depicted in Graph 
2.3. 
 
 
 
 
Audit observed that 2 2.954 Million tonnes ( 54 per cent) out of 4 2.688 
Million tonnes of loading by these 58 PFTs was container traffic.  
Audit reviewed the loading of various commodities through PFTs. Loading 
through PFTs  increased by almost 67 per cent during 2017 -18 as 
compared to the loading during 2015 -16 except for coal  (where loading 
was decreased by 61 per cent ). However, the share of traffic through 
PFTs was still significantly low. Audit also noticed th at traffic generated by 
Goods sheds nearby the PFTs remained unaffected after starting of  
  
 
 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 24 
operation of the PFTs. This indicated that incremental traffic generated by 
PFTs was mainly diverted from road.  
The objective of Railways to generate incrementa l traffic through 
private participation was thus, achieved to a limited extent. However, 
the PFTs have been able to attract new traffic, which was being 
carried by road so far and the scheme has a potential to further 
attract road traffic.  
During Exit conference (29 November 2018), NR stated that goods traffic 
presently dealt with by Railways goods sheds ha ve not shifted to the 
PFTs. Only new commodities such as cement, clinker and clothes etc. are 
being booked through PFTs.  
During Exit conference (14 Jan uary 2019), NCR stated that this policy 
should be examined with the caveat that this is a case of zero investment 
only and any return received is beneficial to Railways. They agreed that in 
order to make such policy a success and improving Railways share i n the 
freight sector, re -engineering of business processes within railways is 
critically required to incentivize an entrepreneur to establish PFT/  Sidings. 
This can be done through simplifying rules and regulations and creation of 
a single window clearance system for the entire zone.   
2.1.8  Installation of electronic in-motion weighbridges in the PFTs  
As per laid down guidelines32, TMC is required to provide an Electronic in-
motion Weigh Bridge (EIMWB) at a suitable location in such a manner 
that all inco ming and outgoing rakes can be weighed. Weighbridge can 
also be provided at the serving station or any other operationally 
convenient location at the cost of the TMC , if it is not feasible to install 
within the PFT for technical reasons. 
Absence of weighin g facility at the PFTs increase the risk of overloading 
which may cause damage to Rolling stock and Railway assets  (rails, 
sleepers etc.). The provision, commissioning and working of EIMWB at 58 
                                                           
32 Para 25 of the policy guidelines of January 2015 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 25 
PFTs was reviewed . A udit noted that EIMWB were either not 
installed/commissioned or not found in working condition in a number of 
PFTs.  
 In eight33 PFTs of six Zonal Railways, EIMWB have not been provided.  
 In five 34 PFTs of two Zonal Railways, though EIMWBs were provided 
these were yet to be commissioned (March 2018). 
 In 12 35 PFTs of nine Zonal Railways, frequent breakdowns and non -
functioning of EIMWBs were observed. 
Non-availability or non-fucntioning of EIMWBs results in failure to exercise 
control over overloading of commodities . Overloading may also  cause 
damage t o wagons and tracks . Railway Board in their reply stated (26 
March 2019) that as per the policy, it is the responsibility of TMCs to 
privde in-motion weighbridges wherever required.  
Audit is of the view that  it is in the interest of the railways to ensure  
that overloaded wagons are not hauled on their tracks . For this , 
Railway need to enforce the contractual obligation to commission 
EIMWB at all PFTs  and monitor their working . Railway should 
explore the feasibility to provide EIMWB on lease/  rental basis, if it 
was not provided by the TMCs. 
2.1.9  Non-recovery of various charges from TMCs 
As per provisions, various charges such as land license fee departmental, 
repair & maintenance, shunting, stabling charges etc. are required to be 
recovered from TMC. The rate and procedure for levy and recovery of 
these charges are prescribed from time to time. In this regard, Audit 
observed that a total amount of ` 33.60 crore was outstanding on account 
of these charges and still to be recovered from the TMCs. 
To carry ou t commercial functions relating to booking and delivery of 
consignments and collection of freight and other charges, Railways 
                                                           
33 CR-2, ER-1, ECR-1, NR-3, NCR-1  
34 ECoR-2 and NR-3 
35 NR-1, ER-1, NCR-1, NER-1, NWR-1, SCR-2, SECR-3, WCR-1 and WR-1 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 26 
deploys commercial staff at PFTs.  The cost of these commercial staff is 
to be borne by the TMC. Audit observed that an amount of ` 13.20 crore 
on account of cost of commercial staff deployed in 29 PFTs on 13 36 Zonal 
Railways was outstanding as on 31st March 2018.  
The commercial staff deployed at PFTs is engaged in various 
commercial activities similar to those of goods sheds of Rail ways. 
These activities are necessary for the Railway to manage their 
freight bookings and bearing of this cost by TMCs is an additional 
burden to them. Railways may c onsider incentivising TMCs by 
bearing the cost for commercial staff deputed at PFTs themselves.  
Railway Board accepted the recommendations and stated (26  March 
2019) that bearing the cost of commercial staff by TMC is proposed to be 
relaxed in the revised policy guidelines. 
2.1.10  Monitoring by the Railway officials  
As per Railway Board inst ructions37 Railway officials need to inspect and  
monitor proper functioning of weighbridges, track maintenance as well as 
commercial activities. Further, the agreement with TMCs mandates joint 
inspection of handling systems with Railway officials every six months.  
Audit noticed that prescribed periodical inspections had not been carried 
out by Railway officials of concerned Departments 38 during 2015 -16 to 
2017-18. Òfficials of various levels did not undertake 2393 out of 3588 (67 
per cent) inspections prescribed during this period. Audit noticed shortfall 
in inspection by various departments39.  
                                                           
36 CR-4 (` 1.30 crore), ER-2 (` 2.46 crore), ECR-1 (` 0.21 crore), ECoR-3 (` 0.65 crore), 
NR-1 (0.36 crore), NCR-1 ( ` 0.16 crore), NER-1 (` 0.21 crore), NWR-3 (` 1.12 crore), 
SCR-5 (` 2.12 crore), SER-3 (` 0.73 crore), SECR-1 (` 0.69 crore), WR-3 (` 0.50 crore) 
and WCR-1 PFT (` 0.39 crore) 
37 Para 5 of Railway Board’s letter No. TCI/2004/109/4 dated 2/11/2004, Advance 
Correction Slip No. 132 to the India n Railways Permanent Way Manual vide Railway 
Board’s letter dated 08/04/2013 and Chapter XXIX of Indian Railway Commercial Manual 
Vol. II. 
38 Civil Engineering, Mechanical, Commercial and Operating Department  
39 67 per cent  by officials of Civil Engineering  Department, 79 per cent  by officials of 
Mechanical Department, 76 per cent by officials of Commercial Department and 41 per 
cent by officials of Operating Department  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 27 
Due to shortfall in inspections, Railways could not ensure proper 
functioning of weighbridges, track maintenance and other 
commercial activities.   
2.1.11  Adherence to rules and provisions regarding environmental 
clearances 
For setting up of PFT, TMC is responsible to fulfil all statutory 
requirements and get necessary clearances  from Government 
departments/ statutory bodies40. Audit observed that  
 2841 PFTs on 12 Zonal Railways had not obtained consent for 
operation of PFT from concerned State Pollution Control Boards.  
 In 16 PFTs, Green Belt of at least one row of trees had not been 
developed along the boundary wall. 
 In 22 PFTs, planting of trees along the connecting road to prevent dust 
due to movement of dumpers/ trucks had not been done. 
 Dust suppression arrangement and fire preventive measures had not 
been provided in 15 and eight PFTs respectively. 
Railway need to monitor the compliance of statutory requirements 
related to environment issues.  
2.1.12  Conclusion 
The policy on setting up of ‘Private Freight Terminals (PFTs)’ was issued 
(May 2010) by the Ministry of Railways . The primary objective of this 
policy was to enhance  Railways share of freight through particip ation of 
private sector. Out of 121 applications received for setting up of PFTs, 
only 58 PFTs could be set up during 2010 -18. Proposals of 63 PFTs were 
pending/under process at various stages . The main reasons for pending 
cases were time consuming approval process and lack of pro -active 
approach on part of Railways in dealing with proposals. Difficulties in land 
acquisition was an important reaso n for non -commissioning of PFTs.  
                                                           
40 Para 15.2 of General Conditions of the PFT policy and FM Circular No. 05 of 2012  
41 CR-4, ER-1, ECR-1, ECoR-1, NR-5, NCR-1, NER-1, NWR-3, SCR-5, SECR-3, WR-2 
and WCR-1 PFT 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 28 
Railways may explore the feasibility to lease surplus railway land for 
setting up of PFTs, wherever there is difficulty in acquisition of land by 
TMCs.  
Railways were not able to achieve substantial improvement in fr eight 
earnings due to non -achievement of the projected traffic volume by the 
PFTs. Of 58 PFTs, o nly eight PFTs were abl e to generate business as 
projected in DPRs.  One of the r easons for less traffic was provision of 
inadequate rakes and engines by railways to TMC on time . The target for 
setting up of 100 Private Terminals and generation of 100 Million Tonnes 
traffic under ‘Mission Hundred’ could not be achieved.  
Railways have considered PFTs as a means for additional earnings 
without any investment on their part. However, Railways have not pro-
actively analysed the reasons for shortfall in traffic generated by PFTs as 
compared to projections. By doing so, the controllable constraints could 
be addressed and help in achieving increase in freight earnings from the 
PFTs.  
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Railway Board stated that policy 
on PFTs was in the process of bei ng made user-friendly. From December 
2018 onwards, TMCs would be paid terminal charges commensurate with 
traffic handled. This would make the scheme more attractive to the TMCs. 
A revised policy as expected to be issued shortly.  
2.1.13    Recommendations 
1. Railway need to re -engineer the scheme with adequate financial 
incentives so that tariff charged by PFTs is competitive vis -a-vis 
that of railway goods sheds and sidings.  Railway also need to 
simplify rules and regulations and create a single window 
clearance system for the entire zone. 
2. Railways may explore the feasibility to lease surplus railway land  
for setting up of PFTs, wherever there is difficulty in acquisition 
of land by TMCs.  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 29 
3. Railways may consider incentivising TMCs by bearing the cost 
for commercial staff deputed at PFTs themselves.  
4. Railways need to enforce the contractual obligation of 
commissioning of electronic in -motion weighbridegs at all PFTs. 
Where these have not been provided by the TMCs, Railway 
should explore the feasibility to provide  EIMWB on lease/rental 
basis. 
5. Railways should pro -actively interact with TMCs, periodically 
review the freight loading and earnings  and address the 
constraints faced.   

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 30 
Figure 2.1: ATVM and Co-ATVM 
 
2.2 All Zonal Railways: Working of Automatic Ticket Vending 
Machines (ATVMs) in Indian Railways 
 
2.2.1 Introduction 
Automatic Ticket Vending Machines (ATVMs) were first introduced by 
Indian Railways in October 2007 in Western Railway (WR) . The main 
objective was to reduce congestion of unreserved class passengers and 
long queuing at the ticket c ounters. ATVMs are touch screen -based 
ticketing kiosks operated using Smart Cards. The Smart Cards can be 
purchased and recharged at the regular ticket counters. The card has to 
be placed on a slot in the ATVM and user has to select the route and 
destination using the touch screen. After confirming the details, the ticket 
is printed and delivered. Once the ticket is issued, charge is debited from 
the smart card. The facility of checking balance on the card is also 
available. Co -ATVMs are cash/smart card ope rated ticket vending 
machines. These machines can be used by passengers themselves to 
buy unreserved tickets through currency/coins as well as smart cards. 
Single journey tickets, platform tickets etc. can be purchased  through 
ATVMs. Renewal of season tickets can also be done through ATVMs.  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 31 
Railway Board appointed a Sub -Group in August 2007, to plan and 
execute the installation of ATVMs on Indian Railways. As per the report of 
the Sub-Group, on an average Indian Railways sell 16.5 million tickets per 
day of which, vast majority are for unreserved passengers. As per the 
report, with the installation of Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS), the 
sale of such tickets has been greatly streamlined. However, the problem 
of long queues persisted at t he counters at se veral stations. This  often 
results in potential passengers not buying tickets especially on busy 
suburban stations. 
Honorable Railway Minister in the Railway Budget for 2015-16 announced 
introduction of ‘Operation Five Minutes’ . The aim was  to ensure that a 
passenger travelling unreserved is able to  purchase a ticket within five 
minutes. 
Audit reviewed the working of ATVMs installed on various selected 
stations over Indian Railways. The audit objective was to assess the 
extent to which these have been able to address the objectives for which 
they were installed.  
The review covered the period from 2015 -16 to 2017-18. A sample of 271 
stations for various categories 42, where 974 ATVMs and 199 Co-ATVMs 
were installed was selected for detailed study. For obtainin g feedback of 
passengers regarding use of ATVMs, 146 trains were also selected for 
review. Audit also carried out survey of 8392 passengers at all selected 
stations and trains to obtain their feedback regarding usage of 
ATVMs/Co-ATVMs. Details of stations selected are given in Annexure 
2.6. 
 
 
                                                           
42 A1 – 51 stations, A-69 stations, B-58 stations, C-37 stations, D-56 stations. The earlier 
criteria for station categorisation was based on the annual passenger earnings only.  
Stations were categorised into 7 categories which A -1, A, B, C, D, E and F.   Since 
December 2017, the criteria for categorisation of stations have been revised to include 
footfalls at the station. 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 32 
Audit findings 
2.2.2 Installation of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs  
As a Pilot Project, installation of 750 43 ATVMs were sanctioned by 
Railway Board over seven Zonal Railways through Works Programme 
2006-07. Further, Railway Board sanction ed (May 2007) expansion and 
installation of 5 964 ATVMs in all Zonal Railways . This  was revised to 
3964 ATVMs and 2000 Co -ATVMs machines. Subsequently, in order to 
allow stabilizing of Co -ATVMs, the number of Co -ATVMs was reduced 
(May 2014) to 45044. In July 201745, Railway Board replaced sanction of 
remaining 1550 Co -ATVMs with ATVMs. Of these, 10 per cent  
procurement was to be done through PPP mode.    
Audit observed that as on 31 March 2018, 38 51 ATVMs and 459 Co -
ATVMs have been installed over Zonal Railway s. Average cost of one 
ATVM - ` 1.71 lakh (based on PO issued by CRIS in January 2016).  
Audit noticed that no ATVM s have been procured and installed through 
PPP mode. Further, in ECR46 and NFR47, no ATVM has been installed till 
date, as against the target of 51048 ATVMs.   
2.2.3 Assessment of requirement and identification of location for 
installation of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs 
The success of any project/  proposal depends on proper planning/survey 
before its implementation. It was imperative to conduct a survey/ 
feasibility study for assessing the requirement of ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs at 
                                                           
43 175 in CR, 125 in WR, 100 each for ER and SER, SR, 75 each for NR and SCR 
44 CR, WR, NR, ER, SER, SR, SCR and SWR 
45 Railway Board Letter No. 2005/C&IS/WP/vending machine(ATVM) dated 19.07.2017  
46 Railway Board sanctioned (May 2007) 353 ATVMs (228 -ATVMs+125-CoATVMs) for 
installation over ECR. In May 2014, Ra ilway Board communicated sanction for detailed 
estimate for ` 18.40 crore for the same. As of March 2018, no ATVM/Co -ATVM has 
been installed in ECR. 
47 The work in NFR did not take off as the Associated Finance had raised certain 
objections regarding non -availability of suburban section and the suitability of ATVMs in 
the region. However, in March 2018, acting on a request from CRIS, NFR furnished the 
requirement for 152 ATVMs, 60 SMCs (Smart Card Management), 60 RFID Readers, 
152000 RFID smart cards and 60 printers to CRIS, New Delhi. As of March 2018 no 
ATVM/Co-ATVM has been installed in NFR. 
48 ECR-353 and NEFR-157 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 33 
stations for optimum utilization of these machines. The main objective of 
installing these machines was to reduce congestions and long queues at 
the ticket counters. As such, factors which are responsible for long waiting 
time at ticket counters should form the basis for deciding the location for 
these machines. Accordingly, t he survey / feasibility study  should be 
based on  
 timings for bunching of coaching trains,  
 quantum of UTS counters available,  
 sale of UTS tickets from window counter,  
 peak-hour queue length,  
 availability of other options like JTBS49 etc. 
Audit, however, noticed that no feasibility study was conducted by the 
Zonal Railways except by WR, WCR and one division of SR. Further, the  
assessment made in WR and WCR did not take into consideration the 
number of existing booking counters. In WR, the number of ATVMs 
installed had no co -relation with the originating passengers handled by 
suburban and non-suburban stations.  
Data regarding passengers handled was readily available with CRIS . This 
could have been used by Zonal Railways as input along with existing 
number of counters for identification of locations for installation of ATVMs/  
Co-ATVMs. 
Audit examination further disclosed that loc ation survey for installation of 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs was not properly done. In SR, 22 ATVMs were shifted 
after installation to other locations. In NER, five ATVMs were installed at 
stations, where the sections were closed due to gauge conversion works.  
For op ening of a new booking window at a station, Railway Board has 
prescribed (March 2013) criteria of sale of 3000 tickets per day. However, 
for assessment of requirement of ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs at a station, no 
specific norms were framed. In the absence of any nor ms, ATVMs/ Co-
                                                           
49 Jan Sadharan Ticket Booking Sevaks 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 34 
ATVMs were installed even at D category stations, where the numbers of 
sale of unreserved tickets were significantly low. Test check of sale of 
tickets through UTS and ATVMs at the selected D category stations 
during 2015 -1750 revealed the sal e of tickets ranged only between 216 
and 2926 per day51.  
During passenger survey Audit noticed that 32 per cent passengers were 
not aware of ATVMs and 27 per cent passengers were not aware of the 
installation of the ATVMs at the selected stations.   
Thus, installation of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs at stations was not preceded 
by proper surveys/ feasibility studies.  
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Railway Board agreed that no 
norms have been laid down for deciding the location and station for 
installation of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs.  
2.2.4 Sale of tickets through ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs  
Audit made a comparative study of sale of tickets to passengers through 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs vis-à-vis sale of tickets through window counters at 
271 selected stations. Audit observed that the share of s ale through 
ATVMs and Co -ATVMs as compared to total tickets sold during 2015 -16 
to 2017 -18 was only 16.52 per cent and 0.38 per cent respectively . No 
benchmark for optimal ut ilization of the ticket vending machines was 
found on record in Railway Board.  
Audit noticed that 
 In non -suburban stations (A1 -51, A -69, B -58 and D -56), only 12 per 
cent52 tickets were sold through ATVMs and 1.12 per cent through Co-
ATVMs, while 87 per cent tickets were sold through window counters.  
                                                           
50 September, October, November and December of 2015, 2016 and 2017  
51 except one station Bhiwandi Road of Central Railway 
52 Out of the total sale of 1744999618 tickets, only 220697753 tickets were sold through 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs and 1524301865 tickets were sold through ticket counters 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 35 
 At 3 853 stations, the share of sale of ATVMs tickets with respect to 
window counter was less than five per cent during 2017-18. Some of 
the important sta tions were Kharagpur, Jaipur, Va sco-da-Gama, 
Kolkata, Ludhiana, Jhansi, Sealdhah, Chandigarh, Howrah, Gwalior, 
New Delhi, Mathura, Tumakuru , Ghaziabad, Saharanpur, Bhusaval 
and Ahmednagar.  
 In 37 selected suburban stations (C category), the share of tickets sold 
through ATVMs was comparatively high i.e. 18 per cent 54. However, 
the same was only 0.1 per cent  for tickets sold through Co -ATVMs. 
The sale of tickets through window counters was 82 per cent  of the 
total tickets booked. 
                                                           
53 Kharagpur, Tatanagar, Digha, Shalimar, Midnapur, Jaipur Keonjhar Road, V asco-da-
Gama, Bolpur Shantiniketan, Haripur, Phillaur, Datia, Kolkata, Banda, Dabra, Kalilabad, 
Mahoba, Korba, Campa, Ludhiana, Jhansi, Dhuri, Sealdhah, Chandigarh, Shahdol, 
Howrah, Gwalior, New Delhi, Anuppur, Karur, Naihati, Mathura, Tumakuru, Barddhaman, 
Vindhyachal, Ghaziabad, Saharanpur, Bhusaval, Ahmednagar  
54 Out of the total sale of 1744999618 tickets, only 220697753 tickets were sold through 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs and 1524301865 tickets were sold through ticket counters 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 36 
 At 13 55 out of 15 stations of C category where both ATVMs and Co -
ATVMs were installed, the share of sale of tickets through Co -ATVMs 
was significantly less than ATVMs.  
Annexure 2.7 
During passenger survey, 63 per cent passengers opined that they have 
never used ATVMs for purchase of tickets. Further, 68 per cent  
passengers were not aware of ATVM smart cards and 89 per cent did not 
have ATVM smart cards. 
During the past three years, the sale of un reserved tickets through 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs was 16.90 per cent of the total sale of unreserved 
tickets at 271 selected stations. At suburban stations, ATVMs were 
preferred as compared to Co -ATVMs. Audit noted that the ATVM 
scheme su ffered from frequent failure of machines, lack of 
passenger awareness and other shortcomings  as mentioned in 
subsequent paragraphs . These shortcomings would automatically 
result in sub-optimal use of the machines.  
 
 
                                                           
55 Ghatkopar, Kurla, Dombivli, Bhandup, Bar rackpore, Bharatnagar, Hi -tech City, Avidi, 
Mambalam, Tambaram, Velachery, Bhayandar, Dadar 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 37 
2.2.5 Utilization of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs 
Audit analysed the utilization of ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs installed at selected 
stations. Audit findings are discussed below: 
(i) Downtime of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs installed at various stations are covered under 
warranty for three years from the date of installa tion56. As per the clause, 
ticket vending machines  and its other supporting components have to be 
attended within 24 hours from date of lodging of complaints . The defects 
should be rectified within two days , f ailing which, penalty was to be 
imposed. In case  of complaints remaining unattended, CRIS was to 
deduct the penalty charges as applicable subject to maximum 10 per cent 
of the contract value calculated on quarterly basis.  
Audit reviewed the position of failures of ATVMs and Co -ATVMs during 
the four -month period from September 2017 to December 2017. Audit 
noticed that  
 In 13 Zonal Railways, where 37 55 ATVMs were installed, 5064 
instances of ATVMs failure for 2,16,425 hours were noticed.  
 In eight Zonal Railways, where 449 Co -ATVMs installed, 1847 
instances of Co-ATVMs failure for 85,190 hours were noticed.  
 Per machine failure rate during the four months’ period was 57.64 
hours for ATVMs and 189.73 hours for Co-ATVMs. 
 Information regarding failure of ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs was not found on 
record in SER, where 95 ATVMs and 10 Co-ATVMs were installed.  
Audit further noticed that during the period checked, maximum number of 
Co-ATVM failures were noticed in CR, followed by WR. In SECR and 
SWR, the duration of failures was 8970 hrs and 4960 hrs in 19 and 23 
failures respectively. Main reasons for failure of ATVMs included network, 
printer, screen problems, card reader faulty etc. Similarly, the reasons for 
                                                           
56 CRIS PO No.2016/CRIS/1113619 dated 05.01.2016 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 38 
downtime of Co -ATVMs were mainly the failure of cash device, faulty 
cash door, network and printer problem, etc.  
Out of 14 Zonal Railways, only four Zonal Railways had levied the 
penalty57 of ` 56.10 lakh against the firms and forwarded it to the CRIS for 
recovery. However, details of recovery from the firms were not found on 
record. 
Thus, the Zonal Railways did not effectively take up the matter of 
rectification/repair of ATVMs/Co -ATVMs with the firms . As a result , 
the machines remained down for a long time. This also discouraged 
the passengers to use them. 
(ii) Sale of tickets using ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs through facilitat ors in 
comparison to passengers buying themselves 
Railway Board instructed 58 (November 2011 and May 2012) that Zonal 
Railways should appoint facilitators at those stations where ATVMs have 
been installed. The facilitators were to be issued smart cards in or der to 
facilitate issuing of unreserved tickets through ATVMs. Railway Board 
also instructed (August 2007) 59 that ATVMs must be easy to understand, 
easy to operate. Further instructions (November 2011) 60 provided that the 
facilitators should also facilitate the user/ passenger (holding smart card) 
in purchasing ticket by themselves from ATVM. Adequate education to the 
user/ passenger should be provided by the facilitators.   
Audit analysed the sale of tickets through facilitators of ATVMs vis-à-vis 
tickets purchased by passenger themselves at the selected stations. The 
data of tickets sold during September to December of three years (2015 
to 2017) was analysed. The result can be seen from the Graph 2.6 below: 
                                                           
57 ECoR ` 6.95 lakh, NER -` 6.15 lakh, SECR - ` 1.00 lakh and WR -` 42 lakh (Total  
` 56.10 lakh) 
58 Railway Board Commer cial Circular no.2011/TG -I/10/ATVMs facilitators dated 
23.11.2011 and No.2011/TG-I/10/ATVMs facilitators dated 18.05.2012 
59No.2005/C&IS/Vending Machine/Pt.I PPP New Delhi, dated 31.8.2007  
60 Commercial Circular no.60 of 2011 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 39 
 
Graph 2.6: Tickets sold, facilitators appointed and ATVMs installed on selected stations for 
the period September to December in 2015, 2016 and 2017 
It can be seen that number of ATVMs installed and number of facilitators 
appointed increased by 33 per cent and 149 per cent respectively. As a 
result of in crease in number of facilitators, the number of tickets sold by 
facilitators increased by 255 per cent. It was, however seen that number 
of tickets purchased by passengers themselves decreased by 41 per 
cent. 
During passenger survey, 58 per cent passengers were of the view that 
facilitators did not educate passengers on how to use ATVMs. Further, 32 
per cent  passengers were of the view that the ATVMs were not user 
friendly. 
Thus, the situation of sale of tickets through ATVMs improved where 
facilitators wer e appointed. Further, the decline in purchase of 
tickets by passengers themselves points toward the need to educate 
the passengers and make the awareness programmes more 
effective. 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 40 
2.2.6 Awareness program for passengers  
(i) Awareness programs at selected stations 
Railway Board had issued instructions from time to time for creating 
awareness amongst passengers regarding ATVMs. The major initiatives 
required to be taken by Zonal Railways for creating awareness included 
the following: 
i) Placement of Instructions Boar ds like “How to use ATVMs” for 
passengers at proper places; 
ii) Display of videos on demo of passengers using ATVMs on CCTVs 
installed on the platforms so as to educate the passengers; 
iii) Concerted efforts for promoting ATVMs and educating passengers 
about the ATVMs. 
iv) Conducting skits/ demonstration drives etc. 
v) Publishing information regarding use of ATVMs in local newspapers, 
vi) Creating cultural teams of the railway to approach corporate offices/ 
major educational institutions to create awareness about ATVMs. 
Audit reviewed the awareness programs initiated by Zonal Railways at 
271 selected stations. Audit noticed 
that 
 Instruction Boards like “How to use 
ATVMs” for passengers at proper 
places were found only in 142 
stations. In NER, seven ATVMs 
had been installed at Lucknow 
junction. However, only one 
Instruction Board was placed at 
the place which was not easily 
visible to the passengers. 
Figure 2.2: Lucknow, NER- Instruction 
Board installed in a corner, hardly 
visible to passengers 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 41 
Figure 2.3: NER -Two ATVMs installed at first class gate at Gorakhpur Station; SR- ATVM at Tirur located next to 
reservation counter and SWR-ATVM placed in CCM’s Office 
  At 10 stations61, ATVMs were not installed at proper locations. ATVMs 
were installed at first class entry gate, near reservation counters, at 
CCM’s office. Only at nine stations 62, videos on demo of passengers 
using ATVMs were shown on CCTVs to educate the passengers on 
this aspect. 
 SCR had devised 
seven easy steps to 
purchase tickets from 
ATVMs and displayed 
at stations for 
passengers. This is a 
best practice which 
other Zonal Railways 
may also follow to 
create awareness 
amongst passengers. 
 In SWR, video clippings were displayed in all selected stations and 
displayed at all the ATVMs locations. Displays were also seen in 
CCTVs and giant screen at Bengaluru station. 
                                                           
61NER (Lucknow NE, Gorakhpur, Bas ti), SECR (Raipur, Kamptee), SER (Dumdum 
Cantt.), SR (Chennai Egmore, Tirur), WR (Ahmedabad, Santra Cruz) 
62 Lucknow NE -NER, Madurai -SR, Bengluru, yasvantpur, Bangalore Cantt., Sri Sathya 
Sai Prasanti Nilayam, Tumkur, Bangalore East, Whitefield-SWR 
Figure 2.4: Instruction Board demonstrating seven easy 
steps to purchase tickets from ATVM at Secunderabad 
Stations(SCR) 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 42 
(ii) Awareness programs at divisional level 
Compliance of Railway Board’s instructions for creating awareness 
amongst passengers regarding ATVMs was also analysed at Divisional 
level. Audit examined the records of 56 divis ions of 14 Zonal Railways in 
this regard and noticed that 
 In 28 divisions (six Railways 63), no concerted efforts were made to 
proliferate and to educate passengers about the ATVMs. 
 In 38 divisions (11 Railways64), no skits/ demonstration drives etc., had 
been conducted. 
 In 30 divisions (11 Railways 65), no information regarding use of 
ATVMs had been published in local newspapers. 
 In 53 divisions (1 3 Railways66), the video showing the demo of 
passengers using ATVMs were not shown on CCTVs installed on the 
platform to educate the passengers. 
 No Zonal Railways, except in two divisions of CR, created any cultural 
teams of the railway to approach corporate offices/major educational 
institutions to create awareness about ATVMs.  
During passenger survey, 87 per cent  passengers had no knowledge 
about the awareness program conducted by the Railways. 
Thus, steps taken by the Zonal Railways to sensitize and make 
passengers aware of the ease of use of ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs were 
inadequate. This was one of the major reasons for unde r-utilization 
of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs.  
                                                           
63 ECoR, NR, NWR, SECR, SR (all divisions) and in WR (3 divisions out of 5). 
64 ECoR, NCR, NWR, SECR, SR, SWR and WCR (all divisions) and in NER (Two 
divisions out of three), SER (3 divisions out of 4) WR (4 divisions out of 5) , Solapur 
division of CR. 
65 ECoR, NCR, NWR, SECR, WCR and WR (all divisions) and in SCR (5 divisions out of 
6) NR (3  divisions out of 5) NER (01 divisions out of 3), SER  (3 divisions out of 4) and 
SR (3 divisions out of 6) 
66 ECoR, NCR, NWR, SECR, WCR and WR (all divisions) and in SCR (5 divisio ns out of 
6) NR (3  divisions out of 5) NER (01 divisions out of 3), SER  (3 divisions out of 4) and 
SR (3 divisions out of 6) 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 43 
(iii) Time taken in purchase of tickets from ATVMs 
For assessing the effectiveness of ATVMs and time taken for sale of 
tickets, a survey was conducted by Audit during peak hours of January 
2019 over five stations 67 of NER and CR. Audit findings during survey at 
stations of NER and CR are tabulated below: 
Audit observed that average time taken at booking window w as much 
higher than that of ATVMs. Audit, however, found during passenger 
survey that 63 per cent passengers never used ATVMs for purchase of 
tickets. This was due to lack of awareness amongst passengers about the 
ATVMs. Audit also observed that there was no information/display 
regarding availability of ATVMs for purchase of tickets stations surveyed 
in Audit.  
2.2.7 Conclusion 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs were introduced to reduce congestions of unreserved 
class passengers and long queuing at the ticket counters. As on 31 March 
2018, 38 51 ATVMs and 459 Co -ATVMs have been installed over 14 
Zonal Railways against the sanction of 5 514 ATVMs and 450 Co-ATVMs. 
In ECR and NEFR, no ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs were installed.  
Audit noticed that no feasibility study was conducted by the Zonal 
Railways for assessing the requirement of ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs at stations. 
The share of tickets sold through ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs was only 16.90 per 
                                                           
67 NER – Gorakhpur (15 January 2019), Lucknow NE (21 January 2019) and Siwan (28 
January 2019); CR – Dombival (22 January 2019) and Thane (22 January 2019) 
Table 2.1 – Average time taken for booking of tickets at ticket windows and 
ATVMS 
S. 
no 
Name of Station Number of 
Passengers 
surveyed  
Average time taken 
at Booking Window 
(in minutes) 
Average time 
taken at ATVM 
(in seconds) 
1. Gorakhpur   43 7 to 8  30 to 120  
2. Lucknow 32 6  30 to 120 
3. Siwan Jn. 35 12  30 to 120 
4. Dombivali 20 1.5 30  
5. Thane 20 1.0 30  

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 44 
cent as compared to total sale of unreserved tickets at the selected 271 
stations. Audit noted that the ATVM scheme suffered from frequent failure 
of machines, lack of passenger awareness and other shortcomings. 
These shortcomings would automatically result in sub -optimal use of the 
machines. Zonal Railways did not effectively take up the matter of 
rectification/ repair o f ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs with the firms. Passenger 
survey conducted by Audit revealed that 32 per cent passengers were not 
aware of ATVMs, 87 per cent  of passengers stated that no awareness 
program was conducted by Railways, 58 per cent of surveyed passengers 
told that the facilitators did not educate passengers how to use ATVMs.  
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Railway Board accepted the audit 
observations and noted the recommendations.  
2.2.8 Recommendations 
1. Railways need to undertake surveys/ feasibility stud ies for 
identification of stations as well as locations for installation of 
ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs. 
2. Facilitators appointed at ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs may be effectively 
used to educate passengers regarding ease of purchasing tickets 
through ATVMs/ Co-ATVMs. The incentive  to facilitators may be 
linked to the number of tickets bought by the passengers 
themselves. 
3. Downtime for ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs may be reduced by ensuring 
timely rectification of defects/problems. 
4. Effective and extensive awareness drives may be undertaken for 
familiarizing and popularizing use of ATVMs/ Co -ATVMs amongst 
passengers.  
5. Effective utilization of ATVMs requires behavioral changes 
amongst passengers. Railways may plan replacing the booking 
counters with ATVMs/  Co-ATVMs in a phased manner on 
identified stations.   

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 45 
2.3 Central Railway  (CR): Implementation of Train Management 
System in Mumbai suburban system 
TMS was not implemented in all the sections of Mumbai Division . 
This restricted the availability of full benefits of the system for the 
Mumbai suburban  system of Central Railway. Various  important 
functions continued to be done manually. The system remained 
ineffective due to non -compliance of basic input data, reduction of 
scope of contract and inadequate knowledge of Railway staff in 
operating the TMS.  The objectives envisaged were not achieved 
despite expenditure of ` 24.23 crore since December 2013. 
2.3.1 Introduction 
The suburban rail network of CR extends from Mumbai Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) to Karjat, Kasara and Khopoli on the 
main line via Kalyan. It also extends from Mumbai CSMT to Panvel, 
Mumbai CSMT to Goregaon on the harbour line and Thane to 
Vashi/Nerul/Panvel on Trans harbour line.  Mumbai CSMT to Kalyan, 
extends over 54 kms and comprises 26 stations. This section handles 
more than 800 suburban trains and carries more than 3.5 million 
passengers per day. 
In the conventional system of working, Controllers of train movements 
collected information over phone regarding actual departure of each train 
from important nominated stat ions. Heavy density of suburban trains on 
this section made it impractical to collect timings from all the 26 stations. 
Therefore, CR decided to introduce a computer based information 
storage-cum-retrieval system viz. Train Management System (TMS) . The 
system was to process and display information in real time. A contract for 
‘Design, supply, installation, testing and commissioning of TMS in Mumbai 
CSMT-Kalyan Suburban section of Mumbai Division’ was awarded (June 
2008) to M/s Bombardier Transportation Indi a Ltd., Vadodara. TMS was 
commissioned in December 2013 at a cost of ` 24.23 crore.  

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 46 
TMS was to provide an effective system of regulating trains by monitoring 
their movements. The system was intended to provide timely information 
to the commuters through d isplay boards and through announcements on 
public address system at all stations/other locations. The system was to 
provide inputs for control of train movements to Central Control 
Office/CSMT. In addition, it was meant for preparing/generating 
punctuality reports, rake and crew links and other MIS related reports. 
The system was intended to facilitate timely decisions for diversion of 
trains, induction/withdrawal of rakes, planning reversal of rakes etc. Audit 
reviewed the usefulness and extent of utilisat ion of TMS in the day to day 
operations in the CSTM-Kalyan Section since inception.  
Audit Findings  
2.3.2 Incomplete data entry in the system 
It is the responsibility of the Station M aster of the originating station to 
enter manually the Train Identificat ion (Train ID) information in the 
system. This information includes train number, rake number, destination, 
platform number, classification of trains (i.e. Fast/Slow/Semi -fast) etc. 
This is to be done every time , the rake enters in the system from 
shed/sidings etc. It helps to fla sh the details by the system automatically 
on screen for all the journeys that train undertakes. This activity is vital for 
the successful operation of the TMS. 
Audit observed that the unique Train ID number will apply to a rake only 
as long as it continues to make trips between different originating and 
destination stations without a break.  Based on requirement of services, 
some rakes are withdrawn from trips, stabled in car sheds during non -
peak hours and reintroduced into servic e during peak hours of the day.  
When a train is taken out of its running trips during any part of the day and 
stabled, it loses the unique Train ID earlier assigned to it.  Thus, it 
becomes essential that when a train is reintroduced into service from the  
car shed during any particular day, it is assigned a unique Train ID again. 
This enables flashing of its details automatically in the TMS. 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 47 
There were 856 trains run on Mumbai suburban Main line sections. Of 
these, 836 suburban trains 68 run between Mumbai C SMT and Kalyan 69. 
Analysis of the data of TMS revealed that Train IDs information was 
keyed in the TMS for only 800 trains out of 836 70. Of these, in  173 trains, 
actual departure time was not captured; in 161 trains, actual arrival time 
was not captured; in 232 trains, both actual arrival and departure time was 
not captured. This happened due to loss of Train IDs as a result of digital 
link failures.  
Ministry, in its reply, stated (July 2019) that average percentage of valid 
entries to total number of trains  in CSMT-Kalyan section, where TMS has 
been commissioned, was 97.79 per cent. However, due to intermittent 
and frequent failures and shortage of staff, departure/arrival of trains was 
not captured in TMS. 
Audit further observed that the status of entering the Train IDs in TMS 
worsened further in December 2018. Audit reviewed the Controllers’ 
Diaries of TMS Control Office for 19 December 2018. Audit observed that 
out of 836 trains, Train IDs were entered in respect of only 449 trains (52 
per cent) in the TMS. Of these, in 10 trains, actual departure time was not 
captured. In 48 trains, actual arrival time was not captured . In 65 trains, 
both actual arrival and departure time was not captured. Reasons for 
decline in percentage of coverage of trains in the TMS were not found on 
record. The benefit of automatic real time information was thus, not 
available to the commuters. 
Ministry stated (July 2019) that Audit has taken data of trains running only 
on non -peak hours (449 trains). However, during test check of Tr ain 
Control Chart (TCC) for 19 March 2019, valid entries were 92.3 per cent 
for down trains and 72.60 per cent for up trains. The low percentage of 
valid train numbers was due to technical failures (malfunctioning of line 
                                                           
6820 trains services outside the jurisdiction of TMS (18 train services on Karjat -Khopoli 
sections and 02 train services on Kalyan-Asangaon section) 
69 including trains to destinations beyond Kalyan 
70 as checked on 13 January 2017 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 48 
interface unit, Router hanged etc. ) and shortage of staff on certain dates 
and shifts. 
Thus, technical failures continue to adversely affect the efficiency of TMS 
even after five years of commissioning of TMS. 
Non-feeding the train IDs in the system also affected the ability of the 
system to regulate trains by monitoring their movements. The ‘Expected 
Arrival in Minutes (EAIM)’ of such trains was not displayed on the platform 
indicator. Also, automatic announcement on train approaching the station 
could not be done. The system also could not generate punctuality reports 
and other MIS related reports automatically. 
Central Railway Administration agreed and stated (January 2018) that 
Controllers had been counselled to enter  Train trips  and appropriate 
Identifications (IDs) in the TMS.  
2.3.3 Manual maintenance of records 
TMS did not cover the entire suburban section of Central Railway. It was 
implemented only for Mumbai CSMT -Kalyan section . The sections 
beyond Kalyan (on main line) and entire Harbour and Trans Harbour lines 
were not covered. 
Audit observed that train originating and terminating, punctuality figures 
were calculated manually from Train Register Books. Train clerks posted 
in the central cabins 71 recorded the time of departure of the trains 
manually in the Train Register Book. In add ition to this, staff was also 
posted at central cabins for operation of TMS workstations. This was 
duplication of work, which could have been done entirely through the 
system, if TMS was implemented on full section. In Mumbai Divisional 
Control Office, Con troller’s Diary for Mumbai CSMT -Kurla and Kurla -
Kalyan sections and Chief Controller’s Diary (Suburban) were maintained 
manually. Operating Department also did not generate any report from 
TMS and depended on manually prepared reports. Thus, the envisaged 
                                                           
71 for recording departure of the trains 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 49 
benefit of TMS in generating automatic reports on real time basis was not 
achieved.  
Ministry stated (July 2019) that for CSMT -Kurla and Kurla -Kalyan 
sections, punctuality can be calculated with the existing system provided 
that all the Train IDs are allot ted and entered into the system. However, 
for calculating the overall punctuality for the entire suburban sections 
which stretches beyond Kalyan, CSMT (Harbour line) and beyond and 
Thane (Trans Harbour), manual calculation is unavoidable. 
Further, train co ntrol charts, train graphs, punctuality reports, unknown 
delayed trains, Controller’s Diary etc. can be generated through TMS. 
However, due to less number of train movements being captured in TMS 
and partial implementation of TMS, various MIS r eports were not being 
generated. 
Central Railway admitted (March and September 2017) that TMS covered 
CSMT-Kalyan section only and timing of trains running beyond Kalyan 
was not available in the TMS. They stated that generation of various 
standard MIS reports was also  restricted to Mumbai CSMT to Kalyan. 
Thus, by implementing TMS in only a part of the section, CR was not able 
to use TMS effectively for the intended objective. 
2.3.4 Live indications of signals, points etc. with geo -layout of the 
stations 
TMS was to pr ovide live indications of signals , points and crossings with 
geo-layout of the 
stations, on -line 
display of train 
movements with train 
details.  This included  
Train ID, Rake number 
and Route settings on 
Figure 2.5: Barco Panel at Kalyan 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 50 
a Mimic Indication Panel 72 (Barco Panel 73) at workstati ons of Controllers 
and at train terminating/originating stations. Audit observed that although 
the Barco Panel installed at Mumbai Divisional Control was calibrated 74 
departmentally in October 2016, visibility of train movements, points etc.in 
Barco Panel remained poor. 
Central Railway stated (January 2018) that the above mentioned panel is 
being used since much before the commissioning of TMS i.e. December 
2013.  The panel had completed seven years of burning life and its 
replacement was planned in 2018 -19.  Audit, however, observed that the 
replacement proposal had not been included in the Works Programme of 
2018-19. 
Audit further noticed that the Barco Electronic Systems (P) Ltd 75. had 
stopped production of this product line in March 2012. They also stopped  
technical support to Railway Admi nistration since December 2013.  
Accordingly, the contractor of TMS M/s Bombardier had provided 
(October and November 2015) CR various options to ensure that the 
efficiency of Barco panel installed in TMS was not affected d ue to lack of 
spares etc. Timely action/decision in this regard was, however, not taken 
by Central Railway Administration.   
Thus, non-replacement of Barco panel, despite completion of its burning 
life led to persistent  issues of poor visibility in the Bar co panel causing 
difficulties to panel controllers.   
Ministry, in its reply, stated (July 2019) that visibility has been 
substantially improved by replacing the defective panel/cubes of Barco 
panel. However, work for complete replacement has been proposed  in 
                                                           
72Technical Specification No. 7 of Section VI of Contract Agreement 
73 Barco refers to the make of panel which is an array of digital display units - two rows of 
eight panels each. The Barco video wall displays live indica tions of signals, points, track 
circuits etc. of suburban section with geo layout of the stations. Barco panel provides a 
visual aid to the controllers for managing the train movements.     
74 Calibration exercise involves updating of TMS database based on changes in station 
layouts. After calibration, updated layout is displayed on the Video wall. 
75 OEM of Barco Panel 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 51 
Works Programme 2019 -20. The overall visibility is slowly deteriorating 
due to increasing burning hours. 
2.3.5 Interface of TMS with Passenger Information System 
TMS was interfaced with Indicators, Visual Display Units (VDUs) and 
Passenger Announcement System (PAS). Audit observed that display of 
arrival of trains in the indicator, VDU and announcement in PAS was not 
being done by the system automatically. Announcers i.e. persons 
operating the TMS were giving instructions/commands to the system to 
display the arrival of next train in the indicator.  In Mumbai CSMT, 
suburban train departure announcement and display of suburban train 
timings was done  manually. This happened as CR did not procure 
equipment/modules for interfacing Central Announcement System 
(CAS)76 with TMS at Central Control Office 77. Reasons for non -
procurement were not on record.   
Central Railway stated (March 2017) that this facility was not used since it 
required maintaining of proper IDs of the running train, otherwise wrong 
information would be communicated to the commuters, which would result 
in passenger complaints. They also stated (January 2018) that integration 
of TMS with existing PIS at Mumbai CSMT was not implemented as 
Mumbai CSMT was originating station, where EAIM and VDU were  not 
relevant from passenger point of view. 
Audit, however, noticed that CSMT station was to be provided with 
Automatic Route Setting (ARS), a system providing online display of train 
movement, flashing message instructions from controllers and information  
about EAIM of next two trains on each line. These facilities as at other 
stations along with ARS were to be provided in CSMT Route Relay 
                                                           
76 A part of Passenger Information System 
77Schedule item (No. 41) provided in the Contract for Supply, installation, testing and 
commissioning of PC based CA system and Item No. 13.5 of FRS 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 52 
Interlocking (RRI) Cabin. Audit noticed that provision of ARS 78  was also 
not done during execution of contract. 
Ministry stated (July 2019) that manual intervention was essential to avoid 
wrong information being given to public on account of trains not logged on 
TMS through IDs, due to various reasons. At CSMT, integration of TMS 
with existing PIS system was not implement ed since it is an originating 
station and EAIM and VDU has no relevance from passenger point of 
view. Further, CSMT was already provided with advance Train 
Information System before commissioning of TMS for suburban traffic and 
same is functioning satisfac torily and therefore no need was felt to 
integrate TMS with PIS. Purpose of CAS is to provide emergency as well 
as other social/security related messages collectively at a point of time to 
all the stations from centralized location.   
Ministry’s reply is n ot acceptable. As per FRS and GCC, these features 
were incorporated in the scope of work.  Reasons for exclusion of 
interfacing the CAS with TMS have not been furnished. Manual 
intervention still continues even after five years of commissioning of TMS. 
As the Advance Train Information System was already provided for 
suburban traffic, the reasons for inclusion of work of integrating TMS with 
PIS has not been given by the Ministry. 
2.3.6 Non-execution of Annual Maintenance Contract 
Warranty of hardware and so ftware of TMS supplied by M/s Bombardier 
under the contract was for a period of two years i.e. up to 05 December 
2015. Audit observed that after the expiry of the warranty period, no 
Annual Maintenance Contract ( AMC) was awarded by CR Administration. 
The h ardware assets were maintained departmentally by Signalling 
Department.  
Central Railway stated (January 2018) that efforts were under way to 
enter into AMC. AMC tender would be re -invited from M/s Bombardier to 
                                                           
78  Item No.34 of Tender schedule 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 53 
cover only proprietary items of the firm. Fo r other items, further course of 
action would be decided based on response to the re-tender. 
Ministry stated (July 2019) that Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) 
M/s Bombardier Transportation India Limited did not participate in two 
tenders opened in Sep tember and November 2017. However, system is 
being maintained departmentally through procurement of proprietary 
items from OEM and other items from Stores Open tender. 
2.3.7 Conclusion  
TMS was not implemented in all the sections of Mumbai Division . This  
restricted the availability of full benefits of the system for the entire 
Mumbai suburban system of CR. Details of movement of all trains running 
on the section, where TMS was implemented, were also not being 
captured. Functions such as recording train move ment in train register, 
entering train details in TMS, collection and display of departure 
information by the controller was done manually. Post implementation, the 
work load at Central Cabins increased as they had to continue recording 
of train movements manually. The system remained ineffective due to not 
capturing basic input data and inadequate knowledge of Railway staff in 
operating the TMS. The objectives envisaged were not achieved despite 
expenditure of ` 24.23 crore since December 2013.  
2.3.8 Recommendations 
1. TMS needs to be implemented on all the suburban sections of 
suburban rail network in Mumbai Division of CR for deriving 
intended benefits. 
2. Complete information, on real time basis, about movement of 
suburban trains should be made available to c ommuters waiting 
for the trains on the platforms. 
3. Details of movement of all trains running should be captured  to 
generate correct MIS reports. 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 54 
4. Punctuality figures should be calculated through TMS to avoid 
manual intervention and possible manipulation of p unctuality 
figures. 
5. Annual Maintenance Contract should be entered into timely to 
maintain TMS in proper working condition. 
2.4 Southern Railway (SR): Injudicious conversion of Domestic 
Container Terminal as Container Rail Terminal led to loss of revenue  
Container Corporation of India Ltd (CONCOR)  was incorporated in March 
1988 as a Public Sector Enterprise under the Ministry of Railways . The 
prime objective of this corporation was to develop modern multimodal 
transport logistics and infrastructure . CONCOR provides  support to the 
country's growing domestic  and international containerized cargo and 
trade. It pays79 license fees to Railways, whereever railway land is leased 
to them for operation of container terminals . The licence fee is based on 
the number of containers (TEUs – Twenty foot equivalent units) handled.  
SR handed over railway land of 7.311 acres at Salem Market to CONCOR 
in 2001 for setting up of a DCT. The DCT became operational during July 
2001. The land licence agreement was executed in July 2004 for a period 
                                                           
79 Railway Board’s letter No.2001/LML/13/55/Vol. III dated 24.1.2008, revised from time 
to time 
SR Administration decided to convert CONCOR D omestic Container 
Terminal (DCT) at Salem Market into Container Rail Terminal (CRT)  
without ensuring the availability of container or cargo storage and 
stacking facility, which was critical for successful runnin g of CRT. 
DCT was exclusively  used by CONCOR, whereas CRT was meant to 
be used by all container train operators. SR, however, did not assess 
the demand for creating another CRT at Salem Market station, where 
already a railway CRT existed.  After conversion  of DC T as CRT, 
there was no outward loading during 2016 -17 and 2017 -18. As a 
result, SR Administration lost the opportunity to earn the revenue on 
account of haulage charges and license fee from CONCOR.  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 55 
of five years and later extended u p to July 2014. The lease charges were 
payable as per Railway Board orders80 on the basis of TEUs handled by 
CONCOR. At this terminal, inward traffic was white cement and outward 
traffic was starch sand, olivine sand, turmeric, magnesium powder etc. to 
Shalimar and Tughlakabad. The outward traffic was routed through the 
CONCOR, Tondiarpet hub (ICDT). 
On expiry of land licence agreement, CONCOR approached SR 
Administration for renewing the licence for a further period of ten years 
from July 2014. SR Administr ation did not agree to extend the period of 
licence and asked CONCOR to vacate the land by April 2015. SR took the 
decision on the grounds that there was a decline in traffic and CONCOR 
was occupying a prime land by paying a modest licence fee. They also 
felt that they could convert the facility into a CRT and operate the same 
for use by all container train operators.  
Audit observed that after notifying 81 DCT as CRT at Salem Market in May 
2015, the outward traffic came down to ‘Nil’ .  Before May 2015, an  
average of 1 35 container units was dealt with by CONCOR at Salem 
Market DCT per month. Besides, the inward traffic also got reduced 
marginally after the conversion of DCT to CRT, as can be seen from the 
table below: 
Table 2.2 – Traffic handled at the terminal since 2012-13 
When the 
terminal was 
functioning as 
Year Inward Outward 
Rakes No. of 
Units 
loaded 
Rakes No. of 
Units 
loaded 
DCT  
(handled by 
CONCOR) 
2012-13 45 3212 45 1962 
2013-14 38 3036 38 1544 
2014-15 35 2770 35 1450 
2015-16 (up to May 
2015) 
6 412 6 186 
CRT 
(handled by SR 
administration) 
2015-16 (from June 
2015 to March 2016) 
20 1510 20 74 
2016-17 31 2528 31 0 
2017-18 31 2484 31 0 
                                                           
80 Railway Board letter No.2001/LML/13/55 dated 24.09.2003 
81 Advance Rate Notification 5 of 2015 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 56 
It can be seen that only 74 contai ners were loaded during 2015 -16. In 
2016-17 and 2017 -18, no outward loaded traffic was booked from the 
terminal. As such, SR lost opportunity to earn additional revenue on 
account of freight haulage charges after conversion of DCT as CRT. 
Audit noticed that subsequently CONCOR requested82 SR Administration 
for restoring the DCT  at Salem Market . They also assured to handle an 
average of 240 container units of inward and 120 container units of 
outward traffic per month. However, the proposal was not considered by 
SR Administration. Divisional Railway Manager of Salem Division also  
suggested (June 2016) for reverting back the CRT to DCT . However, the 
same was not agreed to by the Zonal Headquarters.  
Audit further noticed that at the time of converting (May 2015) Salem 
Market DCT to CRT, the traffic carried by existing 21 CRTs83 during 2013-
14 and 2014-15 was nil. Audit noticed that  
 The CRT at Salem Market Goods shed of the railways was also 
located in the vicinity of the DCT of CONCOR . This was converted to 
CRT by SR A dministration. This Goods shed is located on the other 
side of th e Salem Market Railway Station . It  also did not carry any 
traffic during 2010 -11 to 2014 -15. This fact was not taken into 
consideration while notifying the DCT to CRT.   
 There is no container or cargo storage facility at the newly notified 
CRT (akin to an ICD or DCT of CONCOR). Empty container 
availability was a major issue with the customers at this location.  
 SR Administration did not consider the earnings on movement of 
containers from Tondiarpet hub (ICDT) to Shalimar and Tughlakabad 
under hub and spoke system84 from Salem Market DCT. 
                                                           
82 June and August 2016 
83 Only three CRTs (Melpakkam, Milavittan and Panambur) out of 24 had carried traffic 
84 Under hub and spoke system, a terminal is treated as hub and enables long lead 
services through short lead traffic collections us ing road and rail shuttle services by 
CONCOR. The same facility is not available with the Railways operating CRT.  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 57 
 CONCOR continued to be the lone customer at the newly notified CRT 
at Salem Market even after a lapse of three years . No other private 
container operator offered traffic.  
 There was no loading from this new CRT during 2016-17 and 2017-18. 
There is a possibility that the traffic has moved to road.  
Railway Board in their reply stated (24 January 2019) that the decision to 
notify Salem Market DCT  as CRT was in consonance with the principles 
of the new regime. They stated that other CTOs expressed willingness to 
operate from Salem Market DCT. Therefore, it was the ir duty to create a 
level playing field wherein all CTOs could operate. Taking into 
consideration the poor performance of CONCOR, SR decided to notify it 
as CRT. They, h owever, accepted that lack of stacking facility for 
containers/ cargo at Salem Market DCT affected the booking of loaded 
containers. They also  stated that the proposal of SR requesting 
permission to allot unused railway land at Salem Market DCT to CTOs 
was under consideration. This would facilitate outward loading without 
additional cost to the CTOs. 
Thus, the decision to convert CONCOR DCT at Salem Market to CRT by 
Southern Railway without ensuring the availability of container or cargo 
storage and stackin g facility, which was critical for successful running of 
CRT, was injudicious.  
Southern Railway also lost the opportunity to earn the revenue on account 
of haulage charges and license fee from CONCOR which was accruing to 
them before conversion as CRT. 
 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 58 
2.5 Twelve Zonal Railways85: Non-recovery of penal interest from the 
Nationalized Banks for delayed payment of license fee  
Zonal Railways entered into with Nationalised banks for installation 
of ATMs at stations. They, however, failed to incorporate suitable 
penalty clause in the agreement for delayed payment of licence fee. 
As a result,  12 Zonal Railway could not  recover penal interest of  
` 7.81 crore for the period from 2012 -13 to 2017 -18. Three Zonal 
Railways also did not  recover license fees of ` 94 lakh for 
installation of ATMs at railway stations. 
Railway Board instructions 86 to Zonal Railways allows installation of 
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) by Nationalised banks at different 
categories of stations. Railways charge license fees from the bank for the 
land provided for installation of ATMs. The licesees (Banks) are liable for 
payment of damages up to ` 5,000 per default for late payment of dues to 
Railways up to 10 days. Further, instructions 87 clearly specified levy of 
penal interest at a uniform r ate of 18 per cent  per annum in case of 
delayed payment of license fees.  
Audit reviewed the records of 36 Divisions of 12 Zonal Railways . Audit 
noticed that Railways did not incorporate suitable penalty clause in the 
Agreements with the Banks for levy  of penal interest88 for late payment of 
license fees . This resulted in non -recovery of penal interest of ` 7.81 
crore89 for the period from 2012 -13 to 2017-18 (up to August 2018). Audit 
further observed that three Zonal Railway 90 also did not  recover license 
fee of ` 94 lakh for installation of ATMs at different categories of railway 
stations. 
                                                           
85 SWR, SCR, ECoR, WR, NER, SR, NCR, SER, CR, NR, ECR and NFR  
86 Para 29 of Commercial Circular 3 of January 2001 
87 Commercial Circular No. 39 of 2012 
88 at the rate of 18 per cent per annum 
89 SWR – ` 59.11 lakh, SCR – ` 5.09 lakh, ECoR – ` 14.60 lakh, WR – ` 17.58 lakh, 
NER ` 53.44 lakh and ` 21.80 lakh (licence fee), SR – ` 61.12 lakh, NCR – ` 68.34 lakh 
and ` 7.16 lakh (license fee), SER – ` 11.73 lakh and ` 64.61 lakh (license fee),  
CR – ` 83.36 lakh, NR – ` 342.14 lakh, ECR – ` 12.35 lakh and NFR – ` 52.21 lakh.  
90 NER, NCR and SER 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 59 
In response, South Western Railway stated that there was no provision in 
the Agreements for levy and remittance of 18 per cent penal interest for 
late payment of License Fe es. They stated that a letter would be 
addressed to concerned Bank Managers to remit the interest for late 
payment. The replies from other Zonal Railways was however, awaited.  
 
Audit is of the view that the Banks would not be legally bound to pay 
penal interest with retrospective effect in the absence of such provision in 
the agreement. The chances of remittance of penal interest ` 7.81 crore 
by the Banks are therefore, remote. 
Further, agreement for operation of ATMs shall remain in force for a 
period of five years and extendable for a further period on mutually 
agreeable terms. Audit observed that execution of agreement with Banks 
by the Zonal Railway s for extension of currency for operation of ATMs, 
were inordinately delayed.  Railways also did not add th e penalty clause 
while extending the agreements.   
Thus, Commercial department of Zonal Railways failed to add appropriate 
penalty clause in the agreements for installation of ATMs at stations . As a 
result, penalty ` 7.81 cro re for late payment from banks  could not be 
recovered.  
There is a need to fix responsibility for failure to include penalty clause in 
the agreement for late payment of license fees. 
The matter has been referred to Railway Board on 4 January 2019; their  
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 60 
2.6 West Central Railway (WCR): Loss of revenue due to charging of 
lower freight than Normal Tariff Rate (NTR) of class LR1 
As per Railway Board’s directives, in case of mixed commodities, 
freight should be charged at the rate applicabl e to the higher class 
of the commodities. Further, minimum chargeable freight of the rake 
should not be less than the Normal Tariff Rate (NTR) of Class LR 1, 
after giving all the necessary eligible concessions. Audit observed 
that in Goods Sheds/ Kota of WCR, freight is being charged at lower 
rate than the NTR of Class LR 1 in case of mixed commodities. This 
led to short recovery of freight charges of ` 8.49 crore during July 
2015 to June 2018. 
In June 2014, Railway Board issued directives 91 for operation of  various 
freight incentive schemes including Incentive Scheme for Freight 
Forwarders (ISFF). The objective of this scheme was to facilitate cargo 
aggregation and expansion of the commodity basket of the Railways. The 
scheme was revised in June 2015 92 with some modifications. As per the 
provisions93, that minimum chargeable freight rate should not be less than 
Normal Tariff Rate 94 (NTR) of Class LR 1 (after considering all 
concessions). Under this scheme, the prescribed conditions for charging 
of freight are as follows: 
Table 2.3 - Conditions for charging of freight 
Particulars No. of wagons Freight Rates 
A Individual wagons loaded 
with a single commodity 
Any number of 
wagons 
Train load rate for each wagon for 
the commodity loaded 
B Individual wagons loaded 
with two commodities 
Any number of 
wagons 
Train load rate for each wagon for 
the higher class of the two 
commodities loaded 
C Individual wagons loaded 
with more than two  
commodities  
Not more than 10 
wagons 
Composite class rate of 120 
                                                           
91 Rate Master Circular No. TCR/1078/2014/02 dated 13 June 2014 (Rates Master 
Circular FIS/2014/0) 
92 letter No. TCR /1078/2014/02 dated 16 June 2015 (Rates Master Circular 2015) 
93 Para 2.3 (Floor Rates) of Rate Master Circular 2015 
94 NTR refers to the total charges for transport for a commodity inclusive of the base rate 
as published in Goods Tariff plus demand manage ment charges like busy season 
charge, congestion charge and supplementary charge as applicable on various 
transportation products 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 61 
Audit reviewed the records of Goods Shed, Kota. During July 2015 and 
June 2018 95, 120 rakes were booked under ISFF to Changsari Goods 
Shed and Baihata Goods Shed for various commodities 96. Audit noticed 
that 104 out of 120 rakes loaded in Kota Goods Shed, freight was 
charged at the rate lower than NTR of Class LR 1 . This was not in line 
with the  Railway Board’s directives of June 2015 , as the rakes were 
loaded with mixed commodities. Audit assessed short collection of freight 
of ` 8.49 crore due to incorrect charging of freight  lower than NTR  by  
Sr. Divisional Commercial Manager/ Kota in WCR.  
The matter was referred to Railway Board in September 2018; they stated 
(05 September 2019) that: 
(i) Railway have charged the freight  as per the Railway Board’s 
guidelines of November 2014 . As per this guidelines, freight of Class 
LR 1 rate would not be charged for commodities under Class LR 2, 
LR 3 and LR 4 except in those cases where more than one 
commodity was loaded in a wagon. 
(ii) Any commodity below Class LR  1 should not be charged at highe r 
class under any scheme unless the wagon is loaded with more than 
one/single commodity.  
(iii) The party concerned was granted concession under ISIT (Incentive 
Scheme for Incremental Traffic) agreement for the period from April 
2015 to March 2016 along with the  existing ISFF scheme. Railway 
Board also issued clarification to WCR (August 2019) stating that 
agreements executed by zonal Railways with their customers based 
on Rates Master Circular/  2014 continued to be valid till their 
currency.  
Audit, however, not iced that Rates Master Circular/  2014 itself stipulated 
that minimum chargeable freight after all concessions should not be less 
than NTR of Class LR 1. The was mentioned for both the schemes viz., 
                                                           
95 till 19 June 2018 
96 Lignite Powder, Maize, Carboxy Methyl Cellulose, Ceramic tiles, Kota Stone, Putti, 
PVC Powder, Sugar candy, Sodium Sulphate, D.O.C, Snacks, Gram husk, Groosri 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 62 
ISIT and ISFF. The same clause was reiterated in the revis ed Rates 
Master Circular/ 2015, wherein all existing concession schemes had been 
discontinued except ISFF. Further, Railway itself stated that the 
agreement for the concession under ISIT scheme was valid up to March 
2016.  
Thus, charging of freight below N TR of Class LR 1 was not correct as per 
the Rates Master Circular of 2014 and 2015. 
2.7 East Central Railway (ECR): Underloading of caustic soda lye in 
higher volumetric BTPN wagons  
BTPN wagons have volumetric capacity of 1.82 times to that of BTCS 
wagons. In ECR, BTPN wagons were underloaded by almost one 
tonne per wagon. These were also charged as per the stencil 
carrying capacity of BTPN wagon, which was meant for POL traffic.  
However, there is scope of carrying more caustic soda in BTPN 
wagons, a non -POL product having higher volumetric capacity.  
There is a need to revise the carrying capacity of the BTPN wagons 
which are used for carrying caustic soda lye and charge freight 
accordingly. 
In ECR, there is regular demand of transportation of caustic soda  lye by 
Grasim Industries Limited siding 97/ Garwa Road to two sidings 98 at Muri. 
For carrying of caustic soda lye, siding owner is using BTCS 99 wagons. In 
addition, siding owner is also indenting to Railways for BTPN 100 wagons 
for transportation of caustic soda  lye. BTPN wagons are meant for 
carrying only petroleum products, which is highly inflammable and have a 
low specific gravity in comparison to caustic soda. Further, in BTPN 
                                                           
97 Owned by Aditya Birla Company Limited 
98 Hindalco Industries Limited and M/s Utkal Alumina International Limited  
99 Bogies Tank Caustic Soda wagons meant for carrying caustic soda lye 
100 Bogie Tank wagons for loading of Petrol, Naphtha & other Petroleum products  

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 63 
wagons, for carrying POL products, air space of not less than five per cent 
of the capacity of the wagon is required to be left101.  
Since June 2014, as per the request of siding owner, Railways were 
providing one rake of 30 to 36 BTPN wagons for carrying caustic soda lye 
between Garwa Road and Muri. BTCS wagon has a volumetric capacity 
of 38.75 cum and caustic soda lye was being loaded up to 55.28 tonnes. 
On the other hand, BTPN wagons have a volumetric capacity of 70.40 
cum, which was 182 per cent of the volumetric capacity of BTCS wagon. 
Audit, however, observed that caustic soda was lo aded in BTPN wagons 
up to 54.28 tonne only 102. This was because 54.28 tonne was stenciled 
carrying capacity (CC) of BTPN wagon. Hence, freight for BTPN wagons 
is being charged at stencil CC (54.28 T) of BTPN wagon. Further, there is 
no supervision by the Rai lways for checking weight of loading in these 
wagons and sender’s declared weight was accepted.   
Thus, BTPN wagons, having volumetric capacity of 1.82 times to that of 
BTCS wagons, were being underloaded by one tonne per wagon. 
However, there is scope of carrying more caustic soda in BTPN wagons, 
a non-POL product having higher volumetric capacity.  
The matter was referred to Railway Board in September 2018, they stated 
(February 2019) that BTPN wagons have been inducted in the Garwa 
Road-Muri section to c apture caustic soda lye traffic from roadways to 
railways. They further stated that as no railway staff has been posted in 
the siding, supervision of loading by Railway staff is not feasible and all 
over Indian Railways, BTPN wagons are loaded and freight is being 
charged on sender’s weight only. 
Railway Board’s repl y is, however, silent about volumetric capacity of 
BTPN vis-à-vis BTCS. They have not furnished reasons for charging the 
BTPN wagons as per stenciled CC which was meant for carrying POL 
                                                           
101 As per IRCA Red Tariff no.20 effective from 16 August 2000, petroleum being highly 
inflammable, air spare not less than 5 per cent of capacity of tank wagon is required to 
be left for carrying it. 
102 As per the sender’s declared weight for loading of caustic soda lye. 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 64 
traffic. Audit is of the view that there is scope of carrying more caustic 
soda lye than is being loaded and charged.  
It is recommended that Railway Board may examine the issue and 
revise the CC of the BTPN wagons which are used for carrying 
caustic soda lye. Thi s will ensure optimum utilization of BTPN 
wagons and charging of freight accordingly. 
2.8 East Central Railway (ECR): Non -levy/ collection of shunting, 
demurrage and detention charges  
ECR failed to levy shunting charges of ` 8.08 crore on three coal 
sidings. Demurrage and detention charges of ` 21.51 crore was also 
yet to be recovered from these sidings.  
In November 2004, Railway Board decided that wagons which are found 
to be overloaded beyond the permissible limits at the loading point, will be 
adjusted by the consignors before Railway Receipt (RR) is issued and 
demurrage charges will accordingly be levied for detention of the rake till 
the weight is adjusted.  
Railway Board further directed (March 2007) that where load adjustment/  
detachment had to be r esorted to, detention charges  from the time of 
completion of weigthment to the time of completion of load adjustment/  
detachment, would also be realized in addition to the demurrage charges. 
Railway Board fixed (September 2011) a penalty of ` 5000 as detention 
charges per overloaded wagon in case of detection of overloading at 
originating point.  
Further, as per Railway Board’s Rates Master Circular of July 2014, if a 
railway locomotive is utilized for load adjustment, shunting charges would 
also be leviable as per extant guidelines.  
In respect of three Coal Sidings of Central Coalfields Limited (CCL) and 
Monet Daniel Coal Washery Pvt. Ltd. (MDCW) at Khalari station over 
Dhanbad Division of ECR, Audit observed the following: 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 65 
 Load adjustment was carried out for 1281 rakes handled during the 
period February 2014 to March 2016 . Bills of to ` 14.56 crore against 
demurrage and detention charges  were preferred by Station 
Superintendent, Khalari (ECR) to CCL and MDCW in November 2016 . 
This amount was yet to be received by ECR;  
 Load adjustment was carried out for 846 rakes handled during the 
period April 2016 to March 2018. However, bills of ` 6.95 crore for 
demurrage and detention charges  were not raised by ECR on CCL 
and MDCW. On this being pointed out by Audit, Station 
Superintendent, Khalari (ECR) raised bills of ` 6.95 crore in 
September 2018; and, 
 Two multi electric locos wer e utilized for carrying out load adjustment 
of rakes for the period February 2014 to March 2018. B ills of ` 8.08 
crore for shunting charges were also not raised by ECR on CCL and 
MDCW. 
Thus, as of May 2018, ECR was yet to recover demurrage and detention 
charges amounting to ` 21.51 crore . Further, bills of ` 8.08 crore for 
shunting charges for the period February 2014 to March 2018 were yet to 
be raised by ECR.  
There is a need to fix responsibility on officers responsible for late/  non 
rasing of bills demurrage/  dention and shunting charges.  Railways also 
need to expedite the process of recovery of dues on this account.    
The matter was referred to Railway Board on 18 September 2018; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 66 
2.9 Northern Railway (NR): Loss of revenue due to non -realization of 
empty haulage charges and stabling charges for the flat wagons 
owned by CONCOR 
NR di d not follow Railway Board’s instructions regarding levy of 
empty haulage  charges and stabling charges for flat wagons of 
container operators. Consequently, Railways suffered a loss of 
revenue of ` 5.72 crore. 
Railway Board issued (July 2008) instructions 103 for recovery of haulage 
charges at prescribed rates from all operators including CONCOR 
(Container Corporation of India) for movement of containers in privately 
owned wagons. Haulage charges for empty flat wagons 104 are also fixed  
and revised by Railway Boa rd from time to time 105. Further, when a party 
is unable to receive privately owned stock in its siding beyond permissible 
period or declines to accept such stock at its siding, stabling charges are 
levied. These are levied for detention of privately owned s tocks at Railway 
premises beyond four hours 106. The rates for recovery of stabling charges 
are also prescribed by Railway Board from time to time107. 
Audit observed that CONCOR owned 4,050 Flat Wagons were received 
at Khanalampura Goods Yard/Saharanpur/  Northern Railway between 
October 2008 and September 2014. These Flat Wagons were hauled 
from 91 stations of three Zonal Railways 108 to Khanalampura Goods Yard 
without issue of Railway Receipts (RRs) . E mpty haulage charges  were 
                                                           
103Railway Board’s letter No.2008/TT-III/73/8 dated 01.07.2008 
104 Flat wagons are wagons on which the containesr are carried. Once the containers are 
unloaded, the flat wagons are returned empty. 
105Freight Rate Circular No. 37 of 2009 -effective from 01.07.2009, 32 of 2010 -effective 
from 01.01.2011, 34 of 2012 -effective from 01.12.2012 and 03 of 2013 -effective from 
01.04.2013 
106 Stabling charges shall be levied only where the detention of  the rolling stock is 
stabled for a period in excess of four hours. {Refer Para 7.6.1 of Concession Agreement 
between Railway Administration and Concessionaire (2006) and 7.12.1 of Concession 
Agreement between Railway Administration and Special Freight Tra in Operator (2012)} 
107Freight Rate Circular No.97 of 2006-effective from 01.12.2006, Corrigendum to Freight 
Rate Circular No.97 of 2006 -effective from w.e.f. 01.02.2008 and Railway Board’s letter 
No.TC-I/2005/201/2/Pt. R dated 22.03.2013 and effective from 01.04.2013 
108 Northern Railway -87 stations, North Central Railway -03 stations and Western 
Railway-one station 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 67 
also not collected  by the Forwarding (Originating) stations. Reasons for 
dispatching the flat wagons without preparing the RRs were not on 
records. When the ‘Forwarding stations’ did not recover empty haulage 
charges, Receiving (Destination) station (i.e. Khanalampura Goods Yard) 
should have  realized109 empty haulage charges for these flat wagons. 
However, Khanalampura Goods Yard authorities did not raise debits for 
recovery of empty haulage charges from CONCOR for the flat wagons 
hauled during October 2008 and September 2014.  
Non-realization o f empty haulage charges by both Forwarding and 
Destination stations resulted in loss of revenue of ` 3.27 crore. Audit also 
noticed that empty haulage charges were levied and recovered from 
CONCOR during the period prior to October 2008 and after September  
2014. 
It was further observed that 2,810 CONCOR owned Flat Wagons 110 were 
stabled in Railway premises at Khanalampura Goods Yard/Saharanpur/  
Northern Railway . These were stabled for one to 307 days beyond the 
free time of four hours during January 2008 to April 2011 and July 2013 to 
January 2014. However, bills for stabling charges for the Flat Wagons 
(beyond free time) were not raised by the Sr. Divisional Commercial 
Manager/ Ambala Cantt. against CONCOR. NR suffered a further loss of 
revenue of ` 2.45 cror e as these bills were not raised . Audit further 
observed that stabling charges after January 2014 were being recovered 
from CONCOR.   
In reply, Traffic Accounts/ Northern Railway, stated (June 2014 and May 
2017) that Originating (booking) stations , where r akes were allowed to 
move without preparation of RRs, were responsible to levy empty haulage 
charges. Regarding stabling charges, Sr. Divisional Commercial Manager/ 
Ambala Cantt. stated (November 2016) that there were no clear 
instructions to Saharanpur Goods Shed to realize stabling charges. They, 
                                                           
109 Para 1811 of Indian Railway Manual for Commercial Department (Volume II)  
110 received from 84 stations of Northern Railway and three stations of No rth Central 
Railway 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 68 
however, accepted that stabling charges of ` 0.81 crore had not been 
levied in some cases pertaining to period January 2010 to April 2011.  
Audit, however, observed that t here were clear instructions of Railway 
Board to realize empty haulage charges.  It was the responsibility of 
receiving station to recover undercharges, when  the originating (booking) 
stations failed to levy empty haulage charges . Thus, there was non-
compliance of Railway Board’s instructions  by Traffic authroties . This 
resulted in loss of revenue of ` 5.72 crore towards empty haulage charges 
and stabling charges from CONCOR. 
The matter was referred to Railway Board on 12 September 2018; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
2.10 North Eastern Railway (NER): Non -realization of staff cost from 
siding owners 
NER Administration failed to raise bills against seven siding owners, 
in contravention to Railway Board instructions and contractual 
provisions. This  resulted in non -realization o f ` 6.91 crore towards 
staff cost from the sidings owners for the period from April 2014 to 
June 2018. 
As per provisions111, Railways are required to recover staff cost from 
siding owners. Further, in January 201 2, l iberalisation of siding rules 
provided that in all private sidings other than ‘Engine on Load ’, barring the 
cost of one commercial staff per shift, Railway shall bear the cost of all 
other railway staff112.  
In August 2016, Railway Board  reiterated113 that the party (siding owner) 
shall bear the cost of one commercial staff per shift or as decided by the 
Railway, depending upon the work load. After notification of the siding by 
the Railways, divisional authorities would advise the party to deposit cost 
                                                           
111 Railway Board Circular no.99/TC(FM)/26/1 dated 20 September 2000 
112 Railway Board Circular no.99/TC(FM)/26/1 Pt. II dated 30 January 2012 
113 Railway Board Circular No. 11 of 2016 dated 22 August 2016 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 69 
of the commercial staff estimated for 10 years’ period. This would facilitate 
commercial functioning of the private siding. 
The issue of deficiencies in recovery of cost of commercial staff posted at 
the sidings was earlier raised in the Audit Report 114. Ministry of Railways, 
in their Action Taken Note , had stated (July 2017) that the bills were 
regularly raised and the Zonal Railways have been advised to recover all 
the outstanding dues as per the provisions. Audit , however, noticed that 
irregularities in regard to non -raising of bills/  non-recovery of dues  from 
siding owners towards staff cost are continuing.  
Audit reviewed (May 2017) the records of seven sidings of NER . Audit 
observed that the concerned commercial department of the divisions had 
not raised the bills  towards cost of commercial staff as per  rules. This 
resulted in non-recovery of the staff cost of ` 6.91 crore from these siding 
owners as detailed below: 
Table 2.4 – Details of outstanding amount against seven sidings in NER 
S. 
no 
Name of siding Serving  
station/ 
Division 
Period Amount due 
for recovery (` 
in crore) 
1 Century Pulp and Paper (CPP) 
Siding  
Lalkaun April 2014 to   
June 2018 
1.28 
2 Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. 
(IOC) siding  
Lalkaun April 2014 to   
June 2018 
0.93 
3 Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd. (BPCL) siding  
Baitalpur April 2014 to  
June 2018 
1.28 
4 Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) siding,  
Gonda-
Katchehery 
April 2014 to   
June 2018 
0.97 
5 Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd. (BPCG) siding  
Gonda-
Katchehery 
April 2014 to   
June   2018 
0.97 
6 Food Corporation of India 
(FCI) siding,  
Gorakhpur 
Cantt. 
April 2014 to   
June 2018 
0.97 
7 Bajaj Hindustan Limited  Paliakalan April 2014 to   
December 
2016 
0.51 
Total 6.91 
Audit also noticed that an amount of ` 1.23 crore was due towards staff 
cost for the period 2007 to 2015 from BPCL, Baitalpur. Commercial 
                                                           
114 In Chapter 2 of Audit Report No. 24 of 2015 (Railways) Volume 1 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 70 
Department in NER however, recovered115 only ` 22.69 lakh against the 
total staff cost from the siding owner . Further, the bill raised for staff cost 
was partial. Railways had taken into account only pay and allowances and 
two shifts of commercial staff , instead of taking into account all the 
components of staff cost116.   
In reply, Sr. DCM , Izzatnagar division intimated that no commercial staff 
were posted inside the siding premises and hence the question of 
recovery did not arise.  
Audit, however, observed that t he Commercial Department regularly 
carries out various commercial activities 117 in the sidings. These 
commercial activities are being provided with the assistance of 
commercial staff posted at respective serving stat ions. As such, Sr. DCM 
should have raised bills and recovered amounts towards cost of at least 
one commercial staff per shift from siding owners. 
On this being pointed out by Audit (August 2018), the Ministry stated (July 
2019) that the bills for the staff  cost were raised by Railway for the period 
of 2007 -15 and an amount of ` 1.38 crore has been recovered from 
BPCL, Baitalpur the siding owner. Bills have also been raised by the 
Railway for the years 2016 -18 and the party has been asked to deposit 
the same . The Ministry further stated that keeping in view the policy 
guidelines and provision of agreement, instructions have been issued by 
NER to concerned divisions to raise the bills for recovery of staff cost. 
However, on verification of the recovery particu lars, it has been noticed 
that an amount of ` 99.88 lakh only was recovered against ` 1.38 crore 
from the BPCL, Baitalpur siding for the period 2007-15.  
 
                                                           
115 September 2010 and June 2013 
116 like pay and allowance, contribution towards leave salary, provident fund, gratuity etc.  
117 collection of railway receipt, checking of freight, distance, load (number of wagons 
and their actual weight), realisation of applicable charges, arrangement of unloading of 
consignment, realisation of applicable demurrage charges etc. 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 71 
2.11 East Central Railway (ECR) and Northern Railway (NR): Non -
levy of siding charges from the siding owners 
As per Railway Board’s directives/  circulars, two sidings in ECR and 
NR did not qualify for charging of freight on through distance 
basis118. However, siding charges were not levied by the Zonal 
Railways on two sidings. This resulted in loss of ` 19.74 crore for the 
period July 2013 to March 2018.  
Railway Board prescribed (June 2010) the following criteria on which 
sidings were to be notified for charging freight on through distance basis: 
(i) Traffic should be train load, 
(ii) Traffic should go into the sidi ng directly or indirectly with the engine 
pulling or pushing, 
(iii) There should be no detention of engines except for change of 
engine, and 
(iv) No separate shunting staff is required exclusively for this purpose. 
Bokaro Thermal Power Siding (BTPS) is a private sidi ng of Damodar 
Valley Corporation (DVC) served by Jarangdih Station of Dhanbad 
Division of ECR. Audit observed that  
 At BTPS siding, rakes are placed/withdrawn with the help of shunting 
staff. As per muster roll of Bokaro Thermal station four shunt men are 
exclusively kept for the placement/ withdrawal of rakes.  
 Rakes are placed with the help of two railway engines and after 
placement of rake in the siding one engine is returned back to serving 
station (Jarangdih). Another engine is attached in the rake wit h load in 
the siding for placement of rake in part on the hopper for unloading.  
 The unloading in above siding is done on hopper, where only 11 
wagons can be unloaded at a time. Once the 11 wagons become 
empty, another 11 loaded wagons are pushed to the ho pper. After 
completion of unloading of this part, the same is pushed up to another 
                                                           
118 The sidings are charged freight as per the distance travelled by the rake. The siding 
owners gets benefit of telescopic rates when he is charged freight on through distance 
basis i.e. from the origin point to destination in siding and not the serving station.  

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 72 
line of siding yard . R est one third  part of the rake is brought to the 
hopper and unloaded. This part is also pushed to the same line where 
previous empty wagons are standin g. Thereafter, full empty rake is 
drawn out from the siding.   
In the above process, starting from placement of rake, shunting work 
inside the siding and to draw out the rake, the service of one shunting 
staff is exclusively being utilized. Therefore, BTPS siding does not qualify 
for charging of freight on through distance basis and siding charges are 
leviable. However, freight charges were being charged on through 
distance basis and siding charges were not being levied by Sr. Divisional 
Commercial Manager, Dhanbad. Audit assessed the loss  of ` 8.99 crore 
due to non-levy of siding charges for the period July 2013 to March 2018.  
In reply, ECR Administration stated (November 2018) that the shunting 
staff were at Bokaro Thermal Power Station for the requirement of station. 
They were also utilized same time for loco attachment/ detachments at 
the siding, but they were not posted exclusively for shuting purpose in the 
siding. They further stated that siding authority has no enginer and on 
request, Railway enginer  was utilized for shuting purpose on payment of 
shunting charges. As such, charging of freight on through distance basis 
was not applicable for this siding.  
Audit, however, observed that as per layout of the siding, rake could not 
be placed without help o f shunt man. Also the shuting engine was being 
used in the siding for placement, withdrwal and unloading of goods. As 
such, the Railway Board’s orders of June 2010 itself required charging the 
freight on through distance basis.  
In another case in NR, the container traffic for the Gateway Rail Freight 
Limited (GRFL) siding is received at Sanahwal station (serving station of 
the siding) of Firozepur division . Audit noticed that the rakes were  
detained at the serving station beyond the permissible time before  
placement in the siding. The movement of rakes from serving station to 
the siding involved shunting by separate staff. The engine was detained in 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 73 
addition to the detention due to change of end. As such, in terms of laid 
down criteria, the siding does not qualify of charging of freight on through 
distance basis and siding charges should be leviable. However, the traffic 
to and from GRFL siding has regularly been booked on through distance 
basis and no siding charges were recovered by Sr. Divisional Commercial 
Manager, Firozepur (NR).  
Audit further noticed that a Committee formed (February 2013) by NR 
Administration to look into the issue of levy of siding charges . This 
committee recommended (March 2013) the basis for levy of siding/ 
shunting charges. They suggested that siding/shunting charges would be 
levied in sidings where  
 there is no direct reception or dispatch from/to the siding; and 
 exclusive shunting staff is required for placement and removal of rakes 
from/to the siding.  
However, Audit found that no action was taken in the matter by NR 
Administration. Audit assessed the loss ` 10.75 crore on account of non -
levy of siding charges for the period July 2013 to March 2018. 
Thus, ECR and NR suffered avoidable loss of siding charges of ` 19.74 
crore durin g the period from July 2013 to March 2018 in two sidings.  
There is a need to fix responsibility on officers responsible for non -rasing 
of bills for siding charges.  Railways need to take immediate action to levy 
and recover siding charges. 
The matter was referred to Railway Board on 30 October 2018; their reply 
has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 74 
2.12 South Central Railway (SCR): Non-levy and short levy of service 
tax on taxable auxiliary services 
In September 2012, Railway Board issued instructio ns on the issue 
of levy and collection of service tax on transportation of goods, 
passengers and auxiliary services. However, SCR Administration 
failed to include parking contracts at stations, leasing by catering 
department, commercial lease of stalls in stations etc. in the list of 
auxiliary services identified in the Joint Procedural Order issued by 
them. SCR also failed to levy full service tax on ‘Lease of space in 
parcel vans’. This resulted in non -levy/ short -levy of service tax ` 
41.85 crore for the period October 2012 to March 2017.  
Service tax is leviable 119 on all services other than the services specified 
in the negative list under Section 66D. Accordingly, Railway Board issued 
instructions (September 2012) on the issue of levy and collection of 
service tax on transportation of goods, passengers and auxiliary 
services120 rendered by the Railways. SCR issued a Joint Procedural 
Order (No. 1 of 2013) in October 2013 identifying auxiliary services on 
which service tax was to be levied.  
Audit observed that SCR Administration failed to include parking contracts 
at stations, leasing by catering department, commercial lease of stalls in 
stations etc. in the list of auxiliary services identified in the Joint 
Procedural Order issued by them.  These services were taxable under the 
service category ‘Renting of immovable property i.e., leasing of space’ as 
per Notification No. 25/  2012-Service Tax dated 20 June 2012. Further, 
though interest and maintenance charges were taxable as per the JPO, 
service-tax was not l evied by SCR Administration. Audit assessed non -
                                                           
119 Section 66B of the Finance Act (1994 amended) effective from 1 July 2012  
120Selling of space or time slots for adver tisements, services by way of motor vehicle 
parking to general public, services by way of public conveniences such as provision of 
facilities of bathroom, washrooms, lavatories urinal or toilets, services by way of renting 
of a hotel, inn, guest house, clu b, campsite or other commercial places meant for 
residential or lodging purposes, having declared tariff of a unit of accommodation below 
rupees one thousand per day or equivalent. 

Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 75 
levy of service tax of ` 30.24 crore in respect of these services for the 
period from October 2012 to March 2017. 
In addition, ‘Lease of space in parcel vans’ which constituted a 
declared121 service viz., supply of tangible goods, was erroneously treated 
as ‘transportation of parcels’. This resulted in short levy of service tax of ` 
11.61 crore due to allowing abatement provided for ‘transportation of 
parcels’. 
Thus, Sr. Divisional Finance Manager/  SCR failed to  collect service tax 
amounting to ` 41.85 crore on taxable auxiliary services. 
In reply, Railway Board (January 2019) stated that parking contracts at 
stations are awarded to the licensees on payment of license fee to 
provide the parking facilities to the Rail users on payment of specified 
parking charges. Service Tax is not applicable for parking contracts as per 
JPO 01/ 2013. Hence question of levying of Service Tax does not arise.  
Audit, however, noticed that  in terms of Service Tax Act 122, the renting of  
immovable property shall constitute declared as service. Hence, 
renting/leasing/licensing of immovable property belonging to Railways to 
different persons for parking, catering, book stall, ATM, STD-PCO, leasing 
of plots and renting of buildings would fal l under the category of ‘Renting 
of Immovable Property Service’ and they are liable to pay service tax. 
Regarding ‘Lease of space in parcel vans’, Railway Board stated (January 
2019) that there was no ‘transfer of right’ or leasing of any infrastructure 
involved under the parcel leasing scheme. Rather, only parcel capacity 
was kept reserved for ‘transportation of parcels’ by a private operator.  As 
such, Railway’s activities of providing parcel space to the private operator 
for ‘transportation of parcel on l ease’ basis did not come under the 
purview of service tax. Audit, however, observed that treating this charges 
as “transportation of parcels” was not correct. The service or 
                                                           
121As per Section 65B of Finance Act, 1994, declared services means any activ ity carried 
out by a person for another person for consideration and declared as such under the 
Section 66E. 
122 Chapter IV of Finance Act 1994, Section 66E 

Chapter 2 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 76 
“transportation of parcels” is offered by the lease holder and not Railways. 
The a mount collected by Railways was thus , lease charges. The 
exemptions made were not based on any orders issued by the Ministry of 
Finance. Audit further observed that as per the orders of Central Excise 
and Custom Commissionerate, sale of space for parcel va n and SLRs in 
various trains of a Rajkot division of Western Railway, were correctly 
classified under ‘Supply of tangible goods’ and service tax was leviable.  
 

 
 77 
Chapter 3 -  Engineering  
Member Engineering at Railway Board is responsible for maintenance of 
all fixed assets of Indian Railways such as Tracks, Bridges, Buildings, 
Roads. In addition, construction of new assets such as new lines, gauge 
conversion, doubling and other expansion and developmental works  are 
also undertaken by him . He is assisted by Additional Member (Civil 
Engineering), Additional Member (Works) and Advisor (Land & 
Amenities). 
At Zonal level, the Engineering Department is headed by Principa l Chief 
Engineer (PCE). He is assisted by various Chief Engineers for 
maintenance of Tracks, Bridges, Buildings, Roads etc. Each Zonal 
Railway also has a construction organization headed by a Chief 
Administrative Officer  (Construction) who is responsible f or major 
construction works of Zonal Railway . He  is assisted by various Chief 
Engineers (Construction).  
In 2017-18, the total expenditure on repair and maintenance of assets123 
by Indian Railways during the was ` 13,947.38 crore124.  Indian Railways 
also incu rred an expenditure of ` 38156.76 crore125 on creation of new 
assets126. During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers and 
tenders, audit of 1746 offices of Engineering department including 
Construction Organization was conducted.  
This Chapter include s 19 individual paragraphs. These paragraphs 
highlight issues that relate to construction and utilization of limited height 
subway, short recovery of cess from contractors, discrepancies in 
execution of contracts, delay in execution of works  and non-
recovery/short recovery of land license fee.  
                                                           
123 Permanent way and works, bridges, tunnels, roads, sanitation and water supply etc. 
including plant and equipment 
124 Sub head 3002 -3003 (02) - Repair and maintenance of Permanent Way and works  
and repair and maintenance of plant and equipment during 2017-18 
125 Sub head 5002-5003 – Assets – Acquisition, construction and replacement 
126 new line, doubling, gauge conversion, traffic facility works, track renewal works, 
bridge works, level crossing and passenger amenities works 

 78 
 
3.1 South East Central Railway (SECR): Construction and 
utilization of Limited Height Subway (LHS) 
LHS were constructed without adhering to the prescribed norms, 
where density of train vehicle unit was very low. Th ese were also 
constructed at locations very near to diversion road under/over 
bridges, and thus were not used. As such, Railways incurred an 
expenditure of ` 18.63 crore without any fruitful results. Drainage 
system was either not constructed or partially constructed in many 
LHS. Proper feasibility study was not conducted before 
constructing these LHS. This led to water logging and the LHS 
remained closed/were not utilized. Railways assigned the 
responsibility for maintenance related works to respective the  
State Governments. However, the same was not acknowledged by 
the State Governments and the issue remained unresolved. A 
number of accidents took place at locations where LHS remained 
unused/closed due to water logging and road travellers tried to 
cross tracks. 
Level Crossings  (LCs) facilitate  smooth running of traffic in a regulated 
manner. They also pose a major challenge in the operation of safe 
running of trains. The highest number of fatalities in Railways occurs due 
to accidents at unmanned level cro ssings127. As per  Indian Railways 
Vision 2020 , nearly 70 per cent  of the fatalities in railway mishaps take 
place at UMLCs. Thus, LCs are vulnerable points for accidents . Railways 
remove UMLCs by building Road Over Bridges (ROBs), Road Under 
Bridges (RUBs), Limited/Normal Height Subways (LHSs/NHSs) and 
through other prescribed methods. 
In November 2006, Railway Board issued orders regarding elimination of 
level crossings by construction of limited use subways. The order stated 
that at many locations, the traf fic consist of li ght vehicles, two wheelers 
etc. This can be catered by providing subways of limited height , which are 
                                                           
127 White Paper-Indian Railways (February 2015) 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 79 
economical. Zonal Railways were directed to  identify such unmanned/ 
manned level crossings , which can be eliminated by construction of 
limited use subways. This was to be done  selectively with the personal 
approval of General Manager at critical locations . The following issues 
were to be taken into considerations: 
1. Safety consideration : Accident vulnerable LC locations where 
visibility is poor and elimination of level crossing will increase safety. 
2. Reduction in number of LCs: Locations where elimination of LCs will 
yield substantial operational benefits e.g. where the number of level 
crossings is large or in suburban sections. 
3. Site feasibility : Locations where the embankment height (3 m) is 
adequate and will not allow collection of water under the bridge and 
surroundings. In these locations, water table should be  low and 
approach road feasible. 
4. Train Vehicle Unit 128(TVUs): Locations where TVUs are less, but 
have potential of getting manned or have already qualified for 
manning.  
SECR Administration constructed 159 LHS at 159 locations in Bilaspur, 
Nagpur and Raipur Divisions during the period from 2011 to 2016. Audit 
reviewed the work of construction of LHS undertaken by SECR. The 
objective was to study the  justification and site feasibility undertaken 
before construction of LHS . A greements entered into with State 
Government for maintenance of these LHS and problems being faced at 
the LHS constructed were also reviewed. Audit also studied whether 
these LHS are being used properly and have been able to reduce the 
incidence of accidents. Audit findings are discussed below: 
3.1.1 Justification for construction of LHS 
a. Construction of LHS at LC with very low TVUs 
As per provisions, locations where TVU  were less but have potential of 
getting manned or have already qualified for manning should be selected 
                                                           
128 TVU-Train Vehicle Units/Day (train units x road vehicle units) 
 

 80 
for construction of LHS. Railway Board further directed (August 2014) to 
close UMLCs having nil/negligible TVU.  
Audit noticed that in SECR, LHS were constructed without adhering to the 
prescribed norms. During test check, Audit found that seven LHS 129 were 
constructed at a cost of ` 10.92 crore, where density of  TVU ranged 
between 68 and 321. 
In reply, SECR stated (October 2017)  that no guidelines had been issued 
by Railway Board for fixing of minimum TVU for construction of LHS. In 
this regard, Audit noted  that Chairman Railway Board had directed  
(September 2011) Zonal Railways to eliminate LCs with very low TVUs, 
(less than 500 or so) by outright closure.  
b.   Construction of LHS at places where diversion road already 
existed 
Railway Board instructed (May 2010) Zonal Railways to prepare a Master 
Plan for elimination of UMLCs. One of the methods for elimin ation of 
UMLC was diversion of road to other LC s. Audit conducted joint 
inspections of selected LCs with railway officials. 
At LC no. BK-39, the LHS was newly constructed at a cost of ` 2.34 crore 
in 2014. A diverted RUB already exist ed at a distance of only 134 m from 
this location. Audit noticed that due to water logging during rainy season, 
dried up mud had accumulated on the basement of LHS. Vehicles 
preferred to use the RUB as compared to the LHS.  
In reply, SECR stated (October 2017) that LC no. BK- 39 was initially 
eliminated (March 2013) by construction of diversion road through bridge 
as an interim measure to enhance safety. During peak monsoon, the 
diversion road becomes unusable due to high water level in the bridge. As 
such, for safe movement of the road users in all weather, subway was 
constructed to avoid any mishap. At this LC, the drainage arrangement 
planned along with LHS work was not carried out by the contractor. 
                                                           
129 AB-67 (68), AB-35 (110), AB-44 (144), AB-14 (80), GCF -51 (201), BK-105 (296) and 
BK-106 (321)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 81 
 
Accordingly, the contract was terminated. However, the problem of 
accumulation of water and mud at this subway is being addressed by 
making suitable drainage arrangements in 2017-18. 
During the joint inspection, Audit noticed that bases of the LHS at the LC 
were lower than the existing bridge. The drainage system was defective 
and LHS was more prone to water logging than the existing RUB. 
Similarly, at LC nos. AB-23, AB-24, AB-25 and AB- 35, LHS were 
constructed at cost `
 5.37 crore, where a diversion RUB already existed. 
All the LHS were within a distance of less than 304 m from these RUBs. 
Construction of all these LHS was not justified and in violation of Railway 
Board’s order of May 2010. 
In reply, SECR stated (October 2017) that LC nos. AB-23, AB-25 and AB-
35 were eliminated initially during 2012-13 by construction of diversion 
road through nearby bridges. 
 
Figure 3.1: Clockwise – Satellite image of BK-39, RUB and LHS 
 

 82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Later on, there was protest by local public demanding for construction of 
subways due to difficulty in negotiating additional distance of 300 m to 
700 m.  Also, in case of LC no. AB-23, the slope of the connectin g 
diversion road was very steep. In peak monsoon, when the water level in 
the bridge increases, passing through the bridges also became unsafe. 
As such, for safety and providing unobstructed path in all-weather, 
subways were required to be provided at the above LCs.   
They further stated that LC no. AB-24 was eliminated (February 2011) by 
constructing LHS of 2.50 m height. The height was kept less as 
movement of heavy vehicles was not there. But, later local public 
demanded for giving path for heavy vehicles. Accordingly, an alternate 
path through nearby bridge (at a distance of nearly 30 m) was provided to 
facilitate movement in dry season. 
Figure 3.2: Clockwise - Satellite image of LHS at LC No. AB-23, RUB and LHS 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 83 
Figure 3.3: Clockwise - Satellite image of LHS at LC No. AB-25, LHS and diversion RUB 
Figure 3.4: LHS at LC No. AB-24 and diversion RUB
  
Audit noticed that the 
distances between diversion 
RUB and closed LCs (no s . 
AB-24, AB-25 and AB- 35) 
ranged between 24 m and 
210 m.  
Hence, the contention of 
SECR that there was difficulty 
in negotiating additional distance of 300 m to 700 m was not justifiable.  At 
LC n o. AB-23, distance of Diversion RUB is 304 m. Moreover, in same 
section130, three LCs had been closed either by diversion RUB or by 
constructing LHS . The distance from closed LCs to diversion RUB/LHS 
was more than 400 m at LC Nos. AB-40, AB-48 and AB-33.  Thus, LHS 
were constructed without any justification for their requirements.   
                                                           
130 except LC No.BK-39, Bijuri and Ambikapur 
 

 84 
Figure 3.5: LHS at LC No. AB-35, LHS and diversion RUB 
3.1.2 Problems faced after construction of LHS 
In March 2010, Railway Board remarked that Railways were not 
constructing LHS if adequate embankment height was not available. 
They, however stated that with water proofing arrangements 131, LHS can 
be provided in lieu of most of level crossing. During joint inspection, Audit 
observed the following: 
(a) Non-provision of drainage system - Railway Board’s letter  (April 
2008) envisaged that cost of approaches falling outside Railway 
boundary, if required , should be borne by the respective S tate 
Government/Local authority. Drainage arrangement etc. should also be 
provided by the State Government/ Local authority. During joint inspection 
of 18 LHS
132, Audit noticed that 11 LHS were non-gravitational. The water 
did not drain out automaticaly from these LHS and needed to be drained 
out by construction of drains,  pumps, sumps etc.  Further, there was 
accumulation of water either during rainy season or throughout the year. 
Audit also noticed that of these 11 LHS, in seven LHS, drainage system 
was either not constructed or partially constructed.  
(b) Accumulation of water in LHS - Railway Board orders 
(November 2006) considered embankment height of 3 m as adequate, 
where water table was low and approach road was feasible. It was stated 
that this would not allow collection of water under the bridge and 
                                                           
131 Retaining wall along approach ramp, top covering, water harvesting and other local 
measures 
132 10 LHS at Bilaspur, four  LHS at Raipur and four LHS at Nagpur 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 85 
surroundings. Further, no RUB/LHS were to be planned where natural 
drainage is not available 133. Thus, LHS were to be constructed where 
there was no accumulation of water or remedial action could be taken to 
eradicate water stagnation. Audit, however, noted that there was 
accumulation of water in 39 LHS of Nagpur Division, 11 LHS of Bilaspur 
Division and seven LHS of Raipur Division. Thus, the site conditions were 
not correctly reviewed at the time of survey for construction of LHS . 
Further, proper remedial action was also not taken after construction of 
LHS as well.  
SECR stated that they  always tried to provide gravitational drainage 
wherever feasible in the past. Further, arrangements like retaining wall 
along approach road, top covering of the approaches and drainage 
system were provided to avoid entry of water in the subways. 
                                                           
133 Member Engineer’s and PCE’s seminar (December 2016) 
Fig 3.6: Above- Three ponds in the vicinity of the LHS; below-LHS at LC No.DD-51 
 
 

 86 
By constructing LHS with gravitational drainage, the problem of water 
logging could have been avoided at a large number 134 of LHS in SEC R. 
Even after construction of retaining wall along approach road, top 
covering of the approaches etc. there was water logging in several LHS. 
These LHS remain ed closed for most of the year, defeating the main 
purpose of construction. Thus, SECR Administration constructed the LHS 
without proper feasibility study. 
During joint inspection (April 2017 to June 2017), Audit observed the 
following: 

 The sign of water accumulation on the walls of LHS from 1 feet to 8 
feet was visible and dried up mud was lying inside the 10 LHS135. 
During rainy season, these LHS remained closed due to water logging. 
 LHS no. CG -7 in 
Bilaspur Division was 
full of water even during 
hot, dry summer 
season. This indicated 
that dewatering may not 
be possible during 
rainy season even after 
use of pumps due to 
high seepage of water. Audit found that people continued to cross the 
closed LC risking their lives.  
 Water accumulation with mud was also seen in LHS no.286, 294 and 
295 of Bilaspur Division during the month of December 2016. 
 In Nagpur Division, LC No. GCF-49 could not be commissioned due to 
water logging. Railway Administration replied (November 2014) that 
LHS was functional, pumping was done as and when required and the 
LC is closed.   
                                                           
134 39 LHS in Nagpur Division, 11 LHS in Bilaspur Division and 7 LHS in Raipur Division 
135 LHS no.BK-12, TT-6, GCF-57, CG-1, BK-39, 388, 358, DD-16 ,DD-5, AB-16 
Fig 3.7: LHS CG-7 under ADEN/CPH full of water 
looking like a canal (April 2017) 
 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 87 
During joint inspection (May 2017) Audit noticed that the LHS was full of 
water and that the LC was not closed. Railway Administration accepted 
that there is an irrigation canal near the LHS at GCF-49. They stated that 
due to the existence of the canal nearby, there occurs heavy sub-surface 
flow of water resulting stagnation of water in the LHS. Even though, 
pumping arrangement has been made, due to heavy sub-surface flow of 
water, draining out of water was not possible. A work for providing natural 
drainage by construction of 700 m of long drain had been sanctioned to 
permanently solve the drainage issue at this LC. Another LHS at LC No. 
51 in Nagpur Division was processed for plain closure due to water 
logging, after casting of boxes and base slabs at a cost of ` 29.39 lakh. 
Audit observed that the problem of water logging was brought to notice by 
the concerned Senior Section Engineer (Works) only after a substantial 
amount had been spent over the work. Since one of the major concerns of 
LHS was water accumulation, measuring the level of ground water should 
have been done during estimation stage.  
Fig 3.8: Clockwise - LHS 295 (Dongha Dhakel-Raigarh); LHS 286 (Bhikharimal-Raigarh); 
LHS 294 (Parsada-Raigarh); and LHS GCF-49 full of water up to the brink-looking like 
swimming pool (May 2017) 
 

 88 
Thus, LHS were constructed without conducting the proper feasibility 
study. In several LHS, there was water logging for want of proper 
drainage facility and thus, these were remained closed/not fully utilized. 
These are clear cases  of lapse on part of railway officials and 
responsibility need to be fixed on the erring railways officials.               
3.1.3 Agreements with State Government for maintenance of LHS  
In April 2012, Railway Board, directed all the Zonal Railways that LCs , 
which did not qualify for sanction of RUB on cost sharing basis 136, could 
be planned for elimination by subways, if found technically feasible. 
Railways were to bear the complete initial cost of construction of subway 
and future maintenance cost of subway proper. State Government was to 
acquire and provide encumbrance free land free of cost to Railway area , 
where required. The responsibility for maintenance of road passing 
through subway, lighting, drainage system, diversion road and any other 
allied works, was also to rest on the State Government. In this regard, 
SECR Administration wrote to the Chief Secretary, Government of 
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh. In response, 
Chhattisgarh State Government clarified that maintenance of road 
passing through subway, lighting, drainage system, diversion road and 
any other allied works will be done only in Municipal areas. No response 
was received from other State Governments. 
Test check of records showed that  none of the selected LHS were found 
to be under any municipal areas except one 137. As such, no maintenance 
was committed by the State Government. In May 2014, SECR requested 
Railway Board to withdraw the condition for maintenance and other 
arrangements through the concerned State Government . However, 
Railway Board did not agree with the proposal. 
                                                           
136 in terms of Para 925 of Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM)  
137 except in LHS DD-51 under Raipur Division 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 89 
Audit observed that in Bilaspur and Raipur Divisions dewatering was got done by 
zonal contractors in respect of seven LHS 138. In Nagpur Division, the work of 
dewatering for 20 subways 139 was awarded at a cost of ` 25.35 lakh. Therefore, 
due to faulty construction of LHS and lack of agreement with State Government, 
SECR had to undertake maintenance and a recurring expenditure on dewatering 
of these LHS.
 
Role and responsibility of Railways and the State Governments for 
construction and maintenance of LHS are required to be revisited. These 
need to be clearly spelt out.  Railway Board should initiate steps to take 
State Governments on board to commit these costs and prepare a model 
agreement/MoU for the same. 
3.1.4 Accidents at LCs where LHS could not be used  
Audit noticed that as per the report of RPF (30 December 2016), an 
accident took place on 6 December 2016 at the LC no.286. In the report, 
it was mentioned that though the LC was closed, it was not barricaded. 
Audit conducted a joint inspection at this LC on 7 December 2016 and 
noticed that the LHS was filled with water up to brink. 
An accident also took place on 13 September 2016 as reported (20 
February 2017) by Railways. It was mentioned in the report that there was 
heavy rainfall on the date of accident and the LHS was flooded with water. 
Audit also observed that as per RPF report (31 May 2017), an accident 
occurred at LC no. BK-12 on 22 May 2014. Audit observed that at the 
time of accident, construction of LHS was not completed though the 
scheduled date of completion of the LHS was 11.09.2013. 
Railway need to review the cases, where LHS could not be used and 
people have been forced to use LCs, which pose safety risk for them.  
3.1.5 Conclusion 
LHS were constructed without adhering to the prescribed norms, where 
density of TVU was very low. These were also constructed at locations 
                                                           
138 LHS no. BK-11 in Bilaspur Division and LHS no. 388, DD-11, DD-16, DD-29, DD-42 
and DD-47 in Raipur Division 
139 in Gondia-Chanda Fort section under ADEN/Nagbhir 
 

 
 90 
very near to diversion RUBs/ROBs, and thus were not used. As such, 
Railways incurred an expenditure of ` 18.63 crore  without any fruitful 
results. Drainage system was either not constructed or partially 
constructed in many LHS. Proper feasibility study was not conducted 
before constructing these LHS. This led to water logging and the LHS 
remained closed/were not utilized. Railways assigned the responsibility for 
maintenance related works to respective the State Government. However, 
the same was not acknowledged by the State Governments and the issue 
remained unresolved. A number of accidents took place at locations where 
LHS remained unused/closed due to water logging and road travellers 
tried to cross tracks.  
It is recommended that 
1. SECR Administration may take steps to make these LHS usable, 
so that the amount invested by Railways is not wasted and safety 
of trains and those crossing the railway track is ensured.  
2. LHS which are under construction/lying incomplete may be 
completed at the earliest and respective level crossings may be 
closed to avoid accidents.  
3. There is no agreement between State Government and the 
Railways to provide drainage facilities by State Government 
outside the Municipal areas. Railways may initiate action to take 
State Governments on board to commit these costs.  
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 2 July 2018; their reply 
has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
 
 
 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 91 
3.2 All Zonal Railways: Payment of Workers Welfare Cess by the 
Railways in compliance of Building and Other Construction Workers 
Welfare Cess Act  
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act and 
Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Rules were 
enacted and notified in August 1996 and March 1998 respectively. 
As an ‘Employer’ it was the responsibility of the Railways to ensure 
that the prescribed share (one per cent) of the cost of constru ction 
was set aside and deposited with the Worker’s Welfare Boards. 
However, in some cases, Railways deducted only a part of this 
amount from the contractors (e.g. one per cent of the cost of 
labour in the contract and not on the material) and deposited th e 
same in the Worker’s Welfare Boards.  Nevertheless, it was the 
obligation of the Railways to deposit one per cent of the total cost 
of the work (which includes labour, material etc.) with Workers 
Welfare Boards. There was short recovery of Cess from the 
contractors as Railways were not recovering Cess on the cost of 
materials supplied by the contractors. Cases were seen where no 
recovery of Cess was made from the contractors. Cess recovered 
from the contractors was also not deposited by the Railways to th e 
Workers Welfare Boards within the stipulated period.  In the cases 
test checked in Audit, ` 10.24 crore was short recovered from 
contractors, ` 2.28 crore recovered from contractors was not 
transferred to the Boards and ` 12.95 crore was outstanding for 
payment by Railways to the Boards.  
Government of India (GOI) enacted BOCW Regulation of Employment 
and Conditions of Service (RECS) Act, 1996 (Main Act) 140 and BOCW 
Welfare Cess Act, 1996 (Cess Act) 141 on 19 th August 1996. The objective 
was to regulate the employment and conditions of service of Construction 
                                                           
140Act No. 27 of 1996 (19 th August 1996), shall be deemed to have come into force from 
1st March 1996 
141Act No. 28 of 1996 (19 th August 1996), shall be deemed to have come into force from 
3rd November 1995 
 

 92 
Workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare measures. For 
implementation of the Act, GOI framed BOCW Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 
(Cess Rules) in March 1998142. 
As per provisions 143, Cess shall be levied at such rate not exceeding two 
per cent,  but not less than one per cent  of the cost of construction 
incurred by the employer (Railways) as the Central Government specify. 
Further, the proceeds of the Cess so deducted/collected shall be 
transferred to the Building and Other Construction Board within 30 days of 
its collection
144. Rules145  also provides for levy of interest not exceeding 
the amount of Cess for non-payment of Cess within the specified time146. 
For implementation of provisions of these Acts, Ministry of Railways 
directed (July 2008) all the Zonal Railways to include a new clause in the 
Tender Notice/Tender Documents. In November 2013, the Ministry 
added147 a new clause in the General Conditions of Contract for enabling 
the Railways implementing the same.  As per this clause, the tenderers 
for carrying out any construction work must get themselves registered 
from the Registering Officer 148. They have to submit Certificate of 
Registration issued from the Registering Officer of the concerned State 
Government (Labour Department). The tenderer shall be levied Cess @ 
one per cent of cost of construction work which would be deducted from 
each bill. Cost of material, when supplied under a separate schedule item 
shall be outside the purview of Cess. 
Audit reviewed the status of deduction/collection of Cess from the 
contractors and their remittance to Workers Welfare Boards (Boards) in all 
                                                           
142vide GSR 149(E), dated 26 March 1998 
143Rule 3 of BOCW Workers Welfare Cess Act,1996 
144Rule 5 of BOCW Welfare Cess Rules, 1998 
145 Rule 8 of BOCW Welfare Cess Act, 1996 
146 at the rate of two per cent for every month or part of a month from the date on which 
such payment is due till such amount is actually paid 
147Clause 55 C to the Indian Railways Standard General Conditions of Contract (GCC)  
vide Ministry of Railways’ letter No.2008/CE-I/CT/6 dated 29-11-2013 
148 under Section 7 of the BOCW Act, 1996 and rules made thereto by the concerned 
State Government. 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 93 
the Zonal Railways including Railway Production Units. Audit findings are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
3.2.1 Non-recovery of Cess from contractors 
Ministry of Railways, in July 2008, issued instructions stating that the 
tenderer shall be required to pay Cess @ one per cent  of cost of 
construction work to be deducted from each bill.  
In this regard, Audit observed that keeping cost of material outside the 
purview of Cess was against the spirit of the Cess Act. As per the Act, 
cost of construction shall include all the expenditure incurred by Employer 
excluding the cost of land and compensation to a worker or his kin.   
However, the Railways excluded the cost of material from the cost of 
construction and did not recover Cess on this amount as observed in the 
cases checked.  The clause added by the Railways in the GCC was also 
interpreted differently by Zonal Railways and led to non-uniform 
implementation. 
Audit test checked of 711 completed and on-going Works Contracts in 
various Zonal Railways during 2017-18 and found that: 
 In 74 cases 149 in 13 Zonal Railways, no Cess was recovered by the 
Railway Administration from the contractors.  A sum of ` 1.85 crore 
due from the contractors was not recovered and deposited with the 
Boards.  
 In 35 1 cases150, there was short recovery of Cess of ` 8.39 crore from 
contractors in all Zonal Railways and RWF.   
 In 28 6 cases151, Cess was recovere d from the contractors in all Zonal 
Railways and RWF as per rules.   
                                                           
149ECoR-09, ECR-06, ER-04, NER-05,NR-07, SER-17, CR-05, NCR-04,NFR-02, SECR-
06,SR-02,WR-06,SWR-01 
150CR-12 (` 0.15 crore), ECR-17 (` 0.37 crore), NCR-20 (` 0.32 crore), NFR -12 (` 0.77 
crore), NWR -20 (` 1.19 crore), SECR -33 (` 0.61 crore), SR -27 ( ` 0.32 crore), WR -12 
(`0.36 crore), SWR -01(` 0.0002 crore), ECoR -22 (` 0.92 crore), Metro Rly -11 (` 0.42 
crore), NR-21 (`0.32 crore), SCR-64 (` 0.42 crore),SWR-16 (`0.29 crore), ER-18 (`0.38 
crore),NER-20 (`0.13 crore),RWF-16 (`0.03 crore),SER-15 (`1.47 crore) 
 

 94 
3.2.2 Non-transfer of Cess recovered from contractors to Workers 
Welfare Boards 
Rules provide that proceeds of the Cess deducted/collected shall be 
transferred to the Welfare Board within 30 days of its collection. Interest is 
also leviable for non-payment of Cess within the specified time 152. Audit 
observed that 
 In 7 2 cases153, cess amounting to ` 2.28 crore was not transferred to 
the Boards by eight Zonal Railways. Consequently, Railways wer e 
liable to pay the dues along with the interest accrued until cess is 
transferred to Boards.   
 In 99 cases 154, cess amounting to ` 3.03 crore was recovered from 
contractors. However, the details of transfer of this amount to Boards 
were not available on record. Actual remittance of Cess could not be 
ascertained in audit.   
In November 2012, Ministry of Railways, issued instructions 155 that 
contractor bill amount shall be debited to concerned work. The 
recoverable amount of Cess shall be credited under Suspense head 156 
before arranging payment to the contractors. The Suspense head shall be 
cleared/debited at the time of payment to respective Fund/Board by credit 
to the Suspense head-Cheques and Bills. Audit observed that these 
instructions were not followed by various Zonal Railways and large 
amounts were kept under suspense for long time. 
 In NFR, in Lumding Division, the cess was recovered from the 
contractor’s bills. However, the same was not sent to the Board due to 
non-availability of bank details of the Board. The amount was kept 
under the Suspense Head Deposit Miscellaneous/ Expenditure. In 
                                                                                                                                                              
151 CR-11, NCR -16, NFR -23, NWR -18, SECR -01, SR -09, SWR -16, WR -22, ECoR -10, 
ER-18, Metro Rly-28, NER-14, NR-09,RWF-04,SCR-35,SWR-04,WCR-40,ECR-09 
152 at the rate of two per cent for every month or part of a month from the date on which 
such payment is due till such amount is actually paid 
153 NWR-07,SR-02,WR-05,ER-04,NER-27,NR-14,SER-09,NFR-04 
154 ER-24, Metro Railway-39, SER-02,SECR-34 
155 Letter No. 2008/CE-I/CT/6 dated 8- 11-2012 on ‘Implementation of BOCW Welfare 
Cess Act, 1996 in Railway Contracts –Allocation of head’  
156 Deposit Miscellaneous (BOCW Cess) 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 95 
Rangia Division, cess was not recovered in respect of any completed 
contracts reviewed in audit. 
 In NER, cess of ` 2.04 crore was lying with the Railway Administration 
as on 31 March 2018 under the Suspense head. On pointing out in 
audit, Railway Administration (Varanasi Division) transferred 
(August/September 2018) ` 6.07 lakh to the respective Boards. Cess 
amounting to ` 1.98 crore was not remitted to the Boards.  
 In DLW, cess was being recovered regularly from the contractors.  
 In Metro Railway, the cess of ` 2.98 crore was deducted from the 
contractors during the period from December 2013 to March 2018.  
This was not deposited to the Labour Commissioner/West Bengal and 
kept under Suspense Head-Deposit Miscellaneous. The same was 
deposited only on 5 September 2018.     
 In NWR, in Jodhpur, Jaipur and Bikaner Divisions, cess recovered 
from the contractors was not transferred to the Boards within the 
stipulated period of 30 days. There was a delays of one to 29 months. 
Delay in depositing of cess will entail liability on Railways towards 
payment of interest.    
 In Malda Division in ER, cess of ` 2.40 lakh recovered from 
contractors in four contracts was incorrectly booked under head 
‘Primary Education cess recovered from Contractors’.   

 In NR, in Lucknow Division, cess recovered was remitted to the State 
government as a whole. However, the contract wise details of cess 
recovered and remitted to Board was not available.  
 In WR, Rajkot Division, the cess recovered was being transferred on a 
quarterly basis. In Ahmedabad, Bhavnagar, Mumbai Central Divisions, 
the cess deducted157 from the contractors was yet to be deposited with 
the Board. The amount of cess has been kept in the Suspense head- 
Miscellaneous Deposit. 
                                                           
157 pertaining to period 2016-17 to 2017-18, May 2016 to July 2018 and June 2016 to 
September 2018 respectively 
 

 96 
 In SECR, cess of ` 5.20 crore deducted by the Construction 
organisation from the contractors was not transferred to the Madhya 
Pradesh and Orissa Boards. This  was lying under Suspense head. 
Railway Administration has not offered any remarks for non-
transferring of cess to the Boards. 
3.2.3 Short payment of Cess by the Railways 
Audit observed that it was the responsibility of the Railways to ensure that 
the prescribed share (one per cent ) of the cost of construction was set 
aside and deposited with the Worker’s Welfare Boards. Railways were 
however, deducting only a part of this amount from the contractors (e.g. 
one per cent of the cost of labour in the contract and not on the material). 
Railways deposited the same in the Worker ’s Welfare Boards. 
Nevertheless, it was the obligation of the Railways to deposit one per cent 
of the total cost of the work 158 with the Workers Welfare Boards, whether 
recovered from the contractor or not. 
Review of records (contractor ledgers, contract files, contract agreements) 
revealed that 
 Against Cess of ` 26.87 crore due for payment, Zonal Railways paid ` 
13.92 crore to Welfare Boards in 4 09 cases159 in 2017 -18. Thus, ` 
12.95 crore was outstanding for payment.  
 In 99 cases, Cess of ` 4.65 crore was due for payment to Board. 
Against this, the Railway Administration recovered ` 3.03 crore from 
the contractors. However, remittance of this amount to Boards could 
not be ascertained for want of contract wise details of remittance.  
 In 203 cases160, there was no short payment of cess by the Railway 
Administrations.  
                                                           
158 which includes labour, material etc. 
159CR-20,ECR-17,NCR-25,NFR-19,NWR-21,SECR-06,SR-33,SWR-11,WR-22,ECoR-
30,ER-08,NER-35,NR-31,RWF-16,SCR-67,SER-30,SWR-17 
160CR-10,ECR-08,NCR-15,NFR-18,NWR-16,SR-06,WR-18,SWR-06,ECoR-10,ER-
08,NER-05,NR-04,RWF-04,SCR-32,SWR-03,WCR-40 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 97 
3.2.4 Non-inclusion of clause for payment of Cess by the contractors 
in the tender documents 
Ministry of Railways directed (9 July 2008) all the Zonal Railways to 
include a new clause 161 in the Tender Notice/Tender Documents for 
payment of Cess by the tenderer. In November 2013, Clause 55C was 
added to the Indian Railways Standard General Conditions of Contract 
(GCC) for enabling the Railways implementing the same.   Audit observed 
that in 18 contracts in three Zonal Railways and CLW
162, the said clause 
was not incorporated in the tender documents. As a result, the amount of 
Cess due from contractors was not recovered and transferred to the 
Board. 
3.2.5 Non-submission of information to Assessing Officer 
As per provisions163, every Employer within 30 days of commencement of 
work is required to furnish the information of work in Form I to Assessing 
Officer. In case of modification in the Plan of construction undertaken 
thereby reducing the cost of construction, foreclosure of work etc. 
information in Form-II is to be furnished.  Audit observed that  
 In four Zonal Railways164 and RWF, the required information in Form I 
and II was being sent by the Railway to the Assessing Officer. 
 In two Zonal Railways 165, the required information in Form I and II was 
not being sent by the Railways to the Assessing Officer. Instead, copy 
of Letter of Acceptance was sent to Assessing Officer by these Zonal 
Railways.   
                                                           
161 ‘The tenderer for carrying out any construction work in (Name of the State) must get 
themselves registered form the Registering Office under Section-7 of BOCW Act, 1996 
and Rules made thereto by the (Name of the State) Government and submit certificate of 
Registration issued from the Registering Officer of the (Name of the State) Government 
Labour Department. For enactment of this Act, the Tenderer shall be required to pay 
Cess at the rate of one per cent of the cost of construction work to be deducted from 
each bill. Cost of material shall be outside the purview of Cess, when supplied under a 
schedule item.’   
162 CLW-01, NER-04, WR-09, NCR-04 
163Rule 6 of BOCW Welfare Cess Rules, 1998, 
164 SWR, NFR, WCR, SR 
165 NER,NWR 
 

 98 
 In two Zonal Railways 166 and CLW, no records indicating submission 
of the required information in From I and II were available.  
 In three Zonal Railways 167, the required information in Form I and II 
was not being sent to the Assessing Officer.  
Thus, provisions of BOCW Rules, 1998 for furnishing the required 
information to Assessing Officer in the prescribed forms were not being 
followed scrupulously in most of the Zonal Railways.     
3.2.6 Other audit findings 
In SCR, Clause 55-C of GCC clause was included in the tender conditions 
in the contracts awarded by all the six Divisions.  However, the 
Construction organization deleted the sentence ‘ Cost of material when 
supplied under a separate schedule item shall be outside the purview of 
Cess’ from the tender conditions w.e.f. 25 th May 2015. Therefore, two 
departments of the same Zonal Railways were following the above clause 
differently.  
Audit reviewed the contracts in all the six Divisions and Construction 
Organization of SCR. It was observed that Railway Administration 
recovered Cess only on cost of labour and not on the cost of construction. 
Non-compliance of provisions of BOCW Act and Rules resulted into short 
recovery of Cess of ` 0.84 crore in 77 contracts during the period 2012-
13 to 2016-17.  Exclusion of cost of material for levy of Cess was in 
violation of provisions of BOCW Act and Rules.    
3.2.7 Conclusion  
The main objective for enactment and notification of BOCW Welfare Cess 
Act and BOCW Welfare Cess Rules was to provide a share of the cost of 
construction to Workers Welfare Boards. This share was meant to provide 
for safety, health and welfare measures of the workers.  However, 
Railways as an ‘employer’ did not ensure that amounts as prescribed in 
the Act are deposited with Workers Welfare Boards. Railways kept the 
                                                           
166 ER,SECR 
167 WR, ECoR, NCR 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 99 
cost of material outside the purview of Cess, which was against the spirit 
of the Cess Act.  This led to short recovery of Cess from the contractors. 
Railways were not recovering the Cess on the cost of materials supplied 
by the contractors. In some cases, no recovery of Cess was made from 
the contractors.  Cess recovered from the contractors was not deposited 
by the Railways to the Workers Welfare Boards within the stipulated 
period.  Thus, the provisions of the BOCW Act/Rules were not being 
followed scrupulously in the Railways. 
3.2.8 Recommendations 
It is recommended that Railways may 
1. modify the tender conditions to correctly reflect the provisions 
of the BOCW Act. They may also issue instructions to all field 
formations to recover the Cess in line with the BOCW Welfare 
Cess Act. 
2. ensure that the Railways fulfill their responsibility of remitting 
the Cess at the prescribed rate on the cost of construction to 
the Workers Welfare Boards. This should be done irrespective 
of the amount recovered from the contractors, as the 
responsibility to pay Cess entirely lies on the Employer. 
3. ensure that the Cess recovered from the contractors is remitted 
to the Workers Welfare Boards within the stipulated time period 
as per the BOCW Welfare Cess Act. 
4. ensure the forms as required are submitted to the Workers 
Welfare Boards by the executives of all the concerned 
Departments. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 16 May 2019; their reply 
has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
 
 
 

 100 
3.3 East Central Railway (ECR): Short deduction of Jharkhand VAT 
from the contractors on-account bill resulting in avoidable liability 
With effect from 1 April 2012, Government of Jharkhand revised the 
rate of VAT from two to four per cent. The same was to be deducted 
in advance in respect of works contracts. Construction Organization, 
ECR did no t deduct VAT at the revised rate in 26 works contracts 
awarded between December 2012 and April 2017. In 346 running on -
account bills processed for payment, an amount of ` 12.14 crore was 
short-recovered from the contractors. Railways now have the 
liability to pay the same to the State Government as and when 
demanded. 
As per Section 44 of Jharkhand Value Added Tax (VAT) Act, 2005, for 
effective recovery of tax, the State Government may require in respect of 
contractors or any other class or classes of dealers that any person 
making payment of any valuable consideration to them for the execution 
of a works contract in the State involving transfer of property in goods, 
shall, at the time of making payment, deduct tax in advance therefrom 
which shall be calculated as per the rates specified by the State 
Government from time to time.  
Further, the Act stipulates that every person who is required to deduct tax 
in advance shall furnish prescribed returns and pay the tax deducted 
according to such returns to the State Government in such a manner as 
may be prescribed. If any person fails to deduct the whole or any part of 
the tax or fails to pay the whole or any part of tax then, the authority may, 
at any time within five years of the close of the year when he failed to do 
so, by order in writing, direct him, after giving him a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, to pay, by way of penalty, a sum equal to the 
amount of tax which he failed to deduct or pay as aforesaid.  
Commercial Tax Department of Government of Jharkhand notified (31 
March 2006) the rate of deduction of Jharkhand VAT as two per cent. On 
3 October 2012, it was further revised to four per cent with effect from 1 
April 2012. The notification was communicated (9 October 2012) to the 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 101 
Senior Finance Manager/ECR/Dhanbad by the Commercial Tax 
Department, Dhanbad Circle/Jharkhand. He was requested to recover the 
VAT at the rate of four per cent from the bills of works contract with effect 
from 1 April 2012.  
Audit reviewed the records of works contract agreement, in four 
construction projects
168 under the jurisdiction of Jharkhand State. Audit 
noticed that in 26 works 169 awarded after 9 October 2012, recovery from 
the bills of contractors were made at pre-revised rate of two per cent. In 
these contracts, 346 running on-account bills were processed for payment 
to contractors, wherein VAT was deducted @ two per cent instead of four 
per cent . As a result, an amount of ` 12.14 crore was short-recovered 
from the contractors. Besides, railways now have the liability to pay the 
same to the State Government as and when demanded.  
Dy. Chief Engineer/Construction/ECR in his reply stated (March 2018) 
that the recovery of VAT at the revised rate was not done, as it was not 
pointed out by the associate finance. It was also stated that notification 
regarding revision of rate of VAT was not circulated to their unit by their 
Headquarter office.  
The notification was communicated to Dhanbad Railway Administration by 
the State Government authority on 9 October 2012. Audit noticed that the 
order to deduct VAT at revised rate of four per cent was implemented in 
Dhanbad Division (Open Line). However, the same was not implemented 
in any of the Offices of Construction Department of ECR under Jharkhand 
State. All these works are still on-going and final account bills are yet to 
be processed. Thus, there is a scope to recover the amounts short-
recovered from the final bills of the contractors before the works are 
completed.  
In reply, Railway Board stated (25 June 2019) that as per the contract 
agreement, change of rate of statutory taxes of the State Government 
                                                           
168 Tori-Shivpur, Hazaribagh-Barkakana-Ranchi, Koderma-Giridih and Do ubling project 
between Jarangdih to Gomia 
169 tenders awarded between December 2012 and April 2017 
 

 102 
after date of dropping of tender shall be on Railway Account. They further 
stated that Jharkhand Government (Commercial Taxes Department) did 
not circulate the order of revised VAT rate t o GM/ECR/Principal Chief 
Engineer or Chief Administrative Officer/ Construction. Sr. DFM/Dhanbad, 
to whom the revised notification was sent, is one of the unit of ECR of 
Open Line and not a unit under the control of Construction Organization. 
Also, the State Government never raised the issue with any authority of 
ECR in regard to short recovery.  
Audit, however, observed that the date of notification of levy of enhanced 
rate of VAT was earlier than the date of dropping of tender. As such, the 
rate of VAT should have been revised at the enhanced rate at the time of 
dropping the tenders itself, which was not done. Sr. DFM/Dhanbad is also 
part of ECR Administration under the administrative control of GM/ECR. 
Thus, it was a failure on part of ECR to not circulate the notification of 
revised VAT rate.  
3.4 North Eastern Railway (NER): Construction of sub -standard pit 
lines leading to delay in development of new coaching termin al at 
Mau 
The work of washing pit line at Mau was delayed due to delay in 
providing drawi ngs and permanent way material to the contractor. 
The contractor did not execute the work adhering to RDSO 
specifications and the work was foreclosed. The work was awarded 
to another contractor. However, the work was completed without 
addressing the issue of quality and adherence to RDSO 
specifications. The pillars in washing pit developed cracks, when the 
train was placed for maintenance. The expenditure of ` 13.32 crore, 
which was paid to the first contractor became infructuous. Haulage 
of coaches between  Mau and Gorakhpur for primary maintenance 
led to avoidable expenditure of ` 3.80 crore, as the coaching terminal 
was not completed at Mau. 
Railway Board has time and again issued instructions emphasizing the 
need for adopting better contract management practices. Timely 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 103 
furnishing of detailed drawings to the contractor has also been 
emphasized to avoid delays in the execution of the work. 
Railway Board sanctioned (2013-14) the work of development of a 
Coaching Terminal at Mau, Uttar Pradesh in NER, at an estimated cost of 
` 14.60 crore. The work was justified stating that Mau was an important 
Class A station of the Varanasi Division from the point of view of 
passenger traffic. There had been a consistent demand by the public to 
run long distance trains from this station. NER reasoned that a coaching 
terminal would be required for maintenance of long distance trains. 
In October 2014, the Construction Department of NER issued Letter of 
Acceptance (LOA) to M/s Sunil Kumar Jaiswal (1 st contractor) at a cost of 
`
 9.26 crore. The work included construction of a washing pit line and 
other engineering works 170. In December 2014, the Contract Agreement 
was executed with the contractor. The work was scheduled for completion 
within a year i.e. by November 2015. 
Audit observed that the work was started by the contractor only in March 
2015, after a lapse of five months from the date of issue of LOA. Three 
extensions were given to the contractor from 11 October 2015 to 31 
March 2017. Two extensions were granted as the railways were not able 
to provide drawings to the contractor on time. There was also delay in 
issue of release order for Permanent Way Materials by the railways. Last 
extension was granted to the contractor without citing any reason. The 
contractor requested (December 2016) for foreclosure of the work on 
administrative account, as construction department could not provide the 
drawings timely. The work was finally foreclosed in November 2017 after 
paying `
13.32 crore to the contractor. Subsequently, for undertaking the 
left over work another contract was executed with M/s Krishna Dubey, 
Gorakhpur (2nd contractor) in May 2018. The work was awarded at a cost 
of ` 3.58 crore and targeted for completion by November 2018. 
                                                           
170 Construction of double storied building for Stores and Office, boundary wall, earth 
work, sick line, blanketing, supply of ballast and other miscellaneous works 
 

 104 
Audit further noticed that there were large variations in the quantities as 
against those mentioned in the Contract Agreement. Variation in 
quantities beyond 150 per cent  required approval of General Manager. 
General Manager’s approvals for these variations were not on records. 
Due to delay in providing designs and frequent changes by the Railway, 
the work done by the contractor was not as per the required 
specifications.  
Audit further observed that as per the RDSO drawing, the size of rail 
holding column of terminal should be 520x450 mm. Rails are laid on these 
columns in the coaching depot. However, 1 st contractor constructed rail 
holding column of size 460x300 mm. He also did not provide holes for 
fastening of rails on the columns. Dy. Chief Engineer (Construction) 
intimated (February 2017) the Chief Engineer (Construction) that the 
prescribed drawing was not being followed since commencement of the 
construction work. He further stated that the constructed rail holding of 
460x300 mm needed to be dismantled to construct rail holding of 520 
x450 mm as per RDSO specification. The constructed rail holding of 
460x300 mm was not capable of supporting a beam of 520x 320 mm. 
However, the work awarded to the 2 nd contractor did not include 
construction of rail holding column as per RDSO approved drawing. 
Construction department assigned the work relating to drilling holes 32 
mm dia, 150 mm depth in existing washable apron/pedestal for fixing rails. 
Audit noted that drilling holes in columns would impact the strength of the 
beams built over the column, which were not made as per specifications. 
NER administration had introduced a new weekly train Mau-Anand Vihar 
Express from November 2013. The primary maintenance of this train was 
being carried out at Gorakhpur, 138 kms away, as washing pit line at Mau 
was yet to be completed. NER incurred extra expenditure of ` 3.80 crore 
towards cost of haulage of coaches between Mau and Gorakhpur during 
January 2016 to July 2018.  
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 105 
Figure 3.9 – Cracks/damage after placement of train in washing pit at Mau (18 March 2019) 
In their reply (June 2018), Construction Department admitted the delay in 
approval of the drawings and also excessive variations vis-à-vis the 
contract agreement. They stated that due to gross technical mistake by 
the railway officials concerned and the agency, the work could not be 
completed and the contract had to be closed in November 2017. They 
further stated that disciplinary action was initiated against the responsible 
officials. 
Audit further observed that the washing pit line was inaugurated on 6 
March 2019. When the train (no.15071) was placed on this pit for trial, 39 
pillars developed serious cracks and the washing pit had to be closed. An 
inquiry was conducted (17/18 March 2019) by RDSO; report of which was 
awaited. 
Thus, delay in providing drawings in time to the contractor and non-
compliance to RDSO specifications led to sub-standard quality of work. 
This resulted in infructuous expenditure of `
 13.32 crore, which was paid 
to the first contractor. Further, NER incurred avoidable expenditure of ` 
3.80 crore (up to July 2018) on haulage of coaches between Mau and 
Gorakhpur for primary maintenance. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 15 November 2018; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 

 106 
3.5 North Eastern Railway (NER): Discrepancies in maintenance of 
Works Registers of track renewal works in Varanasi Division 
Audit re viewed the WRs in divisions and construction offices of 
NER. There was lack of internal controls and the registers were not 
being maintained properly. There was absence of due diligence in 
maintaining the Works Registers. Cases of partial entries of 
vouchers and incorrect entries in WRs were noticed. Vouchers 
pertaining to other works were recorded in WRs of the track renewal 
works reviewed in Audit. Discrepancies were also noticed in the 
amount booked in WRs of works reviewed. Improper 
review/examination o f works expenditure indicated complete dis -
regard to the laid down codal provisions by Executive and Accounts 
officers. In this situation, the possibility of fraudulent payments to 
suppliers cannot be ruled out. 
Rules171 stipulate maintenance of Register of Works, which is a collective 
record of expenditure designed for:  
a) effecting control of expenditure on works with reference to estimates, 
by facilitating comparison between the expenditure incurred on each 
work and the detailed provision made in the estimate for work, 
b) effecting budgetary control, by facilitating a comparison between the 
budget allotment for the work and the actual expenditure,  
c) enable any material modification 172 occurring being spotted. 
Register of Works should inter alia  include sanction amount, budget 
allotment and fund allocation. The register should also include voucher 
number with amount, detailed estimates, completion date and details of 
works to be executed. These registers are required to be maintained in 
the Accounts Office both for open line and construction department. 
                                                           
171 Para 1472 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
172 Para 1109 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 107 
Audit reviewed the Work Registers (WRs) being maintained by NER 
during 2001-02 to 2017-18. Audit observed that these registers were not 
being maintained properly. Audit examined 21 WRs including 523 works 
executed by the three Divisions (Varanasi, Lucknow and Izatnagar) and 
the Construction department of NER. Audit noticed that  
 Only in case of 136 works, WRs were found complete, 
 In case of 315 works, WRs were partially complete and did not contain 
all the requisite details, and 
 In 72 works , WRs were not maintained at all.   
During detailed examination, eight WRs containing 301 works executed 
by Varanasi Division were reviewed.  Audit observed that  
 In case of 33 works, the expenditure of ` 11.37 crore was exhibited in 
the register for 2017-18. However, in Appropriation Accounts for 2017-
18, the expenditure was mentioned as ` 31.49 crore, reflecting 
difference of ` 20.12 crore. 
 In case of 222 works, details of vouchers were not available, and  
 In case of 109 works, details of detailed estimates were not available. 
Rules173 also stipulate that executive officer should examine the Works 
Register monthly or at more frequent intervals, and watch the progress of 
expenditure of each work. Accounts Officer should also watch the 
progress of expenditure and advise the executive officers as to the need 
of re-appropriations, whenever such necessity arises. Audit, however, 
noticed that out of aforesaid 523 works, 448 works (86 per cent) had not 
been examined by the Executive officers (Sr. Divisional Engineer of 
concerned Division). Further, 460 works (88  per cent ) had not been 
reviewed by Accounts Officers of the concerned Division.  
                                                           
173 Paras 521-30 of Indian Railway Finance Code (Volume I) 
 

 108 
Non-maintenance/incomplete maintenance of WRs as well as non-
conduct of review of a large number of works was indicative of deficient 
internal controls.   
Audit also undertook a detailed examination (November 2017 and July 
2018) of the Works Registers and payment vouchers/adjustment memos 
of two Track Renewal Works executed by Varanasi Division. Audit 
observed significant differences between the expenditure booked under 
Appropriation Accounts and that shown in the Work Registers. Audit also 
did not find vouchers/adjustment memos worth of `
 31.40 crore on record. 
The discrepancies noticed during review of these two track renewal 
works
174 were as follows: 
 Out of vouchers amounting to ` 49.66 crore, 116 vouchers worth ` 
22.06 crore were not made available to Audit for review.  
 Work Registers of the above two works, produced (November 2017) to 
Audit contained only 78 vouchers of ` 17.11 crore for the period 2011-
12 to 2016 -17. After the issue was raised in audit (July 2018) , 
Accounts Officer made entry of additional 118 vouchers of ` 32.55 
crore in the Work Registers. 
 Only 80 vouchers of ` 27.59 crore of the two works were made 
available to Audit for examination. Audit noticed that only 13 vouchers 
of  ` 2.55 crore related to the above works. The other 67 vouchers of ` 
25.05 crore pertained to Track Renewal Works , procurement of 
Permanent Way materials for various other  sections and revenue 
expenditure on various maintenance works.  
 The work of Track renewal of Gorakhpur Cantt.-Bhatni section was 
completed in June 2013. However, an amount of ` 4.57 crore was 
debited towards procurement of P ermanent Way material through 1 8 
Purchase Orders issued after completion of the work. This clearly 
                                                           
174 Through Rail Renewal (Primary) work of Gorakhpur Cantonment –Bhatni section and 
Through Ballast Renewal work of Gorakhpur Cantonment- Paniyahwa section  
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 109 
indicated that the expenditure of ` 4.57 crore did not pertain to this 
work. 
 Audit also observed significant discrepancies in the amounts booked 
in the Works Register of the work of Track renewal of Gorakhpur 
Cantt.-Bhatni section.  
o Against voucher 175 of ` 11,85,073 pertaining to cost of 19.309 MT 
new rails, an entry of ` 1,11,85,073 was made in the Works 
Register.   
o Similarly, as against the voucher 176 of ` 39,50,182, the entry of ` 
1,39,50,182 was made in the Work Register.  
o Entries of two vouchers amounting ` 15 lakh and ` 4 lakh related 
to two Adjustment memos177 were made twice.  
Thus, in respect of these two track renewal works, a difference of ` 5.49 
crore was being reflected between the expenditure booked in the 
Appropriation Accounts and the expenditure shown in the Work Register. 
However, no efforts were made by NER to reconcile these differences. In 
addition, periodical review of expenditure of these works was not carried 
out by Engineering and Accounts Departments.  
Thus, there was absence of due diligence in maintaining the Works 
Register in NER. Cases of partial entries of vouchers and incorrect entries 
in WRs were noticed. Vouchers pertaining to other works were recorded 
in WRs of the track renewal works reviewed. Discrepancies were also 
noticed in the amount booked in WRs of works reviewed in Audit. 
Improper review/examination of works expenditure by Executive and 
Accounts officers indicated complete dis-regard to the laid down codal 
provisions. In this situation, the possibility of fraudulent payments to 
suppliers cannot be ruled out. 
                                                           
175 Number No. W/78/2166/4B dated 23/06/2016  
176 No. – Cap. JV No. 5XP Rev. Vrs. No. 24XP, Sep’12, Adjustment me mo no. W/39-
1/Pt-IX/Track/W-3 dated 12/10/2012 
177 W/FBWP/5-3/2821 dated 21/12/2015 and FCC-VI/03/Sv dated 08/04/2016, 
DRM/W/55 dated 02/06/2011 
 

 110 
There is a need to fix responsibility on officers, responsible negligence in 
maintaining the Works Register and incorrect entries in the Works 
Register.  
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 13 February 2019; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
3.6 Metro Railway, Kolkata (MR): Duplicate payment to contractors 
due to inclusion of labour and machine charges in two schedules  for 
procurement of steel and execution of work 
In ten contracts awarded by MR, there was double inclusion of 
cutting and bending charges in two schedules for procurement of 
steel and execution of work. This resulted in duplicate payment of ` 
18.42 crore to contractors on this account.  
The accepted schedule of items, scope of work including quantities, rates 
and amount form an integral part of a contract between the Railways and 
the contractor
178. The works contracts issued by Metro Railway, Kolkata 
generally contain five or six schedules. These include schedule on 
earthwork, foundation and sub-structure works, super-structure works, 
supply of cement, supply of reinforced steel and miscellaneous works etc. 
The works contracts are also vetted by Finance wing before finalization.  
In ten 179 works contracts, labour and machine charges such as cutting, 
bending, binding and straightening were included at two places. Labour 
and machine charges are used for processing of steel to make it 
reinforced steel. These charges were included in schedule of execution of 
works (sub-structure and super-structure) in addition to the supply 
schedule (supply of reinforcement steel). Double inclusion of the labour 
and machine charges for the same work, in two different schedules, 
caused duplication of payment of such charges.  
                                                           
178 Para 1218 of the Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
179 Tenders no.1844/2011, 1882/2010, 1885/2010, 1936/2011, 1964/2011, 2071/2013, 
2155/2015, 2169/2016, 2199/2016. These tenders pertaining to works related to 
construction of superstructure, substruct ure, construction of buildings, pump house, 
underground water storage, works of ROB, replacement of manned level crossing. 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 111 
Audit worked out the duplication of payment in the above ten contracts. 
Audit assessed duplicate payments of ` 18.42 crore on the basis of 
review of on-going bills of these ten contracts. All these ten contracts 
were on-going and duplicate payments were continued to be made 
through the running account bills. 
In reply, Railway Board stated (15 May 2019) that there was duplication of 
labour and machine charges only in three contracts
180. They stated that 
the same was not duplicated in other contracts. Railway Board’s response 
and audit rebuttal thereto in respect of remaining seven contract cases 
are given below: 
Table 3.1 – Railway Board response and audit rebuttal 
Tender no. Railway Board’s remarks Audit contention 
Tender nos. 
1882/2010, 
1885/2010, 
1905/2010, 
2071/2013, 
2155/2015, 
2199/2016 
In these contract cases, item 
of supply steel did not contain 
item of cutting, bending, 
binding, straightening etc. 
In two tender cases 181, the basic 
rate for supply of steel was 
worked o ut after including the 
component of cutting, bending, 
binding etc. These charges were 
also included in execution of 
works.182 
In four cases 183, the basic rate 
was worked out on the basis of 
rates of two earlier contracts 184. 
These contracts also contained 
double inclusion of labour and 
machine charges. 
Tender 
no.2169/2016 
In this case, cutting, bending, 
binding, straightening 
charges were not included in 
corresponding items of 
execution of works 
In this case, the execution of 
works included fabrication of 
reinforcement bars. The 
fabrication processes consist of 
cutting and bending the 
reinforcing steel. As such, these 
charges were already included in 
the execution of works. These 
charges were also provided in the 
                                                           
180 Tender no.1844/2011, 1964/2011 and 1936/2011 
181 Tender no.1882/2010, 1885/2010 
182 Schedule-E3 – Station finishing works 
183 Tender no.1905/2010, 2071/2013, 2155/2015, 2199/2016 
184 Tender no.1882/2010 and 1936/2011 - In these tender cases, MR  Administration has 
accepted double inclusion of cutting, bending and binding charges, pointed out by Audit.  
 

 112 
Table 3.1 – Railway Board response and audit rebuttal 
Tender no. Railway Board’s remarks Audit contention 
item of supply of reinforcement 
steel as stated by Metro Railway. 
Thus, Metro Railway, Kolkata made extra payment of ` 18.42 crore to the 
contractors due to duplication of labour and machine charges in two 
schedules in ten works contracts. There is a need to fix responsibility of 
the officers preparing the tender documents and vetting the works 
contracts that resulted in duplicate payment.     
3.7 South Eastern Railway (SER) and South East Central Railway 
(SECR): Delays in completion of yard works and non -achievement of 
expected benefits  
SER executed yar d remodelling work in Tatanagar and Adityapur 
Yard to cope up with incremental traffic and to minimize detention. 
The detention in Adityapur Yard improved. However, in Tatanagar 
yard, the situation worsened as the space and other constraints 
were not addre ssed despite spending ` 21.66 crore.  Similarly, in 
SECR, the works undertaken for remodelling of Bhilai Exchange 
Yard and construction of a new Exchange Yard at Maroda remained 
unfruitful. The work could not be completed due to encroachment at 
the site an d poor planning. This resulted in blocking of capital of ` 
31.15 crore. 
A. South Eastern Railway 
Inward and outward traffic of M/s Tata Iron and Steel Company (TISCO) 
are handled in Tatanagar Yard and Adityapur Yard of South Eastern 
Railway (SER).  
TISCO planned to increase their production from 4 Million Tonne Per 
Annum (MTPA) in 2005 to 10 MTPA by 2010. In view of this, Indian 
Railways anticipated increase in projected traffic from 14 MT to 35 MT by 
2010-11. Accordingly, incremental traffic, SER proposed (October 2005) 
for yard remodelling of both Tatanagar and Adityapur Yard
185. The work 
                                                           
185 In the Works Programme for 2005-06 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 
 113 
was justified as absolutely imperative to de-congest the section and to 
reduce detention to rakes. SER proposed only internal modification for 
better handling of traffic, as Tatanagar Yard had no scope for expansion. 
In Adityapur Yard, expansion as well as modification work was proposed. 
It was decided to develop the requisite facilities in two phases. These 
were targeted for completion in tune with the expansion programme a nd 
traffic growth of TISCO. Construction Organisation/SER took up the work 
for execution in 2006-07, at an estimated cost of ` 39.82 crore
186. The 
work was completed only in October 2014 187 against the target of 
December 2009.  
Audit observed that the situation has improved in Adityapur Yard 188, the 
detention at the Tatanagar Yard did not improve even after completing the 
remodelling work. The yard consists of three parts, Classification Yard, 
Main Yard and Goods Departure Yard. The average detention of rake at 
Tatanagar yard during 2012-13 to 2014- 15189 was 17 hours 56 minutes 
per rake. During 2015-16 to 2017- 18 (post remodelling work ), average 
detention per rake increased to 19 hours 18 minutes. 
Audit observed that there was no scope of expansion in the Yard due t o 
space constraints. However, Divisional Engineering department of SER 
undertook works for yard remodelling incurring an expenditure of `18.45 
crore. This did not bear any fruitful results. Three out of the four new lines 
constructed were extended to full length in the Classification Yard. 
However, this did not help as the lines in the Main Yard could not be 
extended to handle full rake length. The connecting lines between the 
Main Yard and the sidings were also not electrified. One single diesel loco 
was being used for placement/drawal of rakes. Non-availability of 
unloading staff was another reason that led to detentions to the rakes. 
                                                           
186Estimate No.1340W/2006 for ` 26.11 crore for Tatanagar Yard remodelling and 
Estimate No.1323W/2006 for ` 13.71 crore for Adityapur Yard remodelling 
187As recorded in the Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM)  
188Pre-remodeling period detention was 27 hrs 29 mts for BOXN rakes and 11 hrs and 26 
mts for BOBSN Rakes and after completion of the work t he detention came down to 
10.06 hrs and 2.58 hrs respectively in Adityapur Yard. 
189 Before completion of the work 
 

 114 
Audit noticed that these were major constraints in the Tatanagar Goods 
shed which necessitated developing a new Goods Shed in the first place. 
Audit further observed that Railway was aware about the space 
constraints and the fact that there was no further scope to develop the 
shed. However, they decided to develop a freight terminal at Tatanagar. 
Detailed Estimate of `
 10.19 crore was sanctioned in December 2009. 
The work was targeted to be completed by December 2012 190. However, 
the work was abandoned midway (November 2012) after incurring 
expenditure of ` 3.21 crore, The General Manager decided to shift the 
shed to another place (Haludpukur 191) on the ground of congestion, which 
also did not materialize. 
Thus, SER failed to achieve the main purpose of reduction of detention to 
rakes at Tatanagar yard as there were planning deficiencies/space 
constraints. As such, the investment of ` 21.66 crore
192 remained 
unfruitful. There is need to fix responsibility on the Officers involved in the 
planning of the Yards and incurring huge unfruitful expenditure.          
B. South East Central Railway 
Operating Department/SECR proposed two traffic facility works viz., 
remodelling of Bhilai Exchange Yard (2009-10) and construction of a new 
Exchange Yard at Maroda (2010-11). The works were proposed in view of 
the expansion of Bhilai Steel Plant from 4 to 7 MTPA and to decrease 
detention of wagon and locos. The new exchange yard at Maroda was 
aimed to deal with incremental traffic as a result of expansion by Bhilai 
Steel Plant. The details of the works taken up are as follows: 
Table 3.1 – Details for Traffic facility Works 
S. 
no 
Name of the work Year of 
sanction 
Cost  
(` in crore) 
Targeted date of 
completion 
1 Remodelling of Bhilai Exchange Yard 2009-10 5.95 31 December 2014 
2 Construction of New Exchange Yard 
at Maroda 
2010-11 12.32 31 December 2013 
                                                           
190As per Indian Railways Projects Sanctions and Management (IRPSM) 
191 20 kms away from Tatanager 
192` 18.45 crore on remodelling and ` 3.21 crore on development of freight terminal at 
Tatanagar 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 115 
In March 2009, Engineering Department/SECR realized that the work of 
Bhilai Exchange Yard could not be executed. This work required 
execution of Signalling and Telecommunication works pertaining to two 
Cabins193. Accordingly, they took up a new work 194in 2010-11 for 
replacing the signal gear at Cabin K and M at a cost of ` 14.98 crore. The 
target of completion was June 2012. As of May 2018, an amount of ` 
16.35 crore has already been incurred on this work. The physical 
progress was just 60 per cent .  Presently, the work is likely to be 
completed by March 2020 with an anticipated cost of `19.12 crore. Unless 
this work is completed, the work of remodelling of Bhilai Exchange Yard 
cannot be executed. 
The work of construction of New Exchange Yard at Maroda was targeted 
for completion by December 2013. Audit observed that as the work site 
was under encroachment, the progress of the work was not satisfactory. 
After granting seven extensions, the civil engineering contract was finally 
short closed in March 2017.  Following this, both electrical and signal and 
telecommunication work contracts also had to be short closed. An 
expenditure of `
8.62 crore was incurred and as of June 2018, the physical 
progress was only 50 per cent. The traffic facility work has already been 
delayed by four and half years. 
In reply, Dy. Chief Engineer, Construction (Raipur)/SECR stated 
(February/ March 2018) that traffic facility work at Bhilai Exchange Yard 
could not be completed. This could be completed only after 
installation/commissioning of new Route Relay Interlocking (RRI). In 
regard delay in traffic facility work at Maroda, SECR stated the reasons as 
delay removal of encroachment by State Government.   
                                                           
193 Cabin K and M 
194Replacement of signal gear by electrical operation of points and signals at 02 stations 
(K & M cabins) on E route of Raipur Division 
 

 116 
It is, however, a fact that delay in execution of traffic facility works led to 
blocking of capital of ` 31.15 crore 195. This has also resulted in non-
achievement of expected savings as anticipated by SECR 196 on account 
of decrease in detention of wagon and locos. There is need to fix 
responsibility on the Officers involved in the planning of the Yards that led 
to blocking up of capital.          
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 13 February 2019; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
3.8 East Coast Railway (ECoR): Unproductive expenditure due to 
execution of work without prior permission of Commissioner of 
Railway Safety  
East Coast Railway Administration executed a work of extension of 
loop line, with a steeper gradient than prescribed  in the Indian 
Railways Schedule of Dimensions of 2004. However, prior approval 
of Commissioner of Railway Safety was not taken. Comm issioner of 
Railway Safety did not condone the infringement of steeper gradient. 
This led to unproductive expenditure of ` 6.56 crore. In the absence 
of Commissioner of Railway Safety’s sanction, the chances of 
completing the work and utilizing the loop line are remote. 
A maximum gradient of 1 in 400 197 in station yards for existing works 198 is 
prescribed in the Indian Railways Schedule of Dimensions of 2004 (SOD-
2004). The amendment to the SOD-2004 (May 2013), inter alia mentioned 
that no station yard should be constructed nor any siding should join a 
passenger line on a grade steeper than 1 in 260. Where it is unavoidable, 
previous sanction of Railway Board should be obtained through 
Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS). 
                                                           
195 Expenditure of ` 6.18 crore on Remodelling of Bhilai Exchange Yard, expenditure of  
` 16.35 crore on replacement of signal gear at two stations (K & M) and expenditure of ` 
8.62 crore on construction of new exchange yard at Maroda 
196 At the time of  proposing the works SECR expected net annual saving of ` 1.84 crore 
per year from Bhilai Exchange Yard) and ` 3.98 crore per year from Maroda New 
Exchange Yard) from avoidable detentions of Wagons/ Locomotives. 
197 rise/fall of 1 meter in every 400 meter length 
198 Existing works means the works which were existing before issue of revised Schedule 
of Dimensions (2004) and would help the field engineers to provide the information about 
previous dimensions followed at one place. 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 117 
In the Vizianagaram-Palasa section of ECoR, which had reached beyond 
saturation point, a need was felt to create capacity to cater to increase in 
traffic eastern coastal belt. To mitigate section capacity constraint in this 
section, Waltair Division started running long haul trains on an 
experimental basis. These were amalgamated two full length rakes, 
generally known as Python rakes. However, in running such trains a 
constraint was faced is crossing or precedence with other trains.  The 
conventional yard layouts could not hold the python rakes and trains could 
not stop in between to give precedence to other trains (both passenger 
and goods). These trains were thus run through up to destination. This 
was causing significant time loss to other traffic. To overcome this 
difficulty, ECoR proposed to  modify some station yards, so that these 
Python rakes could be accommodated.  
In January, 2014 Sr. Divisional Engineer/Waltair proposed a work for 
modification and extension of existing R/4 line in Chipurupalli Yard 199. For 
accommodating Python rakes, the loop line was proposed to be extended 
into a longer loop line, without disturbing the common loop status. Railway 
Board 
approved this traffic facility work in April 2014 at a cost of ` 8.13 
crore. The work was targeted for completion by March 2016. The 
proposed longer loop line at Chipurupalli Station consisted of steeper 
gradient (1 in 291) beyond the prescribed safety limit of 1 in 400.  
For execution of the works, four contracts200 of ` 5.31 crore were awarded 
during March 2015 to June 2015. However, the drawings for the same 
were not approved at that time. The contract was awarded without 
approved drawings. Previous sanction of Railway Board and CRS was 
necessary before commencement of a work, as the gradient was steeper 
than prescribed. Audit observed that Sr. Divisional Engineer/ Waltair 
approached (December 2015) CRS 201, for condonation of the 
infringement of steeper gradient, six months after the award of contract. 
                                                           
199 which was a common loop 
200 Civil Engineering, Electrical and Signal and Telecommunication Department of Waltair 
Division 
201 South Eastern Circle/Kolkata 
 

 118 
Condonation was sought with a justification that achievement of 
recommended grade of 1 in 400 would involve substantial modifications. 
This would include earthwork, extension and reconstruction of bridges, 
major alteration of Over Head Equipment (OHE) and signaling 
installations at a cost of ` 6.07 crore.  Besides, there would be traffic block 
in the busy route. The CRS returned the proposal on 31 December 2015 
unsanctioned. CRS stated that extension of loop should be planned at 
Station yard where it does not lead to Schedule of Dimensions 
infringement. Chief Bridge Engineer/ECoR reiterated 202 their proposal for 
condonation citing that providing 1 in 400 gradient was not feasible. CRS 
however, did not sanction the condonation proposal and stated (March 
2018) that sharp change of grade from 1:291 down to 1:200 up was not 
permitted.  
Audit observed that not only ECoR started work without CRS sanction, 
but also continued the works during this period. As of September 2018, 
physical progress on the work was 75 per cent and an expenditure of ` 
6.56 crore had been incurred. However, the completion and utilization of 
the infrastructure was uncertain pending the CRS sanction. 
In reply, Railway Board stated (February 2019), that to make the existing 
gradient to 1 in 400, huge expenditure would be required including several 
traffic blocks.  Hence , it was proposed  to provide the gradient 1 in 291 
instead of 1 in 400 for which condonation was sought. On receipt of CRS 
sanction, the work will be resumed and intended facility of longer loop will 
be brought into use. 
 There will be no unproductive expenditure. 
Audit noted that codal provision 203 clearly stipulates that specifications 
and drawings form a part of the tender document and the same should be 
embodied to the contract.  However, in the instant case , the contracts 
were awarded without approved drawings. The CRS s anction for 
condonation was yet be received (December 2018). The work has been 
stalled after achieving 75 per cent  physical progress. This has led to 
                                                           
202 27 June 2016, 20 September 2017 and 3 November 2017 
203 Para 1219 of the Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 119 
unproductive expenditure of ` 6.56 crore. In the absence of Commissioner 
of Railway Safety’s sanction, the  chances of completing the work and 
utilizing the loop line are remote.  Meanwhile, running of Python rakes has 
also been stopped. 
There is a need to fix responsibility of the officers responsible for starting 
the work without obtaining the sanction of CRS and incurring expenditure 
which may not bear any results.   
3.9 Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR): Infructuous expenditure due to 
failure in ensuring full availability of clear site before initiating works 
A new line project from New Maynaguri to Jogighopa was taken up 
by NFR to connect New Maynaguri to Guwahati via Jogighopa. 
However, Railways started construction of the work before 
completing the entire land acquisition. Subsequently, the land 
acquisition did not fructify. NFR made an alternate arrangement  on 
an existing land owned by them to join Maynaguri Road to a 
Special Class Station on Jalpaiguri -Guwahati main line. NFR has 
now dropped the proposal for land acquisition. The expenditure of 
` 25.13 crore incurred on construction of major/minor bridges, 
culverts, waterways, earthwork, etc. on the initially identified route 
has become infructuous.  
Audit has highlighted the issue of non-completion of preliminary works by 
Railways before awarding of contracts for various works, from time to 
time. Railway Board in October 2006 reiterated that pre-requisite works 
such as clearance of site and preparation of plans and drawings may be 
completed in time and handed over to the contractor, so that the progress 
of work is not hampered. Railway Board also directed that failure to do so 
may be viewed seriously and responsibility fixed for any extra expenditure 
incurred. Further for projects, where land acquisition is an essential 
component, tenders should be awarded only after land acquisition is 
completed or it has been entirely tied up204.  
                                                           
204 Railway Board’s letter dated October 2017 
 

 120 
A new line project New Maynaguri –Jogighopa falling under the States of 
West Bengal and Assam was sanctioned by Railway Board in 2000-01 at 
a cost of ` 733.09 crore. This line was to connect New Maynaguri to 
Guwahati via Jogighopa station. The new line was intended to serve a 
sizeable population in remote places of West Bengal and Assam along 
the Bangladesh border. 
 
Figure 3.10: Route Map of the project (not to scale) 
In June 2004, another line of 2.03 km length was proposed as a Material 
Modification. This line was to connect New Domohani station on New 
Jalpaiguri- New Bongaigaon line with Maynaguri Road station on New 
Maynaguri–Jogighopa line. The project was sanctioned (September 2004) 
by Railway Board at a cost of ` 2.39 crore. Th is line was named ‘ Y-
connection’ as it formed shape of ‘Y’ with the stretch of New Maynaguri -
Maynaguri Road station of the new line project. Construction of this new 
line was justified as an alternative route from New Domohani to Guwahati 
via Jogighopa.  
For construction of Major/Minor bridges, culverts, waterways, earthwork, 
track linking etc. in ‘ Y-connection’ portion, expenditure of ` 25.13 crore 
was incurred (January 2010). However, 62.43 acre land pertaining to ‘ Y-
connection’ remained to be acquired. The land owners were demanding 
higher compensation than the one decided by the State Government. As 
such, the entire work of ‘ Y-connection’ remained incomplete till date. The 
status quo continued and in June 2015, General Manager/NFR approved 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 121 
proposal of co nstruction of an alternative route. The alternative route ‘ Y-
leg’ was approved to utilize the already certified portion of track from 
Maynaguri Road towards Jogighopa by Commissioner of Railway Safety 
(CRS).  This was done for connecting the main line at a point between 
Jalpaiguri Road and New Domohani which was 2.06 km west of New 
Domohani station. For utmost utilization of ‘ Y-leg’, a new ‘Special Class’ 
station was constructed at the designated point . The 5.950 kms long ‘ Y-
leg’ was laid entirely upon a po rtion of land already under possession of 
NFR since long. Audit noted that the matter of connecting New 
Mayanaguri-Jogighopa route to the main line was sorted out. However, 
the mother project including its Material Modification portion remained 
incomplete.  
Thus, improper planning and failure to adhere to the Railway Board’s 
instructions led to blocking of expenditure of ` 25.13 crore. This 
expenditure was incurred on construction of Major/Minor bridges, culverts, 
waterways etc. in Maynaguri Road-New Domohani and Maynaguri Road 
– New Maynaguri portions (Y-connection).  
In reply, Railway Board accepted (January 2019) the audit comment and 
stated that ‘Y -connection’, which was planned earlier and executed in 
some portion at the cost of ` 26.42 crore, is not required now since an 
alternative route Y-leg is constructed and commissioned. However, the 
problem of land acquisition had forced the railway to introduce an 
additional ‘SPL’ class station as Y -leg between Jalpaiguri Road and New 
Domohini to derive the benefit of huge investment on New Maynaguri to 
Jogighopa project. They stated that land acquisition was being still 
pursued up to Chief Secretary level. Thereafter, with the permission of 
General Manager this new alignment had been chosen to connect the 
entire stretch of the section. They agreed that at present, the expenditure 
on constructed assets has become infructuous. 
 

 122 
There is a need to fix responsibility of the officers responsible for starting 
the work without ensuring land acquisition and incurring unfr uitful 
expenditure.   
3.10 South Eastern Railway (SER): Failure to augment capacity of 
Electric Loco Shed at Santragachi led to detention of locos 
South Eastern Railway proposed to take up the exten sion work of 
Electric Loco Shed , Santragachi to accommodat e increased holding 
of locos. They also planned commissioning of a Pit Wheel Lathe for 
wheel turning at the shed. The work of capacity augmentation could 
not start as various departments could not come to an agreement. 
The Pit Wheel Lathe machine was also installed at another location 
due to inadequate space at Santragachi Loco Shed. However, locos 
were detained for long hours due to heavy workload resulting in loss 
of earning capacity of ` 8.33 crore.  
Electric Loco Shed, Santragachi (ELS/SRC) of South Eastern Railway 
(SER) caters to motive power requirement of Mail/Express trains running 
towards Mumbai and Bhubaneswar. With the available space and 
infrastructure, the shed was initially planned and equipped for maintaining 
35 locos. This was subsequently increased to 50 locos to accommodate 
increased holding. Subsequently, new trains 205 were introduced and 
additional locomotives were allotted to the shed. As a result, ELS, 
Santragachi was unable to meet the maintenance requirement of the 
additional locomotives. 
In December 2009, SER proposed extension of ELS/SRC for smooth 
running of day to day operations. The site plan for the same was prepared 
by a Committee of Officers
206 from three departments and approved by 
the Divisional Railway Manager, Kharagpur. The Committee suggested 
shifting of Railway Consumer Depot (RCD) tanks of Indian Oil Corporation 
Ltd. meant for diesel loco fueling at Santragachi. The proposal was also 
                                                           
205 Like Duronto from Howrah 
206 Area Manager (ARM), Santragachi, Sr. Divisional Electrical Engineer (Sr. DEE)/TRS, 
Santragachi and Sr. Divisional Engineer (Sr. DEN), Kharagpur 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 123 
agreed to by the Operating Department. However, the Mechanical 
Department did not agree to the proposal in view of the objections 207 
raised by Indian Oil.  
The issue was again deliberated (April 2011) through a Joint Survey by a 
Committee of representatives from the Electrical, Mechanical and 
Engineering Department. However, the same could not be settled due to 
objections of the Mechanical Department. Thereafter, the Electrical 
Department proposed (August 2011) for augmentation of the holding 
capacity to 75 locos in first phase and 100 locos in second phase. 
In April 2012, Railway Board decided 208 that extension of the shed should 
be planned at the earliest and all facilities needed to be upgraded. It was 
also advised (June 2012) shifting of maintenance of diesel locos to 
Kharagpur, as the numbers of diesel locos had decreased. Railway Board 
also advised maintaining a few diesel locos at Santragachi. The matter 
was to be decided by General Manager, SER.  Audit observed that this 
option has not been exercised by SER Administration so far. 
At Zonal level, the issue continued to be discussed by the concerned 
railway departments without any results (December 2015). The matter of 
augmentation of capacity of the loco shed thus, remained unresolved.  
Audit further observed that for wheel turning 209, a Pit Wheel Lathe 
machine was sanctioned for the shed at Santragachi in July 2012. 
However, the same could also not be commissioned due to space 
constraints. Subsequently, this machine was commissioned in Electric 
                                                           
207 IOCL conducted survey of the area and proposed locations and observed that the 
proposed locations were surrounded by un authorized dwelling house, high tension lines 
were passing through the location thereby posing safety and security hazard. They, 
therefore, requested railway to maintain the RCD installation at the same location and 
consider only modification in decantation point. 
208 During discussions in the Conference of Chief Electrical Engineers at Railway Board  
209 Turning is a form of machining, a material removal process, which is used to create 
rotational parts by cutting away unwanted material. The turning process requires a 
turning machine or lathe and cutting tool. 
 

 124 
Multiple Unit (EMU) Car Shed, Tikiapara 210 in January 2017 which is 5 
kms away.  Currently, wheel turnings of Electric locos and EMU rakes are 
mostly done at EMU Car Shed, Tikiapara 211 and other sheds. As against 
the prescribed time of 16 hours for wheel turning for locos, the average 
time taken for wheel turning at EMU Car Shed, Tikiapara and other sheds 
was 51 hou rs
212. This was due to heavy workload at these sheds. The 
possibility of installing the Pit Wheel Lathe Machine in Santragachi was 
still being explored. A Committee of Subordinate Officers
213 found that 
suitable space was available for installing the machine at ELS/SRC with 
some modifications (September 2018). 
The matter was taken up with Principal Chief Electric Engineer/SER in 
July 2018. In reply, they stated (July 2018), that there was no further 
scope for extension of the shed. They stated that the traffic requirement 
for coaching locomotives was increasing day by day.  
 
Thus, the capacity augmentation work in the Loco Shed could not be 
taken up in SER due to lack of co-ordination between various railway 
departments. Railways sustained avoidable loss of ` 8.33 crore due to 
heavy detention of locos at Tikiapara EMU Car Shed. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board in February 2019. 
In their reply (September 2019), it has been stated that despite space 
constraint, the ELS/SRC has been strategically located in Kolkata area to 
feed the coaching trains in SER. Railway Board further stated that 
provision of Pit Wheel lathe at Carshed/ Tikiapara was a wise decision in 
prevailing space constraint. Currently, wheel turnings of electric locos and 
EMU rakes are being done in this Pit Wheel Lathe. In 2018-19, a Pit 
Wheel Lathe was sanctioned for Carshed/Tikiapara which is now being 
                                                           
210 Recently one pit wheel lathe has been sanctioned by Railway Board (2018-19) 
against replacement of over aged pit wheel lathe at EMU Car Shed, Tikiapara, in 
addition to the new machine installed in January 2017. 
211 Almost 83 per cent of the wheels are sent to Tikiapara for wheel turning, remaining 
are sent to other sheds at Tatanagar (244 kms), Kharagpur (109 kms), Bokaro (307 
kms) and Ramnagar (109 kms) 
212ranging between 2 hours 30 minutes and 220 hours  
213 from the Engineering, Electrical, Mechanical Departments 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 125 
commissioned at ELS/SRC by optimizing design of covered shed, 
modifying RCD complex, etc.  
The above reply of Railway Board clearly establishes the fact that the Pit 
Wheel Lathe which was sanctioned in July 2012 for ELS/SRC could have 
been commissioned there itself with necessary internal modification, as 
was done later to install the Pit Wheel lathe sanctioned for 
Carshed/Tikiapara to ELS/SRC. Installation of the Pit Wheel lathe at 
ELS/SRC at the very first instance could have avoided haulage of locos 
as well as their unnecessary detention at other sheds.  
3.11 Metro Railway (MR): Injudicious decision taken in construction 
of third platform/line at Mahanayak Uttam Kumar Station of M etro 
Railway, Kolkata 
Engineering department of Metro Railway/ Kolkata proposed to 
construct third platform/line at Mahanayak Uttam Kumar station. The 
objective was to originate/ terminate train services f rom/to this 
station. On examination, Operating Department stated that the 
proposed 3rd platform had limited utility and would not facilitate 
truncated train services from/to KMUK. However, the third 
platform/line was constructed  without addressing the limi tations 
pointed out by the Operating Department . As such, 3 rd platform and 
line could not be used for originating/terminating trains as planned  
and the expenditure of ` 11.27 crore was rendered unfruitful. 
Engineering Department of Metro Railway, Kolkata p roposed (September 
2011) construction of the 3rd Platform/line in the Mahanayak Uttam Kumar 
station (KMUK) . The existing two 214 platforms are used for through 
services between Kabi Subhas and Dum Dum stations. The third line was 
proposed with the objective o f originating/ terminating train services 
from/to KMUK . KMUK is an intermediate station  between Kabi Subhas 
and Dum Dum stations, which are two ends of the metro route in Kolkata.  
                                                           
214 Down - Kabi Subhas (KKVS) end and UP - Dumdum (KDMI) end 
 

 126 
 
Figure 3.11: Layout of Mahanayak Uttam Kumar Station 
The Operating Departm ent of Metro Railway examined the proposal in 
October 2011 and stated the following:  
 The scope of the work only allowed despatch of train towards 
Dumdum from 3 rd platform, which is coming from KMUK car shed  (Y 
siding).  
 In case where the train coming from  Dumdum is terminated at KMUK 
station, there was no provision for receiving train directly from 
Dumdum end to 3rd platform and despatch from 3rd line itself.  
 Provision was also not there for receiving train directly from Kabi 
Subhas end to 3rd platform and go towards Dumdum. The same could 
go to 3rd Platform only from KMUK car shed.  
Audit observed that the above scope of work did not allow originating and 
terminating services from Platform no.3 of KUMK as envisaged. The 
Operating Department also stated that in the present scope, the proposed 
3rd platform had limited utility and would not facilitate truncated train 
services from/to KMUK. They suggested dropping the proposal as the 
same in the present scope did not address the operational constraints. 
Audit observed that despite the above suggestion/opinion by Operating 
Department, Engineering Department undertook the work . The 3rd 
platform/line was constructed at a total cost of  ` 11.27 crore and opened 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 127 
for traffic on 3 July 2016. Eleven pairs of new trains were started/  
terminated from/to KMUK from 9 September 2016, by altering service 
between Dumdum and Kabi Subhas. However, the services were 
withdrawn with effect  from 03 October 2016.  No reasons were found on 
record for withdrawal of truncated services. As  such, the 3rd platform/line 
at KMUK was not used for originating/ terminating trains at KMUK as 
originally planned. Audit noticed that the trains from Dumdum arriving at 
Platform no.1 needed to go to the yard before placement at Platform no.3 
for starting towards Dumdum. This impacted arrival of trains coming from 
Kabi Subh as towards Dumdum, which were placed on Platform no.2 of 
KMUK.  
Thus, the limitations pointed out by the Operating Department were not 
addressed. The Engineering Department constructed the 3rd line without 
ensuring provision of direct receiving/  dispatch of trains through 3rd line. 
The expenditure of ` 11.27 crore incurred for construction of 3 rd line and 
platform remained unfruitful since October 2016. 
In reply, Railway Board stated (May 2019) that at the time of proposal and 
sanctioning of third line, KMUK carshed was fully operation. But in course 
of time, the workload of KMUK carshed was shifted to Noapara and Kavi 
Subhash carsheds. As such, non-availability of additional rakes as well as 
non-functioning of KMUK shed prevented injection of rakes from KMUK 
restricting utilisation of third platform. They further stated that revival of 
KMUK carshed is being placed as part of the upcoming projects. Once the 
shed is revived the third platfo rm will be productively used for originating 
services.  
The above reply does not indicate the constraints of non -availability of 
provision for receiving train directly from Down line i.e. from Dum Dum 
end to third platform and dispatch of same to Up line. Further, due to poor 
planning of Railway Administration and construction of third line without 
assessing its efficient utilisation, the expenditure incurred remained 
unfruitful.  
 

 128 
3.12 Central Railway (CR): Non -construction of chord lines leading 
to haulage of goods trains via longer route and recurring loss of 
revenue to Railways 
Central Railway did not construct chord lines bypassing Panvel 
station for trains coming from Uran and Roha lines to cross over to 
Panvel-Karjat line, though the same was provided in the original 
detailed estimate. In the absence of a chord line, most of the freight 
traffic originating from Uran and Roha lines was being moved 
through a 55 kms longer route. The situation became worse, when 
these goods trains were further detained at Kalyan goods shed. This 
resulted in loss of ` 68.57 crore during April 2015 to March 2018. 
Panvel-Karjat new line was sanctioned in the year 1997 and completed 215 
in March 2005. The objectives were to pass the goods, passenger and 
sub-urban traffic on this line, decongest the busy sections of Kurla-Kalyan 
and Kalyan-Karjat lines and provide faster transport and utilize the assets 
optimally. Two chord lines216viz. Uran to Apta and Apta to Karjat (total two 
kms) were also provided in the detailed estimate 217of the project. The 
chord lines  are constructed on junctions, where the train has to change 
directions from the junction. If there is no chord line, the engine has to be 
reversed to join at the other end of the train to change the direction. This 
is called engine reversal. A chord facilitated change of tracks without 
reversal of engine. The new line Panvel-Karjat was, however, opened for 
traffic in 2007 without constructing the chord lines as provided in the 
detailed estimate. The reasons for not constructing the chord lines were 
not on record. In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
1. With the construction of Panvel -Karjat line, Goods traffic from 
Uran/JNPT218 area and Konkan Railway to Pune and beyond was booked 
                                                           
215 Sanctioned cost `106.90 crore, Revised Estimated cost ` 137.44 crore    
216 A chord line is a line  segment joining two points on a curve . Chord line facilitates 
change of tracks without reversal of engine. 
217 No work included in an abstract estimate should be commenced till a Detailed 
Estimate for the same is prepared and sanctioned and adequate funds are allotted by 
the competent authority. Detailed Estimate will comprise details of estimated cost of 
work, financial justification and fund allocation. 
218Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 129 
through this shorter route. Audit observed that freight traffic 219 to various 
locations220 was booked via shorter route (Panvel-Karjat). However, most 
of the traffic was carried via longer route (Panvel-Diva-Kalyan-Karjat) and 
some traffic through shorter route. Movement of traffic through longer 
route was being done to avoid reversal of engine at Panvel due to non-
construction of chord lines.  
 
Figure 3.12 – Route map showing Panvel-Karjat line including chord line for bypassing 
Panvel station 
During test check for March 2018, Audit observed that of 254 rakes 
(trains) which were destined to go beyond Karjat from Panvel, in 148 
rakes221, reversal of engine at Panvel was required. Reversal of engine at 
Panvel takes 2.42 hours. Eighty-eight of these 148 rakes (59 per cent ) 
were moved through longer route (Panvel -Diva-Kalyan-Karjat) and 
remaining 60 rakes (41 per cent ) moved through shorter route (Panvel-
Karjat). Movement of traffic through longer route  
(Panvel-Diva-Kalyan-Karjat) entailed extra hauling of trains for 55 kms.  
                                                           
219 fertilizer from Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers, Thal (Pen), Iron and Steel from 
PPDP-Dharamtar and imported coal from PPDP-Dharamtar 
220 in Western Maharashtra i.e. Pune, Satara, Sangli, Kolhapur, Solapur and Marathwada 
i.e. Aurangabad, Jalna, Hingoli, Beed, Parbani, Nanded, Usmanabad and Latur.  
221In 106 rakes received from Western Railway through Vasai Road, reversal of engine 
was not required. 
 

 130 
This resulted in avoidable expenditure of ` 39.15 crore 222 during the 
period from April 2015 to March 2018 alone. 
2. Another constraint was observed at Kalyan station. Kalyan is a 
very busy station with 780 223 passenger and suburban trains passing 
through every day. The goods trains cannot pass through Kalyan station. 
No platform is available for goods trains to pass via passenger yard and, if 
diverted, it will affect punctuality of passenger and suburban trains. The 
goods trains being sent through longer route via Kalyan (i.e. Panvel-Diva-
Kalyan-Karjat) are invariably detained at Kalyan Goods Yard. Detention to 
goods trains at Kalyan Goods Yard caused further detention of rakes, 
being run via longer route through Kalyan. Detention of 33,451 wagon 
days at Kalyan Goods Yard during the period from April 2015 to March 
2018 alone resulted in loss of earnings of `
 29.42 crore to the Railways. 
3. Work for undertaking a Preliminary Engineering-cum-Traffic Survey 
for Panvel chord line 224 has recently been included in the Detailed 
Demand for Grants for Railways (2018- 19)225. As the work is at nascent 
stage, the traffic will continue to be moved via longer route till construction 
of the chord line is completed.  
Thus, Central Railway did not construct chord lines bypassing Panvel 
station for trains coming from Uran and Roha lines to cross over to 
Panvel-Karjat line, though the same was provided in the original detailed 
estimate. In the absence of a chord line, most of the freight traffic 
originating from Uran and Roha lines was being moved through a 55 kms 
longer route. The situation was worse, when these goods trains were 
further detained at Kalyan goods shed. This led to loss of `
 68.57 crore 
during April 2015 to March 2018. 
                                                           
222 Container trains (` 24.83 crore) and Goods trains (` 14.32 crore) 
223 Number of passenger trains passing through, originating/terminating at Kalyan station 
every day 
224Panvel Chord line survey include Chord lines connecting (i) Jasai-Panvelline to Panvel 
–Roha line by  passing Panvel station, (ii) Jasai -Panvelline to Panvel -Karjat line 
bypassing Panvel station and (iii) Roha -Panvel line to Panvel -Karjat line bypassing 
Panvel station 
225 Pink Book item No. 40 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 131 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 13 February 2019; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
3.13 Northern Railway ( NR): Irregular payment of water charg es to 
municipal bodies  
NR made irregular payment of ` 10.43 crore to municipal bodies 
without getting water supply in their colonies in New Delhi . They 
stopped payments in respect of six connections, which did not exist. 
However, they continue to make payment for another six water 
connections where no water or little water is being supplied. Defects 
in water meters in respect of 20 connections were yet to be removed.  
NR continued to make payment of bills raised by municipal 
authorities on average basis. 
NR Administration has taken water connections from New Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (NDMC) and Delhi Jal Board (DJB) for supply of water in 
railway colonies 226situated in New Delhi. They also have their own water 
supply arrangements from bore wells. NDMC and DJB raises water bills 
for each water connection against the Railway Administration. Water bills 
are to be paid by the Railway Administration after due verification of the 
bills. Senior Section Engineer
 (Works)/Hazrat Nizamuddin has been 
nominated for verification of water bills in respect of water connections in 
the railways colonies. 
Audit observed that Divisional Engineer, Delhi was making payment of 
water charges in respect of 21 water connections
227. In a survey 
conducted by Senior Section Engineer (Works)/Hazrat Nizamuddin in 
April 2016, only 15 water connections were found to be in existence. 
Six228 water connections did not exist. Further, in six229 water connections 
                                                           
226at Sarojini Nagar, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Sewa Nagar, Lajpat Nagar, Gulabi Bagh, Lodhi 
Road, Delhi Safdarganj Station 
227Seven water connections taken from NDMC and 14 water connections taken from DJB  
228NDMC’s Water Connection Nos. 36174, 34124, 34039 (Sarojni Nagar colony), DJB’s 
Water Connection Nos.13579-A (Hazrat Nizamuddin colony), 18977, 18978 (Sewa 
Nagar colony) 
229DJB’s water connection Nos.1910731000, 5910731000 (Sewa Nagar colony), 
6300731000, 5300731000, 4300731000, 7300731000 (Hazrat Nizamuddin colony) 
 

 132 
there was no water or little water in the pipelines.  Details 230 of these 12 
connections were not available in the railways’ records.  
Divisional Engineer, Delhi/NR, informed 231 DJB and NDMC authorities 
that there was very negligible water in these water connections an d these 
were almost blocked. Bills for water charges were being raised by DJB 
and NDMC on average basis in 20 water connections as there were no 
water meter or meter was not working. Only in respect of one connection, 
bills were raised on the basis of actual meter reading. Divisional Engineer, 
Delhi/NR, was aware that water connections did not exist at six 
connections and there was no or little water supply in another six 
connections. However, he continued to make payment of water charges in 
respect of all 21 connections. Irregular payment of ` 3.87 crore 232 was 
made in respect of six connections which did not exist during April 2008 to 
December 2016. The payment was stopped thereafter. Railway is still 
making payment to DJB for six other connections having no water supply. 
An amount of ` 6.56 crore has been paid on this account till December 
2017. 
In response, the Engineering Department of NR, stated (July 2017) that 
 It was still not clear at ground level whether connections were 
available or not, as joint inspection carried out partially by NDMC/DJB 
officials with railway representatives even after regular chasing. 
 As an interim measure, water bills for doubtful connections had now 
been stopped.  
 Water connections having defective water meters, bills are being 
raised on average basis by NDMC/DJB and they have been requested 
to rectify the defective water meters.   
                                                           
230 Period for which connection did not exist and no water available 
231 in June 2006, June 2010 and August 2011 
232Payment made for one connection no. 36174 (up to April 2016), for four connection 
nos. 34124, 34039, 18977, 18978 (up to June 2016) and one connection no.13579 -A (up 
to December 2016).   
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 133 
Railway Administration continued to make payment of water charges to 
municipal bodies without any corrective measures to resume water supply 
or to remove defects in water meters. NR Administration failed to actively 
pursue the matter with NDMC and DJB for conducting joint inspections to 
check and remove the obstructions in the water connections/pipelines.  
Thus, NR made irregular payment of ` 10.43 cro re to municipal bodies 
without receiving water supply during April 2008 to December 2017 in 
respect of 12 water connections233.  
In reply, Ministry of Railways stated (April 2019) that the basis on which 
Audit has raised the issue of non-existence of six water connections was 
the report of SSE Works/HNZM, which he conducted on his own. This 
was not a joint inspection with DJB/NDMC and Railways. During 
excavation carried out by the different agencies for various infrastructure 
development/repair works resulted into damage and these became non 
traceable. In six other water connections, water supply was found to be 
intermittent only for a short duration and later on after continued efforts 
supply of water improved. Out of 21 water connections, water meters are 
available in 10 water connections. Correspondences were being made at 
appropriate levels for providing meters/replacement of defective meters. 
Ministry in its reply has not given cognizance to survey report of its own 
official, who is the nominated engineer for verification of water bills. No 
action was taken on his suggestion for conducting joint inspection with 
DJB/NDMC. No water or little water and blocked water connections was 
also reported to DJB/NDMC authorities during June 2006, June 2011 and 
August 2011 without any results. Only after taking up the matter in audit 
(June 2016), the Railway Administration stopped the payment of water 
bills in respect of six water connections which did not exist.        
                               
                                                           
233 Railway colonies in Sarojini Nagar, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Sewa Nagar and Lajpat 
Nagar areas in New Delhi 
 

 134 
3.14 North Eastern Ra ilway (NER): Execution of substandard bridge 
work by the contractor   
The work  for rebuilding of the bridge across the river Ghaghra on 
Chhapra-Aunrihar section of Varanasi Division in NER was approved 
in September 2011. During execution of substructure work two wells 
developed tilts in excess of the permissible limit. However, the work 
was neither declared sub -standard nor the defects rectified by the 
contractor. Open Web Bridge Girders fabricated for the super -
structure also remained unutilized , as the su b-structure work was 
yet to be completed. This led to blocking of capital amounting ` 
67.54 crore.  
Railway Board approved (September 2011) the work of rebuilding of 
bridge234 across the river Ghaghra on Chhapra -Aunrihar in Varanasi 
Division, NER at a cost o f ` 204.68 crore. Rebuilding of bridge included 
the work of  
 sub-structure (including foundation, flooring, bed blocks etc.),  
 superstructure (including girders, arch, pipe, slab etc.) ; and  
 track structure above it.  
The work of the sub-structure was awarded (March 2012) to M/s AKS-
HCIL (JV), Lucknow and was targeted for completion by November 2013. 
After the completion of the substructure, the work of superstructure was to 
be started. Eighteen Open Web Bridge Girders (OWBGs)
235 of 4107 MT 
quantity with a to tal estimated cost of ` 62.07 crore were required for the 
superstructure. Orders for these OWBGs were placed on Bridge 
Workshop and a private firm. The foundation work of the bridge was to be 
completed by November 2013, so that these girders could be utilized.  
                                                           
234 Bridge No.16 (18x61m), single line BG section 
235 Open Web Girders are used for track bridges over large rivers and valleys ; The order 
for fabrication and supply of girders was placed by  Deputy Chief Engineer 
(Construction)/Bridge) (May 2011 ) on the Bridge Workshop, Gorakhpur  (for eight 
OWBGs on actual cost basis ). For remaining ten OWBGs, the order was placed on a 
private firm 235 (December 2014) at a total price of ` 21.62 crore and these were to be 
supplied by  December 2016. The Bridge Workshop, Gorakhpur completed the 
fabrication of eight OWBGs by March 2016 at a cost of ` 50.25 crore. The firm supplied 
six OWBGs during October 2016 to September 2017 and two in March 2018. 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 135 
Figure 3.13 Open Web Bridge Girders lying at the 
workshop of NER 
 
Audit observed that the construction of the substructure was still 
incomplete despite granting five extensions to the contractor  between 
November 2013 and May 2018. Four extensions were granted to the 
contractor on administrative grounds 236. One  extension was granted on 
contractor’s account with a token penalty of ` 1 lakh.  Audit noticed that 
during execution of work two wells P -3 (towards Varanasi side ) and P-4 
(towards Chappra side ) developed tilts in excess of the permissible limit . 
These needed corr ections by the contractor. During inspection, Chief 
Engineer (Construction), Gorakhpur had instructed the contractor to set 
right the tilts, but the same was not  done.  As per the Contract 
Agreement, if the tilts exceeded the permissible limit, the work wa s to be 
classified as substandard and liable for rejection. However, NER , instead 
of taking action against the contractor under the provisions, granted 
extensions to the contractor.  
Audit further observed that there was lack of synchronization between the 
substructure (foundation work) of the bridge and the fabrication of 
OWBGs. The foundation work of the bridge remained incomplete , even 
after four years from the stipulated date (November 2013) of completion. 
As a result, OWBGs , which were supplied between March 2016 to March 
2018 could not be put to use. Of 16 OWBGs supplied, assembling and 
launching of only four 
OWBGs could be 
completed up to 31 
May 2018. The 
remaining OWBGs 
were lying at the work 
site of the bridge 
without any use. 
                                                           
236 delay in providing drawings and design, shortage of funds, increase in water level, 
sinking of well due to soil strata clay, blockage of path due to heavy flood and bog in 
river etc. 
 

 
 136 
In reply,  Railway Boa rd stated (November 2018) that all the fabricated 
girders could not be launched due to unforeseen circumstances 
encountered during construction of substructure. They also stated that the 
well sinking of P-3 and P-4 was in intermediate stage. Tilt and shift  would 
be brought down under permissible limit s during balance sinking of well 
and the contractor ha d already been directed to rectify the problem. The y 
added that all necessary corrective steps were being taken to ensure the 
safe construction of the bridge.     
However, the corrective action was not taken by NER Administration as 
per the provisions of the Contract Agreement. The work was neither 
declared as sub -standard nor the defects rectified at the cost of the 
contractor. This resulted in blocking of c apital to the tune of ` 67.54 crore 
besides non-achievement of stated objectives. 
There is a need to fix responsibility on officers responsible for execution of 
sub-standard work. Railways also need to rectify the defects at the cost of 
the contractor.    
3.15 Metro Railway (MR): Blocking up of capital due advance 
procurement of electric cables and high conductivity rails for 
Naopara-Barasat metro extension project 
Metro Railway, Kolkata made advance procurement of electric 
cables and high conductivity rail s worth ` 46.28 crore for Naopara -
Barasat metro extension project. These items were required only 
after completion of civil works of the project. However, the civil 
works could not be completed even after lapse of seven years of 
procurement due to encroach ment of land. Procured electrical 
cables and High Conductivity Rails were lying idle since March 2012. 
This resulted in blocking up of capital of ` 28.90 crore. 
Metro Railway (MR) undertook the project of extension of Metro Railway 
from Noapara to Barasat ( via Airport) at an estimated cost of ` 2582.55 
crore. This project also included material modification (MM) of Dum Dum-
Tollygunge Metro Project at an estimated cost of `
 184.83 crore. The 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 137 
detailed estimate of the project and its MM were sanctioned in June and 
November 2010 respectively.  
Construction department of MR awarded four contracts for civil works 
during October 2011 to March 2012, for execution of this project. The civil 
works
237 were to be completed by October 2013 to March 2014. However, 
these works could not be completed due to land encroachment in 
Noapara–Barasat section. Despite being aware of encroachments of land 
prior to sanction of detailed estimate in November 2010, MR 
Administration awarded contracts for civil works. 
Audit observed that the Noapara to Barasat metro project covers a length 
of 18.13 km (Noapara-Airport – 6.4 km and Airport –Barasat-11.73 km). 
Out of this, 10.85 km of the project land was encroached at the time of 
sanction of the project. As of June 2018, the land acquisition progress 
was nil. The physical and financial progress of the project was only 15 per 
cent as of March 2018.  
Meanwhile, MR went ahead and procured electrical cables (non-stock 
items) and High Conductivity Rails (HCR) for the Noapara-Barasat 
extension project in 2011 and 2012. The cables were meant for providing 
power and connectivity in the section to rolling stock, signalling system 
etc. besides station electrification. The cables were however, required 
only after completion of civil works. Similarly, the H CR was required for 
track linking with two regular track rails for conducting operation of the 
Metro rakes. These were also to be laid after construction of viaducts 
through civil contracts. 
Audit noticed that MR procured (December 2011 to March 2012) electrical 
cables worth `
 29.09 crore. The civil works of the project could not be 
completed. Hence, the cables valuing ` 15.81 crore were utilized for 
different purpose (other than the ensuing project) up to March 2018. The 
remaining cables worth ` 13.28 crore remained unutilized since March 
2012. 
                                                           
237 foundations, sub-structure and superstructure and the laying of tracks 
 

 138 
Audit further noticed that out of total HCR procured 238 worth ` 17.19 crore 
in March 2012, HCR 239 worth ` 15.62 crore remained unutilized . Only a 
small quantity of 220.222 MT (9.11 per cent ) of HCR was used for 
maintenance work. Remaining quantity was lying  unprotected in an open 
area since March 2012. Hence, proper utilization of these HCR was 
remote.  
In reply, Railway Board stated (15 May 2019) that high conductivity steel 
rails and cable are generally procured in advance through stores. This is 
to ensure that material is available for commissioning through works 
contract as soon as site is ready. He added that the cables and rails are 
being progressively used as per progress of the work 240 and also for O&M 
and traffic facility works as per requirement. He stated that one round of 
painting of the rails has already been arranged for better preservation of 
rails
.  
Regarding progress of work, Railway Board stated that despite several 
meetings at higher level, removal of encroachments could not be done. 
As a result, the contracts of Airport-Barasat section were foreclosed. The 
works between Noapara and Airport is in full swing.  
However, the rails and cable were procured in advance seven years back. 
MR could use only 54 per cent of cables procured and that too in other 
works. Further, only nine per cent of the quantity of HCR could be used in 
maintenance works.   
Thus, due to advance procurement of electric cables and H CRs by MR 
Administration before completion of civil works, capital worth ` 28.90 crore 
remained blocked since March 2012. Further, deterioration of these items 
especially cables cannot be ruled out, as they were lying in the open for 
the last seven years. Preservation by painting of the rails, if done, by 
Railway will entail additional costs. 
                                                           
238 2415.55 MT 
239 2195.328 MT 
240 for extension of Metro from Naopara to Airport 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 139 
3.16 Northern Railway (NR): Non -recovery from State Governments/  
Defence Authorities towards cost of staff deplo yed on level 
crossings  
NR failed to execute Agreements with the State Government/Defence 
Authorities for manning o f level crossings (LCs). This resulted in 
non-recovery of ` 97.06 crore towards cost of staff deployed for 
manning of these LCs. 
Rules241 have been laid down where LCs are provided by Railways at the 
request of the State Government/Local Bodies. Railway should execute 
an Agreement incorporating the terms and conditions for manning and 
maintenance of the LC before the commencement of work. The issue of 
non-recovery of maintenance charges of LCs from the State 
Governments/ Local Authorities had been raised by Audit from time to 
time. In July 1999, Railway Board directed 242 General Manager/NR to 
execute fresh Agreements in all cases where agreements were not 
executed or not traceable. NR was also instructed to realize the 
outstanding dues. 
Ministry of Railways, in its Action Taken Note 243, stated (January 2011) 
that  
(i) continuous efforts were being made for realizing the outstanding 
dues for the maintenance charges and cost of staff from State 
Government, and  
(ii) copies of agreement had been sent to concerned State 
Governments for signing, as the same could not be signed during meeting 
with them. 
Audit reviewed the status of execution of fresh agreements with the State 
Government/ Local Authorities by Divisional Authorities (Ambala and 
Ferozepur). Audit also checked the sta tus of recovery dues towards cost 
                                                           
241 Paras 1819 and 1851 of Indian Railway Code for the Engineering Department 
242 Member Engineering/ Railway Board’s D.O. letter No.92 -BC-Audit/ 33 
(Reconstructed) dated 19 July 1999  
243 Audit Para No.5.1.6 of Audit Report No. CA  6 of 2008 (Railways) on ‘ Non-realization 
of maintenance charges and cost of staff for LCs from State Government’ 
 

 140 
of staff deployed in LCs . Audit noticed that fresh agreements were yet to 
be executed with the State Governments  (Punjab and Haryana ) and the 
dues were also not recovered. Further, the  issue of execution of fresh 
agreements and payment of outstanding dues on LCs were not included 
in the agenda of the meetings 244. Audit noted that Engineering 
Department contacted the State Governments for signing of fresh 
agreements and to accept the debits. However, they did not agree to sign 
the fresh agreements at this stage  indicating the absence of any record 
that LCs opened at the request of State Government. Audit observed that 
as of March 2018, ` 52.84 crore was pending for recovery with State 
Governments for 51 LCs 245 in Ambala Division.  In Ferozepur Division, ` 
39.27 crore was yet to be recovered from the State Governments 246 
towards cost of staff deployed on 53 LCs. Further, ` 4.95 crore from 
Ministry of Defence 247 towards cost of staff deployed on six LCs. State 
Governments/ Defence Author ities were not paying dues to the Railways  
in absence of execution of agreements on these LCs. 
In reply, Sr. Divisional Engineer (Construction), Ambala stated (August 
2017/May 2018) that they had no records available regarding State 
Government request for construction of LCs, estimate and plan. In 
absence of the same, State Government/Authorities were not willing to 
sign fresh Agreements.  
Thus, Sr. Divisonal Engineer (Construction)/Ambala failed to execute 
fresh Agreements and realize the dues from the State Governments. As 
such, chances of realization of Railway’s dues amounting to ` 97.06 crore 
are remote. The dues would accumulate further, as the State 
                                                           
244 between General Manager/Northern Railway and Chief Secretary of the State 
Governments (Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh) during 2015-16 and 2016-17 
245 No. of LCs falling under jurisdiction of Permanent Way Inspectors-RPAR-23, SIR-18, 
BNN-01, PTA-02, BTI-01, DUI-03, RPJ-03. 50 LCs were under State Government o f 
Punjab and one LC under State Government of Haryana.   
246Jammu and Kashmir (for 01 LC, ` 0.74 crore pertaining to period April 1998 to March 
2018), Punjab (for 47 LCs, ` 30.63 crore pertaining to period April 1997 to March 2018), 
Himachal Pradesh (for 11 LCs, ` 7.90 crore pertaining to period March 2004 to March 
2018) 
247 CDA Western Command, Meerut for 06 LCs 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 141 
Governments/Local Authorities were continuing to not pay their dues. 
There was a need to take up the matter at the highest level by the Zonal 
Railway so as to address this issue. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 21 August 2018; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
3.17 Central Railway (CR): Non -realization of license fee for r ailway 
land licensed to private siding owners 
In December 2010, Railway Board instructed General Manager/ CR to 
launch a drive for signing of all pending License Agreements. 
However, CR did not execute land license agreements in respect of 
14 sidings and no siding charges were levied and collected. In other 
nine sidings, where agreement was executed, no bills were raised by 
CR. Audit assessed an amount at ` 127.15 crore of license fee 
outstanding for recovery from these 23 sidings till 31 March 2018. 
The Public Accounts Committee (7 th Lok Sabha) recommended execution 
of agreement with concerned parties in all cases of land given on license 
basis. Accordingly, Railway Board issued (November 1982) direction to 
Zonal Railways. It was stated that under no circumstances, land should 
be licensed without executing proper agreement. They further stated that 
in cases of land already licensed to the outsiders, where no agreements 
were signed, agreements should be executed without further delay. In 
February 2005, Railway Board reiterated that proper agreement must be 
executed between Railway Administration and licensees before the 
licensee is given possession of land/plot.     
As per existing provisions248 and Railway Board’s instructions of February 
2005, railway land can be licensed to lay private sidings. Railway Board 
reviewed the position of execution of license agreements for licensing of 
land and realization of dues. They noted that the position of signing of 
agreements had not improved. There were large arrears of land license 
fee due for realization. In December 2010, Chairman Railway Board 
                                                           
248 Para 821 of Indian Railway Works Manual, Para 1023, 1024 and 1025 of Indian 
Railway Code for Engineering Department 
 

 142 
instructed General Manager/CR to launch a drive for signing of all 
pending License Agreements. They were also directed to ensure signing 
of all pending agreements by 31 March 2011. 
Audit reviewed the records of land license agreements in Nagpur Division 
of CR. Audit noticed that land license agreements in respect of 14 sidings 
were yet to be executed. Of these, Western Coalfields Limited (WCL)
249 is 
the owner of 11 sidings and three sidings are owned by the Defence 
Department. For Defence sidings, Memorandum of Understanding was 
signed between the CR Administration and Defence Department.  The 
land licensing agreements were not executed and land license fee was 
not collected from these sidings since handing over the land.   
In respect of nine other sidings, the agreements for land licensing were 
entered into. However, no bills were raised and no license fee was 
recovered from the parties by the railway administration. The license fee 
outstanding for recovery from these 23 sidings
250 was assessed at ` 
127.15 crore till 31 March 2018 (Annexure 3.1). 
In reply, Sr. Divisional Engineer/Nagpur, stated (December 2016) that in 
respect of some sidings, no land licensing clause was included in the 
siding agreement. As a result, land licensing agreement could not be 
executed by the Engineering Department. Divisional Authorities further 
stated (September 2017) that all private siding agreements over Nagpur 
Division were executed except for the WCL owned sidings. WCL 
authorities did not agree to sign the agreements and the matter was 
referred to Railway Board.  Railway Administration did not furnish reply in 
respect of nine cases, where land licensing agreements were executed, 
but bills for license fee were not preferred.  
Thus, failure on the part of CR Administration in entering into land license 
agreements with the siding owners and non-preferring the bills for land 
license fee resulted in non-recovery of ` 127.15 crore.     
                                                           
249  A subsidiary company of Coal India Limited 
250 Railway land handed over during years 1908 to 2007 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 143 
There is a need to fix responsibility of the officers for non-realization of fee 
for railway land licensed to private siding owners. Railways also need to 
expedite the process of recovery of dues on this account.    
The matter was referred to Ministry of Railways in October 2018. Ministry, 
in its reply, stated (August 2019) that  
 In Nagpur Division, land license agreements in respect of 11 WCL 
sidings, mostly of British era, could not be executed in absence of 
main siding agreement. The matter has already been referred to Coal 
India Limited for directing their subsidiary coal companies to execute 
land license agreements with railway and payment of outstanding 
charges. A special drive has been conducted to initiate the land 
license agreement.   
 In respect of three Defence sidings, process for executing land 
license agreement has been initiated by Railway Administration. Land 
license fee is being worked out and bills will be raised against the 
parties.          
 In respect of nine other sidings in Nagpur Division, bills have been 
raised and payments have been received in some cases. 
 Monitoring of execution of siding agreements and dues towards 
license fee is being done at Zonal Railway Headquarters and Railway 
Board levels.   
Thus, despite Railway Boards’ directives (December 2010) for l aunching 
a drive for signing of pending Licensing Agreements, a number of land 
license agreements are yet to be executed even after eight years. Failure 
of Railway Administration in executing the license agreements resulted 
into non-recovery of ` 127.15 crore of license fee.           
 
 
 
 
 

 144 
3.18 South East Central Railway (SECR): Delay in construction of 
Electric Loco Shed (ELS) and consequent cost overrun   
SECR did not give cognizance to the constraints identified by the 
Committee set up for suggesting loca tions of construction of ELS. 
They constructed ELS at Bilaspur, where the Committee had 
apprehended operational constraints . Due to these constraints, 
despite a cost overrun of ` 27.95 crore and a delay of five years, 
SECR was yet to operationalize the ELS . As of December 2018, t he 
ELS was able to attend to  just 10-15 per cent of its holding capacity 
of 100 locos.  
In August 2006, Electrical Department of SECR formed a Committee of 
Engineers for identifying suitable location for construction of Electric Loc o 
Shed (ELS). The Committee’s Report (October 2007), identified five 
locations for construction of ELS viz. Bhilai Marshalling Yard, Bilaspur, 
Anuppur, Raigarh and Korba-Gevra Road. Out of these, only two 
locations viz., Korba and Raigarh were found to be fit for construction of 
ELS.  The Committee recommended constructing the ELS at Raigarh. 
Detailed estimate of ` 36.86 crore was sanctioned by General Manager, 
SECR in October 2009 with the target date of completion of 31  March 
2013. However, the land could  not be acquired, as it was part of notified 
tribal area of Raigarh and villagers opposed the proposed land 
acquisition. In July 2010, SECR proposed shifting the location of ELS to 
Bilaspur on the ground of operational requirement. The land was available 
at Bilaspur. The proposal was agreed to by the Railway Board in August 
2010.  
Audit found that while the Committee had considered Bilaspur as a 
possible location, but did not recommend it due to some operational 
constraints. The Committee had opined that the location was not proper, 
as it was a junction of Main Line and Central Industrial Coalfield section. 
About 90 goods trains were passing (45 in each direction), but few goods 
trains were originating at Bilaspur. As such, smooth withdrawal and 
induction of locos was not possible. The Committee also stated that 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 145 
Bilaspur Loco Shed would require connection with yard. This requirement 
would further worsen the serious bottleneck already faced at Bilaspur 
Yard. 
Audit observed that the Committee’s views were not t aken into account 
and Chief Administrative Officer (Construction) was entrusted with the 
work of construction of the ELS at Bilaspur. The tender for civil works was 
awarded to a contractor in January 2011 for ` 13.79 crore with completion 
period of 12 mont hs.  However, the progress of the work was very slow 
due to encroachment of land at site of ELS/Bilaspur. The contract was 
finally terminated in August 2015 after incurring an expenditure of ` 8.55 
crore. The balance work was awarded to another contractor in January 
2016 at ` 9.74 crore which was yet to be completed. Thereafter, in 
February 2018, SECR engineers surveyed the site (Bilaspur Yard) for 
connectivity of the ELS with main railway track. They found that original 
plan for connecting the loco shed wi th Bilaspur yard was not possible 
because of various issues as also envisaged by the Committee. They 
then proposed to undertake the work in two phases and extended the 
target date of completion to 31 December 2018. 
Audit observed that shifting of the project to Bilaspur without giving 
cognizance to the Committee’s views was not prudent. Besides 
encroachment of land, the operational constraints continued to affect the 
progress of work. Between October to December 2018, only 15 locos 
could be inspected at Electric Loco Shed at Bilaspur as against the 
holding capacity of 100. Only Phase 1 of the work was completed and the 
ELS was attending to goods locos only. The ELS could not maintain 
passenger locos until S&T work of replacement of route relay was 
completed. The work of construction of ELS was delayed by more than 
five years with a cost overrun of `
 27.95 crore.  
In reply, Railway Board accepted (April 2019) that civil tender for the 
portion of Electric Loco Shed had been finalized only after the availability 
of encroachment free land. They further stated that the change of location 
 

 146 
of new electric loco shed from Raigarh to Bilaspur was agreed by Head of 
Departments (HODs) of technical and finance department. They further 
stated that the signaling movement is planned in replacement work of 
route relay interlocking for which tender has already been invited. 
Audit, however, observed that the Committee of JAG officers did not 
recommend (October 2007) Bilaspur as a suitable site for ELS due to 
operational constraints. These apprehensions became true when SECR 
had to face difficulties for connectivity of ELS with main track. As such, 
huge investment in construction of new ELS did not achieve the intended 
benefits. 
3.19 Eastern Railway (ER): Failure of Internal Contro l mechanism 
resulted in non -realization of license fee  from Hindustan Cables  
Limited 
In 1987, Railway provided 15.66  acre land to Hindustan Cables 
Limited at Rupnarayanpur for laying a private siding. Since then, 
neither Eastern Railway Administration pref erred bills for license 
fee nor Hindustan Cables Limited paid the same. In 2016, 
consequent to the approval of Cabinet Committee of Economic 
Affairs, Hindustan Cables Limited was closed down. Railways, 
however, failed to claim their dues within the prescri bed time limits.  
License fee of ` 39.47 crore could not be recovered from Hindustan 
Cables Limited. 
Engineering Department is responsible for the management of all Railway 
Land by its utilization to the best advantage through leasing or 
licensing251. Accor dingly, they grant rights and facilities in respect of 
available land to outsiders or other departments under a lease or license. 
The agreement with the private party was signed by the Engineering 
Department. 
In all cases of licensing of Railway land, the license agreement should 
provide recovery of occupation fees252. Correct billing and its prompt issue 
                                                           
251 Para 1009, 1010 and 1013 of Indian Railways Code for Engineering Department 
252 Para 1025 of Indian Railway Code for the Engineering Department 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 147 
to the concerned parties are the duty of the Accounts Officer. There 
should be no delay in preparation of bills and timely realization of dues 
should be ensured. The executive officers are responsible for rendering 
all possible assistance in securing promptly realization of sums due to 
Railways. The Accounts Officer should advise the Executive Head of the 
office the position of the outstanding bills every month. He should also 
report the position every quarter to the Financial Adviser and Chief 
Accounts Officer253. 
In 1987, Engineering department/ ER leased 15.66 acres of land to 
Hindustan Cables Limited (HCL) at Rupnarayanpur, District Burdwan, 
West Bengal for laying a private siding. A private siding agreement was 
signed with HCL in May 1987. Consequent to the decision of Cabinet 
Committee of Economic Affairs to close down HCL, in September 2016, 
HCL authorities organized a meeting with all their creditors for settlement 
of their dues. Representative of ER also attended the meeting, wherein 15 
days’ time was allowed to them to work out the recoverable amount and 
submit the same to HCL. ER initiated the process of taking back the land 
and other assets at the siding and settle the outstanding dues.  
Audit observed that Engineering department of Asansol Division had 
never raised any bills against HCL since the inception of the siding. Sr. 
Divisional Engineer, Asansol stated that as no documents related to HCL 
were available with them, no license fee could be claimed from HCL 
authorities. After, the above mentioned meeting, the process of 
assessment of outstanding dues was started. Sr. Divisional Engineer, 
Asansol assessed an outstanding amount of `
 39.47 crore 254 against 
HCL. The details of assessment of the dues were forwarded to the Zonal 
Accounts Department only after expiry of 15 days’ time granted for 
preferring the bills. Zonal Accounts Department, subsequently, sent the 
concerned bills to the Chief General Engineer with request for taking 
                                                           
253 Para 1141 of Indian Railway Code for the Accounts Department (Part 1) 
254 land licence fee of ` 38.20 crore for 29 years from 1988 to 2016 and `1.27 crore as 
cost of track (scrap) in the assisted siding of HCL. 
 

 148 
necessary action to realize all dues against HCL. They also requested 
them to take back the land and other assets at the siding, which were still 
in possession of HCL. 
In November 2017, HCL called their creditors to come forward and submit 
their claims along with necessary supporting documents for full and final 
settlement. They gave all their creditors a time up to 1 January 2018 and 
claims received after this date has not been admitted. Audit observed 
that, ER Administration again failed to produce their claims. 
In reply, Sr. Divisional Engineer/ Asansol replied (May 2018) that they 
worked out the dues from HCL for the period from 1988 to 2016. The 
same had been forwarded the same to the Divisional Accounts office for 
recovery. They could not claim the license fee as no relevant documents 
were available with them. On the other hand, Accounts Department 
intimated that in practice, the bills for license fee were raised and claimed 
by the Executive office. The Accounts department only maintained the 
records of the realization. As such, Accounts Office had no information 
regarding any dues from HCL as no bill was raised by Engineering 
Department. 
Thus, Engineering department failed to raise bills towards license fee for 
leasing the land to HCL since 1987. Requisite documents were also not 
available with them. As a result, they could not avail the opportunity 
provided by HCL to its creditors to facilitate the final closure of dues. 
Railways thus, lost the opportunity to recover the unclaimed license fees 
of ` 39.47 crore from HCL. 
There is a need to fix responsibility of the officers who failed to raise bills 
for license fees and produce claims for recovery of dues.     
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 8 November 2018; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
 
Chapter  Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways)  
 
3 

 
149 
Chapter 4 - Rolling Stock  
At Railway Board level, Member, Rolling Stock is overall in-charge of 
Mechanical Department, including Workshops and Production Units (other 
than locomotives).  The works related to Electric Multiple Unit/Mainline 
Electric Multiple Unit (EMU/MEMU) , and electrical maintenance of all 
coaching stock is also the responsibility of the Member Rolling Stock. 
At Zonal level, the Chief Mechanical Engineer (CME) is responsible for 
overall supervision and maintenance of all coaches, wagons etc. Chief 
Workshop Engineer (CWE) is overall in-charge of the workshops which 
undertake maintenance of rolling stock and related items.  Production 
Units are managed independently by General Managers reporting to 
Member, Rolling Stock at Railway Board.   
The total revenue expenditure on repair and maintenance of rolling 
stock255 in workshop during 2017-18 was ` 15396.25 crore 256. Operating 
expenses on rolling stock and equipment was ` 12690.96 crore 257 during 
2017-18. Further, capital expenditure on Production Units of coaches 
during 2017-18 was ` 10,795.27 crore 258. During the year, apart from 
regular audit of vouchers and tenders, 811 offices of the Mechanical 
Department were inspected.   
This chapter includes one all-India long paragraph on Status of 
Commissioning and Utilization of Major Machineries and Plants procured 
by Central Organization for Modernization of Workshops (COFMOW) in 
Indian Railways. In addition, there are three individual paragraphs related 
to Working of Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela and non-commissioning and 
underutilization of machines. 
                                                           
255 including Carriage & Wagons, Plant & Equipment 
256 Sub head 3002-3003 (4) – Repair and maintenance of carriages and wagons for 
2017-18 and Minor head 300 of sub head 3002-3003 (5)– Repair and maintenance of 
Plant and Equipment 
257 Sub head 3002-3003 (6) – Operating expenses – Rolling stock and equipment for 
2017-18 
258 ICF/Chennai, RCF/Kapurthala and MCF/Rae Bareli, RWP/ Bela, RWF/Yelhanka 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
150 
 
4.1 All Zonal Railways: Status  of Commissioning and Utilization of 
Major Machinerie s and Plants procured by COFM OW in Indian 
Railways 
 
4.1.1  Introduction 
Central Organization for Modernization of Workshops (COFMOW) was 
set up in 1978 as a centralized agency of Indian Railways . It is 
responsible for modernization of Railway Workshops and  Production 
Units. Based on the indents received from Zonal Railways/ Production 
Units, COFMOW prepare specification and procured  Machinery and Plant 
(M&P). It also carries  out procurement of specialized M&P and 
responsible for induction of modern workshop  technologies. COFMOW’s 
responsibilities include procurement of M&Ps by selecting manufacturing 
technologies, prepare detailed technical specification and consultancy for 
on-site commissioning . It  was also responsible for co-ordination of 
warranty services  with manufacturers and purchasing special purpose 
M&Ps meant for transfer of technology (T oT) etc. Inspection of M&Ps 
procured by COFMOW is normally done by Rail India Technical and 
Economic Service (RITES). For imported items, these inspections are 
carried out by Indian Railway representatives in Indian High 
Commissions/ Embassies in London, Berlin and Paris.  
Audit, in its earlier Reports, had brought out instances of significant delays 
at various stages259. Earlier reports also include issues such as defe cts in 
machines, non-utilization/under-utilization of costly M&Ps etc. 
COFMOW is headed by Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), who reports 
to the Member (Rolling Stock) at Railway Board. The CAO is assisted by 
three Chief Mechanical Engineers (CMEs), one C hief Electrical Engineer 
(CEE), two Controller of Stores (COS), two Financial Advisors & Chief 
Accounts Officers (FA&CAOs). Technical evaluations of proposals are 
carried out by CME/Deputy CMEs and CEE/Deputy CEE for their 
                                                           
259 submission of indents by the users to COFMOW, finalization of specifications, calling 
and finalization of tenders. 

 
151 
respective departments. CME/Post Contract Management (PCM) is 
responsible for coordinating with consignees and supplier firms to ensure 
timely supply, installation, commissioning of machines.  
In Zonal Railways, Chief Mechanical Engineer (Planning) coordinates 
procurement of M&Ps with COFMOW. At Production Units, Chief Plant 
Engineer (CPE) is responsible for preparing justification, placing indent, 
making arrangement for installation/ commissioning. He is also 
responsible for coordinating with COFMOW and the supplier firms to 
ensure timely supply, installation, commissioning and performance of 
M&Ps. The users/consignees are responsible for making arrangements 
for their timely commissioning and proper utilization for the M&Ps 
procured. 
4.1.2 Audit objectives 
This review was undertaken to assess whether  
 Installation and commissioning of M&Ps was as per schedule? 
 Effective co-ordination mechanism between COFMOW and ZRs/PUs 
was in place to timely rectify defects in M&Ps? 
 M&Ps were utilized optimally and their performance was satisfactory? 
4.1.3 Audit scope, methodology and criteria 
The present audit covered the M&Ps procured by COFMOW and received 
by ZRs/PUs during the period from 2014 -15 to 2017-18 (up to November 
2017260). Records available at Z Rs/PUs in respect of installation, 
commissioning an d utilization of M&Ps were examined . Instructions, 
circulars issued by Railway Board and agreements entered into between 
suppliers and COFMOW were also looked into. Rules and provisional laid 
down in the relevant Codes and Manuals
261 were used as audit crite ria. 
                                                           
260Generally, three to four months ar e provided for commissioning of the machines. 
Hence, in 2017 -18, machines received up to November 2017 have been cove red in the 
present study.       
261 Indian Railways Code for Mechanical Department , Indian Railways Code for Stores 
Department, Material Proc urement Manual , Indian Railway Financial Code , Indian 
Railways Code for Accounts Department 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
152 
Standard Conditions of Contracts, General Conditions of Contracts, Bid 
Documents were also used as sources for audit criteria.  
4.1.4  Sample size 
Indian Railways procured 2,299 machines costing ` 1,675.41 crore 
through COFMOW during 2014 -15 to 2017 -18. Out of 2,299 machines, 
2,041 machines costing ` 1,552.89 crore were received during April 2014 
to November 2017. Criteria for selection of sample and number of 
machines selected for detailed review in sample are given below: 
Table 4.1 -  Criteria and details of sample selected 
S. 
no. 
Cost of M&P Total number of M&Ps 
procured by COFMOW 
during 2014-18 
(Up to November 2017) 
Selection 
percentage 
Number of 
M&Ps  
selected 
1. Above ₹ 5 crore 102 100 102 
2. More than or equal to ₹ 
one crore but less than 
or equal to ₹ five crore 
163 75 138 
3. Below  ₹ one crore  1,776 10 258* 
 Total 2,041  498 
*Number of machines is higher as minimum 20 machines (or actual no. of machines if the 
total machines procured during the review period are less than 20) were selecte d in each 
ZRs/PUs. 
Out of 2,041 numbers of M&Ps, 498 numbers of M&Ps (24.40  per cent) 
costing ` 1,130.99 crore was selected for test check in Audit. Z Rs/PUs 
wise details of total machines procured and selected for study are given in 
Annexure 4.1. Audit ob served that out of above 498 machines, 70 
machines (14 per cent) were procured through import and  428 machines 
(86 per cent) were procured from indigenous sources. 
Audit findings 
4.1.5      Installation and commissioning of M&Ps in Zonal Railways 
and Production Units 
The M&P should  be installed/commissioned within the prescribed time 
(three to four months) after its receipt. Thereafter, Proven Test Certificate 
(PTC) is issued by the Railways for each machine commissioned verifying 
that the machine is capable of working as per the defined capacity. 

 
153 
Graph 4.1: Time taken from date of indent to receipt of machine 
Audit reviewed the time taken in receipt of machines by Zonal 
Railways/PUs against the indents placed by them to COFMOW. The data 
showed that only 12.65 per cent  (63 out of 498) machines could be 
received by the u sers within one year from the date of placing indent s. 
Remaining machines were received after one to five years  or more from 
the date of placement of indents by the users. Significant delays in receipt 
of machines by the users/consignee was indicative of the long drawn 
process being followed by COFMOW in processing of indents.  
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), the Ministry agreed that there 
were cases of delay in procurement of machines. They stated that a 
number of machines purchased by the COFMOW were highly 
sophisticated and needed detailed market research for preparing 
specifications. Also, due to lack of readiness of sites by the consignees, in 
some cases the firms have to put on hold the supply of the machine and 
reschedule delivery.      
Ministry of Railways needs to direct COFMOW and Zonal 
Railways/Production Units (Consignees) to streamline their activities 
involved in preparation of specifications, market research and vendor 
development. Consignees also need to ensure readiness of sites for 
expeditious installation, commissioning and utilization of machines.        
0 50 100 150
Up to  six months
Six months to one year
One year to two year
Two years to three years
Three years to four years
Four years to five years
More than five years
Information Not Available
8
55
133
98
60
54
65
25
No. of machines

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
154 
Audit reviewed the status of installation and commissioning of 498 
machines in Zonal Railways/Production Units . Audit observed that a 
number of machines could not be utilized optim ally due to non /delay in 
installation/ commissioning after receipt. Delays  in proving out of 
machines after commissioning  was also noticed. This resulted in 
unproductive/ infructuous expenditure or blocking of capital. Status of 
installation, commissioning and proving out of the machines is as follows: 
Table 4.2 - Status of installation, commissioning and proving out of the machines  
Particulars  Number  Cost (` in crore) 
Total number of machines reviewed in Audit 498 1130.99 
Machines received but not 
installed/commissioned262 
16 97.81 
Machines installed but not commissioned263 8 54.88 
Delay in installation of machines 39 178.14 
Delay in commissioning of machines 154 358.81 
Non-proving out of machines 14 25.50 
Delay in proving out of machines 275 538.52 
Details of these machines are given in the following paragraphs: 
4.1.6      Machines received but could not be installed/ 
commissioned 
Out of 498  selected machines,16 machines valuing ` 97.81 crore could 
not be installed/commissioned even after lapse of fo ur to 27 months of its 
receipt by the users. These machines included wheel lathe machines, 
painting systems, Electric Overhead Travel (EOT) crane, simulator -in-
motion etc. The reasons for delay in installation/commissioning were  
 non-availability of funds for construction of infrastructure, 
 delay in initiating the process of getting No Objection Certificate (NOC) 
from civil authorities,  
 delay in permission from forest department for cutting trees,  
 non-availability of clear site,  
 non-providing of material for track linkage etc.  
                                                           
262 Machines which were to be installed and commissioned on the same date  but were 
not installed and commissioned.  
263 Machines which were to be installed and commissi oned at different dates  but were 
not installed and commissioned.  

 
155 
All these reasons were mainly on account of railways and impacted timely 
installation/commissioning of such high value machines. Audit observed 
that eight264 out of 498 selected machines costing ` 54.88 crore were 
installed, but coul d not be  commissioned. The delays ranged from  one 
month (27 days) to 37 months from the date of installation . The reasons 
were non-proving out of machine during trials as per tender conditions, 
incomplete fitment of machine parts by the firm, non -completion of 
infrastructure work etc.   
Out of 498 selected machines, in 39 machines (7.83 per cent) costing ` 
178.14 crore, there was delay in installation ranging from 34 days to 19 
months. 
 In 15 cases, firms were responsible for delay in installation of the 
machines. The main reasons included non-providing equipment, non-
arrival of engineers, slow progress of work and delay in preparation of 
sites.  
 In 12 cases, installation of machines was delayed on the Railway’s 
accounts. Railways failed to provide the site, power supply 
arrangements and material/infrastructure required for installation of 
machines.  
 In six cases, firms and railways both were responsible for delay in 
installation of machines.  
 In six cases, reasons for delay in installation of machines were no t 
found on records. 
Further, after installation of machines there was delay of one to 38 
months in commissioning of 15 4 machines (3 0.92 per cent ) costing ` 
358.81 crore. The delay was more than six months for 49 machines, as 
can be seen from Graph 4.2.  
                                                           
264 DMW-1, DLW-1, RCF-2, SECR-2, SER-1 and WR-1  

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
156 
Audit observed that there is no 
online or regular monitoring 
mechanism at COFMOW to 
track the progress of 
installation and commissioning 
of the machines.  Delay/non-
installation/non-commissioning 
of machines is known to them 
only on receipt of the reports 
from the users concerned.  
Review of reasons for the 
delays in commissioning of 
154 machines showed that 
 In 70 cases, firms were 
responsible for delay in commissioning of the machines. The main 
reasons included delay in preparation of sites, defects in mach ines, 
delay in attending the defects, non-arrival of engineers.  
 In 40 cases, commissioning of machines was delayed on the 
Railway’s accounts. Railways failed to handover the clear sites in time; 
delay in construction of shed, delay in power supply, non -providing 
material for trials.  
 In 30 cases, firms and railways both were responsible for delay in 
commissioning of machines.  
 In 14 cases, reasons for delay in commissioning of machines were not 
found on records. 
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Mini stry stated that most  of the 
machines pointed out by Audit have now been commissioned. They 
added that more and more machines were now being procured on turnkey 
basis with annual maintenance contract. This would avoid delays in 
future. Financial Commission er (Railways) commented that whole 
purpose of procuring the machine is defeated if the same is not installed, 
Graph 4.2: Delay in commissioning of 
machines 

 
157 
commissioned and proved out in scheduled time. Hence, stage-wise 
proper monitoring of machine is required and should be ensured through 
e-procurement system (IREPS). It was stated that for monitoring various 
stages from indenting to commissioning and utilization of machines, a 
computerized system is being developed and will start functioning by the 
end of 2019.       
4.1.7 Non-issue/delay in issue of Proven Test Certificate  
Proven Test Certificate (PTC) is required to be issued by the consignee 
for each machine commissioned and working satisfactorily. Audit 
observed that 14 machines costing `
 25.50 crore were commissioned one 
month to 21 months back , but PTC was not issued (31 March 2018). 
Further, in almost 55 per cent  machines (275 machines out of 498 
selected machines reviewed), PTC was issued after a period of delay of 
one month to 23 months. Reasons were frequent failure of components 
and  delay in attending defects/ repair works by the firm . In a number of 
cases, Railway could not provide clear site/complete infrastructural works 
or kept machine under observations /monitoring performance before 
issuing the PTC etc.  
As a result of delay in all stages viz. installation, commissioning and 
issuance of PTC, machineries could not be put to use effectively. 
Firms/suppliers also did not adhere to their responsibilities. COFMOW 
took up the issues related to delay/non-installation/non-commissioning 
and rectification of defects of machines . However
, no concrete penal 
action such as recovery of liquidated damages or black listing the 
defaulter firms was taken.   
In reply, Ministry of Railways stated (8 April 2019) that some of machines 
had already been succes sfully proved out and PTCs issued. In some 
cases, PTCs were kept pending to deliver the stipulated requirements for 
which firms had already been advised. 
In case of delays attributable to the 
firm, the delay was endorsed in PTCs appropriately and LD invari ably 
levied as per the terms and conditions of Contract. 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
158 
In ER, Audit observed that stage wise delay w as not properly recorded in 
the PTC. Delays were observed265 in respect of 10 machines , but the 
same was not recorded in all the machines. P roper recording of delays on 
the part of supplier is essential for recovery of LD. In the absence of 
appropriate record, LD could not be levied. 
4.1.8 Rectification of defects in machines installed/ commissioned 
4.1.8.1 Detection of d efects at the time of commissioning or  
immediately thereafter 
As per the terms  and conditions 266, the contractor shall replace or repair 
the goods (machine) or such portion thereof as is rejected by the 
purchaser free of cost. The defects should be brought to the notice of the 
contractor within three months of their being first discovered during the 
warranty period. 
Audit noticed that as on 31 March 2019 
 85 out of 498 selected machines ( 17.07 per cent ) costing ` 227.96 
crore developed defects immediately after and up to six months from 
the date of commissioning.  
 In 11 cases, machines costing ` 16.03 crore, remained out of order for 
a month to three and a half years due to non -rectification of defects 
(up to March 2018).  
 Co-ordination mechanism between consignee and COFMOW was not 
effective to ensure timely rectification of the defects.  
 65 out of 498 selected machines (13.05 per cent ) costing ` 290.88 
crore developed defects on a number of occasions during the period of 
review. These machines had frequent breakdowns (ranging from two 
to 18 times267) after their commissioning 
                                                           
265 ranging from one to 201 days in completion of foundation work, , delays of seven to 
753 days in the commissioning of 14 Machines 
266 Clauses 3401 to 3410 of General Conditions of Contract of Bid Document (Part I) 
267The machines, where break downs occurred on ten or more times, included Wheel 
Lathe Surface CAMC in JUDW/NR (18 times), CNC Surface Wheel Lathe in Jamalpur 
Workshop/ER (14 times), Two S pindle Fine Boring Machine in DMW/NR (14 times) and 
Guillotine Shearing Machine Double Column in Coach Rehabilitation Workshop, 
Bhopal/WCR (10 times). 

 
159 
Audit examined the role of COFMOW in cases of failure of the firms in 
timely and proper installation/commissioning of machines and also 
non/delay in rectification of defects. Audit , noticed that no concrete penal 
action such as levy of liquidated damages or getting the defaulter firms 
black listed etc. was taken. Firms did not respond to the  above issues/ 
requests of the COFMOW/Railways after supply of machines . 80 per 
cent268 of the cost of machines had already been paid to the fi rm on 
receipt of machine by the user/consignee.     
4.1.8.2 Non-rectification of defects within the stipulated time 
Rules269 stipulate that the supplier shall cover all replacement and repairs 
of new M&P under warranty within two weeks270. Audit observed that  
 Out of 498 selected machines, in 124 instances in respect of 74 
machines, defects were not rectified within stipulated period of two 
weeks.  

 In 30 instances, the rectification was done beyond three months from 
the date of communicating the defects to the firms.  
In reply, Ministry of Railways stated (8 April 2019) that defects noticed at 
the time of commissioning or immediately thereafter are teething 
problems, which do occur when machines are put into operation. 
COFMOW approaches the firms to attend/recti fy the machines.  Penal 
action as per terms and conditions of the contract is invariably initiated 
against the firms  for failing to rectify the defects. Instructions were also 
issued to the consignees to get rectify the defects by the outside sources 
and deducting the cost from the suppliers ’ 20 per cent dues lying with the 
Railways.  
4.1.9 Rejection of plant and machinery  
Rules provide for rejection, if any, within 90 days of commissioning of the 
machine271. Further, the contractor shall refund any advance/p art 
                                                           
268Clause 1801 and 1802 of General Conditions of Contracts of Bid Documents (Part I)  
269 Para of 3405 of the General Conditions of Contract 
270 One week in certain contracts  
271 Clause 2102 of the Bid Document (Part I) of Accepted Tender 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
160 
payment received by him in respect of the rejected stores within 21 days 
of the receipt of the intimation from the consignee about the rejection of 
the stores 272. In default, the Purchaser may take steps against the 
contractor for recovery of such price. 
Audit observed that  
 A large number of machines (almost 17  per cent) developing defects 
immediately or soon after commissioning . However, Railways did not 
resort to the option of rejection of machine in many cases.  
 Three CNC Vertical Turning Lathe machin es273 costing ` 4.70 crore 
failed to clear proving out tests at the time of commissioning . Finally, 
the  machines were rejected by the consignees after 15 to 31 months 
from the date of commissioning and lying at premises of consignee 
without replacement. As such, by not taking timely action to reject the 
machines, Railways have lost the opportunity to recover the amount 
from the supplier firm except recovering performance bank guarantee.   
Defects in a significant number of newly commissioned machines 
immediately after commissioning indicated lack of proper inspection on 
part of Inspecting Authorities. No representative from the user/consignees 
is present while the inspection is being done . As such , they are able to 
identify the defects/problems only when the machine reaches their 
premises and is installed and commissioned. Due to lack of diligence on 
part of Railways to enforce the penal clause, the firm/supplier did not 
honor their responsibility of attending to the defects.  
As a result, a large number of ma chines are put to use after 
significant delays caused by the firm’s/supplier’s inability to rectify 
the defects. COFMOW/Railway Administration also failed to timely 
reject the machines as a result of which the cost could not be 
recovered from the suppliers.  
                                                           
272 Clause 2105 of the Bid Document (Part I) 
273 DLW-1, WCR-1 and DMW-1 

 
161 
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Ministry stated that, specification, 
components etc. are mainly checked during RITES inspectio n. However, 
actual functioning of machine at firm’s premises is not possible without 
installation. For inclusion of con signee’s representative in the Inspection 
team, the Ministry stated that the same is not possible as users may not 
possess the required technical expertise. However, users are sent for 
inspection in some specific cases. 
However, it is felt that defects arising immediately after installation and 
commissioning raises a question on the quality of inspection done. 
Railways need to ensure that such cases do not arise due to lack of 
proper inspection by a qualified person. The Ministry also needs to 
impress upon the consignees to take timely action for rejection of 
machines and recover cost thereof as per the conditions of the bid 
documents.  
4.1.10 Utilization and performance of machines procured  
Audit assessed whether the machine was properly utilized for the 
intended purpose. Audit findings are given below: 
4.1.10.1 M&Ps lying idle after its commissioning  - Of 498 machines 
checked, 61 machines costing ` 222.20 crore had been lying idle after 
commissioning. During 2014 -18, these 61 machines were kept idle for 
2,75,793 hours. The reasons for keeping these machines idle were mainly  
 non-availability of adequate workload (5 8.94 per cent  of total idling 
hours); 
 non-availability of skilled manpower to operate the machine (three per 
cent of total idling hours); 
 other reasons such as non -availability of power, machine breakdown, 
incomplete site etc.  
4.1.10.2 Shortfall in outturn with respect to rated capacity of machine 
- Out of 498 selected machines, 122 machines (24.50 per cent ) were 
meant for production purposes , the outturn of which could be quantified 
with respect to their rated capacity. Audit observed that most of the newly 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
162 
procured machines were being utilized below their rated capacity. Loss 
due to shortfall in production worked out in 81 274 out of 122 machines 
during 2014-18 was ` 37.49 crore. In 89 275 out of 122 cases, reason for 
shortfall with reference to the rated capacity was non -availability of 
required workload. Other reasons for shortfall in production were frequent 
breakdown of machines, parallel running of  old machines, inadequate 
training for operating the new machines and other reasons. 
Thus, a large number of machines were procured without having 
adequate justification of workload for them. As a result, these were kept 
idle for long periods and were not used for the purpose for which these 
were procured.  
Thus, a large number of machines could not be utilized optimally 
due to non -availability of adequate workload. There was shortfall in 
outturn of the newly installed machines with reference to the rated 
capacity as the machines were not being utilized optimally. Many 
machines were also lying idle for various other reasons such as 
non-procurement of ancillary machines in time, shortage of material, 
non-availability of skilled man powers/operators etc.  
In reply, Ministry of Railways stated (8 April 2019) that working hours of 
the machines depend on many factors like availability of specified raw 
material, manpower, availability of power supply, adequate load, 
breakdown period etc. Thus, there was under -utilization of a majority of 
machines due to non -availability of workload. This also proves that while 
preparing the justification for procurement of the machines, scale of 
workload to be catered to was not assessed properly.   
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Ministry accepted that non -
availability of raw material for the sophisticated machines was an area of 
                                                           
274 In 41 cases, loss could not be worked out as utilization of machines was for different 
nature of jobs. 
275Some of these machines included Broad Gauge CNC Surface Wheel Lathe (ER), 
CNC surface wheel lathe (SR), CNC Vertical Turning Lathe (SCR), CNC Axle Turning 
Lathe (ECoR), Wheel Press -500T (WR), Coil Spring Scragging and Load Deflection 
Test Machine (WCR) 

 
163 
concern. They stated that special emphasis would be given to the quality 
and specification of input raw material for optimal utilization of 
sophisticated machines like robotic machines.  
4.1.11 Conclusion 
There were significant delays in receipt of machines by the 
users/consignee from the date of placing of indents for the same. The 
delay in all stages viz. installation, commissioning and issuance of  PTC 
caused machineries could not be put to use effectively. Railways did not 
ensure availability of necessary site and infrastructure . As a result, the 
machines could not be installed and commissioned timely in many cases. 
Firms/suppliers also did not adhere to their responsibilities and installation 
and commissioning of machines was delayed. 
COFMOW does not have any mechanism to track the progress of 
installation and commissioning of the machines . The delays are known to 
them only when the users inform them so. Further, no representative from 
the user/consignees is present while the inspection is being done . As a 
result, Railways are able to identify the defects/problems only when the 
machine reaches their premises and were installed/ commissioned. 
Defects in a significant number of newly commissioned machines were 
noticed immediately after commissioning. Railways did not take 
appropriate action to get the defects addressed by the firms/suppliers in 
compliance to the bid conditions. They also did not enforc e/ invoke the 
penal clause. As 80 per cent  of the payment was already made by the 
railways to suppliers on receipt of machines by the users/consignees, the 
firm/supplier did not show interest in attending to the defects. As a result, 
a large number of mach ines were put to use after significant delays 
caused by the firm’s/supplier’s inability to rectify the defects. COFMOW/  
Railway Administration also did not take action to reject the machines in a 
timely manner and failed to recover the cost from the suppliers.  
A large number of machines could not be utilized optimally due to non-
availability of adequate workload. There was shortfall in outturn of the 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
164 
newly installed machines with reference to the rated capacity as the 
machines were not being utilized optim ally. Many machines were also 
lying idle for various other reasons such as non -procurement of ancillary 
machines in time, shortage of material and  non-availability of skilled man 
powers/operators. 
4.1.12  Recommendations 
1. The Centralized procurement agency,  COFMOW, failed to 
procure/install/commission machines timely. Railways need to 
analyze whether the system of centralize d procurement for major 
machineries and plants is working. 
2. Railways may decentralize the process of procurement of plant 
and machinery t o some selected field offices on a pilot basis. 
Railways may compare costs to assess whether de -centralized 
procurement has price advantage vis-à-vis COFMOW.  
4.2 Working of Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela  
 
4.2.1 Introduction  
Rail Wheel Plant (RWP), Bela wa s established to meet the growing 
demand of wheels for rolling stock in the Railways. The plant is situated at 
Bela in Saran district of Bihar and is spread over a land area of 295 acres. 
The plant was set up at an approx imate cost of ` 1417.23 crore. With a 
capacity to manufacture 1,00,000 cast steel BOX’N wagon wheel discs 
per annum , the plant was declared as a production unit from 1 August 
2014. 
Indents for loose wheels were sent to Railway Board by Zonal Railways. 
Based on this, instructions for supply of the same received at RWP . 
Accordingly, loose wheels manufactured in RWP/Bela were sent to 
Workshops of these Zonal Railways. RWP has no Axle Shop  and Wheel 
Set Assembly Shop. Loose wheels in excess of requirement of Workshop 
of Indian Railway produced f rom Bela are dispatched to Rail Wheel 
Factory, Yelehanka (RWF) for assembly of wheel sets.  

 
165 
Railway Board fixes annual targets for production of wheel. This was 
based on capacity of the plant, man power available and requirement 
received from Production Units and Zonal Railways. In addition, Durgapur 
Steel Plant (DSP), a unit of Steel Authority of India Ltd. (SAIL), a 
Government Public Sector Undertaking also manufactures and sell 
wheels to Indian Railways. RWP is under the administrative control of 
Member M echanical at Railway Board Level and is headed by Chief 
Administrative Officer. 
Against the projection in the DPR of 801 276 Group C category staff, Men-
in-Position at RWP as of March 2018 was 708 277 staff. The total staff cost 
incurred during the last three years was ` 137.44 crore.  
Audit assessed the planning for setting up the plant at Bela, achievement 
of targets of production and efficiency of working of the plant during the 
three-year period of 2015-16 to 2017-18. For this purpose, Audit reviewed  
 Detailed Project Report (DPR) for establishment of RWP prepared by 
RITES; 
 minutes of the Wheel Tyre Axle (WTA) quarterly meetings held at 
Railway Board; 
 various instructions/guidelines related to planning and execution of the 
Plant issued by Railway Boards.  
Audit Findings 
4.2.2 Justification for setting up of RWP 
Rail Wheel Plant, Bela was planned (July 2005) to setup at an estimated 
cost of `
 470.09 crore at Bela in Chappra (Bihar). Initially, the plant was 
meant for producing 50,000 loose BOX’N wheels annually.  The DPR for 
this plant was prepared (October 2004) by RITES. The DPR assessed 
requirement of 51,226 cast BOX’N loose wheels for maintenance purpose 
by the year 2011-12. For setting up of this plant, RWF was to provide 
necessary technological and managerial support. They were to impart 
                                                           
276 641 direct staff and 160 indirect staff 
277 541 direct staff and 167 indirect staff 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
166 
initial training to the staff. Envisaging shortages in supply of wheels, the 
plant capacity  was proposed to be increased to 1,00,000 wheels per 
annum in January 2006.  
At the planning stage, the main thrust in support of sett ing up of the RWP 
was saving in cost by avoiding import of BOXN loose wheels. Audit, 
however, noticed that there had been no import of BOXN wheels since 
the Plant project was planned. RWP also started production of coaching 
BG wheels from 2016-17 onwards. 
Audit analysed the supply of loose wheels (BOXN and BG Coaching) 
through RWP and other two production units (RWF and DSP) during 
2015-16 to 2017-18 to Zonal Railways.  
Table 4.3 – Indent and supply of wheels by RWF, DSP and RWP 
Unit 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Indented Supplied Perce-
ntage of 
Excess/ 
short 
supply 
Indented Supplied Perce-
ntage of 
Excess/ 
short 
supply 
Indented Supplied Percentage 
of Excess/ 
short supply 
RWF 61107 63789 4.39 35299 36462 3.29 45535 45937 0.88 
DSP 28545 20442 -28.39 30975 27522 -11.15 34261 26583 -22.41 
RWP 14590 12071 -17.27 14261 12593 -11.70 5453 5523 1.28 
Total 104242 96302 -7.62 80535 76577 -4.91 85249 78043 -8.45 
The above data shows that 
 The then existing Production Unit, RWF was able to meet the demand 
for Indian Railways as a whole.  
 During the three years, DSP had short supplied by 11 to 28 per cent 
against the indented quantity. On the other hand, RWF made excess 
supply of one to four per cent.  
 Railway Board decides the share to be produced by each wheel plant 
by d istributing the indented quantity amongst them. Audit observed 
that the share of wheels to be produced by RWF was reduced 
significantly during 2016-17 (42 per cent) and 2017-18 (25 per cent) in 
comparison to 2015-16. The production capacity of RWF was two lakh 

 
167 
wheels per annum. However, the indented quantity was 69 per cent to 
82 per cent below than its capacity.  
Thus, requirement of Indian Railways for loose wheels would easily 
be fulfilled by the existing production units (RWF). As such, 
justification for setting up of new wheel plant was not adequate.  
4.2.3 Setting up of RWP 
The setting up of the plant was planned on Turnkey/ Engineering, 
Procurement and Construction (EPC) basis. The contract for setting up of 
plant was awarded (August 2008) to M/s Larsen and Toubro (L&T) at a 
total cost of ` 1047.59 crore 278. The firm was required to set up the plant 
within the period of 24 months (i.e. by July 2010) from the date of award 
of contract. However, there were delays in completion of the work by the 
firm. Nine extensions were given to the firm till September 2018, out of 
which eight extensions were given on railway account. 
The firm was required to give Performance Guarantee Test (PGT) of the 
plant as a whole. This was to be proved out in an integrated manner for 
six consecutive days. As per the condition of contract executed with L&T, 
any defects/ deficiencies observed during PGT would be completed 
before Final Acceptance Certification. For PGT, maximum three chances 
were to be given to the contractor failing which liquidated damage was to 
be imposed.  
Audit observed that the first PGT, held in July 2012, failed due to non-
functioning of some machines. However, no attempt was made by the 
L&T for next PGT. Audit further observed that for carrying out PGT, RWP 
hired M/s MECON 279 and PGT was held in September 2013. No reasons 
for hiring the third party for PGT were found on record. Railways 
communicated acceptance of the PGT conducted by MECON to L&T and 
made payment of ` 1092.73 crore. Further, the Final Acceptance 
                                                           
278 revised to ` 1133.09 crore 
279 A PSUs of Government of India under Ministry of Steel 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
168 
Certification of the plant was not issued by railways . RWP/Bela was 
declared as production unit from August 2014. 
Thus, RWP was declared Production Unit without issuing Final 
Acceptance Certification. 
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) that th e justification for 
setting up of RWP was a decision taken at Railway Board level and 
implementing agency was Workshop Project/ Patna. They further stated 
that RWP has no role in this regard. Railway Board has not given any 
response in this regard as of 20 June 2019. 
4.2.4 Procurement of Machinery and Plants 
Audit observed that instead of the getting the Performance Test done by 
the original firm, RWP got the same done through MECON . Further, 
without issue of Final Acceptance Certification , the plant was de clared as 
Production Unit. This indicated that the work of setting of the plant was 
not completed comprehensively . The plant was declared operational 
without ensuring required Plant and Machinery in proper working 
condition. In this regard, Audit observed the following: 
(i) Warranty of M&P expired even before commissioning of the 
plant 
The commissioning certificate of the machines was given as and when 
the machines had been installed in the Plant . Warranty of the machines 
started from the date of issue of commi ssioning certificate. Audit found 
that warranty of 114 out of 136 Plant and Machinery expired , even before 
commissioning of the plant. The warranty of 19 Plant and Machinery  
expired between August 2014 and December 2014 . The details of 
remaining three M&Ps were not found on record.  
As such, production of wheel was started in RWP from 2015 -16 and 
the warranty of all the machines had expired before 2015-16. 

 
169 
In reply (April 2019), no specific response has been given by RWP 
Administration in regard to expiry of warranty of M&P before the 
commissioning of the Plant. 
(ii) Machines procured in excess of requirement  
Four Spruce Grinding (SPG) machines were procured and commissioned 
(March 2013) from HYT Engineering company private limited, Pune. The 
cost of the machine was ` 80.39 crore and warranty was till March 2014. 
The machine was to be used for grinding the plate, spruce and riser pads 
on cast steel wheel. The working efficiency of an SPG machine was 90 
seconds/wheel. With a plant installed capacity of 1,00,000 wheels, 
machine hours required for SPG would have been 2,500 hours
280 based 
on its rated capacity. However, total yearly machine hours available as 
per availability of machines were found as 2,64,00 hours
281. As such, one 
SPG machine with one standby machine would have been sufficient to 
carry out the production target of the plant as per installed capacity. Thus, 
purchase of two additional SPG machines was not warranted. The 
expenditure of ` 40.19
282 crore on these machines was unfruitful.  
(iii) Underperformance of M&P  
Audit observed that one SPG machine was continuously under 
breakdown since July 2015. During 2017-18, the break down period of 
three SPG machines was 2042 out of total 17760 hours (11.49 per cent) 
of working. Audit, however, found that no AMC was finalized for 
maintenance of these machines. RWP stated (June 2018) that due to high 
rate offered by OEM, the AMC had not been initiated. Absence of product 
specification drawing and design of spare parts and lack of interest by 
OEM to provide spares, were the main reasons for frequent break down 
of machines.  
                                                           
280 100000 wheels x 90 sec /3600 per wheels 
281 275 days x 24 hrs x 4 machines 
282 ` 80.39 crore/4 x 2 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
170 
Audit also noticed that two machines, viz., SPG and CNC Hub -cutting 
machines283 did not perform as per the benchmarks and rework was 
required on the wheels processed. This resulted in excess expenditure of 
` 1.63 crore on rework of 19017284 wheels during 2015-16 to 2017-18.  
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) that Workshop Project/ 
Patna was the procuring agency of SPG machines. No AMC could be 
finalized for these machines. RWP/ Bela, was itself mana ging the 
maintenance and all four machines were functional. RWP accepted that 
reliability of SPG machines was not satisfactory. They stated that they 
planned to procure Sprue Wash as available in RWF, Yehlanka. 
However, RWP Administration did not respond the procurement of excess 
SPG machines than its requirement. They also did not provide the 
reasons for underperformance of SPG and CNC Hub-cutting machine. 
(iv) Purchase of system without assessing its requirement 
An Automatic Storage and Retrieval System (ASRS)  consist of a variety 
of computer-controlled systems for automatically placing and retrieving 
loads from defined storage locations.  The purchase order of ASRS was 
issued in April 2012 at a cost of ` 2.43 crore. The same was delivered in 
November 2012. Aft er completion of more than 90 per cent  of the 
installation work, RWP/Bela decided (November 2015) that the ASRS 
facility would not be very effective for RWP.  
RWP/Bela stated (November 2015) that purchase of ASRS was 
finalized by Workshop Project Organisat ion/Patna. They stated that  
attempts were being made to transfer the machine to other production 
units of Railways. However, the transfer did not materialize. The system 
remained uninstalled/ unutilized till date (July 2018).  
                                                           
283 used in Mould Room for finishing the wheel at post stage of good chem istry wheel 
machines/ equipment 
284 Cost of rework on wheel @ ` 857.60 and 3323, 6368 and 9326 wheels were 
reworked upon in 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively 

 
171 
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) that the ASRS was 
commissioned in June 2018. However, it was not clarified whether the 
same was being utilized for the purpose. 
4.2.5 Excess consumption of electricity  
For the purpose of Preliminary Acceptance Tests (PAT), L&T had to prove 
the running of full plant in an integrated manner. Accordingly, they 
requested Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)/ Workshop Project for 
arrangement of power through Bihar State Electricity Board (BSEB). They 
agreed to reimburse the cost of actual power consumed through KWH 
meter already installed in all LT panels of unit substation.  
Audit noticed that RWP had not assess ed the actual need/requirement of 
power. They entered (June 2011) into an agreement with BSEB for supply 
of electricity to the Plant for 26.67 MVA maximum contract demand under 
HTS (III) category (132 KVA) . The firm (M/s L&T) was demanding power 
supply for testing some Plant and Machinery. However, the connection 
obtained by RWP from BSEB was sufficient to run plant on almost full 
capacity. During July 2011 and December 2012, Railway paid a sum of ` 
51.17 crore to BSEB for electricity consumption. Against this, only a sum 
of `
 4.70 crore was received from M/s L&T for actual unit consumed 285. 
Thus, during July 2011 to December 2012 RWP incurred a loss of ` 46.48 
crore286 by taking excess electricity without any actual requirement. 
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) the excess consumption 
of electricity was due to  
 Running of Plant below the installed capacity due to less target 
allotment by Railway Board, 
 Two shifts working at the plant, 
 Availability of less skilled staff  
                                                           
285 As per the contract agreement the power consumed in the plant during PAT should 
be debited to M/s L&T. 
286 Difference of amount paid to BSEB and amount recovered from L&T (` 51.17 - ` 4.70 
crore) 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
172 
This indicates that allotment of targets much less than the installed 
capacity and production of wheels accordingly was one of the main 
reasons for underutilization of plant and excess consumption of electricity. 
This also raises a question on the justification of setting up of the plant.  
4.2.6 Delay in starting production of BG wheels 
Initially, RWP was planned (September 2005) as a single product factory 
for ma nufacture of BOX’N wheel. There was no demand for BOX’N 
wheels beyond 25,000 to 30,000 per year.  Accordingly, d uring the 
meeting of Wheel Tyre Axel (WTA), Railway Board advised (August 2012) 
RWP/Bela to explore the possibilities to produce BG coaching wheels.  
Audit noticed that RWP was capable of starting production of BG 
coaching wheels with the existing equipment merely by purchasing some 
tools and tackles. However, RWP started the process of purchasing tools 
and tackles for the production of BG coaching  wheels in January 2016. 
These were received in RWP from June 2016 onwards and casting of BG 
coaching wheels started from September 2016.  
Audit observed that 
(i) There was d rastic reduction in yearly requirement of BOXN loose 
wheels at plant installation stag es. This indicated that assessment 
made at DPR stage and at the time of enhancement of installed 
capacity were not justified. 
(ii) WTA have given repeated advices to switch over to produce BG 
coaching wheels due to low demand for BOXN wheels . However,  
RWP initiated the process for the same after abnormal delays.  
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) that allotment for BG 
coaching wheels was made by Railway Board only in 2nd quarter of 2016-
17. RWP started manufacturing BG wheels in 2015 -16 and starte d 
dispatching in September 2016. 
The above clearly indicates that though Railway Board advised RWP/Bela 
to explore the possibilities to produce BG coaching wheels way back in 
August 2012, the allotment for production was done only in 2016 -17. 

 
 
173 
RWP also delayed their preparation in the absence of an allotment by the 
Railway Board. 
4.2.7 Production Targets and Achievements   
Zonal Railways sent the demand to Stores Directorate of Railway Board 
by 31 st July of the previous year for wheels . Based on this,  production 
target of RWP was fixed every year  by Railway Board. Wheel Type Axle 
(WTA) allotment meetings are held every quarter by Additional 
Member/Production Unit (Railway Board) with the representation by 
RWP. The requirements of the RWP along with constraint s faced by 
RWP in the product process are highlighted during the meeting.  
The year wise position of WTA allotment  and target and achievements 
during 2015-16 to 2017-18 was as follows: 
 
From above data Audit observed that 
i) The target as per production plan of the plant was 25,000 wheels . 
However, in WTA meeting, the target was reduced by 42 per cent (14590 
wheels) during 2015-16. The plant failed to achieve the reduced target by 
17 per cent and the actual production of wheels remained 12,051.  

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
174 
ii) During 2016-17 also, the target of the plant was reduced to 9 ,951 
BOXN and 4 ,310 BG wheels against the production plan (12 ,500 BOXN 
wheels and 10 ,000 BG wheels). The reduction of target in BOXN wheels 
was done due to poor demand. This time, RWP manufactured excess 
BOXN wheels by 48 per cent (14,679 wheels). This resulted in piling up of 
stock of 4503 BOXN wheels after actual dispatch of 10 ,176 wheels for 
use. Similarly, the production of BG wheels was excess against the 
reduced target of 4 ,310 wheels by 113 per cent . Th is also resulted in 
piling up of stock of 6 ,782 BG wheels after actual dispatch of 2 ,417 
wheels for use. 
iii) During 2017 -18, the plant produced 13,750 wheels (lower by 41 
per cent) against the WTA allotment of 23,271 wheels (both BOXN & BG). 
For BOXN and BG wheels, the same was lower by 82 per cent and 28 per 
cent respectively. 
Thus, the plant did not adhere to the target/ allotment fixed by WTA. This 
resulted in piling up of stock in one year and low production in subsequent 
year. Further, the target fixed for  production of wheels by RWP was 70 
per cent to 89 per cent lower than its production capacity (50,000 wheels 
per year). As such the installed capacity of the plant remained grossly 
underutilized. On the other hand, wheels were continuously being 
procured from outside agencies (DSP) and also produced in existing plant 
(RWF).  
In reply, RWP stated (June 2018 and November 2018) that the existing 
manpower is sufficient to cast 50,000 wheels. However, production of 
wheels depends completely on allotment by Rail way Board. Reasons for 
less allotment by WTA despite demand for more allotments were not 
available in records of RWP/ Bela.  Less allotment of wheels in WTA 
meetings in comparison to the capacity would be the reason for under-
utilization of manpower. 
 

 
175 
4.2.8 Excess consumption of input material and electricity for 
production of wheels 
a) In the DPR of the RWP prepared in 2004, quantity to be used of 
different materials during the production of wheels were estimated. This 
included scrap steel, Graphite Mould Blanks, Liquid Oxygen, Liquefied 
Petroleum Gas etc.  The estimated quantity of these materials was based 
on production data of RWF/Yehalanka. Audit analyzed the quantity of 
consumption of these materials during the production of wheels in RWP 
during 2015-16 to 2017-18.  Audit noticed that the materials were 
generally used in excess of the estimated quantities as detailed below: 
Table 4.4 – Excess consumption of material during casting of wheels 
Material Required as per norms/DPR Actual 
consumption  
Excess 
consumption 
Remarks 
Scrap 
Steel 
Each heat requires 21 MT scrap 
steel for casting 27 wheels. As 
such, for casting of 75940 
wheels during the three years 
period, 41848 MT steel scrap 
required  
49608 MT 6922 MT  This excess 
scrap steel 
consumed could 
produce 
additional 14596 
wheels. 
Graphite 
Mould 
Blanks 
(GMB) 
1.88 GMB (48.5” GMBs) 
required for casting of 1000 
BOXN wheels  
2.60 to 3.03 
GMB per 1000 
BOXN wheels 
0.72 to 1.15 
GMB per 1000 
BOXN wheels 
Cost of excess 
GMB consumed - 
` 1.53 crore 
3.60 GMB (43.5” GMBs) 
required for casting of 1000 BG 
coaching wheels 
3.80 to 4.37 
GMB per 1000 
BG coaching 
wheels 
0.20 to 0.77 
GMB per 1000 
BG coaching 
wheels 
Cost of excess 
GMB consumed - 
` 1.02 crore 
Liquid 
Oxygen 
(LOX) 
20 litres i.e. 22.8 kg of LOX per 
wheel. As such, for casting of 
75940 wheels during the three 
years period, 1731 MT LOX 
required 
2936 MT 1205 MT Cost of excess 
LOX consumed - 
` 1.65 crore 
Liquefied 
Petroleum 
Gas (LPG) 
24 kg of LPG per wheel. As 
such, for casting of 75940 
wheels during the three years 
period, 1822.560 MT LPG 
required 
5007.355 MT 3184.795 MT Cost of excess 
LPG consumed - 
` 17.49 crore 
Excess consumption of input material in the production indicated 
inefficiencies in the processes being followed by RWP. This also led to 
blocking of capital. 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
176 
b) In the DPR, it was assessed287 that RWP would require 385 lakh 
KWH of power to manufacture 50,000 wheels yearly. Of this, 80 per cent 
was to be consumed in Wheel Processing Shop and rest 20 per cent for 
allied services/facilities. Furnace of Wheel Shop a lone contributed to 60 
per cent i.e. 231 lakh KWH of the consumption. It was further estimated 
that for casting each wheel, 463 288 KWH of electricity would be required in 
furnace.  
Audit noticed that records for energy consumption for wheel production 
purpose ( shop-wise) and non -production purposes were not maintained 
by RWP. Actual consumption of electricity of all the three furnaces at 
RWP/Bela during the period 2015-16 to 2017-18 was 500.73 lakh KWH in 
comparison to the norms of 351.6 289 lakh KWH. Thus, 149.13 lakh KWH 
of energy was consumed in excess in these furnaces during the last three 
years. The financial implication for this excess consumption was ` 11.79 
crore.   
c) The norms of power consumption was 108.45290 KWH per wheel 
consumption on ancillary serv ices. However, the actual consumption per 
wheel at RWP/Bela varied from 110 KWH to 212 KWH during 2015 -16 to 
2017-18291. Audit observed that the average consumptio n of energy per 
wheel during this  period was 883.80 KWH per wheel , which was also 
much above th e norms of 108.45 KWH per wheel. The financial 
implication of this excess consumption of electricity was ` 35.68 crore 
during 2015-16 to 2017 -18. Audit further assessed that even if RWP had 
produced 1,00,000 wheels per annum consuming the same amount of 
electricity, the consumption per wheel would still be 171 KWH . This is 
much higher than the norms of 108.45 KWH per wheel worked out on the 
                                                           
287 based on trend of consumption of electricity at RWF/Yelahanka, Bangalore, 
288 23140019.4 KWH/50000 wheels 
289 @ 463 KWH per wheel during the three years period 
290 Reference Detailed Project Report (Table 8.3.4). Rate calculated based on 1100 00 
projected production of wheel during the three years period.  
291 At RWP/Bela separate meter was provided for furnace but no meter reading for 
consumption of electricity in other shops (other than furnace) was recorded. Thus, taking 
into consideration the 20 per cent (100-80) of norms as stated in DPR , audit worked out 
the consumption of electricity in wheel shop (excluding furnace). 

 
177 
basis of actual consumption pattern on ancillary services at 
RWF/Yelahanka.   
RWP produced 47,901 wheels during the period of review, but 
consumed all major input material as well as electric way above the 
norms. This indicated, inefficiencies in the systems and processes 
being followed by RWP. There is a need to review the processes and 
procedures being followed by RWP . RWP need to analyse reasons 
for consuming excess quantities of input material and electricity for 
production of wheels and address the same.  The cost of production 
of wheels in-house should always be less than cost of wheels 
procured from the market. 
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) the reasons of excess 
consumption of materials was rejection on higher side at the initial stage 
of this nascent plant. They stated that with increase in production target, 
staff expertise, this will show downward trend. They also stated that the 
rejected wheels were sent for re-cutting and used as scrap in electric arc 
furnaces. During 2015-16 to 2017-18, about 17 per cent of the total wheel 
casted were rejected and sent for re-cutting. Audit, however, noted that 
the rejection rate in RWP was on higher side as audit seen that in similar 
type of wheel plant (Rail Wheel Factory, Yelhanka), the average rejection 
rate was only 5.80 per cent during the last three years.  
4.2.9 Environmental issues 
A. Clearances from State Pollution Control Board 
RWP had obtained all the statutory clearances needed in respect of 
environment from the competent authorities. However, authorization for 
collection, reception, treatment, storage, transport and disposal of 
hazardous waste expired on 26 June 2017. RWP was yet to renew the 
same. Audit further noticed that RWP was yet to take action on the 
following issues: 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
178 
(i) The furnace emits fumes which creates pollution. To contain the 
same a fume extraction system was to be installed at a cost of ` 
21.48 crore. The same was yet to be installed (July 2018). 
(ii) Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) of 500 m 3/day capacity was 
constructed and installed by M/s L & T and trial run of the same was 
also done. However, the same remained defunct due to not having 
full load capacity as residential quarters were yet to be constructed. 
Recycle and reuse of waste water after adequate treatment was not 
being done at RWP/Bela. Plant/shop floor was not connected with 
STP and no arrangement was made for effluent treatment of the 
effluent released from the plant. 
B. Non-disposal of Hazardous Waste 
RWP was to operate a facility for collection, storage, transport, reception 
offering for sale and disposal of hazardous waste. They were required to 
store the hazardous waste for a period not  exceeding 90 days. They were 
also required to maintain records of sale transport, storage, recycling and 
reprocessing of such waste and makes records for inspection.  
Audit noticed that RWP did not take any action to dispose of hazardous 
waste since commi ssioning of the plant. Hazardous waste like hydraulic 
oil, engine oil, gear oil measuring 2580 litre and asbestos measuring 13 6 
kg were lying undisposed since commissioning of the plant in 2010 -11. 
This was  against the provision of p ollution norms authoriz ed by Bihar 
State Pollution Control Board (BSPCB).  
In reply, RWP Administration stated (April 2019) that the installation of 
fume extraction system was in the proposal stage (April 2019). They 
further stated that the hazardous material remained un -disposed as no 
agency was available in Bihar. The issue has been taken up with BSPCB 
by RWP Administration during November 2016 to January 2019. 
However, no response has been received from BSPCB. Railway Board 
need to intervene and resolve the issue to avoid stor age of hazardous 
waste material at the plant. 

 
179 
4.2.10 Conclusion 
Before setting up RWP, the requirement of Indian Railways for loose 
wheels were being fulfilled by the then existing production unit, RWF and 
Durgapur Steel Plant. RWF itself was capable of handling production of 
wheels for Indian Railway requirements as a whole. RWP, Bela was 
however set up without adequate justification. During the past three years, 
the quantity for production assigned by the Railway Board to RWP, was 
much less than its installed capacity. In view of this, RWP was asked to 
start production of coaching BG wheels in 2012. They started production 
of BG wheels in 2016 only. 
L&T was awarded the work of setting up of the plant. However, they coul d 
not complete the work on time. RWP got the Performance Test done 
through MECON instead of the original firm. The Plant was declared as 
Production Unit without issue of Final Acceptance Certificate. Thus, the 
work of setting up the plant was not completed comprehensively. The 
plant was declared operational without ensuring required Plant and 
Machinery were in proper working condition. By the time production of 
wheel was started in RWP from 2015-16, the warranty of all the machines 
had expired. 
RWP produced 47901 wheels during the 2015-16 to 2017-18, but 
consumed all major input material as well as electricity above the 
prescribed norms. This indicated, inefficiencies in the systems and 
processes being followed by RWP. It also did not take adequate action to 
address air, water and land pollution and disposal of hazardous waste.  
4.2.11 Recommendations 
1. Optimal utilization of capacity of RWP need to be ensured 
keeping in view the expenditure incurred in setting up of the 
plant.  
2. RWP needs to analyse reasons for consuming excess 
quantities of input material (scrap steel, Graphite Mould 
Blanks, Liquid oxygen, LPG) and electricity for production of 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
180 
wheels. Corrective action to address the same  need to be 
taken. 
3. RWP should take necessary action to address environmental 
pollution including disposal of h azardous waste as per 
prescribed norms. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 9 January 2019; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
4.3 COFMOW and RCF: Infructuous expenditure due to non -
commissioning of cut to length machine 
Rail Coach Factory imported a cut -to-length machine through 
COFMOW in October 2012. The machine was installed in May 2013. 
Thereafter trials were conducted. However, the trials for 
commissioning were not successful as the machines was not 
capable to cut the coi ls to accuracy set out as per the bid and did 
not meet the standards set in the contract. In March 2014, RCF 
proposed to COFMOW to reject the machine. However, COFMOW 
chose to have protracted correspondence with the firm and did not 
follow the contractual provisions to reject the machine in a timely 
manner. They lost the opportunity to recover the cost of machine 
supplied by the firm. There is no legal remedy available with the 
Railways except for encashing the bank guarantee. The expenditure 
of ` 12.05 crore spent on purchase of the machine has thus become 
infructuous. 
Rail Coach Factory (RCF), Kapurthala placed an indent (March 2008) for 
procurement of a Cut to Length machine 292 on replacement account with 
Centre for Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW).  Railway Board 
approved the procurement proposal in May 2008. Global tenders invited 
by COFMOW were opened in July 2010 . The  letter of acceptance was 
issued (October 2011) on Dimeco Alipresse, France through their Indian 
                                                           
292 The machine is meant for cutting metal sheets which are used in fabrication of 
coaches 

 
181 
agent, at a cost of Euro 16,91,000 plus ` 1.44 crore towards indigenous 
costs.   
Terms and conditions of the contract for imported items stipulated 80 per 
cent payment of net FOB value through irrevocable Letter of Credit 
against submission of inspection certificate and dispatch document. The 
shipment was to be done within 30 days of receipt of shipping documents. 
The balance 20 per cent payment was to be done through bank transfer 
after installation, commissioning and issue of Proven Test Certificate. 
The machine was received in October 2012 and RCF paid `
 12.05 crore 
to the firm. Installation and commissioning of the machine was to be done 
within 120 days of its receipt in RCF i.e. by February 2013.  However, the 
machine was installed in May 2013. Thereafter trials were conducted. 
However, the trials for commissioning were not successful. The machine 
was not capable to cut the coils to accuracy set out as per the bid and did 
not meet the standards set in the contract. In March 2014, RCF proposed 
to COFMOW to reject the machine. However, COFMOW arranged for a 
tripartite meeting (June 2014) and continued further trials till June 2016 
without any successful results. Finally, RCF rejected (September 2016) 
the machine and sent the rejection advice to the firm, their Indian agent 
and COFMOW. COFMOW again tried to organise a joint inspection 
(January 2017 and April 2017). The same was not successful, as the firm 
did not come forward to take remedial action. 
Clause 2102 (Bid Document Part I) of Accepted Tender deals  with 
consignees right of rejection. The clause stipulated that rejection, if any, 
should be made within 90 days of commissioning of the machine. The 
trials for the machine (which should have been installed and 
commissioned by February 2013) commenced only by May 2013. In 
terms of the contract, Railways should have rejected the machine by this 
date (May 2013). However, COFMOW chose to have protracted 
correspondence with the firm. The machine did not meet the required 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
182 
standards set out in the contract documents. As such, t he machine could 
not be commissioned till date.   
In April 2013, Railway Board issued instructions regarding the procedure 
to be followed in handling cases of rejection of machine after supply. Even 
this could not be enforced by COFMOW and RCF, as the due dates as 
per the contract had already elapsed. At present, Railways do not have a 
legal ground for rejecting the machine. Now rejecting the machine after a 
lapse of five years at this late stage is legally not tenable. COFMOW 
unilaterally declared the machine as commissioned in Aug ust 2017, 
despite the same being rejected by RCF, the end user. As verified by 
Audit in September 2018, the machine was yet to be commissioned.  
Clause 2105 (Bid Document Part I) stipulate d the rules for refund of 
advance/part payment received by the contr actor in respect of the 
rejected stores. As per the clause, the contractor shall within 21 days of 
the receipt of the intimation from the consignee about the rejection of the 
stores refund the amount to the Purchaser . In default, the Purchaser may 
take ste ps against the contractor for recovery of such price. Audit 
observed that Railways have not resorted to such course of action . 
Therefore, they have lost the opportunity to recover the amount from the 
supplier firm.  The only remedial course for the Railway s is to encash the 
Bank Guarantee for Euro 169,100 plus ` 14.4 lakh, which is valid till 30 
June 2019.   
In response, Chief Plant Engineer/RCF agreed (July 2016 and April 2017) 
that the machine was yet to be commissioned. Railways have lost the 
opportunity to recover the cost of machine supplied by the firm, as they 
did not reject the same in a timely manner . The machine is yet to be 
commissioned and no legal remedy is available with the Railways except 
for encashing the bank guarantee. The expenditure of ` 12.05 crore spent 
on purchase of cut-to-length machine has thus become infructuous.  

 
 
183 
There is a need to fix responsibility on the officers responsible for non-
commissioning of machines. Also, for failure of timely rejection of the 
machine, responsibility may also be fixed.   
In reply, no specific remarks have been furnished (June 2019) by Railway 
Board in response to the audit observations. They stated that efforts wer e 
being made to commission the machine. The fact remains that the 
machine is yet to be commissioned even after six years of its receipt. 
4.4 Northern Railway (NR): Infructuous expenditure on purchase of 
special purpose machine for Bogie Bolster and Bogie Frame 
Welding 
Special Purpose Machine for robotic welding of Bogie Bolster and 
Bogie Frames was received in Mechanical Workshop/ Amritsar (NR) 
in April 2013. The same was commissioned in March 2015. Audit 
noticed that the machine was utilized for only 211 working days 
(21.25 per cent) out of available 993 days. The machine was meant 
for robotic  welding of the bogie side frame, body bolsters sub -
assemblies. However, as the input material was not as per the 
required specification, most of the welding work was being 
performed manually. As a result, expenditure of ` 4.81 crore on 
procurement of the Special Purpose Machine was rendered 
infructuous.  
Bogies are critical part of coaches and wagons. Mechanical Amritsar 
Workshop, Northern Railway manufactures wagons (BOXNHL and 
BVCM), bogie frames of wagons and coaches, Centre Buffer Couplers, 
Head Stocks and side walls of coaches etc. In September 2006, the 
Workshop proposed to procure one Special Purpose Robotic Machine for 
welding of Bogie Bolster and Bogie Frame. The machine was meant to 
cater to the increased requirement of ICF bogie frames for manufacturing 
of coaches and wagons.  

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
184 
The proposal was 
sanctioned in the 
Machinery and Plant 
Programme for the 
year 2007 -08293. 
Amritsar Workshop 
placed an indent 
(May 2007) on 
Central Organization 
for Modernization of 
Workshops 
(COFMOW). In May 2010, COFMOW placed an order on an Indian firm294 
for supply of the machine. The machine was received in Mechanical 
Workshop/Amritsar in April 2013 and  commissioned in March 2015 . The 
Proven Test Certificate was issued in July 2015.  Audit observed a  delay 
of 436 days in com missioning of the machine. Of this, delay of 408 days 
was on account of the Railways. T hey did not complete the flooring on 
time. They also added circular welding in Brake Beam Assembly and LHB 
Bogie Frame subsequently in the scope.   
The machine has four work stations 295 and can robotically weld five 
different types of items. Log Book of the Machine showed that during April 
2015 to July 2018, the machine was utilized for only 211 working days 
(21.25 per cent) out of available 993 days . Comparison of output o f the 
machine with the total work done in the Workshop indicated that work 
carried out on the machine was very significantly low. The machine was 
meant for robotic welding of the bogie side frame, body bolsters sub -
assemblies. However, most of the welding work was carried out manually. 
                                                           
293Item No. 1001 of 2007-08 for ` 3.55 crore 
294M/s Precision Automation and Robotics Industries/Pune 
295Welding works of Bogie Bolster for 13 Ton Non -AC, Bogie Bolster arrangement for Air 
Spring Bogie, Linke Hofmann Busch ( LHB) Bogie Side Frame (LH and RH), Bogie Side 
Frame (of 13 Ton ICF Bogie) and Bogie Bolster of Stainless Steel BOXNHL wa gons can 
be done on the four work stations. 
Figure 4.1: Bogie Bolster frame  

 
185 
Utilization of the machine for various welding works was negligible, as can 
be seen from the Table below: 
Table 4.5 
Item of work Period Total Output of 
the Workshop 
(in numbers) 
Output through Special 
Purpose Machine (in 
numbers) 
Percentage 
to the Total 
Bogie Side Frame (of 
13 Ton ICF Bogie)   
April 2015 to 
July 2018 
4044 66 1.63 
Bolster for BOXNHL 
wagons 
April 2015 to 
July 2018 
2728 05 0.18 
Bogie Bolster for Linke 
Hofmann Busch (LHB)  
Coaches 
August 2017 to 
July 2018 
30 07 23.33 
The main reasons for under-utilization of the machine were as follows: 
a. The input tack welded 296 material offered for welding by the railways 
was not as per the required specification. Against the tolerance limit of 
+ 1 mm, the input tack welded components were found out of 
tolerance by 4 to 5 mm.  This impacted the productivity of the machine 
and components were not getting proved out in given time.     
b. Railways added circular welding in Brake Beam Assembly and LHB 
Bogie Frame  subsequently in the scop e. The firm did not complete 
programming for the same and these were being done manually. 
c. Gas sensors check the pressure of the gases used for welding the 
components. The sensor was yet to be installed;  
d. For operating the machine in three shifts, at least three operators are 
required. However, only one operator was available for operating the 
machine. 
The issue of underutilization of machine was taken up with the Chief 
Works Manager, Amritsar Workshop in January 2017. In reply, Railways 
stated (July 2017) that the machine would be utilized for fabrication of 
complete LHB bogie frame and LHB bogie bolster for RCF. Audit 
reviewed the Log Book of the Machine after July 2017 and did not notice 
any improvement in its utilization. A total of 30 LHB bogie bolsters for LHB 
                                                           
296After items to be welded together have been positioned as required, generally by 
clamping them on suitable fixtures, tack welds are used as a temporary means to hold 
the components in the proper location, alignment, and distance apart, until final welding 
can be completed. 

Chapter 4 Report No19 of 2019  (Railways) 
 
 
186 
Coaches turned out in the Workshop between July 2017 and July 2018 . 
Of these, o nly seven bogie bolsters and four LHB side frames were 
welded on this robotic welding machine. 
The matter was referred to Ministry of Railways in November 2018. 
Ministry, in its reply, stated (July 2019) that  
 Touch sensing programme, which was not available in the robotic 
welding, has now been added by the firm. This will resolve the problem 
of tolerance during tack welding of material components. 
 Gas sensor, which was n ot provisioned in accepted tender, has now 
been installed.  
 Presently, only one shift is working on the Robotic welding. More staff 
is being trained to operate the machine in three shifts.     
 Outturn of the machine is on increasing trend. Most of the ICF bogie 
frames and all the LHB frames are being welded on this machine. 
Utilization of the machine is being monitored and efforts are being 
made for its full utilization.     
However, Audit observed that from August 2018 to April 2019, only 19 per 
cent of th e capacity of the machine was utilized in welding of 13 Ton 
Bogie Side Frames, LHB Side Frames and LHB Bogie Bolster. Thus, the 
machine procured at a cost of ` 4.81 crore is still being grossly 
underutilized.                 

 
187 
At Railway Board level, Director General (S&T) is overall in-charge of 
Signalling & Telecommunication (S&T) . The post has been re-designated 
as Member (S&T) in April 2019. He reports to Chairman Railway Board. 
At Zonal level, the Chief Signalling and Telecom Engineer (CSTE ) is 
responsible for overall supervision and maintenance of S&T assets.   
For enhancing efficiency and safety in train operation, modern signaling 
plays a very vital role. The Signalling Department handles induction and 
maintenance of signalling systems . The Telecom Department is 
responsible for telecommunication services in Railways. 
The expenditure on repair and maintenance of plant and equipment of 
S&T department during the year 2017-18 was ` 2879.56 crore 297. A 
capital expenditure of ` 1256.82 crore was incurred on creation of S&T 
assets. During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers and tenders, 
183 offices of the Department were inspected.   
This chapter includes a review on ‘Implementation of Train Protection 
Warning System (TPWS) in Indian Railways’ . In this paragraph, Audit 
reviewed planning, implementation assessment of results of trials of 
TPWS. The present performance of the trains nominated for working with 
TPWS was also studied.  
                                                           
297 Minor Head 500, 600 and 700  of Sub head 3002 and 03 (5)  – Repair and 
maintenance of plant and equipment 
Chapter 5 – Signalling and Telecommunications  

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
188 
 
5. Implementation of Train Protection Warning System (TPWS) in 
Indian Railways 
 
5.1 Introduction  
Safety measures on Indian Railways is a continuous process which 
envisage accident prevention and mitigation directed towards continuous 
reduction in risk level to its customers . This is done by adopting new 
technologies and bringing improvement in asset reliability by reducing 
dependency on humans . A new technolog y, Train Protection Warning 
System (TPWS) has been introduced to prevent accidents due to over 
speeding and passing signal at danger. 
TPWS aims to ensure safety of rolling stock, rail infrastructure and 
passengers. The system is based on European standards of European 
Train Control System  (ETCS)298. It is a variant of Auxiliary Warning 
System (AWS), i .e. a train protection system prevalent in European 
countries especially in United Kingdom (UK) Rail Network . The system 
has components installed in locomotives as well as alongside the tracks. 
It provides automatic protection measures for running trains . It activates 
brakes on any train that passes a signal at more than the prescribed 
speed. It is assessed to be in situation of danger . The purpose of the 
TPWS is to reduce the number of accidents and minimize the incidents of 
Signals Passed at Danger (SPADs) by providing the facilities of Over -
Speed Sensor and  Train Stop. The sensors provided in the system gets 
activated in unusual circumstances when train passes a signal at danger 
or is over -speeding and brakes are applied. This helps avoid accidents 
and derailments. The system has two main components:  
a) Track side equipment, which are installed alongside the tracks and 
includes 
                                                           
298 The European Train Control System (ETCS) is the signalling and control component 
of the European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS). It is a replacement for 
legacy train protection systems and designed to replace the many incompatible safety 
systems currently used by European Railways. 

 
189 
 Balise 299; and 
 Line side Electronic Unit (LEU) 
b) On-Board equipment, which are installed on the locos and include 
 On Board Computer (OBC) 
 Man Machine Interface  (MMI) provided to the driver of the loco, 
which includes switches, push buttons, indication lamps and 
horn/hooter fitted on control panel for use in emergency.   
 Antenna and its Balise Transmission Module fitted to 
receive/transmit signals from the equipment fitted alongside the 
tracks. 
 Speed and distance measurement unit (sensors); and 
 Brake interface  
ETCS Level I – In ETCS level I, the track side equipment is interfaced 
with the signal. Details such as gradient, permanent speed restriction, 
distance of next stop signal are coded in the signal. These are transmitted 
through data cable to balise fitted on the sleeper at the center of the track. 
When any locomotive fitted with the antenna travel over the balise, it 
starts transmitting the coded message. The coded message is picked by 
the antenna fitted at the bottom of the loco through radio frequency link. 
The message is then sent through Balise Transmission Module to 
onboard computer for processing the data. The speed profile derived from 
the coded message is displayed at MMI in the form of permission speed 
and distance to travel. In case, the driver exceeds the permissible speed, 
an audio visual warning is given by the system advising driver to control 
the speed.  The TPWS intervenes by application of emergency brakes. 
The system continuously calculates the safe maximum speed for each 
train with cab signaling for the driver.   
The train is necessarily brought to 
halt when the driver exceeds the permissible speed by a predetermined 
value. 
                                                           
299 A Balise is an electronic beacon or transponder placed between rails of a railway as a 
part of automatic train protection system. 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
190 
ETCS Level II  – In ETCS Level II, continuous data transmission is done 
by Global system for Mobile communication – Railways (GSM -R) i.e. 
digital mobile radio communication to provide protection. It is a radio -
based system which displays signaling and move ment authorities in the 
cab. The train continuously sends data to the Radio Block Centre (RBC) 
to report its position and direction. Euro balises are used as passive 
positioning beacons. Trains refine their position with additional sensors 
such as accelero meters, odometers or radar. RBC controls all train 
movements in the covered area for the purpose on the trackside.  
5.2 Audit Objectives 
The audit objective was to evaluate the steps taken by the Railways to 
assess the appropriateness of TPWS as system for  train protection. Audit 
reviewed planning, implementation assessment of results of trials of 
TPWS. The present performance of the trains nominated for working with 
TPWS was also studied. 5.3 Audit Criteria 
5.3 Audit criteria 
Audit used the following source as audit criteria for the review: 
 Railway Board and RDSO instructions, letters and circulars relating to 
TPWS issued from time to time.    
 Recommendation of High level committee issued by RDSO (Report on 
issues relating to introduction of Train Protectio n Warning System on 
electric locomotives). 
 Annual Works Programme of Indian Railway for concerned Zonal 
Railways for TPWS work. 
 Action Plan 2022 (Signal and Telecom) issued by Railway Board. 
5.4 Audit Findings 
Train Protection and Warning System (TPWS) was  implemented in North 
Central and Southern Railways (NCR and SR) on a trial basis after being 
sanctioned during 1999 to 2005. Audit findings on the same are discussed 
below: 

 
191 
5.4.1 Planning and implementation of trials of TPWS 
Following a spate of serious train accidents in Delhi - Mathura section, 
Commissioner of Rail Safety (CSR) recommended to provide safety 
devices in high density routes to prevent accidents. In 1998, a Committee 
of three Heads of Department examined the reasons for these accidents 
and recommended provision of safety devices to be installed in the 
section. Accordingly, based on ETCS system, Railway Board sanctioned 
the work for the implementation of TPWS in North Central Railway (NCR) 
and Southern Railway (SR) in the following sections: 
Table 5.1 – Details of sections where TPWS trials were undertaken 
S. 
no 
Name of the section Route 
kms 
North Central Railway 
1 Delhi - Mathura (work done Hazrat Nizamuddin  - Agra 
Cantonment) 
188 
2 Ghaziabad - Tundla-Kanpur 414 
3 Kanpur - Mughalsarai 351 
4 Agra - Gwalior 521 
Southern Railway 
5 Chennai Central -Gummidipundi section 50 
In the four sections of NCR, the works of implementation of TPWS were 
sanctioned during 1999-2012 at a total cost of ` 47.88 crore.  In Delhi
-
Mathura, the work was physically completed in January 2018 and the 
system is under AMC. However, in other three sections, the work is yet to 
start, as the tenders have not been finalized.  Indian Railway Project 
Management Unit (IRPMU)
300 was the nominated agency for execution of 
TPWS i n selected locos and track side equipment in these sections . In 
respect of Chennai Central – Gummidipundi section of SR, the contract 
was awarded in February 2005 and TPWS was commissioned in May 
2008.  
                                                           
300 IRPMU (Indian Railway Project Management Unit) changed its name to NCRPU 
(North Central Railway Project Unit) 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
192 
The status of implementation of TPWS in the two secti ons301, where the 
work has been completed, was analyzed by Audit. The results are given 
in subsequent paragraphs.  
5.4.1.1 Delhi-Mathura section 
a) Change in scope of work leading to increase in estimated cost 
and frequent change in timelines 
Audit reviewed the records related to implementation of TPWS in Delhi -
Mathura section . Audit noticed that during June 1998 to August 2017, 
Railway Board revised the scope of the work a number of times. This 
increased the cost from ` 48.98 crore to ` 87.44 crore and also shifted the 
timelines for the implementation of the system from June 2006 to January 
2018. There were delays on part of the Railways in freezing the scope of 
the work. These delays were avoidable and well within their control.  Audit 
observed that 
 In June 1998, Railway Board conveyed their decision for trial of TPWS 
with ETCS level II 302 system. The work 303 was included in the Works 
Programme for the year 1999 -2000 of Central Railway with an 
anticipated cost of ` 48.98 crore.  The scope of the work included 
provision of ETCS level II, preferably with GPS based system fitted 
equipment. The system was to be installed in 30 electric and five 
diesel locomotives for trial on Delhi-Mathura section. 
 In January/February 2004, Railway Board revised its decision . It 
directed that the work of TPWS may be taken up with ETCS Level I 304 
system and extended up to Agra.  However, the reasons for revision 
from ETCS level II to ETCS level I were not found on record. The new 
work with a revised scope was included in the Works Programme  of 
                                                           
301Delhi – Mathura section of NCR and Chennai Central – Gummidipundi section of SR 
302 ETCS Level 2 is a radio -based system which displays signalling and movement 
authorities in the cab. The train is continuously sending data to the Radio Block Centre 
(RBC) to report its exact position and direction. 
303 Delhi-Mathura-Trial of European Train Control System 
304 ETCS Level 1 can be easily superimposed on the existing national signalling system 
and provides cab signalling. Movement authorities can be gr anted through fixed and 
switchable Euro Balises 

 
193 
2003-04 of NCR. Against the proposed estimate of ` 67.14 crore given 
by NCR in May 2005, Railway Board in June 2005, approved an 
estimate of ` 60.44 crore.  The agreement was executed with IRPMU 
in March 2006. As per the agreement, the date of commissioning of 
the work was June 2006.  
 IRPMU awarded (June 2005) the comprehensive work 305 in New Delhi 
– Agra Cantonment section to M/s Union Switch and Signal Pvt. 
Limited306 at a cost of ` 51.17 crore.  The work was scheduled for 
completion in one-year time. However, 16 extensions were given and 
the timelines were extended up to September 2016. These extensions 
were given as there were a number of changes in the scope of the 
work. TPWS component were de-installed from WAP 7 locos and re-
installed in WAP 5 locos. The trackside equipment was shifted due to 
conversion of interlocking system in the section. There were changes 
in drawings and design and delay in their approval by Railways. There 
was also delay in training of crew members.  
 In July 2010, Railway Board further revised the scope of the work and 
decided to provide infill balises 307 on Hazrat Nizamuddin-Agra 
Cantonment section for improvement of the system. The detailed 
estimate was revised to ` 80.23 crore in October 2010.  
 The work 308 for providing infill balises was awarded (May 2012) to the 
sole bidder 309. The completion period was of eight months. The work 
was completed in August 2015 after giving six extensions to the 
contractor. The extensions were granted to the contractor as there 
were delays in signing the contract agreement and delay in approvals 
                                                           
305 Survey, design, supply, installation and commissioning of loco borne equipment and 
line side equipment for TPWS system in Delhi- Agra Cantonment section of NR and 
NCR 
306 later name changed to M/s Ansaldo STS Transportation System India Private Limited  
307 Infill balises are interfaced to signal through line side equipment. These are provided 
in advance of the signal to update the movement authority in advance. These baliese 
cannot effect change of mode of On Board system.  
308Survey, Design, Supply, Installation, Testing and commissioning of Infill balise for Agra 
Cantonment –Hazrat Nizamuddin section 
309 M/s Ansaldo STS Transportation System India Pvt. Ltd. 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
194 
of track crossing.  Railways also changed the infill balise layout and 
cable route plan. 
 In January 2015, the detailed estimate was once again revised from ` 
80.23 crore to ` 87.44 crore. The speed for the trials were to be done 
was increased from 130 kmph to 160 kmph. There was also a change 
in the signaling system from Absolute to Automatic for the 3 rd line 
between Palwal and Mathura section . This led to increase in number 
of track side equipment. Railways also de cided to set up a repair lab 
for track side equipment at Agra. 
Frequent changes in scope of work led to increase in cost of the 
work. It also shifted the date of completion from June 2006 to 
January 2018. 
b) De-installation of TPWS equipment from WAP 7 loc os and 
their re-installation in WAP 5 locos  
The trials were to be conducted on WAP 7 electric locos, which have a 
maximum speed of 130 kmph. Audit observed that Railways did not 
analyse the success or otherwise of the trials undertaken. However, 
RDSO, in December 2014 decided to undertake fresh trials on WAP 5 
locos having a maximum speed of 160 kmph.  These were to be done for 
a newly introduced Gatiman Express between New Delhi – Agra 
Cantonment section. In August 2017, New Delhi – Mumbai special train 
was also identified for trials at the speed of 160 kmph.  
In October 2011, Railway Board identified the 35310 WAP 7, locos in which 
TPWS equipment (ETCS Level I) were to be provided.  TPWS equipment 
were fitted in these 35 WAP 7 locos up to April 2017. For unde rtaking 
trials on trains at the speed of 160 kmph, RDSO and Railway Board 
advised to install TPWS equipment in WAP 5 locos.  
Audit noticed that NCR did not provide TPWS component in WAP 5 locos. 
They de-installed (from October 2014 onwards)  TPWS component from 
eight WAP7 locos and re -installed them in WAP5 locos. As of March 
                                                           
310Ghaziabad/NR-17, Lalaguda/SCR-14, Ajni/CR-4 

 
 
195 
2018, they have completed de-installation and re-installation work in 
seven locos at a cost of ` 2.11 crore. 
Audit observed that the decision of Railway Board and RDSO to 
undertake trial in New Delhi- Mumbai Special Train was not justifiable . 
The Special Train was to be run between New Delhi and Mumbai (1354 
kms). TPWS enabled portion on this section was however, restricted to 
Hazrat Nizammuddin to Agra Cantonment (187 kms) only. 
Thus, the decision of Railway Board and RDSO to undertake trials in 
WAP 5 locos without conclusion of successful trials on WAP7 locos 
was not prudent. The decision entailed expenditure on de-
installation and re-installation of equipment. Further, undertaking 
trials only on a part of the section (New Delhi-Mumbai) limited its 
utility.     
c) Issue of acceptance certificate without taking the final 
acceptance from the users 
IRPMU is an implementing agency for the work with users being divisional 
formations of NCR and NR. The analysis of the trials was the 
responsibility of RDSO. Based on inputs from divisional formations, users 
and RDSO Railway Board was the final authority to determine success of 
trial. The work of commissioning of TPWS in the section was to be 
completed by June 2006, which was extended up to September 2016.  
Audit observed that Provisional Acceptance Certificate (PAC) was issued 
by IRPMU in March 2016. However , no documents were found on record 
which could indicate the date of successful commissioning of TPWS . In 
reply to Audit, IRPMU stated (February 2018) that PAC has been issued 
as per contract agreement on completion of successful installation . The 
commissioning of the system was in various phases. Audit, however, 
could not find evidence that indicate that Railway Board or RDSO had 
considered the trials to be successful. No assessment of success or 
otherwise of the trials conducted was carried out at the level of the users 
(NR and NCR) as well.  IRPMU also issued the Final Acceptance 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
196 
Certificate (F AC) on 17 January 2018 without obtaining acceptance 
certificates from the concerned DRMs and GMs i.e. the users. IRPMU 
thus, unilaterally considered the trials as successful, without taking into 
consideration inputs/feedback from the users. 
The trials were being going on for so many years . However,  the 
technology/ product envisaged for train protection was yet to reach 
operationalization stage.  No evidence was found on record to prove 
that the commissioning of the TPWS on this section has been 
successful. 
d) Observations of Electrical department on TPWS trials 
Sr. Divisional Electrical Engineer/  Operations, Agra Cantonment, NCR 
conveyed (August 2016) the following observations to Chief Electrical 
Engineer, NCR on trials of TPWS on the nominated trains over this 
section: 
 Starting up procedure of TPWS was too complicated and needed 
simplification. 
 Nearly 50 per cent  of the time of loco pilot was spent in looking 
towards the Braking Curve Area (BCA) of the display unit in the locos . 
The design needed a change s o that loco pilot is not required to look 
into the BCA at all. 
 TPWS did not responded when a train was passing in a signal BLANK 
condition. This feature needed to be added. 
 No tolerance was available in speed, while negotiating the signal in 
one yellow/Permanent Speed Restriction /entry/exit in loop line etc . In 
case of over speeding by even 0 .1 kmph, the system applied 
Emergency Break to stop the train.  
 When the signal changed  from Red to Yellow /Double Yellow /Green, 
the system did not permit the loco pilot s to pick up speed until loco 
passed the infill balise or switchable balise ahead . This caused loss of 
time. Similarly, when signal changed from Green /Double 

 
197 
Yellow/Yellow to Red , the system was not updating till it passed infill 
balise or switchable balise. 
 A speed of 30 kmph is permitted while entering the loop line in a 
movement of through train via loop line . TPWS permitted only 25 
kmph while exiting the loop line . Also at the time of passing an 
Automatic signal at O N, TPWS permitted only 10 kmph. E ven when 
the weather was clear and in day time also . However, as per General 
Rules (GR) speed is permitted up to 15 kmph in such conditions . 
There is , therefore, a mismatch between existing operational 
instructions and technologically operated conditions. 
These issues/constraints needed to be addressed before assessing 
the success of the TPWS trials. 
e) Joint inspection by Audit along with loco pilots in NCR 
Audit also conducted joint inspection during February 2018 in three 
trains311, running in Hazrat Nizamuddin - Agra Cantonment section, where 
TPWS had been installed. Audit noticed that  
 In loco (WAP 5 – 30007) of Gatiman Express (Train no.12049), TPWS 
did not protect from SPAD during speed of less than 30 kmph. 
 In the loco of Gatiman Express (Train no.12050 ) Do’s & Don’ts 
regarding TPWS were not provided to and carried by the loco pilots. 
The attention of loco pilots was fixed on display unit of TPWS and 
attention to the track and signal ahead was affected. 
 In the loco of Goa Express (Train no.12780 ) and Taj Ex press (Train 
no.12280), the locomotives were in the list of TPWS fitted locomotives. 
However, on the date of Joint Inspection (12  and 14 February  
respectively), no TPWS equipment was found fitted in these locos.  

 In the loco of Goa Express, on the date of joint inspection 
(13.02.2018), the on-board TPWS equipment was not found working. 
                                                           
31112049/12050 – Gatiman Express, 12780 – Goa Express, 12280 – Taj Express 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
198 
The joint inspection by Audit also corroborate the issues highlighted 
by Electrical department of NCR. This needed to be addressed.  
f) Trial performance of TPWS 
Audit analys ed the information regarding the performance of TPWS 
prepared by the Electrical Department and sent to their Zonal 
headquarters. Nominated 30 nominated trains during May 2016 to 
October 2017 and 28 trains during November 2017 to January 2018 were 
run with TPWS fitted locos . This involved run of these trains on 14028 
occasions.  
 Out of this, on 4403 occasions (31 .39 per cent), the locos fitted with 
TPWS were provided in the trains . Only on 2406 (54 .65 per cent ) 
occasions the TPWS fitted in the locos were fou nd in working 
condition. Thus, locomotives fitted  with TPWS, were found in working 
condition only in 17.15 per cent of the total run of the trains during the 
trials.  
 Of 2406, on 255 occasions, TPWS was in working condition. However, 
it could not be utiliz ed due to non -availability of trained Loco 
pilot/Assistant Loco Pilot during May 2016 to January 2018.  
 Performance of track side equipment in April 2016 to January 2018 312 
was reviewed. 3726 track side failures took place in 426 days, which 
worked out to nine failures per day. 
Audit found no benchmark against which this trial performance 
could be rated. As such, there was no conclusive assessment done 
by the Railways to judge the success or otherwise of the trials. 
Railway Board decided to implement TPWS in nine HDN sections in 
August 2016 without judging the success of the trials. 
Further, when any loco not fitted with TPWS is running on the same 
track along with TPWS fitted loco, the ultimate goal of installing 
TPWS for protection cannot fulfilled. This wou ld happen because on 
                                                           
312 Information for the month of July 2016, September 2016 to November 2016 and May 
2017 to August 2017 was not found on record 

 
199 
occurrence of Signals Passed at Danger, the TPWS fitted loco will 
stop, but the other loco will not and they may collide. 
5.4.1.2 Chennai Central – Gummidipundi section  
The contract for provision of TPWS in of Southern Railway was awarded 
in February 2005 and the work was completed and commissioned in May 
2008.  Onboard equipment was provided in 82 motor coaches (77 Electric 
Multiple Units (EMU) and 5 Mainline Electric Multiple Units (MEMU)).  The 
‘Track side’ equipment and ‘Onboard’ e quipment were in operation since 
May 2008. Provisional Acceptance Certificate for the track side equipment 
was issued in May 2008 and for onboard equipment was issued in May 
2009. On completion of warranty obligations by the supplier the system 
was handed over to Chennai Division during February 2013.  
Audit noticed that for analyzing the performance of the TPWS system in 
the section, SR Administration test checked 26 motor coaches in which 
onboard equipment was provided.  During their check (1 March 2013 to 7 
March 2013), they found that the requirement was met by the system. 
Consequently, final acceptance certificate was issued on 19 May 2014. 
An expenditure of ` 54.55 crore was incurred till March 2017. 
Audit analysed the results of trials of TPWS (April 2018) in the section 
(Chennai Central-Gummidipundi section) and noticed that 

 50 EMU/MEMU rakes are in service in Chennai Central – 
Gummidipundi section which also caters to the Chennai Central – 
Arakkonam section. Out of 79 motor coaches, fitted with TPWS, in 57 
motor coaches only TPWS was in working condition. The failure rate 
of TPWS component onboard was 28 per cent. 
 Three of the track side equipment out of 113 installed in the section 
were not in working condition and under repair. This indicated a 97 per 
cent functionality.  
 The use of TPWS is not mentioned in the General and Subsidiary 
Rules (GSR).  However, operating instructions for TPWS for EMUs 
has been issued separately by Southern Railway.  

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
200 
 Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) by OEM ended on 18 May 2017. 
Renewal of the AMC was not done and at present no AMC exists. 
Comprehensive maintenance contract for TPWS for two years for both 
onboard and trackside equipment was under finalization (April 2018). 
Thus, the overall functionality of TPWS components w as nearly 70 
per cent 313 against a prescribed functionality of 99 per cent. The 
work was completed five years back , However,  the decision to 
operationalize the same on other suburban sections was taken only 
in August 2016. 
During Exit Conference (30 April 20 19), Railway Board stated that AMC 
has now been awarded for the section and that they had also improved 
upon the success rate.  
5.4.2 Other sanctioned works of TPWS over various Zonal Railways 
Railway Board s anctioned (August 2016) TPWS works over nine 314 
suburban sections of seven 315 Zonal Railways . These works covered 
1245 RKM and nine 316 HDN routes over six 317 Zonal Railways covering 
2086 RKM. Audit observed that Railway Board decided to implement 
TPWS in these sections in August 2016, before analyzing the resul ts of 
trials over Delhi-Mathura section (extended up to Agra) of NCR.  As on 30 
September 2018, ` 49.35 crore has been incurred for implementation of 
TPWS on these sections/routes. However, in none of the sections/routes, 
the work has been completed. Audit further noticed that in November 
2017, Railway Board has decided to implement TPWS with ETCS level II 
in six routes. All these works, however, continued to be undertaken under 
                                                           
313 {(100-28)/100} x {(97/100) x 100} 
314 Pune-Lonavala, Sealdah -Howrah-Khana and Automatic Section of Sealdah and 
Howrah Divisions, Balance Automatic/EMU routes of Sealdah and Howrah Divisions, 
Delhi Area up to Ghaziabad and Nizamuddin, Delhi -Panipat, Chennai Beach-Tambaram-
Chhengalpattu, Secundrabad Division -Automatic section,  Howrah-Kharagpur, Mumbai 
Central-Virar 
315 CR, ER, NR, SR, SCR, SER, WR 
316 Lonavala-Karjat, Panipat -Ambala-Amritsar, Arrakkonam -Jolarpattai, Kharagpur -
Tatanagar, Tatanagar -Chakradharpur, Virar -Vadodara-Ahmedabad, Ghaziabad -Tundla-
Kanpur, Kanpur-Mughalsarai, Agra-Gwalior 
317 CR, ER, NR, SR, SER, WR 

 
201 
ETCS level I for another six months, before being put on hold with effect 
from May 2018.  
The expenditure of ` 49.35 crore incurred on TPWS ETCS Level I on 
the nine suburban and nine HDN routes did not yield any results and 
rendered unfruitful. 
During Exit Conference (30 April 2019), Railway Board stated that they 
had decided to implement ETCS Level II across all Zonal Railways. They 
stated that care would be taken to ensure dedicated ETCS Level II fitted 
(on Board equipment) locos are run on selected section for successful 
trials.  
5.5 Conclusion 
Nineteen years since its conceptualization and 12 years from issue of 
letter of acceptance in the original contract, TPWS (ETCS level I) in Delhi 
– Agra section continues to be in trial stage. There was no evidence on 
record to prove that the commissioning of the TPWS on this section has 
been successful.  
Railway Board revised the scope of the work a number of times. This 
resulted in increased the cost and also shifted the timelines for the 
implementation of the system. Locomotives fitted with TPWS, were found 
in working condition only in 17.15 per cent  of the total run of the trains 
during May 2016 to January 2018. The failure rate in track side equipment 
was also significantly high. Audit also noticed that TPWS was not 
provided in the nominated trains . TPWS equipment on loco was also not 
found to be in working condition. Non-availability of trained loco pilots was 
another reasons for ineffective TPWS trials. Further, when any loco not 
fitted with TPWS is running on the same track along with TPWS fitted 
loco, the ultimate goal of installing TPWS for protection cannot fulfilled. 
This would happen because on occurrence of SPAD, the TPWS fitted 
loco will stop, but the other loco will not and they may collide. Thus, the 
purpose of installation of TPWS in Delhi - Agra section was not achieved. 
The expenditure of `
 81.98 crore incurred on the section has not given 

Chapter 5 Report No.19 of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 
202 
any fruitful results. In Chennai Central – Gummidipundi sub-urban section, 
the overall success rate was 70 per cent against a prescribed functionality 
of 99 per cent. 
The success of the trails was not assessed/judged by Railways. However, 
Railway Board decided to implement TPWS in nine HDN and nine 
suburban sections in August 2016. There was expenditure of ` 136.53 
crore incurred on Delhi - Agra and Chennai Central - Gummidipundi 
sections, whic h remained unfruitful. In addition , expenditure of ` 49.35 
crore incurred on these works was also rendered unfruitful . In November 
2017, Railway Board has once again decided to implement TPWS under 
ETCS level II and all the works under progress have been p ut on hold 
since May 2018.  
5.6 Recommendations 
1) Railway Board has decided to implement Automatic Train 
Protection ETCS Level II in Indian Railways. The lessons learnt 
from the trials for implementation of ETCS level I, need to be kept 
in mind during execution of works of TPWS ETCS level II.  
2) TPWS works relating to the new systems (ETCS Level II) should 
be undertaken on a complete section and not in piecemeal parts 
of section (as was done for ETCS level I). This would help in 
comprehensive implementation of the system and achieve 
intended benefit for providing train protection.   
3) Railways need to devise a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), 
clearly defining step -by-step process for undertaking and 
documenting trials for induction of technologies.   
During Exi t Conference (30 April 2019), Railway Board noted the audit 
recommendations and stated that these would be implemented while 
implementing ETCS Level II. They stated that they have given the overall 
responsibility for implementation and monitoring of ETCS L evel II trials in 

 
 
203 
four selected sections to REL318. They added that the trials were expected 
to be completed in two to three years’ time.  
 
                                                           
318 A 100 per cent subsidiary of RailTel.  

 
204 
Chapter 6 - Traction  
Member Traction at Railway Board is overall in charge of the Electrical 
department of Indian Railway. He is also responsible for Railway 
Electrification Workshops (exclusively for locomotives) and Energy/Fuel 
Management. 
At Zonal level, Chief Electrical Engineer (CEE) is responsible for 
operation and maintenance of all electrical assets and equipment . 
Maintenance of Diesel locomotives is supervised by Chief Motive Power 
(Diesel). Loco Production Units319 are managed independently by General 
Managers reporting to Member Traction at Railway Board. 
The total expenditure of Indian Railways on repair and maintenance o f 
Motive Power (including plant and equipment) during the year 2017-18 
was `
 16,144.44 crore320. During 2017-18, expenditure on fuel (diesel and 
electricity) was ` 28,011.27 crore 321.  An expenditure of ` 10,102.96 
crore322 was incurred in production units of locomotives during the year 
2017-18. During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers and 
tenders, 683 offices of Electrical department including CLW and DLW 
were audited. 
This chapter includes one review on ‘Installation and commissioning of 
Solar Powe r Plants in Indian Railways’. The chapter also includes five 
individual paragraphs. These relate to non-mixing of bio-diesel into HSD 
oil, procurement of readymade Traction Motors at higher rate by CLW, 
delay in completion of work of Traction Sub Station etc. 
 
                                                           
319 Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) and Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW) 
320 Sub head 3002-3003 (03) & (05) – Repairs & Maintenance of Motive Power and Plant 
& Equipment and Minor Head 400 of Sub head 3002-3003 (05) – Plant and Equipment – 
Electrical  
321 Sub head 3002-3003 (08) – Operating expenses – Fuel  
322 DLW/Varanasi, DMW/Patiala and CLW/Chittaranjan 

 
205 
 
6.1 Installation and commissioning of Solar Power Plants in Indian 
Railways 
6.1.1 Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR) is the single largest consumer of electricity in India, 
consuming about 1.8 crore MWh 323 per year.  This is approximately two 
per cent  o f country’s total power generation 324. Electricity is consumed 
both for traction (hauling of trains) and non-traction purpose (domestic, 
industrial and commercial purposes).  A small saving on part of IR in 
electricity consumption can significantly impact its operating ratio. 
Railways have set a target of meeting 10 per cent  of its total energy 
demand through “Renewable” energy sources by year 2020. These 
include solar power and biomass. As part of IR Solar Mission, Railways 
have planned (2015-16) setting up of 1000 MW 325 solar plants.  This was 
planned with funding support of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE) by 2020.  
Railway Energy Management Company Limited (REMCL) 326 is the nodal 
agency to call for tenders and finalize the solar plant installation. This was 
to be done through Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode on Design, 
Build, Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) basis. As per capacity 
allocated to Zonal Railways by Railway Board, REMCL has to collect 
inputs such as availability of rooftop space and vacant land from them. 
REMCL also has to finalize the tenders and coordinate with the MNRE 
regarding Central Financial Assistance and Viability Gap Funding. 
Audit examined the policy and planning initiatives as part of the Solar 
Mission and its implementation. Audit review covered Solar Plants 
                                                           
3231MWh =1 thousand kWh  
324Source: Climate Policy Initiative Report on De-carbonization of Indian Railways (March 
2017) 
3251 MW=1000 kW (Kilowatt) 
326 REMCL was incorporated in August 2013 under the Companies Act, 1956 (No. 1 of 
1956), as a Joint Venture Company of Ministry of Railways with equity participation of 
Indian Railways: 49 per cent  and RITES Limited: 51 per cent.  It was formed to tap the 
business potential in the energy sector including green energy, power trading etc. by 
setting up of renewable energy wind power projects.
 

 
206 
installed in the Zonal Railways and Production Units through Power 
Purchase Agreements (PPAs)327 and Railways internal resources328. 
Audit Findings 
6.1.2 Progress of installation of solar plants 
Ministry of Railways has set a target of 1000 MW of solar power plants to 
be installed through PPA model by 2020.  The year-wise capacity of solar 
power plants planned was as follows: 
Table 6.1 - Year-wise capacity planned 
Year Rooftop (MW) Land based (MW) 
 Planned achieved planned achieved 
2016-17 05 22.453 0 0 2017-18 50 240 
2018-19 450  150  
2019-20 0  100  
Total 505  490  
Audit reviewed the progress of installation of solar plants in the Railways 
and noticed that 
 There was no progress in respect of ground mounted/land based solar 
plants against the target of 240 MW. Most the works were still at 
conceptual stage and surveys were yet to be conducted at identified 
locations (March 2018). 
 IR decided to set up 10KW/5KW Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) plants on 
the rooftops. It was decided to cover 810 stations 329 of D and E 
category stations330 in 14 Zonal Railways 331. This was included in the 
Works Programme of 2017-18. The work was still at tendering stage 
as on 31 March 2018.  
                                                           
327CR(3), ECoR(2), ECR(3), ER(4), NCR(2), NER(4), NR(1), NWR(2), SCR(5), SECR(2), 
SER(2), SR(2), SWR(3), WCR(6), WR(8), CLW(2), ICF(2), DLW(3) 
328ER (2), ECR(5), ECoR(1), NCR(1), NFR(4), NER(2), SER(3), SECR(2), SWR(1),Metro 
Railway/Kolkata (5), CLW(1), DLW(8) 
329‘ 133 Category ‘D’ stations and 677 Category ‘E’ stations with a total capacity of 4.72 
MW at cost of` 25 crore 
330 D’ Category stat ions-Non suburban stations with passenger earnings between ` 50 
lakhs and ` 3 crore , ‘E’ Category stations - Non suburban stations with passenger 
earnings less than ` 50 lakhs 
331NR, NCR, NWR, WR, CR, WCR, SR, SCR, SECR, SWR, NER, ECR, SER, ECoR  

 
 
207 
 As per the time schedule given in the Agreements, the work of 
installation of solar plants should be completed in 270 days from date 
of Letter of Acceptance (LOA).  There were inordinate delays ranging 
from 21 to 734 days in commissioning of Solar Plants in the Zonal 
Railways. As a result, Railways had to purchase power worth ` 27.63 
crore at comparatively higher rates from the State Electricity Boards. 
 The power consumption by the Railways far exceeded the generation 
of solar power. The deficiency could have been met to some extent by 
planning land based solar plants alongside railway tracks. There were 
293 Traction Substations (TSS
332) exceeding 33 KV (meant for traction 
purposes) in IR. However, IR was yet to explore the option for 
installation of solar plants on land alongside track feeding these TSS. 
In reply, Ministry stated (July 2019) that the work on Category ‘D’ and ‘E’ 
stations was sanctioned to be done at Railway’s cost. However, with solar 
market evolving, there was no point in spending Railway’s capital on 
setting up of solar power plant. Instead, all solar projects presently in 
Railways and also across the country are being done in PPP mode with 
agreement of 25 years. It was further stated that despite floating of 
tenders by NR (nodal office) for five times, no suitable offer was received. 
NR has now proposed (June 2019) for dropping this work.   
Ministry’s reply seems to be an afterthought as conscious decision was 
taken for setting up of solar plants on rooftop s of Category ‘D’ and ‘E’ 
stations in 14 Zonal Railways. This proposal was in line with Indian 
Railways commitment to set up 1000 MW solar plants and accordingly 
works were included in the Works Programme (2017-18).  
Regarding delay in commissioning of solar plants, Ministry stated that 
delays in commissioning was due to policy issues pertaining to Ministry of 
Power, MNRE and various State Governments viz .,
 developer mode not 
being allowed in Gujarat and Maharashtra, lengthy approval process of 
net-metering in many States, cap on net-metering of one MW in many 
                                                           
332A Traction Substation is an  electrical substation that converts electric power for public 
utility service to an appropriate voltage, current type and frequency to supply railways. 

 
208 
States (Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra), net metering not being allowed in Tamilnadu 
and Damodar Valley Corporation area, solar plants not allowed for more 
than contract demand (50 per cent in Gujarat, 64 per cent in Rajasthan, 
80 per cent in Punjab), changes in the taxation regime etc. They further 
stated that reference was made (August 2018) to Secretary/Ministry of 
Power for issuing suitable directions to the State Governments to review 
their policies to facilitate large scale proliferation of solar and wind power.  
The reply of the Ministry indicates that due diligence was not completed 
before framing the Solar Mission policy of Indian Railways. As a result, 
the implementation of the policy ran into many hurdles.  
6.1.3 Review of Power Purcha se Agreements (PPAs) for installation 
of solar plants  
Ministry of Railways prepared (November 2015) a policy framework, with 
an aim to harness solar energy on rooftop of Railways buildings. As per 
this policy, solar power plants should be installed on the rooftops available 
in Railways premises from investment by developers. Railways would 
consume electricity so generated for its own uses through long-term PPAs 
for 25 years with Solar Power Developers (SPDs ). The tariff would be 
fixed as arrived through open bidding process. Such solar plants should 
be put only in States having net metering regulation issued by the State 
Regulatory Commission. 
6.1.3.1 Delay in signing of PPAs  
As per the timelines mentioned in the Agreements 333, PPAs should be 
signed within 15 days of LOA. Out of 56 PPAs examined in audit, three 
PPAs were yet to be signed. In two PPAs, dates of signing of PPAs were 
not available. There were delays ranging from 13 to 372 days in signing of 
PPAs after issue of LOA. Of which, 20 PPAs (39 per cent) were signed 
                                                           
333Schedule-N of PPA 

 
 
209 
more than 100 days after issue of LOA. 17 PPAs (33 per cent) were 
signed between 30 and 100 days after issue of LOA.  
In reply, Ministry stated (July 2019) that as per provisions of Bid 
Document, the successful bidder may implement the project through SPV, 
formation of which takes significant time after award of LOA. They further 
stated that delay in submission of various compliance documents 
regarding formation of SPV by the successful bidder affects timey signing 
of PPA.  
Delay in signing of PPAs was worked out on the basis of time line fixed by 
the Ministry.  Ministry needs to revisit the time line given for signing of 
PPAs based on the experience gained and ensure adherence of the same 
by the SPDs. 
6.1.4 Policy implementation and monitoring of works 
6.1.4.1 Identification of potential area for generation of solar energy 
Railway Board in November 2014 directed 334 Zonal Railways to identify 
the rooftop spaces and non-encroached vacant land for harnessing solar 
energy. Audit observed that 29.98 lakh sqm of rooftop space was 
identified by various Zonal Railways and Production Units. As per Indian 
Railway Organization for Alternate Fuel (IROAF 335) guidelines, rooftop 
space of 10 sqm is required for installation of 1 KW. Based on this criteria, 
the available rooftop space could install only 299.8 MW as against 505 
MW planned. Thus, the planning to install solar plants on rooftop was not 
on realistic basis. 
In reply, Ministry stated (July 2019) that the figures of rooftop and land 
were based on initial assessments. Railways is exploring provision of 
rooftop solar plants on stations, service buildings, hospitals, workshops, 
railway schools, platform shelters, training institutes, production units, 
                                                           
334 Letter No. 2012/Elect (G)/150/4/Pt. IV, dated 05.11.2014 
335IROAF is a single window entity for knowledge and database on technologies, Clean 
Development Mechanism (CDM), suppliers, b usiness partners and consultants.  IROAF 
will emerge as the leader IR in introduction of Alternate Energy, Fuel Efficient and 
Emission Control Technologies, advice and implement these across the Network.   

 
210 
RPF barracks, railway land by side of track, vacant railway land parcels 
etc. 
Ministry’s reply indicates that no proper assessment for rooftop solar 
plants was made by the Railways to optimally utilize the available rooftop 
spaces for installation of solar plants.       
Railway Board instructed (December 2016) 336 Zonal Railways to identify 
land for Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) Plants for traction with 30 minutes 
storage back-up in high visibility areas. In Phase I, it was decided that M/s 
Solar Energy Corporation of India Ltd. (SECI) would set up solar plants of 
25 MW capacity in Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and 
Karnataka337.  M/s SECI was to carry out joint survey of the identified 
locations with Railway officials and provide detailed Action Plan for 
completion of Phase I. 
Audit observed that land required for SPV plants was identified in only 
three Zonal Railways (CR, ECR and SECR). The status of identification of 
land was not on records in SWR. Identification of land in other Zonal 
Railways was yet to be completed. In nine Zonal Railways 338, locations 
initially identified for setting up of solar plants were subsequently found 
unsuitable for installation of power plants by the SPDs
. Against the 
originally planned capacity of 5.99 MW, the solar plant capacity was 
reduced to 0.793 MW. This was only 13.26 per cent of original targeted 
capacity. 
In reply, Ministry stated (July 2019) that Railway is exploring most optimal 
solutions and doing course correction as per the requirements. The reply 
is silent on progress of work of identification of land for setting of solar 
plants in the Zonal Railways.  
6.1.4.2 Adherence to technical specifications 
                                                           
336 Letter No. 2012/Elect (G)/150/4/Vol. I (Solar Mission) of 1128121.82 addressed to 
Managing Director, Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) 
337 Maharashtra (10 MW), Chhattisgarh (5 MW), Jharkhand (5 MW) and Karnataka (5 
MW) 
338CR, ER, NWR, SR, SCR, SER, SECR, WR and MR/Kolkata 

 
211 
Audit checked the 
installation of solar plants 
at 127 locations through 
joint inspections with 
railway officials (Senior 
Section Engineer-
Electrical) with reference 
to prescribed technical 
specifications. The 
deviations/non-compliance 
to the prescribed 
specifications noticed 
during joint inspection was as under: 
a) Trees/tall buildings in close proximity to solar panels 
In two Zonal Railways (SCR and SECR), the solar panels were obstructed 
by trees or tall 
buildings casting a 
shadow on the 
panels. SCR 
Administration, in its 
reply, stated that firm 
had been advised to 
shift the panels 
(ZRTC). In respect of 
Railnilayam, SCR 
Administration stated 
that the shadow 
covers the panels 
from 16:30 hours.  
 
 
Figure 6.1: (clockwise) Bilaspur English Medium School (SECR), 
Rail Nilayam building in Secunderabad (SCR) and Godavari Hostel 
building in Zonal Railway Training Centre (SCR) 
Figure 6.2: (clockwise) Ratlam station in WR, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin station in NR and EMU Shed, Sanpada in CR 

 
212 
b) Tilt/angle and direction of solar panels 
As per the guidelines 339, the following are to be kept in mind while 
installing solar panels: 
 Solar panels should be installed at an angle of ‘(Latitude of the 
place+10) degree’ from horizontal.  
 Solar panels should be installed south facing in the Northern 
Hemisphere and north facing in the Southern Hemisphere. Since India 
is in the Northern Hemisphere, Solar panels will be installed always 
south facing in the country. 
Audit examined 127 locations. At 84 locations 340, the RDSO guidelines to 
garner maximum benefit of daylight were not adhered to. Further, at 122 
locations341 over IR, IRCAMT guidelines on tilt were not complied with. At 
24 locations in eight Zonal Railways 342, solar panels were not aligned to 
south direction. At these locations, solar panels were mounted on fixed 
frames without any provision or scope for angular adjustment contrary to 
the extant instructions. 
c) Provision of adequate space between roof and solar panels  
As per RDSO Guidelines 343, the clearance between lowest part of the 
module structure and the developed ground level shall normally not be 
less than 500 mm.  However, in exceptional cases, lower clearances may 
be allowed on case to case basis. Audit, noticed that at 32 locations in 1 1 
Zonal Railways344, the clearance or space varied between 0 mm (SWR) to 
125 mm (WR). The inadequate space/clearance would prevent effective 
dissipation of heat and impact the functioning of solar panels.  
                                                           
339Para 3.3.1 of Mounting the Solar Modules of Handbook on Installation and 
Maintenance of Solar Panel (RDSO/IRCAMT Guidelines) 
340in 16 Zonal Railways and one Production Unit - CR, ECR, ECoR, NCR,  NER, NFR, 
NWR, SR, SCR, SER, SECR, SWR, WR, WCR, CLW, DLW, Metro Railway/Kolkata. 
341CR-4, ER-3, ECR-6, ECOR-4, NR-4, NCR-4, NER-13, NEFR-4, NWR-8, SR-1, SCR-
10, SER-8, SECR-11, SWR-3, WR-16, WCR-5, Metro Railway/Kolkata-6, ICF-3, CLW-1, 
DLW-8 
342CR-1, ECR-3, NFR-1, NWR-2, SR-1, SCR-5, WR-10 and ICF-1  
343Para 6.10.6 of RDSO Specification No.  RDSO/PE/SPEC/PS/0092-2008 (Rev.‘O’). 
Amendment 5 
344DLW-3, ECR -1, ECOR -4, NR -4, NWR -4, SCR -2, SER -1, SWR -1, SECR -1, WR -10, 
ICF-1 

 
213 
In reply, Ministry stated (July 2019) that SPDs does the survey before 
providing survey panels. All care is taken by SPDs to avoid such locations 
otherwise energy generated would be less and lessen his remuneration. 
Contract permits change of location within the same Zonal Railway and 
SPD has to utilize the space in an optimal fashion to get maximum 
generation. However, the shadows which may come up at later stages 
due to new buildings, trees etc. are unavoidable.   
Ministry’s reply is not acceptable as instances pointed out by Audit were 
existing adverse conditions at the time of installation of solar plants and 
not due to developments which came up at later stages.   
6.1.5 Conclusion  
IR has been able to implement projects only to extent of 22.453 MW out 
of 295 MW planned till March 2018. No works of ground mounted solar 
plants were commissioned. Instructions of RDSO and IRCAMT for setting 
up of solar plants were not complied with. There were change of 
locations, reduction in original capacity planned and installation of solar 
plants at unsuitable locations. This hindered Railway’s ability to harness 
solar power.  
6.1.6 Recommendation 
Railways may revisit and fix the target of installation and 
commissioning of solar plants in the Zonal Railways and Production 
Units on a realistic basis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
214 
6.2 West Centra l, Northern, North Western, North Central, North 
Eastern, and East Central Railways (WCR, NR, NWR, NCR, NER and 
ECR): Non -mixing/ blending of bio -diesel into HSD oil by Zonal 
Railways and non-achievement of Environmental objectives 
Railway Board issued dir ections for blending/mixing bio -diesel into 
HSD oil consumed by Diesel Locomotives in the prescribed extent. 
The same was not complied by Zonal Railways. This led to 
avoidable extra expenditure of ` 103.67 crore during the period 
2015-16 to 2017 -18 on consumption of HSD oil. This also impacted 
Railways efforts towards a cleaner and pollution free environment. 
Indian Railway Organisation for Alternate Fuels (IROAF) has emphasized 
(May 2013) on bio-diesel as a concept on alternate fuels for Indian 
Railways. Bio-diesel345 is a green fuel and can be produced from 
resources within the country. It is also cost effective. Even low level 
blending with bio-diesel can bring about substantial reduction in Green 
House Gases (GHG) and polluting emissions.  This in turn contribute in 
minimizing the effects of global warming. 
Railway Board directed (March 2015) 346 Zonal Railways for blending of 
bio-diesel at the rate of 5 per cent  of HSD oil consumed by the 
locomotives. Six347 Zonal Railways were advised to blend bio-diesel with 
HSD oil only during the months of March to October of the year 348. 
Railway Board also directed (July 2015) Zonal Railways to enter into 
contracts for purchase of bio-diesel for longer periods to ensure sustained 
blending. IROAF further reiterated 349 that mandate of blending of bio-
                                                           
345 Bio-diesel (B-100) is a renewable, cleaner-burning diesel fuel replacement for any 
diesel engine made from an increasingly diverse mix of resources such as recycled 
cooking oil, agricultural oils, fatty acids, animal fats and algae. It is also cheaper than 
HSD oil. 
346 letter No. 2010/Fuel/282/2 Pt.I (DVP) dated. 02 March 2015 
347 NR, NWR, NCR, NER, WCR and ECR 
348 These six ZRs were to stop blending during winter months t o avoid the issues due to 
relatively inferior low-temperature properties of B-100 
349 June 2016 and September 2016 

 
215 
diesel in HSD oil was a Swatch Bharat Mission agenda and needed to be 
implemented in both letter and spirit. 
Audit reviewed the records of six Zonal Railways, where Railway Board 
advised (March 2015) blending bio-diesel with HSD oil. Audit observed 
that bio-diesel was not mixed to the desired extent of 5 per cent of HSD 
oil consumption during the period 2015-16 to 2017-18. These six Zonal 
Railways procured only 27.11 lakh litres of bio-diesel against the 
requirement of 875.94 lakh litres as per Railway Board’s advice. 
Audit analyzed the reasons for non-compliance by the six Zonal Railways. 
Audit found that indents placed by Sr. Divisional Mechanical Engineer 
(Diesel or Operation) were not adequate for taking care of the 
requirements. Therefore, purchase orders were issued by Principal Chief 
Material Manager for supply of bio-diesel for a lesser quantity. Adequate 
funds were also found to be a constraint during the last two years. In 
NCR, procurement of bio-diesel could not be finalized. In NR no 
procurement of bio-diesel was made by its Mechanical department. In 
other three zones (NWR, NER, ECR), reasons were not found on record.  
Bio-diesel is cheaper than HSD oil. These Zonal Railways thus, incurred 
an extra expenditure of ` 103.67 crore 350 during the period 2015-16 to 
2017-18 (Annexure 6.1).  
In reply, Railway Board stated (27 February 2019) that Railways 
processed for procurement of 50000 KL of bio-diesel.  However, the same 
could not be finalized due to non-availability of price variation clause for 
bio-diesel. They further stated that Zonal Railway also faced difficulty in 
procurement due to higher price of bio-diesel than HSD oil. This was due 
to higher cost of import of raw material and taxes. Railway Board, 
however, advised (September/October 2018) Zonal Railway to initiate 
procurement process of B-100 bio-diesel in compliance with National Bio-
fuel Policy.  
                                                           
350 differential cost of HSD oil and bio-diesel 

 
 
216 
6.3 Chittaranjan Locomotives Works (CLW): Procurement of 
readymade Traction Motors at higher rate 
CLW purchased Traction Motors fr om trade at higher price as 
compared to the rates of in -house assembling of Traction Motors 
with readymade procured Rotor and Stators. CLW purchased 1647 
Traction Motors during year 2012 -13 to 2018 -19 ( up to June 2018 
except 2014 -15 and  2015-16) f rom trade  and incurred extra 
expenditure of ` 57.74 crore. 
Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) produces 3-phase locomotives for 
Indian Railways. To produce one 3-phase locomotive (Version WAG-9 or 
WAP-7), six Traction Motors (TM) 351 are required. Traction Motor is an 
assembled item of a Stator and a Rotor 352. CLW has production facility for 
manufacturing of complete TM with manufacturing of Rotors and Stators. 
It can also assemble TM with readymade procured stators and rotors 
along with other accessories of TM. For addi tional requirement beyond 
their in-house production, readymade TM is purchased from trade.  
Audit reviewed the records of tender case files of 2012-13 to 2017-18 for 
procurement of complete TM from trade by CLW. Audit noticed that  
 In the process of finalising the tender cases, rate analysis or market 
survey was not conducted by CLW. CLW instead awarded contract to 
trade by comparison of the current offer rate with the last purchase rate 
(LPR). CLW assembles complete TM with procured readymade Stator 
and Rotor along with the accessories. Further, the cost of assembled 
TM was readily available with it. As such, CLW could have undertaken 
rate analysis.  
                                                           
351 type 6FRA6068 
352 Traction motor refers to a type of electric motor. A traction motor is used to make 
rotation torque on a machine. It is usually changed into a straight line motion. Traction 
motors are used in electrically powered rail vehicles such as electric multiple units and 
electric locomotives.  The stator is the stationary part of the motor. The rotor is the 
rotating electrical component.  

 
217 
 The cost of complete TM procured from trade was very high in 
comparison to the assembled TM. 
Audit compared the expenditure in procurement of complete TM from 
trade353 with the cost of TM assembled by CLW with readymade procured 
rotors and stators. Audit noticed that CLW incurred and extra expenditure 
of `
 57.74 crore on procurement of 1647 TMs as detailed below: 
Table 6.3 – Cost comparison of Traction Motors purchased from trade and assembled  
in-house by CLW 
Year Cost of TM 
procured from 
trade 
(in `) 
Cost of 
assembled TM       
Difference 
of rates 
(` in lakh) 
Quantity 
procured 
from trade 
Total extra 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
2012-13 28,66,747 21,94,307 6.72 175 11.76 
2013-14 26,99,000 22,20,824 4.78 154 7.36 
2016-17 21,14,625 18,14,470 2.99 377 11.27 
2017-18 19,86,641 17,05,978 2.81 243 6.83 
2018-19 (up to June 
2018) 
20,59,100 17,65,074 2.94 698 20.52 
Total 1647 57.74 
In reply, Ministry stated (October 2017) that readymade complete TM was 
procured to meet the demand of production of locomotives. Further, due to 
manpower constraints, the demand could not be met by in-house 
production of TM . They also stated that assembly of TM with readymade 
rotors and stators could not be done due to non-availability of adequate 
trained manpower. They stated that utilizing manpower from other 
department may impact productivity of that department. 
Audit is of the view that in the absence of trained manpower, CLW 
may explore the possibility of assembling of TM by procuring 
readymade rotors and stators. This will be cost effective in 
comparison to procuring readymade traction motors from trade.  
 
 
 
                                                           
353 during the year 2012-13 to 2018-19 (up to June 2018)  except 2014 -15 as no 
procurement of rotors and stators was made this year 

 
 
218 
6.4 Chittaranjan Locomotives Works (CLW): Delay in Commissioning 
of Electric Arc Furnace leading to blockage of fund 
Chittaranjan Locomotive Works procured an Electric Arc Furnace on 
replacement account. However, they failed to provide a clear site for 
commissioning of the furnace. This resulted in blockage of capital 
as the machine procured in March 2012 was yet to be made 
operational. The chances of obsolescence of machine procured six 
years back also cannot be ruled out. 
Steel Foundry in CLW had procured and installed three Electric Arc 
furnaces (EAF) over a period of time. One EAF was of 15 Metric Tonne 
(MT) capacity and installed in the year 2000. Other two EAFs were of 7 
MT capacities, were installed in the year 1987 and 1990 respectively. 
These two furnaces were condemned in August 1997 and December 2008 
respectively. Since then, CLW has been functioning with only one EAF of 
15MT capacity, in which ferrous metal was melted. Molten metal was then 
cast, moulded and these moulded steel casting products were finally 
supplied to the loco shops of CLW. Zonal Railways and other Production 
Units are the end users for these products. 
In August 2011, Deputy Chief Material Manager/CLW placed a purchase 
order for one 10 MT EAF on a firm
354 at the cost of ` 6.16 crore. The EAF 
was to be received by January 2012 and commissioned by July 2012.  
Audit observed that the EAF was supplied to CLW in February 2013. The 
delay occurred as Chief Mechanical Engineer  (Production), Steel 
foundry/CLW, could not provide clear site for its installation. The same was 
finally provided in November 2012. Audit further noticed that six years after 
the date of receipt, the EAF was yet to be commissioned (December 
2018). A payment of `
 4.10 crore was made to the supplier on this 
account. Audit noted that the said machine could not be commissioned as 
the mechanical and electrical works required for commissioning were not 
completed.  
                                                           
354 M/s Megatherm Electronics Private Limited, Kolkata 

 
219 
Audit observed that CLW is managing its function with the existing EAF of 
15 MT. The average daily production of CLW has increased to 6.61 MT in 
2017-18 from 6.26 MT in 2015-16. Further, CLW stated (31 August 2018) 
that Railway Board enhanced (March 2018) order quantity for Casnub 
Bogies from 600 to 1100. They were also advised (July 2018) to develop 
coupler items for Railway wagons. CLW stated that due to these orders, 
target of steel foundry will further increase in coming years. As such, non-
commissioning of new EAF will impact the production of CLW. Further, the 
chances of obsolescence of machine procured six years back cannot be 
ruled out. Besides, enforcing the warranty obligations would also be 
difficult for CLW. The warranty was for 24 months from the date of 
successful installation and commissioning and the delay in commissioning 
is on the part of CLW.  
Thus, failure of CLW in timely commissioning of Electric Arc Furnace has 
led to blockage of capital of ` 4.10 crore. This may also impact production 
work at CLW in view of the increase in work in coming years. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 12 March 2019; their reply 
has not been received (30 September 2019). 
6.5 Western Railway (WR): Avoidable extra expenditure due to delay 
in completion of work of Traction Sub Station at Limkh eda in Ratlam 
Division 
WR Administration delayed completion of work at Traction Sub -
station at Limkheda in Ratlam division for receiving power supply 
from Madhya Gujarat Vij Company Limited (MGVCL). As a result, 
they had to pay ` 4.21 crore towards minimum guarantee charges 
and extension charges to MGVCL.  An amount of  ` 12.40 crore 
remained blocked for a per iod of three years due to delay in 
completion of works. 
Railway Board sanctioned a work for providing a new Traction Sub 
Station (TSS) at Limkheda between Dahod and Godhra in 2010-11. The 

 
220 
estimated cost of the work was `14.90 crore. The main objective of the 
work was to avoid overloading on TSS at Dahod by sharing the load of 
Dahod and Godhra feeding points. Accordingly, the work 355 was awarded 
to a firm 356 in April 2012 at a cost of ` 4.00 crore. The work was required 
to be completed within six months (October 2012). Meanwhile, WR also 
placed (November 2011) order for supply of two transformers of 21.6 
MVA capacities for TSS/ Limkheda. The cost of the transformers was ` 
3.26 crore and these were to be delivered on or before 02 June 2012.  
Western Railway entered into an agreement (February 2012) with 
MGVCL for supply of 10,000 KVA on HTP I tariff at TSS/Limkheda . They 
deposited ` 3.15 crore (January 2012) with MGVCL towards charges for 
transmission and service connection arrangements. As per the 
agreement, WR had to complete all the arrangements
357 for receiving 
supply at least 60 days prior to the date initially indicated for taking 
supply. They were liable to pay minimum guarantee charges in case they 
were not ready to receive reply, unless allowed extension by MGVCL.  
Audit noticed that the work related to supply of power at LMK/TSS was 
completed by MGVCL on 16 September 2013. However, the of supply, 
erection, commissioning of associated equipment for TSS could not be 
completed by that time. The reasons were delay in finalization of 
drawings. Audit further noticed that a total of 26 extensions were granted 
to the firm on Railway Account. This was mainly due to deficient planning 
and poor coordination between engineering and open line departments . 
These included  
 a dditional work as per RDSO’s revised directives of January 2013358,  
 delay in supply of spare items,  
 delay in finalisation of designs and drawings by Open Line (Division),  
                                                           
355 of design, supply, erection, testing and commissioning of associated equipment  
356 M/s Narmada Transmission Pvt. Ltd. 
357 To make available suitable accommodation for housing the Distribution Licensee 
equipment and apparatus 
358 Provision of PTFE neutral section in front of TSS in place of Insulated overlap  

 
221 
 provision of additional protection system for parallel operation of 
LMK/TSS and Dahod/TSS (November 2013), and  
 provision of additional 132 KV points (January 2015) etc.  
The work was finally completed in November 2016 after a delay of four 
years. Further, at the time of granting extensions, WR certified that the 
delay will not cause loss or damage to Railway . However, delay in 
completion of the work caused loss es to Railways , as they had to pay 
minimum guarantee amount to MGVCL. Audit also observed that WR did 
not seek timely extension from MGVCL though necessary arrangements 
were not in place. They requested (December 2013) MGVCL for 
extension after a considerable delay of 77 days, which was not accepted 
by MGVCL.  
Deputy Chief Electrical Engineer (Construction), Ratlam stated (June 
2017) that the delay was due to implementation of RDSO’s  guidelines of 
January 2013 involving technical improvements.  Audit, however, 
observed that the target date of completion was October 2012 i.e. much 
before the issue of guidelines by RDSO. Further, railways were liable to 
be penalized in case of non-completion of works related to receiving the 
power supply. As such, they should have completed the work as early as 
possible.  
Thus, Railway could not achieve energization of supply at LMK/TSS even 
though MGVCL was ready to commence supply. MGVCL commenced 
billing for the minimum guarantee charges from November 2013 after 
expiry of 60 days from the date of intimation 359 of ready for 
commencement of power supply.  WR withheld payment on the plea that 
work related to TSS was not completed. The issue was also taken up by 
Sr. Divisional Electrical Engineer, Ratlam with the Consumer Grievances 
Redressal Forum MGVCL. However, this was ruled (December 2015) 
against the Railways. As a result, Sr. Divisional Electrical Engineer, 
                                                           
359 17 September 2013 

 
222 
Ratlam had to make a payment of ` 3.75 crore towards minimum 
guarantee charges for the period from November 2013 to November 
2015. The amount also included Delayed Payment Charges (DPC) for the 
period. Payment of ` 0.46 crore was also made towards three months’ 
extension from 16 November 2015 to 15 February 2016 to avoid 
permanent disconnection. The delay resulted in blocking up of capital 
amounting to ` 12.40 crore for a period of three years. In addition, WR 
also had to bear a dividend liability of `
 1.42 crore from November 2013 to 
March 2016.  
Indian Railways  now have the right to avail power supply directly from 
generating companies under open access from generators of electricity as 
per Electricity Act. Accordingly , WR decided to obtain power supply 
through open access (February 2016) and got LMK/TSS disconnected 
permanently from MGVCL. 
Thus, Railways incurred an avoidable expenditure of ` 4.21 crore towards 
payment of Minimum Guarantee without availing power supply from 
MGVCL. 
There is a need to fix the responsibility on the officers responsible fo r 
delay in completion of works related arrangement required for receiving 
power supply.  
Railway Board accepted (11 March 2019) the facts  and stated that 
Railway tried their level best to get this minimum guarantee charges 
waived off. However, Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum gave its 
decision in favour of MGVCL. They added that the expenditure towards 
payment of Minimum Guarantee have already been recovered due to 
decision of the Railway to avail power through open access. 
Audit is of the view that had Railway completed the work for construction 
of LMK/TSS, the amount paid towards payment of Minimum Guarantee 
could have been saved.  

 
 
223 
6.6 Western Railway (WR): Non–segregation of electricity supplied to 
Railway colonies 
WR failed to segregate electricity sup plied for Railway colonies at 
Dahod. They continued to pay electricity charges to MGVCL on 
commercial rates, whereas recovery from employees was made at 
domestic rates. This resulted in extra expenditure of ` 3.36 crore . 
Besides, there was loss of ` 2.95 crore due to unaccounted electrical 
consumption for the period 2010-11 to 2017-18.   
Railway Board issued instructions (April 1986) to all Zonal Railways to 
segregate feeder lines for the Railway residential colonies . These 
instructions were issued to ensure that the payment of electricity charges 
in residential colonies was done at domestic tariff. Railway Board also 
advised (January 1987) Zonal Railways to recover the electricity charges 
from Railway employees at the rates, which they would have paid for 
direct supply from Electricity Boards. For new quarters, direct service 
connection from local supply authorities/ Electricity Boards was required 
to be arranged. This was to ensure that occupants could be billed 
individually and clear their electricity charges without coming through the 
railway channel. 
At Dahod/ WR, electricity is being supplied from Madhya Gujarat Vij 
Company Ltd. (MGVCL) since April 2005, at commercial rates 360. The 
segregation of power supply had not been done. As such, payment to 
MGVCL was being made by the Railway at commercial rates. However, 
the electricity charges for consumption in Railway residential colonies 
were being recovered at domestic rates from the occupants. Audit noticed 
that the matter could not be resolved at the local level. The same was 
also not escalated to Zonal Headquarter level. WR also did not approach 
Gujrat Electricity Regulatory Commission (GERC) seeking redressal in 
                                                           
360 High Tension Point (HTP) no.1 for Workshop, HTP no. 2 for service buildings and 
3059 Railway quarters located in five residential colonies scattered in the area of 2.74 
lakh sqm 

 
224 
the matter. Audit observed that 2.94 crore units of electricity was 
consumed in Dahod Railway colonies during the period 2010-11 to 2017-
18. For this, payment was made to MGVCL on commercial rates, whereas 
recovery from employees was made at domestic rates. This resulted in 
extra expenditure of `
 3.36 crore. 
Audit further noticed unaccounted electricity consumption of 41.08 lakh 
units worth `
 2.95 crore in Railway colonies at Dahod during 2010-11 to 
2017-18. WR attributed unaccounted electricity consumption to old 
transformers and distribution lines. However, they have not proposed 
replacement of these installations, as they plan to segregate power supply 
for Railway colonies. 
Railway Board in their reply stated (7 March 2019) that a writ petition was 
filed before GERC, Ahmedabad. Correspondences were also made with 
GERC during February 2015 to November 2017. They further added that 
the extra expenditure pointed out by Audit is notional as the work of 
segregation is still not completed.  
Audit has worked out the extra expenditure based on the difference 
between actual payment to MGVCL at commercial rate and amount 
recovered from the occupants of the Railway quarters at domestic rate.  
This could not be stated as notional. Further, GERC in its judgement (7 
February 2007) had directed Chief Works Manager, Dahod to apply for 
separate connection for the power supply to residential premises.  
However, even after lapse of more than 10 years, power supply to the 
Dahod Railway colony has not been segregated.  
Thus, there was lack of concerted action at appropriate level to install 
segregated electricity connection for Railway colonies at Dahod. This 
resulted in avoidable payment of `
 3.36 crore and loss of ` 2.95 crore due 
to unaccounted electrical consumption during 2010-11 to 2017-18.  
 

 
 225 
Chapter 7  
Other issues 
This Chapter includes a long paragraph on ‘Management of Kumbh Mela, 
2019 by the Railways’, wherein the deficiencies in running of trains, 
delays in completion of works undertaken for preparation of Kumbh Mela 
and issues of sanitation, security and safety of passengers have been 
highlighted. The Chapter also include two individual paragraphs 
highlighting issues related to procurement of stores at higher rates and 
non-redeployment of surplus staff.  

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 226 
7 
7.1 South Eastern Railway (SER):  Extra expenditure due to 
procurement of stores at higher rates and non -levy of liquidated 
damages 
Stores Department of SER purchased various store items during 
2012 to 2017 at higher rates in comparison to the rate of similar items 
procured almost simulta neously by Eastern Railway (ER). The 
information on rates of procurement by neighbouring Zonal Railways 
was readily available in iMMIS. However, while assessing the 
reasonableness of quoted rates, the Tender Committee did not take 
into consideration of these rates.  As a result, SER incurred extra 
expenditure of ` 7.93 crore due to procurement of stores at higher 
rates. Further, in 51 POs even though full contractual quantity of the 
material was not supplied by the supplier, SER issued fresh POs at 
higher rates. This entailed extra expenditure of ` 4.49 crore. Of these, 
in 23 POs the orders were given to the same suppliers at higher 
rates. In addition, liquidated damages of ` 2.35 crore was also not 
imposed on the defaulting contractors. 
Stores Department in various Zonal Railways procures store items for 
various railway departments. Tenders are called for through web -based e-
Procurement System. The summarized position of various stores 
procurements made by all Zonal Railways over a period of time, including 
rates of such procurements, are recorded in the Material Management 
Information System (MMIS)/ Integrated Material Management Information 
System (iMMIS). Audit studied the data of the Stores Department in SER 
for the period May 2011 to December 2017 and obs erved the following 
deficiencies: 
(i) Procurement of stores at higher rates - Ministry of Railways 
included a ‘Fall Clause’ in the Indian Railway Standard Conditions of 
Contract and codified 361 the same in December 1986.  As per the clause 
                                                           
361 Para 417 of Indian Railways Code for the Stores Department , Volume I (Appendix III 
to the Conditions of Contract (Para 3000 to 3003) 

 
 227 
‘the price charged  for the stores supplied under the contract by the 
contractor shall in no event exceed the lowest price at which the 
contractor sells the stores or offer to sell stores of identical description’.  
In December 1988, the Ministry further decided that Fall Clause shall be 
applicable only in rate contracts. In June 2008, the standard text of Fall 
Clause was included in the IRS Conditions of Contract as Clause 3000. 
Accordingly, the contractor is required to furnish a certificate to the 
concerned Accounts Officer along with each bill for payment of supplies 
made against the contract. The certificate should clearly specify that there 
has been no reduction in sale price of stores identical to the stores 
supplied under the contract and such stores have not been offered/ sold to 
any organisation at a price lower than the price charged to the 
Government under the contract.  
Audit undertook an exercise to assess the reasonableness of accepted 
rates of various procurements by SER from the data available in 
MMIS/iMMIS. Audit compared the rates of procurement by SER with the 
rates of similar items procured almost simultaneously (within a period of 
one month to nine months) by ER
362. The corresponding Purchase Order 
(PO) files of SER and copies of POs of ER were also reviewed. The 
review covered a period of five years from December 2012 to December 
2017. 
Audit observed that  
 Stores Department of SER procured various store items at a much 
higher rates per unit than the rates of similar items procured 
simultaneously by ER through 120 POs.  
 In 108 363 POs out of 120, SER incurred extra expenditure of ` 7.93 
crore.  
                                                           
362 ER is a neighbouring Zonal Railway with headquarters at the same station viz. 
Kolkata 
363 In 11 POs out of these, another railway office was the nodal authority for receipt and 
distribution of the store procured for users including COS, Stores, Kolkata  

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 228 
 The difference in rate of SER and ER ranged from 5.08 per cent  to 
234.75 per cent.  
 Out of 108 POs, in respect of five POs, procurement was made from 
the same supplier with in a time gap of one to seven months involving 
extra expenditure of ` 0.46 crore. 
  The certificate which was mandatory to be obtained from the 
contractor was not obtained by the Stores Department of SER. 
SER was aware of the rates of procurement of a parti cular item by other 
Zonal Railways at the time of assessing reasonableness of offered rates.  
However, the Tender Committee364 did not consider the procurement rates 
of ER or any other Zonal Railways for the purpose of assessing 
reasonableness of the quoted r ates. SER also did not enforce the ‘Fall 
Clause’ as part of IRS conditions of contracts to safeguard railway’s 
financial interest. 
Audit verified the system presently being followed by other departments of 
SER for procurement of stores. Audit observed that  the procurement rates 
of other Zonal Railways were taken into account while assessing the 
reasonableness of rates by the Medical Department of SER. 
Thus, Stores Department of SER failed to observe financial propriety in 
application of the ‘Fall Clause’ an d assessing reasonableness of offered 
rates. Ineffective internal control mechanism by SER Administration led to 
extra expenditure of ` 7.93 crore on procurement of stores at higher rates  
in 108 POs. 
 (ii) Issue of fresh POs at higher rates without receivi ng the full 
quantities in the earlier POs (to the same supplier in some cases) - 
The term ‘Delivery’ 365 emphasizes that Contractor inter alia shall, as may 
be required by the Purchaser, deliver the required quantity of the stores 
and by the date specified in the contract. The delivery schedule mentioned 
in a PO gives a fixed period for completing supply of each material under 
                                                           
364 including the Member from the Finance Department 
365 As per Clause 0601 of Appendix III under Para 417 of the Indian Railway s Code for 
the Stores Department, Volume I 

 
 
 229 
procurement, failing which provisions of penalty come into effect. As per 
Railway Board’s orders 366, Liquidated Damages (LD) of a sum equivalent 
to two per cent of the price of the stores for each month or part of a month 
of delay in delivery, as per contract schedule (subject to the upper limit of 
10 per cent ) of value of delayed supplies irrespective of delays, unless 
otherwise provided, should be recovered.  
Audit noticed that the above codal provisions and Railway Board’s orders 
were not observed by the Stores Department on behalf of various railway 
departments. In respect of 51 POs issued during May 2011 to November 
2016, full contractual quantity of the material was not supplied by the 
suppliers. However, SER issued fresh POs at higher rate resulting in extra 
liability of ` 4.49 crore, as assessed in audit
367. Railways did not take any 
initiative to regularize the earlier 51 POs by issuin g formal amendment/ 
cancellation before processing fresh tenders. In 23 of the above POs, 
even though supplies against earlier POs were incomplete, subsequent 
POs were issued to the same suppliers at higher rates.  
(iii) Non-levy of liquidated damages - Audit further reviewed the data 
regarding levy of LD in the IT systems viz. AFRES 368/IPAS369 maintained 
by SER. Audit observed that railway had not imposed LD against any of 
the defaulting contractors in respect of 39 out of the 51 POs mentioned 
above. In these 51 POs, supply of material had been pending for long time 
(ranging between one year and five and half years). The amount of 
leviable LD assessed in audit was 
` 2.35 crore.  
Thus, without receiving the full contractual quantity of the material, SER 
issued fresh POs at higher rates resulting in extra liability of  ` 4.49 crore. 
Further, SER did not impose liquidated damages of  ` 2.35 crore  on 
defaulting contractors for delayed delivery of materials. 
                                                           
366 Compendium of October 2009 on ‘Rules for entering into supply contracts’  
367 In 11 POs, out of these, another railway office was the nodal authority for receipt and 
distribution of the stores procured for users including COS, Stores, Kolkata 
368 Advanced Financial and Railway Expenditure Management System (the application 
which was used by the railways before implementation of IPAS) 
369 Integrated Payroll and Accounting System 

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 230 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 15 November 201 8; their 
reply has not been received (30 September 2019). 
7.2 Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR): Unproductive expenditure due 
to non-redeployment of surplus staff of a closed Me tre Gauge Diesel 
shed  
The Diesel Shed at Lumding was closed in October 2014, du e to 
gauge conversion 370 of Lumding - Badarpur - Silchar section. 
However, NFR did not take timely action to redeploy all the staff of 
the Diesel Shed. This led to unproductive expenditure of ` 34.81 
crore on 362 to 140 surplus staff during October 2014 to July 2018. 
As per instructions371 of Railway Board (April 1989), areas where staff are 
likely to be rendered surplus, are required to be identified well in advance 
and planning made for their suitable redeployment. 
For gauge conversion of the Lumding –Badarpur–Silchar section, Railway 
Board decided (June 2014) to impose Mega Block 372 with effect from 1 
October 2014. Consequently, Diesel Shed at Lumding having strength of 
362 staff became redundant and the personnel engaged in the shed 
became surplus. A meeting wa s held in September 2014 by General 
Manager and other Head of Departments  of both Open Line and 
Construction Organisation. Accordingly, an action plan for redeployment 
of staff of the shed on roll as on September 2014 was drawn.  This was 
done in consultation with the office bearers of recognised unions of NFR. 
The following was decided: 
 Out of 325373 staff on roll, 50 staff would be retained at Lumding for the 
purpose of running trains between Karimganj– Agartala portion. 
 They would be deputed to Karimganj in  a batch of 25 for the period of 
two months on rotation basis.  
                                                           
370 From Meter Gauge to Broad Gauge 
371 Railway Board’s letter No. E(NG)II-84/RE-1/10 dated 21.04.1989 
372 A mega block means suspension of traffic on a long stretch due to 
maintenance/construction work. 
373 Railway Administration did not take Leave Reserves, Stores Staff, Laboratory Staff, 
Loco Inspectors, Ministerial Staff etc. into account. 

 
 
 231 
 Remaining staff was decided to be shifted to other Diesel Sheds of the 
Zone. They were to be transferred back to the Lumding Diesel Shed, 
once BG Diesel Shed was commissioned after two to three years. 
Audit observed that orders of only 178 staff for transfer to different Sheds 
and Workshops were issued (January to February 2015). With effect from 
1 October 2015, 50 staff, who were decided to be retained, also became 
surplus as by that time Mega Block was imposed in Karimganj-Agartala 
portion too. As such, NFR Administration transferred the existing staff only 
partially and that too after a delay of four to five months.  They made 
payment of `
 34.81 crore 374 towards pay and allowances of the surplus 
staff.  
In reply, Railway Board stated (April 2019) that 
a. Resettlement of LMG Diesel Shed staff was a policy matter and 
decision was to be taken by Zonal Headquarters as per minutes of 
meeting. 
b. As per sectional requirement for Meter Gauge train operation in 
section between Karimganj -Agartala from the period 01 November 
2014 to 30 September 2015, 26 locos were maintained at Karimganj. 
c. The LRS staff, store staff, Laboratory staff, loco inspector and 
ministerial staff were included in muster roll in diesel shed because 
they belong to LMG Diesel shed. 
d. Adequate measures/steps were taken as far as possible and practical 
for deployment of surplus staff in other diesel sheds and 
troubleshooting points and they are continuing to work there. 
Audit, however, noticed that after six months from receipt of Railway 
Board’s order and three months from imposing Mega Block, Divisional 
Railway Manager (P) issued (January 2015) transfer orders of only half of 
the staff on roll. As per the instructions, action should have been taken 
immediately after the decision was taken. In the meeting of September 
                                                           
374 ` 10.65 crore for the period from October 2014 to September 2015 and ` 24.16 crore 
for the period from October 2015 to July 2018 

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 232 
2014, no decision was taken for retaining 70 excess staff over and above 
the 50 staff considered. 50 staff decided to be retained were supposed to 
be deputed to Karimganj in a batch  of 25 for a period of two months on 
rotation basis. Also, 25 staff deputed to Karimganj were to attend Minor 
Schedule of Meter Gauge Locomotives. Required infrastructure for major 
repair like periodic overhaul (POH) was not available at Karimganj. Out of 
362 staff on roll as of September 2014, decision was taken to transfer 237 
staff leaving 125 staff outside the purview of re -deployment from the very 
beginning. Out of 237 staff decided for transfer , order was issued to 
transfer only 178 staff leaving behi nd another 59 staff taking the number 
to 184. Retained 140 375 staff were still on roll at the end of July 2018 
against Diesel Shed of Lumding which was closed in October 2014. Thus, 
non-redeployment of all the staff of MG Diesel shed at Lumding led to 
unproductive expenditure of ` 34.81 crore. 
7.3 Management of Kumbh Mela, 2019 by the Railways 
 
7.3.1 Introduction 
Kumbh Mela has 
been inscribed in 
the UNESCO's 
representative list 
of the int angible 
cultural heritage of 
humanity376. At 
Allahabad, the 
Kumbh Mela is held 
after every six 
years and Maha Kumbh Mela after every 12 years. The Kumbh Mela, 
2019 was held between 15 January 2019 and 4 March 2019 for 49 days. 
Railways play an integral role  in ensuring the smooth organisation of the 
event by actively coordinating with the State Government. This includes  
                                                           
375Number decreased owing to superannuation etc. 
376Inscription: 12.COM 11.b.12 
Figure  7.1: Tent City in Kumbh Mela area, Allahabad 

 
 233 
 running special trains for dispersal of pilgrims 
 taking care of sanitation and minimum essential amenities at the 
railway premises 
 arranging temporary holding in station premises 
 facilitation in Mela area for Booking & Passenger Information; and 
 ensuring the safety and comfort of pilgrims during the event.  
The Kumbh Mela railway traffic in the Allahabad area is handled at ten 377 
Railway stations of three zones, viz., North Central Railway (NCR) , 
Northern Railway (NR), and North Eastern Railway (NER). These stations 
are located within 1.6 km to 14 km from Sangam area. 
Audit reviewed (August to November 2018) the activities of Railways for 
management of Kumbh Mela, 2019. Audit recommended short term (for 
Kumbh Mela 2019), medium term (for Magh Mela 2020) and long term 
(for Maha Kumbh 2025) measures. Railways responses and action taken 
have been verified/examined during the Mela period. Audit observed that 
no unfortunate events occurred during the Mela period. Audit, however, 
noticed that issues such as running of special trains, works related to 
passenger amenities and safety, medical facilities to passengers, waste 
                                                           
377 Out of ten Mela serving stations, Daraganj station (NER) was closed during Kumbh 
Mela, 2019 
Map 1: Mela Area Stations 

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 234 
management at station premises were not adequately addressed by 
Railways.  
Audit also studied the manner in which the passengers and operations 
were handled by the railways during the Mela period. Instructions/ 
Guidelines issued by the Railway Board regarding the planning and 
execution of work related to Kumbh Mela, 2019, minutes of meetings to 
monitor the works, Justice (Rtd.) Onkareshwar Bhatt’s Committee Report 
and Report of the Harvard University on Maha Kumbh Mela 2013 were 
the main sources of criteria for audit review. 
Audit findings are discussed in subsequent paragraphs.  
7.3.2  Running of special trains 
During the Maha Kumbh Mela, 2013 to evacuate the expected 34 lakh 
passengers, 471 Mela Special trains were planned. Audit commented on 
shortfall (ranged between four to 13) in the  running of Mela Special trains 
from Allahabad station during the important bathing days (Makar Sakranti, 
Mauni Amawasya and Basant Panchami). This caused overcrowded and 
passenger inconvenience on these days.    
For Kumbh Mela 2019, Railway estimated (September 2018) an 
evacuation of 33 lakh passengers, which was subsequently revised 
(December 2018) to 45.48 lakh. They planned to run 800 (subsequently 
increased to 821378) outward Mela Special trains on 30 days379.  
In order to avoid recurrence of stampede -like situation, the Bhatt 
Committee380 had recommended (August 2014)  that no special train 
should originate or terminate from/ to Allahabad Junction. The Committee 
recommended originating/terminating these trains from satellite stations 381 
of Allahabad Junction. H owever, Railways planned 54 per cent  of the 
                                                           
378 NCR-622, NER-110+21 & NR-68 
379six main bathing days including two days before and two days after  
380 The State Government of Uttar Pradesh on 18 February 2013 appointed 
Onkareshwar Bhatt, the retired Justice of Allahabad High Court to conduct Judicial Probe 
into the Allahabad Railway Station Stampede that occurred during Kumbh Mela  period. 
381 Stations which are little far from main station, in decongested areas so that the train s 
can terminate and originate from these station without congesting the main stations.  

 
 235 
special trains (440 out of 821) to run from Allahabad Junction. Audit 
observed that 
 As against 821 special trains planned, total 565 382 special trains were 
actually run. There was a shortfall of 256383 special trains.  
 Railways were also not able to operate the special trains as per their 
planning for the main bathing days (including one day after). On 13 
Mela days384 including the main bathing days and one day after, 72 per 
cent were run. 
 Audit reviewed the position o f timetabling of special trains during the 
Mela period. Timetable of 50 per cent of special trains was announced  
by railway only on 03 January 2019, due to non -confirmation of 
availability of rakes. This did not leave adequate time for the 
passengers to plan their journey and book tickets in special trains.  
 Railways intimated a figure of 73.66 lakh evacuation of passengers 
during Mela period in Sameeksha Sangosthi of March 2019 held in 
Railway Board. Railways again intimated (August 2019) a figure of 
73.41 lakh passengers based on the special trains and regular trains 
run during the mela period. Railways carried these passengers through 
the special and regular trains. 
                                                           
382 427, 75, and 63 special trains were run by NCR, NER, and NR respectively  
383 195-NCR, 56-NER & 5-NR 
384 Makar Sankranti (15.01.19 and 16.01.19), Paush Poornima (21.01.19 and 22.01.19), 
Mauni Amavasya (04.02.19, 05.02.19 and 06.02.19), Basant  Panchmi (10.02.19 and 
11.02.19), Maghi  Poornima (19.02.19 and 20.02.19) and Maha Shivratri (04.03.19 and 
05.03.19) 
Figure 7.3 Passengers sitting on the engine at 
Naini 
 
Figure 7.2 Passengers entering through 
emergency window 


Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 236 
 However, as per the records of commercial department, 31.21 lakh 
tickets were sold from Al lahabad area (stations of NCR, NR and NER) 
during the mela period.  Even if it is accepted, for arguments sake, that 
the sale of tickets figure may not be total evacuation as there would be 
ticket sale from other stations also for outward journey from Alla habad, 
ticketless travel during the mela period  etc., the gap of over 40 lakh 
passengers seems difficult to explain. 
 Correctness of the estimates  of travel  needs to be also seen in the 
context that based on the estimation of 45.48 lakh passengers, Railway 
planned 821 special trains. They, however, ran only 565 trains. A 
significantly higher number  of passengers, with fewer special trains is 
difficult to accept. 
 No effective steps were taken by the Railways to assess the actual 
footfall at the stations during Kumbh Mela, 2019.  
7.3.3 Impact of incomplete works on passenger amenities, crowd 
management and cleanliness 
Railways undertook 52 works costing approximately ` 1,850 crore for 
supplementing infrastructure facilities relating to passenger amenities. 
These works related to the development of stations, circulating areas, 
traffic facilities, Foot Over Bridge  and Road over Bridge. Of these, 22 
works related to passenger amenities. Remaining 30 works relate to the 
Figure 7.4 Accumulation of passengers outside 
enclosure at Allahabad station 
 
Figure 7.5 Over crowded enclosure at 
Allahabad station 
 


 
 
 237 
creation of infrastructure for the smooth movement of trains during the 
Mela period and beyond.  
(a) Passenger Amenities works 
Out of 22 passenger amenities works, seven works could not be 
completed at the time of the start of the Mela on 15 January 2019. Audit 
observed that 
 Quick watering arrangement work was planned at Allahabad. This 
was meant to reduce the stoppage time of trains for watering at 
Allahabad. The work was not 
completed and at least 4300 
coaches in different trains at 
Allahabad Stations departed 
without water during Kumbh Mela 
period. Around 6.12
385 lakh 
passengers were inconvenienced 
due to trains departing without 
water. 
 The new overhead tank 386 at 
Chheoki Station was not 
constructed up to end of Kumbh 
Mela 2019. Passengers were 
found drinking unhygienic water from pipes meant to hydrate the 
coach toilets.  
 The work of 3 rd down line between Naini and Chheoki with additional 
platform (2km) was not completed. 91 trains from/ to Jabalpur and 
Jhansi originated/ terminated at Allahabad junction. These trains 
could have been run from Cheoki, if the planned work was completed. 
This resulted in an additional burden on already saturated Allahabad 
Junction
387 and impacted movement of regular trains from the station.  
                                                           
385 4300 coaches/20 coaches per train *2850 passenger per train = 612750 passengers 
386 Work of Chheoki-development as a terminal station which included new overhead 
tank 
387 Allahabad station handles around 190 trains per day in five directional passenger 
traffic out of which 18 trains are originating trains 
Figure 7.6 Passengers drinking 
unhygienic water from hydrant pipes at 
Allahabad Chheoki 


Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 238 
 Subedarganj station was planned to be developed as a Terminal 
station. This would en able to shift Kanpur-bound spec ial trains from 
Allahabad to Subedarganj to reduce the burden on Allahabad 
Junction. However, the work was yet to be completed (April 2019). As 
a result, only ten Mela 
special trains could be run 
from Subedarganj.  
 The work o f multi -level 
parking at Allahabad 
railway station was 
sanctioned in 2017. The 
work remained incomplete 
and parking facility in 
circulating area of 
Allahabad Junction was 
closed. This led to huge traffic jams. Unauthorised parking of vehicles 
was noticed outside circulating area of station during the Kumbh 
Mela, 2019. 
 In consultation with State Government, Railways had planned for 
construction of community toilets at 29 locations on Allahabad station 
to prevent open defecation. However, the work was not initiated. Even 
those which were newly constructed (including one for ‘ divyangjan’ at 
platforms of Allahabad Station) were found closed/unusable. This may 
Figure 7.7 Huge traffic jam and discomfort at 
Allahabad Railway station road 
Figure 7.8: Toilets for Divyangjan and females were found locked at Allahabad 
station 
 

 
 239 
have been a reason for open defecation, as noticed in station 
premises. 
There were delays in execution of the  above works, as adequate 
planning was not done and funds provided were not adequate or 
provided late. There were other issues such as non -availability of labour, 
site clearance etc., which delayed these works.  
7.3.4 Cleanliness and waste management  
Provision of clean and hygienic surroundings is one of the commitments 
made by Indian Railways in its Citizen Charter. During Kumbh Mela/ 
Magh Mela, sanitation and cleanliness at the Railway station, disposal 
and treatment of solid and liquid waste is a major challenge for Railways. 
Environment pollution and an 
outbreak of vector-borne disease 
are potential risk areas.   
As per NGT’s 388 interim report of 
10.4.2019, 18,000 metric tonne of 
solid waste collected during Kumbh 
Mela 2019 remained untreated in 
Allahabad district. Audit estimated 
that within railways, ~2029 to 
4788
389 quintal garbage (based on 
the norms 390 suggested by the 
RITES) remained untreated due to 
non-availability of any mechanism for Solid Waste Management during 
Kumbh Mela, 2019. As per solid waste management rule-2016
391 it is the 
responsibility of the waste generator to ensure treatment of generated 
waste.  
                                                           
388 National Green Tribunal 
389 65 gm x 31 21000 (31.21 lakh passengers  of tickets sold in Kumbh 2019)=2029  
Quintals to 65 gm x 73 66000 (73.66 lakh passengers evacuated as per Railway s) = 
4788 Quintals 
390 On an average one railway passenger contributes to roughly 65 gram of waste. 
391 It is the duty of the waste generator to ensure segregation of waste at source, 
facilitate collection of segregated waste in separate stream, handover recyclable material 
to either the authorised waste picker or the authorised recyclers. The biodegradable 
waste shall be processed, treated and disposed of within the premises as far as 
possible. 
Figure 7.9 Non segregation of waste at 
source into bio-degradable and non-
biodegradable wastes - Allahabad 
station 
 
 


Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 240 
During physical verification (13 January to 6 February 2019), Audit 
noticed non-segregation of waste, non - provision of separate dustbins  for 
biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste at Allahabad (platform no.7), 
Naini (platform no.1)  and Chheoki (platform no.1) stations. Audit also 
noticed use of open trucks/trolley for carrying the waste from the platform 
of Allahabad Station. The staff engaged in  cleaning work were found 
without personal protection equipment like hand gloves and face mask  
(platform no.1 and 2 of Allahabad station, platform no.2 of both Chheoki 
and Naini stations).  
7.3.5 Medical Facilities 
Railway Medical department had planned first -aid posts, sanitation 
arrangement, management of portable drinking water, foodstuff check, 
control of infectious diseases, control over flies and mosquitoes, and 
immunization and inoculations of staff members. Railway ha d planned to 
keep Acci dent Relief Medical Equipment (ARME) at Allahabad and 
Kanpur ready for an emergency. During Kumbh Mela, 2019, Audit noticed 
that  
1. Emergency services of blood bank were not available in the Central 
Railway Hospital Allahabad. 
2. Pre-packed first-aid kits for s tampede were made available at Kumbh 
serving Railway stations for better disaster preparedness. 
3. During Kumbh Mela 2019, the contract for Pharmacist and Health 
attendant for first -aid Booth for thirty days (for main bathing days 
including two days before and after) was awarded. However, the same 
was not found functional on five days on all the Mela stations checked 
in Audit 392. Further on two 393 other days, first -aid booth was also not 
found functional at Allahabad Chheoki station.  
4. Audit noticed that five out o f seven ambulances hired by the 
railways394 were without any emergency equipment like oxygen 
cylinder, str etcher, stretcher bearer, first -aid box. Given the past 
experience of the stampede during Kumbh Mela 2013, Railways 
                                                           
392 02.02.2019, 03.02.2019, 12.02.2019, 21.02.2019 & 06.03.2019 
393 08.02.2019 and 11.02.2019 
394 5-Mechanical department, 2-Medical Department 

 
 241 
should have planned for fully equipped ambulances for use in 
emergency. 
7.3.6 Safety arrangement in station premises 
As per Railway Board’s instructions395, third party audit of FOBs need to be 
conducted to assess the condition of FOBs and to ensure safety . In the ibid 
instructions, Zonal Railways were advised to carry out one time third party 
technical audit of FOBs duly checking all aspects of the FOBs by engaging 
expert national/international agencies. However, the same has not been 
conducted at Allahabad and other stations. NCR administration st ated 
(December 2018) that Safety audit is required to be carried out for more 
than 80 years old Bridges / FOBs. Mandatory inspections of all the FOBs 
were being done as per the prescribed guidelines of Railway Board. 
However, Audit noted that third -party sa fety audit of FOBs was not 
conducted in NCR.  
Audit also noticed that there  was no FOB connectivity between platform 
number 02 and 03 at Jhusi station. As a result, the movement of 
passengers from one platform to another platform was primarily through 
railway tracks only, which was risky and could have caused accidents  
(figure 7.10). 
                                                           
395 Railway Board Letter No. 2017/07/CE-III/BR/Safety dated 03.08.2018 
Figure 7.10 Movement of passengers from one PF to another PF through railway 
tracks at Jhusi station as there was no FOB 
 

Chapter 7 Report No. 19  of 2019 (Railways) 
 
 242 
During Kumbh Mela, Audit noticed that while other stations have sufficient 
wide entry gates, widening of entry gates was not planned in Naini station 
for ensuring smooth crowd  management. Wide-entry gates were made at 
Naini Junction during Kumbh Mela, 2019, after the matter was raised in 
Audit. Audit further noticed that  
 During joint inspection (May 
2018) with State Mela Authorities, 
vulnerable locations were 
identified for f encing to ensure 
unidirectional traffic.  Work of 
fencing of identified vulnerable 
locations (track & station entry 
point) at four locations (Chheoki, 
Naini, Jhusi, Allahabad City)  was 
also planned but not completed 
during Kumbh Mela period. This 
resulted in free movement of cattle on the tracks  and passenger 
trespassing compromising their safety (illustrated in figures 7.11 to 
7.13).  
 Metal detectors/luggage scanners were planned for ensuring the safety 
and security of passengers. However, these were not u tilised during 
peak hours or remained non-functional during the Mela.  
 
Figure 7.11 Trespassing at Allahabad 
Chheoki station due to non/partial fencing 
Figure 7.12 No fencing/boundary cause 
trespassing at Naini Junction 
 
Figure 7.13 Incomplete fencing at 
Chheoki station leading to cattle on the 
tracks 
 
 

 
 243 
7.4 Conclusion 
The Kumbh Mela, 2019 was held between 15 January 2019 and 4 March 
2019 for 49 days. Railways had an integral role in ensuring smooth 
organisation of the event by actively coordinating with the State 
Government. Audit noted that issues such as running of special trains, 
works related to passenger amenities and safety, medical facilities to 
passengers, waste management at station premises were not adequately 
addressed by Railways. These caused inconvenience to passengers 
coming for the Kumbh Mela. Temporary fencing at vulnerable locations 
(track & station entry point) were not completed. This led to cases of free 
movement of cattle on tracks and passengers trespassing.  
Not addressing the above issues adequately may pose risk for the next 
mega event such as Magh Mela 2020 and Maha Kumbh Mela 2025. It is 
likely that in future the footfall and accumulation of crowd at Allahabad 
would only increase. Therefore, Railways need to address the above 
issues before the Magh Mela 2020.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi        (ROY MATHRANI) 
Dated:   Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
New Delhi       (RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
Dated:   Comptroller and Auditor General of India  


 

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
244 
 
Annexure 1.1 (Para 1.8) 
Status of Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Railways (as on 30 September 2019) 
Year Total Paragraphs 
included in the 
Reports 
No. of Paragraphs 
on which ATNs 
finalized 
No. of Paragraphs on which ATNs are pending 
ATNs not 
received 
ATNs on which 
comments sent to 
Railway Board 
ATNs finally vetted but yet to be loaded in 
the portal 
ATNs under 
verification 
by Audit 
Total 
2012-13 30 29 0 1 0 0 1 
2013-14 47 43 0 2 0 2 4 
2014-15 44 39 0 2 0 3 5 
2015-16 45 32 0 9 0 4 13 
2016-17 46 12 7 10 1 16 34 
Total 212 155 7 24 1 25 57 
        Status of Public Account Committee's Action Taken Reports of 16th Lok Sabha (as on 30 September 2019) 
  Report no. Total number of 
Paragraph 
No. of 
paragraphs on 
which ATR 
finalised 
No. of Paragraphs on which ATR are pending 
  ATR  vetted by 
Audit and 
pending with 
Ministry 
Vetted ATR sent to 
Ministry with its 
comments 
ATR pending with Audit for vetting 
comment 
  84th  2 2 0 0 0 
  86th  3 2 0 0 1 
  88th  7 7 0 0 0 
  93rd 8 8 0 0 0 
  99th 3 3 0 0 0 
  100th 3 3 0 0 0 
  108th 3 3 0 0 0 
  109th 10 5 0 0 5 
  116th 2 1 1 0 0 
  117th 1 1 0 0 0 
  119th 5 3 2 0 0 
  Total 47 38 3 0 6 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
245 
 
Annexure 2.1 (Para 2.1.6) 
Statement showing status of proposal received and Private Freight Terminals commissioned on Indian 
Railways. 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Period Number of  proposals 
received for setting up 
of PFTs (Opening 
Balance) 
PFTs 
commissioned   
Number of 
proposal 
outstanding 
(Closing 
Balance) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 CR Up to March 2016 4 4 0 
    2016-17 0+2 1 1 
    2017-18 1+3 2 2 
    TOTAL 9 7 2 
2 ER Up to March 2016 6 2 4 
    2016-17 4+0 0 4 
    2017-18 4+0 0 4 
    TOTAL 6 2 4 
3 ECR Up to March 2016 7 2 5 
    2016-17 5+0 0 5 
    2017-18 5+1 0 6 
    TOTAL 8 2 6 
4 ECoR Up to March 2016 3 1 2 
    2016-17 2+1 1 2 
    2017-18 2+2 2 2 
    TOTAL 6 4 2 
5 NR Up to March 2016 14 6 8 
    2016-17 8+5 5 8 
    2017-18 8+10 1 17 

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
246 
 
    TOTAL 29 12 17 
6 NCR Up to March 2016 2 2 0 
    2016-17 0+1 0 1 
    2017-18 1+1 0 2 
    TOTAL 4 2 2 
7 NER Up to March 2016 3 1 2 
    2016-17 2+0 1 1 
    2017-18 1+2 0 3 
    TOTAL 5 2 3 
8 NFR Up to March 2016 0 0 0 
    2016-17 0+1 0 1 
    2017-18 1+0 0 1 
    TOTAL 1 0 1 
9 NWR Up to March 2016 4 3 1 
    2016-17 1+0 0 1 
    2017-18 1+1 0 2 
    TOTAL 5 3 2 
10 SR Up to March 2016 1 0 1 
    2016-17 1+1 0 2 
    2017-18 2+0 0 2 
    TOTAL 2 0 2 
11 SCR Up to March 2016 10 3 7 
    2016-17 7+0 2 5 
    2017-18 5+1 1 5 
    TOTAL 11 6 5 
12 SER Up to March 2016 5 1 4 
    2016-17 4+1 2 3 
    2017-18 3+0 0 3 

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
247 
 
    TOTAL 6 3 3 
13 SECR Up to March 2016 6 3 3 
    2016-17 3+1 1 3 
    2017-18 3+0 2 1 
    TOTAL 7 6 1 
14 SWR Up to March 2016 2 0 2 
    2016-17 2+1 0 3 
    2017-18 3+2 0 5 
    TOTAL 5 0 5 
15 WR Up to March 2016 11 3 8 
    2016-17 8+1 2 7 
    2017-18 7+1 2 6 
    TOTAL 13 7 6 
16 WCR Up to March 2016 2 2 0 
    2016-17 0+2 0 2 
    2017-18 2+0 0 2 
    TOTAL 4 2 2 
  IR Up to March 2016 80 33 47 
    2016-17 47+17 15 49 
    2017-18 49+24 10 63 
    TOTAL 121 58 63 
Note Closing balance of previous year has been shown in opening balance of next year. 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
248 
 
Annexure 2.2 (Para 2.1.7) 
Statement showing the details of projected traffic vis-à-vis actual traffic at PFTs during the period 2015-16 to 2017-18 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of 
Divisions 
Number of  
PFTs 
Year Projected business volume at the time of 
application (DPR) submitted by TMC 
Actual number 
of rakes  
loaded/ 
unloaded in 
PFTs 
Shortfall, if 
any, w.r.to 
col. No.7 
(col.7-col.8) 
Shortfall in 
percentage 
Number of 
rakes for 
loading 
Number of 
rakes for 
unloading 
Total (Col 5 
+ Col 6)  
  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 CR 2 7 
2015-16 552 1683 2235 683 1552 69.45 
2016-17 596 1711 2307 600 1707 74.00 
2017-18 1087 1757 2844 830 2014 70.81 
TOTAL 2235 5151 7386 2113 5273 71.39 
2 ER 1 2 
2015-16 190 625 815 218 597 73.25 
2016-17 194 639 833 214 619 74.31 
2017-18 202 655 857 450 407 47.49 
TOTAL 586 1919 2505 882 1623 64.79 
3 ECR 2 2 
2015-16 12 48 60 118 -58 -96.67 
2016-17 24 96 120 198 -78 -65.00 
2017-18 24 96 120 180 -60 -50.00 
TOTAL 60 240 300 496 -196 -65.33 
4 ECoR 3 4 
2015-16 684 360 1044 274 770 73.75 
2016-17 796 462 1258 283 975 77.50 
2017-18 1505 1113 2618 580 2038 77.85 
TOTAL 2985 1935 4920 1137 3783 76.89 
5 NR 3 12 
2015-16 1459 2031 3490 3234 256 7.34 
2016-17 2062 2621 4683 4510 173 3.69 
2017-18 2946 3576 6522 7457 -935 -14.34 
TOTAL 6467 8228 14695 15201 -506 -3.44 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
249 
 
6 NCR 1 2 
2015-16 186 174 360 604 -244 -67.78 
2016-17 198 186 384 754 -370 -96.35 
2017-18  198 186 384 992 -608 -158.33 
TOTAL 582 546 1128 2350 -1222 -108.33 
7 NER 1 2 
2015-16 100 20 120 129 -9 -7.50 
2016-17 532 177 709 409 300 42.31 
2017-18 654 239 893 848 45 5.03 
TOTAL 1286 436 1722 1386 336 19.50 
8 NWR 1 3 
2015-16 772 772 1544 2285 -741 -47.99 
2016-17  830 830 1660 4277 -2617 -157.65 
2017-18  1205 1205 2410 7145 -4735 -196.47 
TOTAL 2807 2807 5614 13707 -8093 -144.16 
9 SCR 3 6 
2015-16 144 463 607 672 -65 -10.68 
2016-17 211 606 817 615 202 24.72 
2017-18 831 752 1583 909 674 42.58 
TOTAL 1186 1821 3007 2196 811 26.97 
10 SER 1 3 
2015-16 1116 1476 2592 570 2022 78.01 
2016-17  1116 1476 2592 407 2185 84.30 
2017-18  1116 1476 2592 604 1988 76.70 
TOTAL 3348 4428 7776 1581 6195 79.67 
11 SECR 2 6 
2015-16 1893 2248 4141 1163 2978 71.91 
2016-17  2397 2500 4897 1008 3889 79.41 
2017-18  2507 2394 4901 1153 3748 76.47 
TOTAL 6797 7142 13939 3324 10615 76.15 
12 WR 4 7 
2015-16 465 376 841 863 -22 -2.60 
2016-17  1594 1775 3369 1001 2368 70.29 
2017-18  2735 2916 5651 1744 3907 69.14 
TOTAL 4794 5067 9861 3608 6253 63.41 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
250 
 
13 WCR 2 2 
2015-16 292 304 596 2 594 99.66 
2016-17 672 504 1176 90 1086 92.35 
2017-18 672 504 1176 84 1092 92.86 
TOTAL 1636 1312 2948 176 2772 94.03 
  
IR 26 58 
2015-16 7865 10580 18445 10815 7630 41.37 
2016-17 11222 13583 24805 14366 10439 42.08 
2017-18 15682 16869 32551 22976 9574 29.41 
TOTAL 34769 41032 75801 48157 27643 36.47 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
251 
 
Annexure 2.3 (Para 2.1.7-i)  
Status of setting up of Freight Terminals (Private Siding and PFTs) under “Mission 100” during 2016–2018 
S. 
no 
Zonal 
Railway 
Target  for 
commissioning 
of Private 
Sidings  
Private siding 
commissioned  
Target  for 
commissioning 
of PFTs  
PFTs 
commissioned  
Target  for 
commissioning 
of Private 
Terminals  
Private 
Terminals 
commissioned  
Shortfall in 
commissioning 
of Freight 
Terminals 
1 CR 6 3 5 3 11 6 5 
2 ER 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 
3 ECR 5 1 0 0 5 1 4 
4 ECoR 8 5 1 3 9 8 1 
5 NR 6 2 8 6 14 8 6 
6 NCR 10 4 0 0 10 4 6 
7 NER 0 0 2 1 2 1 1 
8 NFR 3 1 1 0 4 1 3 
9 NWR 5 1 0 0 5 1 4 
10 SR 6 4 0 0 6 4 2 
11 SCR 3 3 3 3 6 6 0 
12 SER 11 5 3 2 14 7 7 
13 SECR 8 8 3 3 11 11 0 
14 SWR 4 3 0 0 4 3 1 
15 WR 3 2 6 4 9 6 3 
16 WCR 0 0 2 0 2 0 2 
  IR 78 42 35 25 113 67 46 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
252 
 
Annexure 2.4 (Para 2.1.7-ii) 
Statement showing analysis of freight earnings of PFTs and freight earnings of Divisions where PFTs commissioned during 2015-16 to 2017-18 
Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
Divisions 
Division wise Earnings (In crore) TOTAL Number of 
PFTs 
PFTs Earnings (In crore) TOTAL Contribution of 
PFTs to the 
Gross Earnings 
of concerned 
Divisions (In %) 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2015-
16 
2016-
17 
2017-18 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
CR 2 4363.01 3807.09 4652.27 12822.37 7 55.39 114.30 118.16 287.85 2.24 
ER 1 2805.37 2989.15 3429.18 9223.70 2 10.28 5.48 22.59 38.35 0.42 
ECR 2 11050.90 10770.88 12995.64 34817.42 2 61.53 10.38 30.60 102.51 0.29 
ECoR 3 15842.81 15864.40 17091.43 48798.64 4 30.48 26.50 49.52 106.50 0.22 
NR 3 6590.98 7967.11 7916.19 22474.28 12 211.36 256.40 544.67 1012.43 4.50 
NCR 1 453.43 415.44 426.37 1295.24 2 33.55 38.72 49.64 121.91 9.41 
NER 1 139.46 133.18 117 389.64 2 7.38 25.26 53.10 85.74 22.00 
NWR 1 230.34 328.19 504.58 1063.11 3 64.94 146.23 249.57 460.74 43.34 
SCR 3 8144.75 6950.49 7733.83 22829.07 6 52.37 34.16 73.48 160.01 0.70 
SER 1 7012.09 7925.47 8088.79 23026.35 3 4.24 5.50 37.85 47.59 0.21 
SECR 2 17997.7 17726.94 18662.46 54387.06 6 72.07 44.75 135.89 252.71 0.46 
WR 4 9426.24 7086.13 7599.94 24112.31 7 311.07 135.04 268.69 714.80 2.96 
WCR 2 1678.1 1363.09 1533.58 4574.77 2 0.34 31.42 25.99 57.75 1.26 
TOTAL 26 85735.14 83327.56 90751.26 259813.96 58 915.00 874.14 1659.75 3448.89 1.33 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
253 
 
Annexure 2.5 (Para 2.1.7-ii) 
Statement showing analysis of freight earnings of PFTs and freight earnings of Divisions where PFTs commissioned upto 2015 -16 
(` in crore) 
Zonal 
Railways 
Division on 
which PFTs in 
operation 
No. of 
Divisions 
Total freight 
earning of 
Division during 
2015-16 
Number of PFTs 
in operation on 
Zonal Railway as 
on March 2016 
Total freight 
earning of PFTs 
during 2015-16 
Contribution of PFTs to the 
Gross Earnings of 
concerned Divisions (In %) 
1 2 3 5 6 7 8 
CR 
Mumbai 1 2213.50 1     
Nagpur 1 2149.51 3     
Total 2 4363.01 4 55.39 1.27 
ER 
Asansol 1 2805.37 2     
Total 1 2805.37 2 10.28 0.37 
ECR 
Danapur 1 24.87 1     
Dhanbad 1 11026.027 1     
Total 2 11050.90 2 61.53 0.56 
ECoR 
Sambalpur 1 722.19 1     
Total 1 722.19 1 30.48 4.22 
N.R 
Ambala 1 1906.24 1     
Ferozepur 1 2130.60 1     
Delhi 1 2554.14 4     
Total 3 6590.98 6 211.36 3.21 
NCR Allahabad 1 453.43 2 33.55   
  Total 1 453.43 2 33.55 7.40 
NER 
Izatnagar 1 139.46 1     
Total 1 139.46 1 7.38 5.29 
NWR 
Jaipur 1 230.34 3     
Total 1 230.34 3 64.94 28.19 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
254 
 
SCR 
Secunderabad 1 4896.08 1     
Hyderabad 1 94.19 1     
Vijayawada 1 3154.48 1     
Total 3 8144.75 3 52.37 0.64 
SER 
Chakradharpur 1 7012.09 1     
Total 1 7012.09 1 4.24 0.06 
SECR 
Bilaspur 1 14962.61 1     
Raipur 1 3035.05 2     
Total 2 17997.66 3 72.07 0.40 
WR 
Vadodara 1 2739.01 1     
Ratlam 1 1286.40 1     
Ahmedabad 1 5363.65 1     
Total 3 9389.06 3 311.07 3.31 
WCR 
Bhopal 1 954.50 1     
Kota 1 723.60 1     
Total 2 1678.1 2 0.34 0.02 
  Grand total 23 70577.34 33 948.55 1.34 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
255 
 
Annexure 2.6 (Para 2.2.1) 
Number of ATVMs and Co-ATVMs installed as of March 2018 at the selected stations 
Zonal 
Railway 
A-1 stations ATVM Co-
ATVM 
A stations ATVM Co-
ATVM 
B stations ATVM Co-
ATVM 
C stations ATVM Co-
ATVM 
D stations ATVM Co-
ATVM 
CR 
Thane (TNA) 31 4 Panvel (PNVL) 12 2 Sangli (SLI) 1 0 Ghatkopar 
(GC) 15 1 Bhiwandi 2 1 
Pune (PUNE) 14 4 Miraj (MRJ) 4 2 Dhamangaon 
(DMN) 1 0 Kurla (CLA) 15 1 Baramati (BRMT) 1   
Nagpur (NGP) 6 5 Wardha (WR) 2 2 Sewagram 1 0 Dombivli (DI) 13 1 Uruli (URI) 1   
Nasik Rd (NK) 3 1 Bhusawal 
(BSL) 2 1 Pandharpur 
(PVR) 4 1 Bhandup (BND) 9 1 Ajni (AJNI) 2   
Solapur (SUR) 7 2 Ahmednagar 
(ANG) 2 1 Wadi (WADI) 2 1 Talegaon 
(TGN) 4 0 Akkalkot 1   
ECoR 
Bhubaneswar 
(BBS) 0 0 Srikakulam 
Road (CHE) 3 0 Angul (ANGL) 1 0       Kotabommali 
(KBM) 1   
Puri (PURI) 0 0 Jajpur Keonjhar 
road (JJKR) 1 0 Balugaon 
(BALU)  2 0       Khariar Road 
(KRAR) 1   
Visakhapatnam 
(VSKP) 0 0  Khurda road 
(KUR) 3 0 Balangir 
(BLGR) 1 0       Mahasamunda 
(MSMD) 1   
      Rayagada 
(RGDA)  2 0 Duvadda (DVD) 2 0       Tilaru (TIU)  1   
      Sambalpur 
(SBP) 2 0  Kantabanji 
(KBJ) 1 0       Talcher Road 
(TLHD) 1   
ER 
Howrah (HWH) 18 7 Barddhaman 
(BWN) 4 3 Bolpur (BHP) 2 0 Bally (BLY) 2 2 Salar (SALE) 0   
Sealdah 
(SDAH) 20 7 Kolkata (KOAA) 2 0       Srirampur 
(SRP) 4 2 Azimganj (AZ) 0   
Bhagalpur 0 2 Naihati (NH) 4 0       Chandannagar 
(CGR) 4 2       
      Asansol (ASN) 0 2       Sodepur (SEP) 4 0       
      Durgapur 
(DGR) 0 1       Barrackpur 
(BP) 6 2       
NCR 
Allahabad 
(ALD) 7 0 Mirzapur 
(MZP), 3 0 Firozabad 
(FZD),  2 0       Govindpuri (GOY),  2   
Kanpur (CNB) 6 0  Etawah (ETW),  3 0 Vindhyachal 
(BDL), 2 0       Rura (RURA),  2   
Jhansi (JHS) 7 0 Banda (BNDA),  0 0 Dabra (DBA),  2 0       Bharthana (BNT),  2   
Gwalior (GWL) 6 0 Mahoba (MBA),  0 0 Datia (DAA),  1 0       Bhuteshwar 
(BTSR),  1   
Mathura Jn. 5 0 Agra Fort (AF) 0 0 Dholpur (DHO) 2 0       Hodal (HDL) 1   

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
256 
 
(MTJ) 
NER 
Gorakhpur  
(GKP) 12 0  Mau (MAU) 5 0 Mairwa (MW) 2 0       Fatehgarh (FGR) 2   
Lucknow (LJN) 7 0 Khalilabad 
(KLD) 3 0 Badshahnagar 
(BNZ) 2 0       Barhni (BNY) 1   
      Basti  (BST) 4 0 Lalkuan (LKU) 2 0       Babhnan (BV) 1   
      Chhapra (CPR) 7 0 Mankapur 2 0       Chauri Chaura 
(CC) 1   
      Kathgodam 
(KGM) 2 0 Kaptanganj 1 0       Yusufpur 1   
NR 
New Delhi 
(NDLS) 5 6 Ghaziabad 
(GZB) 3 0 Gurgaon 
(GGN) 2 0       Shamli (SMQL) 3   
Ludhiana (LDH) 5 6 Ferozpur Cantt. 
(FZR) 3 0 Phillaur (PHR) 1 0       Fazilka (FKA) 2   
Lucknow (LKO) 6 6 Sultanpur 
(SLN) 0 0 Prayag (PRG) 3 0       Bachhrawan (BCN) 2   
Dehradun 
(DDN) 3 3 Moradabad 
(MB) 5 0 Najibabad 
(NBD) 3 0       Gajraula (GJL) 1   
Chandigarh 
(CDG) 2 3 Saharanpur 
(SRE) 5 0 DhuriJn (DUI) 2 0       Sirhind (SIR) 1   
NW 
Ajmer (AII) 9 0 Abu Road 
(ABR) 3 0 Beawar 
(BWBN) 2 0       Ranapratap Nagar 
(RPZ) 2   
Jaipur (JP) 11 0 Bikaner (BKN) 3 0 Sirsa (SSA) 3 0       Sadulpur (SDLP) 2   
Jodhpur (JU) 5 0 Bandikui (BKI) 4 0 Dausa (DO) 3 0       Durgapura (DPA) 3   
      Gandhinagar 
(GADJ) 4 0 Nokha (NOK) 2 0       Sanganer (SNGN) 1   
      Nagaur (NGP) 3 0 Merta Road 
(MTD) 2 0       BhagatKi Kothi 1   
SCR 
Vijayawada Jn 
(BZA) 12 4 
Kakinada Town 
(CCT) 2 1 Basar (BSX) 1 1 
Bharatnagar 
(BTNR) 2 1 
Dwarapudi (DWP) 
1   
Hyderabad 
Decan (HYB) 3 2 Guntur  (GNT) 6 1 
Dharmavaram 
(DMM) 2 0 
Hitec City 
(HTCY) 2 1 
Godavari (GVN) 
1   
Kacheguda 
(KCG) 5 2 
H Sahib 
Nanded (NED) 5 1 
Gudivada 
(GDV) 2 0 
Malakpet 
(MXT) 2 0 
Jadcharla (JCL) 
1   
Secunderabad 
(SC) 14 6 
Nizamabad 
(NZB) 3 1 
Kamareddi 
(KMC) 2 0 
Sitafal Mandi 
(STPD) 2 0 
Krishna (KSN) 
0   
Tirupati (TPTY) 7 4 
Rajamundry 
(RJY) 3 1 Narasapur (NS) 2 0 
Vidyanagar 
(VAR) 2 0 
Malkajgiri (MJF) 
1   
SECR Bilaspur (BSP) 2 1 Raigarh (RIG) 1 1 Anuppur  (APR) 1 0       Tilda (TLD) 1   
Raipur ( R ) 3 2 Champa (CPH) 1 1 Korba (KRBA) 1 1        Aamgaon 1   

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
257 
 
      Bhilai Power 
House (BPHB) 0 1 Shahdol (SDL) 1 1       Kamptee 1   
      Durg (DURG) 1 0 Bhatapara 
(BYT) 1 0        Tumsar Road  1   
      Rajnandgaon 
(RJN) 1 1 Dongargarh 
(DGG) 1 0       Tirora 1   
SER 
Kharagpur 0 2 Midnapur 
(MDN) 0 0 Midnapur 
(MDN) 4 0 Bagnan (BZN) 6 0 Jhargram (JGM) 3   
Tatanagar 0 2 Digha 0 0       Mecheda 
(MCA) 5 0 Belda (BLDA) 3   
      Shalimar 0 0       Santragachi 
(SRC) 4 0 Kanthi (KATI) 1   
                  Chengel (CGA) 2 0       
                  Shyamchak 
(SMCK) 1 0       
SR 
Chennai 
Egmore 2 1 Katpadi Jn. 1 1 Karur Jn. 2 1 Velachery 2 1 Thiruvarur 0   
Madurai Jn. 4 1 Tiruppur 2 1 Tirur 1 1 Tambaram 4 1 Rameswaram 2   
Thiruvananthap
uram Central 2 1 Tiruchchirappall
i Jn. 2 1 Kumbakonam 1 0 Avadi 2 1 Tirupattur 0   
Ernakulam Jn. 2 1 Palakkad Jn. 3 1 Tenkasi Jn. 2 0 Mambalam 2 1 Pattambi 1   
Coimbatore Jn. 3 1 Tirunelveli Jn. 3 1 Changanasseri 1 0 Tiruvottiyur 1 0     
SWR 
Bengaluru 
(SBC) 10 6 Hubballi (UBL) 4 2 Londa (LD) 2 0       Whitefield (WFD) 1   
Yasvantpur Jn 
(YPR) 7 3 
Vasco Da 
Gama (VSG) 3 0 Gadag  (GDG) 2 0 
  
    
Bangalore East  
0 1 
      Bangalore Cant 
(BNC) 2 2 
Tumkur (TK) 
2 0             
      
Sri Sathya Sai 
Prasanti 
Nilayam 
(SSPN) 
2 0 
Haveri (HVR) 
2 0             
      
Mysore(MYS) 
5 2 
Harihar (HRR) 
2 0             
WCR 
Jabalpur 6 0 Katni,  4 0 Narsinghpur 2 0       Sihora Road 1   
Bhopal 6 0 Bina,  4 0  Guna 2 0        Shridham 1   
 Kota 6 0 Habibganj,  6 0  Ganjbasoda 2 0        Ashoknagar 1   

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
258 
 
      Bharatpur  4 0  Bhawanimandi  1 0        Bayana  1   
      Swaimadhopur 4 0  Gangapur City 2 0       Shamgarh 1   
WR 
BCL+Mumbai 
Central (BCT) 8 3 Andheri (ADH) 28 2 Maninagar 
(MAN) 0 2 Bhayandar 
(BYR) 10 2       
Borivali (BVI) 28 2 Anand (ANND) 0 2       Churchgate 
(CCG) 9 2       
Ahmedabad  
(ADI) 28 6 Bharuch (BH) 0 2       Dadar (DDR) 15 2       
Indore (INDB) 0 4 Jamnagar 
(JAM) 0 2       Elphinstone 
Road (EPR) 7 0       
Surat (ST) 0 5 Nimach (NMH) 0 2       Goregaon 
(GMN) 10 0       
Ujjain (UJN) 0 3 Rajkot (RJT) 0 2       Jogeshwari 
(JOS) 9 0       
                  Kandivli (KILE) 14 0       
                  Malad (MDD) 14 0       
                  Mira (MIRA) 9 0       
                  Mahim (MM) 6 0       
                  Nalla Sopara 
(NSP) 17 0       
                  Santa Cruz 
(STC) 11 0       
Total 51 353 118 69 203 46 58 103 9 37 246 24 56 69 2 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
259 
 
Annexure 2.7 (Para No.2.2.4) 
 Share of tickets sold through UTS, ATVMs and CoATVMs 
Category of 
station 
Number of 
stations 
selected 
Sale of unreserved tickets during 2015-16 to 2017-18 
Total number of 
tickets sold from 
UTS 
Total number 
of tickets sold 
from ATVMs 
Total number of 
tickets sold 
from Co-ATVMs 
Total 
A1 51 837074110 99883177 14596479 951553766 
A 69 426763701 61147440 3475141 491386282 
B 58 104251094 22010386 303101 126564581 
C 37 3547180648 793474401 4239304 4344894353 
D 56 53584791 11283078 1944 64869813 
Total 271 4968854344 987798482 22615969 5979268795 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
260 
 
Annexure 3.1 (Para 3.19) 
Statement Showing land license  fee to be recovered from the siding Authorities 
S. 
no 
Name of the siding Station Area of land 
in Sq.M. 
Date of  Handing over to 
Party 
License Fee to be 
recovered (in Rs.) 
Agreement 
executed with 
Party 
1 M/s WCL, Nandan Washery siding Hirdagargh 32700 Jan-84 11118000 No 
2 M/s WCL, Damua Colliery Siding Hirdagargh 29218 Jan-84 9962000 No 
3 M/s WCL, Hirdagarh Siding Hirdagargh 8451 Jan-48 5950000 No 
4 M/s Air force Siding Amla Amla 4952 Nov-44 3700000 No 
5 M/s WCL,Lalpeth Colliery,Babupeth Babupeth 11507 Mar-50 7888000 No 
6 M/s WCL, Rajur Colliery,Rajur Rajur 2148 Feb-26 2024000 No 
7 M/s WCL,Ghugus Ghugus 78620 15/11/1918 78700000 No 
8 M/s Ordinance Factory, Bhandak Bhandak 26074 Oct-67 13311000 No 
9 M/s WCL,Umrer Butibori 933 Dec-65 530000 No 
10 M/s WCL,Ballharshah Ballarshah 16025 02/01/1908 17710000 No 
11 M/s WCL,Rayatwari Colliery, Chandrapur Chandrapur 2099 Apr-65 10445964.67 No 
12 M/s CAD/Pulgaon Pulgaon 8455 01/09/2003 12397261.85 No 
13 M/s WCL,Rawanwara/Parasia  Parasia 21275 21/10/1960 323299353.8 No 
14 M/sWCL, East Dongar Chikhli,Parasia Parasia 32537 14/06/1948 494942866.19 No 
15 M/s MEL, Chandrapur Chandrapur 2099.00 01/10/1979 819000.00 Yes 
16 M/s MSEB,Chandrapur Chandrapur 5575.00 24/01/2007 26268926.21 Yes 
17 M/s ACC,Ghugus Ghugus 472 25-Sep-68 950775.9477 Yes 
18 M/s FCI/Ajni Ajni 1330 22/05/2007 210184411.98 Yes 
19 M/s Kartikay Coal Washries,Wani Wani 1248 11/08/2006 486888.54 Yes 
20 M/s HPCL,LPG bottling plant,Khapri Khapri 4681 18/06/2007 12860622.29 Yes 
21 M/s MSEB,CD/Vivekanand Nagar Vivekanand Nagar 22483 25/09/1968 4561621.00 Yes 
22 M/s FCI/Sewagram Sewagram 3396 15/11/1986 11572449.32 Yes 
23 M/s Llyod Steel,Bhugaon Bhugaon 6345.2 12/01/1994 11784162.52 Yes 
          1271467304.29   
 

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
261 
 
Annexure 4.1 (Para 4.1.4) 
Statement showing ZRs/PUs wise details of Machines selected for the study 
S. 
no 
Zonal Railway/ Production Unit Total Machines procured by COFMOW during 
2014-18 (Up to November 2017) 
Machines selected for review 
1 2 3 4 
1 Central Railway 117 20 
2 East Coast Railway 83 20 
3 East Central Railway 98 20 
4 Eastern Railway 162 33 
5 North Central Railway 79 20 
6 North East Railway 71 20 
7 North East Frontier Railway 73 20 
8 Northern Railway 125 25 
9 North West Railway 98 22 
10 South Central Railway 99 22 
11 South East Central Railway 95 20 
12 South East Railway 58 20 
13 Southern Railway 169 33 
14 South West Railway 47 20 
15 West Central Railway 75 20 
16 Western Railway 94 24 
17 Metro Railway 3 3 
18 Chittranjan Locomotive Workshop 17 17 
19 Diesel Locomotive Workshop 39 20 
20 Diesel Modernisation Workshop 28 20 
21 Integrated Coach Factory 267 31 
22 Modern Coach Factory 35 20 
23 Rail Coach Factory 101 20 
24 Railway Wheel Factory 8 8 
  Total 2041 498 
 
  

Report No  19  of 2019 (Railways)                                                                            Annexure 
 
262 
 
 
 
Annexure 6.1 (Para 6.2) 
Statement showing the extra expenditure done by Railways for procurement of extra quantity of HSD oil, where the Railway 
Board has advised to Zonal Railways to blend bio-diesel with HSD oil consumed by Locomotives (in litres) 
Zonal 
Railway 
Quantity of HSD 
oil procured 
Consumption 
during eight 
months (March to 
October) 
Required quantity of 
bio-diesel (@5% of 
HSD oil consumed 
(col.3) 
Quantity of bio-
diesel actually 
procured 
Less 
procurement 
of bio-diesel 
Loss (in `) 
(Col.4 - Col. 5) 
1 3 4 5 6 7 8 
WCR 374816640 263977786 13198889.3 1885480 11313409.3 184328021.7 
NCR 335649472 199223767 9961188 490000 9473188 75507736.03 
NR 269315852 168059889 8402997 0 8402997 485807185 
NWR 774187812 510473933 25523696.65 144000 25379696.65 203965250.1 
NER 432598725 286125364 14403609 191467 14212142 87056845 
ECR 556028000 322067744 16103387.2 0 16103387.2 NAP  
Total 2742596501 1749928483 87593767.2 2710947 84884820.2 1036665038 
      875.94 lakh litres     `103.67 crore 
 