Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
National Pension System 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Ministry of Finance 
Report No. 13 of 2020 
(Performance Audit) 
 
 

 
 
 
Para No. Particulars Page No. 
 Preface i 
 Executive Summary iii-vi 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 Rolling out the New Pension Scheme 1 
1.2 National Pension System for the Government Sect or – 
Basic features 
1 
1.3 Architecture of the National Pension System (NPS) 3 
1.4 Flow of funds/ information across the architect ure 4 
1.5 Nodal Offices  5 
 
Chapter 2: Audit Framework 
2.1 Audit Objectives 7 
2.2 Scope of Audit 7 
2.3 Sources of Audit Criteria 7 
2.4 Audit Methodology  and  Sample 8 
2.5 Acknowledgment 9 
 
Chapter 3: Planning 
3.1 Introduction 10 
3.2 Framing of Rules on service matters of NPS bene ficiaries 
(Central Government employees) 
10 
3.3 Accounting arrangements for Central Autonomous Bodies  12 
3.4 Annual Account Statements (upto 31 March 2008)  12 
3.5 Legacy contributions 14 
3.6 Choice of Pension Funds and Categories of Schem es 16 
3.7 No scheme for Minimum Assured Returns 18 
3.8 Replacement Rate 19 
3.9 Appointment of Actuary and actuarial evaluation of the 
Scheme 
20 
3.10 Appointment of National Securities Depository Limited as 
CRA 
21 
 
Chapter 4: Implementation 
4.1 Coverage and Registration of Nodal Offices and eligible 
employees 
23 
4.2 Delay in issue of Permanent Pension Account Num ber 32 
4.3  
 
Delay/Time taken in issuance of Permanent Retirement 
Account Number, deductions of NPS contributions etc. 
34 
4.4 Delay in bills reaching PAO  40 
4.5 Delay in uploading SCF/obtaining Transaction ID  41 
4.6 Delay in remittance of contribution to the Trus tee Bank 43 
Contents 

 
 
4.7 Discrepancies in deduction of employee’s contribution 
from salary 
47 
4.8 Non-remittance of contribution to the Trustee B ank 49 
4.9 Exit/Withdrawal from NPS 52 
 
Chapter 5: Monitoring 
5.1 Monitoring 56 
5.2 Redressal of Subscribers’ Grievances  60 
5.3 Issues affecting finalisation of cases for grant of additional 
relief  
61 
   
Chapter 6: Conclusion and Recommendations 
6.1 Conclusion  66 
6.2 Recommendations 68 
  Annexures  
I(A) State wise details of date of notification for implementation 
and adoption of NPS 
I-II 
I(B) Key functionaries in NPS III-V 
I(C) Roles and functions of the Nodal Offices VI-VII 
II(A) List of selected DDOs from the selected States VIII-XVI 
II(B) List of the selected DDOs of the selected UTs XVII 
II(C) List of selected DDOs of the selected 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government and Central 
Autonomous Bodies 
XVIII-XXIII 
III Non issuance of Annual Account Statements XXIV-XXVI  
IV Delay in registration of selected DDOs of the Central 
Government Ministries/Departments under NPS 
XXVII-XXXI 
V Delay in registration of selected Central Autonomous 
Bodies under NPS 
XXXII 
VI Time taken in registration of selected DDOs in State 
Government under NPS 
XXXIII-XLV 
VII Time taken in registration of selected DDOs in State 
Autonomous Body under NPS  
XLVI-XLVIII 
VIII(A) Delay in issuance of Permanent Pension Account Number 
(PPAN) 
XLIX 
VIII(B) Delay in issuance of Permanent Pension Account Number 
(PPAN) 
XLIX 
IX Delay in issuance of Permanent Retirement Account 
Number (PRAN) 
L-LI 
X(A) Time taken to issue PRAN in State Government in selected 
DDOs 
LII 
X(B) Time taken to issue PRAN in State Autonomous Bodies in 
selected DDOs 
LII 
XI(A) Delay in commencement of first deduction of NPS 
contribution 
LIII 

 
 
XI(B) Delay in first deduction in State Government and State 
Autonomous Bodies in selected employees 
LIV 
XII(A) Delay in pay bills reaching PAO LV 
XII(B) Delay in bill reaching PAO in State Government and State 
Autonomous Bodies 
LVI 
XIII(A) Delay in uploading SCF /Obtaining Transaction ID LVII-LVIII 
XIII (B) Delay in uploading SCF /Obtaining Transaction ID LIX 
XIV(A) Delay in remittance of contribution to Trustee Bank (TB) 
by Nodal Office of the Central Government and Central 
Autonomous Bodies 
LX-LXI 
XIV(B) Delay in remittance of contribution to the Trustee Bank by 
the DDOs of State/UT Government and State Autonomous 
Bodies 
LXII 
XV(A) Non deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in 
State Government in selected DDOs 
LXIII 
XV(B) Non deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in 
State Autonomous Bodies in selected DDOs 
LXIII 
XVI(A) Less deduction of NPS contribution LXIV 
XVI(B) Less contribution deducted from salary of the employees of 
Central Autonomous Bodies 
LXV 
XVII(A) Less deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in 
selected DDOs/DTOs of the State Government  
LXVI 
XVII(B) Less deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in 
selected DDOs of State Autonomous Bodies  
LXVI 
XVIII Access of dashboard by Financial Advisors LXVII-LXI X 
 List of Abbreviations LXX-LXXI 
 

i 
Preface 
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared 
for submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution of 
India for being laid before the Parliament. The rep ort has been prepared in 
accordance with the Performance Auditing Guidelines , 2014 and Regulations 
on Audit and Accounts, 2007 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The National Pension System (NPS) was introduced wi th effect from 
01 January 2004  for new entrants to Central Government service (except Armed 
Forces) replacing the old pension system and subsequently, State Governments 
also adopted NPS on voluntary basis for their emplo yees. The NPS is being 
regulated by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Develo pment Authority 
(PFRDA).  
There are 58.01 lakh Government sector subscribers as on 30 April 2018. 
NPS covers a large number of Government sector empl oyees; it affects the 
financial security and retirement benefits of these  employees. Its effective 
implementation is of utmost importance. In this context, the Performance Audit 
was undertaken to get an assurance that the system for NPS was established as 
envisaged; all eligible Government Sector employees  had been covered under 
the NPS; and due contributions (subscribers’ and em ployers’) were timely 
deducted and remitted to Trustee Bank.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
iii 
Executive Summary 
By 2001-02, Central Government (i.e. Government of India) pension liability 
had reached unsustainable proportions. To review th e existing pension system 
and to develop a new one for new recruits entering Government service, a High 
Level Expert Group was set up (June 2001). Its report, providing a road map for 
next steps to be taken by the Government, was submitted in February 2002.  
Government of India approved (August 2003) the prop osal to introduce a new 
restructured defined contribution pension system i. e. National Pension System 
(NPS) for new entrants to Central Government servic e (except Armed Forces) 
with effect from 01 January 2004 replacing the old pension system . Its basic 
features are: 
• Employee to pay a monthly contribution of 10 per cent (salary and 
Dearness Allowance), matched by the Central Governm ent to be 
deposited in a non-withdrawable Tier-I account.  
• On exit (at or after 60 years for Tier-I) from NPS,  the individual would 
be mandatorily required to invest 40 per cent of pension wealth to 
purchase an annuity and 60 per cent  would be paid to the subscriber in 
a lump sum.  
• For exit prior to the age of 60, the mandatory annuitisation would be 80 
per cent  of the pension wealth and 20 per cent  would be paid as lump 
sum. 
NPS was also applicable to new employees of all autonomous bodies of Central 
Government Ministries/ Departments with effect from  01 January 2004. 
Further, State Governments and their Autonomous Bodies also adopted NPS on 
different occasions for their employees.  
The Nodal Offices (act as interface between subscri bers and Central Record 
keeping Agency) under NPS were the Principal Accoun ts Officers (Pr. AOs), 
Pay and Accounts Officers (PAOs) and Drawing and Di sbursing Officers 
(DDOs) under the Central Government and analogous o ffices under the State 
Governments. As on 30 April 2018, there were 19,303 DDOs, 4,719 PAOs and 
687 Pr. AOs having 19.29 lakh subscribers in Centra l Government Ministries/ 
Departments and Central Autonomous Bodies (CABs). F urther, there were 
2,31,745 DDOs, 5,463 PAOs/ District Treasury Office s and 443 Pr. AOs/ 
Directorate of Treasury and Accounts having total 3 8.72 lakh subscribers in 
State Government and State Autonomous Bodies (SABs). 
Performance Audit on the NPS was conducted to assess whether the system for 
NPS was established as envisaged; all eligible subs cribers had been covered 
under the NPS; and due contributions (subscribers’ and employers’) were timely 
deducted and remitted to Trustee Bank. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
iv 
The Performance Audit was conducted during October 2018 to January 2019 
covering the period from 01 January 2004 to 31 Marc h 2018 in the selected 
sample of seven State Governments (Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Ut tarakhand), 02 Union 
Territories (National Capital Territory of Delhi an d Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands) and 16 Ministries/ Departments of Central Government.  
The audit findings have been categorized under thre e broad headings viz. 
Planning, Implementation and Monitoring as follows: 
Planning  
• Even after 15 years from introduction of NPS, rules on service conditions/ 
retirement benefits in respect of employees covered  by NPS were pending 
finalisation.  
(Para 3.2)  
• NPS was made applicable to new entrants in all Autonomous Bodies under 
various Central Ministries/ Departments recruited o n or after 01 January 
2004, without putting in place record keeping and accounting arrangements 
for the Autonomous Bodies. 
(Para 3.3)  
• In respect of States, CABs and SABs, PFRDA did not fix timelines for 
upload of legacy data and transfer of legacy contri butions to the Trustee 
Bank, affecting the timely transfer of legacy amoun t to the Trustee Bank. 
Further, PFRDA was unaware of the quantum of legacy  amount and the 
status of its transfer to the Trustee Bank.  
(Para 3.5)  
• Unlike private sector employees who had the choice in making their 
investments, Government employees did not get to choose the Pension Fund 
and schemes for a period of more than 15 years i.e.  from 01 January 2004 
to 30 January 2019. 
(Para 3.6)  
• There was no indication that  actuarial evaluation of the fund/ scheme was 
conducted once in two years and of adoption of any other mechanism to 
assess the viability of the fund/ Scheme.  
(Para 3.9) 
Implementation  
• There was no assurance that all Nodal Offices (under Central Government, 
State Governments, CABs and SABs) were registered under NPS.  
(Para 4.1.1) 
• During formulation of the scheme, essential controls to ensure 100 per cent  
coverage of eligible employees were not envisioned.  Thereby there was no 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
v 
assurance that 100 per cent  of eligible employees were covered under NPS, 
despite 15 years of implementation. 
(Para 4.1.3) 
• There were cases of delay in issue of Permanent Ret irement Account 
Number (PRAN), first deduction of NPS contributions, bills reaching PAO, 
uploading Subscriber Contribution Files (SCFs) and remittance of 
contributions to the Trustee Bank.  
(Para 4.3.1, 4.3.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6) 
• An amount of `5.20 crore and `793.04 crore were not remitted to the Trustee 
Bank by Central Government/ CABs DDOs and States/ U Ts DDOs 
respectively in respect of those nodal offices who had joined NPS. 
(Para 4.8) 
Monitoring  
• Out of 66-68 Ministries/ Departments between 2012-1 3 and 2018-19, not 
all had constituted the Committee comprising Joint Secretary, Principal 
Chief Controller of Accounts/ Chief Controller of A ccounts and Financial 
Advisers. 
(Para 5.1.1) 
• Substantial number of grievances were outstanding f or one or more years, 
between 2013-14 and 2017-18. 
(Para 5.2) 
• In 4,130 cases pertaining to Civil Ministries of Ce ntral Government, an 
amount of `139.95 crore of NPS accumulations was lying in the NPS 
accounts (i.e. PRANs) which were required to be tra nsferred to Nodal 
Office/ Government as these employees/ families of employees were 
granted the benefit of additional relief (old pension on death/ invalidation). 
(Para 5.3)  
Recommendations  
• A foolproof system needs to be put in place to ensu re that all nodal offices 
and eligible employees are registered under NPS. Internal Audit mechanism 
should see that every employee is brought into the system. To ensure this, 
delays need to be penalised and compensation effect ed to avoid loss to the 
subscriber.   
• Government may ensure that rules on service matters for NPS beneficiaries 
of Government sector are put in place.   
• Government must identify all such cases where legac y contributions were 
not remitted to Trustee Bank and ensure that the same may be remitted with 
due interest and compensation so that subscriber does not suffer loss.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
vi 
• Immediate steps need to be taken for providing Mini mum Assured Return 
Scheme (MARS), in compliance to the provisions of t he PFRDA Act, to the 
subscriber for ensuring their social security post retirement.  
• DFS may arrive at minimum replacement rate taking into consideration the 
annuity rates, increased longevity and interest rates.  
• DFS may ensure that the amendment being made to the PFRDA Act, clearly 
defines the responsibility, accountability and penalty for delay at each level 
(as they are for employees in the Employees Provide nt Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952)   to ensure that NPS subscribers’ 
contribution is remitted to the Trustee Bank and cr edited in subscriber’s 
PRAN within the scheduled time. 
• PFRDA should mark cases of grant of additional reli ef in CRA system to 
avoid payment of any sum to Annuity Service Provide r or to subscriber/ 
family member subsequently. The pension paying authority may obtain NOC 
from nodal office to the effect that claimant has not been granted the pension 
under NPS. Government may take immediate steps to r ecover the payment 
already made from the NPS corpus or on account of N PS pension to the 
subscribers/ family members who had received benefits of additional relief. 
• Audit findings in report are based on sample scrutiny. Government, both at 
the Centre and States, may identify similar instanc es in the entire NPS 
Universe and determine the magnitude of deficiencie s in implementation 
and take remedial action.  
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 1 of 69  
Chapter 1 - Introduction 
 
1.1   Rolling out the New Pension Scheme 1 
The Budget for the year 2001-02 mentioned that Cent ral Government (i.e. 
Government of India (GOI)) pension liability had re ached unsustainable 
proportions and there was a need to review the exis ting pension system and 
steps were needed including developing a new pension scheme for new recruits 
entering Government service. Accordingly, a High Level Expert Group (HLEG) 
was set up (June 2001) to provide a road map for ne xt steps to be taken by the 
Government and submitted its report in February 200 2. Regarding the 
unorganized sector, the OASIS (Old Age Social and I ncome Security) project, 
commissioned by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, submitted 
a report in January 2000.  
Further, the total pension liability on account of the Central Government 
employees had risen from 0.6 per cent of GDP (at constant prices) in 1993-94 
to 1.66 per cent of GDP (at constant prices) in 2002-03 and the actual outgo had 
increased from 
`5,206 crore in 1993-94 to `23,158 crore (excluding telecom) 
in 2003-04 (BE). As per the Government decision for  introduction of New 
Pension Scheme, in view of the above, and after exa mining the experiences of 
other countries, as well as recommendations of the OASIS report and HLEG 
report, the new pension scheme was announced in the Budget 2003-04 for new 
entrants to Government service and others.   
As on 31 March 2018, the total number of Central Go vernment employees 
covered under National Pension System (NPS) was 17, 58,144 and those of the 
State Governments was 31,63,415. If NPS fails, the liability to provide pension 
as a social security measure to these subscribers w ill fall on Central and 
respective State Governments, in addition to their existing pension liabilities. 
1.2   National Pension System for the Government Sector:  Basic features 
1.2.1  For Central Government employees 
Government approved (23 August 2003) the proposal t o implement the budget 
announcement of 2003-04, relating to introduction of a new restructured defined 
contribution pension system i.e. New Pension Scheme  for new entrants to 
Central Government service (except Armed Forces). T he new system was to 
replace the then existing system of defined benefit  pension.  Basic features of 
NPS are as follows: 
                                                           
1  New Pension Scheme: Department of Financial Servi ces vide its O.M. dated 13 August 
2009 replaced this nomenclature by “National Pension System” (NPS). 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 2 of 69  
• The Central Government introduced 2 NPS from 01 January 2004, with 
monthly contribution of 10 per cent of salary and Dearness Allowance 
(DA), to be paid by the employee and matched by Central Government. 
The contributions and investment returns were to be deposited in a non-
withdrawable pension Tier-I account. It was also specified that the then 
existing provisions of defined benefit pension and General Provident 
Fund (GPF) was not to be available to the new recru its in Central 
Government service.  
• Individuals could normally exit at or after 60 year s for Tier-I of the 
pension system and at exit, the individual would be mandatorily required 
to invest 40 per cent of pension wealth to purchase an annuity from an 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of I ndia (IRDAI) - 
regulated life insurance company. Further, individu als would have the 
flexibility to leave the pension system prior to ag e 60, however, in this 
case, the mandatory annuitisation would be 80 per cent  of the pension 
wealth. 
• As per the Notification (December 2003), each indiv idual might also 
have a voluntary Tier-II withdrawable account at hi s option. 
Government would make no contribution into this account. 
Following are the major differences between the Old Pension System and NPS: 
Table: 1.1 
Description Old Pension System NPS 
(Tier-I) 
Contribution of employee Nil 10% of (Basic pay plus  DA) 
Pension guarantee by 
Government 
Yes No 
Amount of pension 50% of last pay drawn No link wit h last pay 
Dearness Relief provided by 
Government for mitigating 
impact of inflation  
Yes No 
Amount of commutation allowed Upto 40% No option 
GPF eligibility Yes No 
GPF/NPS withdrawal Temporary: within 15 
years 
Final: after 15 years 
Tier-I : Not allowed till May 
2015 
3 
1.2.2  For Central Autonomous Bodies (CABs) employees 
As per Department of Expenditure (DoE) O.M. dated 1 3 November 2003, all 
new recruits joining any autonomous body under the administrative control of 
                                                           
2  NPS was introduced vide its Notification dated 22 December 2003 . As per Notification of 
Department of Financial Services, GOI, dated 31 Jan uary 2019, co-contribution by GOI 
was enhanced to 14 per cent . This was applicable from 1 April 2019 onwards. 
3  Partial withdrawal of 25 per cent  of contribution made by subscribers for certain specified 
purpose as notified by PFRDA (Exit and Withdrawal under NPS) Regulation, 2015 (May 
2015). 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 3 of 69  
various Ministries/ Departments of Central Government, on or after 01 January 
2004 would also be governed by NPS. 
1.2.3  For State Governments and State Autonomous Bodies ( SABs) 
employees 
State Governments and their Autonomous Bodies also adopted NPS 
architecture on different occasions for their emplo yees. State-wise details of 
date of adoption and notification are mentioned in Annexure I(A). 
1.3   Architecture of NPS  
As per Government decision ( 23 August 2003) and the notification of the 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA), dated 22 December 2003:  
i.  An independent Pension Fund Regulatory and Developm ent Authority 
(PFRDA) would regulate and develop the pension market, which would 
be located in New Delhi; 
ii.  There would be a Central Record Keeping and Account ing Agency 
(CRA) which would be the central facility for holdi ng records for all 
individuals in the new pension system;  
iii.  There would be several pension fund managers (PFMs) , each offering 
three categories 4 of schemes – A, B and C; and 
iv.  The participating entities (Pension Funds and CRA) would give out 
easily understood information about past performanc e, so that the 
individual would be able to make informed choices about which scheme 
to choose. 
The key functionaries in NPS {details in  Annexure I(B)} are as follows: 
• Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority  
The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), an 
interim regulator (precursor to a statutory regulator), was constituted in 
October 2003. The PFRDA Act was passed on 19 Septem ber 2013 and 
notified on 01 February 2014. PFRDA regulates NPS s ubscribed by 
employees of Central Government, State Governments and employees 
of private institutions/ organisations and unorganised sectors.  
• Central Record Keeping Agency (CRA) 
Central Record Keeping Agency acts as an operationa l interface 
between PFRDA and other NPS intermediaries such as Pension Funds, 
Annuity Service Providers, Trustee Bank etc. It per forms the record 
                                                           
4 Under option A, around 60 per cent  of the assets would be held as Government paper, 30 
per cent in investment grade corporate bonds and 10 per cent in equity. The asset 
allocation for option B would be around 40 per cent for Government paper, 40 per cent 
for investment grade corporate bonds and 20 per cent in equity. Option C would have 25 
per cent  of pension assets in Government paper, 25 per cent  in investment grade corporate 
bonds and 50 per cent  in equity. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 4 of 69  
keeping, administration and provides customer service functions for all 
NPS subscribers.  
• Trustee Bank  
Trustee Bank is responsible for day-to-day flow of funds and banking 
facilities in accordance with the guidelines/ direc tions issued by the 
Authority under NPS. 
• Pension Funds  
Pension Funds manage pension corpus through various  schemes under 
NPS. 
• Custodian 
Custodian holds scheme securities in Demat account in the name of NPS 
Trust and provides custodial and depository partici pant services for the 
pension schemes regulated by the Authority. 
• Annuity Service Providers  
Annuity Service Providers (ASPs) are IRDAI licensed and regulated life 
insurance companies, for servicing the annuity requirements of the NPS 
subscribers. 
• NPS Trust 
NPS Trust has been constituted to take care of the assets and funds under 
the NPS in the interest of the subscribers. 
1.4   Flow of funds/ information across the architecture  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PFRDA  
PR. AO / DTA NPS TRUST 
TRUSTEE BANK 
(AXIS BANK) 
CUSTODIAN 
(SHCIL) 
PENSION FUND 
DDO 
SUBSCRIBER 
ANNUITY SERVICE 
PROVIDER 
PAO / DTO 
INFORMATION 
FLOW 
FUND FLOW 
NODAL OFFICE 
BANK  
CENTRAL RECORD 
KEEPING AGENCY 
(NSDL & KARVY) 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 5 of 69  
The subscribers’ enrolment/ registration in NPS is followed by deduction of the 
defined contribution by Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) and sending of 
the pay bill containing the contributions so deduct ed, to Pay and Accounts 
Officer (PAO)/ District Treasury Officer (DTO).  
Thereafter, Nodal Offices 
5 upload subscriber details in New Pension Scheme 
Contribution Accounting Network (NPSCAN) and remit NPS contributions (of 
employee and employer) to the Trustee Bank through their bankers.  
This is followed by transmission of NPS funds by the Trustee Bank to Pension 
Funds, investment of NPS funds by Pension Funds as per investment guidelines 
prescribed by PFRDA and daily interaction of Pensio n Funds with the 
Custodian for purchase of securities and valuation of Net Asset Value (NAV) 
at the end of the day.  
When there is exit of the subscriber from NPS, ther e is flow of funds from the 
Trustee Bank to the subscriber (lump sum) and ASP (annuity). 
 
1.5   Nodal Offices 
Nodal Offices are offices, which act as interface between subscribers and CRA. 
They include the Principal Accounts Officers (Pr. AOs), PAOs and DDOs under 
the Central Government and analogous offices under the State Governments. 
The following table depicts the number of Nodal Offices and subscribers 
involved in the Government Sector NPS model as on 30 April 2018.  
Table: 1.2 
Sector DDOs PAO/ DTO Pr. AO/ 
DTA 
Total subscribers 
(in lakh) 
Central Government 6 15,443  2,885  131  17.58  
State Government 2,20,217  2,249  67  31.63  
Total (A) 2,35,660 5,134 198 49.21 
The number of Nodal offices and subscribers in Cent ral and State Autonomous Bodies 
are as under:  
Central Autonomous 
Bodies 
3,860  1,834  556  1.71 
State Autonomous 
Bodies 
11,528  3,214  376  7.09 
Total (B) 15,388 5,048 932 8.8 
Total (A) + (B) 2,51,048 10,182 1,130 58.01 
The primary function of DDO is to obtain duly filled application for Permanent 
Retirement Account Number (PRAN) from subscribers, whereas the PAO 
uploads the Subscriber Contribution File (SCF) cont aining details of pension 
contribution, PRAN, DDO, amount etc. to the NPSCAN  system. The Pr. AO 
                                                           
5  PAO / DTO / Directorate of Treasury and Accounts (DTA) 
6  Central Government includes these accounting form ations : Civil, Defence (Civilian 
employees), Railways, Posts, Telecommunications and NCT of Delhi 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 6 of 69  
monitors the performance of PAO and DDO and monitor s the grievance 
redressal.  
The details of role and functions of the Nodal offi ces are mentioned in 
Annexure I(C). 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 7 of 69  
Chapter 2 – Audit Framework 
 
2.1  Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit of NPS was conducted to assess whether: 
i.  the system for NPS was established as envisaged; 
ii.  all eligible subscribers had been covered under NPS ; 
iii.  subscribers were registered within the prescribed t imelines, if any; 
iv.  SCFs were uploaded timely, total contributions (sub scribers’ and 
employers’) were remitted to Trustee Bank, within p rescribed 
timelines, if any; and 
v.  NPS is being regulated and monitored in accordance with relevant 
Acts/ regulations/ orders etc.  
2.2  Scope of Audit 
The Performance Audit was conducted during October 2018 to January 2019 
covering the period from 01 January 2004 to 31 March 2018.  This Performance 
Audit was primarily focused on planning of NPS, its implementation (from the 
stages of registration of Nodal offices and subscri ber to deduction and 
remittance of contribution to the Trustee Bank) and  monitoring in respect of 
Tier-I contributions pertaining to Government sector only.  
2.3  Sources of Audit Criteria 
The sources of audit criteria are as mentioned below: 
• Government Resolution, October 2003, by DEA; 
• Gazette Notification, December 2003, by DEA; 
• Government Resolution, November 2008, by Department  of Financial 
Services (DFS); 
• PFRDA Act, 2013 (linked to Gazette Notification, Fe bruary 2014, by 
the DFS); 
• PFRDA Regulations, Notifications, Circulars and Rules; 
• Agenda and Minutes of Board Meetings of PFRDA; 
• Office Memoranda (OM), relevant to NPS issued by Do E, DFS, DEA, 
Department of Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare (DoPP W), Controller 
General of Accounts (CGA) and Central Pension Accou nting Office 7 
(CPAO); and 
• Notifications and OMs issued by State Governments. 
                                                           
7  CPAO is a subordinate office under CGA. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 8 of 69  
2.4  Audit Methodology and Sample 
2.4.1  Audit Methodology 
An Entry Conference was held on 08 October 2018 with the major stakeholders 
before commencement of field audit. Audit scrutinis ed records related to 
planning, implementation and monitoring of NPS in k ey stakeholders – 
Ministries/ Departments of the GOI i.e. DFS, DoE, DoPPW, PFRDA, CGA and 
CPAO.  In selected States records pertaining to Ministries/ Departments/ Nodal 
Offices of NPS were scrutinised. S alary bills and records/ data of selected 
subscribers 8 at selected Nodal Offices were scrutinised in Minis tries/ 
Departments of Central Government, State Government , Central Autonomous 
Bodies and State Autonomous Bodies. Records/ data relating to uploading of 
subscribers’ contribution details by Nodal Offices to CRA and remittance of 
NPS contributions to the Trustee Bank were scrutinised .  
2.4.2  Audit Sample 
The following five criteria 9 were employed for selecting the sample of 
Ministries/ Departments/ Autonomous Bodies, in Cent ral Government (Civil 
accounting formation) as well as in the States: 
• total number of subscribers as on 30 April 2018; 
• total amount of arrears’ contribution (employee + e mployer) between 
2008-09 and 2017-18; 
• number of instances (DDO-wise and month-wise) where  credit was 
delayed by more than one year; 
• number of transaction IDs 10  generated; and 
• number of transaction IDs where upload of SCF was a fter fund 
transfer to Trustee Bank. 
The audit sample covered: 
• 168 DDOs 11  in 07 State Governments 12  {Annexure-II(A) }; 
• 15 DDOs 13  in 02 Union Territories { Annexure-II(B) }; 
                                                           
8  Audit scrutiny of a minimum of 15 subscriber record s was proposed for every selected 
DDO of Central Ministry or Department/ State/ UT, wherever feasible.  
9 Based on data provided by PFRDA upto 31 August 201 8. 
10   Transaction ID – When a SCF is uploaded in the CR A system, a unique ID called 
Transaction ID is generated. This ID would be the reference for the TB against which the 
funds remitted are matched with the SCF uploaded. 
11   140 DDOs of State Government and 28 DDOs of SABs 
12   Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karn ataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and 
Uttarakhand 
13   10 DDOs in 2 UTs (Andaman and Nicobar Islands and  NCT of Delhi) and 5 DDOs of 
SABs in 1 UT (NCT of Delhi). No SAB was selected in Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 9 of 69  
• 74 DDOs 14  in 16 Ministries/ Departments 15  of Central Government 
under 26 Pr. AOs { Annexure- II(C) }; and 
Records of 3,822 subscribers were scrutinised in au dit.  
2.5 Acknowledgment 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation receiv ed from the 
DEA, DFS, 
DoE, DoPPW, PFRDA, CGA, CPAO and concerned offices of State 
Governments, during the audit process. 
  
                                                           
14   15 Pr. AOs of Central Government Ministries/ Depa rtments and 11 Pr. AOs of CABs 
having 62 DDOs (Central Govt.) and 12 DDOs (CABs) respectively. 
15  (1) Department of Revenue [CBEC, CBDT, Department of Revenue], (2) Department of 
Atomic Energy, (3) Ministry of Home Affairs, (4) Mi nistry of Information and 
Broadcasting, (5) Ministry of Law and Justice, (6) Ministry of Mines, (7) Ministry of 
Planning, Statistics and Programme Implementation, (8) Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways, (9) Department of Science and Technology,  (10) Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, (11) Ministry of Water Resources, (1 2) Ministry of Agriculture, 
(13)Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, (14) Min istry of Human Resource 
Development, (15) Department of Economic Affairs, ( 16) Department of Financial 
Services.  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 10  of 69  
Chapter 3 - Planning 
 
3.1 Introduction 
As discussed in Para 1.1, a HLEG was constituted on  25 June 2001 to review 
the existing pension scheme and provide a road map for introducing a new 
pension system based on defined contribution. The H LEG in its report, 
submitted in February 2002, proposed that a pure De fined Contribution (DC) 
scheme was not suitable as risk of uncertain yield due to varied interest rates 
and life expectancy would be borne by the pensioner . Accordingly, it 
recommended a hybrid scheme with inflation indexati on, with combined 
contribution from employees and Central Government on matching basis, 
and 
committing a Defined Benefit (DB) as pension to the employees.   
Audit noted that certain crucial aspects highlighted in the HLEG Report and the 
Government decision (23 August 2003), were either n ot implemented or 
implemented with delays and are detailed in subsequent paragraphs along with 
other audit observations. 
3.2 Framing of Rules on service matters of NPS bene ficiaries (Central 
Government employees) 
With the introduction of NPS 16  with effect from 01 January 2004, Government 
clarified that non-contributory pension benefits wo uld not be available to 
Government employees covered by NPS from the date o f effect of notification 
of NPS. 
Audit noted that even after 15 years from introduction of NPS, 
rules on service 
conditions/ retirement benefits in respect of employees covered by NPS had not 
been framed due to difference in views between various departments of Central 
Government as evident from the sequence of events mentioned below: 
• The Department of Legal Affairs (August 2016) indic ated that rules/ 
regulations could be framed under the PFRDA Act only by PFRDA/ DFS, 
however, DFS was not agreeable and was of the view that DoPPW and 
DoPT could frame rules under Article 309 of Constit ution. Subsequently 
the departments (DoPPW and DFS) finally arrived at a conclusion 
(September 2016) that DoPPW should frame the rules regarding service 
conditions and pensionary benefits of Central Government employees and 
should ensure that such rules did not relate to any  matter specifically 
covered under PFRDA Act nor were contrary to any provisions. 
                                                           
16  Amendments were also made to Central Civil Service s (Pension) Rules, Central Civil 
Services (Commutation of Pension) Rules, Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) 
Rules, General Provident Fund Rules and Contributory Provident Funds Rules 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 11  of 69  
• The Committee formed (October 2016) for streamlining implementation of 
NPS 17  in its report also identified the necessity for separate rules on service 
matters pertaining to pensionary benefits of NPS employees for issues like 
suspension, extra-ordinary leave (i.e. leave without pay) or without medical 
certificate unauthorised absence, entitlements in the event of imposition of 
penalty of compulsory retirement or dismissal/ remo val, recoveries in the 
event of pecuniary loss caused by employee to Government during service, 
cases of pending departmental or judicial proceedings, voluntary retirement 
etc.  
• DoPPW vide its O.M. dated 05 May 2009 extended provisionally the 
benefit of gratuity (on invalidation/ death during service), invalid pension 
(on invalidation during service), family pension (o n death during service), 
disability pension (disability attributable to perf ormance of duty) and 
extraordinary family pension (death attributable to performance of duty) to 
NPS covered employees at par with the employees app ointed before 01 
January 2004.  The benefits, being provisional, were subject to adjustment 
against final payments to be made in accordance wit h the Rules to be 
framed by PFRDA.  
Audit noticed that benefits of retirement and death  gratuity were made 
applicable 18  to NPS employees on the same terms and conditions as were 
applicable to employees covered by Central Civil Se rvices (Pension) Rules.  
However, rules in respect of invalid pension, family pension, disability pension 
and extraordinary family pension are yet to be framed.  
DFS in its reply stated (May 2019) that as per Allo cation of Business (AoB) 
Rules, 1961, DoPPW was responsible for formulation of policy and co-
ordination of matters relating to retirement benefi ts to Central Government 
employees while DoPT was responsible for conditions  of service of Central 
Government employees.  
DoPPW, framed draft rules on service conditions of NPS employees and 
circulated the same on 05 June 2018 to DoPT, DoE, D FS, CGA and PFRDA 
requesting them for their comments on the draft rules along with inputs on any 
additional issue to be included in the draft rules.  
DFS in its reply (December 2019), further intimated that DoPPW had circulated 
revised draft NPS service rules vide OM dated 01 May 2019 and DFS intimated 
(May 2020) to Audit that DFS had forwarded its comments on the draft rules in 
March 2020.  The rules in this regard have not yet been notified (May 2020).  
                                                           
17   Committee – The Union Cabinet in its meeting held  on 29 June 2016, considered the 
proposals based on the recommendation of the 7 th  Central Pay Commission and approved 
the proposal for setting up a Committee of Secretaries. 
18  As per DoPPW’s O.M. dated 26 August 2016. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 12  of 69  
Recommendation: Government may ensure that rules on service matters for 
NPS beneficiaries of Government sector are put in place.   
3.3   Accounting arrangements for Central Autonomous Bod ies 
As per DoE O.M. dated 13 November 2003, all new rec ruits joining any 
autonomous body under the administrative control of  various Ministries/ 
Departments, on or after 01 January 2004 would also  be governed by NPS  and 
not by the existing pension scheme in these organizations. 
For the Central Government employees, CPAO was appointed as interim CRA 
(from 01 January 2004 to 31 March 2008) for record keeping and accounting of 
NPS contributions. However, Audit observed that in respect of Autonomous 
Bodies, no such arrangement was made till 2009 (whe n the first CAB was 
registered under NPS, with regular CRA in place). I t was observed that the 
responsibility for devising record keeping and acco unting arrangement were 
neither finalised nor notified by DEA during this p eriod and it kept shifting to 
different bodies/ authorities as cited below: 
• DEA advised autonomous bodies to devise their own interim procedures 
and retain the NPS contributions for time being. Su bsequently, DEA 
considered (May 2005) that concerned administrative  Ministries might 
devise uniform procedures for all autonomous bodies  under their 
administrative control; and  
• DEA later informed (May 2006) PFRDA that the latter  might like to 
devise record keeping and accounting arrangements f or autonomous 
bodies.  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) was silent on the inconsistent approach 
towards devising record keeping and accounting arrangements for autonomous 
bodies, and stated that CGA suggested (October 2004) that autonomous bodies 
could maintain their own records and contributions during the interim period, 
till a regular CRA was in place. CPAO and CGA would  assist them in the 
process. 
The reply of DFS may be seen in the context that whereas interim arrangements 
were made for Central Government employees, no such arrangement was made 
for CABs. 
3.4 Annual Account Statements (upto 31 March 2008)  
3.4.1 Central Government 
As per 
Ministry of Finance  (GOI) OMs dated 07 January 2004 and 04 February 
2004, CPAO had to prepare Annual Account Statement (AAS) for each 
employee (showing the opening balance, details of m onthly deductions and 
Governments matching contribution, interest earned and the closing balance) 
and issue AAS to the subscribers. Further, CPAO after the close of each 
financial year, had to report the details of the ba lances (PAO-wise) to each 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 13  of 69  
Pr. AO, who would forward the information to each P AO for the purpose of 
reconciliation.  
PFRDA highlighted (February 2006) the criticality o f accounting of pension 
subscriptions and the potential of any laxity there in to cause insecurity in the 
mind of employees and embarrassment to the Government. It also intimated that 
even after passage of two years, none of the new recruits under NPS, said to be 
over 1,00,000 in number, had received AAS and that the CPAO did not have 
complete reliable information about over 85 per cent  of the subscribers. 
Scrutiny of records at selected DDOs/ PAOs of Ministries/ Departments of the 
Central Government, revealed that out of 71 selecte d employees under 40 19  
selected DDOs, the AAS was not issued to 55 employe es in 31 DDOs as 
tabulated below (details in Annexure III ): 
Table: 3.1 
Total 
DDOs  
Total DDOs 
where selected 
eligible 
employees did 
not receive 
AAS  
Total DDOs 
where 
eligible 
employees 
received 
AAS  
Total 
selected 
beneficiaries 
in 40 selected 
DDOs  
Total selected 
employees 
who did not 
receive AAS  
Total selected 
employees 
who received 
AAS  
40  31  09  71  55  16  
Further, no records relating to preparation and issuance of AAS were furnished 
during the audit at CPAO.  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) stated that CGA in timated that CPAO is 
making sincere efforts to trace requisite records/ files.  
It is noted that NSDL now sends monthly and annual transaction statement to 
subscriber which shows contribution, PF-wise alloca tion of subscriber’s NPS 
fund, market value, actual value of investment etc. 
3.4.2 State Government 
Government of Rajasthan (March 2004) and Government  of Jharkhand 
(December 2004) issued similar instructions in resp ect of provision of AAS to 
their NPS subscribers showing the opening balance, details of monthly 
deductions and government’s 
matching contributions, interest earned, if any, 
and the closing balance. However, Audit observed th at in Rajasthan AAS was 
not provided in all 25 selected DDOs and in Jharkhand, 15 DDOs out of 2 0 
DDOs had not affirmed the receipt of AAS.  
 
                                                           
19  Out of 62 total selected DDOs, in 22 DDOs, either there was no employee eligible for 
selection in sample during 01 January 2004 to 31 Ma rch 2008 or the records were not 
available with DDO for this period. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 14  of 69  
3.5 Legacy contributions  
3.5.1 Central Government Ministries/ Departments 
3.5.1.1  Department of Economic Affairs (vide its OM dated 29 March 2008) 
sanctioned transfer of 
`1,165.39 crore from GOI's Budget for the year 2007-08 
to the Trustee Bank in respect of NPS accumulations  (legacy contributio ns 20 ). 
Till March 2008, GOI gave interest at GPF rate on s uch amount. Vide the OM 
it was indicated that no more interest would be giv en after March 200 8 and 
subscriber-wise accounts were to be transferred to CRA within the month 
of April 2008. 
In this regard, Audit sought (October 2018) from th e CPAO, records/ 
information to confirm w hether all Ministries/ Departments had transferred 
subscriber-wise account by April 2008, whether all Ministries/ Departments 
were included in the OM and whether information in respect of all Ministries 
were received and the date by which these were reconciled.  
CPAO replied (29 November 2018) that no record was available in their office 
to furnish reply to the Audit query. Due to non-ava ilability of records, Audit 
could not derive assurance about the accuracy and c ompleteness of accounting 
of contributions (with interest due) and their timely remittance to Trustee Bank.  
DFS informed (December 2019) that the office of CGA  has intimated that 
relevant information may be available with Ministri es/ Department concerned. 
Statement of CGA is not acceptable as CPAO had to p repare AAS for each 
employee  and to report the details of the balances (PAO-wise) to  each Pr. AO 
at the close of each financial year. Had such state ments been issued, the 
accuracy of the accumulation amount of `1,165.39 crore could be confirmed in 
Audit.  
DFS further accepted (December 2019) that it was a matter of great concern that 
no information/ consolidated information was availa ble with CGA on whether 
the legacy pension contributions of the employees h ave been deployed in the 
market and credited to the NPS accounts or not. It also noted that the issue 
required urgent attention of the CGA and appropriat e compensation to 
subscribers needed to be given for the presumptive financial loss occurred so 
that they are not placed at any disadvantage in terms of their pension payments. 
3.5.1.2 Creation and operation of the Pool account 
When CRA-NSDL system became operational in June 200 8, nodal offices 
remitted employee/ employer contributions (pertaining to Central Government) 
to 
Trustee Bank . Some of these contributions were remitted to Trustee Bank  
without giving corresponding details to CRA such as name of employee, period 
to which contribution pertained etc.  
                                                           
20  Legacy amount is arrear contribution from effectiv e date of NPS to date of first regular 
upload.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 15  of 69  
Such contributions were invested as a lump sum in p ool account 21 , pending its 
posting into concerned PRANs so as to prevent loss of returns on such funds. 
Apart from these funds, the pool account also included those funds, which were 
received with incomplete details upto 30 April 2012.  
Audit observed the following in this regard: 
• The pool balance as of 01 January 2019 stood at `17.35 crore and the 
value of investment was `40.68 crore which remained un-reconciled for 
want of details, and pending for its credit into em ployees’ Individual 
Retirement Account (PRANs) . Thus, not a ll funds received by Trustee 
Bank  during the period upto 30 April 2012 were accounted for. 
• As per NSDL-CRA, as on 30 September 2018, 9,187 Cen tral 
Government subscribers had attained 60 years of age , of which SCFs 
were pending for reconciliation due to un-reconciled funds, in respect of 
144 subscribers. Out of these 144 subscribers, 27 subscribers had exited 
from NPS, 20 exited partially (pending for annuity)  and 14 subscribers 
had raised online withdrawal requests in CRA system . However, CRA 
cancelled the withdrawal requests as SCF was pending for matching and 
booking. Hence, a complete withdrawal request (lump -sum as well as 
annuity) was pending for these subscribers. Thus, s everal retirement 
cases were held up for want of these details.  
DFS replied (December 2019) that these issues were envisaged by CGA while 
shifting to CRA-NSDL and in case of variation, the CRA was to take up the 
matter of reconciliation with concerned Chief Controllers of Accounts (CCAs)/ 
Controller of Accounts (CAs). It further stated tha t t o oversee and track the 
implementation of NPS, Financial Advisers' Committe e was formed for each 
Ministry/ Department. DFS further added that DoE needed to fix responsibility 
and specify consequences on failure of the Committe es to function in the 
prescribed manner.  
The reply of DFS needs to be seen in the light of the fact that CPAO (reporting 
to DoE) had to prepare annual accounts for each employee after the end of each 
financial year and report the balance details (PAO- wise) to each Pr. AO, who 
would forward the information to each PAO for recon ciliation purposes. 
If all 
subscribers were provided with AAS, the creation of  a pool account would not 
have been necessitated. 
 
 
                                                           
21   Pool account was created on 20 March 2010. From 0 1 May 2012, it was decided that if 
funds were not received with proper details corresp onding to the SCF uploaded on CRA 
system and the matching and booking of funds could not materialise, the same would be 
returned. Fresh credits into pool account was discontinued from 01 May 2012. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 16  of 69  
3.5.2 State Governments, CABs and SABs 
With respect to States, CABs and SABs, no timelines were fixed by PFRDA for 
upload of legacy data and transfer of legacy contributions. Further, PFRDA was 
unaware of the quantum of legacy amount and the sta tus of its transfer to the 
Trustee Bank .  
PFRDA replied (March 2019 and April 2019) that quan tum of legacy amount 
to be uploaded or transferred was dependent upon va rious factors like number 
of employees, the date of joining, basic pay, DA an d increment of such 
employees and that such information would be availa ble with the concerned 
State Government, CABs and SABs. PFRDA, further sta ted (December 2019) 
that it was the responsibility of the concerned Sta te Governments to fix 
timelines for upload of legacy data and transfer of legacy contributions and that 
as a regulator, it consistently raised the issue of  delay in uploading/ non-
uploading of legacy funds by the Government Nodal o ffices from time to time 
through letters, review meetings, workshops and conferences. 
The reply of PFRDA needs to be seen in light of the fact that delay in remittance 
of pension contributions and non-transfer of the legacy amount would result in 
loss of return to subscribers, non-receipt of compl ete entitlements in the event 
of premature exit due to death or retirement, and l egal liability for State 
Governments. The audit observations relating to non -transfer/ delayed transfer 
of legacy contributions in the sample selected for audit are discussed in Para 4.6 
and 4.8. 
Recommendation: Government must identify all such c ases where legacy 
contributions were not remitted to Trustee Bank and  ensure that the same 
may be remitted with due interest and compensation so that subscriber does 
not suffer loss.  
3.6 Choice of Pension Funds and Categories of Schem es 
The GOI notification (22 December 2003) envisaged s everal pension funds to 
offer three categories of schemes 22 . Further, the subscriber would be free to 
allocate his money across any of these choices and the participating entities 
would give out easily understood information about past performance, so that 
the subscriber would be able to make informed choices about which scheme to 
choose. The Government decision  (April 2008), for management of funds under 
NPS, also indicated that Fund/ Asset Managers i.e. SBI, LIC and UTI selected 
by Government would offer a choice of schemes to su bscribers of NPS within 
the ambit of the investment pattern prescribed by G overnment and the 
                                                           
22  Three categories of schemes - A, B and C. Option A  - around 60 per cent  of the assets 
would be held as Government paper, 30 per cent  in investment grade corporate bonds and 
10 per cent  in equity. The asset allocation for option B would  be around 40 per cent  for 
Government paper, 40 per cent  for investment grade corporate bonds and 20 per cent  in 
equity. Option C would have 25 per cent  of pension assets in Government paper, 25 per 
cent  in investment grade corporate bonds and 50 per cent  in equity. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 17  of 69  
subscribers would have a choice of Fund/ Asset Mana gers and approved 
investment schemes. T he 40 th  Report (2010-11) of the Standing Committee on 
Finance (Para 56) of the 15 th Lok Sabha, desired greater flexibility in operation 
of the scheme and the employees were to have flexib ility to exercise choice of 
model/ scheme as well as fund managers periodically.  
The management of NPS funds of Central and State Go vernment employees, 
however, was restricted to the three Public Sector Pension Fund Managers viz. 
SBI, LIC and UTI as per the investment pattern pres cribed by the GOI. 
Government sector subscribers were also not given t he option of choosing 
schemes of investments as available to private sect or subscribers (who had 
choices 23  of investment schemes as well as Pension Funds). P FRDA was also 
of the view that level playing field was not availa ble to the Central/ State 
Government employees compared to the private (non-Government) subscribers 
to NPS.  
In this regard, DFS clarified (April 2013) that Cen tral Government employees 
might be allowed to make investment choices, but such major change had to be 
preceded by a financial literacy and awareness campaign by PFRDA. 
Subsequently, 
Sub section 2(d) under Section 20 of the PFRDA Act,  2013 
specified that there shall be a choice of multiple pension funds and multiple 
schemes. PFRDA also repeatedly raised this issue (June 2015, September 2015 
and January 2016) with DFS. One of the recommendations of the 7 th Central 
Pay Commission also was that government, in consult ation with PFRDA, 
should come up with different options for investmen t mix and provide 
subscribers a range of options. 
GOI vide its notification 24  dated 31 January 2019 allowed subscribers to choose 
(i) any one of the pension funds, including Private Sector Pension Funds (ii) the 
option to invest 100 per cent  of the funds in Government securities, and (iii) 
two Life Cycle based schemes 25 . 
Audit noticed that,  Government Sector employees did not have the choic e of 
pension fund and different categories of schemes fo r a period of more than 15 
years i.e. from 01 January 2004 to 30 January 2019 (till Government issued a 
notification in this regard), which implied that Go vernment Sector subscribers 
had no choice in making their investment whereas Non-Government subscribers 
                                                           
23  choices - (i) to select one of the PFs amongst the  eight Public as well as Private Fund 
Managers (ii) to decide the allocation of their fun ds amongst the three asset classes of 
Equity, Corporate Debt, & Government Debt with no r estrictions, except that the 
allocation to equity could not be more than 50  per cent  of the individual’s corpus (iii) of 
changing the PFs and the allocation among the three asset classes, once a year. 
24   Came into force with effect from 01 April 2019.  
25   Two schemes - (i) Conservative Life Cycle Fund with maximum expos ure to equity 
capped at 25  per cent  – LC-25  
 (ii) Moderate Life Cycle Fund with maximum exposur e to equity capped at 50  per cent  – 
LC-50  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 18  of 69  
had this opportunity available since 01 May 2009.  Investment in different 
schemes and Fund Managers, since inception to 31 December 2018, led to rate 
of return ranging between 9.59 per cent  to 9.91 per cent  for Central Government 
employees, 9.50 per cent  to 9.63 per cent  for State Government employees and 
8.41 per cent  to 11.43 per cent  for Non-Government subscribers.  
While accepting the issue of lack of level playing field to Central Government 
employees in terms of managing their NPS funds till  31 March 2019, vis-à-vis  
private sector, DFS stated (December 2019) that sin ce financial literacy is still 
lacking among Central Government employees especially among Group B and 
C, to take decisions regarding their investments, P FRDA has been advised to 
take steps for creating awareness and financial lit eracy among these set of 
subscribers. 
3.7 No Scheme for Minimum Assured Return 
As per the Government decision (August 2003), it wa s proposed to evaluate 
mechanisms through which certain investment protect ion guarantees could be 
offered for the different schemes, through private financial markets and paid for 
by the individuals. These would not constitute cont ingent liabilities for the 
exchequer.  
As per PFRDA Act 2013, vide sub section 2(d) under Section 20, the subscriber: 
• shall have an option of investing upto 100 per cent  of his funds in 
Government Securities; and 
• seeking minimum assured returns, shall have the opt ion to invest his 
funds in such schemes providing minimum assured ret urns as may be 
notified by the Authority. 
In this regard, Audit noticed that PFRDA initiated (February 2019), the process 
to design the Minimum Assured Return Scheme (MARS) by issuing an 
Expression of Interest for design and development o f MARS under NPS 
inviting response from Actuary/ Actuarial-Investmen t Management Firms. 
However, it was not available (December 2019) to NPS subscribers, in violation 
of PFRDA Act. 
Thus, it was only after a lapse of five years since  notification of the PFRDA 
Act, that PFRDA had initiated process to design/ fo rmulate a scheme offering 
minimum assured returns and even after lapse of mor e than 15 years since the 
introduction of the NPS, the subscribers were 
yet to receive such  minimum 
assurance.  
Recommendation: Immediate steps need to be taken fo r providing MARS, 
in compliance to the provisions of the PFRDA Act, t o the subscriber for 
ensuring their social security post retirement. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 19  of 69  
3.8 Replacement Rate 
As per HLEG Report, the first tier pension would be  a defined benefit at 
50 per cent  of the average emoluments over the last 36 months,  the minimum 
qualifying service would be 20 years and full pensi on would be payable on 
superannuation for qualifying service of 33 years.  
As per the Government decision (August 2003), it wa s expected that 
contribution of 10 per cent  of the salary (basic pay and DA) and a matching 
contribution by the employer i.e. Central Governmen t could achieve a 
replacement rate of around 56 per cent  of the last emolument (basic pay and 
DA) for Group A employees, around 58 per cent  for Group B employees, 
around 59 per cent  for Group C employees and around 68 per cent  for Group D 
employees. These estimates were based on certain as sumptions which, inter-
alia, included no change in the existing pay struct ure, inflation indexation of 
wages (rise of DA) at the rate of four per cent  per annum, investment of 
contribution in Scheme A, (it estimated that Govern ment securities give real 
return of 1.6 per cent  per annum, corporate bonds give a real rate of ret urn of 
five per cent  per annum and equity gives a real rate of return o f eight per cent  
per annum over a long period). The old system of pe nsion provided for a 
replacement rate of 50 per cent  (based on the average emoluments of the last 10 
months of service) on completion of service period of 33 years. 
In this regard, Audit noticed that Confederation of  Central Government 
Employees and Workers, with a notice of strike, submitted a charter of demand 
to DEA. With reference to the charter of demand, PF RDA informed 
(October 2007) that apprehensions expressed regarding inadequacy of return on 
pension accumulations to provide a replacement rate  of 50 per cent  were 
unfounded. It added that simulations made by expert s indicated that a real rate 
of return of five per cent  or more per annum would provide a pension of more 
than 50 per cent  of the last pay (nominal returns during the last t hree years 
would have ranged from 14 per cent  to 29 per cent  had the savings been 
invested). 
In this regard, clarifications were sought (Decembe r 2018 and January 2019) 
from DFS regarding whether replacement rates for Gr oup A, B, C and D 
employees were based on the study by any expert com mittee and the details of 
simulations made by experts along-with parameters t hereon. Further, 
clarification was also sought as to whether any ass essment of the actual 
replacement rate was carried out, subsequent to 01 January 2004 and whether a 
critical level of such replacement rate was identif ied to protect the interest of 
the subscribers. 
DFS replied (March 2019) that periodic assessment o f the actual replacement 
rate vis-à-vis  the assessment rate and identifying a critical lev el of the 
replacement rate across the various categories of employees was not mentioned 
in the Government decision. DFS further added (Dece mber 2019) that with 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 20  of 69  
falling annuity rates, increased longevity and inev itable lowering of interest 
rates as the economy matures, the replacement rates  envisaged in the 
Government decision might not be achieved. 
In the absence of details regarding basis of assess ment of replacement rates, 
Audit was unable to derive assurance about achievem ent of the expectations 
mentioned in the Government decision (August 2003). Besides, clarification on 
whether or not the recommendation given by the HLEG  was accepted by the 
Government, with reasons thereof, was not provided. 
 
Recommendation:  DFS may arrive at minimum replacem ent rate taking 
into consideration the annuity rates, increased longevity and interest rates.  
3.9 Appointment of Actuary and actuarial evaluation  of the Scheme 
The HLEG recommended that in order to ensure that t he fund would be viable 
in the long run, it would be necessary to have an actuarial evaluation conducted 
once in two years, adding that based on the findings of the actuarial evaluation, 
the Government might like to rationalise the benefi t structure or increase 
contribution rate as the case might be. 
From the documents/ responses made available to Aud it, it was observed that 
there was no indication whether: 
• above referred HLEG recommendations were accepted o r not and the 
reasons for the same; 
• 
actuarial evaluation of the fund/ scheme was conduc ted once in two 
years; and 
• any other mechanism to assess the viability of the fund/ scheme had been 
adopted.  
DFS replied (May 2019) that the HLEG was set up by DoPPW , which submitted 
its report in February 2002 and the information rel ating to acceptance and 
implementation of the recommendation of the Group was not traceable in DFS 
records. However, DFS did not provide specific repl y with regard to actuarial 
evaluation once in two years (as recommended in HLE G report) and adoption 
of any other mechanism to assess the viability of the fund/ Scheme. 
Thus, Audit could not draw assurance on viability of the fund/ scheme. This 
assumes importance in view of the fact that the actuarial evaluation is at the core 
of any pension scheme and also total Assets Under M anagement (AUM) 
amounted to `3,99,245.04  crore as of 31 January 2020, with AUM of 
`3,41,815.87 crore pertaining to Government sector (Central/ Sta te 
Government). 
DFS in its reply (December 2019) stated that a revi ew of performance of NPS 
vis-à-vis  the expected outcomes and standards envisaged at i nception, and the 
way forward is under consideration. 
Further, DFS intimated (May 2020) that it 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 21  of 69  
intended to conduct actuarial evaluation to assess the present situation and take 
appropriate measures to maximize and optimize the r eplacement rate keeping 
in view the recent replacement rates under NPS vis-à-vis  the benefits envisaged 
at the introduction of NPS.  
3.10 Appointment of National Securities Depository Limited as CRA 
As per the Government decision (August 2003), the o ption of joining the new 
system would also be available to the State Governm ent and as and when they 
decided, the new system would be capable of accommo dating the new 
participants. 
As per CGA’s OM (January 2004) read with OM (Februa ry 2004), pending 
formation of a regular CRA, CPAO would function as the CRA for NPS. 
National Securities Depository Limited (NSDL) start ed functioning as regular 
CRA with effect from 1 June 2008 (contract between PFRDA and NSDL 
executed in November 2007).  
In this regard, seven states, selected as sample for audit, had adopted NPS from 
15 May 2003 to 01 April 2006 and agreements were si gned with NSDL as 
tabulated below: 
Table 3.2 
Name of the 
State  
Date of 
Notification  
Date of 
Adoption  
Date of signing 
agreement with 
NSDL CRA  
Month of upload 
of first 
contribution  
Andhra Pradesh 22.09.2004  01.09.2004  21.11.2008 December 2010 
Himachal Pradesh 17.08.2006  15.05.2003  24.12.2009 December 2010 
Jharkhand 09.12.2004  01.12.2004  25.10.2008 February 2010 
Karnataka 31.03.2006  01.04.2006  20.01.2010 April 2010 
Maharashtra 31.10.2005  01.11.2005  10.10.2014 March 2015 
Maharashtra 
(All India 
Services) 
02.03.2013 February 2014 
Rajasthan 28.01.2004  01.01.2004  09.11.2010 November 2011 
Uttarakhand 25.10.2005  01.10.2005  11.09.2009 October 2010 
Audit observed that there was no parity between Central and State Government 
employees with respect to protection of interest of subscribers and that the State 
Government employees were in a disadvantageous position as cited below: 
• At the Centre, there was no necessity for Ministries/ Departments to sign 
agreements with NSDL-CRA. However, for the States, it was only after 
respective States’ concluded agreements with NSDL-CRA that the first 
upload of subscriber details and corresponding remi ttance of 
transactions to the Trustee Bank, occurred. Consequ ently, the first 
upload of subscribers’ details and remittance of co ntributions 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 22  of 69  
commenced in the aforesaid states in February 2010,  one year after the 
functioning of NSDL as CRA. 
• Unlike in case of Central Government employees, in case of the State 
Governments’ subscribers’, funds which were not rec eived with 
complete details corresponding to the SCF uploaded on CRA system or 
funds remitted to the Trustee Bank where matching a nd booking of 
funds could not materialize, were returned/ rejecte d, instead of being 
pooled and invested until 30 April 2012.  
Reply of DFS (December 2019) was silent on the issu e of parity of treatment 
between Central and State Government employees rega rding investment of 
funds.  
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 23  of 69  
Chapter 4 - Implementation 
 
4.1 Coverage and Registration of Nodal Offices and eligible 
employees 
4.1.1 Coverage and Registration of Nodal Offices 
4.1.1.1 Ministries/ Departments of GOI 
PFRDA informed (15 February 2008) the Ministry of Finance that CRA was to 
commence operations with effect from 01 June 2008. It was of critical 
importance that all Nodal Offices such as Pr. AOs, PAOs, DDOs and individual 
subscribers were registered into the new CRA system by 01 June 2008, so as to 
enable individual, subscriber-wise contributions to  be accepted for the 
investment purposes. NSDL started functioning as the CRA from 
June 2008 26 . 
PFRDA also informed that any delay in this process would have adverse 
consequences on the pension savings of NPS subscrib ers, adding that their 
assessment indicated that one day’s delay in transf er of funds would erode the 
terminal pension wealth of an employee by `40,000. 
• Test check of a sample of 62 DDOs of Central Ministries/ Departments 
showed that there were delays ranging between 37 to 884 days in all the 
DDOs, in registration under NPS ( Annexure IV ) since 01 June 2008 
(i.e. date when NSDL started functioning or from th e date of DDO 
started functioning, whichever is later). 
DFS replied (December 2019) that as per CGA all the  PAOs/ DDOs, 
who submitted legacy data to NSDL were to be regist ered with NSDL. 
However, Audit noted that the reasons for delays (i n respect of cases 
cited in Annexure IV ) and the mechanism in place to monitor the follow 
up of directions of CGA were not furnished by DFS/ CGA.  
Regarding timeline for registration of a Nodal offi ce under NPS, 
subsequent to 01 June 2008, DFS referred to OM date d 02 September 
2008 which stated that registration was of emergent  nature and hence 
“immediate action” was prescribed in the OM instead  of laying down 
timelines in term of days, as there was no scope for delay.  
However, considering the delay noticed in registrat ion of nodal offices 
despite issuance of above OM, Audit is of the view that the instructions 
were not strictly followed and it also highlighted absence of effective 
mechanism to monitor follow up of instructions. 
                                                           
26   As per information provided by PFRDA, 15660 DDOs,  2932 PAOs & 131 Pr. AOs were 
registered in NPS between April 2008 and October 2018. 9643 out of 15660 DDOs, 1849 
out of 2932 PAOs, and 119 out of 131 Pr. AOs were registered in 2008-09 itself. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 24  of 69  
• As regards the number of eligible Nodal offices whi ch were not 
registered under NPS, PFRDA replied (March and December 2019) that  
O.M. issued (July 2011) by DoE fixed the ultimate responsibility of NPS 
implementation on the Financial Advisors in respect  of their Ministries 
and that concerned accounting formations would be i n a better position 
to provide information as to whether there were eli gible Nodal offices 
which were not registered under the NPS.  
4.1.1.2 Central Autonomous Bodies (CABs) 
As per DoE O.M. dated 13 November 2003, all new rec ruits joining any 
autonomous body under the administrative control of  various Ministries/ 
Departments, on or after 01 January 2004 would also  be governed by NPS. 
Minutes of the meeting held on 30 May 2008 also ind icated that DoE 
would ensure that NPS was adopted and implemented b y all autonomous 
bodies. However, in its subsequent OM (November 200 8), DoE asked the 
Ministries/ Departments to advise autonomous bodies  to contact PFRDA for 
shifting to the NPS architecture and stated that this exercise was to be completed 
by 31 January 2009 by all autonomous bodies.  
Audit observed that as against the stipulated date of 31 January 2009 for shifting 
of all CABs to NPS architecture, PFRDA was the first CAB, brought under the 
NPS architecture in February 2009. 
 As per information provided by PFRDA, 
3,999 DDOs, 1,874 PAOs and 573 Pr. AOs were registe red in NPS between 
April 2008 and October 2018. Nil out of 3,999 DDOs,  one out of 1,874 PAOs, 
and one out of 573 Pr. AOs were registered in 2008-09 itself. 
In a meeting held in June 2013, it was decided that  Secretary (Expenditure) be 
requested to provide the list of CABs (as grants we re captured in budget 
documents), to PFRDA to enable it to bring all CABs  under the fold of NPS, 
immediately. However, such list was not made availa ble to PFRDA. DoE 
requested (December 2015) all Ministries/ Departments that despite instructions 
issued by PFRDA from time to time, a large number of CABs had not yet joined 
NPS and that the Ministries/ Departments of the Cen tral Government may 
review the matter and ensure that the exercise of j oining NPS by all the 
autonomous bodies under their administrative contro l was completed 
immediately. 
Audit observed that a co-ordinated approach between  DoE, PFRDA and the 
respective Ministries/ Departments was essential for ensuring registration of all 
CABs. As against this, the responsibility for regis tration of CABs has been 
shifting between DoE (May 2008), PFRDA (June 2013) and respective 
Ministries/ Departments (December 2015).  
PFRDA was not aware of the complete list of CABs, w hich were out of the 
ambit of NPS and replied (March 2019) that the actual position of CABs could 
be confirmed by the respective Ministries/ Departments.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 25  of 69  
DoE has only one autonomous body (National Institut e of Financial 
Management) 27  under its administrative control, which was not registered under 
NPS (February 2019). 
Test check of sample of 12 DDOs of CABs showed that there were delays of 
121 to 1,003 days in registration under NPS (Annexure V)  from 1  June 2008 
(i.e. date when NSDL started functioning or from th e date of DDO started 
functioning, whichever is later). 
4.1.1.3 State Governments and State Autonomous Bodi es (SABs) 
i.  Total number of DDOs registered in States were 2,20 ,217 (as of 
30 April 2018). In response to Audit query seeking clarification on status 
of registration of Nodal offices in State Governmen ts (in terms of total 
eligible nodal offices to be registered and those remaining unregistered), 
PFRDA replied (March 2019) that NPS had been notifi ed and adopted 
by State Governments on different dates based on th eir decision. 
PFRDA also replied that the notifications were forwarded to concerned 
Nodal offices and/ or Finance Department and that i t was the 
responsibility of concerned State Governments to ensure registration of 
Nodal offices into NPS.  
Further, in response to Audit query seeking clarification about the status 
of enrolment of SABs (in terms of total eligible nodal offices to be 
registered and those remaining unregistered) under NPS, DFS replied 
(March and December 2019) that, there was no mechanism to assess the 
number of eligible SABs to be covered under NPS and  that the 
concerned State Government would be in a position to confirm the same.  
ii.  As regards assurance of 100 per cent  coverage of all Nodal Offices in 
selected State Governments and UTs (including their  SABs), Audit 
scrutiny revealed the following:  
• In Andhra Pradesh, 244 out of 22,073 DDOs were unre gistered 
as of February 2019.  
• In Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand, not  all nodal 
offices (SABs) were registered under NPS.  
• In Rajasthan, as per State Insurance and Provident Fund (SIPF) 
Department, Jaipur, which acts as Nodal Office, 27, 538 DDOs 
were registered under NPS. However, as per data available with 
Audit the number of DDOs in the State is 35,595.  
• In Karnataka, salary is prepared by DDOs through Human 
Resource Management System (HRMS), wherein control has 
been introduced so that generation of salary bills was not allowed 
                                                           
27   Renamed as Arun Jaitley National Institute of Fin ancial Management (February 2020). 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 26  of 69  
in respect of employees with date of entry into service on or after 
01 April 2006, if deduction towards NPS was not don e. This 
system ensured registration of all eligible DDOs in  the state.  
However, there is no centralised database of SABs in the state.  
• In the remaining selected States/ UTs 28  also, Audit could not 
gain assurance about complete coverage of Nodal Offices.  
iii.  Audit scrutiny of 168 selected DDOs of State Govern ment and SABs 
showed that, keeping in view the date of agreement with NSDL or 
functioning of the DDO after the date of agreement (whichever is later), 
the time taken for registration of State Government  DDOs ranged from 
62 days to 1,687 days (Annexure VI) , and the time taken for registration 
of SAB DDOs ranged from 552 days to 3,385 days (Annexure VII) . 
The details are tabulated below:  
Table: 4.1 
State  Number of 
selected 
DDOs of 
State 
Government  
Number 
of selected 
DDOs of 
SABs  
Date of 
agreement of 
State 
Government 
with NSDL  
Time taken for 
registration of 
State Govt. 
DDOs (days)  
Time taken for 
registration of 
SAB DDOs 
(days)  
Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
20  05  21.11.2008  228-1215  1630-3385  
Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
20  05  24.12.2009  110-131  832-1693  
Jharkhand  20  02  25.10.2008  162  830-3341  
Karnataka  20  05  20.01.2010  62-182  1997-2599  
Maharashtra  20  01  10.10.2014  97-601  1006* 
Rajasthan  20  05  09.11.2010  192-1687  552-2512  
Uttarakhand  20  05  11.09.2009  75  1027-2594  
Total  140 28  - - - 
*Government of Maharashtra extended the date of reg istration of Zilla Parishad upto 
31 March 2018. Zilla Parishad, Nanded was registered on 8 December 2017, therefore, no delay 
in registration. 
NSDL-CRA informed (October 2014) PFRDA that the reg istration of SABs 
was undertaken as soon as all registration related documents were received at 
CRA in the prescribed format. Reason for pending re gistration of SABs 
included required documents being incomplete and/ o r not submitted, 
non-receipt of documents for registration etc.  
Thus, there was no assurance that all Nodal Offices (under Central Government, 
State Government, CABs and SABs) had been registered under NPS. 
                                                           
28  Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Delhi and Maharashtra 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 27  of 69  
Recommendation: A foolproof system needs to be put in place to ensure that 
all nodal offices are registered under NPS.  
4.1.2 Compensation for non-remittance/ delayed remi ttance 
As per Section 2(g) of the PFRDA Act, 2013 “interme diary” includes pension 
fund, central record keeping agency, NPS Trust, pen sion fund adviser, 
retirement adviser, point of presence and such other person or entity connected 
with collection, management, record keeping and distribution of accumulations. 
Further, provision 41 29  of PFRDA (Point of Presence) Regulations, 2018 
provided that in the event of failure on the part of point of presence to adhere to 
the Service level Standards or any guidelines issue d by the Authority resulting 
in loss or inconvenience to the subscriber, the sub scriber shall be compensated 
as per the guidelines issued by the Authority or th e compensation limits 
mentioned in the service level standards. As per Section 14B of the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 19 52, where an employer 
makes default in the payment of any contribution to  the fund or in the transfer 
of accumulations required to be transferred by him,  the commissioner or such 
other officer may recover from the employer by way of penalty such damages, 
not exceeding the amount of arrears, as may be specified in the scheme. 
4.1.2.1  PFRDA informed (June 2016) DFS that Government  nodal offices were 
not registered as intermediaries under NPS architec ture. Clarifying on the 
present status of Government nodal offices, PFRDA r eplied (November 2018) 
that there were no specific regulations, which provided for registration of nodal 
offices under Section 27 30  of the PFRDA Act. However, these offices were at 
present regulated through various OMs issued by the Government(s).  
The reply of PFRDA needs to be viewed in light of the fact that Section 2(t) of 
the PFRDA Act 2013, defines subscriber as a person who subscribes to a 
scheme of a pension fund and does not differentiate  between government 
subscribers and private subscribers to NPS.  
4.1.2.2  Audit observed that interest of NPS subscribers und er PoPs 
(non-government) registered with PFRDA was protecte d by way of 
compensation for non-remittance/ delayed remittance  compared to subscribers 
under Government Nodal Offices who were not similar ly protected, indicating 
absence of parity among subscribers under NPS. Furt her, none of the OMs 
applicable to Nodal Offices (Central Government) co ntained provisions to 
                                                           
29   Previously, provision 40 of the PFRDA (Point of P resence) Regulations 2015 
compensated the subscriber to the tune of bank rate  plus two per cent  for the period of 
such delay or violation, in the event of non-upload  of contributions as per the prescribed 
timelines. 
30   Section 27 specifies that no intermediary, includ ing a pension fund or a point of presence 
to the extent regulated under this Act, shall comme nce any activity relating to a pension 
fund except under and in accordance with the condit ions of a certificate of registration 
granted by the Authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 28  of 69  
compensate the NPS subscriber who faced non-remitta nce/ delayed remittance 
of contributions. The PFRDA Act also provided for p enalty for failure by an 
intermediary or any other person to comply with its  provisions, rules, 
regulations and directions. However, as Government nodal offices were not 
registered as intermediaries, imposition of penalti es by PFRDA for 
non-compliance and recovery of losses in lieu of delays was not possible.  
Audit observed that rules have not been framed by GOI to fix accountability of 
the concerned officials causing non-remittance/ del ayed remittance of 
subscriber’s contribution. Besides, rules have not been framed by GOI to decide 
the source from where such compensation would be pa id. Further, taking into 
consideration the issue of non-deposit/ delayed dep osit of contribution during 
2004-2012, GOI has notified (31 January 2019) that Government subscribers 
would be compensated for non-deposit or delayed dep osit of contributions 
during 2004-12 at GPF rates. Framing of such regula tions would ensure better 
discipline among Government nodal offices and act as a deterrent against erring 
offices, towards bringing about timely remittance of contributions.  
To implement the decision (31 January 2019), CGA, i ssued guidelines 
(07 January 2020) that prescribed that interest wou ld be calculated by the 
present DDO of the employee on the basis of data provided by CRA (NSDL) in 
confirmation with service records of the employee. Confirmation of correctness 
of data/ records may also be obtained from the employee concerned. 
However, Audit noted that, neither the GOI notifica tion nor the guidelines 
issued by CGA cover non-deposit or delayed deposit of contributions from 
2012-13 onwards.  
DFS replied (December 2019) that for delays post 20 12, the recommendation 
of Committee of Secretaries, suggesting measures fo r streamlining NPS, were 
under active consideration for implementation. Furt her, pursuant to the budget 
announcement 2019 on separation of NPS Trust from P FRDA, requisite 
amendments to PFRDA Act also were under examination  inter-alia including 
incorporating provisions for compensation and penal  provisions for delay in 
Government Departments. DoPPW has also incorporated  penal provisions in 
the draft CCS (NPS) Rules.  
 
4.1.3 Coverage and Registration of eligible employe es 
4.1.3.1 Ministries/ Departments of GOI and CABs  
During a meeting in December 2012, PFRDA observed t hat the coverage gap 
could be between five per cent  to 10 per cent and about one lakh potential 
subscribers of the Central Government and autonomou s bodies were not 
covered. Accordingly, PFRDA was advised to take imm ediate action to enroll 
all the remaining employees of the Central Governme nt under NPS. 
Subsequently, during another meeting in June 2013, PFRDA brought out that, 
there were 11.65 lakh subscribers enrolled in the system (June 2013), but in the 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 29  of 69  
absence of recruitment data, it was not possible to  determine whether 
100 per cent coverage had been achieved. It was decided in the m eeting that 
‘the incremental additions to Government employees based on the budget 
documents may be taken as the benchmark and PFRDA s hould achieve 
100 per cent enrolment for all employees from 01 January 2004 till a particular 
date say March of last year on a rolling basis’. 
PFRDA was mandated as per notification dated 01 February 2014 to implement 
NPS across the country and also monitor and oversee  the enrolment of all 
Central Government employees who had entered the se rvice on or after 
01 January 2004. It however stated (January 2015) t hat it was not very certain 
whether 100 per cent coverage of the employees in terms of enrolment and  
subscriptions and their remittances into the system under the Scheme had been 
achieved and, therefore, requested DoE to issue necessary instructions to enable 
them to ensure 100 per cent coverage. PFRDA stated (January 2015) that in 
order to arrive at any reasonable assessment regard ing the coverage of the 
Scheme across the entire Central Government sector, they required database of 
recruitment in Central Government sector or the act ual number of employees 
who had joined on or after 01 January 2004. PFRDA had previously (June 2013 
and August 2013) raised similar request with DoE. 
While providing clarification on 100 per cent coverage of employees, PFRDA 
replied (November 2018) that the database with resp ect to total number of 
employees who had joined Central Government sector on after 01 January 2004 
was not available with them and they could not conf irm whether 100 per cent 
coverage of employees under the Scheme had been ach ieved. PFRDA also 
replied that they had no mechanism to check whether 100 per cent coverage of 
employees in terms of enrolment and subscriptions a nd their remittances into 
the system under NPS was there.  
DFS replied (May and December 2019) that PFRDA had no mechanism to 
check whether there was 100 per cent coverage of employees and nodal offices 
into the system under NPS, adding that only the con cerned nodal offices were 
in a position to confirm the same because PFRDA/ NS DL-CRA did not have 
any data about joining of new employees in Government service before receipt 
of application for creation of PRAN. 
In eight out of 13 Ministries/ Departments 
31  of the Central Government, no 
database of eligible employees vis-à-vis  employees covered under NPS was 
maintained to assure 100 per cent coverage of eligible employees under NPS as 
given in table 4.2.  
 
                                                           
31   Out of sample of 16 Ministries, 3 Ministries viz.  Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and Ministry of Human Resource and 
Development included only ABs DDOs. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 30  of 69  
Table: 4.2  
Total No. of selected 
Ministries 
(Total No. of selected 
DDOs in selected 
Ministries/ Departments) 
 
No. of Ministries which 
have not assured 100% 
coverage of eligible 
employees under NPS 
(No. of selected DDOs 
falling under the above 
Ministries) 
 
No. of Ministries which 
have assured 100% 
coverage of all eligible 
employees under NPS 
(No. of DDOs falling 
under the above 
Ministries)
 
13 (62)  08 32 (35)  05 33 (27)  
However, in 12 DDOs of selected 11 CABs all eligibl e employees working 
under the DDOs were registered into the NPS.  
4.1.3.2 State Governments and SABs  
PFRDA (17 November 2015) requested State Governments 34  that to ensure 100 
per cent  coverage of eligible employees under NPS, the prec ise number of 
employees eligible for NPS along with the number of  employees registered be 
furnished. Such information, however was not available with PFRDA. 
Audit scrutiny of 183 DDOs in selected States and UTs revealed that 75 DDOs 
had cases of non-issue of PRAN to the eligible empl oyees in six 35  States and 
one 36  UT. 
DDOs stated that application forms could not be pro cessed and forwarded 
timely to DTO for allotment of PRAN due to non-subm ission of application 
forms by the employees, delayed submission of CSRF (Common Subscriber 
Registration Form) by the subscribers, errors in th e CSRF as pointed out by 
DTO/ NSDL, etc. The reply however, may be seen in t he light of the fact that 
DDOs were to ensure submission of application with correct particulars by the 
employees immediately after their joining. Further, due to non-issue of PRAN, 
these employees were not covered under NPS and consequently they would not 
be eligible for any benefit under the scheme.  
Further, Audit observed instances (cited below) in respect of coverage of all 
eligible employees, in the selected States, which h ighlights the uncertainty 
regarding completeness of information/ data on the number of employees 
eligible for coverage under NPS. Due to this uncertainty, the coverage gap (i.e. 
difference between number of employees eligible and  the number registered) 
remained unidentified at PFRDA. 
                                                           
32   DEA, DFS, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Home  Affairs, Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting, Ministry of Law and Justice, Mini stry of Mines, Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation. 
33   Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Ministry o f Road Transport and Highways, 
Department of Science and Technology, Ministry of W ater Resources, Department of 
Atomic Energy. 
34   Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Ker ala, Bihar, Maharashtra etc. 
35   Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Rajas than, Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand 
36   NCT of Delhi 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 31  of 69  
• Karnataka: had 100 per cent  coverage of employees except SABs. 
DDOs have to necessarily prepare salary bills throu gh HRMS, wherein  
control has been introduced to disallow generation of salary bills in 
respect of employees whose date of entry into servi ce is on or after 01 
April 2006, if deduction towards NPS is not done; 
• Andhra Pradesh, Delhi and Andaman and Nicobar Islands: there was no 
mechanism for confirming 100  per cent  coverage of all employees; 
• Maharashtra: 21,206 out of 2,77,216 employees were not registered 
(as of 31 March 2018). Employees of some SABs 37  were not covered 
under NPS; 
• Uttarakhand: 8,253 out of 84,159 employees remained out of NPS (as of 
30 November 2018); 
• Himachal Pradesh: 908 employees remained out of NPS  (as of 
13 February 2019); and 
• Jharkhand: 62 employees remained out of NPS as of December 2018. 
PFRDA replied (March and December 2019) that it was  the responsibility of 
concerned nodal office to assess the number of eligible employees to be covered 
under NPS, reiterating that it had no mechanism to check whether 100 per cent  
coverage of employees under the NPS was there. 
Thus, during formulation of the scheme, essential c ontrols to ensure 100 per 
cent coverage of eligible employees were not envisioned.  Further, despite 15 
years of implementing NPS, assurance on 100 per cent coverage of eligible 
employees is still lacking. 
Recommendation: Foolproof system needs to be put in place to ensure that 
all NPS eligible employees are registered. Internal Audit mechanism should 
see that every employee is brought into the system.  To ensure this, delays 
need to be penalised and compensation effected to a void loss to the 
subscriber.   
4.1.4 Incomplete registration of subscribers 
As per DoE letter dated 29 April 2009 to PFRDA/ NSD L and various 
accounting formations, all subscribers who were reg istered through the legacy 
data were to fill up the application for registration, which were to be forwarded 
to NSDL by the PAO concerned, with the exercise to be completed by 31 July 
2009. Further, DoE reiterated that all new entrants  who joined service on or 
after 01 April 2009 might be registered directly wi th NSDL through the form 
prescribed by NSDL, with their SCF upload commencing thereafter.  
                                                           
37   Recognised and aided educational institutions, ag ricultural/non-agricultural universities 
and affiliated non-Government colleges, Corporations under Water Resources Department 
and teachers under Zilla Parishad (ZP). 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 32  of 69  
DoE noted (17 August 2009) that the individual appl ication forms for 
registration to the NPS, had not been filled up and sent to NSDL in respect of a 
large number of cases pertaining to post 01 January  2004 entrants into 
Government service. It accordingly advised that all  such employees fill up the 
form which may then be forwarded by DDO/ PAO to NSDL immediately (latest 
by 31 August 2009). 
In this regard, PFRDA replied (November 2018) that the exercise of submission 
of physical PRAN applications in respect of Non-IRA
38  subscribers who were 
registered through minimum data (legacy data/ zero contribution) was still 
continuing, as physical forms of certain number of PRANs were yet to be 
received from some of the Central Government Minist ries/ Departments and 
State Governments. PFRDA also stated in its reply that in Central Government, 
4,383 PRANs (excluding 33,948 Non-IRA PRANs, which had been deactivated 
on 31 October 2018 based on PFRDA advisory) were still non-IRA, adding that 
the non-IRA PRANs which had been de-activated would  only be re-activated 
upon submission of physical CSRF form. 
Thus, the registration of subscribers who entered t he CRA system on the basis 
of legacy data, is still incomplete due to non-subm ission of physical forms. 
Resultantly, processing of terminal benefits may be delayed.  
DFS replied (December 2019) that CGA had suggested that PFRDA may raise 
issue of registration of NPS subscribers before the  committees of Financial 
Advisors formed for the purpose and also share data with DDO/ Head of Office 
as documents are updated in the Service Book. 
4.2 Delay in issue of Permanent Pension Account Num ber  
The Permanent Pension Account Number  (PPAN) is a unique 16-digit 
permanent pension account number, which was issued by the PAO in 
Ministries/ Departments of the GOI, till commenceme nt of functioning of 
regular CRA and issue of PRAN by NSDL-CRA. In five 39  out of the sample of 
seven State Governments selected, PPAN was being issued in a similar manner, 
except in case of Maharashtra, where PPAN continues to be issued by the nodal 
authority of the State Government, irrespective of issue of PRAN. 
4.2.1 Ministries/ Departments of the Central Govern ment and CAB  
As per OM (January 2004) read with OM (February 2004) issued by the CGA, 
the DDO concerned was responsible for obtaining com plete information from 
the newly joined Government servant and forward the  same to PAO by 7 th  of 
the month following the month in which the employee had joined Government 
                                                           
38   The subscribers in respect of whom complete KYC d etails (address, photograph, 
signature, nominee details etc.) are not available in CRA system are non-IRA (Individual 
Retirement Account) compliant subscribers. 
39   Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Himachal Pr adesh, Maharashtra.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 33  of 69  
service and PAO was required to issue PPAN to the e mployee by 10 th  of that 
month. 
Audit noticed that: 
• In four out of 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central G overnment, in nine 
out of 62 selected DDOs, for 13 subscribers out of 79 selected 
subscribers (who were entitled for issuance of PPAN), delay in issue of 
PPAN ranged from 01-2009 days, as mentioned in Annexure VIII(A); 
and 
 
• In two out of 11 selected autonomous bodies of the Central Government, 
in two out of 12 selected DDOs, for four subscriber s out of 18 selected 
subscribers, delay in issue of PPAN ranged from 44- 375 days, as 
mentioned in Annexure VIII(A). The details are tabulated below.  
Table: 4.3 
Central 
Government/ 
CAB  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
Selected 
DDOs 
where delay 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers in 
selected 
DDOs  
Delay noticed 
in number of  
subscribers  
Average 
delay in days  
Central 
Government  
62 
 09  79  13  373.77 @ 
CAB  12  02  18  04  183.75  
@ Most of the instances of delay are between the ra nge of one and 200 days and only two 
instances of delay were between 1,900 to 2,009 days. 
4.2.2  State Governments and SABs  
As discussed in Para 3.10, the option of joining th e new system would also be 
available to the State Governments and as and when they decided, the new 
system would be capable of accommodating the new pa rticipants . The seven 
selected State Governments had issued notifications between January 2004 and 
August 2006, for adopting NPS.  
Audit scrutiny showed that: 
• In three out of nine States/ UTs, delay in issue of  PPAN was noticed in 
71 employees (in 23 DDOs) out of 250 employees (of 40 DDOs who 
had employees with PPAN, out of total 150 selected DDOs of State 
Governments/ UTs). Delay ranged from 18-2,038 days, as mentioned in 
Annexure VIII(B); and  
• In one out of eight 40  States/ UTs, delay in issue of PPAN was noticed in 
13 employees (in one DDO of a SAB) out of 15 employees (of one DDO 
which had employees with PPAN, out of total 33 selected DDOs). Delay 
ranged from 453-2,607 days, as mentioned in Annexure VIII(B). 
                                                           
40   Out of the sample of nine states and UTs, in one UT Andaman & Nicobar Island no 
Autonomous Body was in the selection. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 34  of 69  
Table: 4.4 
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/ 
UT)  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
DDOs 
with 
PPAN 
employees  
Selected 
DDOs 
where 
delay was 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
Number of 
selected 
employees 
with 
PPAN  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed  
Average 
delay in 
days  
State 
Government 
 
150  40  23  2210  250  71  583.29 @ 
SAB  33  1 1 539  15  13  1448 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in the range of one to 1,200 days and in five instances delay of 
more than 1500 days was noticed.  
# Most instances of delay were in the range of 400 to 1,700 days and in two instances delay was 
of more than 2,300 days. 
Thus, in cases where due to delay in issuance of PPAN, commencement of first 
deduction of contribution did not occur in the mont h subsequent to the month 
of joining, the subscriber suffered a loss of inter est (wherever no such 
compensation have been made to the subscriber) on c ontributions between 
months of actual deduction and the months in which deduction was due.  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) expressed its view that penal provisions need 
to be introduced for delinquent officials to prevent occurrence of delay in future.  
The audit observations are based on the samples exa mined. Government may 
run suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to i dentify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
4.3 Delay/ time taken in issuance of Permanent Retirement Account 
Number, deduction of NPS contribution etc.  
CGA had prescribed (September 2008) that NPS contri butions should be 
credited to the Trustee Bank on the last working day of each month. Test check 
of the selected sample revealed that there were del ays at each stage from the 
issuance of Permanent Retirement Account Number (PR AN), deduction of 
contribution, submission of bills to PAO, uploading of Subscriber Contribution 
File (SCF) containing details of pension contribution, PRAN, DDO, amount etc. 
which would ultimately lead to delayed remittance of cont ribution to Trustee 
Bank.  
4.3.1 Delay/ time taken to issue PRAN  
4.3.1.1 Ministries/ Departments of the Central Gove rnment and CABs  
As per the OM (September 2008) of CGA, NPS bills were to be preferred so as 
to reach the PAO by 20 th  of every month. 
Audit observed that in order to provide support to the State Governments in 
framing timelines for NPS related activities, PFRDA  had finalised maximum 
permitted timelines for all the activities under NPS. PFRDA also requested State 
Governments to frame their own timelines covering all such activities ensuring 
that such timelines framed by State Governments do not exceed the timelines 
specified by PFRDA. However, no such instructions were issued by PFRDA to 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 35  of 69  
competent authority at Central level for framing ti melines for submission of 
form by subscriber to DDO, submission of form by DD O to PAO and 
submission of form by PAO to NSDL.  
It is evident from the above that timelines were no t prescribed for submission 
of form by subscriber to DDO, submission of form by  DDO to PAO and 
submission of form by PAO to NSDL. Hence, as the ti meline for pay bills 
(containing NPS deduction) of a new employee to rea ch PAO was 20 th  of the 
subsequent month, audit has tabulated the delay in generation of PRAN at 
Central Government Ministries/ Departments from the  21 st  of the month 
subsequent to the month of joining service.  
Audit noticed that: 
• In 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Ministries/ Departments, in 58 out 
of 62 selected DDOs, for 683 out of 901 selected subscribers, there was 
delay ranging from one day to 1,986 days in issue o f PRANs, as 
mentioned in Annexure IX ; and  
• In 11 selected ABs of Central Government, in 12 sel ected DDOs of the 
CABs, for 168 subscribers out of 172 selected subsc ribers, there was 
delay in issue of PRANs, ranging from 20 days to 2, 435 days, as 
mentioned in Annexure IX . In one CAB, in respect of nine out of 13 
employees, there was no deduction of employee’s con tribution 
amounting to `3.49 lakh upto registration under NPS. The details are 
tabulated below:  
Table: 4.5  
Central 
Govt./ 
CAB  
No. of  
selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs 
where 
delay was 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of subscribers 
where delay was 
noticed  
Average 
delay in days  
Central 
Govt.  
62  58  901  683  138.20 
@ 
CAB  12  12  172  168  348.34 # 
@ Most of the instances of delay fall between the range of one to 200 days. 
# Most of the instances of delay fall between the range of one to 400 days and in 11 instances delay was 
of more than 2000 days.  
4.3.1.2 State Government/ UTs and SABs 
Among the seven selected States, in Andhra Pradesh,  Himachal Pradesh and 
Karnataka timelines had been prescribed for submiss ion and forwarding of the 
application form to CRA. 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 36  of 69  
Audit noticed delays 41 / undue time taken in issue of PRANs: 
• In six out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 77 out of 150 DDOs, in 999 
out of 2,210 selected employees, delay/ time taken in issue of PRANs 
ranged from 26 to 1,886 days, as mentioned in Annexure X(A) ; and  
• In 20 out of 33 selected SAB DDOs, for 266 out of 5 39 selected 
employees, time taken in issue of PRANs ranged from 15 to 4015 days, 
as mentioned in Annexure X(B).  
Table: 4.6 
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/ 
UT)  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
Selected 
DDOs where 
issue of undue 
time taken 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where issue of 
undue time 
taken noticed  
Average time 
taken  
(in days)  
State Govt.  150  77  2210   999  169.4 @ 
SAB  33  20  539  266  419.04 # 
@ Most instances of undue time taken were in the ra nge of one to 200 days and in four instances undue 
time taken was more than 1600 days.  
# Most instances of undue time taken were in the ra nge of one to 200 days and in two instances undue 
time taken was more than 2,500 days. 
Further audit examination revealed following instan ces of delay/ non-issuance 
in respect of issue of PRANs of all eligible employ ees and its consequences in 
some selected States: 
• Uttarakhand: 
i.  in respect of employees who joined service from Aug ust 2010 
onwards, there was delay of two months to 36 months in issue of 
37,798 PRANs from date of joining. 
ii.  in five selected DTOs, 10,321 subscribers were issu ed PRANs 
with delay of two months to 36 months. 
• Himachal Pradesh: 
i.  during August 2016 and March 2018, 11,566 out of 12,578 PRANs 
were issued with delay ranging from 61 to 757 days; 
ii.  in 12 out of 20 selected DDOs, 282 employees joined  service 
between September 2010 and September 2017 and were not issued 
(as on 31 March 2018) PRANs even after six to 87 mo nths. 
Resultantly, NPS subscription amounting to `1.92 crore was not 
recovered from their pay and equal matching contrib ution of 
`1.92 crore was also not accounted for in their NPS accounts due 
to non-issue of PRANs; 
                                                           
41   Delays/time taken has been calculated from date o f joining or date of DDO registration in 
NPS, whichever is later. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 37  of 69  
iii.  arrears subscription of `32.23 lakh were not recovered from 155 
selected employees for the period between October 2 004 and 
September 2018; and 
iv.  arrears subscription of `26.06 lakh 42 for the period between 
November 2008 and February 2015 were not recovered from 
30 selected employees.  
Audit noted that the reasons for delayed issue of PRAN were late receipt of duly 
filled application forms from subscribers or forms received with incorrect/ 
missing details and delay in procedural approvals. The delay in issue of PRAN 
resulted in delayed remittance to the Trustee Bank . 
DFS replied (December 2019) that PFRDA intimated th at the referred delays 
primarily appeared to be at the end of concerned Nodal offices, accordingly the 
reasons for such delays may be provided by the respective Nodal Offices.  
Delay in issuance of PRAN would lead to loss of NPS  corpus to the extent of 
contribution of subscriber and its employer and ret urn thereon (wherever such 
contribution and return was not provided subsequently to the subscriber of NPS 
account), thereby affecting its terminal wealth. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action.  
Good Practices 
The state of Karnataka specified roles and duties of DDOs and Treasury officers 
along with timelines to be followed at different st ages in the process of filling 
and submission of forms required for obtaining PRAN . Audit noted that this is 
a good practice for reference by others.  
4.3.2 Delay in first deduction of NPS contribution 
4.3.2.1 Ministries/ Departments of the Central Gove rnment and CABs 
As per OM (January 2004) read with OM (February 2004) issued by the CGA, 
recoveries towards NPS contribution were to start from the salary of the month 
following the month in which the Government servant  had joined service and 
recoveries were not to be effected for the month in which the subscriber joined 
Government service. 
As per DoE OM (November 2003), all new recruits joining 
any autonomous body under the administrative contro l of various Ministries/ 
Departments, on or after 01 January 2004 would be g overned by NPS 
{Annexure XI(A)}.  
  
                                                           
42  ZP, Mandi `14.39 lakh and ZP, Kangra `11.67 lakh 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 38  of 69  
Audit noticed that: 
• In six out of 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Go vernment, in 14 out 
of 62 selected DDOs, for 63 subscribers out of 901 selected subscribers, 
the delay in first deduction of NPS contribution ra nged from one to13 
months, and;  
• In four out of 11 selected CABs, in five out of 12 selected DDOs of 
CABs, for 45 subscribers out of 172 selected subscr ibers, the delay in 
first deduction of NPS contribution ranged from one to 79 months . 
Table: 4.7 
Central 
Govt./ CAB  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of selected 
DDOs where 
delay was 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of subscribers 
where delay was 
noticed  
Average 
delay in 
months  
Central 
Govt.  
62 
 14  901  63  3.36  
CAB  12  05  172  45  9.06 # 
# Most instances of delay were in the range of one to 24 months and in only one instance the 
delay was of 79 months. 
The delay in first deduction of NPS contribution, implied delay in credit of the 
contribution to the subscriber’s individual PRAN, which would have led to loss 
of NPS corpus to the extent of contribution of subs criber and its employer and 
return thereon for that period thereby affecting it s terminal wealth (wherever 
such contribution and return was not provided subse quently to the subscriber 
NPS account).  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) informed that CGA intimated that the 
movement of documents for getting PRAN is in physic al form, which may be 
dispensed with. NSDL/ CRA should provide an online platform for generation 
of PRAN number. Registration form should be filled up by subscriber online. 
Timely allotment of PRAN to NPS subscriber may sort out the issue of delay in 
first deduction of NPS contribution. It was further  stated that there was a need 
for instructions for various NPS activities perform ed by DDOs/ PAOs etc. 
including provisions for appropriate penalty on delinquent officials. 
It is, however, noted that, no penal provision exists for delay in performing any 
of the NPS related activities for Government Nodal Office (concerned officers/ 
officials). The Committee constituted to suggest me asures for streamlining the 
implementation of NPS also recommended (vide its re port submitted in 
February 2018) that responsibility and the amount o f liability on the part of 
delinquent official would be determined in the same  manner as in the case of 
delayed deduction/ remittance of TDS under Income t ax Rules. DFS intimated 
(May 2020) that PFRDA Act is being amended by incor porating the enabling 
provision for imposition of penalty on government n odal office for delay in 
deducting and crediting NPS contributions.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 39  of 69  
DFS further replied (May 2020) that similar measure s (as notified for the 
Central Government employees vide notification date d 31 January 2019) may 
be adopted by the autonomous bodies/ PSUs to compen sate for the financial 
loss occurred. DFS requested DoE to issue appropriate clarification in the matter 
to all such bodies as the applicability of NPS to t hese bodies were decided by 
DoE. 
4.3.2.2 State Governments and SABs 
As per orders/ circulars, issued by State Governmen ts of Andhra Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh 
43 , Karnataka, Maharashtra and NCT Delhi, recoveries 
(towards NPS contribution) from salary were to start from the month following 
the month in which the Government servant had joine d service and recoveries 
were not to be effected for the month of joining Government service. However, 
in case of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, in case th e employee joined on the 
1st  of a particular month, the first NPS deduction would be effected in the month 
of joining service itself.  
Audit noticed that: 
• In four out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 46 out of 150 selected DDOs 
of States, for 294 subscribers out of 2,210 selected subscribers, the delay 
in first deduction of NPS contribution ranged from one to 65 months, as 
mentioned in {Annexure XI(B)}; and 
• In three out of eight selected States/ UTs, in seve n out of 33 selected 
DDOs of SABs, for 90 subscribers out of 539 selecte d subscribers, the 
delay in first deduction of NPS contribution ranged  from one month to 
28 months, as mentioned in {Annexure XI(B)}. 
Table: 4.8  
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(in State/UT)  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of selected 
DDOs where 
delay was 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed  
Average 
delay in 
months  
State Govt.  150  46  2210  294  8.74 @ 
SAB  33  7 539  90  4.6 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in the range of one month to four months and in nine instances 
delay was of more than 46 months.  
# Most instances of delay were in the range of one month to three months and in 11 instances 
delay was of more than 15 months. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
 
                                                           
43   Criteria prescribed by Himachal Road Transport Co rporation only and not by State 
Government. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 40  of 69  
4.4 Delay in bills reaching PAO  
4.4.1  Central Government Ministries/ Departments and CABs 
CGA had prescribed (September 2008) that NPS bills should be preferred so as 
to reach the PAO by the 20 
th  of every month. 
Audit noticed that: 
• In six out of 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Go vernment, in 18 out 
of 62 selected DDOs, in respect of 229 out of 901 s elected subscribers, 
the delay ranged between one and 189 days, {(Annexure XII(A)}; and 
• In two out of 11 selected ABs of Central Government, in three out of 12 
selected DDOs, in respect of 31 out of 172 selected  subscribers, the 
delay ranged between one and 54 days, {Annexure XII(A)}. 
Table: 4.9  
Central 
Govt./ 
CAB  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No of DDOs 
where delay was 
noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers in 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed  
Average 
delay in 
days  
Central 
Govt. 
62 18 901 229 5.75 
@ 
CAB 12 03 172 31 10.60 # 
@Most instances of delay were in the range of one day to 10 days. 
#Most instances of delay were in the range of one day to 20 days. 
Reasons for delay as mentioned by DDOs were non-familiarity and inadequate 
knowledge of software, rotational transfer of staff and other technical issues. 
The late submission of NPS pay bills to the PAO/ DT O adversely affected the 
timeline for upload of the SCF to NPSCAN. 
DFS replied (December 2019) that since delay in bills reaching PAO may cause 
delay in deduction and onward crediting in subscrib er’s NPS account, action 
needs to be taken by the nodal offices for compensa tion in line with DFS 
notification dated 31 January 2019. As also mention ed earlier, imposing penal 
provisions in such cases is being considered by the Government. 
DFS further replied (May 2020) that similar measure s (as notified for the 
Central Government employees vide notification date d 31 January 2019) may 
be adopted by the autonomous bodies/ PSUs to compen sate for the financial 
loss occurred. DFS has requested DoE to issue appro priate clarification in the 
matter to all such bodies as the applicability of N PS to these bodies were 
decided by DoE. It also intimated that PFRDA Act is  being amended by 
incorporating the enabling provision for imposition  of penalty on government 
nodal office for delay in deducting and crediting NPS contributions.  
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 41  of 69  
4.4.2  State Governments and SABs 
Audit noticed that: 
• In one out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 20 out of 150 selected DDOs 
of States, for 285 subscribers out of 2,210 selected subscribers, the delay 
in bill reaching the DTO/ DTA, reckoned from the last day of the salary 
month, ranged from one to 838 days {Annexure XII(B)}; and 
• In one out of eight selected States/ UTs, in two out of 33 selected DDOs 
of SABs, for 29 subscribers out of 539 selected subscribers, the delay in 
bill reaching the DTO/DTA, reckoned from the last d ay of the salary 
month, ranged from two to 815 days, {Annexure XII(B)}.  
Table: 4.10  
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/UT)  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No of DDOs 
where delay 
was noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed  
Average 
delay in 
days  
State Govt.  150  20  2210  285  37.25 @ 
SAB  33  2 539  29  31.38 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in the range of one to 400 days and in one instance delay was of more 
than 700 days.  
# Most instances of delay were in the range of one to 400 days and in one instance delay was of more 
than 500 days. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
4.5 Delay in uploading SCF/ obtaining Transaction I D 
CGA had prescribed (September 2008) that the PAO sh ould upload the 
subscriber contribution details on NPSCAN and obtai n the Transaction ID by 
the 25 th  of each month.  
4.5.1 Central Government Ministries/ Departments an d CABs. 
Audit noticed that: 
• In 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Government, i n 61 out of 62 
selected DDOs, in respect of 817 out of 901 selecte d subscribers, the 
delay in uploading subscriber contribution details on NPSCAN and 
obtaining the Transaction ID ranged between one and  3,175 days 
{Annexure XIII(A)}; and 
• In 12 selected DDOs (11 selected CABs), in respect of 163 out of 172 
selected subscribers, the delay in uploading subscr iber contribution 
details on NPSCAN and obtaining the Transaction ID ranged between 
one and 404 days {Annexure XIII(A)}. 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 42  of 69  
Table: 4.11  
Central 
Govt./ 
CAB  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of DDOs 
where delay 
was noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers in 
selected DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed   
Average 
delay in 
days  
Central 
Govt.  
62 
 61  901  817  18.05 @ 
CAB  12  12  172  163  11.74 # 
@ Instances of delay were in the range of one day to 20 days except in one case where delay 
was of 3,175 days. 
# Instances of delay were in the range of one day to 20 days except in one case where delay 
was of 404 days. 
Delay in uploading SCF results in delayed remittance of the contribution to the 
Trustee Bank, which in turn affects timely credit o f contributions to the 
subscriber’s PRAN account. 
4.5.2  State Governments and State Autonomous Bodie s 
Audit noticed that: 
• 
In one out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 19 out of 150 selected DDOs, 
in 285 out of 2,210 subscribers, the delay in uploading subscriber 
contribution details on NPSCAN and obtaining the Tr ansaction ID,  
ranged from two days to 1582 days {Annexure XIII(B)}; 
• In two out of eight selected States/ UTs, in nine out of 33 selected DDOs 
of SABs, in 117 out of 539 subscribers, the delay i n uploading the 
subscriber contribution details on NPSCAN and obtai ning the 
Transaction ID, ranged from one to 1403 days, {Annexure XIII(B)}.  
Table: 4.12  
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/UT)  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No of DDOs 
where 
delay was 
noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay was 
noticed  
Average 
delay in 
days  
State Govt.  150  19  2210  285  216.33 @ 
SAB  33  9 539  117 86.74 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in the range of one day to 100 days and in 15 instances delay 
was of more than 1500 days. 
#Most instances of delay were in the range of one d ay to 300 days and in six instances delay 
was of more than 800 days. 
Reasons for delay in uploading of SCF were attribut ed to late receipt of bills 
from DDO, shortage of staff, absence of timelines f or remittance, delay in 
receipt of data from various field units/ DTOs and PAOs, delay in approval/ 
permission from DTA for SCF, delay in compilation o f monthly accounts and 
lack of awareness etc. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 43  of 69  
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
4.6 Delay in remittance of contribution to the Trus tee Bank  
4.6.1 Central Government Ministries/ Departments an d CABs 
CGA had prescribed (September 2008) that the NPS co ntributions should be 
credited to the account of Trustee Bank on the last working day of each month. 
Further, the responsibility for timely remittance t o the Trustee Bank is that of 
the PAO in respect of all subscribers under his domain. 
Audit noticed that:  
• In 14 out of 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Gov ernment, in 45 out 
of 62 selected DDOs, in respect of 509 out of 901 s elected subscribers, 
an amount of `181.78 lakh was remitted to Trustee Bank with a del ay 
ranging between one and 770 days  {Annexure XIV(A)}; and  
• In 10 out of 12 selected DDOs, (10 out of 11 selected CABs) in respect 
of 133 out of 172 selected subscribers of the ABs o f Central 
Government, an amount of `81.25 lakh was remitted with a delay 
ranging between one and 404 days {Annexure XIV(A)}. 
Table: 4.13  
Central 
Govt./ CAB  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No of DDOs 
where delay was 
noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers in 
selected DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed   
Average 
delay in 
days  
Central 
Govt.  
62 
 45  901  509  15.53@ 
CAB  12  10  172  133  13.26 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in  the range of one day to 30 days and only two instances of delay  
were of more than 700 days. 
# Most 
instances of delay were in the range of one day to 30 days and only one instance of delay  was 
of 404 days. 
Besides,  `2.46 lakh of legacy contribution was remitted to Trustee Bank with a 
delay of seven months, in respect of four out of 10  selected subscribers, in two 
DDOs (Department of Legal Affairs and Income Tax Ap pellate Tribunal) out 
of five selected DDOs. 
Delay in remittance of the contribution to Trustee Bank affects timely credit of 
contributions to the subscribers account. 
 DFS accepted (December 2019) that 
these cases may lead to monetary loss to the subscr ibers. It further stated that 
recently, to streamline process, provisions for compensation for delay in respect 
of Central Government subscribers only during 2004- 2012 had been notified 
vide notification dated 31 January 2019. Further, c ompensation for post 2012 
cases and imposing penal provisions in such cases was being considered by the 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 44  of 69  
Government based on the recommendations of the Comm ittee constituted to 
suggest measures for streamlining NPS. 
DFS further replied (May 2020) that similar measure s (as notified for the 
Central Government employees vide notification date d 31 January 2019) may 
be adopted by the autonomous bodies/ PSUs to compen sate for the financial 
loss occurred. DFS had requested DoE to issue appro priate clarification in the 
matter to all such bodies as the applicability of NPS to these bodies was decided 
by DoE. It also intimated that PFRDA Act is being a mended by incorporating 
the enabling provision for imposition of penalty on government nodal office for 
delay in deducting and crediting NPS contributions.  
4.6.2 State Governments and SABs 
In Himachal Pradesh, timeline of 12 days for prepar ation, uploading and 
remittance of the NPS contribution from the salary date was fixed but no 
specific timeline has been given for remittance of contribution to the Trustee 
Bank. In Maharashtra, in respect of two salary bill cycles (1 
st  to 18 th  of the month 
and 19 th  to end of the month) the respective timelines (before the last day of the 
month and before 15 th  of the next month) for remittance has been prescribed by 
the State Government. In remaining States, there were no specific timelines for 
remittance of contribution to Trustee Bank. 
Audit noticed that: 
• In four out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 61 out of 150 selected DDOs 
of States, for 769 subscribers out of 2,210 selecte d subscribers, delay 
ranged from one to 1199 days, {Annexure XIV(B)}; and 
• In two out of eight selected States/ UTs, in seven out of 33 selected 
DDOs of SABs, for 94 subscribers out of 539 selecte d subscribers, the 
delay/ time taken in remittance ranged from one day  to 242 days, 
{Annexure XIV(B)}. 
Table: 4.14 
 
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/ UT)  
No. of 
selected 
DDOs  
No of DDOs 
where delay 
was noticed  
Total no. of 
subscribers in 
selected DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where delay 
was noticed   
Average 
delay in 
days  
State 
Government  
150 
 61  2210  769  14.10 @ 
SAB  33  7 539  94  53.12 # 
@ Most instances of delay were in the range of one  day  to 100 days and in two instances delay 
was of more than 900 days. 
# Most instances of delay were in the range of one 
 day  to 300 days and in 100 instances delay 
was of more than 240 days. 
Further audit examination revealed following instances of delay in remittance 
of contribution to the Trustee Bank of all eligible employees: 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 45  of 69  
• Himachal Pradesh : 
i.  An amount of `900.21 crore was remitted to the Trustee Bank, 
between January 2011 and July 2016 44 , by DTA Shimla after a 
period ranging from 16 to 35 days from salary date.  Further, in the 
same DTA, `227.86 crore was remitted to the Trustee Bank  between 
September 2016 to November 2017, with delay ranging from one to 
eight days after 12 days of salary date. 
ii.  In Himachal Road Transport Corporation (HRTC), an amount of 
`8.62 crore was remitted to the Trustee Bank, between January 2015 
to July 2016, after a period ranging between 21 and 75 days after the 
payment of salary. Further, an amount of `6.10 crore was remitted 
to the Trustee Bank between October 2016 to March 2 018 with 
delay, ranging between 10 to 15 days, after the pre scribed date of 
remittance fixed by the State Government. 
 Further, DTA had not fixed any date for transfer o f the data, 
resultantly there was delay of five years and four months in 
transferring of `5.97 crore lying in the accounts of 681 subscribers  
to NSDL/ Trustee Bank by HRTC. The amount was trans ferred 
during July 2018 to October 2018, though the scheme  was adopted 
by the HRTC during March 2013.  The subscription am ount of 
`3.24 crore of remaining 91 subscribers was still to be transferred by 
the HRTC as of November 2018. 
iii.  In Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited  (HPSEBL), 
during February 2013 to July 2016, NPS contribution  of 
`36.30 crore was remitted to Trustee Bank with delay  ranging 
between four and 50 days. Further, an amount of `6.08 crore was 
remitted to the Trustee Bank between October 2016 t o March 2018 
with delay, ranging between two and 11 days, after the prescribed 
date of remittance fixed by the State Government. 
iv.  In Zilla Parishad Kangra, NPS contribution amountin g to 
`49.12 lakh for the period from April 2015 to March 2018 was 
remitted to the Trustee Bank after a period ranging  between 83 and 
496 days. 
v.  In Zilla Parishad Mandi, NPS contribution amounting to `40.82 lakh 
for the period from November 2014 to March 2018 was  remitted to 
the Trustee Bank after a period ranging between 26 and 241 days. 
 
                                                           
44   Upto June 2016, no timelines were fixed by the St ate Government for remittance of NPS 
contribution. In July 2016, timeline of 12 days was  fixed for preparation, uploading and 
remittance of the NPS contribution from the salary date. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 46  of 69  
• Andhra Pradesh: 
i.  In ANGRAU 45 , `17.28 crore was remitted towards legacy amount 
(pertaining to the period from November 2006 to Mar ch 2015) in 
March 2016 in respect of 501 subscribers, along wit h interest 
amount of `1.28 crore, with a delay ranging from one year to n ine 
years four months. 
ii.  In Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams , `44.77 crore was remitted in 
September 2015 towards legacy amount, with a delay of more than 
five months. 
iii.  In Rajiv Gandhi University of Knowledge Technologie s,  `1 crore 
was remitted in March/ April 2018 towards legacy am ount with a 
delay of more than two years. 
Reasons for delay in remittance to Trustee Bank  were attributed to late 
submission of Pay Bills by DDO, technical errors in uploading files in the 
Pay package, non-availability of NPS grants, shortage of manpower, etc. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may 
run suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to identify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
4.6.3   Erosion in terminal pension wealth 
PFRDA informed (February 2008) the Ministry of Fina nce that it was of 
critical importance that all Nodal Offices and indi vidual subscribers were 
registered by 01 June 2008, so as to enable individ ual, subscriber-wise 
contributions to be accepted for investment purposes. PFRDA also informed 
that any delay in this process would have adverse c onsequences on the 
pension savings of NPS subscribers, adding that the ir assessment indicated 
that one day’s delay in transfer of funds would ero de the terminal pension 
wealth of an employee by `40,000. Considering loss of `40,000 per day, t he 
range (minimum to maximum) of erosion in terminal pension wealth due to 
this delay (as highlighted in para 4.6) has been ca lculated as `40,000-
`3,08,00,000 for Central Government, `40,000-`1,61,60,000 for CAB, 
`40,000-`4,79,60,000 for State Government, `40,000-`96,80,000 for SAB.  
4.6.4 Notional loss of compensation  
The Ombudsman 
46  referred the Guidelines for operational activities by PoP-
Service providers dated 18 June 2015 issued by PFRDA and directed to pay 
`20 for each day of delay in remittance to Trustee B ank. Keeping in view 
the aforesaid award of `20 per day, t he range (min-max) of notional loss of 
compensation for this delay has been calculated as `20-`15,400 for Central 
                                                           
45   Acharya N G Ranga Agricultural University 
46   Ombudsman is a person appointed by PFRDA to recei ve, consider and facilitate resolution 
of complaints or grievances which fall within the a mbit of PFRDA (Redressal of 
Subscriber Grievance) Regulations, 2015 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 47  of 69  
Government, `20-`8,080 for CAB, `20-`23,980 for State Government, 
`20-`4,840 for SAB. 
However, amount of actual loss to the subscriber du e to this delay lies 
somewhere between the  figures of loss shown in above two scenarios i.e. 
between `20 and `40,000 per day. 
4.7 Discrepancies in deduction of employee’s contri bution from salary 
4.7.1 Non-deduction of NPS contribution 
As per orders/ circulars issued by Governments of A ndhra Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasth an and Uttarakhand and 
Union Territories, every Nodal office would deduct 10 per cent  of the Basic Pay 
plus DA plus Dearness Pay (if any), from an NPS emp loyee’s salary bill every 
month, with the State Government making an equal matching contribution 
Audit noticed that: 
• In four out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 48 out of 150 selected DDOs 
of States, for 457 subscribers out of 2,210 selecte d subscribers, an 
amount of 
`1.55 crore was not deducted (as on 31 March 2018), 
{Annexure XV(A)}; and 
• In four out of eight selected States/ UTs, in seven  out of 33 selected 
DDOs of SABs, for 76 subscribers out of 539 selecte d subscribers, an 
amount of `8.21 lakh was not deducted 47  (as on 31 March 2018), 
{Annexure XV(B)}. 
Table: 4.15 
State 
Govt./ 
SAB  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
Selected 
DDOs 
where issue 
was noticed  
Total 
subscribers in 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
where issue 
was noticed  
Average of 
amount not 
deducted (in `) 
State Govt.  150  48  2,210  457  1,512.17 @ 
SAB  33  7 539  76  3,246.03 # 
@ Most instances were in the range of `1,200 to `1,900 and in two instances amount was 
more than `2,700.  
# Most instances were in the range of `1 to `2,000 and in five instances amount was more 
than `25,000. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
 
 
                                                           
47  Apart from this, Audit noticed that in HRTC (Himac hal Pradesh), `3.01 lakh was not 
deducted from five non-selected subscribers. 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 48  of 69  
Good Practices 
Audit observed some good practices adopted by some of the selected states as 
mentioned below: 
• Andhra Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh: reasons for no n-recovery from 
a particular employee in any month were to be furni shed by the DDO 
concerned in the recovery schedule without fail.  
• Maharashtra: the DDO has been specifically assigned the duty to ensure 
that the contribution of the employee and the employer are compulsorily 
made on a monthly basis. 
4.7.2 Less deduction of NPS contribution  
4.7.2.1 Ministries/ Departments of the Central Gove rnment and CABs  
As per MoF notification (December 2003), the monthl y contribution would be 
10 per cent  of the salary and DA to be paid by the employee an d matched by 
the Central Government. As per CGA OM (September 2008), the responsibility 
of the correct and timely deduction of the contribu tion for each subscriber as 
mandated under the scheme rests with the respective DDOs.  
Audit noticed that: 
• In 12 out of 15 selected Pr. AOs of the Central Gov ernment, in 29 out 
of 62 selected DDOs in respect of 149 out of 901 se lected subscribers, 
the less contribution deducted cumulatively amounte d to `2.95 lakh, 
{Annexure XVI(A)} . This has resulted in payment of less 
co-contribution by the Government to the same extent.  
• In seven out of 11 selected ABs of Central Government, in seven out of 
12 selected DDOs, in respect of 42 out of 172 selec ted subscribers, the 
less contribution deducted amounted to `0.26 lakh, {Annexure XVI(B)}. 
This has resulted in payment of less co-contributio n by the AB to the 
same extent.  
Table: 4.16  
Central 
Govt./ 
CAB  
Total 
selected 
DDOs  
Selected 
DDOs 
where issue 
noticed  
Total 
subscribers 
in selected 
DDOs  
No. of subscribers 
in which issue was 
noticed  
Average 
amount less 
deducted (in `` ``) 
Central 
Govt.  
62 
 29  901  149  791.51 @ 
CAB  12  7 172  42  168.36  
@ Most of the instances of amount were falling between the range of `1 to 100. 
DFS in its reply (December 2019) expressed its view  that for cases where less 
deductions were made, action needs to be taken in l ine with DFS’ notification 
dated 31 January 2019. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 49  of 69  
4.7.2.2 State Governments and SABs 
As per orders/ circulars issued by the Governments of Andhra Pradesh, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra , Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand, NCT Delhi and Andaman and Nicobar Isla nds, the monthly 
contribution of 10 per cent  of Basic pay plus DA plus Dearness Pay (if 
applicable) would be deducted and an equal contribution would be provided by 
respective State Governments.  
Audit noticed that: 
• In six out of nine selected States/ UTs, in 35 out of 150 selected 
DDOs and one DTO of States, for 172 subscribers out  of 2,210 
selected subscribers an amount of 
`92,797 was less deducted, 
{Annexure XVII(A)}; and 
• In five out of eight selected States/ UTs, in seven  out of 33 selected 
DDOs of SABs, for 37 subscribers out of 539 selecte d subscribers an 
amount of `19,955 was less deducted, {Annexure XVII(B)}. 
Table: 4.17  
State Govt./ 
SAB 
(In State/ UT)  
Total 
Selected 
DDOs  
Selected 
DDOs 
where issue 
was noticed  
Total 
subscribers in 
selected 
DDOs  
No. of 
subscribers 
in which 
issue was 
noticed  
Average 
amount less 
deducted  
(in `` ``) 
State 
Government  
150 
 35 DDO + 1 
DTO  
2,210  172  270.21 @ 
SAB  33  07  539  37  169.70 # 
@ Most instances were in the range of `1 to 300 and in one instance amount was more than 
`9,000.  
# Most instances were in the range of `1 to 200 and in two instances amount was more than 
`1,100. 
Reasons cited for less deduction were problems with system/ software in states 
and incorrect calculation. The less deduction affects the amount credited to the 
individual PRAN in those selected months, and thereby, the accumulated corpus 
in respect of those subscribers. 
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
 
4.8 Non-remittance of contribution to the Trustee B ank  
Upon successful upload of SCF, CRA system generates  a unique Transaction 
ID. Subsequently, Nodal offices are required to transfer funds equivalent to SCF 
to the Trustee Bank. 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 50  of 69  
4.8.1 Central Government Ministries/ Departments an d CABs 
Audit noticed some instances of non-remittance of c ontribution of `5.20 crore 
to the Trustee Bank  in four selected Ministries/ Departments, as tabul ated 
below:  
Table: 4.18  
Ministry/ Department  Audit Observation (as of 31 March 2018)  
Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare  
`4.47 crore ( 
pertaining to 449 subscribers ) was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank, by two DDOs of  AIIMS  
Ministry of Law and Justice  `42.52 lakh (contribution from 2009-10 to 2017-18) lying 
with one DDO (Supreme Court), out of five selected 
DDOs, was not remitted to 
Trustee Bank  
Department of Science and 
Technology (DST)  
`29.59 lakh was not remitted to Trustee Bank, from o ne 
DDO (PAO, DST) out of seven selected DDOs 
 
Ministry of Mines  `6,430 was not remitted to Trustee Bank, in respect of two 
selected employees under one DDO (Geological Survey  
of India, Kolkata) out of five DDOs selected  
Total  `5.20 crore  
4.8.2  State Governments and SABs 
Audit noticed some instances of non-remittance of contribution of 
`793.04 crore 
to the Trustee Bank  in six selected States and one UT, as tabulated below:  
Table: 4.19 
State/ UT  State Govt./ SAB  Audit Observation  
Andhra Pradesh  State Govt. `200.22 crore was not remitted to Trustee 
Bank , as of March 2018.  
SAB  • Out of `22.55 crore (contributions from 
2014-15 to 2017-18), `5.08 crore was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank  by ANGRAU. 
• Out of arrear subscriptions of `13.78 lakh of 
18 subscribers, `1.85 lakh was not remitted 
by Area Hospital Parvathipuram 
(Vijayawada), as the amount was not 
recovered as of 
December 2018.  
• `19.72 lakh pertaining to 2011-18 was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank  by Board of 
Intermediate Education. 
State Govt.  `325.06 48  crore was not remitted to Trustee 
Bank, as of November 2018.  
                                                           
48   Includes `49.30 crore pertaining to legacy amount.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 51  of 69  
State/ UT  State Govt./ SAB  Audit Observation  
Rajasthan  SAB  • `1.65 crore was not remitted to Trustee Bank  
by Rajasthan State Sports Council, as of 
November 2018. 
 
• `2.25 crore was not remitted to Trustee Bank  
by Jaipur City Transport Service Ltd. 
(JCTSL), as of March 2018. 
 
• In Nagar Nigam, Jaipur, NPS subscription for 
all 1,247 employees for the period from 
December 2017 to March 2018 amounting to 
`1.33 crore was deducted, but was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank 
. 
Uttarakhand  State Govt.  • `150.76 crore (legacy contributions from 
November 2005 to April 2010) was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank , as of March 2018. 
Further, the State Government also did not 
provide interest of `25.09 crore on the legacy 
amount for 2016-17 and 2017-18.  
• `12.76 crore (regular contributions from 
2010-11 to 2017-18) was not remitted to 
Trustee Bank . Resultantly, the State 
Government would have to bear an interest 
burden of 
`7.32 crore on the above amount. 
Himachal Pradesh  State Govt.  • `2.42 crore was not remitted to Trustee Bank , 
as of March 2018.  
SAB  • `3.24 crore of 91 subscribers was not 
remitted to Trustee Bank  by HRTC, as of 
November 2018. 
• In HRTC, the arrears of subscription `0.75 
lakh for the period August 2004 and April 
2011, in respect of 14 out of 15 selected 
employees, had not been deducted. 
Resultantly, matching Government 
contribution was also not credited in their 
account. 
• In case of 13 out of 15 selected employees, 
HPSEBL Shimla, had not deducted the 
arrears of subscription amounting to `1.64 
lakh for the period between March 2008 and 
June 2016.   
• In ZP (Kangra), it was noticed that NPS 
monthly contribution amounting to `7.10 
lakh was not remitted to Trustee Bank for 
four months (February 2016, March 2016, 
January 2017 and January 2018 
). 
Maharashtra  State Govt.  `21.75 crore was not remitted to Trustee 
Bank , as of March 2018.  
SAB  `33.70 crore was not remitted to Trustee 
Bank  by ZP (Nanded), as of October 2018.  
Jharkhand  SAB  `3.77 lakh of 31 employees was not remitted 
to the Trustee Bank  by Rajendra Institute of 
Medical Sciences (Ranchi),  as of March 
2018.  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 52  of 69  
State/ UT  State Govt./ SAB  Audit Observation  
NCT of Delhi  SAB  `6 lakh out of `7.69 lakh legacy amount was 
not remitted to Trustee Bank  by MCD 
(North), as of January 2019.  
Total   `793.04 crore  
Reasons for non-remittance of contribution to Trust ee Bank were non-
reconciliation of legacy amount, non-issuance of PR AN, mismatch/ errors in 
the records/ data, etc. 
DFS replied (December 2019) that since non-remittan ce of contribution to 
Trustee Bank may cause delay in crediting of contributions to subscriber’s NPS 
account resulting in monetary loss to the subscriber, action needs to be taken by 
the nodal offices for compensation in line with DFS ’ notification dated 31 
January 2019. Further, compensation for post 2012 c ases and imposing penal 
provisions in such cases is being considered by the Government. 
DFS further replied (May 2020) that similar measure s (as notified for the 
Central Government employees vide notification date d 31 January 2019) may 
be adopted by the ABs/ PSUs to compensate for the f inancial loss occurred. 
DFS has requested DoE to issue appropriate clarific ation in the matter to all 
such bodies as the applicability of NPS to these bodies were decided by DoE. It 
also intimated that PFRDA Act is being amended by incorporating the enabling 
provision for imposition of penalty on government n odal office for delay in 
deducting and crediting NPS contributions.  
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
Recommendation: DFS may ensure that the amendment being made to the 
PFRDA Act, clearly defines the responsibility, acco untability and penalty 
for delay at each level (as they are for employees in the Employees Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952) to en sure that NPS 
subscribers’ contribution is remitted to the Truste e Bank and credited in 
subscriber’s PRAN within the scheduled time. 
 
4.9 Exit/ Withdrawal from NPS 
As per the Notification (December 2003), individuals could normally exit at or 
after age 60 years and at exit the individual would  be mandatorily required to 
invest 40 per cent  of pension wealth to purchase an annuity (from an IRDAI-
regulated life insurance company). It was also stated that in case of government 
employees, the annuity was to provide for pension f or the lifetime of the 
employee and his dependent parents and his spouse a t the time of retirement. 
The individual would receive a lump-sum of the rema ining pension wealth, 
which he would be free to utilise in any manner and individuals would have the 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 53  of 69  
flexibility to leave the pension system prior to ag e 60. However, in this case, 
the mandatory annuitisation would be 80 per cent  of the pension wealth. 
PFRDA (Exits and Withdrawals under NPS) Regulations , 2015 aim at 
providing an effective mechanism in the interest of  subscribers, upon exit or 
withdrawal from the NPS, including the conditions, purpose, frequency and 
limits for withdrawals from individual pension acco unt, as also the conditions, 
subject to which a subscriber shall exit from the N PS and purchase an annuity 
thereupon. Central Government has not prescribed an y timelines for final 
settlement of exit/ withdrawal cases.  
4.9.1  Central Government Ministries/ Departments 
Audit noticed that in one out of five selected DDOs  of Ministry of Mines, 10 
cases were settled within a period of 13 to 1,412 d ays and two cases have not 
been finalised even after a lapse of 1,825 days and  2,555 days respectively. In 
three DDOs of Department of Science and Technology and Ministry of Water 
Resources, cases of 98 employees were not settled, cases of five employees 
were settled between 116 to 155 days and cases of 4 4 employees were settled 
within 120 to 3,795 days. 
4.9.2  State Governments  
Audit noticed that in: 
• Himachal Pradesh: no timelines for processing of fi nal payment cases 
were fixed by the State Government at the time of a doption of the NPS 
during June 2010. It was only in July 2016 that time lines were fixed for 
finalisation of final payment cases; and 
• Maharashtra: State Record Keeping Agency had prescr ibed (February 
2017) timelines for processing of exit requests, wh ich were as per 
timelines prescribed by PFRDA. As per the timelines , in retirement, 
death and premature retirement cases, the DDO was required to forward 
the final payment case with all requisite documents to DTO, who in turn 
was required to forward these cases to CRA within s even days of entry 
in the CRA software. However, no timeline was fixed  for the final 
settlement/ refund. 
Delay in settlement/ pendency in exit cases was due to: 
• non-receipt of proper claims’ forms from the respective NPS subscribers 
or legal heirs (Andhra Pradesh); and  
• lack of proper guidelines for settlement of NPS amount on death; family 
members of the deceased having not applied for settlement in some cases 
(Karnataka). 
The reason for delay in finalisation of final payme nt cases were attributed by 
the DTOs to delay in forwarding of cases by the DDOs.  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 54  of 69  
Audit also noticed delayed settlement as well as pendency in settlement of 
cases, as tabulated below:  
Table 4.20 
State Governments/ 
Union Territories     
Cases settled/ pending     
Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 
    
In five selected DDOs,     
• 14 cases settled after 180 days 
• 31 pending cases involving `93.73 lakh 
Andhra Pradesh     55 pending cases as of 31 March 2018  
Maharashtra     In two DTOs and four DDOs     
• 148 cases were settled within 90 days 
• three cases took more than 180 days 
• 33 pending cases as of 31 March 2018 
Karnataka     In 10 out of 20 selected DDOs     
• 14 cases were settled within two to 34 months 
Pending cases  
• one case for less than one year  
• four cases for one to four years 
• 10 cases for more than three years 
Uttarakhand     In five selected DTOs     
• 90 death cases took one month to 58 months for 
settlement 
• 33 cases pending as of October 2018 
Delhi     In two selected DDOs, four out of 33 cases took 105  to 148 days 
for settlement     
Himachal Pradesh     Out of 3,358 cases finalized (for entire State)     
• 949 cases were settled within 90 days 
• 648 cases within 90-180 days  
• 1,761 cases after 180 days and   
268 cases pending (as of 31 March 2018) 
Out of 471 cases in 20 selected DDOs 
    
• 152 were forwarded by DDO to NSDL within two 
months 
• 297 cases were forwarded by DDO to NSDL in three to  
75 months 
• 22 pending cases pertaining to official retired dur ing the 
period between October 2012 and March 2018 (as of 3 1 
October 2018) 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 55  of 69  
SABs     Cases settled/ pending     
Himachal Pradesh     In two SABs, out of 103 cases     
• 21 cases took less than 90 days 
• 24 cases took 90 to 180 days 
• 58 cases took more than 180 days 
Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi 
(East, North, South) 
    
Eight exit cases pending till 31 December 2018, wit h pendency 
ranging from six months to 38 months     
Delhi Jal Board 
( I and III) 
 
Seven cases (pendency ranging from 141 to 1,542 days)  
DFS informed (December 2019) that PFRDA has submitt ed that aforesaid 
delays reflect delay in initiation of exit cases at  the end of concerned Nodal 
offices. DFS further expressed its view that penal provisions for such cases need 
to be imposed to maintain discipline among the nodal offices and to ensure that 
subscribers do not suffer. The same is being considered actively in DFS.  
The Audit observations are based on samples examine d. Government may run 
suitable checks on the entire NPS universe to ident ify delays and initiate 
remedial action. 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 56  of 69  
Chapter 5 - Monitoring 
Monitoring is an integral part of any scheme. Monit oring ensures that the 
scheme progresses in the direction determined at th e time of its formulation/ 
planning. Monitoring includes collection and analys is of information about a 
scheme, undertaken while the scheme is ongoing. Eff ective monitoring 
mechanism would ensure that NPS subscribers’ intere st is protected, ensuring 
timely credit to individual PRANs, essential in ach ieving the overall broad 
objectives of the scheme and ultimately ensuring ex pected 49  replacement rates 
envisaged in the NPS. 
Evaluation is the periodic, retrospective assessmen t of scheme that might be 
conducted internally or by external independent eva luators to review the 
progress of the scheme and to identify weak areas i n planning and 
implementation, so as to provide a mid-course correction in scheme. 
Monitoring and evaluation help to assess the efficacy of the implementation of 
the scheme and identify steps required for mid-cour se correction and thereby 
provide vital inputs for government policy in this regard.  
5.1 Monitoring 
The key pillars in the monitoring mechanism are as under: 
• Authority responsible for overseeing implementation of NPS  
In the meeting held (30 May 2008) on the “Issues in Pension Reforms”, 
it was decided that a Committee under the chairmans hip of Secretary 
(Expenditure) would be constituted by the DoE to ov ersee the 
implementation of the systems and procedures for al l accounting 
formations under the NPS. 
• Authority responsible for monitoring: 
As per DoE O.M. dated 03 February 2009, Ministries/ Departments (of 
Central Government) were required to constitute a C ommittee 
comprising Joint Secretary (Admn) and Principal CCA 50 / CCA and 
subsequently (July 2011) Financial Advisers (FAs) were also included 
in the composition of the committee in each Ministr y/ Department for 
NPS monitoring. 
• Key indicators and frequency of collection of data 
In the Review Meeting (06 July 2011), it was decide d that 
implementation of NPS in each Central Ministry/ Department would be 
a key performance area of the FAs. The FAs would up load the 
Quarterly Performance Reports (QPRs) with regard to implementation 
and monitoring of NPS in their respective Ministrie s/ Departments on 
                                                           
49   As indicated in the Government decision (August 2 003) 
50   Chief Controller of Accounts 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 57  of 69  
the following parameters: (i) IRA compliance status (ii) SCF uploading 
status (iii) SCF pendency status (iv) SCF regularity status (v) Grievance 
status. 
Despite the envisaged set up mechanism, Audit noticed following shortcomings 
in the monitoring of NPS, which adversely affected the interest of subscribers 
of NPS. Some of the issues have been addressed now after significant delay 
while some are still persisting. 
5.1.1 Non-formation of committees for overseeing an d monitoring NPS  
In May 2008, it was decided that a committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Expenditure) would be constituted by DoE  to oversee the 
implementation of the systems and procedures for al l accounting formations 
under the NPS. 
In  February 2009, it was decided that Ministries/ Dep artments (of Central 
Government) would constitute a committee comprising Joint Secretary (Admn) 
and Principal CCA/ CCA to monitor the operationalis ation of the NPS in their 
respective Ministries/ Departments. It was subseque ntly decided (July 2011) 
that the composition of these committees should be broad based to include the 
FAs of the Ministries/ Departments. 
Audit observed that out of 66-68 Ministries/ Departments between 2012-13 and 
2018-19, not all Ministries/ Departments had consti tuted the committees and 
some had constituted committees after delays.  
In May 2015, PFRDA also requested all Central Gover nment Ministries and 
Departments to constitute a committee each to monit or operationalisation of 
NPS and to hold regular meetings of such committee.   However, nothing was 
on record to indicate the efforts made by DoE to as sess the constitution of 
committees and their functionality in all the Ministries/ Departments of Central 
Government. 
DoE intimated (January 2019) to audit, that there w as no indication of 
constitution of any such committee under the Chairm anship of Secretary 
(Expenditure) and that monitoring of the proper imp lementation of NPS was 
duly taken care of by Committee set up in each Ministry with FA as a Member. 
DFS in its reply (December 2019) stated that DoE in formed about receipt of a 
synopsis on performance of various Ministries/ Depa rtments with respect to 
QPR for the year 2011-12 from NSDL and that it was sent (June 2012) to 
concerned FAs for taking corrective action.  
However, it was noted that receipt of such synopsis  on performance of various 
Ministries/ Departments with respect to QPR did not  indicate the existence of 
committees’ in the respective Ministries/ Departmen ts and only indicated 
involvement of FAs in the process of QPRs. Besides,  the reply was silent on 
subsequent efforts (from 20 June 2012 to 01 July 20 19) made by DoE with 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 58  of 69  
regard to ensuring constitution and functioning of such Committees in 
remaining Ministries/ Departments and pursuing corr ective action taken by 
concerned FAs. It was DoE’s responsibility to ensur e that all such committees 
were formed and were functioning as envisaged, whic h was not ensured by 
DoE. Government has to ensure that committees are m ade in all Ministries/ 
Departments for effective monitoring of NPS. 
Audit further noticed that DoE, vide its OM dated 0 2 July 2019 had reiterated 
its instructions to constitute a committee in each Ministry (as done earlier vide 
OM dated 03 February 2009). It has also additionally assigned the responsibility 
of receiving half-yearly status report about the monitoring mechanism, from FA 
of each Ministry/ Department, to DoPPW.  
5.1.2 Non-utilisation of dashboard by FAs 
In the Review Meeting (06 July 2011), it was also d ecided that the 
implementation of NPS in each Central Ministry/ Dep artment would be a key 
performance area of the FAs and they would submit a  detailed quarterly report 
to DoE with regard to implementation and monitoring  of NPS in their 
Ministries/ Departments. Accordingly, FAs from Ministries/ Departments of the 
GOI were provided with access to a dashboard on the  website of CRA, where 
they could upload QPRs with regard to implementation and monitoring of NPS 
in their respective Ministries/ Departments.  
Scrutiny of quarter-wise information pertaining to FAs, which was provided by 
DoE, revealed that not all FAs were accessing the dashboard and providing any 
remarks even on yearly basis, as shown in table 5.1.  
Audit further noticed that FAs of 16 Ministries/ Departments had never accessed 
the dashboard. The number of instances of dashboard  access by FAs of 15 
Ministries/ Departments ranged between 1-5, by FAs of 20 Ministries/ 
Departments ranged between 6-10, and by FAs of rema ining 17 Ministries/ 
Departments ranged between 14-28, as detailed in Annexure XVIII . 
The number of instances when the dashboard was acce ssed and remarks were 
provided by all FAs vis-à-vis  total number of instances of dashboard access that 
was envisaged (on a quarterly access basis), is tabulated below: 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 59  of 69  
Table: 5.1 
Year  No. of 
Ministries/ 
Departments  
Total no. of 
FAs who 
accessed 
the 
dashboard 
at least 
once a year  
Total 
number of 
FAs who 
provided 
remarks at 
least once a 
year  
Total no. of 
dashboard 
accesses to 
be done/ 
remarks to 
be 
provided*  
Total no. 
of 
dashboard 
access 
done  
Total no. 
of 
occasions 
when 
remarks 
were 
provided  
2011-12 
(From 
Oct’ 
2011) 
 
66  31  14  132  48  14  
2012-13  66  50  35  264  177  112  
2013-14  67  38  26  268  105  75  
2014-15  67  17  16  268  67  65  
2015-16  68  18  17  272  61  60  
2016-17  68  13  13  272  51  49  
2017-18  68  14  13  272  47  43  
2018-19 
(upto 
Sep’18) 
 
68  11  11  136  22  22  
*No. of Ministries x No. of Quarters 
Regarding mechanism to check compliance by FAs, DoE stated (January 2019) 
that NPS was an employee-centric and Department-cen tric system and 
concerned administrative authority and FA were in the best position to monitor 
the implementation of NPS. DoE also stated that whi le it might impress upon 
the concerned authorities to do the needful, there was no need for any 
institutionalised mechanism in DoE to check the same . DoE further replied that 
at this stage NPS was 14 years old and had fairly stabilised.  
The reply of DoE is not tenable because as per data provided by PFRDA, there 
were still issues in implementation of NPS.   
To illustrate, Ministry of Home Affairs had over 80  per cent of total Central 
Government civil subscribers as on 30 April 2018. During 2008-09 to 2016-17, 
there were 29,597 instances of delay in credit of more than one year (DDO-wise 
and month-wise credits). This indicates that there is a continuing need for FAs 
to monitor the implementation of NPS through Dashbo ard. The reiteration of 
instructions regarding need for constitution of committee in each Ministry vide 
DoE’s O.M. of 02 July 2019 substantiates audit conclusion. 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 60  of 69  
5.2 Redressal of Subscribers’ Grievances 
PFRDA (Redressal of Subscriber Grievance) Regulatio ns, 2015 provided 
subscribers with a clear process of grievance redre ssal including timelines for 
resolution and an escalation mechanism in the event  of a failure of resolution 
with penalty implications. The subscriber may escal ate the grievance to NPS 
trust for its resolution, in case if the grievance is not resolved or the resolution 
provided is not satisfactory. Further, as per the p rocedure laid down in the 
regulations, NPS Trust takes up the matter with the concerned office to provide 
the resolution and in case if the grievance still r emains unresolved, such 
escalated grievances are reported to PFRDA. Subsequ ently, PFRDA takes up 
the matter with the oversight offices 51  to provide resolution within the stipulated 
period. 
Major categories of grievances in Central Governmen t/ CAB/ State 
Government/ SAB are as mentioned below: 
• Contribution amount not reflected in the account  
• Delays in uploading of contribution amounts 
• Grievance of Trustee Bank against the Nodal office 
• Incorrect contribution amount reflected 
• Not processed/ delay in processing subscriber changes request 
• PRAN Card related-other 
• Transaction statement related 
• Tier II related 
• Withdrawal related 
As discussed in Para 4.1.2, on the issue of imposit ion of penalties on erring 
nodal offices, PFRDA replied that the provision of imposition of penalty on the 
erring Nodal offices was not provided in the PFRDA regulations as, at present 
regulations specifically for Government Nodal Offices had not been framed by 
PFRDA. However, section 28 of PFRDA Act, 2013 cover ed penalties and 
adjudication for failure by an intermediary or any other person to comply with 
provisions of the Act, rules, regulations and directions.  
The reply of PFRDA indicates that as Government nod al offices were not 
registered as intermediaries, imposition of penalties for non-compliance or lack 
of timely compliance to grievance redressal timelin es was not applicable on 
them. Thus, due to non-registration of Government n odal offices as 
intermediaries and no imposition of penalty on these offices, timely compliance 
                                                           
51   Pr. AOs in Central Government, and designated aut horities in State Government 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 61  of 69  
of major categories of grievances as mentioned above with grievance redressal 
timelines could not be ensured. 
Table: 5.2 
No. of grievances outstanding for one year or more '(A)' out of total no. of outstanding 
grievances '(B)' as of 1 April  
Year  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  
Sector  A B A B A B A B A B A B 
Central 
Government  
5,924 
 6,561  6,366  6,786  1,401  2,092  646  1,018  365  773  192  596  
Central 
Autonomous 
Bodies  
438 
 623  616  806  562  562  176  377  138  282  50  199  
State 
Government  
1,100 
 1,701  1,579  2,155  705  2,011  220  638  77  385  1 320  
State 
Autonomous 
Bodies  
18 
 33  33  94  32  192  104  365  315  493  74  275  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) stated that PFRDA had informed that in 
the absence of any provisions for penalty/ regulati ons for the Government 
sector the matter is being pursued constantly by PF RDA with Government 
Nodal offices for providing early resolution of grievances to protect the interest 
of the subscriber.  
5.3 Issues affecting finalisation of cases for grant of additional relief  
The DoPPW provided (vide its O.M. dated 05 May 2009 ) for additional relief, 
on provisional basis, like invalidation pension/ fa mily pension to the central 
government NPS subscribers who were retired due to invalidation/ disablement 
and family members of deceased central government employees covered under 
NPS, on optional basis. This was done to mitigate t he hardship faced by 
employees appointed on or after 01 January 2004 who  were discharged on 
invalidation/ disablement and by the families of su ch employees who had died 
during service since 01 January 2004. Under the option, the subscribers/ family 
members could either choose to opt for benefits of the earlier pension scheme 
or choose to take benefits as provided under NPS.  
As per PFRDA (Exit and Withdrawal under NPS) Regula tions, 2015, if the 
subscriber or the family member of the deceased sub scriber, upon his death, 
availed the option of additional relief on death or  disability provided by the 
Government or employer, the Government shall have the right to adjust or seek 
transfer of the entire accumulated pension wealth of the subscriber to itself. 
In this regard, the nodal office is required to submit request to NSDL-CRA. On 
receipt of request from the nodal office, if all th e documents are correct, 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 62  of 69  
‘Invalidation/ Family pension’ withdrawal request i s executed in the CRA 
system and funds are transferred to the Nodal Offic e. However, if the Nodal 
Office did not submit the request for ‘Invalidation / Family pension’ and 
processed exit/ death withdrawal request, then as p er the stipulated procedure, 
the funds are transferred to the claimant’s bank ac count as provided by the 
Nodal Office. 
PFRDA noted (July 2014) that some state governments , state/ central 
autonomous bodies etc were also offering such relie f to their employees who 
were covered under NPS, however there was no commun ication from them in 
this regard. Consequently, it indicated the possibility that the subscriber/ family 
members could avail both the benefits, either knowi ngly or unknowingly. To 
address this concern, it started seeking (March 2014) a No Objection Certificate 
from the nodal office (PAO/ DDO) stating that no ap plication for providing 
family/ invalidation pension has been received from  the deceased subscriber’s 
family members/ subscriber and that they have no objection to release the NPS 
benefits. PFRDA also sought details regarding the a pplications received for 
payment of family pension/ invalidation pension or any other benefit from all 
Government Departments and ABs.  
PFRDA intimated audit (December 2018) that CRA received information from 
102 Nodal Offices (Pr. AO/ DTA) that family pension/ invalidation pension was 
paid/ payable to 2,822 subscribers. Of these, Audit noticed that 552 subscribers 
were from Central Government Civil Ministries/ Depa rtments and remaining 
2,270 subscribers were from Central Government Railways, Defence and Postal 
Departments including CABs and State Governments De partments including 
SABs.  
Audit also sought (October 2018) further details of  such cases from CPAO, 
which deals with pension matters of Civil Ministrie s/ Departments (except 
Railway/ Post/ Defence). In response, CPAO intimate d (November 2018) that 
4,767 cases of NPS subscribers/ families of Civil M inistries/ Departments 
(including Delhi Administration and UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands) had 
received/ were eligible to receive the benefits of invalidation/ family pension in 
terms of DoPPW’s OM dated 05 May 2009.  
It was noted that whereas PFRDA had details in respect of 2,822 cases in all of 
which only 552 pertained to Central Government Civil Ministries/ Departments, 
the CPAO had intimated about 4,767 cases. Thus, the  lack of co-ordination or 
existence of a mechanism for sharing of information  between nodal office, 
CPAO and CRA/ PFRDA was evident from the above.  
To correlate and analyse the data further, the data  received from CPAO was 
forwarded to PFRDA seeking the status/ details of the same. In response, CRA/ 
PFRDA provided the status/ details in respect of 4, 361 cases. However, while 
furnishing the status/ details CRA/ PFRDA did not i ntimate the year to which 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 63  of 69  
each case pertained and type of pension viz. extra ordinary pension or old 
pension etc. 
From the scrutiny of data (4,361 cases) provided by CPAO and its status/ details 
provided by CRA/ PFRDA, Audit observed the following: 
• 
Government’s interest was secured in 149 deceased c ases, wherein 
`6.94 crore had been transferred to the Nodal Office between May 2016 
and December 2018. PFRDA replied that the Nodal Offices had 
intimated CRA about Family Pension and submitted re quest for 
withdrawal and accordingly, the funds were transferred to the respective 
Nodal Office.  
• In 82 cases, as discussed below, funds were released to the subscribers/ 
family members even though they were in receipt of invalidation 
pension/ family pension benefits:  
o In 76 cases, an amount of `2.11 crore was transferred to the 
subscriber/ family members instead of Government ac count. Of 
these 76 cases, 39 cases pertained to the period 2004-05 to 2013-14 
(`57.11 lakh) and 37 cases ( `1.54 crore) pertained to the period 
2014-15 to 2017-18. Audit noted that there was no c larity either to 
CPAO or PFRDA as to whether or not the funds releas ed in these 
cases were being recovered from the amount of Invalidation/ family 
pension.  
PFRDA stated (April 2019) that funds were transferred to claimants 
as death withdrawal request was submitted by the No dal Office 
without mentioning about payment of family pension.  It further 
stated that, respective Nodal Offices would be in a  position to 
provide details of recovery/ adjustment of the amount from pension 
payments. CPAO stated (May 2019) that it only made payment of 
family/ disability pension cases under NPS forwarded by PAOs and 
as such no information as to whether the subscriber  was getting 
benefit of family pension as well as NPS withdrawal  was available 
with it.  
o In 06 cases an amount of `6.98 lakh had been transferred to the 
subscribers/ family members due to incorrect withdrawal request (as 
‘Exit on Death’ or ‘Premature Exit’ instead of ‘Family Pension’) by 
the nodal office.  
PFRDA intimated (April 2019) that i n three cases, 20 per cent  of 
corpus was transferred to subscribers/ family membe rs and 
80 per cent  of corpus was transferred to the respective ASP as opted 
by subscriber. In two cases, 20 per cent  of corpus was transferred to 
Subscriber’s bank account and 80 per cent  of the corpus was lying 
in Subscriber’s PRAN as subscribers/ family members  were yet to 
purchase annuity from the ASP. In one case, the ent ire corpus was 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 64  of 69  
transferred to the subscribers/ family members as i t was less than  
`1 lakh.   
From this reply of PFRDA, it is evident that in thr ee cases, 
subscribers/ family members were in receipt of pens ion benefits 
under NPS as well as old pension system Further, they also received 
20 per cent  of their corpus. This lack of co-ordination or sha ring of 
information between CPAO and CRA/ PFRDA resulted in financial 
loss to Government. Neither CRA/ PFRDA nor CPAO was aware as 
to whether or not the recovery of excess benefits released, was being 
effected by nodal office.  
DFS in its reply (December 2019) intimated that PFRDA had stated 
that the amount lying in the NPS account may be pai d back to the 
Nodal office on receipt of request from Nodal offic e. Further, the 
recovery/ settlement of 20 per cent  of the amount already paid as 
lump sum would be the responsibility of concerned Nodal office.  
Appropriate action for protecting the interest of G overnment may be taken in 
these cases without further delay.  
• In the remaining 4,130 52  cases, an amount of `139.95 crore still lay in 
NPS account of the subscribers pending transfer to the Government as 
under: 
o In 3,122 cases, `121.21 crore was lying in PRAN accounts as the 
concerned nodal office had not initiated/ processed  the exit/ 
withdrawal request. PFRDA replied (April 2019) that when 
documents would be received from respective  Nodal Offices, the 
NPS corpus would be transferred  to Nodal Office in lieu of 
family pension. CPAO replied (May 2019) that it had no role to 
settle these cases as it only finalised family/ dis ability pension 
cases under NPS forwarded by PAO in terms of OM dat ed 05 
May 2019.  
o In 751 cases 53  where  PFRDA had deactivated non-IRA PRAN 
accounts, an amount of `11.42 crore was lying with the NPS 
account of the  subscribers. PFRDA replied (April 2019) that on 
receipt of request from Nodal Offices, entire NPS corpus would 
be transferred to the respective Nodal Office. CPAO (May 2019) 
had no comments to offer in this regard.  
o In 257 cases, where PRANs had been frozen by PFRDA on 
intimation received by Nodal Office that employee w as eligible 
for family pension, `7.32 crore was lying in the PRAN accounts. 
PFRDA replied (April 2019) that nodal offices were yet to 
submit request for withdrawal/ transfer of funds to  Nodal  
                                                           
52   4,361 cases – 149 cases – 82 cases 
53   Includes 34 cases, where there were no contributi ons received in the PRAN account. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 65  of 69  
Offices. Accordingly, funds would remain invested i n PRAN 
and would be transferred to the respective Nodal Of fice on 
receipt of request. CPAO (May 2019) had no comments to offer 
in this regard. 
The status of the above cases, indicate lack of co- ordination among various 
entities involved. Subsequent to the issue of OM da ted 05 May 2009, no 
mechanism was put in place by the Government to ide ntify/ mark the cases 
where the benefits under the OM were granted and en sure that the 
corresponding NPS funds have been remitted to Gover nment. PFRDA did not 
intimate audit regarding similar cases pending in v arious States, SABs and 
CABs since inception/ date of grant of additional relief.  
The audit observations are based on the data available with CPAO and PFRDA 
in respect of Central Civil Ministries/ Departments  (including Delhi 
Administration and UT of Andaman and Nicobar Islands) and Government may 
run suitable checks on the entire NPS universe (i.e . Post, Railways, Defence, 
CABs at the Centre and State Government departments and SABs at respective 
States) to identify all such delays and initiate co rrective actions to ensure that 
the subscriber does not suffer a loss. 
Recommendation: 1) PFRDA should mark cases of grant  of additional 
relief in CRA system to avoid payment of any sum to  Annuity Service 
Provider or to subscriber/family member subsequentl y. 2) The pension 
paying authority may obtain NOC from nodal office t o the effect that 
claimant has not been granted the pension under NPS. 3) Government may 
take immediate steps to recover the payment already  made from the NPS 
corpus or on account of NPS pension to the subscrib ers/ family members 
who had received benefits of additional relief.  
  

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 66  of 69  
Chapter 6 – Conclusion and Recommendations  
 
6.1  Conclusion 
GOI introduced 54  the NPS from 01 January 2004, with monthly contribution @ 
10 per cent  of the salary and DA to be paid by the employee an d matched 55  by 
the Central Government. The contributions and investment returns are deposited 
in Tier-I account. It was also specified that the t hen existing provisions of 
defined benefit pension and General Provident Fund (GPF) would not be 
available to the new recruits in Central Government service. State Government 
and its Autonomous Bodies also adopted NPS architec ture on different 
occasions for their employees . After lapse of 15 years, since NPS was made 
applicable in 2004, Government in 2019 took measure s 56  for streamlining the 
implementation of NPS. However, action on some issues is still pending or 
under consideration of the Government.  
Performance Audit on NPS revealed the following: 
• There was no assurance that all Nodal Offices (under Cent ral 
Government, State Government, Central Autonomous Bodies and State 
Autonomous Bodies) were registered under NPS.  
• During formulation of the scheme, essential control s to ensure 100 per 
cent  coverage of eligible employees were not envisioned  and an 
assurance on 100 per cent  coverage of eligible employees is still lacking 
despite 15 years of implementing NPS. 
• There were cases of delay in issue of PRAN, first d eduction of NPS 
contribution, bills reaching PAO, uploading SCF and  remittance of 
contribution to the Trustee Bank. However, no penal provisions exist for 
such delays on Government Nodal Office (concerned officers/ officials) 
to ensure timely performance of NPS related activit ies. DFS intimated 
(May 2020) that PFRDA Act was being amended by inco rporating 
enabling provisions for imposition of penalty on Go vernment Nodal 
Offices for delay in deducting and crediting NPS contributions.  
• An amount of `5.20 crore and `793.04 crore were not remitted to the 
Trustee Bank by Central Government/ CAB DDOs and St ates/ UT 
DDOs respectively in respect of those nodal offices  who had joined 
NPS. 
                                                           
54   NPS was introduced vide its Notification dated 22 December 2003 .  
55   As per the Notification of the DFS, GOI, dated 31  January 2019, the co-contribution 
by Government of India has been enhanced to 14 per cent . This is applicable from 
1 April 2019 onwards. 
56   As per the Notification of the DFS, GOI, dated 31  January 2019, Government, inter alia , 
provided for the choice of PFs and investment pattern; and compensation for non-deposit 
or delayed deposit of contribution during 2004 to 2012. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 67 of 69  
• Unlike private sector employees who had the choice in making their 
investments, Government employees did not get to ch oose the Pension 
Fund and schemes for a period of more than 15 years  i.e. from 01 
January 2004 to 30 January 2019. 
• In 4,130 cases pertaining to Civil Ministries of GO I, where additional 
benefit/ relief as per O.M dated 05 May 2009 was granted, an amount of 
`139.95 crore of NPS accumulations lying in the PRAN accounts is yet 
to be transferred to the Nodal Office/ Government. 
• Even after 15 years from introduction of NPS, rules  on service 
conditions/ retirement benefits in respect of employees covered by NPS 
were pending for finalisation.  
• NPS was made applicable to new entrants in all Auto nomous Bodies 
under various Central Ministries/ Departments recru ited on or after 1 
January 2004, without record keeping and accounting  arrangements in 
place for the Autonomous Bodies. 
• In respect of States, CABs and SABs, PFRDA did not fix timelines for 
upload of legacy data and transfer of legacy contributions to the Trustee 
Bank, affecting the timely transfer of legacy amount to the Trustee Bank. 
Further, PFRDA was unaware of the quantum of legacy amount and the 
status of its transfer to the Trustee Bank.  
• There was no indication (i) that actuarial evaluation of the fund/ scheme 
was conducted once in 2 years and (ii) of adoption of any other 
mechanism to assess the viability of the fund/ Sche me. DFS intimated 
(May 2020) that it intended to conduct actuarial evaluation to assess the 
present situation and take appropriate measures to maximize and 
optimize the replacement rate keeping in view the r ecent replacement 
rates under NPS vis-à-vis  the benefits envisaged at the introduction 
of NPS. 
• Out of 66-68 Ministries/ Departments between 2012-13 and 2018-19 not 
all Ministries/ Departments had constituted the Com mittee comprising 
Joint Secretary, Pr.CCA/ CCA and Financial Advisers. 
• As Government nodal offices were not registered as intermediaries, 
timely compliance with grievance redressal timeline s could not be 
ensured with the result that substantial number of grievances were 
outstanding for one or more years, between 2013-14 and 2017-18. 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020  
Page 68  of 69  
Governments introduced NPS for their employees as a conscious decision. Till 
March 2018, there were 49.21 lakh subscribers of Central and State Government 
under NPS, besides 8.80 lakh subscribers in Central  and State Autonomous 
Bodies. Even after a lapse of more than 15 years si nce introduction of NPS in 
2004, the system still suffers from deficiencies as  highlighted in the report. If 
these deficiencies remain unaddressed, then there is a likelihood that NPS may 
fail. In case of such failure, the liability to pro vide pension as a social security 
measure to these subscribers would fall on the Cent ral and respective State 
Governments, entailing huge financial burden on account of this, in addition to 
their existing pension liabilities.  
6.2 Recommendations 
• A foolproof system needs to be put in place to ensu re that all nodal 
offices and eligible employees are registered under NPS. Internal Audit 
mechanism should see that every employee is brought  into the system. 
To ensure this, delays need to be penalised and com pensation effected 
to avoid loss to the subscriber.  
• Government may ensure that rules on service matters  for NPS 
beneficiaries of Government sector are put in place.   
• Government must identify all such cases where legac y contributions 
were not remitted to Trustee Bank and ensure that t he same may be 
remitted with due interest and compensation so that subscriber does not 
suffer loss.  
• Immediate steps need to be taken for providing MARS, in compliance to 
the provisions of the PFRDA Act, to the subscriber for ensuring their 
social security post retirement. 
• DFS may arrive at minimum replacement rate taking into consideration 
the annuity rates, increased longevity and interest rates.  
• DFS may ensure that the amendment being made to the  PFRDA Act, 
clearly defines the responsibility, accountability and penalty for delay 
at each level (as they are for employees in the Emp loyees Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952) to en sure that NPS 
subscribers’ contribution is remitted to the Truste e Bank and credited 
in subscriber’s PRAN within the scheduled time. 
• PFRDA should mark cases of grant of additional reli ef in CRA system 
to avoid payment of any sum to Annuity Service Prov ider or to 
subscriber/ family member subsequently. The pension  paying authority 
may obtain NOC from nodal office to the effect that  claimant has not 
been granted the pension under NPS. Government may take immediate 
steps to recover the payment already made from the NPS corpus or on 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page 69 of 69 
account of NPS pension to the subscribers/ family m embers who had 
received benefits of additional relief. 
• Audit findings in report are based on sample scrutiny. Government, both 
at the Centre and States, may identify similar instances in the entire NPS 
Universe and determine the magnitude of deficiencies in implementation 
and take remedial action. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
(SHUBHA KUMAR) 
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
(Commercial) and Chairperson, Audit Board 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
(RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 

Annexures  
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page I of LXXI  
Annexure I(A) 
State wise details of date of notification for implementation and adoption of NPS  
(Referred to in Para No. 1.2.3) 
S. No.  Name of the 
State/ Union 
Territory 
Date of 
Notification 
Date of 
Adoption 
of NPS 
Date of 
signing 
agreement 
with 
NSDL 
CRA 
Date of 
signing 
agreement 
with NPS 
Trust 
Month and 
year of first 
upload by the 
State 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 22-09-2004  01-09-2004  21-11-2008  15-09-2009  December 
2010 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh  17-11-2007  01-01-2008  08-01-2013  20-05-2013  February 2015  
3.  Assam 25-01-2005  01-02-2005  29-10-2009  29-10-2009  November 
2010 
4.  Bihar 31-08-2005  01-09-2005  11-11-2008  04-03-2010  June 2010 
5.  Chandigarh 11-07-2009  01-01-2004  31-08-2009  05-05-2010  April 2011 
6.  Chhattisgarh 27-10-2004  01-11-2004  19-09-2008  20-02-2009  August 2009 
7.  Goa 05-08-2005  05-08-2005  30-09-2009  21-01-2010  December 
2011 
8.  Gujarat 18-03-2005  01-04-2005  29-01-2009  22-05-2009  August 2011 
9.  Haryana 04-12-2008  01-01-2006  25-11-2008  17-12-2008  June 2009 
10.  Himachal Pradesh 17-08-2006  15-05-2003  24-12-2009  22-03-2010  December 
2010 
11.  Jammu and 
Kashmir 
24-12-2009 
 01-01-2010  24-10-2009  08-01-2010  November 
2010 
12.  Jharkhand 09-12-2004  01-12-2004  25-10-2008  20-03-2009  February 2010  
13.  Karnataka 31-03-2006  01-04-2006  20-01-2010  20-01-2010  April 2010 
14.  Kerala 07-05-2006  01-04-2013  12-11-2013  11-10-2013  February 2014  
15.  Madhya Pradesh 13-04-2005  01-01-2005  28-11-2008  16-12-2008  December 
2009 
16.  Maharashtra 31-10-2005  01-11-2005  10-10-2014  10-10-2014  February 2014  
Maharashtra 
(AIS 
1) 
02-03-2013  30-07-2012  March 2013 
17.  Manipur 31-12-2004  01-01-2005  12-11-2009  13-04-2010  December 
2010 
18.  Meghalaya 24-03-2010  01-04-2010  26-10-2010  23-12-2010  January 2012 
19.  Mizoram 17-06-2010  01-09-2010  28-09-2010  14-12-2010  July 
 2011 
20.  Nagaland 28-01-2010  01-01-2010  31-05-2010  18-10-2010  September 
2013 
                                                           
1  All India Service 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page II  of LXXI  
S. No.  Name of the 
State/ Union 
Territory 
Date of 
Notification 
Date of 
Adoption 
of NPS 
Date of 
signing 
agreement 
with 
NSDL 
CRA 
Date of 
signing 
agreement 
with NPS 
Trust 
Month and 
year of first 
upload by the 
State 
21.  Odisha 17-09-2005  01-01-2005  29-05-2010  02-08-2010  April 
 2011 
22.  Puducherry 07-03-2005  01-01-2004  26-06-2009  07-09-2009  January 2010 
23.  Punjab 02-03-2004  01-01-2004  29-09-2009  13-04-2010  October 2010 
24.  Rajasthan 28-01-2004  01-01-2004  09-11-2010  02-12-2010  November 
2011 
25.  Sikkim 18-05-2006  01-04-2006  11-11-2011  06-03-2012  March 2013 
26.  Tamil Nadu (only 
for AIS) 
06-08-2003 
 01-04-2003  28-06-2017  28-06-2017  January 2018 
27.  Telangana 22-09-2004  01-09-2004  16-09-2014  13-11-2014  September 
2014 
28.  Tripura 13-07-2018  01-07-2018  31-10-2018  23-07-2013  
(only for 
AIS) 
December 
2013 
(only for AIS) 
29.  Uttar Pradesh 28-03-2005  01-04-2005  12-08-2011  12-08-2011  March  
2012 
30.  Uttarakhand 25-10-2005  01-10-2005  11-09-2009  09-10-2009  October 
2010 
31.  West Bengal (only 
for AIS) 
Not Notified 
 01-01-2004  18-07-2011  05-09-2011  May 
 2012 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page III  of LXXI  
Annexure I(B) 
Key functionaries in NPS   
(Referred to in Para No. 1.3) 
1.  Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) 
The Government of India constituted an interim regulator, the Interim Pension Fund Regulatory 
and Development Authority (PFRDA) through a Governm ent Resolution in October, 2003 as 
a precursor to a statutory regulator. With an objec tive to bring the New Pension Scheme, 
renamed as National Pension System (NPS) (August 20 09), within a statutory regulatory 
jurisdiction, an Ordinance was promulgated on 29 De cember 2004 for setting up a statutory 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority. The Bill lapsed on dissolution of the 
14 th  Lok Sabha. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha ag ain on 24 March 2011 and the 
Parliament passed it in September 2013.  
As per the PFRDA Act 
2, PFRDA has the duty, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth 
of the NPS and pension schemes to which this Act ap plies and to protect the interests of NPS 
subscribers. The powers and functions of PFRDA, als o called the Authority shall, inter alia,  
include:- 
 regulating the NPS and the pension schemes to which the PFRDA Act applies; 
 approving the schemes, the terms and conditions thereof and laying down norms for the 
management of the corpus of the pension funds, including investment guidelines under 
such schemes;  
 registering and regulating intermediaries; 
 protecting the interests of subscribers by ensuring  safety of the contribution of 
subscribers to various schemes of pension funds to which the PFRDA Act applies; and 
 establishing mechanism for redressal of grievances of subscribers. 
2.  Central Record Keeping Agency (CRA) 
The primary role of Central Record Keeping Agency ( CRA) is of record keeping, 
administration, providing customer service function s for all NPS subscribers, issuance of 
unique Permanent Retirement Account Number (PRAN) t o the subscribers. Further, among 
other responsibilities: 
 CRA sends SMS alerts and emails at the time of regi stration, credit/debit of units, 
withdrawal, balance against a PRAN; 
                                                           
2  The PFRDA Act was notified  on (became effective from) 1 February 2014 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page IV  of LXXI  
 CRA allocates funds to Pension Funds (PFs) and prov ides relevant details of 
subscribers, as received from respective nodal offi ce, through online platform to 
Annuity Service Provider (ASP) for further issuance of annuity by them. 
The contract for providing CRA services was signed with the National Securities Depository 
Limited (NSDL) in November 2007 by PFRDA. Subsequen tly, M/s Karvy Computershare 
Private Limited was also appointed (PFRDA issued certificate of registration in June 2016) as 
CRA. The subscriber has been provided with an option to choose between NSDL e-governance 
Ltd and M/s Karvy Computershare Pvt. Ltd with effect from 15 February 2017. Interoperability 
functionality allows the existing subscribers of NP S to shift from one CRA to the other from 
01 April 2017 onwards. 
3.  Trustee Bank (TB) 
Bank of India was appointed (March 2008) as Trustee Bank (TB) and functioned as such up to 
June 2013. Axis Bank has been functioning as TB sin ce 01 July 2013. TB facilitates fund 
transfers across various entities 3 of CRA system. The roles and responsibilities of the Trustee 
Bank include the following:  
 Contribution of subscribers and corresponding gover nment contribution is 
transferred by Nodal offices to the Trustee Bank; 
 It uploads the file containing details of funds rec eived from various nodal offices to 
the CRA system, which is then matched with contribu tion details provided by nodal 
office(s) to CRA System; 
 It receives instructions from CRA system, to transf er funds to various entities and 
also returns unidentified remittances on the next d ay; and 
 At the end of each settlement day, balance funds at  Trustee Bank are reconciled with 
CRA system. 
4.  Pension Funds (PFs) 
 
It is the intermediary which has been granted a Cer tificate of Registration by PFRDA as a 
Pension Fund (PF) for receiving contributions, accu mulating them and making payments to 
subscriber in the manner specified by the Authority.  
 
PF is mandated to invest and manage pension assets of subscribers covered under NPS. PFRDA 
appointed (September 2007) LIC Pension Fund Ltd, SB I Pension Funds Pvt. Ltd and UTI 
Retirement Solutions Ltd as PFs for Government Sector.  
 
 
                                                           
3  entities - Pension Funds, Annuity Service Provide rs and Nodal Offices (uploading offices)  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page V of LXXI  
5.  Custodian 
 
Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL) had been appointed as Custodian on 31 
March 2008.  
 
6.  Annuity Service Providers (ASP) 
 
Annuity 
4 Service Providers (ASPs) are Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of 
India (IRDAI) licensed and regulated life insurance companies, transacting annuity business in 
India, which are empanelled by PFRDA for servicing annuity requirements of NPS subscribers.  
 
Life Insurance Corporation of India, HDFC Life Insu rance Co. Ltd, ICICI Prudential Life 
Insurance Co. Ltd, SBI Life Insurance Co. Ltd, Star  Union Dai-ichi Life Insurance Co. Ltd, 
Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co. Ltd and Reliance Life Insurance Co. Ltd are the seven 5 ASPs 
in NPS.  
 
7.  NPS Trust 
The NPS Trust, established on 27 February 2008 thro ugh a Trust Deed executed by PFRDA, 
is the registered owner of all assets under the NPS  architecture. The Board of Trustees is 
responsible for monitoring of operational and servi ce level functions under National Pension 
System.  
As on 31 January 2020, the total Assets Under Management (AUM) amounted to 
`399,245.04 
crore (of 1,31,72,762 Subscribers), wherein AUM of `1,36,078.63 crore (of 20,82,941 
Subscribers) pertains to Central Government sector and AUM of `2,05,737.24 crore (of 
46,93,933 Subscribers) pertains to State Government sector.  
  
                                                           
4  Annuity provides for a monthly payment of pension  against deposit of a lump sum amount. The subscriber 
has to mandatorily buy the annuity as specified in the exit rules of NPS, from a PFRDA empanelled Annuity 
Service Provider. 
5  Bajaj Allianz Life Insurance Co. Ltd and Reliance  Life Insurance Co. Ltd. have not applied for 
re-empanelment under Regulations. Hence, the number of ASP as on 31.03.2019 is five. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page VI  of LXXI  
Annexure I(C) 
 
Roles and functions of the Nodal Offices  
(Referred to in Para No. 1.5) 
 
1.  Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) 
 
Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) registers itse lf with CRA before it starts providing 
various services to the subscribers. The following are the functions of the DDO: 
 Obtain the duly filled Application for allotment of  PRAN from the subscribers, fill 
and certify the employment details; 
 Consolidate application for allotment of PRAN and f orward it to Pay and Accounts 
Office (PAO); 
 Distribute PRAN kit, I-Pin, T-Pin to subscribers; 
 Forward the switch requests, new scheme preference requests, change in subscriber 
details request, withdrawal requests received from subscribers to the PAO; 
 Provide information to PAO about subscribers’ pensi on contribution; and 
 Forward the grievance of the subscriber to the PAO.  
 
2.  Pay and Accounts Office (PAO) 
 
Pay and Accounts Office (PAO) is responsible for ca rrying out the following activities: 
 
 For registering itself in CRA system, PAO forwards the application for registration 
to the concerned Principal Accounts Office (Pr.AO);  
 Consolidating DDO registration form and forward it to CRA for registration; 
 Facilitating registration of subscribers by consoli dating the application for allotment 
of PRAN received from the concerned DDO and forward  it to the CRA; 
 Uploading Subscriber Contribution File (SCF) contai ning subscriber-wise details of 
pension contribution such as PRAN, associated DDO, pay month and year, 
subscriber contribution amount and Government contr ibution amount etc., to 
NPSCAN system; 
 Remitting contribution to Trustee Bank as per the S CF uploaded in New Pension 
Scheme Contribution Accounting Network (NPSCAN), up dating switch requests, 
new scheme preference requests, withdrawal requests , requests for change in 
subscriber details etc. through NPSCAN; and 
 Raising grievance/(s) on behalf of DDO and subscrib er as well as resolving 
grievance/(s) raised against it by any entity in th e CRA system.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page VII  of LXXI  
3.  Principal Accounts Office (Pr. AO) 
 
Registration of Principal Accounts Office (Pr. AO) is a pre-requisite for registration of its 
underlying PAOs under NPS. Pr.AO is responsible for  carrying out the following activities: 
 Consolidating PAO registration form and forward it to CRA for registration; 
 Monitoring performance of PAO and DDO in dischargin g their responsibilities and 
taking necessary steps to ensure compliance to the operational procedures of CRA 
system by PAO and DDO; and 
 Monitoring the resolution of grievances raised agai nst PAO. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page VIII  of LXXI  
Annexure II(A) 
List of selected DDOs from the selected States  
(Referred to in Para No. 2.4.2) 
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
1 Mandal Revenue Office, 
Vijayawada (R) 
SGV015425E Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
2 Executive Engineer, 
Vijayawada 
SGV103088B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
3 Commissioner (SE) 
Municipality, 
Machilipatnam 
SGV015626C Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
4 Superintendent of Police, 
Guntur 
SGV017319B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
5 Assistant Director 
Agriculture, Nandyal 
SGV052905G Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
6 Superintendent of Police, 
Kurnool 
SGV021396E Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
7 Superintendent of Police, 
Anantapur 
SGV022455G Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
8 Superintendent of Police, 
Kadapa 
SGV024277B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
9 PA to SP, Chittoor (CTR) SGV023391E Andhra Prades h State Govt. 
10 Mandal Revenue Office, 
Pedapadu 
SGV014414B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
11 MEO MP, Palakoderu SGV014055G Andhra Pradesh Sta te Govt. 
12 Mandal Revenue Office, 
Kovvur 
SGV014701B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
13 Mandal Revenue Office, 
Palakollu, West Godavari 
SGV014774E Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
14 HM Govt  HS, Korukonda SGV013458E Andhra Pradesh  State Govt. 
15 MEO, Ambajipeta SGV012707C Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
16 Superintendent of Police, 
Kakinada 
SGV012519D Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
17 Superintendent of Police, 
Visakhapatnam 
SGV038525E Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
18 Excise Superintendent, 
Vizianagaram 
SGV141451E Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
19 Deputy Director SW, 
Vizianagaram 
SGV036127A Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
20 Asst. Treasury Officer, 
Srikakulam 
SGV037374B Andhra Pradesh State Govt. 
21 Area Hospital, 
Parvathipuram 
SGV182404A Andhra Pradesh SAB 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page IX  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
22 Board of Intermediate 
Education, Vijayawada 
SGV150164C Andhra Pradesh SAB 
23 Acharya N. G. Ranga 
Agricultural University, 
Hyderabad 
SGV148338D Andhra Pradesh SAB 
24 Rajiv Gandhi University of 
Knowledge Technologies, 
Guntur  
SGV233982E Andhra Pradesh SAB 
25 Accounts Officer, Tirupati 
Tirumala Devasthanam 
SGV206819B Andhra Pradesh SAB 
26 Deputy Commissioner of 
Police, Traffic, East 
Division, Bangalore 
SGV056127B Karnataka State Govt. 
27 Commissioner of Police, 
Mysore City 
SGV059798E Karnataka State Govt. 
28 Registrar General, High 
Court of Karnataka 
SGV078734F Karnataka State Govt. 
29 Office of the Superintendent 
of Police, Gulbarga 
SGV065721F Karnataka State Govt. 
30 Superintendent of Police, 
Shimoga 
SGV067798D Karnataka State Govt. 
31 Commissioner of Police, 
Mangalore City 
SGV086872C Karnataka State Govt. 
32 Under Secretary to 
Government of Karnataka. 
DPAR Accounts 
SGV069717E Karnataka State Govt. 
33 Principal, KSRP, Training 
School, Hosahalli, 
Munirabad, Koppal  
SGV062134C Karnataka State Govt. 
34 Executive Officer, Taluk 
Panchayat, Chintamani 
SGV057581G Karnataka State Govt. 
35 SNR District Hospital, Kolar  SGV058902E Karnataka State Govt. 
36 Thahasildar Office, 
Srinivasapur Taluk, Kolar  
SGV059137B Karnataka State Govt. 
37 Office of Executive Officer, 
TP, Holenarsipura 
SGV067579B Karnataka State Govt. 
38 Director of Economics & 
Statistics, Bangalore 
SGV070047F Karnataka State Govt. 
39 District Fire Officer, Kolar SGV070131F Karnatak a State Govt. 
40 Range Forest Officer, 
Haliyal District, Karwar 
 
SGV070827B Karnataka State Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page X of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
41 Tahshildar, Joida SGV070860G Karnataka State Gov t. 
42 Primary Health Centre, 
Rupangudi 
SGV070947C Karnataka State Govt. 
43 Civil Judge (Senior 
Division), Kunigal 
SGV078587F Karnataka State Govt. 
44 Civil Judge (Junior Division) 
& JMFC Channapatna 
SGV079935C Karnataka State Govt. 
45 Government Women's 
Polytechnic, Karkala 
SGV082125B Karnataka State Govt. 
46 Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board, Bangalore 
SGV211470E Karnataka SAB 
47 University of Horticultural 
Sciences, Bagalkot 
SGV227926D Karnataka SAB 
48 Karnataka Sanskrit 
University, Bangalore 
SGV210358F Karnataka SAB 
49 B.M.S College Of 
Engineering, Bengaluru 
SGV204701E Karnataka SAB 
50 City Municipal Council, 
Bijapur 
SGV209045B Karnataka SAB 
51 Office of Superintendent, 
District Treasury Office, 
Pune 
SGV201040E Maharashtra State Govt. 
52 Office of Superintendent, 
Commissioner of Police, 
Navi Mumbai 
SGV193471A Maharashtra State Govt. 
53 Office of Superintendent,  
Superintendent of Police, 
Palghar 
SGV205115F Maharashtra State Govt. 
54 Office of Superintendent, 
Commissioner of 
Police,Thane 
SGV189484D Maharashtra State Govt. 
55 Office of Superintendent, 
District Treasury Office, 
Pune 
SGV199831E Maharashtra State Govt. 
56 Dy. Regional Transport 
Office, Jalgaon 
SGV197379C Maharashtra State Govt. 
57 Tahsildar, Phaltan, Satara SGV198408C Maharashtr a State Govt. 
58 Executive Engineer, Takari 
Mhaisal, Lift Irrigation 
Management Division, 
Sangli 
SGV199206C Maharashtra State Govt. 
59 Assistant Electrical 
Inspector (Lifts) Mumbai 
Suburban 
SGV200249E Maharashtra State Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XI  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
60 Tahsildar, Bhadgaon, 
Jalgaon 
SGV200687B Maharashtra State Govt. 
61 District Supply Office, 
Ahmednagar 
SGV191346D Maharashtra State Govt. 
62 Integrated Tribal 
Development Project, 
Nagpur 
SGV190829E Maharashtra State Govt. 
63 Joint District Registrar, C-1, 
Nanded 
SGV190418G Maharashtra State Govt. 
64 Superintentendent of Police, 
Gadchiroli 
SGV191016C Maharashtra State Govt. 
65 Taluka Agriculture Officer, 
Taluka Circle Office, 
Chandrapur, Bhadravati 
SGV191000A Maharashtra State Govt. 
66 Chief Conservator of Forest, 
(Territorial), Gadchiroli 
SGV191049A Maharashtra State Govt. 
67 Commissioner of Police, 
Nagpur City, Nagpur 
SGV200893E Maharashtra State Govt. 
68 Director, Government 
Institute of Science, Nagpur 
SGV190759E Maharashtra State Govt. 
69 Range Forest Officer, Hingni  SGV198439F Maharashtra State Govt. 
70 Tahsildar Kelapur, Distt. 
Yavatmal 
SGV198780D Maharashtra State Govt. 
71 Deputy Chief Executive 
Officer (General 
Administrative Department) 
Zilla Parishad, Nanded 
SGV229653B Maharashtra SAB 
72 Block Elementary Education 
Officer, Barmer 
SGV109747D Rajasthan State Govt. 
73 Block Elementary Education 
Officer, Sindhri 
SGV109750G Rajasthan State Govt. 
74 Superintendent of Police, 
Jodhpur 
SGV120108E Rajasthan State Govt. 
75 Head Master GSS, Chadi 
Osiyan  
SGV129867F Rajasthan State Govt. 
76 Government Secondary 
School, Sai, Shergarh  
SGV141958A Rajasthan State Govt. 
77 Head Master Government 
Secondary School, Cheela, 
Phalodi 
SGV148572G Rajasthan State Govt. 
78 Additional District 
Superintendent of Police, 
Udaipur 
SGV124754C Rajasthan State Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XII  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
79 Head Master Government 
Secondary School, 
Nadakhera 
SGV149492C Rajasthan State Govt. 
80 Government Secondary 
School,  Kulthana, Rohat,  
Pali 
SGV149569C Rajasthan State Govt. 
81 Crime Asstt (DDO) 
S.P.(Hq), Jaipur City 
SGV115733E Rajasthan State Govt. 
82 DDO, SMS Medical 
College, Jaipur 
SGV115769F Rajasthan State Govt. 
83 GSS Dora, Bundi SGV149708B Rajasthan State Govt.  
84 Government Secondary 
School, Haideripura Uniyara 
Tonk 
SGV147489B Rajasthan State Govt. 
85 Tehsildar, Vazirpur, 
Sawaimadhopur 
SGV148922G Rajasthan State Govt. 
86 HM Government Secondary 
School Uplagrah, Sirohi 
SGV146938D Rajasthan State Govt. 
87 Block Chief Medical 
Officer, Rohat, Pali 
SGV129981A Rajasthan State Govt. 
88 Analyst Cum Programmer 
Deputy Director Information 
Technology & 
Communication 
SGV204510C Rajasthan State Govt. 
89 HM, Government Secondary 
School,  Dawa, Nokha, 
Bikaner 
SGV142046E Rajasthan State Govt. 
90 HM Government Secondary 
School, Bhaneka Gaon, Sri 
Kolayat, Bikaner 
SGV177523A Rajasthan State Govt. 
91 Deputy S.P. Police For 
Office of S.P., Bikaner 
SGV111849F Rajasthan State Govt. 
92 Rajasthan State Sports 
Council, Jaipur 
SGV212377B Rajasthan SAB 
93 Jaipur City Transport 
Services Limited, Jaipur 
 
 
SGV231419D Rajasthan SAB 
94 Nagar Nigam, Jaipur SGV143037B Rajasthan SAB 
95 Maharaja Ganga Singh 
University, Bikaner 
SGV142393B Rajasthan SAB 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XIII  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
96 Urban Improvement Trust, 
Kota 
SGV183172F Rajasthan SAB 
97 Senior Superintendent of 
Police, Dehradun 
SGV044702A Uttarakhand State Govt. 
98 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Dehradun 
SGV044702A Uttarakhand State Govt. 
99 DEO/DPO Elementary 
Education, Dehradun 
SGV044702A Uttarakhand State Govt. 
100 Executive Engineer,  
Infrastructure Division, 
Dakpathar 
SGV044702A Uttarakhand State Govt. 
101 Senior Superintendent of 
Police, U S Nagar 
SGV044726D Uttarakhand State Govt. 
102 Commandant 31 BN PAC, 
Rudrapur 
SGV044726D Uttarakhand State Govt. 
103 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), U.S. Nagar 
SGV044726D Uttarakhand State Govt. 
104 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Rudrapur 
SGV044726D Uttarakhand State Govt. 
105 Superintendent of Police, 
Champawat 
SGV044727E Uttarakhand State Govt. 
106 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Lohaghat 
SGV044727E Uttarakhand State Govt. 
107 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Champawat 
SGV044727E Uttarakhand State Govt. 
108 DEO/DPO Elementary 
Education, Champawat 
SGV044727E Uttarakhand State Govt. 
109 Superintendent of Police, 
Bageshwar 
SGV044728F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
110 Executive Engineer CD, 
PWD, Kapkot 
SGV044728F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
111 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Bageshwar 
SGV044728F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
112 DEO/DPO Elementary 
Education, Bageshwar 
SGV044728F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
113 MOIC Community Health 
Centre, Beeronkhal 
SGV044707F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
114 Executive Engineer NH 
Division Public Works 
Department, Dhumakot 
SGV044707F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
115 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Nainidanda 
SGV044707F Uttarakhand State Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XIV  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
116 Deputy Education Officer 
(Elementary), Beeronkhal 
SGV044707F Uttarakhand State Govt. 
117 GB Pant University of 
Agriculture and Technology, 
Pant Nagar  
SGV143016B Uttarakhand SAB 
118 DPO, CEO, Bageshwar SGV206425G Uttarakhand SAB 
119 DPO, SSA,  Pithoragarh SGV143667B Uttarakhand S AB 
120 Jal Sansthan, Dehradun  SGV147144G Uttarakhand SAB 
121 Chief Education Officer, 
Pithoragarh 
SGV207221E Uttarakhand SAB 
122 Head Master Middle School, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C Jharkhand State Govt. 
123 District Education Officer, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C Jharkhand State Govt. 
124 Superintendent of Police, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C Jharkhand State Govt. 
125 Commandant, JAP-5, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C Jharkhand State Govt. 
126 Judge-in-charge, Civil 
Court, Garhwa  
SGV007753E Jharkhand State Govt. 
127 Head Master, Middle 
School, Sonpurwa, Garhwa  
SGV007753E Jharkhand State Govt. 
128 Head Master Middle School, 
Dounadag 
SGV007753E Jharkhand State Govt. 
129 Superintendent of Police, 
Garhwa  
SGV007753E Jharkhand State Govt. 
130 Judge-in-Charge, Civil 
Court, Koderma  
SGV007732E Jharkhand State Govt. 
131 Head Master, G. Middle 
School, Block Koderma  
SGV007732E Jharkhand State Govt. 
132 Head Master Middle School. 
Block, Domchanch  
SGV007732E Jharkhand State Govt. 
133 Superintendent of Police, 
Koderma  
SGV007732E Jharkhand State Govt. 
134 Head Master , Girls Middle 
School, Panki  
SGV007742A Jharkhand State Govt. 
135 Head Master , Middle 
School, Shahpur Chainpur, 
Daltonganj 
SGV007742A Jharkhand State Govt. 
136 Superintendent of Police, 
Palamu   
SGV007742A Jharkhand State Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XV  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
137 Commandant, JAP-8, 
Lesliganj, Palamu  
SGV007742A Jharkhand State Govt. 
138 Judge-in-charge, Civil 
Court, Ranchi 
SGV007735A Jharkhand State Govt. 
139 District Education Officer, 
Ranchi 
SGV007735A Jharkhand State Govt. 
140 Commandant, JAP-2, 
Tatisilwai 
SGV007735A Jharkhand State Govt. 
141 Senior Superintendent of 
Police, Ranchi 
SGV007735A Jharkhand State Govt. 
142 Rajendra Institute of Medical 
Science, Ranchi 
SGV104211E Jharkhand SAB 
143 Netarhat Residential School, 
Netarhat 
SGV233136F Jharkhand SAB 
144 EE IPH, Solan SGV068633F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
145 BPEEO Dharmpur SGV068633F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
146 S.P., Solan  SGV068633F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
147 Animal Husbandry, Solan SGV068633F Himachal Pra desh  State Govt. 
148 EE IPH, Padhar SGV068638D Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
149 EE HPPWD, Dharampur SGV068638D Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
150 EE HPPWD, Joginder Nagar  SGV068638D Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
151 Police Batallion, Pandoh SGV068638D Himachal Pr adesh  State Govt. 
152 S.P. Kangra  SGV068632E Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
153 Animal Husbandry, 
Dharamshala 
SGV068632E Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
154 Medical College, Tanda SGV068632E Himachal Prad esh  State Govt. 
155 4th Battalion, Sakoh SGV068632E Himachal Prades h  State Govt. 
156 HPPWD, Hamirpur SGV068640F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
157 HPPWD, Touni Devi SGV068640F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
158 Police Battalion, Jangalberi SGV068640F Himacha l Pradesh  State Govt. 
159 Animal Husbandry, 
Hamirpur 
SGV068640F Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
160 Secretariat Administration 
Department, Shimla 
SGV068642A Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
161 Registrar High Court, 
Shimla 
SGV068642A Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
162 AO Indira Gandhi Medical 
College, Shimla 
SGV068642A Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
163 Settlement Forest Kasumpti, 
Shimla 
SGV068642A Himachal Pradesh  State Govt. 
164 Himachal Pradesh State 
Electricity Board Limited 
(HPSEBL) 
SGV141899E Himachal Pradesh 
 SAB 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XVI  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
State State 
Govt./SAB 
165 Himachal Road Transport 
Corporation (HRTC) 
SGV148360E Himachal Pradesh  SAB 
166 Himachal Board of School 
Education, Dharamshala 
SGV142193E Himachal Pradesh  SAB 
167 Zilla Parishad, Mandi SGV184452E Himachal Prade sh  SAB 
168 Zilla Parishad, Kangra SGV183173G Himachal Prad esh  SAB 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XVII  of LXXI  
Annexure II(B) 
List of the selected DDOs of the selected UTs  
(Referred to in Para No. 2.4.2) 
S. 
No. 
DDO DDO 
Registration 
Number 
UT State 
Govt./SAB 
1 
Deputy Superintendent of 
Police Headquarters, South 
Andaman, Port Blair 
CGV010682A Andaman & Nicobar State Govt. 
2 Assistant Commandant, India 
Reserve Battalion, Port Blair 
CGV010679E Andaman & Nicobar State Govt. 
3 Assistant Commissioner, 
Settlement, Port Blair 
CGV010747C Andaman & Nicobar State Govt. 
4 AO, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs, Port Blair 
CGV010692D Andaman & Nicobar State Govt. 
5 
Construction Division, 
Andaman  Public Works 
Department, Diglipur 
CGV011130A Andaman & Nicobar State Govt. 
6 
Executive Engineer (Delhi Jal 
Board) South West-I, Janak 
Puri ,New Delhi  
CGV016152D Delhi SAB 
7 
Executive Engineer (Delhi Jal 
Board) South west- III Sector-
7, R.K. Puram, New Delhi  
CGV016154F Delhi SAB 
8 ADE/Edu Narela Zone, MCD CGV013443D Delhi SAB 
9 
Chief Administrative and 
Medical Officer, Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi (MCD) 
CGV013190C Delhi SAB 
10 Assistant Commissioner, 
MCD 
CGV014767E Delhi SAB 
11 GSV Sector 6, Rohini  CGV010224E Delhi State Govt. 
12 SBV, Uttam Nagar  CGV010474C Delhi State Govt. 
13 Lok Nayak Jai Prakash 
Narayan Hospital, New Delhi 
CGV008432E Delhi State Govt. 
14 SKV, Kondli CGV011081A Delhi State Govt. 
15 Directorate of Education 
(Headquarter) 
CGV010296G Delhi State Govt. 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XVIII  of LXXI  
Annexure II(C) 
List of selected DDOs of the selected Ministries/Departments of Central Government 
and Central Autonomous Bodies  
(Referred to in Para No. 2.4.2) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
1 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Bureau of 
Communication and 
Outreach (erstwhile 
Directorate of 
Advertising and 
Visual Publicity) 
CGV000327F Central Govt. 
2 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting  
Publication Division  CGV006954D Central Govt. 
3 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Main Secretariat  CGV000468G Central Govt. 
4 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Films Division, Delhi 
 CGV010177G Central Govt. 
5 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Press Information 
Bureau  
CGV000471C Central Govt. 
6 Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
Communication Unit, 
Delhi Police 
CGV003785F Central Govt. 
7 Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
Crime Branch, New 
Delhi 
CGV008855A Central Govt. 
8 Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
Group Centre, Central 
Reserve Police Force 
(CRPF), New Delhi 
CGV002317A Central Govt. 
9 Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
Special Police Unit 
for Women & 
Children, Delhi Police 
 
CGV008846F Central Govt. 
10 Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
Central Record 
Office, Indo-Tibetan 
Border Police, New 
Delhi 
CGV002454E Central Govt. 
11 Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal, Delhi  
CGV001664F Central Govt. 
12 Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
Department of Legal 
Affairs 
CGV001661C Central Govt. 
13 Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
Legal Affairs (Central 
Agency Section) 
CGV001663E Central Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XIX  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
14 Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
Official Languages 
Wing 
 
CGV000188G Central Govt. 
15 Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
DDO, Supreme Court 
of India  
CGV000141B Central Govt. 
16 Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
Department of 
Statistics  
CGV001907D Central Govt. 
17 Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
Field Operation 
Division 
Headquarters, 
National Sample 
Survey Office, 
(NSSO) New Delhi  
CGV001911A Central Govt. 
18 Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
Data Processing 
Centre, NSSO, Delhi  
CGV008155A Central Govt. 
19 Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
National Statistics 
Systems Training 
Academy  
CGV017467C Central Govt. 
20 Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
Niti Aayog CGV001316A Central Govt. 
21 Department of 
Revenue 
CIT-IV , CR Building  CGV010207B Central Govt. 
22 Department of 
Revenue 
DDO (Dirc. Of 
Inspec. & audit , C & 
CE) 
CGV001686G Central Govt. 
23 Department of 
Revenue 
Directorate of 
Enforcement, MTNL 
Building 
CGV001610A Central Govt. 
24 Department of 
Revenue 
Department of 
Revenue 
CGV001607E Central Govt. 
25 Department of 
Revenue 
Directorate of 
Enforcement, Khan 
Market 
CGV001611B Central Govt. 
26 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer 
"S" Division, CPWD, 
R.K.Puram, New 
Delhi. 
CGV004531C Central Govt. 
27 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer 
"MCD-II" Division, 
CPWD , Nirman 
Sadan, Kanne Nagar, 
Mumbai. 
CGV002174E Central Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XX  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
28 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer, 
ED-9, R.K.Puram, 
 
New Delhi  
CGV004536A Central Govt. 
29 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Assistant 
Manager,Government 
of India Press, Minto 
Road, New Delhi 
CGV003936C Central Govt. 
30 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Assistant Manager, 
Government of India 
Press, Ring Road, 
New Delhi. 
CGV011073G Central Govt. 
31 Department of 
Economic Affairs  
Department of 
Economic Affairs IES 
Division, New Delhi 
CGV001578D Central Govt. 
32 Department of 
Economic Affairs  
DDO (Cash), 
Department of 
Economic Affairs, 
New Delhi 
CGV001577C Central Govt. 
33 Department of 
Economic Affairs  
Securities Appellate 
Tribunal, Mumbai  
CGV001602G Central Govt. 
34 Department of 
Economic Affairs  
Pay and Accounts 
officer 
(Establishment), New 
Delhi. 
CGV001581G Central Govt. 
35 Department of 
Financial Services,  
Banking Division, 
New Delhi 
CGV001579E Central Govt. 
36 Ministry of Mines Director General, 
Geological Survey of 
India, CHQ, Kolkata  
CGV002774C Central Govt. 
37 Ministry of Mines Geophysics Division, 
Geological Survey of 
India, SR, Hyderabad 
CGV011601C Central Govt. 
38 Ministry of Mines Geological Survey of 
India, Bhopal  
CGV000097G Central Govt. 
39 Ministry of Mines Geological Survey of 
India, Jammu 
CGV000101D Central Govt. 
40 Ministry of Mines Geological Survey of 
India, Jaipur 
CGV000227D Central Govt. 
41 Ministry of Road 
Transport and 
Highways 
DDO- Cash, Ministry 
of Road Transport and 
Highways  
CGV002594E Central Govt. 
42 Ministry of Road 
Transport and 
Highways 
Senior AO 
(Establishment) 
CGV014123E Central Govt. 
43 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Department of 
Science and 
CGV000074E Central Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXI  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
Technology, New 
Delhi 
44 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Office of the Surveyor 
General of India, 
Dehradun 
CGV000271F Central Govt. 
45 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Geo-spatial Data 
Centre Uttarakhand, 
Dehradun 
CGV000303C Central Govt. 
46 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Geo-spatial Data 
Centre, Jammu 
CGV000271F Central Govt. 
47 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Indian Institute of 
Surveying and 
Mapping, Survey of 
India, Hyderabad. 
CGV001938G Central Govt. 
48 Department of Science 
and Technology 
National Atlas & 
Thematic Mapping 
Organisation, Kolkata 
 
CGV001376E Central Govt. 
49 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Geo-spatial Data 
Centre, Assam & 
Nagaland, Guwahati 
CGV001264E Central Govt. 
50 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Eastern River 
Division, Central 
Water Commission, 
Bhubaneswar 
CGV000339D Central Govt. 
51 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Office of the 
Executive. Engineer, 
Central Ground Water 
Board, Division-X, 
Bhubaneswar 
CGV000368E Central Govt. 
52 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Central Ground Water 
Board, Division-V, 
Ranchi 
CGV000374D Central Govt. 
53 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Central Water and 
Power Research 
Station, Central Water 
Commission, Pune  
CGV000458D Central Govt. 
54 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Central Water 
Commission, 
R.K.Puram, New 
Delhi 
CGV000455A Central Govt. 
55 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
P&I Division, Central 
Water Commission, 
Faridabad 
CGV000352C Central Govt. 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXII  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
56 Ministry of Water 
Resources 
Middle Ganga 
Division-II, Central 
Water Commission, 
Lucknow 
CGV000347E Central Govt. 
57 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Atomic Mineral 
Directorate for 
Exploration and 
Research, Bangalore 
CGV004690A Central Govt. 
58 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Indira Gandhi Centre 
for Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 
CGV002627C Central Govt. 
59 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
General Service 
Organization, 
Department of 
Atomic Energy, 
Kalpakkam 
CGV002588F Central Govt. 
60 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre , 
Mumbai 
CGV002589G Central Govt. 
61 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Atomic Mineral 
Division, Hyderabad 
CGV002593D Central Govt. 
62 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Nuclear Fuel 
Complex, Hyderabad 
CGV002585C Central Govt. 
63 Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare 
Division of Soil 
Science and 
Agricultural 
Chemistry, Indian 
Council of 
Agricultural Research 
 
CGV011991A CAB 
64 Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
All India Institute of 
Medical Science, 
CNC 
CGV014513C CAB 
65 Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
All India Institute of 
Medical Science, 
Cash Section 
CGV014517G CAB 
66 Ministry of Human 
Resource 
Development 
Kendriya Vidyalaya, 
Pragati Vihar, Lodhi 
Road, New Delhi  
 CGV014018E  CAB 
67 Ministry of Human 
Resource 
Development 
National Council for 
Promotion of Urdu 
Language   
CGV011582E CAB 
68 Department of 
Financial Services 
Pension Fund 
Regulatory and 
Development 
Authority, Delhi 
CGV009644F CAB 
69 Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Delhi Development 
Authority, Delhi 
CGV013259B CAB 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXIII  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Name of the DDO DDO Registration 
Number 
Central 
Govt/CAB 
70 Department of Atomic 
Energy 
 
Tata Memorial 
Centre, Mumbai 
CGV014202G CAB 
71 Department of Science 
and Technology 
Sree Chitra Tirunal 
Institute of Medical 
Sciences & 
Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
CGV01300B CAB 
72 Department of Science 
and Technology 
TIFAC, New Delhi CGV014729B CAB 
73 Department of Science 
and Technology 
National 
Environmental 
Engineering Research 
Institute, (Council of 
Science and Industrial 
Research), Nagpur 
CGV011666E CAB 
74 Department of Science 
and Technology 
National Botanical 
Research Institute, 
(Council of Science 
and Industrial 
Research), Lucknow 
CGV011664C CAB 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXIV  of LXXI  
Annexure III 
Non issuance of Annual Account Statements  
(Referred to in Para No. 3.4.1) 
S. No. DDO Name Ministry No. of 
Selected 
Employees 
Whether 
Annual 
Account 
Statement 
issued 
If 
issued, 
to how 
many 
1.   Bureau of Communication and Outreach  Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
1
 No 0  
2.   Main Secretariat 2 No 0  
3.   Press Information Bureau  1 No 0  
4.   Communication Unit, Delhi Police Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
2 No 0  
5.   Crime Branch, New Delhi 2 No 0  
6.   Group Centre, Central Reserve Police Force, New De lhi 2  No 0  
7.   Special Police Unit for Women & Children, Delhi Po lice 2  No 0  
8.   Central Record Office, Indo-Tibetan Border Police,  New 
Delhi 
2 No 0  
9.   Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi  Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
2 No 0  
10.   Department of Legal Affairs 2 No 0  
11.   Official Languages Wing 
 
2 Yes 2  
12.   DDO, Supreme Court of India  2 No 0  
13.   Department of Statistics  Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
2
 No 0  
14.   Field Operation Division, Headquarters National Sa mple 
Survey Office, New Delhi  
1 No 0  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXV  of LXXI  
S. No. DDO Name Ministry No. of 
Selected 
Employees 
Whether 
Annual 
Account 
Statement 
issued 
If 
issued, 
to how 
many 
15.   CIT-IV, CR Building  Department of 
Revenue, 
Ministry of 
Finance 
2
 No 0  
16.   DDO (Dirc. Of Inspec. & audit , C & CE) 2 No 0  
17.   Directorate of Enforcement, MTNL Building 1 No 0  
18.   Department of Revenue 2 No 0  
19.   Directorate of Enforcement , Khan market 1 No 0  
20.   Executive Engineer "MCD-II" Division, Central Publ ic 
Works Department, Nirman Sadan, Kanne Nagar, Mumbai. Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
2
 No 0  
21.   Assistant Manager, Government of India Press, Mint o Road, 
New Delhi. 
2 No 0  
22.   Director General, Geological Survey of India, CHQ,  Kolkata  Ministry of Mines 2  No 0  
23.   DDO Cash - Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  Ministry of Road 
Transport and 
Highways 
1
 No 0  
24.   Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi De partment of 
Science and 
Technology 
2
 No 0  
25.   TIFAC, New Delhi 2 No 0  
26.   Geo-spatial Data Centre Uttarakhand, Dehradun 2 No 0  
27.   Geo-spatial Data Centre Jammu 2 No 0  
28.   Indian Institute of Surveying and Mapping, Survey of India, 
Hyderabad. 
2 No 0  
29.   National Atlas & Thematic Mapping Organisation, , Kolkata 2  Yes 2  
30.   Geo-spatial Data Centre, Assam & Nagaland, Guwahat i 2  Yes 2  
31.   Office of the Executive Engineer, Central Ground W ater 
Board, Division-X, Bhubaneswar 
 
Ministry of Water 
Resources 
2
 No 0  
32.   Central Ground Water Board, Division-V, Ranchi 2 No 0  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXVI  of LXXI  
S. No. DDO Name Ministry No. of 
Selected 
Employees 
Whether 
Annual 
Account 
Statement 
issued 
If 
issued, 
to how 
many 
33.   Central Water and Power Research Station, Central Water 
Commission, Pune  
2 Yes 2  
34.   Middle Ganga Division-II, Central Water Commission , 
Lucknow 
1 No 0  
35.   Atomic Mineral Directorate for Exploration and Res earch, 
Bangalore 
Department of 
Atomic Energy 
1
 Yes 1  
36.   Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakka m 2  Yes 2  
37.   General Service Organization, Department of Atomic  
Energy, Kalpakkam 
2 Yes 2  
38.   Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 2 Yes 2  
39.   Atomic Mineral Division, Hyderabad 1 Yes 1  
40.   Nuclear Fuel Complex, Hyderabad 2 No 0  
Total 71  9 (Yes) &  
31 (No) 
16  
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXVII  of LXXI  
Annexure IV 
Delay in registration of selected DDOs of the Central Government 
Ministries/Departments under NPS  
(Referred to in Para No. 4.1.1.1) 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the DDO Date of 
Registration of 
the DDO 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days)  
1 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Bureau of 
Communication and 
Outreach  
27-08-2008 
 87  
2 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Publication Division 27-08-2008 
 87  
3 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Main Secretariat  28-08-2008 
 88  
4 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Films Division, Delhi  27-08-2008 
 87  
5 Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
Press Information Bureau  28-08-2008 
 88  
6 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
Communication Unit, 
Delhi Police 
17-10-2008 
 138  
7 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
Crime Branch, New 
Delhi 
4-02-2009 
 248  
8 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
Group Centre, Central 
Reserve Police Force, 
New Delhi 
25-09-2008 
 116  
9 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
Special Police Unit for 
Women & Children, 
Delhi Police 
4-02-2009 
 248  
10 Ministry of 
Home Affairs 
Central Record Office, 
Indo-Tibetan Border 
Police, New Delhi 
25-09-2008 
 116  
11 Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
Income Tax Appellate 
Tribunal, Delhi  
16-09-2008 
 107  
12 Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
Department of Legal 
Affairs 
 
16-09-2008 
 107  
13 Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
Legal Affairs, Central 
Agency Section 
 
16-09-2008 
 107  
14 Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
Official Languages Wing 
 
11-08-2008 
 71  
15 Ministry of Law 
and Justice 
DDO Supreme Court of 
India  
11-08-2008 
 71  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXVIII  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the DDO Date of 
Registration of 
the DDO 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days)  
16 Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
Department of Statistics  22-09-2008 
 113  
17 Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
Field Operation Division 
Headquarters, National 
Sample Survey Office, 
New Delhi  
22-09-2008 
 113  
18 Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
Data Processing Centre, 
National Sample Survey 
Office, Delhi  
19-01-2009 
 232  
19 Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
National Statistics 
Systems Training 
Academy  
07-10-2013 
6 37  
20 Ministry of 
Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
Niti Aayog 10-09-2008 
 101  
21 Department of 
Revenue 
CIT-IV , CR Building 22-04-2009  325  
22 Department of 
Revenue 
DDO (Dirc. Of 
Inspection & audit , C & 
CE)  
10-09-2008 
 101  
23 Department of 
Revenue 
Directorate of 
Enforcement, MTNL 
Building 
13-09-2008 
 104  
24 Department of 
Revenue 
Department of Revenue 13-09-2008  104  
25 Department of 
Revenue 
Directorate of 
Enforcement, Khan 
market 
13-09-2008 
 104  
26 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer "S" 
Division, Central Public 
Works Department , R. 
K. Puram, New Delhi. 
17-11-2008 
 169  
                                                           
6  DDO formed in August 2013, therefore delay taken from 1 September 2013 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXIX  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the DDO Date of 
Registration of 
the DDO 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days)  
27 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer 
"MCD-II" Division, 
Central Public Works 
Department , Nirman 
Sadan, Kanne Nagar, 
Mumbai. 
24-09-2008 
 115  
28 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Executive Engineer, ED-
9, R.K.Puram, 
New Delhi  
17-11-2008 
 169  
29 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Assistant Manager, 
Government of India 
Press, Minto Road, New 
Delhi. 
22-10-2008 
 143  
30 Ministry of 
Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
Assistant Manager, 
Government of India 
Press, Ring Road, New 
Delhi. 
19-06-2009 
 383  
31 Department of 
Economic 
Affairs, Ministry 
of Finance 
Department of Economic 
Affairs IES Division, 
New Delhi 
13-09-2008 
 104  
32 Department of 
Economic 
Affairs, Ministry 
of Finance 
DDO (Cash), Department 
of Economic Affairs, 
New Delhi   
13-09-2008 
 104  
33 Department of 
Economic 
Affairs, Ministry 
of Finance 
Securities Appellate 
Tribunal, Mumbai  
13-09-2008 
 104  
34 Department of 
Economic 
Affairs, Ministry 
of Finance 
Pay and Accounts officer 
(Establishment), New 
Delhi. 
13-09-2008 
 104  
35 Department of 
Financial 
Services, 
Ministry of 
Finance 
Department of Financial 
Services, Banking 
Division, New Delhi 
13-09-2008 
 104  
36 Ministry of 
Mines 
Director General, 
Geological Survey of 
India, CHQ, Kolkata  
03-10-2008 
 124  
37 Ministry of 
Mines 
Geophysics Division, 
Geological Survey of 
India, SR, Hyderabad 
06-10-2009 
 492  
38 Ministry of 
Mines 
Geological Survey of 
India, Bhopal  
08-08-2008 
 68  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXX  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the DDO Date of 
Registration of 
the DDO 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days)  
39 Ministry of 
Mines 
Geological Survey of 
India, GSI, Jammu 
08-08-2008 
 68  
40 Ministry of 
Mines 
Geological Survey of 
India, Jaipur 
14-08-2008 
 74  
41 Ministry of 
Road Transport 
and Highways 
DDO Cash  26-09-2008 
 117  
42 Ministry of 
Road Transport 
and Highways 
Senior AO 
(Establishment) 
02-11-2010 
 884  
43 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Department of Science 
and Technology, New 
Delhi 
04-08-2008 
 64  
44 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Office of the Surveyor 
General of India, 
Dehradun 
03-11-2008 
 155  
45 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Geo-spatial Data Centre 
Uttarakhand, Dehradun 
25-08-2008 
 85  
46 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Geo-spatial Data Centre, 
Jammu 
03-11-2008 
 155  
47 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Indian Institute of 
Surveying and Mapping, 
Survey of India, 
Hyderabad. 
22-09-2008 
 113  
48 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
RPAO, Survey of India, 
National Atlas & 
Thematic Mapping 
Organisation, Kolkata 
10-09-2008 
 101  
49 Department of 
Science and 
Technology 
Geo-spatial Data Centre, 
Assam & Nagaland, 
Guwahati 
10-09-2008 
 101  
50 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Eastern River Division, 
Central Water 
Commission, 
Bhubaneswar 
01-09-2008 
 92  
51 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Office of the Executive 
Engineer, Central Ground 
Water Board, Division-X, 
Bhubaneswar 
01-09-2008 
 92  
52 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Central Ground Water 
Board, Division -V, 
Ranchi 
01-09-2008 
 92  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXI  of LXXI  
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the DDO Date of 
Registration of 
the DDO 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days)  
53 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Central Water and Power 
Research Station, Central 
Water Commission, Pune  
01-09-2008 
 92  
54 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Central Water 
Commission, R.K.Puram, 
New Delhi 
01-09-2008 
 92  
55 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
P&I Division, Central 
Water Commission, 
Faridabad 
01-09-2008 
 92  
56 Ministry of 
Water 
Resources 
Middle Ganga Division-
II, Central Water 
Commission, Lucknow 
01-09-2008 
 92  
57 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
Atomic Mineral 
Directorate for 
Exploration and 
Research, Bangalore 
21-11-2008 
 173  
58 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
Indira Gandhi Centre for 
Atomic Research, 
Kalpakkam 
30-09-2008 
 121  
59 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
General Service 
Organization, 
Department of Atomic 
Energy, Kalpakkam 
26-09-2008 
 117  
60 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
Bhabha Atomic Research 
Centre, Mumbai 
26-09-2008 
 117  
61 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
Atomic Mineral Division, 
Hyderabad 
26-09-2008 
 117  
62 Department of 
Atomic Energy 
Nuclear Fuel Complex, 
Hyderabad 
16-01-2009 
 229  
Range of Delay (in Days) 37-884  
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXII  of LXXI  
Annexure V 
Delay in registration of selected Central Autonomous Bodies under NPS  
(Referred to in Para No. 4.1.1.2) 
S. 
No.  
Name of Ministry / 
Department 
Name of the DDO DDO 
Registration 
Date 
Delay in 
registration  
(in days) 
1.   Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare 
Division of Soil Science and 
Agricultural Chemistry, Indian 
Council of Agricultural 
Research 
23-09-2009 
 479  
2.   Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare  
All India Institute of Medical 
Science, CNC 
29-12-2010 
 941  
3.   Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare  
All India Institute of Medical 
Science, Cash Section 
29-12-2010 
 941  
4.   Ministry of Human 
Resource 
Development 
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Pragati 
Vihar, Lodhi Road, New Delhi  
03-12-2010 
 915  
5.   Ministry of Human 
Resource 
Development 
National Council for Promotion 
of Urdu Language  
08-10-2009 
 494  
6.   Department of 
Financial Services 
Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority, Delhi 
01-04-2009 
 304  
7.   Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Delhi Development Authority, 
Delhi 
09-09-2010 
 830  
8.   Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai 26-11-2010 
 908  
9.   Department of Science 
and Technology  
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute of 
Medical Science & Technology, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
14-07-2010 
 
(DDO 
started 
functioning 
from 15-03-
2010) 
121 
 
10.   Department of Science 
and Technology 
TIFAC, New Delhi 01-03-2011 
 1003  
11.   Department of Science 
and Technology 
National Environmental 
Engineering Research Insitute, 
(Council of Science and 
Industrial Research), Nagpur 
16-10-2009 
 502 
12.   Department of Science 
and Technology 
National Botanical Research 
Institute, (Council of Science 
and Industrial Research), 
Lucknow 
14-10-2009 
 500  
Range of Delay (in Days)  121-1003  
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXIII  of LXXI  
Annexure VI 
Time taken in registration of selected DDOs in State Government under NPS 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.1.1.3) 
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
1.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MRO, 
Vijayawada (R) 
SGV015425E  07-07-2009  228 
2.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Executive 
Engineer, 
Vijayawada. 
SGV103088B 
 31-12-2010  770 
3.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Commissioner 
(SE) 
Municipality, 
Machilipatnam 
SGV015626C 
 07-07-2009  228 
4.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Guntur 
SGV017319B 
 07-07-2009  228 
5.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Assistant 
Director 
Agriculture, 
Nandyal 
SGV052905G 
 24-02-2010  460 
6.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Superintendent  
of Police, 
Kurnool 
SGV021396E 
 08-07-2009  229 
7.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Anantapur 
SGV022455G 
 08-07-2009  229 
8.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Kadapa 
SGV024277B 
 08-07-2009  229 
9.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 PA to SP, 
Chittoor (CTR) 
SGV023391E  08-07-2009  229 
10.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MRO, 
Pedapadu 
SGV014414B  07-07-2009  228 
11.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MEO MP, 
Palakoderu 
SGV014055G  07-07-2009  228 
12.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MRO, Kovvur SGV014701B  07-07-2009  228 
13.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MRO, 
Palakollu, West 
Godavari 
SGV014774E 
 07-07-2009  228 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXIV  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
14.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 HM 
Government  
HS, Korukonda 
SGV013458E 
 07-07-2009  228 
15.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 MEO, 
Ambajipeta 
SGV012707C  07-07-2009  228 
16.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Kakinada 
SGV012519D 
 07-07-2009  228 
17.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 SP,  
Visakhapatnam 
SGV038525E 
 09-07-2009  230 
18.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Excise Supt, 
Vizianagaram 
SGV141451E  20-03-2012  1215 
19.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Deputy 
Director, SW, 
Vizianagaram 
SGV036127A 
 09-07-2009  230 
20.   Andhra Pradesh 21-11-2008 Asst. Treasury 
Officer, 
Srikakulam 
SGV037374B 
 09-07-2009  230 
21.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master 
Middle School, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C 
 05-04-2009  162 
22.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 District 
Education 
Officer, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C 
 05-04-2009  162 
23.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Deoghar  
SGV007737C 
 05-04-2009  162 
24.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Commandant, 
JAP-5, Deoghar  
SGV007737C  05-04-2009  162 
25.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Judge-in-
charge, Civil 
Court Garhwa  
SGV007753E 
 05-04-2009  162 
26.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master, 
Middle School 
Sonpurwa, 
Garhwa  
SGV007753E 
 05-04-2009  162 
27.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master 
Middle School 
Dounadag, 
Garhwa. 
SGV007753E 
 05-04-2009  162 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXV  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
28.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Garhwa  
SGV007753E 
 05-04-2009  162 
29.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Judge-in-
Charge, Civil 
Court, 
Koderma  
SGV007732E 
 05-04-2009  162 
30.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master, 
G. Middle 
School Block, 
Koderma  
SGV007732E 
 05-04-2009  162 
31.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master 
Middle School. 
Block, 
Domchanch  
SGV007732E 
 05-04-2009  162 
32.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Koderma  
SGV007732E 
 05-04-2009  162 
33.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master , 
Girls Middle 
School, Panki, 
Palamu 
SGV007742A 
 05-04-2009  162 
34.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Head Master , 
Middle School, 
Shahpur 
Chainpur, 
Daltonganj 
SGV007742A 
 05-04-2009  162 
35.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Palamu   
SGV007742A 
 05-04-2009  162 
36.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Commandant, 
JAP-8, 
Lesliganj, 
Palamu  
SGV007742A 
 05-04-2009  162 
37.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Judge-in-
charge, Civil 
Court, Ranchi 
SGV007735A 
 05-04-2009  162 
38.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 District 
Education 
Officer, Ranchi 
SGV007735A 
 05-04-2009  162 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXVI  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
39.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Commandant, 
JAP-2, 
Tatisilwai 
SGV007735A 
 05-04-2009  162 
40.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008 Sr. 
Superintendent 
of Police, 
Ranchi 
SGV007735A 
 05-04-2009  162 
41.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Deputy 
Commissioner 
of Police, 
Traffic, East 
Division, 
Bangalore 
SGV056127B 
 23-03-2010  62 
42.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Commissioner 
of Police, 
Mysore city 
SGV059798E 
 23-04-2010  93 
43.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Registrar 
General, High 
Court of 
Karnataka, 
SGV078734F 
 07-06-2010  138 
44.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Office of the 
Superintendent 
of Police, 
Gulbarga 
SGV065721F 
 23-04-2010  93 
45.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Shimoga 
SGV067798D 
 03-05-2010  103 
46.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Commissioner 
of Police, 
Mangalore City 
SGV086872C 
 21-07-2010  182 
47.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Under 
Secretary to 
Government of 
Karnataka, 
DPAR 
Accounts 
SGV069717E 
 11-05-2010  111 
48.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Principal, 
KSRP, Training 
School, 
Hosahalli, 
Munirabad, 
Koppal  
SGV062134C 
 23-04-2010  93 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXVII  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
49.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Executive 
Officer Taluk 
Panchayat, 
Chintamani 
SGV057581G 
 12-04-2010  82 
50.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 SNR District 
Hospital, Kolar 
SGV058902E  23-04-2010  93 
51.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Thahasildar 
Office, 
Srinivasapur 
Taluk, Kolar 
Dist 
SGV059137B 
 23-04-2010  93 
52.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Office of 
Executive 
Officer, TP, 
Holenarsipura 
SGV067579B 
 03-05-2010  103 
53.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Director of 
Economics & 
Statistics, 
Bangalore 
SGV070047F 
 11-05-2010  111 
54.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 District Fire 
Officer, Kolar 
SGV070131F  11-05-2010  111 
55.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Range Forest 
Officer Haliyal 
district, Karwar 
SGV070827B 
 11-05-2010  111 
56.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Tahsildar Joida SGV070860G  11-05-2010  111 
57.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Primary Health 
Centre,  
Rupangudi 
SGV070947C 
 11-05-2010  111 
58.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Civil Judge 
(SD), Kunigal 
SGV078587F  03-06-2010  134 
59.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Civil Judge (JR 
DN) & JMFC, 
Channapatna 
SGV079935C 
 06-07-2010  167 
60.   Karnataka 20-01-2010 Government 
Women's 
Polytechnic, 
Karkala 
SGV082125B 
 10-07-2010  171 
61.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Office of 
Superintendent 
of Police, Pune 
SGV201040E 
 02-02-2015  115 
62.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Office of 
Superintendent, 
SGV193471A  02-02-2015  115 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXVIII  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
Commissioner 
of Police, Navi 
Mumbai 
63.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Office of 
Superintendent  
of Police, 
Palghar 
SGV205115F 
 17-08-2015  311 
64.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Office of 
Superintendent, 
Commissioner 
of Police, 
Thane 
SGV189484D 
 15-01-2015  97 
65.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Office of 
Commissioner 
of Police, Pune 
SGV199831E 
 Not available - 
66.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Deputy 
Regional 
Transport 
Office, Jalgaon 
SGV197379C 
 04-02-2015  117 
67.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Tahsildar, 
Phaltan, Satara 
SGV198408C  04-02-2015  117 
68.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Executive 
Engineer, 
Takari Mhaisal, 
Lift Irrigation 
Management 
Division, 
Sangli 
SGV199206C 
 04-02-2015  117 
69.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Assistant 
Electrical 
Inspector 
(Lifts), 
Chembur, 
Mumbai  
SGV200249E 
 05-02-2015  118 
70.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Tahsildar, 
Phaltan, Satara 
SGV200687B  05-02-2015  118 
71.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 District Supply 
Office, 
Ahmednagar 
SGV191346D 
 16-01-2015  98 
72.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Integrated 
Tribal 
Development 
Project, Nagpur 
SGV190829E 
 16-01-2015  98 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XXXIX  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
73.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Joint District 
Registrar, C-1, 
Nanded 
SGV190418G 
 15-01-2015  97 
74.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Gadchiroli 
SGV191016C 
 16-01-2015  98 
75.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Taluka 
Agriculture 
Officer, Taluka 
Circle Office, 
Chandrapur, 
Bhadravati 
SGV191000A 
 16-01-2015  98 
76.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Chief 
Conservator of 
Forest, 
(Territorial), 
Gadchiroli 
SGV191049A 
 16-01-2015  98 
77.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Commissioner 
of Police, 
Nagpur City, 
Nagpur 
SGV200893E 
 05-02-2015  118 
78.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Director, 
Government 
Institute of 
Science, 
Nagpur 
SGV190759E
 16-01-2015  98 
79.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Range Forest 
Officer, Hingni 
SGV198439F  04-02-2015  117 
80.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014 Tahsildar 
Kelapur, 
Yavatmal 
SGV198780D 
 02-06-2016  601 
81.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 B.E.E.O., 
Barmer 
SGV109747D  21-05-2011  193 
82.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Block Ele. Edu. 
Officer, Sindhri 
SGV109750G  21-05-2011  193 
83.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Jodhpur 
SGV120108E 
 20-05-2011  192 
84.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Head master 
GSS, Chadi 
Osiyan  
SGV129867F 
 13-06-2011  216 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XL  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
85.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Govt. Sec. 
School, Sai, 
Shergarh  
SGV141958A 
 16-04-2012  524 
86.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Head master 
Government 
Secondary 
School, Cheela, 
Phalodi 
SGV148572G 
 03-06-2013  937 
87.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Additional 
District 
Superintendent 
of Police, 
Udaipur 
SGV124754C 
 20-05-2011  192 
88.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 H.M.GSS, 
Nadakhera 
SGV149492C  04-09-2013  1030 
89.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Government 
Secondary 
School,  
Kulthana, 
Rohat,  Pali 
SGV149569C 
 01-03-2012  478 
90.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Crime Asstt 
(DDO), 
S.P.(HQ), 
Jaipur City 
SGV115733E 
 21-05-2011  193 
91.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 DDO SMS 
Medical 
College, Jaipur 
SGV115769F 
 21-05-2011  193 
92.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 G.S.S. Dora, 
Bundi 
SGV149708B  17-09-2013  1043 
93.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Government 
Secondary 
School, 
Haideripura 
Uniyara, Tonk 
SGV147489B 
 22-02-2013  836 
94.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Tehsildar, 
Vazirpur, 
Sawaimadhopur 
 
SGV148922G  16-07-2013  980 
95.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 HM 
Government 
Secondary 
School 
Uplagarh, 
Sirohi 
SGV146938D 
 17-01-2013  800 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLI  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
96.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 BCMO Rohat, 
Pali 
SGV129981A  13-06-2011  216 
97.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 Analyst Cum 
Programmer, 
Dy. Director 
Information 
Technology & 
Communication 
 
SGV204510C  23-06-2015  1687 
98.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 HM, 
Government 
Secondary 
School,  Dawa, 
Nokha, Bikaner 
SGV142046E 
 19-04-2012  527 
99.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 HM 
Government 
Secondary 
School, 
Bhaneka Gaon, 
Sri Kolayat, 
Bikaner 
SGV177532A 
 24-02-2014  1203 
100.   Rajasthan 09-11-2010 DYSP, Office 
of S.P., Bikaner 
SGV111849F  21-05-2011  193 
101.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Senior 
Superintendent 
of Police, 
Dehradun 
SGV044702A 
 25-11-2009  75 
102.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Dehradun 
SGV044702A 
 25-11-2009  75 
103.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 DEO/DPO 
Elementary 
Education, 
Dehradun 
SGV044702A 
 25-11-2009  75 
104.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Executive 
Engineer,  
Infrastructure 
Division, 
Dakpathar 
SGV044702A 
 25-11-2009  75 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLII  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
105.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Senior 
Superintendent 
of Police, U S 
Nagar 
SGV044726D 
 25-11-2009  75 
106.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Commandant, 
31 BN, PAC, 
Rudrapur 
SGV044726D 
 25-11-2009  75 
107.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
U. S. Nagar 
SGV044726D 
 25-11-2009  75 
108.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Rudrapur 
SGV044726D 
 25-11-2009  75 
109.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Champawat 
SGV044727E 
 25-11-2009  75 
110.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Dy Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Lohaghat 
SGV044727E 
 25-11-2009  75 
111.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Champawat 
SGV044727E 
 25-11-2009  75 
112.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 DEO/DPO 
Elementary 
Education,Cha 
mpawat 
SGV044727E 
 25-11-2009  75 
113.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Superintendent 
of Police, 
Bageshwar 
SGV044728F 
 25-11-2009  75 
114.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Executive 
Engineer, CD- 
PWD, Kapkot 
SGV044728F 
 25-11-2009  75 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLIII  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
115.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary) 
SGV044728F 
 25-11-2009  75 
116.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 DEO/DPO 
Elementary 
Education, 
Bageshwar 
SGV044728F 
 25-11-2009  75 
117.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 MOIC 
Community 
Health Centre, 
Beeronkhal 
SGV044707F 
 25-11-2009  75 
118.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Executive 
Engineer NH 
Division Public 
Works 
Department, 
Dhumakot 
SGV044707F 
 25-11-2009  75 
119.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Nainidanda 
SGV044707F 
 25-11-2009  75 
120.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009 Deputy 
Education 
Officer 
(Elementary), 
Beeronkhal 
SGV044707F 
 25-11-2009  75 
121.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Solan, EE 
IPH, Solan 
SGV068633F  13-04-2010  110 
122.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Solan, 
BPEEO, 
Dharmpur 
SGV068633F 
 13-04-2010  110 
123.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Solan, 
S.P. Solan  
SGV068633F  13-04-2010  110 
124.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Solan, 
Animal 
Husbandry 
SGV068633F 
 13-04-2010  110 
125.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Mandi, 
EE IPH, Padhar 
SGV068638D  04-05-2010  131 
126.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Mandi, 
EE HPPWD, 
Dharmpur 
SGV068638D 
 04-05-2010  131 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLIV  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
127.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Mandi, 
EE HPPWD, 
Jogindernagar 
SGV068638D 
 04-05-2010  131 
128.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Mandi, 
Battallian, 
Pandoh 
SGV068638D 
 04-05-2010  131 
129.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO 
Dharmshala, 
S.P. Kangra  
SGV068632E 
 04-05-2010  131 
130.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO 
Dharmshala, 
Medical 
college, Tanda 
SGV068632E 
 04-05-2010  131 
131.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO 
Dharmshala, 
4th Battallion, 
Sakoh 
SGV068632E 
 04-05-2010  131 
132.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Hamirpur, 
HPPWD, 
Hamirpur 
SGV068640F 
 04-05-2010  131 
133.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Hamirpur, 
Touni Devi 
SGV068640F  04-05-2010  131 
134.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Hamirpur, 
Police 
Battallian, 
Jangalberi 
SGV068640F 
 04-05-2010  131 
135.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009  Animal 
Husbandry, 
Dharamshala 
SGV068632E 
 04-05-2010  131 
136.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Hamirpur, 
Animal 
Husbandry, 
Hamirpur 
SGV068640F 
 04-05-2010  131 
137.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Capital 
Shimla, SAD, 
Shimla 
SGV068642A 
 04-05-2010  131 
138.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Capital 
Shimla, 
Registrar High 
Court, Shimla 
SGV068642A 
 04-05-2010  131 
139.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Capital 
Shimla, AO 
IGMC, Shimla 
SGV068642A 
 04-05-2010  131 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLV  of LXXI  
S.  
No. 
Name of the State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of 
Selected DDO 
Registration 
No. of DDO 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
DDO 
Time 
taken in 
DDO 
Registrat 
ion 
(in days)  
140.   Himachal Pradesh 24-12-2009 DTO Capital 
Shimla, 
Settlement 
Forest 
Kasumpti, 
Shimla 
SGV068642A 
 04-05-2010  131 
Range of Time Taken (in Days) 62-1687 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLVI  of LXXI  
Annexure VII 
Time taken in registration of selected DDOs in State Autonomous Body under NPS 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.1.1.3)  
Sl.  
No. 
Name of State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of Selected 
SAB 
Registration 
No. of SAB 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
SAB 
Time taken 
in SAB 
registration  
(in days) 
1.   Andhra Pradesh  21-11-2008  Area Hospital, 
Parvathipuram SGV182404A 
 12-06-2014  2029 
2.   Andhra Pradesh  21-11-2008  Board of 
Intermediate 
Education, 
Vijayawada 
SGV150164C 
 
09-10-2013  1783 
3.   Andhra Pradesh  21-11-2008  Acharya N. G. 
Ranga Agricultural 
University, 
Hyderabad 
SGV148338D 
 
09-05-2013  1630 
4.   Andhra Pradesh  21-11-2008  Rajiv Gandhi 
University of 
Knowledge 
Technologies, 
Guntur 
SGV233982E 
 
27-02-2018  3385 
5.   Andhra Pradesh  21-11-2008  Accounts Officer, 
TTD SGV206819B 
 26-11-2015  2561 
6.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
24-12-2009 
 Himachal Pradesh 
State Electricity 
Board Limited  
SGV141899E 
 04-04-2012  
832 
7.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
24-12-2009 
 Himachal Road 
Transport 
Corporation  SGV148360E 
 14-05-2013  
1237 
8.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
24-12-2009 
 Himachal Board of 
School Education, 
Dharamshala 
SGV142193E 
 05-08-2012  
955 
9.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
24-12-2009 
 Zilla Parishad, 
Mandi  SGV184452E 
 13-08-2014  1693 
10.   Himachal 
Pradesh 
24-12-2009 
 Zilla Parishad, 
Kangra SGV183173G 
 15-07-2014  1664 
11.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008  Rajendra Institute 
of Medical 
Science, Ranchi 
SGV104211E 
 02-02-2011  830 
12.   Jharkhand 25-10-2008  Netarhat 
Residential School 
SGV233136F 
 18-12-2017  3341 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLVII  of LXXI  
Sl.  
No. 
Name of State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of Selected 
SAB 
Registration 
No. of SAB 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
SAB 
Time taken 
in SAB 
registration  
(in days) 
13.   Karnataka 20-01-2010  Bangalore Water 
Supply And 
Sewerage Board, 
Bangalore 
SGV211470E 
 15-09-2016  2430 
14.   Karnataka 20-01-2010  University of 
Horticultural 
Sciences, Bagalkot 
SGV227926D 
 03-03-2017  2599 
15.   Karnataka 20-01-2010  City Municipal 
Council, Bijapur 
SGV209045B 
 08-06-2016  2331 
16.   Karnataka 20-01-2010  Karnataka Sanskrit 
University, 
Bangalore 
SGV210358F 
 05-08-2016  2389 
17.   Karnataka 20-01-2010  B.M.S College of 
Engineering, 
Bengaluru 
SGV204701E 
 10-07-2015  1997 
18.   Maharashtra 10-10-2014   Deputy Chief 
Executive Officer 
(General 
Administrative 
Department), Zilla 
Parishad, Nanded 
SGV229653B 
 08-12-2017  1006  
(no delay) 
19.   Rajasthan 9-11-2010 Rajasthan State 
Sports Council 
Jaipur 
SGV212377B 
 16-11-2016  2199 
20.   Rajasthan 9-11-2010 Jaipur City 
Transport Services 
Limited, Jaipur 
SGV231419D 
 25-09-2017  2512 
21.   Rajasthan 9-11-2010 Nagar Nigam, 
Jaipur 
SGV143037B  04-07-2012  603 
22.   Rajasthan 9-11-2010 Maharaja Ganga 
Singh University, 
Bikaner 
SGV142393B 
 14-05-2012  552 
23.   Rajasthan 9-11-2010 Urban 
improvement 
Trust, Kota 
SGV183172F 
 15-07-2014  1344 
24.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009  GB Pant 
University of 
Agriculture and 
Techonogy  
SGV143016B 
 04-07-2012  1027 
25.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009  DPO, CEO, 
Bageshwar 
SGV206425G 
 29-10-2015  2239 
26.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009  DPO, SSA  
Pithoragarh 
SGV143667B 
 06-09-2012  1091 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLVIII  of LXXI  
Sl.  
No. 
Name of State  Date of 
signing 
contract 
with NSDL 
CRA 
Name of Selected 
SAB 
Registration 
No. of SAB 
Date of 
Registration 
of Selected 
SAB 
Time taken 
in SAB 
registration  
(in days) 
27.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009  DDO, Jal 
Sansthan, 
Dehradun  
SGV147144G 
 04-02-2013  1242 
28.   Uttarakhand 11-09-2009  Chief Education 
Officer, 
Pithoragarh 
SGV207221E 
 18-10-2016  2594 
Range of Time Taken (in Days) 552-3385 
 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page XLIX  of LXXI  
 
Annexure VIII 
(A)  Delay in issuance of Permanent Pension Account Number (PPAN) 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.2.1) 
Ministry/Department  Delay in Ministries/Departments Delay in CABs 
Ministry of Finance In 4 out of 10 selected DDOs, t here was a 
delay in issuance of PPAN ranging between 
1-154 days to all 6 selected subscribers. 
- 
Department of Atomic 
Energy 
In 4 out of 6 selected DDOs, there was a 
delay in issuance of PPAN ranging between 
32-2009 days to 5  out of 6 subscribers. 
- 
Department of Science 
and Technology 
In 1 out of 7 selected DDOs, there was a 
delay ranging between 10-20 days in 
issuance of PPAN to 2 selected subscribers.
 
In 2 out of 4 selected 
DDOs, there was a 
delay in issuance of 
PPAN ranging 
between 44-375 days 
to all 4 selected 
subscribers. 
Range of Delay (in 
Days) 
1-2009 44-375 
(B)  Delay in issuance of Permanent Pension Account Number (PPAN)  
(Referred to in Para No. 4.2.2) 
State/UT Delay in State/UT Delay in SABs 
Maharashtra In 3 out of 20 selected DDOs, 
there was a delay in issuance of 
PPAN ranging between 259-
2038 days to 10 subscribers. 
In 1 selected DDO, there was a 
delay in issuance of PPAN 
ranging between 453-2607 
days to 13 subscribers. 
Jharkhand In 15 out of 20 selected DDOs, 
there was a delay in issuance of 
PPAN ranging between 54-1251 
days to 51 subscribers. 
- 
Andaman & Nicobar In all 5 selected DDOs, there 
was a delay in issuance of PPAN 
ranging between 18-236 days to 
10 subscribers. 
 
- 
Range of Delay (in 
Days) 
18-2038  453-2607  
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page L of LXXI  
Annexure IX 
Delay in issuance of Permanent Retirement Account Number (PRAN) 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.3.1.1) 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Observation in the Ministry Observation in the 
CAB 
Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting 
In 4 out of 5 selected DDOs, the delay 
was ranging between 7 to 900 days in 
respect of 51 out of 69 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Law & Justice In 4 out of 5 selected DD Os, the delay 
was ranging between 2 to 1967 days in 
respect of 52 out of 75 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Home Affairs In 5 selected DDOs, the de lay was 
ranging between 2 to 811 days in 
respect of 62 out of 76 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
In 5 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 2 to 642 days in 
respect of 56 out of 64 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Finance In 10 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 2 to 1986 days in 
respect of 80 out of 150 selected 
employees 
Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 21 to 358 days 
in respect of  14 out of 
15 selected employees 
in 1 selected DDO . 
Ministry of Mines In 4 out of 5 selected DDOs, the delay 
was ranging between 4 to 278 days in 
respect of 54 out of 76 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways 
In 2 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 4 to 220 days in 
respect of 23 out of 30 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
In 5 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 3 to 1164 days in 
respect of 60 out of 69 selected 
employees 
Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 249 to 663 
days in respect of 15 
selected employees in 1 
selected.  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LI  of LXXI  
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Observation in the Ministry Observation in the 
CAB 
Department of Atomic 
Energy 
In 6 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 4 to 615 days in 
respect of 84 out of 90 selected 
employees 
Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 20 to 223 days 
in respect of 15 selected 
employees in 1 selected 
DDO .  
Department of Science & 
Technology 
In 7 selected DDOs, the delay was 
ranging between 1 to 539 days in 
respect of 79 out of 100 selected 
employees 
Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 32 to 2435 
days in respect of  57 
out of 60 selected 
employees in 4 selected 
DDOs .  
Ministry of Water 
Resources 
In 6 out of 7 selected DDOs, the delay 
was ranging between 3 to 1863 days in 
respect of 82 out of 102 selected 
employees 
- 
Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers’ Welfare 
- Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 133 to 965 
days in respect of  13 
selected employees in 1 
selected DDO . 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
- Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 119 to 503 
days  in respect of  30 
selected employees in 2 
selected DDOs . 
Ministry of Human 
Resource Development 
- Delay in issuance of 
PRAN was ranging 
between 31 to 994 days 
in respect of 24 selected 
employees in 2 selected 
DDOs .  
Range of Delay (in Days) 1-1986 20-2435 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LII  of LXXI  
Annexure X 
(A)  Time taken to issue PRAN in State Government in selected DDOs 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.3.1.2) 
State/UT Time taken in issue of PRAN 
Maharashtra 56-556 days time taken in 7 DDOs out of 20 DDOs in 45 out of 
278 selected employees 
Andhra Pradesh 26-1886 days time taken in all 20 DDOs in 279 out o f 300 
selected employees 
Karnataka 30-1590 days time taken in all 20 DDOs  in all 300 selected 
employees  
Jharkhand 42-1215 days time taken in all 20 DDOs in 298 out o f 300 
selected employees  
Delhi 34-867 days time taken in all 5 DDOs in 44 out of 5 0 selected 
employees  
Andaman & Nicobar 82-221 days time taken in all 5 DDOs in 33 out of 7 5 selected 
employees 
Range of Time taken    
(in Days) 
26-1886 
(B)  Time taken to issue PRAN in State Autonomous Bodies in selected DDOs  
(Referred to in Para No. 4.3.1.2) 
State/UT Time taken in issue of PRAN  
Andhra Pradesh 15-1146 days time taken in 66 out of  75 selected 
employees in all 5 DDOs 
Karnataka 68-580 days time taken in 43 out of selec ted 75 employees 
in 3 out of 5 selected DDOs 
Jharkhand 232-417 days time taken in 8 out of 75 se lected employees 
in all 2 selected DDOs 
Uttarakhand 60-4015 days (2 months to 11 years) tim e taken in all 75 
selected employees in all 5 selected DDOs 
 Delhi 22-2647 days time taken in all 74 selected e mployees in 
all 5 selected DDOs  
Range of Time taken (in Days) 15-4015 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LIII  of LXXI  
Annexure XI 
(A)  Delay in commencement of first deduction of NPS contribution 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.3.2.1) 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Delay in 
Ministries/Departments 
Delay in CABs 
Ministry of  Housing 
and Urban Affairs  
In 3 out of 5 selected DDOs, the 
delay was ranging between 1 to 6 
months for 19 subscribers out of 
69 selected subscribers 
In 1 selected DDO,  delay was 
of 15 months for 5 out of 15 
selected subscribers  
Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare 
- In 1 selected DDO, the delay 
was ranging between 1 to 20 
months for 9 subscribers out of 
13 selected subscribers 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
- In 2 selected DDOs, the delay 
was ranging between 1 to 79 
months for 17 subscribers out of 
30 selected subscribers 
Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
In 1 out of 5 selected DDOs, the 
delay was ranging between 3 to 5 
months for 7 subscribers out of 
64 selected subscribers 
- 
Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
In 2 out of 5 selected DDOs, the 
delay was of 1 month for 2 
subscribers out of 69 selected 
subscribers 
- 
Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
In 1 out of 2 selected DDOs, the 
delay was ranging between 1 to 3 
months for 5 subscribers out of 
15 selected subscribers 
- 
Ministry of Finance In 4 out of 10 selected DDOs, t he 
delay was ranging between 1 to 
11 months for 27 subscribers out 
of 150 selected subscribers 
In 1 selected DDO, the delay 
was ranging between 2 to 24 
months for 14 out of 15 selected 
subscribers. 
Ministry of Mines In 3 out of 5 selected DDOs, the 
delay was ranging between 3 to 
13 months for 3 out of 76 selected 
subscribers. 
- 
Range of Delay (in 
months) 
1-13 1-79 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LIV  of LXXI  
(B)  Delay in first deduction in State Government and State Autonomous 
Bodies in selected employees 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.3.2.2) 
State/UT Delay 
Andhra Pradesh In 10 out of 20 selected DDOs, in 43  out of 300 selected employees 
delay ranged from 1 to 44 months 
Maharashtra In 16 out of 20 selected DDOs, in 114 o ut of 278 selected employees  
delay ranged from 1  to 50 months 
Karnataka In 19 out of 20 selected DDOs, in 135 out  of 300 selected employees, 
delay ranged from 1  to 53 months 
Delhi In 1 out of 5 selected DDOs, in 2 out of 50 s elected employees delay 
ranged from  49 to  65 months   
Range of Delay (in 
months) 
1-65  
 
 
State/UT Delay 
Himachal Pradesh-
SAB 
In 2 out of 5 selected DDOs, in 30 out of 75 selected employees delay 
ranged from 2 to 28  months  
In another SAB 102 employees got delayed first dedu ction ranged 
from 2 to 21 months  
Andhra Pradesh- 
SAB 
In 1 out of 5 selected DDOs, in 13 out of 75 selected employees delay 
ranged from 2 to 15 months 
Karnataka SAB In 4 out of 5 selected DDOs, in 47 ou t of 75 selected employees delay 
ranged from 34 to 136 days (1 to 4 months) 
Range of Delay  
(in months) 
1-28  
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LV  of LXXI  
Annexure XII 
(A) Delay in pay bills reaching PAO 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.4.1) 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Delay in the Ministry Delay in the CAB 
Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 33 days in 29 out of 89 
selected months in respect of 67 
out of 69 selected subscribers in 
5 selected DDOs. 
- 
Ministry of Law & Justice The delay was ranging between 
1 to 64 days in 32 out of 51 
selected months in respect of 41 
out of 75 selected subscribers in 
3 out of 5 selected DDOs. 
- 
Ministry of Finance The delay was ranging between 
1 to 10 days in 19 out of 134 
selected months in respect of 16 
out of 150 selected subscribers 
in 1 out of 10 selected DDOs. 
- 
Ministry of Mines The delay was of 8 days each in 
1 out of 107 selected months in 
respect of 30 out of 76 selected 
subscribers in 2 out of 5 
selected DDOs. 
- 
Department of Science & 
Technology 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 10 days in 45 out of 65 
selected months in respect of 42 
out of 100 selected subscribers 
in 4 out of 7 selected DDOs. 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 20 days in 20 selected 
months in respect of 30 out of 
60 selected subscribers in 2 out 
of 4 selected DDOs. 
Ministry of Water 
Resources 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 189 days in 46 out of 104 
selected months in respect of 33 
out of 102 selected subscribers 
in 3 out of 5 selected DDOs. 
- 
Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers’ Welfare 
- The delay was of 54 days in 
respect of 1  out of 13 selected 
subscribers in 1 selected DDO. 
Range of Delay (in Days) 1-189 1-54 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LVI  of LXXI  
(A)  Delay in bill reaching PAO in State Government and State Autonomous Bodies 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.4.2) 
State/UT Delay 
Jharkhand-State 
Govt. 
In 285 out of 300 selected employees in all 20 DDOs  delay range was 1 
to 838 days 
Delhi -SAB In 29 out of 74 selected employees in 2 out of 5 selected  DDOs delay 
 range was 2  to 815  days 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LVII  of LXXI  
Annexure XIII 
(A)  Delay in uploading SCF /Obtaining Transaction ID 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.5.1) 
Name of the Ministry Delay in the Ministry Delay in the CAB 
Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting 
The delay was ranging between 
2 to 358 days in 34 out of 89 
selected months in 5 selected 
DDOs in respect of 58 out of 69 
selected subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Law & Justice The delay was ranging bet ween 
1 to 1501 days in 37 out of 51 
selected months in 4 out of 5 
selected DDOs in respect of 60 
out of 75 selected subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Home Affairs The delay was ranging betw een 
1 to 1103 days in 66 out of 70 
selected months in 5 selected 
DDOs in respect of 72 out of 76 
selected subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme 
Implementation 
The delay was ranging between 
3 to 371 days in 41 out of 61 
selected months in 5 selected 
DDOs in respect of 64 selected 
subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Finance The delay was ranging between 
3 to 3175 days in 297 selected 
months in 10 selected DDOs in 
respect of 122 out of 150 
selected subscribers. 
The delay was ranging 
between 12 to 124 days in 
respect of 15 selected 
employees in 3 out of 37 
selected months in 1 DDO 
Ministry of Mines The delay was ranging between 
1 to 462 days in 94 selected 
months in 5 selected DDOs in 
respect of 72 out of 76 selected 
subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 34 days in 35 selected 
months in 2 selected DDOs in 
respect of 28 out of 30 selected 
subscribers. 
- 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LVIII  of LXXI  
Name of the Ministry Delay in the Ministry Delay in the CAB 
Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 250 days in 68 out of 81 
selected months in 5 selected 
DDOs in respect of 69 selected 
subscribers. 
The delay was ranging 
between 5 to 49 days in 
respect of 15 selected 
employees in 24 out of 46 
selected months in 1 DDO 
Department of Atomic 
Energy 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 775 days in 57 out of 101 
selected months in 6 selected 
DDOs in respect of 90 selected 
subscribers. 
The delay was ranging 
between 2 to 214 days in 
respect of 6 selected 
employees in 5 out of 24 
selected months in 1 DDO 
Department of Science & 
Technology 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 761 days in 85 selected 
months in 7 selected DDOs in 
respect of 96 out of 100 selected 
subscribers. 
The delay was ranging 
between 1 to 283 days in 
respect of 60 out of 61 
selected employees in 48 out 
of 125 selected months in 4 
DDOs. 
Ministry of Water 
Resources 
The delay was ranging between 
1 to 187 days in 65 out of 104 
selected months in 7 selected 
DDOs in respect of 86 out of 
102 selected subscribers. 
- 
Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers’ Welfare 
- The delay was ranging 
between 3 to 103 days in 
respect of 13 selected 
employees in 24 out of 30 
selected months in 1 DDO 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
- The delay was ranging 
between 1 to 26 days in 
respect of 30 selected 
employees in 24 out of 60 
selected months in 2 DDOs . 
Ministry of Human 
Resource Development 
- The delay was ranging 
between 1 to 404 days in 
respect of 24 selected 
employees in 26 out of 51 
selected months in 2 DDOs. 
Range of Delay (in Days) 1-3175 1-404 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LIX  of LXXI  
(B)  Delay in uploading SCF /Obtaining Transaction ID 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.5.2) 
State/UT Delay  
Andhra Pradesh- 
State Govt. 
In 19 out of 20 selected DDOs in 285 out of 300 employees delay 
ranged from 2 to 1582 days  
Range of Delay 
 (in Days) 
2-1582  
 
State/UT Delay  
Andhra Pradesh- 
SAB 
In  all 5 selected DDOs in all 75 employees delay ranged from 8 to 731 
days  
Delhi- SAB In 4 out of 5 selected DDOs in 42 out of 74 employe es delay ranged 
from 1 to 1403 days 
Range of Delay 
 (in Days) 
1-1403 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LX  of LXXI  
Annexure XIV 
(A)  Delay in remittance of contribution to Trustee Bank (TB) by Nodal Office of the 
Central Government and Central Autonomous Bodies 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.6.1) 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Observation in the Ministry Observation in the 
CAB 
Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting 
An amount of 
`2632149 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 466 days 
in respect of 54 out of 69 
selected employees in 5 
selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Law & Justice An amount of `2609134 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 563 days 
in respect of 60 out of 75 
selected employees in 4 out of 
5 selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Home Affairs An amount of `1415554 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 363 days 
in respect of 57 out of 76 
selected employees in 5 
selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation 
An amount of 
`2057479 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 106 days 
in respect of 43 out of 64 
selected employees in 5 
selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Finance An amount of `2168129 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 414 days 
in respect of 47 out of 151 
selected employees in 6 out of 
10 selected DDOs.  
An amount of 
`259255 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 2 
to 125 days in respect of 
15 selected employees 
in 1 selected DDO. 
Ministry of Mines An amount of `3001947 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 176 days 
in respect of 60 out of 76 
selected employees in 4 
selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways 
An amount of 
`636940 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 26 days 
in respect of 28 out of 30 
selected employees in 2 
selected DDOs.  
- 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXI  of LXXI  
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Observation in the Ministry Observation in the 
CAB 
Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs 
An amount of 
`358200 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 7 to 63 days 
in respect of 12 out of 69 
selected employees in 1 out of 
5 selected DDOs.  
An amount of 
`1100793 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 2 
to 51 days in respect of 
15 selected employees 
in 1 selected DDO. 
Department of Atomic Energy An amount of `419082 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 770 days 
in respect of 30 out of 90 
selected employees in 3 out of 
6 selected DDOs.  
An amount of 
`106421 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 2 
to 214 days in respect of 
6 out of 15 selected 
employees in 1 selected 
DDO . 
Department of Science & 
Technology 
An amount of 
`885310 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 244 days 
in respect of 61 out of 100 
selected employees in 5 out of 
7 DDOs.  
An amount of 
`4349819 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 1 
to 283 days in respect of 
60 selected employees 
in 4 selected DDOs. 
Ministry of Water Resources An amount of `1994411 was 
remitted to TB with a delay 
ranging between 1 to 187 days 
in respect of 57 out of 102 
selected employees in 5 out of 
7 selected DDOs.  
- 
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers’ Welfare 
- An amount of 
`914315 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 2 
to 114 days in respect of 
13 selected employees 
in 1 selected DDO . 
Ministry of Human Resource 
Development 
- An amount of 
`1394681 
was remitted with a 
delay ranging between 1 
to 404 days in respect of 
24 selected employees 
in 2 selected DDOs. 
Range of Delay (in Days) 1-770 1-404 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXII  of LXXI  
(B)  Delay in remittance of contribution to the Trustee Bank by the DDOs of 
State/UT Government and State Autonomous Bodies 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.6.2) 
State/UT Delay in State/UT Delay in SABs 
 
Andhra Pradesh  In all 20 selected DDOs delay 
ranged from 2 to 22 days 
In all 5 selected DDOs delay ranged 
from 9 to 33 days 
Maharashtra  In 19 out of 20 selected DDOs  
delay ranged from 1 to 35 days  
- 
  
Karnataka  In 17 out of 20 selected DDOs 
delay ranged from 1 to 1199 
days 
- 
Delhi In all 5 selected DDOs delay 
ranged from 1 to 442 days  
In 2 out of 5 DDOs delay ranged 
from 1 to 242  days 
Range of Delay 
 (in Days) 
1-1199 1-242 
 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXIII  of LXXI  
Annexure XV 
(A)  Non deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in State Government in 
selected DDOs 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.7.1) 
State Non deduction 
Maharashtra For 22 out of 278 selected employees, i n 7 out of 20 selected DDOs, an 
amount of  `47976 was not deducted from 38 pay bills  
Jharkhand For 51 out of 300 selected employees, in 6 out of 20 selected DDOs, an 
amount of `2.60 lakhs was not deducted from 160 pay bills 
Uttarakhand For 229 out of 307 selected employees i n all 20 selected DDOs ,an 
amount of `120.18 lakh was not deducted  
Himachal Pradesh  For 155 out of 300 selected employees in 15 out of 20 selected DDOs 
,an amount of `32.23 lakh was not deducted  
Total `` ``1.55 crore 
 
(B)  Non deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in State Autonomous 
Bodies  in selected DDOs 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.7.1) 
State/UT  Non deduction 
Maharashtra For 2 out of 15 selected employees in one DDO, an amount of `2712 
was not deducted from 2 pay bills 
Jharkhand For 7 out of 75 employees, in one out of 2 selected DDOs, an amount 
of  `0.21 lakh was not deducted.  
Himachal Pradesh For 14 out of 15 selected employee s, in one out of 5 selected DDOs, 
an amount of  `0.75 lakh was not deducted - HRTC 
For 13 out of 15 selected employees, in one out of 5 selected DDOs , 
an amount of  `1.64 lakh was not deducted - HPSEBL 
For 5 employees in one out of 5 selected DDOs, an amount of `3.01 
lakh was not deducted  (not selected subscribers) - HRTC 
Delhi  For 40 out of 74 selected employees, in 3 ou t of 5 DDOs, an amount 
of  `5.58 lakh was not deducted  
Total `` ``8.21 lakh + `` ``3.01 lakh 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXIV  of LXXI  
Annexure XVI 
Less deduction of NPS contribution 
(Referred to in Para No. 4.7.2.1) 
(A)  Less contribution deducted from salary of the employees of Ministry/Department 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department 
Observation in the Ministry/Department 
 
Ministry of 
Information & 
Broadcasting 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `1767 in respect 
of 6 out of 69 selected subscribers in 3 out of 5 s elected DDOs 
amounting to `6001. 
Ministry of Law & 
Justice 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`5 to `8274 in respect 
of 27 out of 75 selected subscribers in 3 out of 5 selected DDOs 
amounting to `169643. 
Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `1854 in respect 
of 30 out of 76 selected subscribers in 4 out of 5 selected DDOs 
amounting to `9695. 
Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme 
Implementation 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `2567 in respect 
of 7 out of 64 selected subscribers in 3 out of 5 s elected DDOs 
amounting to `11344. 
Ministry of Finance The less contribution was ranging between `1 to `4560 in respect 
of 29 out of 151 selected subscribers in 7 out of 10 selected DDOs 
amounting to `57313. 
Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `2957 in respect 
of 26 out of 69 selected subscribers in 4 out of 5 selected DDOs 
amounting to `5932. 
Department of Atomic 
Energy 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `3990 in respect 
of 7 out of 90 selected subscribers in 2 selected DDOs amounting 
to `8818. 
Department of Science 
& Technology 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to  `729 in respect 
of 9 out of 100 selected subscribers in 1 out of 7 selected DDOs 
amounting to `1579. 
Ministry of Water 
Resources 
The less contribution was ranging between 
`324 to `4473 in 
respect of 8 out of 102 selected subscribers in 2 out of 7 selected 
DDOs amounting to `24909. 
Total `` ``2.95 lakh 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXV  of LXXI  
 
(B)  Less contribution deducted from salary of the employees of Central Autonomous 
Bodies 
Name of the 
Ministry/Department  
Observation in the CABs 
Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare 
Less contribution  was ranging between 
`793 to `2158 in respect 
of 4 out of 30 selected subscribers of 1 out of 2 s elected DDOs 
of a CAB amounting to `16056 
Ministry of Human 
Resource 
Development 
Less contribution was ranging between 
`159 to `590 in respect 
of 3 out of 24 selected subscribers of 1 out of 2 s elected DDOs  
amounting to `1560. 
Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
Less contribution was ranging between 
`30 to  `1455 in respect 
of 6out of 15 selected subscribers in 1 selected DDO  amounting 
to `4522. 
Department of Atomic 
Energy 
Less contribution was ranging between 
`1 to `127 in respect of 
9 out of 15 selected subscribers in 1 selected DDO  amounting to 
`136. 
Department of Science 
& Technology 
Less contribution was ranging between 
`10 to `652 in respect of 
20 out of 60 selected subscribers in 3 out of 4 sel ected DDOs 
amounting to    `3822. 
Total  `` ``0.26 lakh 
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXVI  of LXXI  
Annexure XVII 
Less deduction of employee’s contribution from salary in selected DDOs/DTOs of the 
State Government and State Autonomous Bodies. (Referred to in Para No. 4.7.2.2) 
(A)  Less deduction in DDOs/DTOs of the State Government 
State/UT Less deduction 
Andhra Pradesh In 22 out of 300 selected employees in 6 out of 20 selected DDOs in 92 
paybills  less deducted employee’s contribution was `8084 
Himachal Pradesh In 7 out of 300 selected employees  in 1 out of 5 selected DTOs in 7 
paybills less deducted employee’s contribution was  `9024 
Maharashtra In 38 out of 278 selected employees in 5 out of 20 selected DDOs in 
943 pay bills less deducted employee’s contribution was  `24628 
Rajasthan In 20 out of 300 selected employees in 10  out of 20 selected DDOs  less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `5789  
Jharkhand In 37 out of 300 selected employees in 9 out of 20 selected DDOs  less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `28050 
Delhi In 48 out of 50 selected employees in all 5 s elected DDOs  in 124 
transactions less deducted employee’s contribution was `17222 
Total `` ``92797 
 
(B)  Less deduction in DDOs of the State Autonomous Bodies  
State/ UT Less deduction 
Andhra Pradesh In 11 out of 75 selected employees i n 1 out of 5 selected DDOs in 42 
paybills less deducted employee’s contribution was `4085  
Maharashtra In 7 out of 15 selected employees in 1 selected DDO in 19 paybills less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `5703  
Rajasthan In 13 out of 75 selected employees in 3 o ut of 5 selected DDOs less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `6586  
Jharkhand In 3 out of 75 selected employees in 1 ou t of 2 selected DDOs less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `1622  
Delhi In 3  out of 74 selected employees in 1 out o f 5 selected DDOs less 
deducted employee’s contribution was `1959   
Total `` ``19955  
  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXVII  of LXXI  
Annexure XVIII 
Access of dashboard by Financial Advisors  
(Referred to in Para No. 5.1.2) 
S. No. Range of 
Dashboard 
Access 
done 
Name of the Ministry/Department No. of 
Access 
Done 
Total 
Dashboard 
Access to be 
done (if done 
at least once 
in a quarter) 
1 Nil Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment 0  28  
2   Department of School Education and Literacy 0  28  
3 
  
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievance and 
Pensions 
0
 28  
4   Ministry of Steel 0  28  
5   NCT of Delhi 0 28  
6   Ministry of Panchayati Raj 0  28  
7   Food Processing Industry 0  28  
8   Election Commission 0  28  
9   Department of Science and Technology 0  28  
10   Indian Audit and Accounts 0  28  
11   Ministry of  Rural Development 0  28  
12   Department of Commerce (Supply Division) 0  28  
13   President Secretariat 0  28  
14 
  
Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Human Resources and Development 
0
 28  
15   Dadar and Nagar Haveli 0  28  
16 
  
Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship 
0
 28  
17 1 to 5 Ministry of Civil Aviation and Tourism 1  28  
18 
  
Ministry of Consumer Affairs Food and Public 
Distribution 
2
 28  
19   Ministry of Coal 4  28  
20   Department of Space 3  28  
21   Ministry of Commerce and Textiles 4  28  
22   Ministry of Mines 4  28  
23   Ministry of Labour and Employment 3  28  
24 
  
Department of Chemicals and Petrochem, 
Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers 
1
 28  
25 
  
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
1
 28  
26   Rajya Sabha Secretariat 5  28  
27   Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 1  28  
28   Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 4  28  
29   Ministry of Culture 3  28  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXVIII  of LXXI  
S. No. Range of 
Dashboard 
Access 
done 
Name of the Ministry/Department No. of 
Access 
Done 
Total 
Dashboard 
Access to be 
done (if done 
at least once 
in a quarter) 
30 
  
Ministry of Development of North Eastern 
Region 
2
 28  
31  Ministry of Defence 4  28  
32 6 to 10 Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Island 
6 28  
33   Ministry of Agriculture 6  28  
34   Ministry of Home Affairs 7  28  
35 
  
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance 
8
 28  
36 
  
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance 
10 
 28  
37   Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance 8  28  
38 
 
Department of Disinvestment, Ministry of 
Finance 
8
 28  
39   Ministry of Law and Justice 7  28  
40   Ministry of Corporate Affairs 7  28  
41 
 
Central Board of Direct Taxes, Department of 
Revenue, Ministry of Finance 
8
 28  
42 
  
Ministry of Planning Statistics and Programme 
Implementation 
7
 28  
43   Ministry of Shipping 7  28  
44   Ministry of External Affairs 6  28  
45   Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 7  28  
46   Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 8  28  
47 
  
Central Board of Excise and Customs, 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance 
8
 28  
48   Central Pension Accounting Office 9  28  
49   Lok Sabha Secretariat 6  28  
50   Union Territory of Lakshdweep 6  28  
51   Union Territory of Daman and Diu 6  28  
52 14 to 28 Ministry of Tribal Affairs 14  28  
53   Ministry of Minority Affairs 14  28  
54  Ministry of Water Resources 15  28  
55  Ministry of Women and Child Development 15  28  
56  Department of Atomic Energy 25  28  
57   Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 23  28  
58   Ministry of Power 24  28  
59  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 25  28  
60  Department of Industry 22  28  
61 
 
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty 
Alleviation 
27 
 28  

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXIX  of LXXI  
S. No. Range of 
Dashboard 
Access 
done 
Name of the Ministry/Department No. of 
Access 
Done 
Total 
Dashboard 
Access to be 
done (if done 
at least once 
in a quarter) 
62 
  
Dy. DG, Accounts, Department of 
Telecommunication 
27 
 28  
63   GM Finance, Postal Accounts, Delhi 27  28  
64   Ministry of Environment and Forest 27  28  
65 
  
Department of Information and Technology, 
Ministry of Telecommunication and 
Information Technology 
27 
 28  
66   Ministry of Earth Sciences 28  28  
67   Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 28  28  
68   Ministry of Railways 27  28  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXX  of LXXI  
List of Abbreviations 
Term Description 
AAS Annual Account Statement 
AoB Allocation of Business 
ASP Annuity Service Provider 
AUM Asset Under Management 
BE Budget Estimate 
CA Controller of Accounts 
CAB Central Autonomous Body 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
CDDO Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
CGA Controller General of Accounts 
CPAO Central Pension Accounting Office 
CRA Central Record Keeping Agency 
DA Dearness Allowance 
DB Defined Benefit 
DC Defined Contribution 
DDO Drawing and Disbursing Officer 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DFS Department of Financial Services 
DoE Department of Expenditure 
DoPPW Department of Pension and Pensioners’ Welfare  
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DTA Directorate of Treasury and Accounts 
DTO District Treasury Office 
FA Financial Advisor 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GoI Government of India 
GPF General Provident Fund 
HLEG High Level Expert Group 
HRMS Human Resource Management System  
IRA Individual Retirement Account 
IRDAI Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 
LC Life Cycle 
LIC Life Insurance Corporation 
MARS Minimum Assured Return Scheme 
NAV Net Asset Value 
NPS New Pension Scheme/National Pension System 
NPSCAN New Pension Scheme Contribution Accounting Network 
NSDL National Securities Depository Limited 
OASIS Old Age Social and Income Security 

Report No. 13 of 2020 
Page LXXI  of LXXI  
OM Office Memorandum 
PAO Pay and Accounts Office 
PF Pension Fund 
PFRDA Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
PoP Point of Presence 
PPAN Permanent Pension Account Number 
Pr. AO Principal Accounts Office 
Pr. CCA Principal Chief Controller of Accounts 
PRAN Permanent Retirement Account Number 
SAB State Autonomous Body 
SBI State Bank of India 
SCF Subscriber Contribution File 
SHCIL Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited 
SIPF State Insurance and Provident Fund 
TB Trustee Bank 
UTI Unit Trust of India 
 
 
 