 


 

 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended 31 March 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
No. 18 of 2020 
(Compliance Audit Observations) 

 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT CPSE PAGE 
NO. 
 PREFACE  v 
 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  vii 
 
Chapter I MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
1.1 Non-Compliance of DPE 
Guidelines on payment of 
Performance Related Pay 
Rashtriya Chemicals 
and Fertilizers Limited 
1 
 
Chapter II MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
2.1 Payment of Performance 
Related Pay due to non-
adherence of conditions of 
‘Bell Curve Approach’ 
Airports Authority of 
India 
3 
2.2 Short recovery of liquidated 
damages from a contractor 
Airports Authority of 
India 
4 
2.3 Irregular absorption by Air 
India Limited towards ground 
handling services charged by 
Air India SATS Airport 
Services Private Limited  
Air India Limited 6 
2.4 Undue favour to M/s Ballarpur 
Industries Limited by 
withdrawal of recovery 
proceedings pending final 
payment of dues 
Air India Limited 8 
 
Chapter III MINISTRY OF COAL 
3.1 Excess payment to the 
contractor under mining 
contract 
Mahanadi Coalfields 
Limited 
10 
3.2 Avoidable  expenditure on 
excavation outsourcing in 
South West Area of Mine II 
NLC India Limited 11 
3.3 Avoidable payment of 
demurrage charges 
NLC Tamilnadu Power 
Limited 
13 
 
Chapter IV  MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY 
4.1 Information Systems Audit of 
Government E-Marketplace 
Government  
E-Marketplace 
15 
 
CONTENTS 

 
ii 
Chapter V MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES) 
5.1 Review of Loans to Road 
Projects 
India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
49 
5.2 Avoidable loss due to extension 
of loan in terminated projects 
India Infrastructure 
Finance Company 
Limited 
68 
5.3 Non-Performing Assets NABFINS Limited 69 
5.4 Review of Underwriting of 
Group Mediclaim Insurance 
Policies 
National Insurance 
Company Limited 
83 
5.5 Avoidable expenditure on rent 
due to delay in relocation of 
offices  
National Insurance 
Company Limited 
91 
5.6 Failure to collect motor 
insurance premium from 
discontinued dealer outlets 
resulted in loss 
National Insurance 
Company Limited  
92 
5.7 Imprudent underwriting and 
arrangement of injudicious 
reinsurance cover leading to 
loss 
Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited 
94 
5.8 Non-liquidation of factoring 
facility to a client despite clear 
signs of incipient sickness 
leading to non-recovery 
SBI Global Factors 
Limited 
96 
5.9 Violation of specific directions 
of the Ministry led to loss of 
premium 
 
United India Insurance 
Company Limited 
100 
5.10 Factoring and Loan Services by 
IFCI Factors Limited 
IFCI Factors Limited 102 
 
Chapter VI MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND 
PUBLIC ENTERPRISES 
 
6.1 Loss due to non-performance 
under a contract 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited 
131 
6.2 Avoidable payment of 
sewerage cess 
Bharat Heavy 
Electricals Limited 
133 
6.3 Township and Land 
Management 
HEC Limited 134 
6.4 Avoidable payment of income 
tax   
Tungabhadra Steel 
Products Limited 
143 
 

 
iii 
Chapter VII MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS   
7.1 Unauthorised payment to 
employees 
NBCC (India) Limited  146 
 
Chapter VIII MINISTR OF MINES   
8.1 Unfruitful investment in 
acquisition and loss from 
operation of Gujarat Copper 
Project  
Hindustan Copper 
Limited 
 
148 
 
Chapter IX MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL 
GAS 
 
9.1 Irregular payment of 
Performance Related Pay 
Brahmaputra Cracker 
and Polymer Limited 
151 
9.2 Follow  up IT Audit of the 
Financial and Controlling 
(FICO) modules 
 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
153 
9.3 Loss of revenue due to sale of 
crude oil containing Basic 
Sediments & Water above the 
norms as per sales agreement 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation Limited 
164 
9.4 Implementation of de-
regulation of pricing regarding 
major Petroleum Products 
 
Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited, Bharat 
Petroleum Corporation 
Limited and Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation 
Limited 
166 
9.5 Additional expenditure on 
energy charges 
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited 
174 
 
Chapter X MINISTRY OF POWER  
10.1 Avoidable loss due to under-
recovery of capacity charges 
Damodar Valley 
Corporation 
177 
10.2 Undue favour extended by 
NSPCL in award of contracts 
on nomination basis 
NTPC-SAIL Power 
Company Limited 
179 
 
Chapter XI MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS 
11.1 Improper contract management 
by NHAI resulted in loss of 
revenue 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
 
181 
11.2 Undue Benefit to Contractors National Highways  
Authority of India 
183 
11.3 Less receipt to Consolidated 
Fund India due to delay in 
collection of User fees 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
 
185 
11.4 Short remittance of additional 
concession fee 
National Highways 
Authority of India 
187 
 

 
iv 
Chapter XII MINISTRY OF SHIPPING  
12.1 Non-safeguarding of financial 
interests under dredging 
contract 
Dredging Corporation 
of India Limited 
188 
 
Chapter XIII MINISTRY OF STEEL  
13.1 Loss due to termination of 
contract and encashment of BG 
by the client 
Mecon Limited 191 
13.2 Energy Management Rashtriya Ispat Nigam 
Limited 
193 
13.3 Performance of Captive Mines 
of SAIL 
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
208 
13.4 Safety and Environment 
Management in SAIL 
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
230 
13.5 Avoidable expenditure by 
SAIL/ RSP 
Steel Authority of India 
Limited 
248 
 
Chapter XIV RECOVERIES AND CORRECTIONS/RECTIFICATIONS BY 
CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT  
14.1 Recoveries at the instance of 
audit 
Air India Limited, 
Northern Coalfields 
Limited, National 
Highways Authority of 
India, Oil and Natural 
Gas Corporation 
Limited, Madras 
Fertilizers Limited, 
Mahanadi Coalfields 
Limited, Oriental 
Insurance Company 
Limited, United India 
Insurance Company 
Limited, The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited 
251 
14.2 Corrections/ rectifications at the 
instance of audit 
Rashtriya Chemical and 
Fertilizers Limited, 
India Oil Corporation 
Limited, Steel 
Authority of India 
Limited 
251 
 
Chapter XV FOLLOW UP ON AUDIT REPORTS 
(COMMERCIAL) 
252 
 Appendix I  257 
 Appendix II  259 
 Appendix III  260 
 Annexures  261 
 

v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.  The accounts of Government Companies set up under t he provisions of the 
Companies Act (including Companies deemed to be Gov ernment Companies as per the 
provisions of the Companies Act) are audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (CAG) under the provisions of Section 143(6) of Companies Act, 2013. The 
accounts certified by the Statutory Auditors (Chart ered Accountants) appointed by the 
CAG under the Companies Act are subject to the supp lementary audit by CAG whose 
comments supplement the reports of the Statutory Au ditors. In addition, these companies 
are also subject to test audit by CAG. 
 
2.  The statutes governing some Corporations and Author ities require their accounts 
to be audited by CAG. In respect of five such Corpo rations viz. Airports Authority of 
India, National Highways Authority of India, Inland  Waterways Authority of India, Food 
Corporation of India and Damodar Valley Corporation , the relevant statutes designate 
CAG as their sole auditor. In respect of one Corpor ation viz. Central Warehousing 
Corporation, CAG has the right to conduct supplemen tary and test audit after audit has 
been conducted by the Chartered Accountants appoint ed under the statute governing the 
Corporation. 
 
3.  Reports in relation to the accounts of a Government  Company or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by CAG under the provis ions of Section 19-A of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers a nd Conditions of Service) Act, 
1971, as amended in 1984. 
 
4.  The Audit Report for the year 31 March 2019 contain s 42 individual audit 
observations relating to 31 CPSEs under control of 13 Ministries/ Departments. Instances 
mentioned in this Report are among those which came  to notice in the course of audit 
during 2018-19 as well as those which came to notic e in earlier years. Results of audit of 
transactions subsequent to March 2019 in a few cases have also been mentioned. 
 
5.  All references to ‘Companies/ Corporations or CPSEs ’ in this Report may be 
construed to refer to ‘Central Government Companies / Corporations’ unless the context 
suggests otherwise. 
 
6.  The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 

 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
vii 
 
 
I Introduction   
1.  This Report includes important audit findings noti ced as a result of test check of 
accounts and records of Central Government Companie s and Corporations conducted by 
the officers of the Comptroller and Auditor General  of India under Section 143 (6) of the 
Companies Act, 2013 or the statutes governing the particular Corporations. 
2.  The Report contains 42 individual observations rel ating to 31 Central Public 
Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under 13 Ministries/ Dep artments. The draft observations 
were forwarded to the Secretaries of the concerned Ministries/ Departments under whose 
administrative control the CPSEs are working to give them an opportunity to furnish their 
replies/ comments in each case within a period of s ix weeks. Replies to 34 observations 
were not received even as this Report was being fin alised as indicated in para 3 below. 
Earlier, the draft observations were sent to the Ma nagements of the CPSEs concerned, 
whose replies have been suitably incorporated in the report.  
3. The paragraphs included in this Report relate to th e CPSEs under the 
administrative control of the following Ministries/  Departments of the Government of 
India:  
Ministry/ Department 
(CPSEs involved) 
Number of 
paragraphs  
Number of paragraphs in 
respect of which Ministry/ 
Department’s reply was 
awaited 
1. Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Rashtriya Chemicals and 
Fertilizers Limited) 
1 1 
2. Civil Aviation 
(Airports Authority of India, Air 
India)  
4 4 
3. 
 
Coal 
(Mahanadi Coalfield Limited, 
NLC India Limited, NLC Tamil 
Nadu Power Limited) 
3 2 
4. Commerce and Industry 
(Government E-Marketplace) 
1 1 
5. Finance 
 (IIFCL, NABFINS Limited, 
National Insurance Company 
Limited, Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited, SBI Global 
Factors Limited, United India 
Insurance Company Limited, 
IFCI Factors Limited) 
10 6 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
viii 
6. 
 
Heavy Industries and Public  
Enterprises  
(BHEL, HEC Limited, 
Tungabhadra Steel Products) 
4 4 
7. 
 
Housing and Urban Affairs 
 (NBCC (India) Limited) 
1 1 
8.  Mines 
(Hindustan Copper Limited) 
1 1 
9. Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(BCPL, ONGC, IOCL, BPCL, 
HPCL) 
5 1 
10. Power 
 (Damodar Valley Corporation, 
NTPC-SAIL Power Company 
Limited)  
2 2 
11. 
 
 Road Transport and Highways 
(NHAI) 
4 4 
12. Shipping  
(Dredging Corporation of India 
Limited) 
1 0 
13. Steel 
(MECON Limited, RINL, SAIL) 
5 5 
Total 42 34 
4. Total financial implication of individual audit observations is `1,243.20 crore. 
5. Individual Audit observations in this Report are broadly of the following nature: 
• Non-compliance with rules, directives, procedure, t erms and conditions of the 
contract etc. involving `462.13 crore in 16 audit paragraphs. 
• Non-safeguarding of financial interest of organisat ions involving  
`227.41 crore in 14 audit paragraphs. 
• Defective/ deficient planning involving `440.80 crore in three audit 
paragraphs. 
• Inadequate/ deficient monitoring involving `112.86 crore in nine audit 
paragraphs. 
6. The Report contains a Chapter on “Recoveries & corr ections/ rectifications” by 
CPSEs at the instance of audit. The Chapter contain s two paragraphs viz.  
(a) recoveries of `51.43 crore made by 9 CPSEs at the instance of Audi t, and  
(b) corrections/ rectifications carried out by 3 CPSEs at the instance of Audit. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
ix 
II    Highlights of some significant paragraphs inc luded in the Report are given 
below: 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) vide its Off ice Memorandum (OM) dated 26 
November 2008, stipulated that the payment of perfo rmance related pay (PRP) would be 
directly linked to the profits of CPSE and performa nce of executives. CPSE was required 
to adopt ‘Bell Curve Approach’ in grading the offic ers so that not more than 10 per cent  
to 15 per cent  executives are ‘Outstanding/ Excellent’ and 10 per cent  of executives 
would be graded as ‘Below Par’ and not paid any PRP .  However, AAI modified the 
grading of last 10 per cent  of ‘Below par’ category of employees in three sub- categories, 
i.e., Very Good, Good and Below Good and paid the P RP benefits at the rate of  
60 per cent , 30 per cent  and NIL, respectively. Thus, only limited number o f employees, 
sub-categorised as below good, did not receive PRP instead of all the employees under 
the last 10 per cent ‘Below par’ category. As a result of non-adherence to the condition of 
‘Bell Curve Approach’, payment of PRP amounting to 
`38.78 crore during 2010-11 to 
2016-17 to ineligible employees, which was in violation of DPE guidelines. 
(Para 2.1) 
Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited (AI SATS), the joint venture company 
of Air India Limited (AIL) is providing Ground Hand ling (GH) services to International 
and Domestic airlines including Airline Allied Serv ices Limited (AASL), a subsidiary of 
AIL, at Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and  Mangalore. AIL borne the 
differential amount of GH charges to the tune of `44.88 crore for the services availed by 
AASL despite the fact that the revised lower rate w as approved by Chairman, AISATS . 
The differential charges absorbed by AIL do not hav e approval of Audit Committee of 
AIL as required under Section 177(4) of the Companies Act, 2013. 
(Para 2.3) 
NLC India Limited entered into an outsourcing contr act for lignite excavation in respect 
of Mine-II, while the opening stock of lignite, act ual quantity of lignite excavated from 
Mine II and lignite transported from Mine IA was su fficient to meet the requirement of 
both the Thermal Power Stations, linked with Mine-I I, for the years 2015-16 and 
2016-17. Outsourcing excavation contract resulted i n expenditure of `28.74 crore which 
was avoidable. Further, quantity excavated through outsourcing contract resulted in 
overstocking of inventory and ultimately deterioration in the quality of lignite. 
(Para 3.2) 
Government e-Marketplace (Special Purpose Vehicle) was incorporated on 17 May 2017 
under the Companies Act 2013 with responsibility fo r building, operating and 
maintaining the GeM platform to provide an end-to-e nd online marketplace for Central 
and State Government Ministries/ Departments, Centr al & State Public Undertakings 
(CPSUs & SPSUs), autonomous institutions and Statut ory & Constitutional Bodies, for 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
x 
procurement of common use goods and services. Purchases through GeM by Government 
users was authorised and made mandatory by the Mini stry of Finance vide Rule (No. 
149) in the General Financial Rules, 2017. The GeM application (new version) (also 
termed as GeM Version 3.0) has been operational since 26 January 2018.   
Audit observed that although GeM has been successfu l in implementing an on-line 
solution for government procurement. However, STQC audit for compliance with 
“Guidelines for compliance to Quality requirements of e Procurement Systems” of 
Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology no t conducted due to which Audit is 
unable to derive assurance about the authenticity, non-reputability and integrity of the e-
bidding module of GeM, (the electronic equivalent o f the manual ‘sealed bid’ process). 
There were deficiencies in the input controls for b uyer and seller registration and the 
process of registration and verification of users n eeded further strengthening along with 
regular cleaning and updation of legacy data and wr ong data. The objectives of faster 
procurement, efficiency and speed in procurement pr ocess remained partially achieved 
since there were numerous delays at different stage s of the procurement process, 
especially about delays in payment. Similarly, ther e were inadequate controls to ensure 
achievement of objective of transparency and there were deficiencies with regard to 
achievement of objective of economy and price reaso nability. Despite being mandatory 
for all central government offices, high number of dormant or inactive users indicated 
that universal acceptance may not have been achieve d.   There were deficiencies in the 
mapping of the GFR and Government of India (GoI)’s other rules and regulations and 
Business Requirement Documents. There were also sig nificant delays in the incident 
resolution mechanism.  Although GeM had intended to introduce procurement of services 
through GeM, however, various services were yet to be introduced on GeM. As regards 
economy, Audit felt that the methodology used by Ge M to indicate savings did not give 
an accurate picture.  The application lacked ease o f usage due to absence of 
functionalities and assistance.  The application wa s also not benchmarked as per the 
requisite number of users leaving the application slow and in continuous breakdown. 
 (Para 4.1)  
In road sector, the projects do not have physical assets to provide as security against loan. 
Viability of the project is the only comfort for se curing the quality of loan asset. As such, 
due diligence on the project before signing of comm on loan agreement (CLA), ensuring 
compliance to the conditions set in the CLAs before disbursement of loan and monitoring 
of project work progress for timely corrective acti on are vital activities to be undertaken 
by lenders for financing the road projects.  
Lenders including IIFCL did not give due cognizance  to the major risk of RoW 
availability to Projects.  In seven out of nine NPA  cases, non-availability of required 
RoW was the leading factor for non-completion of pr ojects and turning of the loans into 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xi 
NPA. In one NPA case, unrealistic traffic projectio n affected the project’s commercial 
viability. 
The loans were disbursed, in many cases including N PA cases, without ensuring the 
compliance to the CLA conditions relating to environment/ forest/ tree cutting clearances, 
infusion of required equity through escrow account and funding of cost overrun/ IDC by 
promoters. This led to delay in work progress, risk  of misuse of fund by promoters and 
avoidable additional loan to badly managed projects.   
Monitoring of project progress was weak due to inad equacies in internal control systems 
established by the lenders, particularly the incomp lete/ deficient information contained in 
LIE reports and CA certificates relating to the RoW  availability, the equity infusion by 
promoters, the changes in shareholding pattern, the physical work progress vis a vis funds 
available with the project and the advances release d/ unadjusted/ unrecovered release of 
advances to EPC contractor without any security and  misutilisation of such advances. 
The deficiency in monitoring led to the promoter ta king undue benefits out of project 
fund, at the cost of project work progress. 
The above deficiencies led to loan of 
`1,895.50 crore to nine projects out of 32 projects 
examined in audit becoming NPA which indicate that IIFCL still has a long way to go to 
achieve its mission of adopting best practices and developing core competencies for 
facilitating infrastructure development. 
(Para 5.1)  
IIFCL sanctioned and disbursed two loans under Take out Finance Scheme without 
ensuring compliance of critical requirement of obta ining ‘No Objection Certificate’ from 
Concessioning Authorities, and without ensuring req uired debt servicing capacity of the 
borrowers. Resultantly, IIFCL ended up lending of `26.20 crore in already terminated 
projects. 
(Para 5.2) 
NABFINS Limited was formed with the objective to pr ovide financial services in the 
areas of agriculture and micro finance. The Company  operates loan disbursements in 
three major business verticals, viz., Second Level Institutions (SLIs), Business and 
Development Correspondents (B&DCs) and Direct Lendi ng (DL) to borrowers. During 
audit of Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) in NABFINS Limited, it was observed that: 
• The Company incorrectly included the thrift of memb ers of Second Level 
Institutions (SLIs) in the calculation of their net  worth while determining their 
loan eligibility. Consequently, loans aggregating t o `299.80 lakh were sanctioned 
to six SLIs, even though five of them were not elig ible for any loan and one was 
eligible for a loan of `0.15 lakh only against `50 lakh sanctioned to it. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xii 
• There were deficiencies in appraisal of loans as th e list of book debts provided by 
the SLIs were not certified by the auditor and the third party guarantees or 
personal guarantees of promoters were not obtained. 
• The findings of investigative audits of Business & Development Correspondents 
(B&DCs) were not properly recorded. Post disburseme nt visits in respect of loans 
disbursed were not conducted as per the Operations Manual of the Company. 
• The follow-up mechanism in respect of the NPA accou nts was weak and needed 
to be strengthened. 
(Para 5.3) 
NICL, nationalised in 1972, has been servicing in t he general insurance industry.  
Thematic Audit was undertaken to review the perform ance of underwriting of GMPs as 
Incurred claim ratio (ICR) under the GMPs was consistently adverse over the years.  
Para highlights the deviations/ violations of instr uctions of IRDA and of its own laid 
down norms. Audit noticed instances of: 
• issuance of policies without approval of HO 
• Non-adherence to IRDA guidelines and non-revision o f prices of its products 
despite adverse ICR  
• Short collection of premium against the premium approved by HO 
• short charging of premium due non-adherence to the underwriting guidelines for 
GMPs 
• Cases of unauthorised and excess payment of brokerage/ commission  
Non-adherence to the circulars/ instructions of IRD A and of its own laid down norms 
guidelines indicate deficiencies in the monitoring and control mechanism in the 
organisation. 
(Para 5.4) 
SBI Global Factors Ltd, sanctioned domestic factori ng facility worth `35 crore to M/s. 
Fabtech Projects & Engineers Ltd (FPEL).  The facil ity showed early warning signals of 
stress such as delays in payments, direct payments,  downgrading of credit rating, adverse 
remarks in Auditor’s report etc.. The Company continued to factor the invoices submitted 
by FPEL and made payments to them instead of taking  affirmative action to reduce and 
exit from the facility.  The asset became a NPA in March 2019 and dues amounting to 
`28.37 crore were not recovered.     
(Para 5.8) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xiii 
Non adherence to guidelines of Ministry of Finance for pricing of group health insurance 
policies by United India Insurance Company Limited led to forego the revenue of 
`112.28 crore during 2016-17 to 2018-19. 
(Para 5.9) 
 
IFCI Factors Limited (IFL) is registered as a NBFC- Factor with Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) and is primarily engaged in the business of factoring and short term corporate loan. 
It is a subsidiary of IFCI Limited. 
 
As asset quality of Company had deteriorated over l ast five years, audit was taken up 
covering a period of 2014-15 to 2018-19 with object ives to examine compliance with the 
annual Credit Policy and business plan of the Compa ny, review the credit appraisal 
mechanism and examine whether due diligence has bee n exercised in sanction and 
disbursement of loans, and examine the efficiency of credit monitoring mechanism. 
Following were major audit observations: 
• 20 out of 26 cases of sanctioning and disbursement reviewed in Audit were 
approved with one to seven deviations  
• In eight cases of Corporate Loans, Company unduly u pgraded/ notched up the 
rating of the clients by two points on the basis of  comfort of security, despite 
collateral security being basic and essential eligi bility criteria for sanction of 
Corporate Loans.  
• Out of 25 cases of NPA and write offs (17 NPA and 8  Write Off cases) reviewed 
by Audit, non-compliance of credit policy was obser ved in 21 cases with respect 
to sanctioning and monitoring of the facility which  led to these accounts turning 
into NPA or being written off. Out of 25(sample), r ecovery in 15 cases of 
`212.31 crore was doubtful.   
• Company continued to fund the clients by way of deb it note funding despite 
invoices being in recourse (30 days above due payme nt date). This practice of 
debit note funding leads to knocking off/ settling of the old overdue/ recourse 
invoices and allows funding against the new invoice s received thereby delaying 
the classification of an account as NPA and ever greening such accounts. 
• Company did not classify the account as NPA in 16 cases where the overdue were 
more than the prescribed period in violation of RBI guidelines. 
• In four cases company reported a fraud committed by  the client/ debtors whereby 
company had to incur a loss (doubtful recovery) of `50.33 crore. The major lapses 
on part of the company were (i) Sanctioning the cre dit facility to the client who 
did not meet the eligibility criteria, (ii) Lack of  due diligence at the time of 
sanctioning and addition of new debtor, (iii) Non-monitoring of the account as per 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xiv 
the procedure laid down in the credit policy, (iv) Delay in declaration of the 
account as NPA by reassignment of invoices and debi t note funding and (v) Non-
compliance with the terms of sanction as per sancti on letter, disbursement 
condition and waiver of crucial pre disbursement conditions. 
(Para 5.10) 
BHEL suffered a loss of Euro 3.83 million ( `28.35 crore) due to failure to deliver 
performance as per the contractual provisions and r esultant invocation of bank guarantee 
by the client 
(Para 6.1) 
The Heavy Power Equipment Plant, Hyderabad of BHEL failed to avail 50 per cent  
rebate in sewerage cess on water charges, as extend ed by the Hyderabad Water Supply 
and Sewerage Board, which resulted in avoidable ext ra expenditure of `21.24 crore 
during January 2012 to March 2019. 
(Para 6.2) 
Tungabhadra Steel Products Limited gave incorrect t reatment to the waiver of 
Government of India loan and interest thereon in th e books of accounts for the year  
2016-17. Consequently, the Company made avoidable p ayment of Income Tax to the 
tune of `55.38 crore with a further tax liability of `41.18 crore. 
(Para 6.4) 
Hindustan Copper Limited (HCL) was approached by the Asset Reconstruction Company 
(India) Limited, Mumbai (ARCIL) seeking the interes t of the Company in the acquisition 
of the plant of Jhagadia Copper Limited (JCL), Guja rat which was closed since was 
September 2009 for want of working capital. Though apprised of the threats regarding 
operational aspects as well as constraints for avai lability of raw materials for the plant, 
HCL acquired (February 2015) JCL plant at a price o f `210 crore from ARCIL as a 
single bidder and renamed it as Gujarat Copper Project (GCP). The capacity utilization of 
GCP was only 20 percent of the total capacity of th e plant during the period from 
November 2016 to March 2019 primarily due to non-av ailability of raw materials. As a 
result, HCL suffered a loss of `102.49 crore during the above period by operating G CP. 
In the meantime, the Company made a total investmen t of `303.18 crore in GCP 
(including acquisition cost) till March 2019.  
 (Para 8.1) 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) init iated a project  called Information 
Consolidation for Efficiency (ICE) in October 2003 to realign its business processes 
under a common Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) s ystem with the objective of  
optimizing and standardizing business processes for  integrated information availability 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xv 
on real time basis and to eliminate duplication of activities to increase efficiency and 
transparency by capturing data at source point.  
 
Audit observed that data on location and custodian of assets was not properly populated 
in the master records and 571 ex-employees continue d to be denoted in the system as 
custodians of assets valuing `87.43 crore. Incorrect bank keys and duplicate vend or 
records were identified in vendor master. Further, Audit noted that repetitive payments 
were made to vendors classified as one-time vendors  and overdue payments continued 
without any reason attributed in the payment block key (upto 1,096 days). Audit also 
observed that uniform practice is not followed acro ss the Company for adoption of 
allocation of drilling costs. 
(Para 9.2) 
  
ONGC entered (April 2002) into a MoU with IOCL and BPCL for sale of crude oil. The 
sale price was subject to discount at slab rates, i n case Basic Sediment & Water (BS&W) 
content in the crude oil exceeded 0.2 per cent  by volume. The oil produced from Assam 
fields of ONGC has high BS&W content, due to which further processing of crude oil is 
required to bring down the BS&W content level below  0.2 per cent  before supply to the 
refineries. Audit observed that Assam Renewal Plan was conceptualized way back in 
December 2005 with an estimated cost of `2,465.15 crore. One of the major deliverables 
of the project was to control the BS&W level below 0.2 per cent . Though the project was 
scheduled to be completed in March 2013, the work i s still on. Crude oil contained 
BS&W ranging from 0.164 - 0.417 per cent  during April 2013 to October 2019 resulting 
price discount/ loss of revenue to ONGC amounting to `27.06 crore. 
(Para 9.3) 
The prices of Petrol (MS) and Diesel (HSD) which fo rm major part of the sale of 
petroleum products of the Oil Marketing Companies ( OMCs) were deregulated by the 
GoI in June 2010 and October 2014 respectively. OMC s effected daily change in Retail 
Sale Price (RSP) of MS and HSD with effect from 16 June 2017 as against fortnight 
revision being followed till then. Audit test check ed 188 Retail Outlets (ROs) to review 
the implementation of daily pricing and observed inadequacies in OMCs’ preparedness at 
the time of implementation of daily price revision in terms of automation of ROs and 
provision of sustained connectivity at the ROs. In some of the automated ROs, the 
dealers were found to be manually changing the dail y prices. The dealers were also not 
prompt in changing the prices leading to over/ unde rcharging of prices to the customers. 
Audit noticed inadequate monitoring of the price changes, reduced inspections of ROs by 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xvi 
field officers of OMCs and inadequate reporting by field officers in their inspection 
reports.    
 (Para 9.4) 
Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) entered into a PPA  with Kerala State Electricity 
Board Limited (KSEBL) for supply of 150 MW from Rag hunathpur Thermal Power 
Station-I (RTPS-I) for a period of 25 years. Due to  increase in project cost, DVC and 
KSEBL mutually agreed (July 2015) to reduce the qua ntum of power from RTPS-I in 
respect of the above PPA from 150 MW to 50 MW and a  fresh PPA for supply of 100 
MW of power from its existing other units. However,  no such PPAs were entered into 
with KSEBL.  
The scheduling of power from RTPS-I was commenced f rom May 2016. Thus, the 
Corporation was not in a position to recover capaci ty charges of 
`78.15 crore from May 
2016 to March 2019  in respect of RTPS-I corresponding to 100 MW of pow er from 
KSEBL. Additionally, the Corporation has to absorb recurring loss of `3.53 crore per 
month till new consumer for purchasing of 100 MW of power is firmed up. 
(Para 10.1) 
Even though the responsibility of collection of tol l dues from TNSTC buses was of the 
concessionaire, NHAI accepted the claim of the conc essionaire, amounting to `28.92 
crore, which was not permissible as per the article  22.8 of the Concession Agreement. 
Also failure of the NHAI to maintain the stretch of  the project highway resulted in a 
Public Interest Litigation and subsequent interim o rder of Hon’ble High Court of Madras 
for reducing the toll rates by half. This has resulted in revenue loss of `20.38 crore.  
(Para 11.1) 
 
NTPC Limited awarded (February 2017) work of External Coal Handling Plant for North 
Karanpura Super Thermal Power Project to MECON. Del ay in commencement of work 
by MECON Limited and inability to ensure submission  of Bank Guarantee by its foreign 
associate, to execute External Coal Handling Plant Project awarded by NTPC, resulted in 
termination of contract and encashment of BG by NTP C and loss of `42.26 crore to 
MECON.  
(Para 13.1)   
RINL had a Thermal Power Plant (TPP) with five Turb o Generators (TGs) and Auxiliary 
Power Generating Units with an overall installed ca pacity 542.48 MW as of 31 March 
2019. During audit of Energy Management in RINL, it was observed that: 
• Plant Load Factor achieved by the Main TPP was less  than the norm prescribed 
by CERC. Even assuming the operation of TPP at PLF of 80 per cent , savings to 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xvii 
the extent of `85.48 crore would have accrued to the Company towards the cost of 
power imported from APEPDCL.   
• RINL curtailed TPP generation due to shortage of bo iler coal and blended high 
cost Medium Coking Coal with boiler coal without envisaging for alternate source 
of procurement of boiler coal leading to increased cost of power generation. 
Savings to the extent of `145.21 crore were lost by the Company due to improp er 
blending of MCC with indigenous boiler coal.  
• The utilisation of Auxiliary Power Generation units was poor due to faulty design/ 
insufficient heat recovery from Sinter Machine/ ins ufficient top gas pressure 
resulting in shortfall in generation of power with consequential purchase of power 
from APEPDCL.  
• Auxiliary Power Consumption, beyond the norms presc ribed by CERC, resulted 
in avoidable expenditure of `230.56 crore.  
• The excess consumption of steam during 2014-15 to 2 018-19, beyond the 
stipulated norms, accounted for 29.91 lakh tons of steam which when converted to 
monetary terms valued `382.48 crore.  
(Para 13.2) 
Audit examined records of all captive mines of SAIL  for the period 2014-19 to assess the 
management of captive mines and compliance with safety and environmental laws. It was 
noted that SAIL did not apply technical due diligen ce and conduct techno-commercial 
viability study to assess viability before the allo tment of Parbatpur and Sitanala Coal 
Blocks, which had to be surrendered subsequently. T he amount spent on development of 
these coal mines thus became infructuous. Productio n lower than the planned levels at 
Dalli, Rajhara and Barsua mines, led to transfer of  iron ore from distantly located mines 
by BSP and RSP with extra expenditure on freight differential. At Barsua mines, the non-
compliance of Forest Conservation Act, 1980, on acc ount of use of forest land for non-
forest purpose, without approval led to payment of penal NPV and CA. Non-compliance 
of Odisha Minerals Rule, 2007 by Bolani mines led t o additional expenditure on 
differential royalty. Additional royalty payments were made at Manoharpur mine, as Iron 
ore was graded at the highest grade and at Nandini mines on rejected limestone chips that 
were not suitable for iron making. Government of Od isha and Government of Jharkhand 
demanded compensation on account of mining beyond q uantity permitted under 
Environmental Clearance/ Consent to operate by the Iron ore and Limestone mines under 
Raw Material Division. Delay in surrender of excess  Railway land at Bolani at 
Meghahatuburu mines led to avoidable expenditure. T here was 41 per cent shortfall in 
statutory manpower against the requirement in mines. 
(Para 13.3) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
xviii 
Audit examined records relating to safety policy an d environment management of SAIL 
for the period 2014-19 to assess the compliance to stipulated Act/ Rules/ Regulations and 
Standard Operating Practices (SOP) and whether soci al responsibilities related to 
environmental and pollution control, safety standar ds and application of the best 
industrial practices was followed. It was noted tha t SAIL Safety Organisation did not 
develop any plan or frame timeline to implement its  recommendations. Out of 686 
recommendations, 258 were yet to be complied. Ruptu re in pipelines in Pump House at 
BSP led to fall in water pressure and Blast Furnace  Gas spread into Pump House causing 
death of six persons. Laxity in taking safety measu res and unsafe practice of doing 
De-Blanking job of CO Gas Line on charged pipelines  caused accident at BSP where 14 
people died. There were less number of Safety Officers posted in plants than the statutory 
requirement. Non-disposal of fly ash and slag dump and non-setting up of sewage 
treatment plant led to delay in issue of EC in abse nce of which work for Sinter Plant and 
SMS-I packages at BSL was stopped. CO 2 emission in SAIL was higher than 
international standards as well as TATA Steel. Dela y in completion of air pollution 
control system led to flaring up of gases in the en vironment. Average Specific Energy 
Consumption in SAIL was more than the world average as well as Tata Steel and RINL. 
(Para 13.4) 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
1 
CHAPTER I: MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
1.1 Non-compliance of DPE Guidelines on payment of Performance Related Pay 
As per DPE guidelines, profits from core business a ctivities of the CPSEs only were to 
be considered for distribution of PRP to employees but Rashtriya Chemicals and 
Fertilizers Limited considered income from non-core  activities also, for distributing 
PRP. 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE), Ministry of  Heavy Industries and Public 
Enterprises, while approving (26 November 2008) the  pay revision of Board level executives 
and non-unionized supervisors of Central Public Sec tors Enterprises (CPSEs), laid down 
certain conditions regarding payment of Performance  Related Pay (PRP). The CPSEs were 
required to follow a ‘Bell Curve’ approach in gradi ng the officers so that not more than 10 to 
15 per cent  are graded outstanding and 10 per cent  are to be graded below par who are not to 
be paid any PRP 1. Further, DPE clarified 2 that PRP should be distributed based on profits 
accruing only from core business activities of the CPSEs.  
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (Compan y) paid an amount of `52.53 crore as 
PRP to its executives for the years 2013-14 to 2017-18. 
Audit observed that: 
• Manufacturing and marketing of fertilizers and chem icals is the main objective of the 
Company as per its Memorandum of Association and th e same is disclosed as the core 
business of the Company in its Annual Report.  Howe ver, while computing PRP for the 
period from 2013-14 to 2017-18, the Company had inc luded income from rent received 
(
`126.47 crore), interest income ( `38.28 crore), dividend income ( `0.78 crore), profit on sale 
of fixed assets ( `2.44 crore), Government grant ( `0.90 crore) and miscellaneous income 3 
(`25 crore) aggregating to `193.87 crore, though these are income earned from n on-core 
activities.  Inclusion of income from such non-core  activities has resulted in excess payment 
of PRP of `5.05 crore. 
• Though clarification regarding inclusion of only pr ofits from core business activities 
for the purpose of PRP has been issued by DPE on th ree occasions since 2010, Board of 
Directors of the Company took note of the clarifica tion only while approving the PRP for 
2017-18.  For the remaining years, the aspect regar ding core activity was not deliberated, 
while finalising the payment of PRP.  Even for 2017 -18, only one item viz. income from 
                                                           
1   As per DPE clarification dated 6 July 2011 
2  02 November 2010, 18 September 2013 and 02 Septem ber 2014 
3   Miscellaneous Income-Security Deposit/ Earnest M oney Deposit recovered - `` ``    13.23 crore; Cash 
discount on early payment of Electricity bills - `` ``    11.55 crore; Horticulture income on account of sale  of 
fruits/ coconuts/ woods collected from factory premises - `` ``    0.22 crore 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
2 
TDR 4 was reduced from the Profit before Tax for calculation of PRP, though there were other 
heads of income, which were clearly not from core activities, as brought out in para above.   
• The Company did not comply with the DPE guidelines regarding non-payment of 
PRP to ‘below par’ employees (bottom 10 per cent  of the Bell curve) and these employees 
were paid PRP amounting to `2.58 crore.    
Management replied (12 November 2019) that:  
• Certain incomes which have accrued to the Company a re offshoots to the business 
activities such as rent received, recoveries made, interest, dividend etc.  Also, these are 
required to be reported separately under ‘Other inc ome’ as mandated by Accounting 
Standards and cannot be netted out of the total expenditure.  
• Government of India (GoI) is granting subsidy on ur ea based on cost data which 
includes fixed cost, net of other income.  Accordin gly, such income is part of the core 
business activities of the Company. 
• Profitability performance of a CPSE is being monito red by the Government at an 
overall level as reported in financial statements and not restricted to core activity only. 
The above reply is to be viewed against the following facts: 
• DPE has emphasised that only core activities are to  be considered for the purpose of 
PRP and, hence, there is no provision for including offshoot activities or non-core activities.   
• The basis adopted by GoI for computing urea subsidy  cannot be a criterion for 
computing PRP.  While subsidy is granted as a polic y by Government, PRP is a part of 
employee benefits.  
• Though performance of CPSEs is evaluated at an over all level, separate guidelines 
have been laid down by DPE for payment of PRP, focussing on core activities.   
Thus, failure of the Company in complying with DPE guidelines has resulted in excess 
payment of PRP of `5.05 crore to its employees. It is recommended that  irregular payment 
made to ineligible employees may be recovered.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
                                                           
4   TDR means transferable development rights which are obtained in the form of certificates which the 
owner can subsequently use or can trade it in the market 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
3 
CHAPTER II: MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
 
 
 
 
Airports Authority of India 
 
2.1 Payment of Performance Related Pay due to non-a dherence of conditions of ‘Bell 
Curve Approach’  
 
Due to non-adherence to the conditions of ‘Bell Cur ve Approach’ of DPE guidelines, 
the Airports Authority of India made an irregular p ayment of `` ``38.78 crore for the 
years 2010-11 to 2016-17 to ineligible employees.  
DPE vide its OM dated 26 November 2008, stipulated the admissibility, quantum and 
procedure for determination of variable pay/ performance related pay (PRP) to executives and 
non-unionised supervisors of Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs).  As per the OM, the 
payment of PRP would be directly linked to the prof its of CPSE and performance of 
executives for which each CPSE was required to deve lop a robust and transparent 
Performance Management System (PMS).  Further, the CPSE would adopt ‘Bell Curve 
Approach’ in grading the officers so that not more than 10 per cent  to 15 per cent  executives 
are ‘Outstanding/ Excellent’.  Similarly, 10 per cent  of executives would be graded as ‘Below 
Par’.  In this regard, DPE vide its OM dated 06 Jul y 2011 clarified that ‘Bell Curve 
Approach’ should be followed strictly and it was to  be ensured that 10 per cent  of the 
executives and non-unionised supervisors in a CPSE should be graded as ‘Below Par’ and not 
paid any PRP.   
Airports Authority of India (AAI) approved the paym ent of PRP for the years 2010-11 to 
2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 on 27 October 2016, 16  October 2017 and 23 October 2018, 
respectively.  The methodology adopted by AAI for t he payment of PRP was not in 
conformity with the aforesaid DPE guidelines since the last 10 per cent  should not have 
received any PRP.  However, AAI modified the gradin g of last 10 per cent  of ‘Below par’ 
category of employees in three sub-categories, i.e. , Very Good, Good and Below Good and 
paid the PRP benefits at the rate of 60 per cent , 30 per cent  and NIL respectively. Thus, only 
limited number of employees, who were sub-categoris ed as below good, did not receive PRP 
instead of all the employees under the last 10 per cent ‘Below par’ category.  
As a result of non-adherence to the condition of ‘B ell Curve Approach’, payment of PRP 
amounting to 
`38.78 crore was made for the years 2010-11 to 2016- 17 1 to ineligible 
employees, which was in violation of DPE guidelines. 
Management replied (February 2020) that: 
• Decision was taken by Manpower Advisory Board in or der to keep up the moral of 
the executives and also to have harmonious relation  in the organisation. Further, during the 
process of normalisation of PMS, in some cases the executives who had PMS grade as ‘Very 
                                                           
1   Bell Curve Approach was discontinued by DPE and new PRP model was effective from financial year 
2017-18  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
4 
Good’ were falling in 10 per cent  of the lowest end of the bell curve.  Therefore, t he sub-
categorisation of Very Good, Good and Below Good fo r such employees within 10 per cent  
category was proposed in line of other CPSEs, like, ONGC, NTPC, BHEL, MMTC, etc.   
• Also, DPE vide its guidelines on pay revision with effect from 1 January 2017 
decided to discontinue the forced rating of 10 per cent  as below par/ poor performer.   
• There has been no financial burden as PRP paid during the period 2010-11 to 2016-17 
viz.-a-viz. availability of funds for the said peri od and eligibility for PRP was in consonance 
with the DPE guidelines.  
Reply of Management is not acceptable in view of the following:  
• As DPE specifically clarified vide its OM dated 06 July 2011 that ‘Bell Curve 
Approach’ was to be followed strictly and the CPSE was to ensure that 10 per cent  of the 
executives and non-unionised supervisors in a CPSE were to be graded as ‘Below Par’ and 
not paid any PRP.  
• The contention of Management that other CPSEs were following the same practice 
cannot be a justification for making irregular paym ent in violation of DPE guidelines.  In 
fact, the issue relating to non-adherence to the co nditions of ‘Bell Curve Approach’ of DPE 
guidelines was highlighted in CAG Compliance Audit Report No 13 of 2014, 21 of 2015 and 
11 of 2018 etc.  in respect of CPSEs like MECON, IOCL and ONGC etc. 
• The focus of the draft para is on unjustified payme nt of PRP to ineligible 10 per cent  
executives with ‘Below Par’ rating which was in con travention of DPE guidelines.  As such 
the contention of Management that there was no fina ncial burden does not hold good. 
Additionally, Audit observation is limited to period prior to 1 January 2017 . 
Thus, as a result of non-adherence of condition of ‘Bell Curve Approach’ issued by DPE in 
relation to payment of PRP, AAI had made an irregul ar payment of `38.78 crore 2.  It is 
recommended that irregular payment made to ineligible employees may be recovered.   
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
2.2  Short recovery of liquidated damages from a co ntractor  
 
Undue favour to contractor by Airport Authority of India, Ranchi due to short 
recovery of liquidated damages amounting to `` ``9.53 crore.  
AAI Ranchi awarded (21 January 2009) the work of construction of New In tegrated 
Passenger Terminal Building (NIPTB) at Birsa Munda Airport, Ranchi to M/s Ahluwalia 
Contracts (India) Limited (ACIL) at the contract pr ice of `109.95 crore. The agreement was 
entered into between AAI and ACIL on 2 February 200 9 with the stipulated date of 
completion being 30 January 2010.  As per clause 32  of the agreement, in case of delay in 
completion of work, liquidated damages (LD) was to be levied at the rate of 0.5 per cent  of 
                                                           
2  2010-11 – `` ``    3.03 crore; 2011-12 – `` ``    2.57 crore; 2012-13 – `` ``    2.71 crore; 2013-14 – `` ``    5.73 crore; 2014-15 – 
`` ``    5.27 crore; 2015-16 – `` ``    7.16 crore; and 2016-17 – `` ``    12.31 crore  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
5 
the contract value per week of delay subject to a m aximum of 10 per cent  of the contract 
value. 
The contractor could not complete the work and AAI issued show cause notice to the 
contractor in December 2010, i.e. 10 months after t he stipulated completion.  The work was 
finally completed on 21 June 2013 after a delay of 1,238 days.  ACIL requested (October 
2015) for grant of extension of time (EoT) up to 21  June 2013 without levy of LD, on the 
plea that AAI had not suffered any loss and the del ay was caused by hindrances which were 
beyond their control.  AAI, however, decided (Novem ber 2015) to grant EoT for 826 days 
(31 January 2010 to 5 May 2012) as justified period  of hindrance without levy of LD and to 
levy compensation of `1.46 crore from the contractor for unjustified peri od of hindrances of 
412 days (6 May 2012 to 21 June 2013). ACIL dispute d the deduction of LD and matter was 
referred to Dispute Resolution Board (DRB) constitu ted (30 August 2016) by AAI. DRB 
recommended (July 2017) that EoT case may be recons idered by AAI. AAI reanalysed the 
EoT and recommended (September 2018) no change in the earlier approved EoT. 
Audit observed that as per the provisions of clause  32 of the contract, since ACIL was 
responsible for delay of more than 58 weeks (412 da ys) in completion of work, an amount of 
`10.99 crore (10 per cent  of the contract value of `109.95 crore) was recoverable as LD from 
the contractor. AAI however recovered only `1.46 crore calculated on the basis of a technical 
circular issued by it (May 2013) for calculating co st implications in cases of EoT with 
unjustified delay. Thus, there was a short recovery of `9.53 crore from the contractor. 
Management replied (November 2019) that the compete nt authority for grant of EoT, as per 
the contract agreement was Member (Planning) and th e same authority issued the Technical 
circular to have uniformity for working out cost im plications/ losses in such cases.  The 
circular was also incorporated in the Works Manual.  It, therefore, stated that the loss of 
`1.46 crore, for unjustified period was worked out i n line with provision of the Contract 
Agreement, Technical Circular in-vogue and AAI Work s Manual and there was neither short 
recovery of LD nor undue favour to the contractor.  Management further replied that 
Arbitration on the matter where one of the claims i s for refund of `1.46 crore is going on 
between ACIL and AAI. 
Reply of Management is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• Clause 32 of the contract clearly stipulated that t he contractor was liable to pay LD as 
a percentage of the value of the contract.  The ter ms of contract were agreed to by both the 
parties and, therefore, were binding on the contrac tor.  The clause did not contain any 
reference to the Works Manual of AAI and thus, prov isions thereto were not to be applied 
unless in the event of need for clarification of any matter.  
• Further, though the competent authority for grant o f EoT as per the contract 
agreement and that who approved the Technical Circu lar was the same, however, undue 
benefit was extended to the contractor by recoverin g a lower amount of LD from the 
contractor than that agreed as per the agreement.  Moreover, the technical circular quoted in 
the reply was issued in May 2013 much later than th e date of entering into contract with 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
6 
ACIL in February 2009, and, therefore, cannot autom atically override the terms of an 
agreement. 
• The arbitration referred to in Management’s reply w as on certain claims of the 
contractor including claim for refund of 
`1.46 crore recovered as LD.  The fact that the 
matter is under arbitration does not undermine the right of AAI to recover LD as per terms of 
the agreement.  
Thus, the short recovery of LD amount of `9.53 crore by AAI, Ranchi for delays attributable 
to a contractor in completion of construction of NI PTB at Birsa Munda Airport, Ranchi was 
against the provisions of the contract and constitu ted an undue favour by AAI to the 
contractor. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
Air India Limited 
2.3 Irregular absorption by Air India Limited towar ds ground handling services 
charged by Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited  
Air India SATS Airport Services Private Limited (AISATS), a joint venture company 
of Air India Limited (AIL) is providing Ground Hand ling (GH) services to 
international and domestic airlines including Airli ne Allied Services Limited (AASL), 
a subsidiary of AIL, at Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad , Trivandrum and Mangalore.  
AIL borne the differential amount of GH charges to the tune of `` ``44.88 crore for the 
services availed by AASL despite the fact that the revised lower rate was approved by 
Chairman, AISATS. 
Section 177 of Indian Companies Act, 2013 stipulates constitution of Audit Committee by the 
Board of Directors of every listed company and such  other class or classes of companies, as 
may be prescribed.  As per sub-section 177(4) of th e Act, every Audit Committee shall act in 
accordance with the terms of reference specified in writing by the Board and specified certain 
items to be included in the terms of reference.  In  compliance with the requirement of Act, 
AIL constituted an Audit Committee and the Board of  Directors approved its terms of 
reference, which inter-alia,  included approval or any subsequent modification o f transactions 
of the company with related parties.   
AISATS, a joint venture company of Air India Limite d (AIL), incorporated in April 2010, is 
providing GH services to international and domestic  airlines at Delhi, Bangalore, Hyderabad, 
Trivandrum and Mangalore stations.  
AISATS is also providing GH services to AASL, a ful ly owned subsidiary of AIL, at these 
five stations.  The GH rate per flight charged by A ISATS for AASL flights for the period 
2011-2018, ranged between `9,258 and  `34,000.  AASL found these rates very high and 
requested (February 2016) Chairman, AISATS for redu ction of GH rate to `5,000 per flight 
as were charged by AIL in the past and charged by A ir India Air Transport Services Limited 
(AIATSL), another subsidiary of AIL providing GH se rvices, at smaller stations. Chairman, 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
7 
AISATS approved (February 2016) the revised GH rate  to be charged to AASL by AISATS 
at `5,000 per flight departure. 
Audit noted that though the request of AASL for rev ised lower rate was accepted by 
Chairman, AISATS, the difference between revised GH  rate and earlier GH rate for the 
services availed by AASL during the period 2011-12 to 2017-18 (till December 2017), was 
charged to AIL in 2017-18 by AISATS.  It was also n oted that the GH services to AASL 
were charged at higher rates during the years 2016- 17 and 2017-18, period subsequent to the 
approval by Chairman, AISATS for lower rates.  Audi t observed that AIL had borne the net 
impact of the revised rates, amounting `44.88 crore for the period 2011-12 to 2017-18 (till  
December 2017) for GH services not availed by AIL.  This included the differential charges 
of `23.29 crore for the years 2016-17 and 2017-18, the period subsequent to the approval of 
Chairman, AISATS for applying lower rates for groun d handling services to AASL.  Audit 
further noted that the decision to absorb the diffe rential amounting to `44.88 crore was taken 
by Air India management.  As per the terms of refer ence to the Audit Committee duly 
approved by Air India Board, approval of Audit Comm ittee is required for approval or any 
subsequent modification of transactions of the comp any with related parties, which was not 
complied with.    
While accepting that AIL had absorbed the different ial charges arising out of revised GH 
rate, Management replied (25 September 2019) that: 
• In view of the request made by AASL on 5 February 2 016, the then CMD conveyed 
his approval for Alliance Air to be billed based on  rate of 
`5,000 per flight with retrospect 
effect. 
• However, since AISATS had incurred all these expens es, the differential arising out 
of the aforesaid approval had to essentially be abs orbed by AIL as these costs would in any 
case be attributable to AIL in the absence of AASL flights. 
Reply of management is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• AIL had borne the cost of GH services which were no t availed by it. Moreover, the 
GH rate of `5,000 per flight was approved by Chairman, AISATS.  The amount includes 
differential charges of `23.29 crore for the period subsequent to the approv al by Chairman, 
AISATS.  Further, the differential charges absorbed  by AIL do not have approval of Audit 
Committee of AIL as required under Section 177(4) of the Companies Act, 2013. 
• The contention of Management that the differential arising out of the approval had to 
be absorbed by AIL does not hold good since both AA SL and AIL are two different entities 
and Alliance Air flights are fully operational. 
Thus, AIL gave undue favour to AISATS by absorbing `44.88 crore, without proper 
authorisation, towards differential GH charges for services not availed by it from AISATS. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in October 2019; their response was awaited (June 2020). 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
8 
2.4 Undue favour to M/s Ballarpur Industries Limite d by withdrawal of recovery 
proceedings pending final payment of dues 
M/s Ballarpur Industries Limited failed to pay outs tanding rent for the premises 
occupied in Air India Building.  At the request of Air India, Collector’s office started 
recovery proceedings and initiated attachment of pr ivate property of the tenant.  
However, Air India withdrew the recovery proceeding s initiated by the Collector’s 
office without any out of court settlement agreemen t and pending final payment of 
dues thereby granting undue favour to the tenant.  An amount of `` ``7.77 crore is still 
outstanding, realisation of which is doubtful.  
M/s Ballarpur Industries Limited (the tenant) had b een occupying an area admeasuring 
2,632.39 sq. ft in Air India Building at Nariman Po int, Mumbai.  The Leave and License 
Agreement of the tenant was terminated in February 1995 and tenant was asked to hand over 
vacant possession of the premises on or before 31 M arch 1995.  Since the tenant failed to 
vacate the premises as per termination notice, they  were treated as unauthorised occupants 
effective from 1 April 1995. 
The Estate Officer appointed in accordance with the  Public Premises Act passed an eviction 
order on 20 May 1996.  The tenant filed an appeal i n the City Civil Court, Mumbai against 
eviction order, which was dismissed in June 2000.  Further, the tenant preferred an appeal in 
Bombay High Court, which was also rejected in Decem ber 2000. The tenant vacated the 
premises on 30 June 2001.  The Estate Officer condu cted damage proceedings and passed an 
order (September, 2008) awarding damages/ mesne pro fits @ 
`300 per sq. ft. per month for 
the period from 1 April 1995 till 30 June 2001 ( `5.38 crore) along with simple interest @12 
per cent  p.a. for the period from 01 April 1995 to 31 March  2008 ( `6.36 crore) totaling to 
`11.74 crore and thereafter till the date of payment. 
The tenant preferred an appeal in the City Civil Co urt against the mesne profits and the Court 
granted (August 2010) mesne profits @ `175 per sq.ft. from April 1995 to June 2001 with 
interest @12  per cent  p.a. till realisation.  The tenant preferred appea l in Division Bench, 
Bombay High Court, which refused (July 2011) to grant interim relief in the matter. 
The Estate Officer requested (March/ June 2014) the  Collector’s office, Mumbai for recovery 
of dues to the Company.  The Collector’s office ser ved (July 2014) notice of demand to the 
tenant.  The tenant filed (August 2014) an application in Bombay High Court for setting aside 
Collector’s attachment notice.  The tenant also fil ed an affidavit/ Undertaking to the effect 
that they shall not alienate their premises (flat admeasuring 1720 sq.ft. situated at Prabhadevi, 
Mumbai valued at more than `10 crore) pending the hearing and final disposal of  writ 
petition.  The appeal was rejected (September 2014) and the Court granted time till the end of 
October 2014 to effect payment which was further ex tended till 9 January 2015.  The tenant 
made an attempt to safeguard their interest by fili ng a Special Leave Petition in Supreme 
Court, which was dismissed on 27 January 2015.  The  tenant thereafter, deposited (March 
2015) `1.25 crore with the Collector’s office, Mumbai. 
Air India, however requested (October 2015) the Col lector’s office not to pursue recovery 
proceedings/ attachment against the tenant and with drew revenue recovery certificate issued 
in June 2014 for recovery of the remaining amount stating that the matter was being amicably 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
9 
settled.  Accordingly, Collector’s office withdrew the recovery proceedings.  However, the 
tenant did not settle the dues except one-time remittance of `1.50 crore in May 2016. 
Audit observed that though Bombay High Court refuse d (July 2011) to grant interim relief/ 
stay in the matter, Air India initiated recovery pr oceedings with the Collector’s office only in 
March 2014, after a delay of three years.  Air India also erred by intimating Collector’s office 
to stop recovery proceedings without entering into any out of court settlement agreement with 
the tenant and when the private property of the ten ant had already been sealed by Collector’s 
office. 
Management replied (November 2018) that: 
• The decision to stop recovery proceedings and withd raw the notice given to the 
Collector’s office was taken based on an e-mail (dated 05 August 2015) of the tenant wherein 
it was requested to accept their proposal of 
`175 per sq. ft. with six per cent  simple interest 
and withdrawal of the notice issued to the Tehsildar. 
• This matter was put up to the Board at its 70 th  Meeting held on 23 November 2015 
and the Board noted the same.  Earlier, the Board i n its 57 th  meeting held on 4 February 2014 
had directed Air India to pursue out of court settl ement in respect of disputes with evicted 
tenants. 
• Out of court settlement appears to have been pursue d with Ballarpur Industries in the 
above circumstances. 
Management reply is not acceptable in view of the following facts: 
• The tenant had not deposited the pending dues with the Company. Hence decision to 
stop recovery proceedings based on an email request  was against the financial interest of Air 
India. 
• Air India brought the tenant’s proposal for out of court settlement to the notice of the 
Board in its meeting held on 23 November 2015.  How ever, the Board was not informed 
about Air India’s decision to stop recovery proceedings.  Moreover, the Management directed 
the Collector’s office not to pursue recovery proce edings against the tenant in October 2015.  
Thus, Management took the decision before Board was  apprised of the matter relating to out 
of court settlement. 
• Approval of the competent authority to direct the C ollector’s office stopping recovery 
proceedings was neither found on record nor clarified by the Company.   
Thus, Air India could not recover the remaining due s from the tenant amounting to 
`7.77 
crore (December 2019), realisation of which is doub tful.  Air India’s decision to withdraw 
recovery/ attachment proceedings without receiving outstanding dues from the tenant was not 
in the best financial interest of the company and tantamount to undue favour to the tenant. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020). 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
10  
CHAPTER III: MINISTRY OF COAL 
 
 
 
 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited  
3.1  Excess payment to the contractor under mining contract 
 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited, under mining contract,  allowed excess payment to a 
contractor of `` ``45.17 crore due to difference between the power cos t included in the 
mining fees as per the contractual terms and the am ount actually recovered from the 
contractor based on actual consumption of power, du ring the period from 
January 2013 to December 2018. 
 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL), a subsidiary of Coal India Limited, is engaged in the 
mining activities for production of coal.  MCL cons tituted (February 2008) a committee to 
estimate the rate of mining fees payable to success ful bidders for outsourcing the work 
relating to removal, extraction and transportation of overburden and coal and other associated 
activities in respect of Bhubaneswari opencast proj ect of Jagannath Area.  The Committee 
firmed up (May 2008) 
`132.97 per tonne as the estimated cost of the work,  considering 
different components of cost ( viz ., plant & machinery spares, petrol, oil & lubrican ts, labour, 
explosive and power) involved in the work.  
MCL issued (July 2010) work order to M/s. Essel Min ing & Industries Limited and 
Consortium (Contractor), being L 
1 bidder to the tender floated (December 2008) for t he 
work, involving mining fees of `128.70 per tonne.  The contract involved removal of  193.40 
million cubic metre of overburden and extraction of  269.50 million tonne of coal over a 
period of 15 years (2011-12 to 2025-26).  The value of the contract was `3,468.47 crore. 
Audit observed that in the past, power component wa s not included in the mining fees in the 
mining contracts entered by the MCL.  Power was pro vided to the contractor by MCL and its 
payment was recovered on actual consumption basis.  However, in the instant contract, power 
component was included in the mining fees.  MCL con tinued to settle the electricity bills 
raised by Central Electricity Supply Utility of Odi sha (CESUO) for the power consumed by 
the contractor and eventually recovered it from the  contractor.  Thus, by inclusion of power 
as component in mining fees, there was huge differe nce between the amount of power 
component paid to the contractor and the amount rec overed from the contractor based on 
actual consumption of power.  Hence, during the per iod from January 2013 to December 
2018, against `53.39 crore paid to the contractor for power cost c omponent as part of the 
mining fees, MCL recovered only `8.22 crore from the mining fees for actual power 
consumption, and thus, `45.17 crore 1 (Annexure-I) was paid in excess to the contractor. 
                                                           
1  Coal extracted during the period from December 20 11 to December 2012 was not taken into account due 
to non-availability of separate figures for power cost component as included in mining fees  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
11 
Management stated (September 2019) that, in absence  of electrical equipment for 
transportation of coal through two streams of belt conveyor due to various issues viz. land, 
formation of benches, etc; the contractor had to in cur costs on the use of diesel-operated 
equipment in lieu of electrically operated conveyor  belt.  The extra expenditure incurred by 
the contractor for use of diesel-operated equipment  in place of electrically operated 
equipment was not reimbursed to the contractor. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable, as t he contractor was required to deliver coal 
at a mutually agreed place/ stockyard irrespective of eventualities without extra cost.  Further, 
due to injudicious provisions under the contract, a ctual amount recovered from the contractor 
for consumption of power was significantly less tha n the amount paid to the contractor for 
power component under mining fees.  The contractor should not have been allowed to derive 
extra benefit under the contract. 
Ministry in its reply (May 2020) while endorsing views of the Management further stated that 
in the tender, the lowest cost offered on composite  basis was accepted by the tender 
committee.  The analysis on single input cost parameter i.e. power component of the estimate, 
excluding all other input cost parameters of the es timate is not correct as the contractor may 
be using different set of input resources. 
The reply of the Ministry is not specific to audit observation as selection of contractor 
quoting lowest cost has not been challenged.  Since  as per the contractual provisions, MCL is 
responsible for arrangement of power including its payment on actual basis, inclusion of 
power cost component in the mining fees was not pru dent.  It only resulted in significant 
difference between the amount of power cost include d in the mining fees and the amount 
actually recovered from the contractor based on act ual consumption of power.  The company 
should review the cost components to be included in  the mining fees so that the contractor 
should not derive any extra benefit under the contract. 
Thus, injudicious provisions under the mining contr act resulted in the excess payment to 
contractor to the tune of 
`45.17 crore. 
NLC India Limited 
3.2 Avoidable expenditure on excavation outsourcing  in South West Area of Mine II 
 
Outsourcing contract for lignite excavation in Sout h West Area of Mine II without 
properly assessing the requirement resulted in avoidable expenditure of `` ``28.74 crore. 
The lignite requirement for two Thermal Power Stati ons (TPSs) of NLC India Limited 
(Company) namely TPS-II and TPS-II Expansion was me t from two mines viz. Mine-II and 
Mine-II Expansion.  As per the Annual Action Plan ( AAP) prepared by both the TPSs, the 
total lignite requirement for the year 2015-16 was 13.24 MT.  The Mine II & Expansion 
Division (MIIED) estimated 13.3 Million Tonne (MT) of lignite production from both the 
mines for the said year.  Further, the opening stoc k of lignite available at Mine II was  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
12  
0.83 MT.  As such, the total estimated quantity of lignite available for operating both TPSs 
during 2015-16 was 14.13 MT. 
During March 2015, MIIED estimated that the lignite  requirement would be 14.7 MT and 
proposed to outsource lignite excavation in South-W est area of the Mine II to meet the 
shortfall.  However, the Industrial Engineering (IE ) wing of the Company rejected (July 
2015) the said proposal stating that the estimated requirement of both the TPSs would only be 
13.91 MT and not 14.7 MT as projected by MIIED.  IE  wing also suggested that the shortfall 
could be met out using departmental machinery instead of outsourcing. 
MIIED re-submitted (29 July 2015) the outsourcing p roposal requiring the same quantity and 
obtained approval from the Director (Mines) on 08 S eptember 2015 as existing equipment 
were to be diverted to other mines.  Accordingly, t he Company invited open tender (October 
2015) and awarded (December 2015) the outsourcing c ontract to M/s Mahalakshmi 
Infracontract Private Limited at a cost of 
`26.29 crore for excavation of 1.5 MT lignite at the  
South-West Area of Mine II and its transportation t o the dump sites.   The contract was 
completed in March 2017 with an actual expenditure of `28.74 crore. 
Audit observed that for the year 2015-16, opening s tock of lignite (0.83 MT), actual quantity 
of lignite excavated from Mine II (12.15 MT) and tr ansported from Mine IA (0.9 MT 2) was 
summed up to 13.88 MT which was sufficient to meet the requirement (13.24 MT as per 
AAP) of lignite of both the TPSs.  It was noticed t hat the actual quantity of lignite used by 
these two TPSs during 2015-16 was 12.52 MT only.  F urther, the lignite available through 
own excavation and transportation from Mine IA was sufficient to meet the requirement of 
both TPSs for the year 3 2016-17 also.  Thus, adequate quantities of lignit e were available to 
operate both the TPSs without going into for excava tion outsourcing.  Despite knowing the 
above facts, outsourcing contract for lignite excav ation was entered into, which was 
avoidable. Further, the quantity excavated through outsourcing contract resulted in 
overstocking of inventory and ultimately deterioration in the quality of lignite. 
Management replied (December 2018) that non-availab ility of departmental machines had 
impact on lignite exposure, performance of some of the departmental machines got 
deteriorated and to avoid further investment, outso urcing was initiated.  Further, the lignite 
production at Mine IA had to be maintained to achie ve the production targets as the lesser 
production may lead to increase in the cost.  Also,  the available lignite stock at Mine IA had 
to be utilised in other Mines.  Further, award of o utsourcing contract generated substantial 
revenue which resulted in increase in the profit of Mine II. 
Reply of Management is not acceptable as the requir ed production could be achieved with 
departmental machines.  The audit observation was a bout avoidable outsourcing in respect of 
Mine II and not about the production in Mine IA.  H owever, in case, the Company was 
required to maintain the lignite production at Mine  IA, it should have considered the targets 
                                                           
2   In September 2015, the Company decided to award a contract to transport 0.7 MT of lignite from Mine  
IA to Mine II which was renewed in subsequent year.  Another contract was awarded in July 2015 for 
transportation of 0.2 MT of lignite from Mine IA to Mine II 
3  2016-17- Lignite requirement as per AAP – 13.87 M T; Lignite actually used – 13.63 MT, Lignite 
available- 14.93 MT 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
13 
and requirements of lignite across the Company and could have avoided outsourcing 
excavation of lignite in another mine.  Reply on re venue generation and increase in profit, is 
also not acceptable, as it is the indicative positi on of Mine II only.  Excess production of 
lignite through outsourcing, in Mine-II resulted in better financial highlights of Mine-II but at 
the cost of natural resources. Besides this, longer period of storage resulted in deterioration in 
the quality of lignite as recorded in internal note  of the Company.  Natural resources need to 
be exploited on the basis of the need of the time a nd utilisation capacity of TPSs.  Also, 
Ministry of Coal in its ‘Guidelines on Fixation of Transfer Price for NLC Mines’, stipulates 
that for calculation of Working Capital, the invent ory of lignite in mines be restricted to 20 
days’ production to meet the exigency requirements.   This has also been overlooked by the 
Company.  
Thus, the total quantity available was adequate to meet lignite requirement of both the TPSs 
during 2015-16 and 2016-17.  Therefore, outsourcing  excavation contract was inappropriate 
and unjustified.  This resulted in expenditure of `28.74 crore which was avoidable. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020). 
NLC Tamil Nadu Power Limited 
 
3.3 Avoidable payment of demurrage charges 
Avoidable payment of demurrage charges of `` ``8.97 crore to M/s SICAL Logistic 
Limited in contravention of agreement.     
 
NLC Tamil Nadu Power Limited (NTPL), a subsidiary o f NLC India Limited commissioned 
(June 2015 and August 2015) two units of coal based  500 MW power plant at Tuticorin, 
Tamil Nadu.  NTPL decided to meet fuel requirement of the power plants through indigenous 
and imported coal.  Accordingly, NTPL signed (July 2013) an agreement with M/s SICAL 
Logistic Limited (SICAL) for transportation of indi genous coal from Bhubaneshwari Coal 
Mines, Orissa to Tuticorin Port (Port) which was valid upto October 2018.  
Clause 2.30 of the agreement stipulated that SICAL shall be responsible for delivery of 
indigenous coal at Port.  Further, clause 2.43 of t he agreement envisaged that no claim for 
any damage/ demurrage/ detention/ idle charges for transportation/ equipment, labour and 
other enabling facilities organised by the contract or in connection with stevedoring, handling 
and transportation operation shall be payable to th e contractor under any circumstances 
whatsoever.  As per terms of the agreement (Clause 8.1), SICAL had to prepare quarter-wise 
scheduled loading programme in advance on behalf of  NTPL. Further, NTPL had option to 
revise the schedule by prior intimation of 15 days.  
Audit observed that non-preparation of scheduled pr ogramme by SICAL and supply of 
excess quantity of coal by the other contractors im porting coal, against the schedule, resulted 
in bunching of vessels at Port and consequent pre-b erthing of vessels during December 2016 
to February 2017.  SICAL paid the demurrage charges  to the Port for pre-berthing of vessels 
and claimed (July 2017) the same from NTPL.  NTPL reimbursed (January 2018) `8.97 crore 
to SICAL, for these charges, contrary to the agreement clause.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
14  
Management replied (September 2018) that the supply  of coal to power companies is 
controlled by coal companies depending upon their p roduction level, availability of coal and 
not on the schedule given by consumers.  Moreover, every power generating company tries to 
maximise stock of coal during the period January to  April to maintain the maximum 
generation level for the upcoming rainy season.  Fu rther, agreement clause was amended 
(December 2015) and a new clause 4 was added for payment of demurrage charges relatin g to 
delay in unloading of vessels at Tuticorin Port and hence, there was no excess payment. 
The reply of Management is to be viewed against the facts that: 
• As per original clause 2.43 of the agreement, no cl aim for any demurrage was to be 
paid to contractor by NTPL.  Newly added clause as indicated above was applicable only to 
post berthing delay and not for pre-berthing delay/ detention of the vessels. As such, payment 
of demurrage for pre-berthing delay i.e. before dis charge procedure was in contravention of 
the agreement. 
• The coal supply was regulated by the Coal Supply Ag reement entered between M/s 
Mahanadi Coal Limited (MCL) and NTPL.  As such, MCL  could not exclusively change the 
quantity to be supplied. 
• NTPL had not made any request for supply of excess/  additional quantity of coal 
during December 2016 to February 2017 to SICAL as well as MCL.  
• Non-preparation of schedule by SICAL and supply of excess quantity of coal by t
he 
other contractors importing coal  resulted in bunching of vessels at Port and consequ ently 
resulted in payment of demurrage charges. 
Thus, NTPL made an avoidable payment of demurrage c harges of 
`8.97 crore to SICAL in 
contravention of the agreement. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in May 2019; their response was awaited (June 2020). 
                                                            
4  Amendment No. 1 dated 14 December 2015 clause no.  1.0 xxxi in Section IV of agreement 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
15 
CHAPTER IV: MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY  
 
 
Government E-Marketplace 
 
4.1   Information Systems Audit of Government E-Marketpl ace 
4.1.1  Introduction 
Since 1951, the Directorate General of Supplies and  Disposal (DGS&D), the Central 
Purchase Organisation of the Government of India (G oI), provided a single point of contact 
for government users and suppliers for procurement of commonly used goods. DGS&D 
functioned as an attached office under the Departme nt of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry.   
In order to improve operational processes, in Febru ary 2016, a one-stop shop was envisaged 
in the form of an online end-to-end procurement sys tem for Government buyers.  Based on 
the recommendations of a Group of Secretaries, it w as decided to set up a dedicated e-market 
for different goods and services procured by Govern ment Organisations/ Departments/ PSUs.  
Subsequently, the Government e-Marketplace (GeM) wa s incorporated on 17 May 2017 
under the Companies Act 2013 and, in turn, DGS&D wa s wound up on 31 October 2017.  
The GeM Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is responsibl e for building, operating and 
maintaining the GeM platform, which provides an end -to-end online marketplace for Central 
and State Government Ministries/ Departments, Central & State Public Undertakings (CPSUs 
& SPSUs), autonomous institutions and Statutory & C onstitutional Bodies, for procurement 
of common use goods and services.   
The GeM application (new version) (also termed as G eM Version 3.0) has been operational 
since 26 January 2018.  Purchases through GeM by Go vernment users have been authorised 
and made mandatory by the Ministry of Finance vide Rule (No. 149) in the General Financial 
Rules, 2017. 
The Government envisaged (April 2017) that in the s etting up and funding of the GeM SPV 
as the National Public Procurement Portal, GeM SPV shall provide an end-to-end online 
marketplace for Central and State Government Minist ries/ Departments, Central and State 
PSUs, autonomous institutions and local bodies, for  procurement of common use goods and 
services in a transparent and efficient manner.  Ge M shall be professionally managed with a 
Managed Service Provider (MSP), who would be respon sible for development, management 
and operation of the marketplace and shall be under the overall control of the SPV.  
The justification for the GeM SPV included the draw backs in the Rate Contract System of 
DGS&D (such as no demand aggregation, encourages ca rtelisation, being restricted to only 
products, limited to only firms registered with DGS&D or NSIC 
1, non-integration of payment 
process, delayed payments, non-dynamic prices, limi ted scale of operations of Rate 
Contracts).  
                                                           
1  NSIC: The National Small Industries Corporation L imited 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
16 
As per the approval of the competent authority in G overnment (April 2017), GeM is a 
scalable system and being complete online, transpar ent and system driven, takes care of the 
problems encountered with the Rate Contract system.   GeM covers the entire procurement 
process chain, right from vendor registration, item  selection by buyer, supply order 
generation, and receipt of goods/ services by the consignees, to online payment to the vendor.  
For large orders, the system automatically directs buyers to bidding/ reverse auction and the 
entire process would be completed online and in a c ompletely secure environment.  Price 
comparison with prominent e-Commerce portals is als o made available by GeM in order to 
bring about price transparency. 
The option for demand aggregation on GeM allows the  Government users to extract the best 
price in the market, thereby making public procurement more efficient. 
In terms of business through GeM Version 3.0, upto 
March 2019, total 13.81 lakh orders valuing 
`16,286.99 crore 2 were placed through GeM by 
various buyer organisations3. 
Further, till this time, approx. 8.85 lakh products and 
0.07 lakh services were available for procurement4.   
 
 
4.1.2 Organisation structure 
GeM is headed by a Chief Executive Officer who is s upported by seven Additional Chief 
Executive Officers, one Chief Technical Officer and  12 Deputy Chief Executive Officers.  
These officers are further assisted by executives a nd staff who look after all the modules and 
operations of GeM application.   
4.1.3 Development and Implementation of GeM application 
GeM pilot phase was developed by DGS&D with the tec hnical assistance of National e-
Governance Division (NeGD).  NeGD was involved as p art of Project Management Unit for 
operational aspects of GeM pilot phase.  The pilot,  expected to function till a full-fledged 
GeM was made operational, was launched on 09 August  2016 with a limited set of 
functionalities of the GeM solution, catering to on ly 120 products categories and one service 
category.  
Thereafter, for the full-fledged version of GeM app lication, DGS&D engaged M/s PWC, 
through limited tendering, at a cost of `49.36 lakh (March 2016) for preparing the Detailed 
                                                           
2  excluding orders which were under demand creation  stage 
3  As of 30 March 2020, this cumulative value had inc reased to 38.38 lakh orders (including orders under  
demand creation stage) valuing `` ``    51,467 crore, reflecting a substantial increase fro m the position as of 
March 2019 
4  As of 30 March 2020, this had increased to 22.00 lakh products and 0.25 lakh services 
Figure 4.1.1: Orders placed on GeM 
Figure 4.1.2: Number of products and services  
13.81 lakh 
orders 
Valuing `16286.99 
crore.
products: 
8.85 lakh Services: 
0.07 lakh

Report No. 18 of 2020 
17 
Project Report (DPR) and Request for Proposal (RFP)  for selection of a suitable MSP.  DPR 
and draft RFP were submitted by M/s PWC in July 201 6 and January 2017 respectively.  On 
the basis of open tendering, a consortium of M/s In tellect Design Arena Limited (along with 
partner M/s Infibeam Incorporation Ltd), with M/s Tata Communications Limited as Network 
Service Provider, was selected as the MSP and agree ment was signed on 31 August 2017 for 
design, development, implementation, operation and maintenance of GeM application.  
As per the terms of the RFP, the project was divide d into two phases – Phase 1 and 2 were to 
be achieved within six and ten months respectively of signing of the agreements, followed by 
operations and maintenance of the application by MS P for five years.  Phase-1 covered 
application development for the e-Commerce Marketplace, e-Contracting, e-Tendering, CRM 
Implementation, Technical Helpdesk & Contact Centre , and limited buyer, seller, products 
and services management, while Phase-2 covered the remaining functionalities and scope.  
Phase 1 went live on 26 January 2018 (i.e one month  before the scheduled date) whereas 
Phase 2 go-live was achieved in December 2018.  
4.1.3.1 Modules implemented in GeM:  In order to automate various processes involved in  
e-procurement, apart from other supporting modules 5, following modules have been 
implemented which are directly related to procurement through GeM:  
Figure 4.1.3: Modules implemented in GeM 
4.1.3.2 Process involved in GeM:  Procurement process in GeM begins with the registr ation 
of buyers/ sellers and ends at payment to vendors, in case no incidents are raised against the 
said order.  The stages in the process are shown diagrammatically in Figure 4.1.4.   
 
   
 
 
GeM platform provides three primary buying modes – Direct Purchase for orders upto 
`50,000 (now `25,000) Direct Purchase with L 1 for orders between `50,000 to `30,00,000 
(now `25,000 to `5,00,000) and e-bid/ Reverse Auction (RA) which allows buyers to conduct 
an electronic bid for the goods and services on the  platform (mandatory for order values 
above `30,00,000 (now `5,00,000). 
                                                           
5  Such as ‘Rating of Buyers and Sellers/ service pr ovider’ and ‘GeM Analytical Dashboards’ 
Figure 4.1.4: Procurement procedure on GeM 
INCIDENT 
MANAGEMEN
T
•Enables 
identificatin and 
handling of pre 
or post order 
incidents.
PAYMENT
INTEGRATION
•Enables payment 
through PFMS, 
GeM Pool 
Account, Online 
and Offline 
payment
ORDER 
FULFILMENT
•Enables 
receiving, 
processing/reject
ing, delivering 
orders to end 
customers.
MARKETPLAC
E
•Enables browsing 
and searching 
and placing order 
of available 
goods and 
services.
CATALOGUE 
MANAGEMEN
T SYSTEM
•Enables adding 
goods & services 
by sellers/service 
provider.
REGISTRATIO
N
•BUYERS
•SELLERS/SERVICE 
PROVIDER
Registration of 
Buyer/sellers/serv
ice provider
Upload of 
Products/Services 
by Sellers/service 
provider.
Placement of 
Order by Buyers.
Delivery of 
Products/Services 
by Sellers/service 
provider.
Payment by 
Buyers.

Report No. 18 of 2020  
18  
4.1.4   Audit Objectives, Scope and Methodology 
The objectives of the audit were to assess whether the: 
• rules, regulations and procedures of Government of India in relation with the 
Government procurement and the user and other stake holders’ requirements were 
assessed and duly incorporated in the development and implementation of GeM; 
• envisaged objectives were achieved; 
• functional, quality and security requirements for e -procurement systems, as specified 
in the RFP, GoI guidelines, GFR were implemented; and 
• general and application controls for meeting the fu nctional and non-functional 
requirements were adequate and effective. 
For attainment of the above audit objectives, Audit  analysed data of key modules 6 of GeM, 
for the period from Phase-I Go-live of GeM version 3.0, i.e. 26 January 2018, upto 31 March 
2019 (including migrated data).  Samples of data we re also analysed as per requirement.  
Additionally, Audit examined certain records relati ng to development, implementation and 
operation of GeM application version 3.0.  The audi t scope did not cover the contracting 
process for selection of the MSP.  
4.1.5  Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria were drawn from: 
• Agenda and minutes of the meeting held by competent  authority in Government for 
approval of the GeM SPV (April 2017). 
• GoI MEITY guidelines for compliance to quality requ irements of eProcurement 
systems (August 2011); Other directives, instructio ns, policies, rules and procedures 
laid down in connection with Information Technology , Public procurement and third-
party information.   
• GeM documents like RFP, MSP agreement, System Requirement Specifications, etc. 
• Business Requirement Documents for different module s and other technical 
documents like manuals, policies etc. 
4.1.6  Audit findings 
Audit findings based on assessment of attainment of  these requirements have been elaborated 
in the ensuing paras. 
4.1.6.1   Non-compliance to GoI Directives for Compliance wi th Guidelines for 
e-Procurement Systems and RFP provisions relating t o Benchmarking and 
Disaster Recovery Drill 
                                                           
6  Registration, Catalogue Management System, Market place, Order fulfilment, Payment Integration, 
Incident Management 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
19 
(i) STQC audit for compliance with “Guidelines for comp liance to Quality 
requirements of e Procurement Systems” of Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology not conducted  
Para 5.3.1.1 of the RFP stipulated that the MSP sha ll provision the e-Procurement Solution in 
compliance to the published guidelines of Standardi zation Testing & Quality Certification 
(STQC) Directorate, Ministry of Electronics & Infor mation Technology (MEITY) 7 on 
‘Compliance to Quality Requirements of e-Procurement Systems’.  
As per the ‘Guidelines for compliance to Quality re quirements of e-Procurement Systems 
issued by STQC Directorate on 31 August 2011, the a udit for certification of the entire 
e-Procurement solution shall be undertaken after it s deployment and prior to its usage.  This 
was also reiterated by CVC vide its circular dated 12 January 2012.  Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Expenditure vide its OM of 3 Septembe r 2012 reiterated that e-procurement 
solutions meet the requirements under these guideli nes and further stipulated that testing of 
the e-procurement solutions shall be conducted by S TQC.  The focus of the guidelines is 
mainly on e-Tendering (i.e. tendering with encrypte d bids, the equivalent of which in the 
manual context would be ‘sealed bids’). 
However, audit observed that such STQC audit for co mpliance with the above cited 
guidelines of August 2011 (endorsed by CVC and Mini stry of Finance) was not conducted.  
GeM SPV had provided two audit certificates/ report s from STQC dated August 2018 and 
December 2018, whose scope was not, however, in com pliance with the GoI guidelines.  
Further, Management stated (May 2020) that STQC car ried out a CVC & IT Act Compliance 
and Security Process Audit of GeM in August 2019, a nd its scope was in line with CVC 
circular number 29/9/09 dated 17 September 2009 & 1 8/04/2010 dated 26 April 2010 and IT 
Act 2000 (ITAA 2008).  However, the report required  GeM to address some areas and after 
submission of response, GeM is in discussion with STQC for issues of final certificate. 
The Management response is not acceptable.  There w as no STQC audit, demonstrating full 
compliance with the “Guidelines for compliance to Q uality requirements of e Procurement 
Systems” of Meity, and mandated by CVC in January 2 012 and Ministry of Finance in 
September 2012.  Even the STQC Report of August 201 9 referred to by Management (which 
does not cover the scope, as mentioned above) indic ates numerous deficiencies in key areas, 
and cannot be treated as compliant.  In the absence  of such compliance with the Guidelines, 
as evidenced by a satisfactory STQC Report, the GeM platform is not compliant, and Audit is 
unable to derive assurance about the authenticity, non-repudiability and integrity of the 
e-bidding module of GeM, especially considering tha t procurement through the e-bidding 
mode of GeM comprises more than 37 per cent  of total value of procurement from GeM. 
(ii) Non-benchmarking of the application as per the requisite number of users resulting 
in frequent break-down of GeM application 
Clause 5.3.2.7 of RFP requires that the system be b enchmarked as per the estimated buyers 
and sellers/ service providers upto 2 lakh and 4 la kh respectively at the time of Go live of 
application with growth of 20 per cent  per year.  RFP further detailed that estimated 
                                                           
7  Erstwhile Ministry of Communications & Informatio n Technology 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
20  
concurrent users at peak load would be 7,500 in num ber with year-on-year growth of 
20 per cent  for the first three years and 25 per cent  for the next two years.  In this regard, 
Audit observed that the benchmarking, to be conduct ed by a third party, was not conducted 
with estimated number of users.  Instead, performan ce and load testing as per requirement of 
clause 5.3.2.5 8 of the RFP, was done through a third party (January 2019).  The deviation was 
as follows: 
Table 4.1.1: Details of User load to be tested against actually tested by MSP 
Particulars User load to be tested as per RFP User load actually tested 
At the time of go live of 
phase 2 
15,000 users  600-900 users 
Every year after phase 2 5 times of actual concurrent users Yet to be done 
It is pertinent to mention that, upto March 2019, t here were 2.37 lakh registered buyers and 
2.32 lakh sellers/ service providers at GeM, out of  which 1.85 lakh buyer and 2.23 lakh 
sellers/ service provider are active (as per the data provided by GeM management).  Also, the 
average numbers of concurrent users using GeM appli cation ranged between 1,500 and 
1,750.  However, the performance was tested on only  600 to 900 concurrent users.  Audit 
further observed that the GeM application broke dow n frequently while using the portal and 
messages such as “The website is under heavy load, we are sorry many people are accessing 
this website at the same time”, “502 bad gateway”, we are sorry but something went wrong” 
were displayed  Since the application was not benchmarked as per the required level and load 
testing was also done on lesser than actual number of concurrent users, GeM management 
would be unable to take pre-emptive action against issues of breakdown in the application 
which are bound to occur.   
Management vide its reply (February 2020) stated th at a comprehensive benchmarking 
exercise will be conducted by third party and furth er assured that KPMG has been 
selected for performing performance audit, security  audit, systems audit and application 
audit. 
Audit notes this response of Management but reitera tes that this audit cannot be a substitute 
for the audit of c 
ompliance with the GoI e-procurement guidelines, which has to be done only 
through STQC. 
(iii)  Non-conducting of Disaster Recovery Drills 
Clause 10.8.9.3 of RFP pertaining to cloud service SLA required MSP to conduct at least two 
Disaster Recovery Drills in a year (once every six months).  This was to be monitored every 
six months and the liquidated damages were to be le vied in the quarter following the end of 
the six-month period.  However, Audit observed that  since implementation of GeM version 
3.0, no drills were conducted till audit and no liq uidated damages were collected from the 
                                                           
8  The MSP shall provide the testing strategy includ ing the traceability matrix and relevant test cases  and 
shall also conduct the testing of various component s of the software developed/ customised along with 
the solution as a whole. The testing should be comp rehensive and should be carried out at each stage o f 
development as well as implementation 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
21 
2.37 
1.85 
0.45 
0.45 
2.32 
2.23 
0.38 
0.3 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 
Registered 
Active 
Placed Order/Participated 
Received orders 
Sellers 
Buyers 
MSP.  Non-conducting disaster recovery drill might result in an unwarranted situation of 
application and data loss.   
Management vide its reply (July, October 2019 & Feb ruary 2020) stated that DC-DR drill 
was conducted in August 2019 and second drill was c onducted in January 2020.  
Management further stated that appropriate liquidat ed damages for this would be applicable 
on the MSP. 
4.1.6.2  Flawed Process of Registration 
The GeM registration process (of buyers 
and sellers/ service providers) was 
expected to be driven by principles of 
ease, convenience and minimal data 
entry. 
Upto 31 March 2019, total 2.37 lakh 
buyers were registered on GeM, out of 
which 1.85 lakh were treated as ‘active’ 
whereas out of these, only 24.32 per 
cent 
9 buyers placed orders through GeM.  
Similarly, total 2.32 lakh sellers/ service provide rs were registered on GeM, out of which 
2.23 lakh were treated as ‘active’ 10  by the system.  However, Audit found that during t his 
period, only 17.04 per cent 11  sellers/ service providers participated for orders / bids and 
13.45 per cent 12  seller got orders.  
A.  Buyer Registration  
User authentication, as per GeM Buyer Registration Manual, is through AADHAAR.   The 
Primary user (Head of the Department - HoD), after registration, would authorise various 
users 13  based on their roles and responsibilities as part of the procurement process of a 
particular organisation. 
The process of primary user registration includes the following steps: 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
9  0.45 lakh 
10   All successfully registered users are marked as ‘ active’ status 
11   0.38 lakh 
12   0.30 lakh 
13   Buyer, Consignee and PAO/ DDO 
Figure 4.1.5: Registration & Participation of 
Buyers and sellers (in lakh) 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
22 
 
Figure 4.1.6: Steps in Primary User Registration 
i) Non mapping of ‘verifying’ and ‘competent authority ’ resulting in absence of 
controls on registration of Government user 
Buyer Registration Manual of GeM required an organi sation to have following users and 
roles, on GeM: 
Table 4.1 2: User-wise roles in GeM 
Users Designation Responsibility/role 
Competent 
Authority 
 
Secretary/ Principal Secretary/ Managing 
Director/ Chief Managing Director/ Chief 
Executive Office/ Chairman/ DG/ Director and 
JS (for central ministry) or Principal Secretary 
(for state). 
Will be notified (through 
email) when verifying 
authority and primary users are 
added. 
Verifying 
Authority 
 
Under Secretary/ Equivalent or above 
nominated by competent authority. 
Responsible for approving the 
registration of all primary 
users. 
Primary User 
Deputy Secretary or above, Head of the Office 
at Sub Centre/ Unit/ Branch of Government 
Organisation/ PSU/ Autonomous Bodies / 
Local Bodies/ Constitution Bodies/ Statutory 
Bodies Director/ Equivalent Officer 
Creates and manages all 
secondary users. 
Secondary 
Users: Buyer, 
Consignee & 
Paying 
Authority 
As defined by Primary User 
Can search, view catalogue, 
place order, bid, receive/ reject 
consignment and release 
payment, as per the role 
assigned by primary user. 
Audit observed that this process was vulnerable as it had weak controls.  In order to test the 
process and controls related to registration, an Au dit Team member, tried to register as a 
primary buyer on the GeM portal with ‘.gov’ id.  After feeding basic details like Aadhaar 
number, name etc, he entered his counterpart’s ‘.gov’ email id (having same designation) as 
‘verifiers email’.  As per registration process, an  email was sent to ‘Verifying Authority’ for 
intimation and after 48 hours, the registration was  considered as ‘deemed approved’ (in case 
no action is taken or if not deactivated).  Hence, Audit team member was successfully able to 
register himself as a ‘Primary User’ on GeM Portal.   Further, roles of ‘buyer’, ‘consignee’ 
and ‘PAO/ DDO’ were also easily added by the Audit team member.  
In this regard, Audit noted that: 
• As per the registration manual, only an official, n ot below, the rank of an ‘Under 
Secretary’ or ‘Head of Office’ can hold the role of  verifying authority.  GeM did not have an 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2020 
23 
automated mechanism for verifying or enforcing this  condition; hence, risk of application 
accepting users who may be below the rank of ‘Under  Secretary’ or ‘Head of Office’ as 
‘Verifying Authority’, unless verified and enforced manually, existed.  
• Confirmatory emails were being sent to ‘Competent A uthority’ only in case of 
‘Ministries’ and ‘States’ since other organisations  (Central/ State PSUs and Autonomous 
bodies) were not yet mapped.   
Thus, checks to ensure that only those officials wh o have been authorised to make public 
procurements get registered on GeM as primary user,  were not adequate and needed further 
strengthening.  Any official of any designation, ev en if terminated or retired, having a ‘.gov’  
(Government) id could register on GeM portal and ma ke procurement.  Other than check 
through the ‘.gov’  email id, no other check/ control was in place to ensure exclusive 
participation of an authorised government employee,  and therefore, once a user is 
successfully registered on GeM, the system would be  unable to stop the user from making 
procurements.  Also, the additional checks implemen ted with regard to competent authority 
need further strengthening in a manner that the ema il sent to ‘verifying authority’ and 
‘competent authority’ allow registration only when it is actually ‘approved’ or ‘accepted’ by 
them and not on the basis of ‘deemed approval’. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) assured t hat process of maker checker, wherein 
HoD registration would be enabled only after receiv ing approval of Verifying Authority 
would be implemented on GeM as in the case of CGDA users. 
ii)  Absence of input controls leading to registration w ithout .gov email id in violation 
of requirements 
Audit examination revealed that out of the total bu yers 
14 , 16.87 per cent  (40,196 buyers) did 
not register with a .gov email id as required in th e Buyer Registration Manual.  Instead, the 
system allowed these buyers to register with gmail,  yahoo or rediffmail id.  It is pertinent to 
mention that these users placed orders amounting to  `4,349.18 crore, out of which 
procurement of top three ministries (Ministry of Hu man Resource Development 15 , Ministry 
of Defence 16  and Ministry of Home Affairs 17 ) was `446.81 crore.   
Thus, due to absence of adequate input control, the re existed risk of placement of orders by a 
person who may not be a government employee. Also, against the requirements of 
‘Registration Manual’ to regularly monitor and re-v erify users’ accounts, the application did 
not re-verify or force these buyers to update their  email ids with .gov mail before placing an 
order. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) stated that GeM was integrating with the LDAP 
18  
Service of NIC, which would allow GeM to validate the e-mail given by users registered with 
NIC in real time and capture the date of retirement  of Government employees.  Management 
                                                           
14   2.37 lakh nos. 
15   Users without .gov or .gembuyer email id – 431 no s. placed orders worth `` ``    205.71 crore 
16   Users without .gov or .gembuyer email id – 982 no s. placed orders worth `` ``    127.42 crore 
17   Users without .gov or .gembuyer email id – 375 no s. placed orders worth `` ``    113.68 crore 
18   LDAP: Lightweight Directory Access Protocol is a method for accessing and maintaining distributed 
directory information services over an Internet Protocol (IP) network 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
24  
further assured that an automated process of introducing users, who have neither “ gov.in ” nor 
public sector domain-based email, by the Government HOD, would be defined and developed 
so that GeM buyer domain-based email ids generated by NIC can be assigned to them. 
(iii)  Absence of validation controls resulting in registr ation of users beyond age of 
retirement  
In government ministries and departments, the maxim um retirement age of an employee is 
60 19  years.  Audit review showed that due to lack of va lidation controls in respect of feeding 
of date of birth of buyers, age of 426 users was fo und to be more than 60 years to 65 years.  
Similarly, age of ‘33’ buyers was found to be more than 66 years to 75 years, two buyers 
were within age of 75 to 95 and 21 buyers 
were more than 95 years of age.  Thus, 
the application allowed a ‘retired 
official’ 
20  to get registered on GeM and 
make procurements and did not revoke 
access rights after retirement.  Case Study 
1 is illustrative of the problems associated 
with this issue and how the application 
did not block an official after date of his 
retirement.  
GeM is an exclusive procurement portal for governme nt users, therefore, it is imperative that 
GeM ensure that relevant conditions to check the el igibility of a user are mapped into the 
system since weaknesses in such controls increases the risk that the application’s functioning 
may be susceptible to compromise. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) assured t hat GeM would integrate with NIC to 
validate the email of users registered with NIC, in  real time and capture date of retirement of 
Govt. employee.  GeM also assured that it will not allow retired government users to procure 
and would introduce functionality (in integration w ith NIC) to send notifications regularly to 
Government organisation for making alternate arrang ements of transferring the accounts of 
employee three months before retirement or email validation expiry date. 
(iv)  Absence of validation checks leading to feeding of incorrect mobile numbers 
A valid phone number linked to Aadhar number is a p re-requisite for accessing the GeM 
application.  Consequently, the mobile number linke d to Aadhar becomes critical for the 
verification and authentication process since valid ation is done by sending OTP (One-time 
Password) on this number.  Therefore, the mobile nu mber being fed by the user should be 
correct, in order to commence this process. 
Accordingly, Audit performed different tests on the  total ‘active users 
21 ’ to see the eligibility 
of the numbers and/ or verify their correctness.  G iven that this assessment was not 
                                                           
19   Except central Government doctors and Central Uni versities professors 
20   92 users beyond the age of 60 years were able to place orders through GeM 
21   1.86 lakh 
Case Study 1 
In X organisation, the primary user retired on 31 
July 2018, however, he continued to receive 
messages and notifications from GeM. His user 
access privilege was not automatically revoked 
until September 2019, when the organisation 
intervened and changed/ updated the primary 
user. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
25 
exhaustive and different permutations of inadmissib le numbers are possible, the test check 
revealed: 
• In case of 75 users, the mobile number was not fed/ fetched into the system at all 
22 ; 
• In 11 cases, the mobile number was below 10 digits 23 ; 
• In the case of 652 users’ same mobile number i.e. ‘9999999999’ was fed in 24 ;  
• In other random cases, 28 records with misleading m obile numbers such as 
‘111111111’ or ‘1111112222’ etc were found. 
Besides the lack of input and validation controls i n respect of feeding of mobile number by 
the users, the absence of a correct mobile number i ndicated that the verification process 
would have been incomplete.   
Management, in continuation of its earlier reply (O ctober 2019), wherein it stated that these 
instances occurred mostly when the eSign or Aadhaar  services were disrupted and some 
of the entries were migrated data, confirmed (Febru ary 2020) that existing users (from 
earlier version) are being prompted to correct any incorrect mobile number before transacting 
through GeM and detailed (through data) that number  of such users has been reducing.  
Management further stated that Aadhaar linked mobil e number is verified through OTP and 
that basic checks pertaining to length of mobile number would be in place. 
(v)  Absence of input control in respect of user organis ation leading to non-feeding of 
‘name of ministry’, ‘state’ and ‘name of organisation’  
In the absence of adequate input controls, buyer or ganisations were able to register without 
filling even basic details such as name of Ministry / State, name of organisation, name of 
office as these fields were not made mandatory in t he application. While this resulted in 
incomplete classification of Ministry-wise/ State-w ise data/ orders, for instance, orders 
amounting to `14,145.46 crore 25  could not be mapped to any Ministry/ State, greate r 
vulnerability lies in the fact that the GeM applica tion can be used for non-Government 
procurements by registered buyers.  
Management vide its reply (October 2019 and Februar y 2020) has assured that GeM 
application is prompting all users who have fed inc orrect details of organizational hierarchy 
to first correct them before transacting on GeM.  I t further assured that GeM would make it 
mandatory for all organisations to feed all four le vels of hierarchy.  Management also stated 
that as on 30 April 2019 there are only 118 orders valuing 
`1.78 crore, involving 24 users 
where either Ministry/ State/ Department/ Organisation/ Office is null.  
Audit acknowledges Management reply.  However, Audi t observation pertains to those cases 
where the field related to Ministry/ States is blan k whereas GeM appears to have excluded 
cases wherein even one level of the four level hier archy is filled.  Therefore, the figures may 
                                                           
22   6 users out of 75 placed orders through GeM 
23   1 user out of 11 placed order through GeM 
24   57 users out of 652 placed orders through GeM 
25   Blank Entries: `` ``    7,080.54 crore, entries with ‘N/A’- `` ``    7,064.91 crore 26  Out of 2.41 lakh 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
26 
not be comparable, especially as cases of ‘null’ en try may have been updated during this 
time.  Hence, they would be subject to further verification.   
Thus, there were certain deficiencies in input cont rols relating to buyer details which need to 
be strengthened and legacy/ migrated data of buyers needs to be cleansed.  
B Seller Registration  
With respect to Seller Registration, the Business Requirement Document (BRD) required that 
the primary seller should be able to register online using AADHAAR or PAN on GeM Portal.  
The process of registration involves the following steps: 
Figure 4.1.7: Steps in Seller Registration 
(i) Usage of same email ids by multiple sellers/ servic e provider in absence of 
validation check 
Para 3.1 of Seller Registration BRD states that, ‘U nique Email id check was applicable for 
primary seller at the time of creating Primary sell er account’, which implies that one email id 
is to be used for registration by one primary selle r only.  However, Audit observed that in 
violation of this rule, 841 email ids were used by multiple users simultaneously, and within 
these, 32 email ids were used simultaneously by mor e than four users.  In addition, email id 
was found to be blank in case of six sellers, despi te it being mandatory to operate on GeM.  
Thus, rule pertaining to ‘unique check’ on email wa s not mapped into the application and the 
email field was not made mandatory for users.   
Management vide its reply (February 2020) stated th at the GeM application has been 
prompting all users who have fed duplicate emails t o choose one email id when they login 
and that they are not be allowed to transact unless  they make this correction.  Further, it has 
been ensured that only one email id is to be used f or registration by one primary seller only.  
Management also detailed figures comparing status/ position of these users upto October 
2019 and upto December 2019 and accepted figures qu oted by Audit.  Management brought 
forth that the number of such users were reduced fr om 841 (upto October 2019) to 194 (by 
December 2019) and from four (upto October 2019) to  zero (by December 2019) and also 
stated that out of these 194 users, 70 were secondary users. 
Management reply is acceptable, however, in respect  of secondary users, it is pertinent to 
mention that out of total registered sellers of 2.3 2 lakh, there are only 4,834 secondary sellers 
and out of these cases mentioned by GeM, only 36 per cent (approximately) of cases were 
found to be secondary sellers, implying that the ap plication did not prevent other primary 
users from using same email id. 
 


Report No. 18 of 2020 
27 
(ii)  Absence of input validation in respect of ‘experien ce’ of sellers/ service provider 
leading to feeding of unrealistic information  
Para no. 4.8 of Seller Registration BRD pertaining to ‘Experience’ requires that ‘Seller 
should be able to enter total experience as well as  experience with Government and that the 
experience will be used as filter criteria by Buyer s’ while searching catalogues on GeM.  
BRD further stated that ‘Total Year of Experience’ would be populated from ‘Date of 
Incorporation’.  However, Audit observed that no in put validation was implemented in the 
application in this regard which resulted in experi ence data of unreasonable period such as ‘1 
crore years’, ‘15 lakh years’ etc.  In 16 cases, the experience wa s found to be more than 100 
years, out of which in 10 cases, the experience was more than 1,000 years.  
Thus, experience was not populated with date of inc orporation and due to absence of 
validation checks, sellers’/ service providers with  misleading information were operating on 
GeM.  This may also compromise the technical evalua tion process, in case experience is a 
selection parameter. 
Management, in continuation of its earlier reply (O ctober 2019) wherein it had indicated that 
there were 
necessary checks to handle validation in respect of  ‘experience’ for migrated/ 
existing seller further submitted (February 2020) that ‘ filter’ of seller experience has been 
removed from the marketplace so it cannot impact th e selection process.  This would be 
verified in future audits. 
(iii)  Non-classification of type of organisation due to absence of input control 
Seller Registration BRD requires that a primary sel ler be registered either as proprietor, 
partnership firm, Company, Trust or Society, State or Central Government.  
 
Figure 4.1.8: Types of Organisations on GeM 
However, audit observed that in 1,154 
cases 
26 , the ‘constitution type’ was 
blank, in 981 cases, the field was filled 
with ‘0’ and in case of 676 cases the 
field was filled with ‘N’.  Thus, total 
2,811 sellers’/ service provider did not 
feed the ‘constitution type’ as the field 
was not made mandatory. This 
resultantly led to bypassing of 
verification and various checks (CIN 
                                                           
26  Out of 2.41 lakh 
Case Study - 2 
Audit received one feedback wherein a buyer organis ation 
placed an order through Direct Purchase for procure ment of 
13 UPS.  The order was accepted by the seller, howe ver, no 
delivery was received against the order within 15 d ays.  In 
absence of any contact number of seller and the add ress being 
local, buyer reached the office address of the sell er.  Here, it 
was ascertained that the Seller’s registered name i ncluded 
‘’construction company’’ whereas on GeM, the seller  was 
registered for selling IT hardware. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
28  
verification, PAN verification and other third-part y verification etc.) in the respective 
constitution type.  Case Study 2 is illustrative of  the problems associated with this issue and 
how performance of GeM is exposed to reputational risk on this account. 
Management vide its reply (October 2019 and Februar y 2020) stated that MSP had been 
tasked with regular cleansing of such data and sellers’/ servic e providers with incomplete 
profile shall not be able to transact .  
In respect of case study 2, it stated that the name of the company may not actually reflect 
the entire business spectrum of the seller and that  there is no legal bar for anyone to sell 
products which, intuitively, may not be in tune wit h the company’s name, provided that the 
activities of the company are otherwise in consonan ce with the extant laws and rules and 
regulations.  While management’s reply is noted, it  is imperative that the system may be 
improved in such a manner that sellers with mislead ing or incorrect information are duly 
flagged through data analytics reports for follow-up and seller investigation.  
(iv)  Inadequate verification of credentials of sellers’/  service provider and incomplete 
integration with third parties 
• Permanent Account Number (PAN) issued by the Income  Tax Department is an 
identifier for the "person" with the Tax Department  and is mandatory for taxpayers and is to 
be quoted for specified financial transactions.   Para no. 4.2 of Seller Registration BRD, 
pertaining to ‘PAN’ verification requires that GeM,  once integrated with the Income Tax 
database, would cross verify PAN number and ‘name’ entered by the user.  However, it was 
observed that, in 42.79 per cent 27  of records the ‘PAN number’ remained ‘unverified’ by the 
system due to feeding of incorrect PAN number or no n-feeding of the same.  Further, in 
36.96 per cent 28  of records, the PAN ‘name’ through PAN card was no t fed/ fetched by the 
system.  Further, GeM also did not verify the information fed by the sellers’/ service provider 
and allowed sellers’/ service provider to operate a nd transact through GeM despite 
incomplete profile.   
Management vide its reply (October 2019 and Februar y 2020) stated that 
additional checks 
have been added to ensure the correctness of PAN fo rmat and PAN name for any older 
data existing in the system and this process is ful ly and exclusively automated such that 
users are allowed to transact only if the PAN infor mation is complete and verified 
through the PAN database and that all those sellers  who have not fed PAN numbers are 
prompted by GeM for correction before transacting on GeM. 
• Para 4.3 of Seller Registration BRD pertaining to ‘ Key Person’ verification required 
that GeM, integrated with Income Tax database, woul d cross verify ‘Key Person’ based on 
PAN Number, authorised Person Name, ITR Type, Ackno wledgement Number and 
Assessment Year.  However, it was observed that in 81.34 per cent 29  of records, the name of 
‘authorised person’ was found to be blank.  Thus, t he system had neither auto-captured nor 
verified the details.  
                                                           
27   96,106 out of 2.25 lakh sellers/ service provider  
28   79,417 out of 2.15 lakh sellers/ service provider  
29   1,78,285 out of 2.19 lakh sellers/ service provid er 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
29 
Management vide its reply (October 2019 and Februar y 2020) stated that this gap would get 
plugged over a period of time as and when these dat abase owners synchronise with Aadhaar. 
Due to limitations related to integration and non-s ynchronisation of names between Aadhaar 
and ITR databases, key person verification feature although present had to be relaxed as a 
mandatory requirement.  It further assured to explo re to get key Person’s e-mail data from 
MCA21 or Income Tax databases wherein the Key perso ns will be notified of registration of 
their company on the GeM Portal.  
• Para 4 of Seller Registration BRD required that, in  case of Company, the system 
would prompt for the Corporate Identity Number (CIN ) and thereafter, the system would 
automatically validate CIN with MCA21 
30  and also fetch ‘date of incorporation’ from the 
MCA21 database. Audit observed that in 36.12 per cent 31  cases of sellers’/ service providers 
registered as companies, the CIN number was not fed  into the system implying that the field 
was not mandatory for users.  Further, CIN number o f only 56.27 per cent 32  of sellers’/ 
service providers was verified.  Also, in case of 6 97 sellers’/ service providers, the date of 
incorporation was not fetched even after feeding of  CIN although the system should have 
automatically fetched the date of incorporation after getting the CIN number. 
Further, Audit compared the ‘year’ appearing in CIN  number 33  with ‘date of incorporation 
(year)’ fetched by the GeM application and found th at in case of 211 sellers’/ service 
providers, ‘date of incorporation (year)’ fetched f rom MCA21 was not matching with the 
‘year’ of incorporation mentioned in CIN number.  A lso, in 117 cases, the ‘year of 
incorporation’ fetched through system was more than  ‘year of incorporation’ as per CIN 
number.   
Management, stated (October 2019 and February 2020)  that these cases pertain to initia 
l 
versions while the platform was stabilising.  Manag ement has further assured that post 
July 2019, users are allowed to transact only if th e CIN information is complete and 
verified through the MCA database and date of incorporation is being fetched.   Also, CIN 
is mandatory for companies in GeM and additional ch ecks have been added to ensure the 
correctness of CIN format for any older data existing in the system. 
Legacy data was neither updated nor sanitised, in respect of PAN and CIN, for verification of 
sellers.  Thus, the application did not have adequa te controls or a fool-proof verification 
process to prevent access by an unverified seller a nd there existed risk of misuse of 
application by an unscrupulous seller.  GST numbers  of sellers, if the turnover of sellers 
exceed a certain threshold, may also be included is one of the credentials for registration. 
4.1.6.3    Delays at different stages of the procurement process 
As per the approval of the competent authority in G overnment (April 2017) and RFP, GeM 
portal was expected to make the end-to-end process of procurement faster, bring efficiency 
and speed.  
                                                           
30   MCA21 is an e-Governance initiative of Ministry o f Corporate Affairs (MCA), Government of India that  
enables easy and secure access to MCA services by corporate entities, professionals and citizens of India 
31   13,659 nos of Companies out of total 37,819 Compa nies 
32   21,279 nos of companies 
33   CIN is a unique 21 digit alpha-numeric number whi ch also contains the numerals of the year of 
incorporation 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
30  
Audit observed that there were significant delays a t different stages of the procurement 
process, from placement of order to payment to sell ers’/ service provider as detailed in the 
succeeding paras. 
A.  Delay in placement of orders 
As per the order placement procedure for Direct Pur chase, an organisation, after making his 
selection, places an order on a particular 
seller.  The BRD pertaining to ‘orders’ 
provides that a seller would have five 
calendar days to accept or reject a Direct 
Purchase Order.  After expiry of five days, in 
case of no response from seller, the order 
would get auto cancelled.  Otherwise, the 
buyer then confirms placement of the order or 
‘award’ the same.  Ideally, this can happen immedia tely or at least within one day of 
acceptance by the seller.   
However, it was seen that there is no control or ma pping of any time-limit to ensure 
confirmation of placement of order by the buyer.  C onsequently, Audit observed that a total 
of 12.33 per cent 
34  of orders valuing `792.41 crores were awarded after a delay ranging from 
more than five days from date of creation of orders  up to a maximum of 312 days.  Further, 
18 orders were awarded after 90 days whereas the co mplete bid cycle on GeM was 90 days 
only.  It was further observed, that out of these c ases of delayed placement of orders, in case 
of 88.66 per cent 35  of orders valuing `172.40 crore, the orders placed were below `50,000 
implying that selection of seller was at the discre tion of buyer, even then the orders were not 
placed in time.  Thus, controls to ensure award of order within a specified time period were 
inadequate.  Case study 3 indicates how the absence  of this control has made the 
procurement process inefficient and prone to unnecessary delay. 
Management in its reply (February 2020) stated that  these cases are due to buyers amending 
the order post placement of order subject to consen t by seller.  The amendment order created 
carries the carting time of the original order and hence may show a high time difference 
between order confirmation time and carting time an d can be carried out until the expiry of 
the original delivery period.  However, management also assured that in future, along with 
original date of carting, amended date of order alo ng with amendment number will be 
attached to the amended order so that the delivery time can be computed by taking the 
difference between delivery date and amended order date.  
Management’s claim that these cases are due to ‘amendment’ could not be verified in absence 
of details.  Further, Management’s reply is not bor ne out by facts that amendment can be 
made once order is placed and accepted by sellers s ince audit observation pertains to delay 
after the order is moved from cart to placement and time taken from placement to award only.   
                                                           
34   1,38,837 orders out of 11,25,392 orders 
35   1,23,096 orders out of 1,38,837 orders 
Case Study 3 
An organization placed an order amounting 
to 
`` ``4,847,259 for procurement of 03 nos of 
‘LPT1613 cowl chassis 4x2 BS IV of TATA 
Motors’. The order was created on 
22.09.2018, but was awarded on 15.02.2019, 
i.e with a lapse of 146 days and the goods 
were delivered afterwards. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
31 
B.  Delay in delivery of products 
Business requirement document pertaining to Direct Purchase (Marketplace) requires that 
the buyer should get an option to enter the deliver y days for purchase and the maximum 
delivery days for direct purchase should be 15 days  unless a different value is configured for 
the category, e.g. for automobiles.  
However, an analysis of data revealed that in 39.64  
per cent 
36  of the total orders placed upto March 2019, 
the delivery was either not initiated or was delaye d 
beyond the prescribed time.  The maximum delay 
was as much as 418 days.  Case study 4 shows that a  
seller supplied a small item of stationery after mo re 
than a year.  Since GeM is mandatory for government  
purchases, there has to be a high level of reliabil ity 
assured in delivery otherwise the convenience of 
electronic ordering would dissipate, especially in the case of small items/ items required for 
routine functioning.  
Management stated (May 2019, October 2019 and Febru ary 2020) that m 
ore than 
71 per cent  orders have been delivered till date out of which 78 per cent  of orders have 
been delivered on time.  Management has further ass ured to improve the same.  
Management has further reiterated that GeM 
application allows the buyer to apply “Seller 
rating” filter in market place to exclude sellers 
who have low ratings in the Direct Purchase 
mode of procurement  
Management’s reply is acknowledged; however, 
management’s reply in respect of rating 
overlooks the fact that L 
1 selection through GeM application is not affected by usage of  
filter on ‘seller rating’ as even after selection o f a specific rating, the same is overlooked by 
the application and the L 1 selected by application may not hold the specified  rating.  Thus, 
seller rating loses its significance as indicated i n Case study 5. On the contrary, sellers are 
allowed to reject an order based on the rating of buyers. 
C.  Delay in payment to sellers’/ service providers 
Ministry of Finance OM titled ‘Procedure for payment to Sellers/ Suppliers in Government e-
Marketplace’ (dated 20 September 2016), required that the time taken for payment should not 
exceed 10 days including holidays.  Further, Micro,  Small and Medium Enterprises 
Development (MSMED), Act 2006 provided that, for th e goods and services supplied by the 
MSME units, the buyer is to make payment within 45 days.   
                                                           
36   1,93,850 & 2,52,161 orders of delayed and non del ivered orders respectively out of total 11,25,392 o rder 
for goods 
Case Study 4 
X organisation placed an order for 
20 pieces of ‘Tape 2 Inch 
Transparent’ on 09.03.2018 for 
`` ``860.  The order was accepted by 
the seller on 09.03.2018, however, 
the delivery of the item was made 
on 01.05.2019 (418 days) which 
was accepted by the 
 buyer . 
Case Study 5 
Audit received feedback from one buyer 
organisation stating that while 
procuring ‘Desktop’ through ‘Direct 
Purchase’ the system selected L 
1 who 
had rating of 1.37 points (out of 5) and 
was suspended once and disabled twice. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
32  
However, Audit observed that upto 31 March 2019, to tal 10.29 lakh CRACs 37  valuing 
`6,780.36 crore were issued.  However, in more than 50 per cent  of the cases no payment 
was made at all.  Payments ‘within time’ 38  were made only in case of 3.79 39  per cent  CRACs 
valuing `298.12 crore cases and in rest of the cases, either  payments were not made at all or 
were delayed beyond an unreasonable period as detailed below: 
Table 4.1.3: Cases of delay in payments  
Cases wherein payments 
were made, including 
delayed payment 
Cases wherein payment was 
made after prescribed time 
Cases wherein no 
payment was made 
Cases of delay 
in payment to 
MSE vendor 
per 
cent 
value  
in ` crore 
per cent value  
in `crore 
per cent value  
in ` crore 
per cent  
49.08 40  3,308.18 45.29 41  3,010.05 50.92 42  3,785.04 69.11 43  
The delay in payment ranged to an 
unreasonable period of 439 days (as illustrated 
in case study 6) and in cases wherein no 
payments were made, the pendency ranged to 
415 
44  days.  Further, in violation of MSE 
(Micro and Small Enterprises) Act, the delay 
to MSE vendor ranged to 436 days.  Audit 
noted that non-updation of payment status by 
buyers could be one reason for these figures. 
The issue of lack of timely payment to sellers has been flagged by GeM in its GeM Quality 
Reports, in particular the reports for Jan-March 20 19 and for Apr-June 2019. The 
recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries on GeM (May 2018) also indicated that 
the Standing Committee of GeM (SCoGem) of the buyer  Ministries/ Departments should 
ensure that all purchases are done through GeM platforms and timely payments are made.  
Management in its reply (October 2019 and February 2020) stated that that payment is a 
service level commitment of the buyer agency and it is exclusively a function of their internal 
processes and completely outside the purview of GeM  SPV; the SCoGeMs headed by AS/ JS 
& FA are mandated to ensure that buyer service leve ls are adhered to.  I
t is a change 
management issue of overall government systems and will take time; upto  September 
2019 the percentage of timely payments has increase d to 25 per cent .  Department of 
Expenditure has also issued fresh instruction (23 J anuary 2020) regarding procedure for 
                                                           
37   As per the existing procedure on GeM, the payment  advice on GeM would be prepared after generation 
of Consignee Receipt and Acceptance Certificate (CRAC) by the buyer 
38   Within 10 days 
39   38,506 CRACs out of 10.29 lakh 
40   5.05 lakh CRACs 
41   4.66 lakh CRACs out of 10.29 lakh 
42   5.24 lakh CRACs 
43   0.94 lakh CRACs out of 1.36 lakh CRACS 
44   Cases wherein CRACs have been issued but payments  have been pending (excluding CRAC issued after 
31 March 2019) 
Case Study 6 
X organization placed an order amounting 
to 
`` ``46,000 for procurement of 250 nos. of 
‘JK COPIER A4 75 GSM (A4 size papers)’.  
Order was awarded to seller on 16.02.2018, 
the delivery of the product was made on 
25.02.2018, however, the payment was 
made on 11.05.2019, after a delay of 439 
days. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
33 
payments on GeM.  Management has further stated tha t GeM is going to release Auto 
Debit 80-20 facility for non-PFMS entities, wherein  the complete bill will be released 
within 45 days in two parts and is also working wit h Central PSUs for integrating their 
ERP systems.  Also, the system would now close the payment which are due post-CRAC 
for more than 60 days as buyers do not update the o ffline payment status on the GeM 
portal.  Management has further iterated that GeM h as introduced a dynamic GeM 
Rating System wherein performance of both buyers and sellers is measured. 
In Audit opinion, low rating for buyers, in itself,  will not be sufficient to expedite 
payments.   
Thus, there were significant delays from placement of orders, to delivery of goods to delay in 
payment.  The average procurement time (time taken from creation of orders to payments) on 
GeM application was 136.31 days and in cases wherei n payment was not even initiated, the 
average time remained 118 days (pending upto 31 Mar ch 2019).  Thus, the objective of 
providing an efficient and speedy platform for procurement was not fully achieved.  
Management in its reply (October 2019 and February 2020) stated that in case of ‘Direct 
Purchase’, median time taken from cart to order pla cement is less than a day, median time 
from order placement to delivery is eight days and from delivery to CRAC generation is four 
days.  In the case of Bid, median time from Bid sub mission to order placement is 12 days, 
Median Delivery Time after placement of Order in Bi d/ RA is 18 days and from Delivery to 
CRAC generation in Bid/ RA is eight days. 
In Audit’s view, delay in payments is a serious sys temic issue which impacts the 
achievements of objectives of GeM.  While GeM SPV n eeds to take continuous, pro-active 
action to follow up such delays with the buyers and  sellers, Ministry of Commerce should 
take up the issue with Ministry of Finance to issue  instructions to all Government entities to 
mandatorily ensure timely payment of dues.  
Overall, as pointed out by audit in the preceding p aras, the performance of GeM needs 
further improvement although we also note that such  improvement in performance requires 
the collaboration of all stakeholders (including buyer Departments/ entities and sellers). 
4.1.6.4   Inadequate controls to ensure achievement of trans parency in procurement 
process as envisaged  
Government e-Marketplace was envisaged to provide e nd-to-end online marketplace for 
procurement of common use goods and services in a t ransparent and efficient manner.  
Further, as per the RFP issued for selection of MSP , the GeM was to act as a public 
procurement platform between suppliers and buyers, by providing them a common, unified, 
and transparent Government to Business (G2B) portal  for supply and procurement of goods 
and services registered with GeM.  However, the fol lowing deficiencies were observed in the 
application which led to non-achievement of these objectives: 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
34  
Case Study 7 
X organisation repeatedly placed 
558 orders valuing 
`` ``2.81 crore on 
same vendor from January 2018 to 
March 2019 for procurement of 
‘Cartridge’ or ‘toner’.  The 
highest value of order was 
`` ``12.78 
lakh and the lowest was `` ``569. 
Interestingly, total orders placed 
by the said buyer during this 
period were 687. 
A.  Placement of orders repeatedly to same seller 
Audit observed that orders 45  valuing `1,206.45 crore 
were placed more than 20 times by the same buyer 
organisation repeatedly to same suppliers during th e 
period January 2018 to March 2019.  Further, buyers  
also placed orders 
46  valuing `117.41 crore more than 
100 times to same seller and 30 buyer organization 
gave more than 200 orders to same seller (as elabor ated 
through case study 7).  Thus, the system did not ha ve 
checks to ensure transparency and control favouritism.  
Hence, the application may develop in-built control s to 
ensure that ceilings over which value of orders rep eatedly placed on the same seller may be 
implemented, to avoid splitting of orders below the GFR specified thresholds.  
Management (October 2019 and February 2020) stated that 
it is a mark of transparency on 
GeM that this information is centrally available fo r the first time.  Management further 
assured that controls such as masking of identity o f seller, provision of Dashboard to 
competent authority of buyers to control favourism,  fortnightly alerts to such buyers and 
reduction in limit of direct purchase from `50,000 to `25,000, through an amendment in 
the GFR dated 2 April 2019.  Management further sta ted that Business Rule wherein 
Buyers cannot place the order of same product in th e same week to the same seller in Direct 
Purchase has been implemented in the application. 
B.  Invitation for participation in bids to single sellers’/ service provider  
As per RFP, GeM system was envisioned to promote pr ocurement of standardised products 
and services which would in turn reduce/ eliminate the malpractices from the procurement 
process including bid rigging such as making produc t specifications very ‘specific’.  
However, a test check of data pertaining to bid not ifications sent to sellers/ service provider 
for participation, revealed that out of 31,993 bids , in 256 bids, the notifications were sent to 
‘one single seller’ whereas the item procured 
through these bids included items such as 
desktops, writing and printing papers, battery cells, 
chairs, computers server, drinking water cooler, 
Notebook-laptop, etc for which there may be 
several sellers/ service providers on GeM.   
This indicated that the buyers were able to select 
the parameters in such a manner that GeM system 
sent the notification to a single seller despite 
availability of several sellers’/ service provider (as 
indicated in case study 8).   
                                                           
45   3,25,925 cases 
46   37,572 cases 
Case Study 8 
XYZ organisation published a bid for 
procurement of 100 over bed tables 
(hospital beds) valuing 
`` ``10.51 lakh.  
The notification was sent to a single 
seller instead of all the seller selling 
similar items.  Against the bid, single 
participation was received from the 
only seller who received the 
notification and order was 
consequently awarded to that seller. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
35 
Management stated (October 2019 and February 2020) that  GeM has already put limits on 
turnover requirement for resellers and review of Ad ditional Terms & Conditions library 
on a periodic basis is undertaken to ensure no rest rictive conditions are allowed for bids.  
Further, requests for the addition of any additiona l terms and conditions are included 
only with the approval of the competent authority w ithin the buyer’s organisation. Any 
corrigendum uploaded for bids are vetted through Ge M legal team.  Further, the process 
has been improved so that notification goes a larger group of sellers; the filter of turnover 
to determine the eligibility of seller has been relaxed.  
C.  Non-masking of names of service providers 
Audit observed that the name of the ‘Service provid ers’, while selecting services, were not 
‘masked’ and, therefore buyers were able to see the  names of the service provider and could 
easily select the same service provider again and a gain, thereby defeating the purpose of 
transparency.  
Management vide its reply (February 2020) has accepted the audit observation and assured to 
mask the names of service providers in the marketplace. 
4.1.6.5     Deficiencies with regard to economy and price reasonability  
Audit observed certain deficiencies with regard to price reasonability and economy as 
detailed below. 
i.  Sale of products at abnormally low prices 
Audit observed that certain products were available  at an extremely low rate raising concerns 
about the quality and authenticity of the offered p roduct.  Also, due to extremely low prices, 
such products had potential of getting selected as L 1 by the application.  Test check revealed 
that ‘compatible cartridge’ was available at `30 (with market price being `9,000); similarly, a 
trolley bag was available at `67 (with its market price being `1,455). 
Thus, an effective and real-time in built-mechanism  in the application needs to be evolved to 
control these irregularities in such a manner that abnormal changes by the seller in order to 
become L1 are detected in real-time, and investigated.   
Management vide its reply (February 2020) has assur ed that GeM is in the process of 
evolving such real time controls and apart from oth er steps, GeM would ensure price range 
determination on category/ product level and on per cent  discount, monitoring of price 
change during bidding, display the tag of authorise d Reseller/ OEM, explore the movement 
of categories from Q3 to Q2 on case to case basis, evolve system of periodic health reports 
on sellers/ OEMs/ categories and products and ident ification of products with abnormally 
low or high prices product with use of tool.  Manag ement further stated that GeM is making 
it necessary for OEMs to get assessed and developin g additional functionalities to ensure 
market sanity. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
36  
ii.  Procurement of goods at higher rates in case the qu antity to be procured is not 
available with L 1 (Direct Purchase)  
Audit observed that, at the time of selection of it ems, L 1 rates were shown to the buyer along 
with the stock available with L 1.  In case, the quantity required by the buyer was more than 
the stock available with L 1, the L 1 gets changed and new L 1 would be available at higher rates 
than the earlier L 1 due to availability of similar/ same products at d ifferent rates.  There is no 
option to obtain the lower quantity from the old L 1 and additional quantity from another 
vendor. Although this functionality was not require d to be implemented by BRD/ RFP, 
however, lack of this option in GeM application res ults in procurement of items at higher 
rates. 
Management without refuting audit observation state d (October 2019 and February 2020) 
that 
GeM places high emphasis on ensuring price reasonab ility and it has provisioned 
many tools on the platform.  A buyer can view past trends and price of the product which 
is available on other e-commerce portals. Management further stated that savings from the 
portal have been consistently above 25 per cent  for Top-10 categories (excluding 
automobiles).  
Management reply is appreciable, however, buyers ma y be provided more options to 
achieve economy in procurement as in instant cases,  the prices of same product were 
found to be varied and different due to which altho ugh L 
2 happened to have requisite 
quantity however, his prices were more than L 1.  Further, past trends and price 
comparison with other e-commerce websites may be ma de available for all the products 
on GeM as it is not available for all the products presently. 
iii.  Variation in prices of same product 
Audit observed that there were variations in the pr ice 
offered on GeM for the same item on the same day. 
Same departments placed orders at different prices for 
same item on same date.  The variation in ‘offered 
price’ ranged from 
`139 to as high as `6,000 for same 
item (as illustrated in case study 9).  
Management contented that that these items were lar ge 
volume/ heavy weight furniture items and being frei ght intensive, the prices were therefore 
very sensitive to location of consignee also.  Ther e was therefore, very strong possibility that 
rate of even the same item with exactly same specif ication can vary significantly based on 
consignee location etc.  However, Audit review show ed that the system did not allow the 
buyer to choose seller from same or nearby location  which resulted in loading of extra cost 
for distance.  Further, in such instances, the appl ication may prompt/ encourage buyers to 
club their orders in order to achieve economy and d iscounts in prices.  Further, the reply did 
not address the cases where the same department has  got different prices on the same day for 
same consignee location. 
Case Study 9 
A department ordered ‘meeting tables’ 
for 
`` ``23,181 and `` ``17,181 on the same 
day.  Similarly, ‘Steel clothes Locker’ 
were ordered for 
`` ``24,000 and for 
`` ``21,159 on the same day by the same 
department. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
37 
Management vide its further reply (February 2020) a ssured that GeM currently provides 
information on last procurement price in marketplac e and will enhance the functionality to 
provide more information to buyers as suggested by Audit.  
iv.  Variation in market and offered prices and resultant increase in ‘savings’ 
Variations were also observed in ‘Market Price’ sho wn at GeM marketplace and in price 
offered for sale through bid.  A test review of 131 orders considered as “demand aggregation” 
by GeM due to their high value (above `20 crores) revealed that the variation between market 
price and offered price were as high as `1.72 crore 47  with the highest difference being 
93.07 per cent .  In 22 cases 48  out of 131, the price variation was more than `2 lakh.  
Similarly, in 12 cases, the variation was more than `10 lakh.  
Such drastic change in price by sellers resultantly  increased the ‘savings’ which GeM 
claimed to achieve after implementation of version 3.0 in its quarterly GeM Quality Report 
(published on its website), as the ‘savings’ are ca lculated on the basis of difference between 
market price and offered price.  Since GeM is the exclusive procurement portal for 
government organisations, actual economies and savi ngs achieved by buyer 
organisations should be reflected rather than notio nal savings based on dated figures.  
Thus, these figures would better evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of the platform.  
Hence, the methodology for calculation of ‘savings’ on GeM does not appear to be robust and 
needs further review.  
Management vide its reply (February 2020) stated th at GeM has requested IIM Lucknow 
to develop a framework for calculation of savings o n GeM and assess the savings occurring 
due to procurement from GeM and this work is in progress. 
This also raises concerns about the quality of product being offered, especially in cases where 
a product is offered after a reduction of more than 93 per cent  on market price are raised. 
In view of the concerns raised about the price reas onability and related quality {Para (i), (ii) 
and (iv)}, GeM management may identify such transac tions and carry out a detailed analysis 
of the factors giving rise to such cases, develop a  tool to detect the irregularities and 
associated vendors in real-time and also review the  outcomes in such situations and take 
appropriate action, if needed.  These transactions may also be flagged to the buyer 
organisations so that they can rectify deficiencies at their end. 
4.1.6.6     Non-mapping of conditions of Catalog Management 
Catalog Management System (CMS), in GeM, details th e process of new ‘product category’, 
definition of technical parameters, approval/ rejection of Product Catalogue.  It further details 
process of seller authorisation such as ‘Original E quipment Manufacturer’ (OEM) or 
‘Authorised Reseller’.  However, Audit observed tha t following conditions of catalogue 
management were not mapped in the application. 
                                                           
47   Item-full HD video conferencing system 
48   Items such as UPS, routers, Diesel Generators, se rvers, firewall etc. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
38  
i.  Non-integration with validity of OEM authorisation leading to product/ brand 
status remaining ‘active’ despite expiry of validity  
An analysis of data pertaining to OEM authorisation  revealed that from January 2018  
to March 2019, total 65,234 brands/ products reques ted or were approved for OEM 
authorisation out of which 51,557 were 'active' and  13,672 were 'inactive'.  It was observed 
that validity of authorisation in respect of 5,669 product/ brands had ‘expired’.  However, due 
to non-mapping of conditions of BRD and inadequate integration, the status of these product/ 
brands was appearing as ‘Active’ signifying that th ese products were available for ‘sale’ on 
GeM despite expiry of their authorisation from resp ective OEM.  Thus, there is inadequate 
integration with validity period of the product/ br and authorisation with OEM and may lead 
to sale of an unauthorised product or through an unauthorised seller through GeM.   
Management in its reply (October 2019 and February 2020) stated that GeM would 
implement a functionality to notify OEM of all auth orisations due for expiry/ expired so 
that OEMs can take necessary action as required whe rein OEMs would have the option to 
renew/ remove authorisation of such sellers and all  the sellers that have expired authorisation 
codes would be highlighted on the OEM's Panel .  Further, steps are being taken to put in 
place an appeal mechanism for authorised resellers not being permitted by OEMs to onboard 
on GeM. 
ii.  Non-mapping of conditions pertaining to approval of ‘brand’ 
Catalog Management System requires that the entire catalog uploaded by the sellers’/ service 
providers is to be validated by the CMS team before  being published on Marketplace.  In 
respect of Brand Approval, the user could ‘approve’ , ‘reject’, ‘put on-hold’ the requested 
brand within 15 days.  
In this regard, a test check of data revealed that 1,146 brands were ‘requested’ for approval; 
however, the condition pertaining to approval of brand within 15 days was not mapped which 
led to unreasonable delay in approval of the brands .  The details of delay in approval, 
rejection and pendency in respect of brand approval are as follows: 
Table 4.1.4: Details of approval of brands and delays in approval  
Status of approval Number of brands Number of brands 
delayed 
Range of delay 
Approved  636 398 Up to 85 days 
Pending 502 370 More than 80 days 
Rejected 8 1 Up to 23 days 
Management in its reply (June, October 2019 and Feb ruary 2020) stated that sometimes 
sellers’/ service provider upload incomplete docume nts for which GeM team needs to guide 
the sellers’/ service provider to submit correct do cuments before approving or rejecting a 
request.  Also, in some cases, the correspondence w ith seller goes in multiple iterations, as 
sellers’/ service providers take a long time to arr ange the correct documents.  However, 
management assured that changes such as upload of d ocument, website link at the time of 
brand application itself, requisition and submissio n of additional supporting documents 
through approval panel/ seller panel, restriction on submission of brand in category upto three 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
39 
times, and introduction of an automated queue manag ement system ensuring one by one 
approval by members would be implemented. 
iii. Ineffective utilisation of Incident Management System due to non-mapping of 
conditions 
BRD pertaining to ‘Incident Management’ (IM), detai ls the overall framework for 
identification and handling of incidents 49 raised because of deviations on GeM portal at both  
pre-order50 and post-order  stages.  The procedure for resolution of incidents involves the 
following stages: 
 
 
 
 
 
The deviations are categorised on the basis of 
severity as ‘Mild’
51, ‘Serious’ 52 and ‘Severe’ 53 
incidents.  Upto 31 March 2019, 93,222 incidents, 
raised against 55,984 54 orders, were reported 
through ‘Incidents Management Module’.  Out of 
total incidents, 39,460 incidents were raised 
against the buyers while 49,948 incidents were raised against sellers’/ service providers.     
•• •• Delayed resolution of incidents 
Audit observed that there were abnormal delays in r esolution of incidents.  Out of total 
incidents reported upto 31 March 2019, only 51.92 per cent55 of incidents were ‘closed’ and 
rest 48.08 per cent incidents were pending (upto April 2019) for final  resolution.  The details 
are as follows:  
 
 
                                                           
49  deviations from the terms and conditions of procu rement on GeM, including general terms and 
conditions, special terms and conditions 
50  Registration, Product Listing, Procurement Proces s etc.  
51  Mild incidents such as incomplete or unintentiona l erroneous submissions of information 
52  Serious incidents such as non-delivery for direct / L 1 purchases, mis-declaration of Government 
Transaction experience or financial information, su pply of inferior/ substandard quality, furnishing 
inaccurate, false, misleading or forged documents 
53  Severe incidents such as non-delivery of product/  services after successful bidding, seller withdraw s/ 
modifies/ impairs/ derogate from bid in any respect , fails to furnish requisite PBG, registration with  fake 
identity, indulgence in any anti competitive behavi or or cartel formation, corrupt influence, mis-
declaration of MRP 
54  excluding incidents without any order number refe rence 
55  48,399 out of 93,222 
Figure 4.1.10: Incidents raised 
Figure 4.1.9: Stages involved in resolution of incidents 
Against Buyers: 42.33 
per cent
Against Seller: 53.58 
per cent

Report No. 18 of 2020  
40  
Table 4.1.5: Details of resolution of incidents.  
Type of 
Incident 
Total 
incidents 
reported 
Total incidents 
resolved after 
prescribed period 
Percentage of incidents 
resolved after 
prescribed time 56   
Longest 
resolution time in 
one incident 
Mild 2,232 1,645 73.70 283 days 
Serious 65,320 35,369 54.15 338 days 
Severe 21,772 13,475 61.89 336 days 
Thus, in the absence of automatic escalation to the  appropriate authority based on pre-
specified conditions, eg. type of incident, time el apsed from receipt, etc, there were 
prolonged delays in resolution of the incidents, an d thus, the incident management 
mechanism loses its effectiveness as a deterrent.  Further, it allows the defaulter buyers/ 
sellers to operate on GeM even during the period of  consideration of incident which is 
lasting upto 6 - 10 months.   
Management vide its reply (October 2019 and Februar y 2020) stated that the auto-escalation 
and auto-show cause notice in case of non-delivery of products and services fo r Direct 
Purchase, quality related issues of product/ servic e and submission of forged documents to 
GeM  is being implemented and activities such as auto-c losure of non-escalated incidents 
due for escalation, imposition of auto-penalty for system identifiable deviations is also 
under development to enhance the effectiveness of the IM portal. 
The GeM Handbook (July 2018) states that while GeM provides the platform for dispute 
resolution and incident management, GeM is, at the crux of it all, only a platform.  Thus, 
GeM is limited to taking administrative action, ran ging from deviations recorded against 
the seller/ buyer to blocking or suspending of the defaulting buyer/ seller account and a 
blacklisting recommendation to the Board/ Ministry of Commerce.  Nevertheless, Audit 
believes that the GeM SPV needs to take such admini strative action to the fullest extent 
possible. 
•• •• Non-categorisation of level of severity of incidents 
As per the procedure, types of incidents were class ified into ‘Mild’, ‘Serious’ or ‘Severe’ on 
the basis of level of severity.  However, Audit obs erved that field referring to ‘severity level’ 
of the incident was not automatically populated on the basis of type of incidents reported by 
the users, this left severity level of 58 incidents  ‘blank’, i.e. undefined by the system.  The 
resolution time and procedure to be followed for re solution of an incident depended upon 
‘severity’ of incidents, therefore, in absence of s uch categorisation, the resolution time got 
adversely affected.  
Management vide its reply (February 2020) stated th at the system has been evolved now and 
stabilised and no incident can be created without s electing a reason and these reasons 
populate severity of incident in the table; so now such cases do not occur 
. 
 
 
                                                           
56   25, 24 and 22 days in case of mild, serious and s evere incidents respectively 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
41 
iv.  Non-mapping of functionalites as per requirements of GoI, GFR & RFP 
Audit observed that following requirements of GoI, GFR and RFP were not developed and 
implemented in the GeM application. 
• Exclusive procurement of items reserved for Micro a nd Small Enterprise:  Although 
MSE vendors with their respective products have bee n identified on GeM portal, however, 
358 items, reserved for exclusive procurement (20 per cent  annual target) from MSEs as 
required under the Public Procurement Policy for Mi cro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) 
Order, 2012 were not been mapped or linked in the system. 
• ‘Option clause’ of Manual for Procurement of Goods, 2017 (Ministry of Finance):  
The ‘Option Clause’ of ‘Manual for Procurement of Goods, 2017’ specifies that the purchaser 
retains the right to place orders for an additional quantity (increase/ decrease) upto a specified 
percentage (25 to 30 per cent ) of the originally contracted quantity at the same  rate and terms 
of the contract, during the currency of the contrac t.  It further provides that this clause and 
percentage should be part of the Bid Document and t he contract for raw materials/ 
consumables of regular and year-on-year recurrent r equirements and all tenders of value 
above 
`50 lakh should invariably include this clause.  
Audit observed that though the requisite conditions  of ‘option clause’ were mentioned in the 
terms and conditions of the bidding process, however, the process for availing this option was 
not mapped in the application for procurement throu gh bidding.  Therefore, the buyer could 
not increase the quantity of product selected at th e time of bidding as the option for the same 
was not available in the application. 
• Functionality for buy back:  The provision of Buy-Back offer to replace the exi sting 
old items with new procurements through buy-back mo de, especially in case of electronics 
items, e-waste or hazardous items, as required under Rule 176 of GFR, was not mapped.  
• Forward Auction:  ‘Forward Auction’ functionality was not developed f or users as 
required in RFP. 
• Demand aggregation:  Demand aggregation was projected as one of GeM’s g oal in the 
RFP to maintain equilibrium between demand and supp ly, enabling bulk purchase by 
allowing buyer to participate in cycle of Demand Ag gregation and put their demand 
requirements in the portal enabling vendors to offe r the products and best offer prices in the 
portal which would result in more competitive price s.  Audit observed that functionality 
relating to Demand Aggregation was not implemented on GeM portal and the option to put 
the request for participating in cycle of Demand Ag gregation by buyer was not available on 
the portal.   
• Provisions pertaining to QR Code:   RFP required that in order to facilitate effectiv e 
tracking of goods within GeM system, system would h ave functionality of generating GeM 
specific QR-Code for the various goods transacted t hrough GeM platform.  It further stated 
that vendors shall be required to print the GeM QR- Code and affix the same on the supplied 
goods and vendors may have their own QR-code/ bar c ode that may be additionally affixed 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
42  
on the supplied goods.  However, the said functiona lity was not made available which would 
lead to inability of user to track the ordered item. 
• Inadequate implementation of e-EMD and e-PBG:   Audit observed that, though, 
GFR 170 and 171 did not provide for any monetary restriction on value of orders in obtaining 
EMD and PBG from seller, on GeM application, option for EMD was not available for orders 
having value less than 25 lakh and option for PBG w as not available for orders having value 
less than 30 lakh. It was also observed that EMD was not automated. 
• GeM ios application : RFP required that the MSP shall create a GeM Mobile  App 
(both for Android and iOS) in Phase-2 which would i nclude access to Plain Buy, Plain L 1 
Buy, Reverse Auction, Forward Auction, Demand Aggre gation, etc.  However, mobile app 
for iOS supported phones was yet to be rolled out.  
Management vide its reply (May, October 2019 and Fe bruary 2020) has assured that 
necessary s teps to implement/ enable all the above functionali ties/ compliances are 
already in process except in case of e-EMD & e-PBG wherein it has replied that in 
compliance to Rule 170 (iii) 57  of GFR, provision has been made in GeM ‘General Terms & 
Conditions’ to obtain Bid Securing Declaration of all sellers. 
Management reply in respect of e-EMD and e-PBG over looks the fact that GFR does not put 
restriction on value of order.  Further, provision mentioned in Rule 170 (iii) is an ‘option’ 
available in place of ‘bid security’ and does not t ake away the right to obtain bid security 
implying that buyers may be provided with both the options. 
v.  Deficiences and lack of functionalities in ‘marketplace’ 
GeM was intended to provide an end to end system, seamless process flow and standardised 
specifications; however, Audit found certain deficiencies: 
a.  Limited development of functionality of ‘Price Comparison’ and ‘Price Trend’:  
Para 3.2 of BRD on ‘Market place’ related to price reasonability states that buyer should have 
provision to view price trends basis, the purchase history of a product and category on GeM.  
It further provides that the buyer should have the provision to view prices of the same or a 
similar product on different marketplaces.  
However, a test check revealed that the link to tre nds and comparisons was not implemented 
exhaustively for all the items available on GeM and  was available for limited products.  Price 
comparison feature was not available for categories  such as office furniture (almirah), 
operating system software, etc.  Also, the trend of  entire ‘category’ was shown instead of 
trend of ‘individual’ items 
58  thereby making the comparison invalid and of limit ed use.  Test 
check also revealed that despite availability of co mparison link, no comparison was shown 
                                                           
57   In place of Bid security, the Ministries/ Departm ents may require bidders to sign a Bid Securing 
declaration accepting that if they withdraw or modi fy their bids during the period of validity, or if they 
are awarded the contract and they fail to sign the contract, or to submit a performance security befor e 
the deadline defined in the request for bids docume nt, they will be suspended for the period of time 
specified in the request for bids documents from be ing eligible to submit bids for contracts with the entity 
that invited the bids. 
58   A scooty was compared with bikes such as Bullet 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
43 
while clicking on ‘comparison link’ in respect of i tems such as AC, Television, Desktop, 
Laptop and projector.  Thus, the functionality of t rends and comparisons is not exhaustive 
and needs enhancements.   
Management vide its reply (May, October 2019 and Fe bruary 2020) assured that it has 
implemented price comparison for 32 categories and is in the process of implementing for 
other most relevant categories in stages.  Manageme nt has further stated that enhanced 
version of price trends on basis of similar matchin g products is available for 72 categories 
and will be implemented for remaining categories. 
b.  Non display of breakup of installation and commissioning charges 
Audit observed that the prices of some goods requir ing installation and commissioning were 
shown inclusive of installation and commissioning c harges whereas prices of similar other 
goods were shown exclusive of these charges.  As pr ocurement of items are largely affected 
by ‘price’, therefore in the case of items which ar e shown exclusive of installation and 
commissioning charges, the buyer would find it hard  to ascertain the probable amount of 
these charges.  Therefore, Audit is of the opinion that the charges of installation and 
commissioning, whether inclusive or not, may be spe cifically mentioned along with cost of 
product as it causes inconvenience to buyers if suc h products are selected as L 
1 by GeM 
application. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) 
stated that enhancement in respect of providing 
breakup of installing and commissioning cost has already initiated. 
c.  Non-availability of the application in any other language except English 
As per sub para 2 of clause 10.2.4 of RFP, the port al should have multi-lingual capabilities 
with regional, localisation and unicode support and  one of the key features would be the 
ability of showing the content in multiple languages.  
Audit observed that, although there is a language d rop down menu at the top bar of the home 
page, however, on choosing ‘Hindi’ language option,  only ‘login page’ was available in 
Hindi language and once the user logged into the ap plication, the content on next page 
appeared in English language instead of Hindi.  Thu s, the requirement of providing the portal 
in various languages, was not implemented on GeM an d the application is not catering to 
regional users in their regional languages.  Hence, users are not left with any option but to use 
the application in ‘English’ language.   
Management (May, October 2019 and February 2020) as sured that development of this 
functionality is prioritised for taking up in April  2020, as this enhancement requires freezing 
of source code for four to six weeks. 
d.  Non-availability of functionality to apply for corrigendum through GeM application 
Sub-clause 4 of Bid Terms and Conditions of clause 7.1 states that buyers can edit buyer 
specific Additional Terms and Conditions (ATC) for an on-going bid before any participation 
begins with minimum three days remaining for bid to  end and the same would be published 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
44  
as a corrigendum in the bid and can be viewed by bu yers, sellers/ service provider and public 
with notification to existing participants. 
However, Audit observed that there was no option av ailable on buyer’s dashboard to initiate 
the process of issuance of corrigendum and if a buy er wanted to issue corrigendum the buyer 
had to send an email to GeM for approval for the sa me.  The process causes inconvenience to 
the user due to manual intervention.  In order to e liminate manual intervention, prejudices 
and subjectivity and ensure availability of complet e audit trail, it is essential that the process 
may be mapped in application itself on the buyer’s dashboard. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) confirmed  that as per suggestion of audit, in 
place of e-mail based approval used earlier, the re quest and approval part has now been made 
available in application itself in Request Manageme nt Module.  Thus, corrigendum request 
process has been fully automated. 
e.  Non-display of batch/ year of manufacturing 
While procuring on GeM portal a buyer can see the s pecifications of the product along with 
all the features of item.  However, the batch or ye ar of manufacturing of the article is not 
shown which may help in ensuring quality/ expiry of  the product, especially those products 
which are perishable in nature and have limited she lf life.  The batch number/ year of 
manufacture may be intimated to buyer at the time of dispatching the shipment to avoid delay 
due to rejection of goods at the stage of CRAC and to ensure assurance of adequate quality to 
buyers in advance which may be ascertained with date of packaging/ manufacturing. 
Management (June, October 2019 and February 2020) i n its reply stated that since seller 
inventory information is not maintained on GeM, the  stock information is not available to 
show on the portal.  However, management also assur ed that GeM is working on the 
implementation of the QR Code which will cater to t he suggestion of Audit of making the 
batch number/ year of manufacture available to the buyer at the time dispatching the 
shipment. 
 
f.  Inadequate development of functionalities related to various ‘filters’ and ‘sorting’ 
Audit observed that sorting on the basis of ‘Number  of order count’ and ‘Product/ service 
rating’ was not implemented by GeM and the Product Details Page (PDP) did not show MSE 
as category and PMA value 59  as required under BRD. 
Management vide its reply (February 2020) assured t hat a revised Business Requirement 
Document (BRD) is being prepared for simultaneous i mplementation of MSE and Make in 
India (erstwhile PMA) based on the latest policies in consultation with the controlling 
ministries i.e. MSME Ministry and DPIIT and also as sured that sorting feature is being 
enhanced. 
 
 
                                                           
59   Preference for domestically manufactured electron ic goods 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
45 
g.  Difficulties while navigating through the application 
Audit observed that application lacked ease while n avigating through the application due to 
deficiencies in functionalities such as ‘switching to previous page’ as the application directly 
logged the user out, application did not respond to  ‘Enter’ button of keyboard.  The 
application did not indicate how long it would take  to approve the service while uploading a 
service.  Thus, an uncertainty remained for approva l for service and time taken for it.  Audit 
also observed deficiencies in following services re sultantly causing inconvenience and 
lacking ease of usage: 
Table 4.1.6 
Name of service Deficiency observed 
 ‘Consultancy Services’ and 
‘Application Development Services’ 
Functionality to add these services was missing des pite 
availability of their ‘names’ in the drop-down menu.   
 ‘Florist’, ‘Cleaning & Sanitisation’ 
and ‘Data & Voice Services’  
The tool tip for manner of filling location was not  
available making it difficult to understand the pro cess of 
selecting location. 
‘Back up Service’  Absence of tool tip while feeding information of qu antity 
field in ‘estimator’ due to which it could not be 
understood as to what information was to be fed in 
‘estimator’ field. 
 ‘Cleaning and Sanitization 2.0’. The location tabs/ filters in respect of ‘Cleaning and 
Sanitization 2.0’ was not available. 
As user experience differs, therefore, application mus t ensure inclusion of easy and 
understandable terms with adequate tool tips for fu rther support and the easy 
functionality.  
Management in its reply (February 2020) assured to consider all these in the UI/ UX (User 
Interface/ User Experience) enhancement work which is currently in the design stage in GeM 
and redesigning of GeM portal is underway. 
vi.  Inadequacies in functionalities pertaining to procurement and upload of ‘Services’ 
GeM was envisioned to introduce functionality of pr ocurement of services as procurements 
from DGS&D were restricted to products only.  Audit  found following deficiencies in the 
existing process of service procurement: 
(i)  Inadequate development of services 
As per clause 5.3.2 RFP pertaining to Application Design, Development and Implementation, 
total 79 services were to be implemented on GeM por tal.  However, Audit observed that 
services such as, ‘Inspection Service’, ‘Survey’, ‘ Energy Conservation’, ‘Custodial’, ‘Land 
Record Services’, ‘Project Management Services’, ‘H ighway Services’, ‘Bridges and 
Tunnels’, ‘Irrigation and other water works’ etc. a s required in RFP, have not been 
introduced on GeM portal till now instead services are added on demand of buyers.   
Management in its reply (October 2019 and February 2020) stated that 
services in RFP are 
defined only in flat form.  Service on-boarding is an ongoing exercise on GeM; currently 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
46  
there are 105 services.  Management assured that Ge M shall consider implementation of 
service mentioned in RFP on the basis of periodic r eview and suitability of services 
category.  However, the management reply that 105 s ervices have been implemented 
overlooks the fact that the services on GeM have be en inflated due to introduction of a 
sub-services/ category of main service as a separate full-fledged service.  
(ii)  Non-verification of nature of vehicles being hired by various Government offices in 
violation of Ministry of Finance and CVC instructions 
To prevent corrupt/ undesirable practices in awardi ng contracts for hiring of vehicles to 
Government offices, Ministry of Finance circular dated 23 September 2016 requires that only 
vehicles registered as taxi or public transport veh icle be hired.  However, Audit observed that 
on GeM portal, there was no mechanism to confirm th at the vehicle being provided to 
Government Offices are private vehicles or register ed as taxi vehicles.  Further, other related 
statutory requirements such as vehicle permits, etc. were also not being verified by GeM.   
Management in its reply (February 2020) stated that  GeM is planning to allow the sellers to 
attach all statutory documents in the bid for verification by the buyers and that the documents 
may expire during the tenure of service contract pe riod which will have to be verified by the 
buyer only.  It is, therefore, for the buyer organi sations to ensure compliance of the relevant 
guidelines of Ministry of Finance and CVC. 
(iii)  Non-availability of option to upload registration certificate 
As per clause 4.1 of SLA of ‘Data and Voice Service ’, the seller needs to be registered with 
and comply to all the rules and regulations set for th by DoT/ TRAI on time-to-time basis. 
However, there is no option to add the ‘Registration Certificate’ at the time of addition of this 
service by the seller. Thus, the system allowed buy ers even without ‘Registration Certificate’ 
with TRAI to operate on GeM.  T 
hese are preliminary verifications and may be undertaken 
by GeM at the time of registration so as to ensure that only service providers with 
verified credentials are allowed.  
Management in its reply (February 2020) assured to  provide the provision to upload 
registration certificate for Data and Voice service. 
(iv)  Deficiency in experience parameters of resources in  case of outsourcing of Human 
Resource Services 
While selecting parameters for outsourcing of Human  Resource Service, it was observed that 
in case of selection of ‘Experience’ of resources, the given options were either ‘0-3 years’, 
‘3-7 year’ and ‘more than 7 years’. Thus, in the fi rst slab (0-3 years experience), non-
experienced (zero experience) resources as well as experienced (above zero experience) 
resources are lying in the same category.  Due to t his, the chances of getting a non-
experienced resource especially in case of skilled services are equal, even if not desired.   
Management vide its reply (July and October 2019) h as assured that GeM will re-define 
experience in case of outsourcing of Human Resource  Services in the slabs of 
‘inexperienced’, ‘> 0 year and < 3 years’, ‘> 3 and < 7 years’ and ‘>7 years’. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
47 
4.1.7 Conclusion  
GeM was envisaged to bring transparency, speed, eff iciency and ease of doing business, curb 
delay in payment, economy and price reasonability.  GeM has been successful in 
implementing an on-line solution for government pro curement.  However, the critical 
requirement of STQC audit for ensuring compliance w ith the GoI MEITY Guidelines 
(August 2011) for compliance to Quality Requirement s of e-Procurement Systems was not 
complied with.  Hence, Audit is unable to derive as surance about the authenticity, non-
repudiability and integrity of the e-bidding mode o f GeM (the electronic equivalent of the 
manual ‘sealed bid’ process). 
Further, the objectives of GeM, as per the approval of the competent authority in Government 
(April 2017), remain partially achieved since there  are numerous delays at different stages of 
the procurement process, especially with regard to delays in payment.  Delay in payments is a 
serious systemic issue which impacts the achievemen ts of objectives of GeM and needs to be 
addressed by Ministry of Commerce in coordination w ith Ministry of Finance.  There were 
also deficiencies in the input controls for buyer a nd seller registration.  Despite being 
mandatory for all central government offices, high number of dormant or inactive users 
indicates that universal acceptance may not have be en achieved.  There were deficiencies in 
the mapping of the GFR and GoI’s other rules and re gulations and Business Requirement 
Documents.  There were also significant delays in t he incident resolution mechanism.  
Although GeM had intended to introduce procurement of services through GeM, however, 
various services were yet to be introduced on GeM.    
Audit had noted that the timeframe of six months fr om the date of signing of the MSP 
Agreement (31 August 2017) for implementation of Phase-1 was challenging inspite of which 
the Phase-1 Go-Live of GeM 3.0 was declared prematu rely.  The deficiencies pointed out in 
this report, i.e. in obtaining the requisite certif ication and in various general and application 
controls, would appear to have required greater due diligence. 
As regards economy, Audit felt that the methodology  used by GeM to indicate savings did 
not give an accurate picture.  The application lacked ease of usage due to absence  of 
functionalities and assistance.  The application wa s also not benchmarked as per the requisite 
number of users making the application slow and in continuous breakdown.   
4.1.8 Recommendations 
• The requirement for STQC audit of compliance with t he GoI MEITY Guidelines for 
Quality Requirements of e-Procurement Systems shoul d be immediately complied with on 
top priority.  Such audits should also be made appl icable for new/ amended functionalities to 
ensure that application releases are released into the production environment only after STQC 
audit for compliance with the Guidelines is done. 
• Ongoing maintenance of seller credibility and marke t sanity should be a key area of 
focus for GeM, both through use of analytics report s for outliers/ anomalies as identified in 
this Report (e.g. unusually low prices, unusual var iations/ increases in prices, non-delivery/ 
extreme delivery delays; other seller incidents etc .) and through strong seller management 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
48  
teams, with blacklisting being used appropriately t o address seller misbehaviour and ensure 
seller compliance. 
• On the buyer side, delayed payment is a critical is sue which could adversely impact 
the performance of the GeM Platform.  GeM SPV shoul d closely monitor the implementation 
of Ministry of Finance instructions on timely payme nt, and instances of undue delay should 
be taken up at the highest level with the concerned  Department Secretary/ Head of the 
Organisation for speedy corrective action.  Further , Ministry of Commerce may take up the 
issue with Ministry of Finance to issue specific in structions to all Government entities for 
mandatorily ensuring timely payment of dues. 
• A rigorous data cleansing process for addressing th e instances of incomplete/ wrong 
data of buyers and sellers (including legacy data) needs to be put in place, with clear 
timelines by which buyers and sellers should be de- activated/ closed for not correcting 
erroneous data. 
• In order to attain economy in procurement, especially in bulk purchases which require 
aggregation of demand, to ensure availability of ge nuine quality products, participation from 
OEMs and authorised sellers need to be increased.  This will also ensure timely delivery and 
will further reduce cases of rejection of products and non-payment. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
49  
CHAPTER V: MINISTRY OF FINANCE 
(DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES)  
 
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited 
 
5.1 Review of Loans to Road Projects  
5.1.1    Introduction  
India Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL ), is a wholly-owned Government of 
India company set up (January 2006) to provide long  term finance to viable infrastructure 
projects through the scheme for financing viable in frastructure projects under its policy 
documents referred to as SIFTI.  The sectors eligib le for financial assistance from IIFCL 
broadly include transportation, energy, water, sani tation, communication, social and 
commercial infrastructure.  Resources for carrying out the loan activities are raised by IIFCL 
through bonds and loans from domestic sources and l ines of credit from external sources like 
Asian Development Bank and World Bank etc.  
IIFCL provides loans to road projects being execute d under Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
model, based on Concession Agreement (CA) signed be tween a Concessionaire (the 
developer) and a Concessioning Authority 
1.  Financing activities of IIFCL were largely 
concentrated in road sector at 44 per cent ( `31,051 crore) as on March 2019.  Gross non-
performing assets (NPA) in road sector were signifi cant as 37.25 per cent  (`5,187 crore ) of 
the amount was outstanding as on 31 March 2019 and the net NPA in road sector was much 
higher at 17.84 per cent  against internally approved overall limit for net NPA at 2.75 per cent 
of total loan outstanding across all sectors.   
In view of the deteriorating position of NPAs perta ining to loan accounts of road projects, 
Audit selected to review the mechanism in vogue for  sanction, disbursement, restructuring 
and monitoring of loans of road sector by IIFCL dur ing the period 2016-17 to 2018-19.  The 
audit sample was selected based on Stratified Rando m Sampling Method using IDEA from 
the total disbursements made as indicated below {details of loan are given in (Annexure-II)}: 
Table 5.1.1: Details of sample selected 
Categories of loan cases during 2016-17 
to 2018-19) 
Total no. of loan 
cases 
No of loan 
cases selected 
Percentage  
NPA cases 49 9 18 
Disbursement only  33 9 2 27 
Sanction having disbursement  12 3 25 
Prepayment  32 4 12 
Restructuring  4 3 75 
Sanction only 18 4 22 
Total  148 32 21 
 
                                                           
1  National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)/ Stat e Government Agencies 
2  Includes one case under Takeout Finance Scheme.  All other selected cases are under Direct Lending 
Scheme 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
50  
5.1.2   Audit findings  
Audit has commented on 24 cases out of 32 cases as in four cases, borrowers have fully paid 
the loans and in other four cases of sanctioned loa n, no Lending Confirmation Notice (LCN) 
was received till completion of field audit.  Audit  findings on 24 loan cases are given in the 
succeeding paragraphs:  
5.1.2.1 Failure to ensure availability of land/ Rig ht of Way (RoW) to the 
concessionaires 
In road financing, the lenders have negligible phys ical security against the loan dues as the 
main assets of the project i.e. land, road and othe r structures thereon constructed by the 
concessionaire (borrower) are owned by the Concessi oning Authority.  The loan is serviced 
mainly from toll revenue generated from operations of commercially viable road project 
completed under BOT model.  In case the project rem ains incomplete for any reason, there 
exists inter alia  no mechanism in the CA to compensate the borrower for the work done so 
that the lenders are paid their dues as discussed below:  
• If CA is terminated by Concessioning Authority for Concessionaire’s default, a 
termination payment (equivalent to 90 per cent  of debt dues) would be payable by the 
Concessioning Authority to the Concessionaire provi ded the project is issued the Project 
Completion Certificate 3/ Provisional Project Completion Certificate i.e., Certificate of 
Provisional Commercial Operation Date (PCOD) by Con cessioning Authority.  PCOD is 
issued by the Concessioning Authority only after co mpletion of atSleast 75 per cent  work on 
the project, thereby permitting the Concessionaire to collect toll revenue from operations of 
the project, pending completion. 
• The Appointed Date, which shall also be deemed to b e the date of commencement of 
concession period, shall generally be fixed only on  or after each and every condition 
precedent to the CA including availability of unenc umbered right of way to the land (RoW) 
to the Concessionaire to the extent of at least 80 per cent of the total area of project is either 
satisfied or waived off by the Concessioning Authority.  
The above provisions in the CA increase the risk le vel of the road projects if the 
Concessionaire commences the work in the project be fore having possession of the required 
RoW and the project is unable to achieve PCOD.  
The condition for availability of minimum 80 per cent RoW before first disbursement was 
stipulated in 14 cases (58 per cent ) examined in Audit, while the condition of 100 per cent  
RoW for loan disbursement after appointed date was found included in only two cases 
(eight per cent ). Deficiencies in the Common Loan Agreements (CLAs ) and also the 
observations pertaining to non-compliance of the st ipulated conditions in the above cases are 
discussed below: 
                                                           
3  In case of four to six laning, Project Completion  Certificate is issued on 100 per cent completion o f the 
project and commercial operation date (COD) commenc es from the Appointed Date or the date of 
Financial Closure, whichever is later. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
51  
(i)  In six cases, the pre-disbursement conditions of CL As either did not quantify (i.e. 
stipulated only ‘reasonable availability of RoW’) or did not include any specific clause on the 
issue of requirement of RoW.  As a result, the loan was sanctioned without mitigating the risk 
of non-availability of atleast 80 per cent  RoW of the project on appointed date  before 
disbursement of first loan installment and it was o ne of main reasons that out of six loans, 
three 4 loans amounting to `674.35 crore turned into NPA and one loan (NJTBPL) had to be 
restructured.  These four cases are indicated as under: 
Table 5.1.2 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
contractor 
Name of project  Length 
of 
road 
in KM 
Provision of 
availability 
of RoW in 
CA as on 
Appointed 
Date  
in per cent  
Actual 
availability 
of RoW at 
the time of 
first 
disbursement 
by IIFCL 
in per cent   
Date & amount of 
first disbursement  
Date Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
1 IIGTL 5 4 laning of 
Indore to Gujarat 
155.15  80 51.43 January 
2011 
18.20 
2 BKEL 6 4 lane highway 
on the Barasat-
Krishnagar 
84.317 
 80 14.73 December 
2011 
21.54 
3 BHPL 7 2 lane road on 
NH 24 from 
Bareilly to 
Sitapur 
151 
 80 72 June 2011 16.92 
4 NJBPL 8 Development of 
a Greenfield 
alignment 
connecting NH-
31 
50.943 
 80 23.55 August 
2012 
7.69 
IIFCL continued to disburse the loan despite NHAI n ot making available the balance land 
within six months of appointed date or de-scoping t he work on non-available land, which is 
indicative of the fact that lenders including IIFCL  did not adequately protect their interest 
before disbursement of loan. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that NHAI has been declaring Appointed Date without 
complying with agreed terms of providing RoW.  Besi des, NHAI often declares availability 
of RoW at 3C/ 3D 
9 stage whereas the RoW is supposed to be declared a t 3G/ 3H 10  stage.  
IIFCL in case of BHPL and BKEL replied that NHAI ne ither made the balance RoW 
available within six months of Appointed Date nor d e-scoped the RoW, which was not made 
                                                           
4  IIGTL( `` ``    299.72 crore), BKEL( `` ``    121.18 crore), and BHPL( `` ``    253.45 crore) 
5  IVRCL Indore Gujarat Tollways Limited 
6  Barasat-Krishnagar Expressway Limited 
7  Bareilly Highways Project Limited 
8  Navayuga Jhanvi Toll Bridge Private Limited 
9  3C denotes stage of hearing of objections, 3D den otes stage of notification for acquiring the land 
10   3G denotes stage of determination of amount of co mpensation of land, 3H denotes stage of deposit of 
amount of compensation with competent authority to pay to the respective persons 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
52  
available, resulting in erosion of viability of the  road project.  NHAI delayed handing over of 
RoW in case of IIGTL while in case of NJTBPL, it fa iled to fulfill its duty to provide RoW 
within the scheduled period, which adversely affect ed the project. IIFCL added that as per 
SIFTI, it was supposed to follow the appraisal carr ied out and disbursements made by the 
lead bank, which was adhered to by IIFCL .  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) the views of 
Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that as per SIFTI, IIFCL is to finance viable 
projects only.  Without the required unencumbered R oW for construction of road, the 
viability of the project cannot be established and that in itself is a risk. IIFCL was required to 
safeguard its interest by ensuring inclusion of sui table pre-disbursement clauses in the CLA 
on pre-availability of RoW and its compliance to mi tigate the risk, which was not done.  
Further, the Inter Creditor Agreement 11  also required the lenders to decide on sanction/ 
disbursement of loan based on their independent jud gement without reliance on information 
provided by any other lenders. This requirement also remained unfulfilled. 
(ii)  As per CA, the concessionaire is eligible for payme nt in case of default subject to 
completion of 100 per cent  work in respect of widening the roads from four to  six lane.  As 
such, the condition of 100 per cent  pre-availability of encumbrance free RoW with requ isite 
forest clearances should have been stipulated in the CLAs, so as to plan the work and execute 
it smoothly.    
In four cases {SEW LSY Highway Limited (SLHL), Barw a Adda Expressway Limited 
(BAEL), Pune Satara Toll Road Private Limited (PSTP L) and DA Toll Road Limited 
(DATRL)},  CLAs stipulated the condition of minimum 80 per cent  to 85 per cent  RoW for 
disbursement of first loan installment, but did not stipulate the condition of 100 per cent  RoW 
for subsequent disbursements of loan within 90 days  from the Appointed Date.  This has 
resulted in non-completion of work in two 
12  loan cases i.e. SLHL and BAEL mainly due to 
non-availability of clear RoW. These projects were not eligible even for termination 
payments due to Concessionaire’s default occurring prior to commercial operation date 
(CoD). Both loan cases turned into NPAs with outsta nding principal amount of 
`439.42 crore.  
Besides this, in other two loan cases i.e. PSTPL and DATRL, due to non-availability of RoW, 
the projects got delayed and the loans had to be re structured thrice with extension of time for 
original Scheduled COD (as per CLA) from January an d April 2016 to January and April 
2019 in respect of DATRL and PSTPL respectively.  T he work is still under progress, 
(January 2020) and the loan of IIFCL amounting to `591.78 crore (DATRL: `400 crore, 
PSTPL: `191.78 crore) in the projects is still at high risk.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that: 
• In case of SLHL and BAEL, NHAI declared availabilit y of RoW at 3C/ 3D stage 
(issue of notification/ gazette) whereas the RoW is  supposed to be declared at 3G/ 3H 
                                                           
11  Signed among the consortium lenders 
12   SLHL and BAEL 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
53  
(deposition of compensation and right to enter) sta ge.  In case of SLHL, as per the 
borrower, land was available to the extent of 95.67  per cent .  In case of BAEL, at the 
time of sanction/ disbursal, more than 80 per cent  of RoW was available with the 
Concessionaire, and thus it complied with the provisions of CLA.  
• In case of PSTPL, three years after first disbursem ent (April 2018), availability of 
hindrance-free land was 96 per cent  and as the project is tolling for 100 per cent  
stretch there is no revenue risk. 
• In case of  DATRL, provisional completion certificate (PCC) may  be issued by the 
Independent Engineer, if construction work is compl eted on all the lands for which 
RoW has been granted by the Authority within 90 days of the Appointed Date. 
The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) the views of Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that, th ere is no provision in CAs to issue PCC for 
incomplete road and tolling for 100 per cent  stretch from the existing four lanes would not 
mitigate the risk of non-recovery of debt in case o f termination of Concession Agreement 
before completion of the Project. 
(iii)  In case of Concast Path Bameetha Satna Road Project s Private Limited (CPBSRPL), 
the CLA stipulated (May 2013) the condition of 100 per cent  availability of RoW before 
disbursement of any loan.  Yet, the loan was disbur sed with availability of 64 per cent  RoW 
only.  Non-availability of required RoW resulted in  non-achievement of CoD, termination 
(January 2018) of CA and the loan amounting to 
`43.20 crore of IIFCL turned NPA on 
30 September 2017. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that as informed by  the Concessioning Authority, 
100 per cent  RoW was handed over to the Concessionaire and the pre sanction inspection 
was done by the lead bank.   The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) the views of Management.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that non -availability of 100 per cent  RoW to the 
project was known to the lenders including IIFCL be fore disbursement of second installment 
(December 2013) as 
Lenders Independent Engineer (LIE)’s report (December 2013) 
mentioned that MPRDC 13  has not awarded the construction permit in the ent ire stretch of 
12 km of reserved forest and some land acquisition was required in some places which was 
under inspection. 
5.1.2.2   Not ensuring availability of necessary clearances/  approvals  
One of the conditions for loan disbursement in all CLAs was that the Concessionaire shall 
obtain all requisite statutory and other necessary approvals, including the forest, 
environmental and pollution clearances/ approvals before commencing disbursement.  
Status of the compliance of pre-disbursement condit ions before first disbursement of loan in 
the selected cases is given as under: 
                                                           
13   Madhya Pradesh Road Development Corporation Limit ed (MPRDC)  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
54  
Table 5.1.3: Details of compliance to the conditions of clearances/ approvals 
Category of Loan  Sample 
size 
Compliance to pre-disbursement 
condition of all clearances/ 
approvals 
Yes No 
NPA 9 3 6 
Fresh sanction & disbursement 3 3 0 
Old sanction & disbursement 9 8* 0 
Restructuring 3 2 1 
Total 24 16 7 
*One case pertained to take out finance where clearance issue was not applicable  
As such, in 29 per cent  (7 out of 24) cases, the loans were disbursed desp ite non-compliance 
of the pre-disbursement conditions of obtaining env ironment/ forest clearance and other 
necessary approvals before first disbursement.  Delay of 13 months to 95 months in obtaining 
statutory clearance has resulted in delay in comple tion of work and consequently turning of 
six 14  loan cases in NPAs and restructuring of one 15  loan case.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that the Concession aire had issued the draw down notice 
confirming that all the pre-disbursement conditions  in CLA had been satisfied and all the 
necessary certificates had already been provided.  As per SIFTI, IIFCL disbursed the amount 
in line with what the lead bank disbursed in the Pr oject.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) 
the views of Management.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  Inter Creditor Agreement required the 
lenders to decide on sanction/ disbursement of faci lity based on their independent judgement 
without reliance on information provided by any other lender.   
5.1.2.3    Adjustment/ funding of overdue IDC  
The loan for a project is sanctioned based on the p roject financials, including inter alia , the 
proportion of interest during construction (IDC) in the project cost.  Audit noticed that during 
disbursement of loans, IIFCL adjusted a higher proportion of loan against IDC than what was 
approved during loan sanction.  With these adjustments, the loan account remained ‘standard’ 
though no repayment was made by the borrower as per  the loan servicing schedule.  Audit 
noticed six such instances in the sample audited wh erein `284.47 crore was adjusted against 
the admissible limit of `124.89 crore.  This has resulted in excess adjustme nt of IDC by 
`159.58 crore and deferment of NPAs by 4 months to 43 months as detailed in table 5.1.4. 
                                                           
14   (i) BHPL, (ii) Sion-Panvel Tollways Private Limit ed (SPTPL), (iii) SLHL,(iv) SSRPL, (v) HHPL, and 
(vi) IIGTL 
15   NJBTPL 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
55  
Table 5.1.4 
Statement showing details of selected loans wherein IDC was excess adjusted  
(figures in `` ``crore) 
Sl.No. Name of 
borrower 
Inbuilt 
portion of 
IDC in loan 
(IIFCL)   
Actual 
IDC 
adjusted 
by IIFCL   
Excess 
adjustment  
IDC 
adjustment 
through self 
disbursement  
Deferment 
of NPA 
1 BKEL 14.89 44.00 29.11 -- March 2016 
to March 
2017 
2 BHPL  56.82 71 14.18 --  
3 IIGTL 23.98 87.42 63.44 -- July 2013 to 
January 2017  
4 SLHL 9.66 29.7 20.04 5.88 November 
2015 to 
September 
2016 
5 CPBSRPL  4.52 10.71 6.19 -- -- 
6 SSRPL 16  15.02 41.64 26.62 4.02 May 2018 to 
December 
2018 
 Total  124.89 284.47 159.58 -- -- 
IIFCL stated (May 2020) that they have disbursed as  per LCN's issued by Lead Bank to 
maintain the basic consortium spirit.  It is to be mentioned here that all other consortiu m 
members also disbursed the fund on the basis of LCN 's issued by the Lead Bank.  The gap in 
the means of finance was funded by the Company, onc e the allocated IDC was exhausted.  
After that, IDC portion is continuously funded by t he promoter to keep the account standard 
till date.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
Reply of IIFCL is to be viewed against the fact tha t the promoter had not funded the IDC 
after exhausting of limit.  This has resulted in excess adjustment of IDC by `159.58 crore and 
deferment of NPAs by 4 months to 43 months. 
5.1.2.4   Sanction of loan for cost overrun without obtainin g approval from the 
Concessioning Authority 
The CAs provided that, in the case of termination o f CA, the Concessioning Authority shall 
make termination payment towards the ‘debt dues’ of  senior lenders subject to the condition 
that the amount of debt due shall be determined wit h reference to the terms of Financial 
Agreements (including CLA).  The CLAs stipulate tha t ‘The promoter/ sponsor of the 
Concessionaire company gives a shortfall undertakin g that they would invest additional 
funds in the project in case of any cost overrun an d/ or gap in means of financing due to 
whatever reasons.’   As such, any loan disbursed towards cost overrun (by signing 
supplementary agreements with the concessionaire) w ithout getting the project cost revised 
                                                           
16   Sidhi Singrauli Road Project Limited 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
56  
from the concessioning authority may not constitute  the ‘debt due’ for the purpose of 
termination payment.   
Audit observed that IIFCL sanctioned and disbursed loans of `356.88 crore and  ` 347.85 
crore towards cost overrun including additional IDC , without ensuring prior approval of 
revised project cost from the concessioning authority in four cases as detailed below: 
Table 5.1.5 
Detail of loans where cost overrun was sanction without approval of Concessioning Authority   
(figures in `` `` crore)  
Particulars Sanction of cost 
overrun   
Disbursement  Remarks  
BHPL 58.69 53.45 The promoter company had also suffered 
substantial operating losses and was under 
Corporate Debt Restructuring with one of 
the directors of the promoter company being 
arrested in July 2015 for an alleged real 
estate fraud.  
HHPL 51.96 51.96 At the time of sanction of both the abo ve 
stated cost overruns by IIFCL, the promoter 
company had suffered loss of `773.09 crore 
by 31 March 2014 and was under Corporate 
Debt Restructuring. The release of additional 
fund under such circumstances was highly 
risky.  
IIGTL 108.64 108.64 Profitability of the promoters had tu rned into 
NPA since 2012-13 and credit rating had 
gone down to ‘D’ in 2013-14.  
REPL 17   137.59 133.80 - 
Total  356.88 347.85 - 
IIFCL stated (May 2020) that after initial disburse ment it is not feasible to stop further 
disbursement on account of non-compliance of CLA wh ich are of regular/ renewal in nature 
as stopping funds availability during construction phase may had led to zero recovery for 
lenders as in accordance with the terms of CA proje ct is eligible for termination payment 
only after achievement of PCOD/ DCCO.  The Ministry  endorsed (June 2020) the views of 
Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that sin ce cost overrun was funded by the lenders 
without ensuring approval of revised project cost b y the Concessioning Authority and despite 
the deteriorating financial position of the Concess ionaires/ promoters, IIFCL had written off 
loan amounting 
`410.42 crore in case of BHPL ( `253.46 crore), and HHPL ( `156.96 crore) 
as the Conessioning authority had terminated the CAs.  Loan to IIGTL, had turned into NPA. 
 
 
                                                           
17   Rayalseema Expressway Private Limited 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
57  
5.1.2.5    Advances disbursed by concessionaires 
The CLAs inter-alia stipulated that lenders shall r eview the EPC contract before making 
disbursement of first installment of loan.  In case  of all the selected projects, the EPC 
contracts were awarded by the concessionaires to th eir promoter companies and these 
contracts provided for allowing interest free advan ce without any security and any time limit 
for recovery, except in one case (BKEL) where provi sion for a BG was included.  Audit 
noticed that there were deficiencies in release/ ad justment/ recovery of the advances in the 
following cases: 
(i)  SLHL awarded the EPC contract to SEW Infrastructure  Limited i.e. main promoter of 
SPV.  SLHL granted mobilisation advance of 
`359.19 crore to its EPC contractor which was 
almost equivalent to equity contribution of main pr omoter i.e `384.74 crore.  This advance 
was given  without any security.  The Concessioning Authority terminated CA as only 
13.61 per cent  of work was completed which was far less than the scheduled completion.  
Resultantly, the outstanding amount of mobilisation  advance of `359.19 crore, extended by 
SLHL to the EPC contractor remained unadjusted/ unr ecovered.  IIFCL has written off its 
portion of loan amounting to `89.07 crore.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that the project wa s delayed due to the Concessioning 
Authority’s faults which hampered the work progress  and recovery of the mobilisation 
advance.  IIFCL also responded that Arbitration award of `935 crore has been given in favour 
of Concessionaire against the Concessioning Authori ty wherein lenders have the first right to 
recover their dues.  However, the Concessioning Aut hority has not yet honoured the award .  
The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management . 
The fact remains that mobilisation advance has not been recovered so far and promoters had 
invested very meager amount in the SPV.  Main inves tment of promoter was from the 
mobilsation advance.  
(ii)  CPBSRPL had awarded its EPC contract to M/s Concast  Infra Tech Limited i.e. main 
promoter of SPV.  EPC contractor was paid advance o f 
`58.54 crore by CPBSRPL which 
was equivalent to equity contribution of main promo ter i.e. `58.03 crore.  As per LIE Report 
(February 2017), the project had achieved physical progress upto 51.66 per cent.  
Accordingly, 50 per cent  of the mobilisation advance (i.e., `20.86 crore) was due for 
adjustment.  However, only `3.73 crore could be adjusted leaving an unadjusted advance of 
`54.81 crore (March 2017) with the promoter company.   Audit noticed that neither the CA 
certificates nor LIE’s reports contained the detail s of the mobilisation advances paid/ 
adjusted.  Further, the lenders including IIFCL did  not monitor the utilisation/ adjustment of 
advance.  The project was eventually delayed, and t he Concessioning Authority terminated 
the CA in January 2018.  IIFCL has written off its loan of `43.20 crore to the project.  
While remaining silent on advance without security,  IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that 
disbursement of fund of IIFCL is governed by SIFTI,  whereby the lead bank is responsible 
for regular monitoring and periodic evaluation of c ompliance of project with agreed 
milestones.  IIFCL further stated that the EPC agre ement is between the Concessionaire and 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
58  
the EPC contractor; accordingly, lenders have limit ed maneuverability in the matter.  The 
Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that as per the CLA, the lenders including IIFCL 
had the right to vet the EPC contract and the lende rs could have insisted for inclusion of 
suitable clauses for ensuring safe recovery of the advances to the EPC contractor.  Further, 
SIFTI did not restrict IIFCL from taking up the abo ve issue with the lead bank for corrective 
action and also having independent monitoring mecha nism.  Inter Creditor Agreement 
required the lenders to decide on disbursement of f acility based on their independent 
judgement without reliance on information provided by any other lender.  
(iii)  BKEL awarded the EPC contract to Madhucon Projects Limited i.e. holding company 
of the SPV.  EPC contractor was disbursed an advanc e of `238.42 crore for mobilisation 
(`170.21 crore) and material ( `68.22 crore), whereas promoters contributed the equ ity of 
`184.15 crore.  The Concessioning Authority terminat ed CA as only 29.88 per cent  of work 
was completed which was far behind the schedule com pletion.  Out of this advance of 
`238.43 crore, an amount of `209.91 crore remained unadjusted.  Though there was  
provision for BG in EPC contract, availability/ invocation of BG could not be traced.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that advance to EPC  contractor is provided to meet 
preliminary expenses and to ensure physical progres s.  However, due to non-availability of 
RoW from the Concessioning Authority, the project w itnessed delays and cost overrun, 
resulting in the Concessionaire terminating the pro ject.  Since the EPC agreement is between 
the Concessionaire and the EPC contractor, lenders have limited maneuverability in the 
matter. IIFCL further added that the issue has been  taken up with lead bank.  The Ministry 
endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management.  
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  above situation is a fallout of lenders 
agreeing for advances to the EPC contractor without  any encashable security in their 
possession.  Further, lenders’ fund was also at stake as EPC contract was awarded to a related 
party.   
(iv)  In case of SSRPL, the EPC contract provided for mob ilisation advance of 15 per cent 
 
of the contract value which worked out to `146.25 crore.  The EPC contractor was, however, 
paid `163.10 crore as advance without any security.  Neit her the CA certificates nor the LIE 
reports gave details of mobilisation advance paid a nd/ or adjusted.  In the absence of such 
details, it was not clear as to how the lenders inc luding IIFCL monitored the release/ 
adjustment/ recovery of the advance paid to the EPC contractor. 
IIFCL did not offer (April/ May 2020) any comments on the issue of release of mobilisation 
advance beyond the agreed amount and on non-reporti ng of details of release/ adjustment/ 
recovery of advance in CA certificates and LIE reports . 
(v)  In case of HHPL, the EPC contract provided for 10 per cent  mobilisation advance of 
`146.23 crore and an additional advance of five per cent on request/ justification basis.  
Adjustment of the advance was to commence after cer tified work completion of 20 per cent  
and the said adjustment was to be over before 80 per cent  completion of work.  In this case, 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
59  
Audit observed that an advance of `190.88 crore was released based on revised contract  cost 
of `1,272.54 crore whereas equity contribution from promoters was `215.20 crore.  However, 
the advance recovery schedule was modified at 28 per cent  to 90 per cent  of the contract 
value, instead of 20 per cent  to 80 per cent without approval of lenders including IIFCL.  
This led to the contractor retaining the advance fo r a longer period.  Further, an additional 
advance of `44.66 crore was also released as mobilisation advan ce towards the cost overrun, 
after reporting of physical progress of 43.12 per cent.  The same was financially imprudent as 
mobilisation of resources was not required after commencement of the work. 
On termination of CA, the unadjusted/ unrecovered a dvance of `51.03 crore remained with 
EPC contractor, which could not be recovered in the absence of security. 
(vi)  In case of BHPL, mobilisation advance of `172.36 crore was paid to EPC contractor 
till December 2011.  The project had achieved 75 per cent  progress in October 2017, when 
contractually, the unadjusted balance of the advanc es was to be `14.36 crore, against which 
actual amount of unadjusted advance was `56.24 crore.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) in respect of HHPL and BHPL that due to defaults 
committed by Concessioning Authority, project progr ess got stalled and the advance could 
not be recovered.  IIFCL added that it is governed by SIFTI under which, IIFCL follows the 
lead bank.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that SIF TI did not restrict IIFCL to raise the visible 
issue of non-adjustment/ recovery of the mobilisation advance with the lead bank. 
(vii)  In case of NJTBPL, in the initial EPC contract (Oct ober 2010) there was no provision 
for mobilisation advance, however, the same was inc luded in a supplementary EPC 
agreement (September 2013), whereby the EPC contrac tor was allowed revolving 
mobilisation advance not exceeding 20 per cent  of total contract value.  The set off amount 
from the mobilisation advance was to be decided by the Concessionaire, subject to a 
minimum set off of 25 per cent  from each EPC bill.  Audit observed that mobilisat ion 
advance is paid for mobilisation of resources for s tart of work.  Hence, continuous release of 
mobilisation advance throughout the contract was no t justified.  Further, the CA certificates 
indicated the amount of mobilisation advance lying with EPC contractor, but neither the CA 
certificates nor the LIE reports gave any details o f mobilisation advances released and 
adjusted/ recovered from time to time.  In the abse nce of such details, it is not clear as to how 
the advances were being monitored by lenders including IIFCL.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that EPC advances t o EPC contractor is an essential aspect 
which is required for mobilisation of resources inc luding material and manpower.  IIFCL 
further stated that as per spirit of consortium ban king, lead bank monitors/ decides in regard 
to mobilisation advance to be given/ recovered from EPC contractor as well as certification of 
RA Bills.  The reply was, however, silent regarding  the audit observation pertaining to CA 
certificates/ LIE reports.  IIFCL also replied that  in this project mobilisation advance facility 
was sanctioned by consortium at later stage to expe dite the work at site.  In this project, on 
the one hand, EPC contractor was given substantial mobilisation advance while on the other 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
60  
hand the promoters were also infusing money in the form of subordinate debt over and above 
their equity commitment which was noticed by the co nsortium.  In the consortium meeting 
held on 22 March 2018, the company was directed to net off the mobilisation advance given 
to SPV with the subordinate debt.  The same was don e and can be seen in the CA certificates 
dated 01 March 2018 and 31 March 2018 in which the outstanding mobilisation advance 
(advance to EPC contractor) reduced from `143.90 crore to `33.31 crore. Hence, the 
observation in regard to non-recovery of mobilisati on advance is addressed . The Ministry 
endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management.  
The reply is not acceptable as this does not addres s the audit concern on letting the EPC 
contractor to have a revolving mobilisation advance as the spirit behind mobilisation advance 
for initial mobilisation of resources by the EPC co ntractor has been defeated and the 
Concessionaire/ EPC contractor has been favoured by  allowing revolving mobilisation 
advance in this case.  The project is not yet compl ete and any further mobilisation advance to 
the EPC contractor in terms of existing conditions of EPC contract cannot be ruled out.  
(viii)  In case of DATRL, the EPC contract was signed with REL Utility Engineers Limited 
(the promoter company) on 28 March 2011 which subco ntracted the EPC contract to R-Infra.  
The R-Infra further subcontracted the same to L&T L imited on 21 August 2012.  As per EPC 
contract, 10 per cent  of contract value as mobilisation advance amountin g to `267.30 crore 
(10 per cent  of `2,673 crore) was payable whereas, as per the sub co ntract with L&T, 
advance was only to be five per cent  of the total contract value ( `102 crore @ 5 per cent  of 
`2,040 crore).  Thus, an interest free advance of `65.30 crore ( `267.30 crore - `102 crore) 
was given to the promotor company.  This was an undue advantage to the Concessionaire, but 
neither the EPC cost nor the advance differential w as objected to by the lenders including 
IIFCL.  
IIFCL replies (April/ May 2020) are silent on the issue of undue benefit to the EPC contractor 
in the form of mobilisation advance which was not a ctually fully passed on to actual working 
contractor. The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
Thus, it is evident that in the above cases, the le nders including IIFCL did not monitor the 
release/ adjustment/ recovery of advances paid by t he Concessionaires to their EPC 
contractors which are related parties, leading to u ndue benefit to contractors at the cost of 
project and lenders.  Further, non-reporting of det ails of advances released and adjusted, by 
the CAs and/ or LIE in their certificate(s)/ report (s) across the board, was also indicative of 
deficiency in monitoring of release and utilisation of advances. 
5.1.2.6     Inadequacies in review of financial and physical progress  
As per the directions of RBI (July 2015), the banks / financial institutions should not entirely 
depend upon CA certificates and need to strengthen their own internal controls and the credit 
risk management system to enhance the quality of their loan portfolio. 
Audit examination of reports of LIE on the progress  of work revealed wide differences 
between the financial progress vis-à-vis physical p rogress, indicating that the project funds 
were not utilised efficiently for the project work. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
61  
(i)  In case of BHPL, against revised project cost of `2,601.89 crore, total funds (i.e., loan 
disbursement, equity contribution by promoter and g rant of NHAI) provided to the 
Concessionaire till July 2017 were `2,417.95 crore (93 per cent ), whereas, as per LIE’s 
monthly progress report of August 2017, the physica l and financial progress of the project 
was only 73.50 per cent  and 77  per cent  respectively.  However, without giving cognisance to 
the unutilised funds laying  with the Concessionaire, the lenders’ consortium ma de 
(November and December 2017) further disbursement of `160 crore in two more installments 
towards cost overrun including IIFCL’s share of `23.70 crore. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that the lenders ha d disbursed in the project as the project 
was more than 70 per cent  complete and nearing PCOD.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) 
views of the Management.  
The reply is not acceptable as disbursing the loan without verifying the progress against the 
previous disbursements for achieving PCOD was not prudent. 
(ii)  In case of CPBSRPL, as per the CA certificate (Febr uary 2017), against EPC work of 
`208.61 crore, the Concessionaire expended `161.98 crore (77.74 per cent ).  However, 
Independent Engineer (IE) of the Concessioning Auth ority reported (April 2017) that 
50 per cent  work was complete physically.  The gap of 27 per cent  between financial 
progress and physical work, reflects poor monitorin g of lenders including IIFCL over work 
progress. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that different meth odologies are applied by different 
agencies such as LIE, IE for measurement of physical and financial progress.  Therefore, they 
are two different set of statements which are norma lly not comparable. The Ministry 
endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply is not acceptable as the difference was s ubstantial and the same should have been 
reconciled from the concessionaire/ LIE. 
(iii)  In case of HHPL, against revised project cost of 
`1,645.25 crore, total funds (i.e., loan 
disbursement, equity contribution by promoter and g rant of NHAI) provided to the 
Concessionaire till February 2018 were `1,525.03 crore (92.69 per cent ), whereas, as per 
LIE’s monthly progress report of February 2018, the  physical progress of the project was 
only 73.73 per cent .  Reasons for slow progress of work despite availability of funds were not 
ascertained to take corrective action by the lenders including IIFCL. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that the lenders ha d disbursed in the project as the project 
was more than 70 per cent  complete and nearing PCOD.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) 
views of the Management. 
The reply is not acceptable as disbursing the loan without verifying the progress against the 
previous disbursements for achieving PCOD was not prudent. 
5.1.2.7     Disbursement of loan without verifying utilisation of previous disbursal  
As per the provisions of CLA, borrowers are require d to certify while requesting for drawal 
of loan that ‘ the proceeds of the earlier drawdown have been appl ied only to finance the 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
62  
estimated project cost and the proceeds of proposed  drawdown shall be applied to meet this 
cost’ .  However, audit observed that borrowers submitted  only general statements in the 
notice, such as (i) proposed disbursement shall be applied only towards the estimated project 
cost, (ii) the proceeds would be used in accordance  with the CLA.  These certificates did not 
provide reasonable details of road stretches/ activ ities on which the proposed loan would be 
spent.  Such details were also not given in the LIE ’s draw down certificates enclosed with 
draw down notices and the LIEs generally certified that the proposed disbursement is 
reasonably and timely needed by the borrower to mak e payments for the project costs in 
accordance with the project completion schedule.  Details such as road stretch/ activity where 
the fund would be used were essential in the drawl notice, for ensuring genuineness of the 
fund requirement from borrower and also for verifyi ng the progress of work in real terms 
against the previous disbursals at the time of next  disbursement.  In the absence of such 
details, the prevailing internal control failed to provide due assurance on utilisation of the 
project fund.  Audit noticed that loan of `1,182.58 crore was disbursed to BKEL 
(`563.32 crore) and SLHL ( `619.26 crore) against the work done of `656.58 crore.  As such, 
there was excess disbursement of loan amounting to `526 crore with respect to the work done 
and loans turned into NPA.  IIFCL has written off i ts loan portion ( `210.24 crore) as CAs 
were terminated by NHAI.  
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that funds were dis bursed on reimbursement basis against 
LIE certified bills.  At any point of time the proj ect progresses on multiple chainage and as 
such ascertaining on what chain funds were utilised  is not possible.  The Ministry endorsed 
(June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply indicates failure of lenders to effectively monitor the project expenditure as it could 
not ascertain on what chain funds were utilised. 
5.1.2.8     Inadequacy in site visits 
Lenders, in co-coordination with the Concessionaire , conduct site visits to monitor the 
progress of work.  Such visits also support the lenders in verifying the work progress reported 
by LIE, CA and the Concessionaire.  
As per the Credit Policy of IIFCL of 2012 (revised in 2015), the site visit will be arranged by 
the lead bank or the borrower, and it was desirable  for IIFCL to join the first visit before 
commencing any disbursement.  Subsequently, IIFCL was to ensure atleast one visit in a year 
for each project.  Audit noticed the following: 
(i)  In four cases {Sai Maatarini Tollways Limited (SMTL ), BPMCPL, AETPL and 
YATL}, the lead banks had conducted the first site visit before first disbursement of loan.  
IIFCL, however, did not join the same.  In case of AETPL, IIFCL attended only one site visit 
(February 2017) during the period 2016 to 2019. 
(ii)  In five cases (BKEL, HHPL, NJTBPL. PSTPL and SSRPL, ), the lenders had not 
made any site visit before making first disbursemen t.  The first site visits were conducted 
with a lapse ranging from 2-18 months from the dates of first disbursement. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
63  
Thus, it was evident that IIFCL did not consider th e site visits as an important tool of 
monitoring the project, despite stipulation in their Credit Policy. 
While noting the audit observation for future compl iance in cases of HHPL, YATL, AETPL, 
BKEL and PSTPL, IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) tha t in case of SMTL, BPMCPL, 
SSRPL and NJBTPL, it was not possible to attend few  site visits due to paucity of manpower 
and office exigencies.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
Reply is to be viewed against the fact that site vi sit was one of the elements instituted for 
effective monitoring of the project, for securing p roject viability and ensuring quality of loan 
assets.  Hence, required resources should have been  put in place in the larger interest of the 
organisation as well as the projects. 
5.1.2.9     Miscellaneous Issues 
(i)  Sanction and disbursement of loan on the basis of u nrealistic projections of 
traffic/ toll revenue 
While availability of RoW is essential for completi on/ operational viability of road projects 
as discussed above, realistic projections of traffi c and toll collection also have a bearing on 
the commercial/ financial viability of the projects .  If the project is commercially/ financially 
unviable, the risk of the Concessionaire not being able to service the loan becomes high. 
In case of SMTL (NPA), Audit noticed that the repor t (November 2011) of the traffic 
consultant, had ignored the impact of prevailing imposition of restrictions on illegal mining in 
State of Orissa on the toll revenue.  However, in a ddendum traffic report of September 2012 
considering the restriction on illegal mining, numb er of trucks was considered as 3,600 per 
day (no. of 2 axle – 1,980 and no. of 3 axle – 1,62 0) and number of other vehicles remained 
unchanged as presented in earlier traffic report.  IDBI Bank (the lead lender), in its loan 
appraisal (November 2012) for projected traffic, ho wever, increased the traffic flow 
exponentially to 29,154 (2 and 3 Axle) trucks with hypothetical assumptions that there would 
be future increase in demand of iron ore due to pro posed Tata Steel plant in Duburi, 
improvement in the iron ore export by 2016 and impr ovement in condition of road which 
would further increase the traffic etc.  The projec t was completed in August 2017.  LIE, on 
the basis of survey conducted in December 2017 over  a period of seven days, reported actual 
average daily traffic of 1,069 (2 and 3 Axle).  As the toll revenue was lower than anticipated, 
the Concessionaire failed to service the loan, lead ing to turning the IIFCL loan of 
`278.66 crore into NPA on 31 December 2017.  Later, the Concessionaire issued notice of 
termination on 27 March 2019 on the grounds of force-majeure 18  clause. 
IIFCL, while accepting the audit observation, repli ed (April/ May 2020) that the project was 
found viable based on other factors viz. increase i n demand of iron ore in the existing 
industries in the Kalinga Nagar area and proposed Tata Steel plant in Duburi, improvement in 
the iron ore exports, expected development in cargo  handling capacity in Paradip Port etc.  
                                                           
18   unforeseeable circumstances that prevent someone from fulfilling a contract 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
64  
IIFCL added that they followed the lead bank apprai sal/ sanction as per SIFTI.  The Ministry 
endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that IIF CL is mandated to finance viable projects 
only under SIFTI and the toll revenue, projected an d considered at the time of appraisal was 
not based on realistic traffic. 
(ii)  Non-cognisance of apparent risk while sanctioning a loan under Takeout finance 
In case of Sion-Panvel Tollways Private Limited 
 (SPTPL), the Concessioning Authority 
(PWD, Government of Maharashtra) allowed toll colle ction from 01 Jnauary 2015 but 
exempted certain category of local vehicles from pa yment of toll, even though no such 
exemption was agreed in the CA.  On 30 June 2015, P WD, further exempted light motor 
vehicles such as car, jeep etc., having capacity of  upto 12 passengers, from payment of toll.  
This affected the toll collection of SPTPL and cons equently, the loan of IIFCL in the project 
amounting to `160 crore turned NPA on 30 September 2016.  SPTPL i ssued notice to the 
Concessioning Authority on 28 November 2017 for ter mination of the CA and PWD has 
since taken over the project.  The issue of the ter mination payment under the CA is under 
arbitration (January 2020). 
Audit noticed that IIFCL did not take cognisance of  similar risk in another project (MEPIPL) 
in the same State (Maharashtra), wherein IIFCL sanc tioned (February 2016) additional 
Takeout Finance of 
`269.90 crore for an operational project in Mumbai.  Thus, the known 
risk of exempting the toll collection from certain category of vehicles arbitrarily by 
Government of Maharashtra was not given due cognisance in this Takeout Finance. 
IIFCL replied (January/ April/ May 2020) that Toll notification issued by PWD, Government 
of Maharashtra is not applicable to MEP infrastruct ure Private Limited and MEPIPL is 
collecting the toll to service the debt obligation (interest plus Principal payment) to all the 
lenders.  Hence, the risk to SPTPL is not applicabl e to MEPIPL.  Therefore, the comparison 
between the two projects is not appropriate.  The e xemption of vehicles by PWD was a force 
majeure situation which could not be predicted.  Th e Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of 
the Management. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  toll exemption was given arbitrarily by 
Government of Maharashtra without an acceptable com pensation to the Concessionaire 
leading to termination of contract by the Concessio naire.  In the instant case, the said risk of 
Government of Maharashtra exempting certain categories of vehicles from toll collection and 
its fallouts were already experienced by IIFCL and therefore, the risk should have been 
considered and mitigated by IIFCL before sanction of the loan under takeout finance. 
(iii)   Credit rating of the concessionaire  
Under the CLA, lenders were mandated to take puniti ve action if the credit rating 
19  is not 
submitted or is below the prescribed rating.   
                                                           
19   Credit rating is a warning mechanism on the likel ihood of default in servicing of loan asset on the part 
of the Concessionaire 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
65  
In case of BATL, the CLA required that ‘the borrowe r unconditionally agrees and undertakes 
to get itself rated by credit rating agencies withi n six months from date of first drawdown 
notice and thereafter within every 12 months and/ o r such other intervals as may be required 
by the lead lender.  In the event, the borrower doe s not obtain credit rating in time and/ or 
obtains a credit rating lower than BBB-, the lender s have a right to charge an additional 
interest of one per cent  per annum’.  First external rating of BATL was done on 03 December 
2013 as BB+, which was downgraded as B+ on 06 May 2016.  
IIFCL, without ensuring compliance to timely submis sion of credit rating by the 
Concessionaire, continuously disbursed the loan wit hout charging additional interest of one 
per cent  per annum, resulting in loss of revenue of `3.12 crore 20  (up to July 2017). 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that the matter has  been taken up with lead bank for 
charging additional interest.  The lead bank has al so confirmed (November 2019) that they 
were not charging additional interest. The matter i s being pursued further with borrower and 
other consortium members .  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management.  
(iv)   Equity infusion and Shareholding Pattern 
As per RBI directions (July 2009), the funding agen cies should not depend entirely on the 
Certificates of Chartered Accountants (CA Certifica te). Rather, they should strengthen their 
internal controls and the credit risk management sy stem to enhance the quality of their loan 
portfolio.  One of the measures suggested by RBI in  this regard was the periodical scrutiny of 
borrowers’ books of accounts and the ‘no-lien’ bank accounts. 
CLAs required that (i) the promoters shall bring upfront equity in Escrow Account, before the 
disbursement of loan, and (ii) Management of, and c ontrol over, the Concessionaire shall not 
change, without the prior written consent of the Le nders.  The CAs also required that the 
Concessionaire shall not undertake or permit any ch ange in ownership, except with the prior 
approval of the Concessioning Authority.  Examinati on of selected cases in Audit revealed 
the following: 
a)  In case of CPBSRPL , the CLA stipulated that the promoter would bring in  equity 
contribution into an Escrow Account opened with Ori ental Bank of Commerce, which was 
also the lead bank.  The promoter made deposits in 16 tranches, each of 
`0.50 crore, during 
21 to 30 May 2015, as share application money, in a  non-escrow bank account, opened with 
Allahabad Bank.  The funds, so deposited in each tr anche, were withdrawn on the same day.  
In the CA Certificates dated 06 January 2015 and 15  June 2015, attached with the 
Concessionaire’s drawdown notices, the total amount  of above 16 tranches of deposit was 
treated as equity infusion of `08.00 crore in the project by the promoter.  Consid ering any 
deposit made by the promoters in a non-escrow bank account as equity infusion was 
irregular . 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that as per SIFTI, monitoring is the primary responsibility 
of the lead bank.  The Ministry endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
                                                           
20   @ one per cent per annum on the amount of loan di sbursed during December 2014 to January 2017 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
66  
The reply is not acceptable as IIFCL did not apply due diligence in line with RBI guidelines 
and the provisions of Inter Creditor Agreement whic h required independent decision making.  
Further, any deposit, made in a non-escrow account,  cannot be treated as equity infusion in 
the project as certified by CA. 
b)  As per annual accounts of 2013-14 of CPBSRPL, the s hareholding of PATH, one of 
the two promoters in CPBSRPL, was reduced to 0.02 per cent  whereas the shareholding of 
Concast Infrastructure Limited had gone up to 99.98  per cent, which  remained so till 31 
March 2016.  Records of IIFCL did not indicate any approval for the change in shareholding 
pattern by the Concessionaire.  Yet, IIFCL disburse d the loan despite the change in 
shareholding pattern, in contravention of the pre-d isbursement condition stipulated in the 
CLA. 
IIFCL replied (April/ May 2020) that in meetings he ld with the Concessioning Authority, 
PATH agreed to actively participate in the project.   However, PATH did not honour its 
commitment and the lenders have filed an applicatio n against PATH in NCLT.  The Ministry 
endorsed (June 2020) views of the Management. 
The reply is not acceptable as records of IIFCL did  not indicate that the lenders including 
IIFCL took any action against the Concessionaire du ring currency of the CA.  Further, the 
financials of the Concessionaire showed that there was a change in shareholding pattern 
which was either overlooked or not given due consid eration which led to disbursement of the 
loan despite non-compliance to the pre-disbursement condition stipulated in the CLA. 
5.1.3   Conclusion 
In road sector, the projects do not have physical a ssets to provide as security against loan.  
Viability of the project is the only comfort for se curing the quality of loan asset.  As such, 
due diligence on the project before signing of the CLA, compliance to the conditions set in 
the CLAs before disbursement of loan and monitoring  of project work progress for timely 
corrective action are vital activities to be undert aken by lenders for financing the road 
projects.  
Lenders including IIFCL did not give due cognisance  to the risks of RoW availability, the 
EPC contracts being awarded to promoter company and  the restrictions on change in 
shareholding pattern in concessionaire company.  In  seven out of nine NPA cases, non-
availability of required RoW was the leading factor  for non-completion of projects and 
turning of the loans into NPA.  In one NPA case, un realistic traffic projection affected the 
project’s commercial viability while in another NPA  case, low traffic revenue led to 
unviability of the project.    
Vital risks were also not mitigated in many cases b y inclusion of suitable pre-disbursement 
conditions.  Although the CLAs contained other vali d pre-disbursement conditions for 
ensuring sustained viability of the project, the lo ans were disbursed, in many cases including 
NPA cases, without ensuring the compliance to the conditions relating to environment/ forest/ 
tree cutting clearances, infusion of required equit y through escrow account and funding of 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
67  
cost overrun/ IDC by promoters.  This led to delay in work progress, risk of misuse of fund 
by promoters and avoidable additional loan to badly managed projects.   
Monitoring of project progress was weak due to inad equacies in internal control systems 
established by the lenders, particularly incomplete / deficient information contained in LIE 
reports and CA certificates relating to the RoW availability, the equity infusion by promoters, 
the changes in shareholding pattern, the physical w ork progress vis a vis  funds available with 
the project and the advances released/ unadjusted/ unrecovered.  The deficiency in 
monitoring led to the promoter taking undue benefits out of project fund, at the cost of project 
work progress. 
The CA provided that on termination of CA debt due would be worked out on the basis of 
lowest project cost which would normally be as ment ioned in the CA.  However, IIFCL 
agreed to finance the cost overrun of 
`347.85 crore without seeking approval from the 
Concessioning Authority for increase in total proje ct cost which was not only irregular but 
also imprudent, as this encouraged incapable promot ers to continue with the project, 
increased loan exposure to badly managed projects, delayed corrective action and most 
importantly exposed the lenders to risk of non-reco very of debt given on account of cost 
overrun/ IDC on termination of CA in view of provisions of CA.   
Due to NHAI not making the RoW available and huge l oan amount disbursed to the Projects 
including IIFCL’s loan of `1,895.50 crore without ensuring availability of RoW  and 
clearances, not only the loan turned NPA, but the c ountry also could not reap the benefit of 
these road projects due to non-completion of the roads.   
5.1.4   Recommendations 
Audit suggests the following recommendations in ord er to address the issues highlighted in 
this report: 
1.  Efforts may be made at the level of Ministry of Fin ance to get the issues related with 
non-issuance of PCOD Certificates by the Concession ing Authorities despite 
achievement of progress stipulated in the Concessio n Agreements, resolved amicably 
with the Concessioning Authorities/ Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. 
2.  A separate Tripartite agreement among the Concessio ning Authority, the 
Concessionaire and the consortium of lenders may al so be entered into with a view to 
ensure improved communication in the interest of su ccessful completion of the 
projects under execution and also to safeguard the financial interest of all the 
stakeholders including lenders. 
3.  IIFCL should include loan disbursement conditions i n sanction letter/ CLA on 
availability of RoW to cover the risks flowing out of restrictive clauses like 
termination payments, conditions in concession agre ement or stricter conditions to 
safeguard its financial interest.  
4.  A mechanism may be developed to restrict the Conces sionaire from allowing any 
advance, other than mobilisation advance, to the EP C contractor, that too backed by 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
68  
sufficient encashable security, in the possession o f the lenders and such advances 
should be recovered in a time bound manner. 
5.  Audit observations are based on selected sample. Th ere is need to get entire 
population examined to assess the prevalence of the  problem and fix the 
responsibility, wherever required. Cases with indic ations of mala-fide, if any, may be 
referred to professional agencies for further examination. 
5.2  Avoidable loss due to extension of loan in ter minated projects 
 
IIFCL sanctioned and disbursed two loans under Take out Finance Scheme without 
ensuring compliance of critical requirement of obta ining ‘No Objection Certificate’ 
from Concessionaire Authorities, and without ensuri ng required debt servicing 
capacity of the borrowers from their audited annual  accounts.  Further, in one case, 
the project had already been terminated before exec ution of the takeout financing 
documents between IIFCL and the original lender ban ks, while in the other case, the 
notice of termination of project happened before di sbursement of loan by IIFCL.  
Resultantly, the loans of `` ``26.20 crore became irrecoverable. 
Raipur Waste Management Private Limited (RSWPL) and  Bhilai Durg Waste Management 
Private Limited (BDWPL) were two concessionaire Spe cial Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), for 
operation of solid waste management projects of Rai pur Municipal Corporation (RMC) and 
Bhilai and Durg Municipal Corporation (BMC), respec tively, in the State of Chhattisgarh.  
The Concession Agreements were signed between RSWPL  and RMC on 03 September 2012 
and between BDWPL and BMC on 17 July 2012, for a pe riod of 30 years, each.  The project 
viability was fully dependent upon the revenue to b e generated/ received by the SPVs from 
RMC/ BMC under the concession agreements.  
IIFCL sanctioned (22 September 2014) two loans of 
`13.71 crore and `12.74 crore to 
RSWPL and BDWPL, respectively, under its ‘Takeout Finance Scheme’ 21 , by partially taking 
over the outstanding amount of loans, which had bee n extended to the SPVs by different 
banks.  The loans (`13.71 crore and `12.74 crore) were disbursed on 03 December 2014.  
Considering the poor performance of both the conces sionaires (RSWPL and BDWPL), the 
Concessioning Authorities (RMC and BMC) served noti ces of termination of concession 
agreement on 24 December 2013 and 21 October 2014.  The concession agreements were 
finally terminated on 25 November 2014 and 24 Novem ber 2014, respectively. Resultantly, 
servicing of the loans was not being done by these SPVs since January 2015.  Eventually, 
both the loans turned into non-performing assets (N PA) as on 30 June 2015 (i.e. within seven 
months of disbursement) and finally `26.20 crore (`13.59 crore and `12.61 crore) due from 
RSWPL and BDWPL, respectively, were written off (March 2016).  
With regard to sanction and disbursement of above loans, Audit observed the following: 
• As per Credit Policy (2012) of IIFCL for takeout fi nance, No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Concessionaire Authority, lenders an d the consortium of lenders was 
                                                           
21     Under the takeout financing scheme, loans given  by banks to infrastructure projects are taken out of 
their books by IIFCL. This helps banks in avoiding an asset-liability mismatch and also frees up their  
funds to be loaned to new projects 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
69  
required to be obtained before scheduled date of oc currence of takeout.  However, 
NOC from the Concessionaire Authority was not obtained.   
• IIFCL was also required to consider only those prop osals, which had Debt Service 
Coverage Ratio (DSCR) of at least 1:00.  However, s ufficiency of the stipulated 
DSCR was also not ensured by IIFCL at the time of sanction of loans. 
• In case of RSWPL, notice for termination of concess ion agreement was served  
(24 December 2013) before the date of sanction of t he loan by IIFCL (22 September 
2014), and in case of BDWPL, signing of financing d ocuments by IIFCL took place 
(27 November 2014), i.e., after termination of the concession agreement 
(24 November 2014). Moreover, the disbursement of funds in both the cases was done 
after termination of its concession agreements, whi ch indicates injudicious 
disbursements of loans to the SPVs.  
IIFCL replied (November 2019) that NOCs dated 28 Oc tober 2014, 29 October 2014 and 26 
November 2014 were obtained from all the lenders be fore effecting the takeout.  It was 
further replied that the loan was disbursed, based on the DSCR for the period July 2013 to 
June 2014, certified by a Chartered Accountant. 
Replies of the IIFCL is not tenable due to the following: 
• NOC, as required to be obtained from the Concession aire Authority as per the Credit 
Policy of the Company, was not obtained.   
• The legitimacy of three of the four NOCs obtained ( dated 28 October 2014 and 29 
October 2014) could not be established as these wer e not dated and contain reference 
to a future date {i.e., signing date of ‘Amended an d Restated Facility Agreement’ was 
27 November 2014}.   
• Regarding DSCR, it was seen from the annual account s of the borrowers for the year 
2013-14 that DSCR was only 0.13 for RSWPL and 0.48 for BDWPL i.e. less than the 
stipulated ratio of 1.  
• Further, the fact remained that the disbursement of  funds in both the cases were done 
after termination of its concession agreements. 
Thus, due to non-adherence of the provisions of its  own Credit Policy, IIFCL extended loan 
in the projects which had already been terminated a nd resultantly suffered a loss of 
`26.20 
crore (`13.59 crore plus `12.61 crore written off).  It is recommended that r esponsibility may 
be fixed for the lapses pointed out by Audit. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020). 
NABFINS Limited 
5.3  Non-Performing Assets 
  
5.3.1 Introduction  
NABFINS Limited which was earlier known as NABARD F inancial Services Limited 
(Company) was formed with the objective to provide financial services in the two broad areas 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
70  
of agriculture and micro finance.  Its registered o ffice is at Bengaluru.  It is a registered Non-
Banking Financial Company (NBFC) and conducted its activities in 11 States 22  during the 
period covered under audit i.e. 2015-16 to 2018-19.   As per the regulations of Reserve Bank 
of India, the Company is a systemically important N on-Banking Financial Company - Micro 
Finance Institution (NBFC-MFI).   
The objectives of the Company are: 
• to provide credit and other facilities for promotio n, expansion, commercialisation and 
modernisation of agriculture and allied activities, and 
• to provide micro finance services to the needy and disadvantageous sections of the 
society for securing their prosperity in both rural and urban areas. 
5.3.2 Audit objectives 
Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• the Company achieved its financial and physical targets; 
• there was an effective mechanism for sanction of loans; and 
• there was a robust mechanism for collection of dues. 
5.3.3 Audit criteria 
• Instructions issued by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time, 
• Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) entered into with NABARD, 
• Provisions of the Operations Manual on Loans of the Company, 
• Internal working instructions issued by the Company, 
• Agenda and Minutes of Board meetings of the Company, and 
• Guidelines for One Time Settlement (OTS) scheme 
5.3.4 Audit scope and methodology 
An Entry Conference was held with the Company on 05  October 2018 after which the audit 
was conducted and the draft para was issued to the Management in March 2019.  The reply of 
Management was received in May 2019.  An Exit Conference was held with the Management 
on 13 September 2019 to discuss the audit findings,  after which the draft para was issued to 
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Financial Se rvices) in December 2019.  The reply of 
the Ministry was received in January 2020, which ha s been duly considered while finalising 
the draft audit para. 
Loan accounts were selected from five States having  highest overdues as on 31 March 2018. 
  
In the selected States, the district/ branches havi ng highest overdues were selected.  The 
details of the selected branches/ districts are given as under: 
 
                                                           
22   Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnatak a, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Mizoram, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Tripura 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
71  
Table 5.3.1 
State Districts/ Branches selected 
Karnataka Sirsi, Vijayapura, Tumkur 
Tamilnadu Cuddalore, Dindugul, Madurai, Erode 
Maharashtra Gondia, Yavatmal, Nanded, Amravati 
Andhra Pradesh Chittoor 
Telangana Warangal 
Details of the accounts selected are shown in Annexure-III . Audit was conducted for the 
period 2015-16 to 2017-18 and the audit findings were updated up to 2018-19. 
5.3.5 Business models of NABFINS 
The Company operates loan disbursements in three ma jor business verticals, viz., Second 
Level Institutions (SLIs), Business and Development  Correspondents (B&DCs) and Direct 
Lending (DL) to borrowers. 
(i)  Second Level Institutions (SLIs): It is a registered body having a distinct legal 
identity comprising first level organisations such as Self Help Groups 
23  (SHGs), Joint 
Liability Groups 24  (JLGs) and Farmers’ Groups/ Societies.  Prospectiv e SLIs are 
identified by field (Branch/ District) offices of t he Company and designated teams 
from Headquarters (Bangalore) of the Company visit to conduct project assessment 25  
and due diligence.  The SLIs carry out onward lendi ng to first level organisations out 
of the loans disbursed by the Company.  The SLIs ar e entitled to the surplus arising 
out of the interest differential, i.e., the difference between the interest payable by SLIs 
to the Company and  interest receivable from the onward lending activity.  
(ii)  Business & Development Correspondents (B&DCs) : These are intermediaries 
between the Company and SHGs.  They are responsible  for identifying SHGs, 
processing loans, collecting instalments and remitt ing the same to the Company.  For 
these services, they are entitled to be paid commis sion at the rate of two per cent  of 
the loan disbursed (0.5 per cent on the disbursement of loan and 1.5 per cent on 
completion of collection and remittance). 
(iii)  Direct Lending (DL): Under DL, the staff of the Company directly supervi ses the 
activities of lending and collection.  This busines s vertical commenced its operations 
during the year 2016-17 and created a business of `88.38 crore and `193.35 crore 
during 2017-18 and 2018-19 respectively. 
                                                           
23   Self Help Groups are small informal group of 10-2 0 individuals, who are homogenous with respect to 
social and economic background and come together vo luntarily for promoting savings habit among 
members and for a common cause to raise and manage resources for the benefit of group members 
24   A Joint Liability Group is an informal group comp rising of 4-10 individuals coming together for the 
purpose of availing bank loan on individual basis o r through group mechanism against mutual 
guarantee 
25   The Company has to make an assessment of the proj ects intended to be taken up by the first level 
institutions out of the loans to be obtained from SLIs 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
72  
The outstanding loans and Non-Performing Assets (NP As) as on 31 March 2019 under the 
above three major business verticals of the Company were as under: 
Table 5.3.2 
(`` `` in crore) 
Particulars SLIs B&DCs DL 
Outstanding Loans 141.59 1101.41 196.31 
NPAs 3.01 47.45 0.86 
Out of the three major business verticals, 95.31 per cent  of total NPAs as on 31 March 2019 
(`52.94 crore) were accumulated under B&DC and SLIs. 
5.3.6     Audit Findings  
 
5.3.6.1   Targets and Achievements 
The details of financial and physical targets and a chievements of the Company for the years 
2015-16 to 2018-19 are shown in Annexure-IV.  The Company was able to achieve 
satisfactory levels of growth in the achievement of  financial and physical targets during all 
the four years.  The growth in financial achievemen t in terms of overall loan disbursement 
was 56 per cent  over the four years’ period 2015-16 to 2018-19.  T he growth in physical 
achievement in terms of number of Self-Help Groups (SHGs), number of States covered, 
Districts covered and Business & Development Corres pondents (B&DCs) covered, increased 
by 50 per cent , 100 per cent , 36 per cent  and 87 per cent  respectively during the years 
2015-16 to 2018-19. 
The Company concurred (May 2019) with the facts reported by Audit. 
5.3.6.2    Non-Performing Assets 
Non-Performing Asset (NPA) is any account, wherein either the principal or the interest or 
both are due for a period of 90 days or more.  The details of NPAs of the Company for the 
four years ended 31 March 2019 are shown in Annexure-V. 
It was observed that: 
• NPAs of the Company increased from 
`36.53 crore to `85.11 crore (including 
prudential write-offs 26  made in the years 2016-17 & 2017-18) which recorde d a 
growth of 133.02 per cent  during the preceeding four years ended 31 March 2019. 
• The Company made prudential write-offs of `32.17 crore. 
• During the period 2015-16 to 2018-19, outstanding l oan portfolio was increased by 
67.72 per cent  whereas NPAs recorded a growth of 133.02 per cent . NPAs constituted 
4.24 per cent  (2015-16), 6.17 per cent  (2016-17) and 6.12 per cent  (2017-18) and 
5.89 per cent  (2018-19) of total outstanding loan portfolio (Annexure-VI). 
                                                           
26   Prudential write-off is the amount of non-perform ing loans which are outstanding in the books of the  
branches, but have been written-off (fully or partially) at Head Office level 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
73  
The Company concurred (May 2019) with the facts rep orted by Audit.  The Ministry replied 
(January 2020) that Management  had strengthened th eir Stressed Assets Management 
Section in order to follow-up with overdue customer s and address the issue of loan becoming 
NPA.  Special Recovery Team (SRT) had been constitu ted to undertake field visits and 
recover the overdues.  Audit will review the performance of SRTs in subsequent audits. 
5.3.6.3    Sanction of loans 
 
i)  Sanction of loans through SLIs  
There were 36 SLIs covering 39 loan accounts whose NPA stood at `3.83 crore as on 
31 March 2018.  Out of these 36 SLIs, Audit covered  19 SLIs in the selected branches whose 
NPA stood at `2.23 crore.  SLIs, by definition, were supposed to extend loans to the first 
level institutions.  
As per para 5.5 of the Operations Manual on Loans ( September 2015), an SLI would be 
eligible for sanction of loans, if it was in existe nce for a minimum period of one year of 
operations after registration.  The loan eligibility would be the lowest of the following: 
• 85 per cent  of the project outlay excluding cost of land; 
• up to debt-equity ratio of 10:1 (10 times of net worth);  
• up to 100 per cent  of the value of collateral security. 
Every such loan would have the following securities: 
• hypothecation of goods/ assets procured out of loan amount; 
• mortgage of land and buildings if purchased out of loan amount; 
• collateral by way of mortgage of properties of SLI or its promoters, wherever 
available; and 
• guarantee of promoters or directors, wherever available. 
Further, as per para 5.8 of the Operations Manual o n Loans, Post Disbursement Visits 
(PDVs) were to be conducted to ensure proper end-use of loan amount.  
Audit, however, observed that the loan eligibility criteria for SLIs and appraisal requirements 
were not duly followed while sanctioning loans, as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
(a) Six SLIs promoted by Pragati Seva Samiti, Waran gal 
The Company extended (March 2015) loans aggregating  to 
`299.80 lakh to six SLIs 
promoted by Pragati Seva Samiti, Warangal, Telangan a.  The loan eligibility in terms of the 
amount of loan to be sanctioned was to be determine d on the basis of 10 times of the net 
worth of SLI minus  amount of existing debt of the SLI.  Audit, howeve r, observed that the 
loan eligibility was not determined correctly due t o errors in calculation, due to which the 
loans were sanctioned even though the SLIs were eit her not eligible for it or were eligible for 
a much lesser amount than was sanctioned, as shown below: 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
74  
Table 5.3.3 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the SLI Amount 
sanctioned 
Net 
worth 
Existing 
Debt 
Loan 
eligiblity 
Remarks 
1. Jhansilaxmi Mahila 
Paraspara Sahayaka 
Sahakara Parimitha 
Sangham 
50.00 (0.52) 14.78 Nil Net worth is negative, 
so not eligible for 
loan. 
2. Mother Therissa 
Mahila Paraspara 
Sahayaka Sahakara 
Parimitha Sangham 
50.00 0.15 20.97 Nil Existing debt exceeds 
10 times of net worth, 
so not eligible for 
loan. 
3. Munneru Mutually 
Aided Cooperative 
Credit & Marketing 
Society Limited 
50.00 6.15 62.97 Nil Existing debt exceeds 
10 times of net worth, 
so not eligible for 
loan. 
4. Priyadarshini 
Mahila Paraspara 
Sahayaka Sahakara 
Parimitha Sangham 
49.80 (0.03) 13.95 Nil Net worth is negative, 
so not eligible for 
loan. 
5. Sarojini Naidu 
Mahila Paraspara 
Sahayaka Sahakara 
Parimitha Sangham 
50.00 2.30 22.85 0.15 10 times of net worth 
minus  existing debt 
6. Swarna Bharati 
Mahila Paraspara 
Sahayaka Sahakara 
Parimitha Sangham 
50.00 0.38 22.85 Nil Existing debt exceeds 
10 times of net worth, 
so not eligible for 
loan. 
 Total 299.80   0.15  
The primary reason for incorrect determination of l oan eligibility was that the Company 
considered thrift (savings) of members of SLIs as p art of their net worth.  The thrift of the 
members was an outstanding liability of the SLIs as this amount was liable to be repaid along 
with interest upon demand from the members.  As suc h, thrift should have been excluded in 
calculation of net worth of SLIs.  Further, the following deficiencies were noticed in sanction/ 
appraisal of loans: 
• Loans were extended by the SLIs to individuals dire ctly, and not to the first level 
institiutions.  Thus, the principle of collective g roup responsibility was not ensured 
and the above six borrowers did not meet the definition of SLIs. 
• Loans were extended with book debts as only collate ral and the list of book debts of 
the SLIs were not certified by the auditor, as required. 
• Loans were sanctioned without considering the existing NPAs of the SLIs. 
• Third party guarantee/ personal guarantees of the promotors were not obtained. 
• The loan repayments were rescheduled without verify ing the intended utilisation of 
the loans sanctioned. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
75  
As on 31 March 2019, the NPAs from these six SLIs stood at `62.24 lakh and remained at the 
same level as on 30 September 2019.   
Management replied (May 2019) that the above referr ed six borrowers can be construed as 
SLIs.  They are registered as Mutually Aided Co-ope rative Society (MACS) with the 
Government of Andhra Pradesh and MACS falls under S LI category as per loan policy of the 
Company.  Due to non-payment by borrowing members, the SLIs had prayed for 
rescheduling of loans and the same was acceded to.  
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that these MACS  extend loans to SHGs affiliated to 
them and maintain disaggregate borrower-wise loans outstanding and the same had been 
submitted in the form of book debts.  The accounts were being followed up regularly. 
The reply is not acceptable as the lists of book de bts of the SLIs contained only individual 
beneficiaries, instead of groups/ societies.  As pe r clause 5.3 of the Operations Manual on 
Loans of the Company, an organisation would be called as SLI if it was formed by a group of 
first level organisations like SHGs, JLGs, farmers/  artisans groups/ society and may include 
federations.  Therefore, these six organisations we re only first level institutions but not SLIs.  
Further, before rescheduling of loans, the Company should have verified and satisfied itself 
about the purpose of the loan and that there was adequate possiblity of recovery of loans.  
 
(b) Navjeeven Mutually Aided Cooperative Thrift Soc iety, Nellore 
 
Audit observed that loans were extended by the abov e SLI to individuals directly, instead of 
to the first level institutions.  Thus, the princip le of collective group responsibility was not 
ensured and the borrower did not meet the definitio n of an SLI.  The loan eligibility was 
enhanced by considering thrift (savings) amount of members as part of net worth.  The 
Company sanctioned loans with only book debts as co llateral and it was observed that out of 
the initial loan of `30 lakh disbursed in December 2013, the chances of disbursement of the 
loan to members of SLI were doubtful since as much as `25 lakh was paid to a single person. 
Out of another loan amount of `50 lakh disbursed in March 2015, an amount of `2.42 lakh 
was transferred to Navjeevan Organisation (NGO of S LI) and an amount of `11.25 lakh was 
paid to the Company towards repayment of its outsta nding loan which tantamounted to 
diversion of sanctioned loan. 
In respect of the loan of 
`50 lakh given in March 2015 to SLI, the Company recorded that the 
outstanding loan amount was “0.00”, instead of `42.98 lakh as of 1 March 2015 (out of a loan 
of `50 lakh sanctioned in August 2014) and a further lo an of `50 lakh was sanctioned.  
Further, it was observed that neither the list of book debts was certified by auditor as required 
nor any third-party guarantee/ personal guarantee o f the promoter was obtained.  The 
outstanding loan amount as on 31 March 2019 was `44.81 lakh and the same amount was 
lying outstanding as on 30 September 2019.   
Management accepted (May 2019) that the inclusion o f savings of members for arriving at 
net worth was due to lack of understanding on the p art of the loan appraiser and stated that 
the Company was pursuing the recovery through legal  means.  It was further stated that 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
76  
`25 lakh was drawn by Secretary of the Society for d isbursement to its members.  In respect 
of non-certification of book debts, it was stated t hat it obtained the details of some of the 
borrowers on a sample basis and disbursements were made.   
The reply of Management is not acceptable.  There w as no recorded evidence available that 
the said Secretary of SLI had actually disbursed th e loan amount to the intended 
beneficiaries.  The Company did not obtain any thir d-party guarantee/ personal guarantee of 
the promoters.  Further, Management did not respond  to the audit observations on diversion 
of loan funds by the SLI for repayment of earlier loan. 
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that the loan w as periodically monitored by obtaining 
book debt statement.  Hence, there was no deviation of funds. 
The reply is not acceptable as the SLI utilised `11.25 lakh for repayment of previous 
outstanding loan which is nothing but diversion of loan funds. 
Similar deficiencies were noticed in sanction of lo ans by the Company to  Sri Soundarya 
Mahila Mutually Aided Cooperative Thrift Society, C hittoor (Andhra Pradesh) and  
Kongunadu Vivasaigal Sangam, Erode (Tamil Nadu). Th ese cases have been discussed at 
Annexure-VII . 
ii)  Sanction of Loans through B&DCs 
As on 31 March 2019, the outstanding amount of loan s disbursed through B&DCs was 
`1,101.41 crore.  Out of this, there were 53 B&DCs in the branches selected for audit, against 
whom the NPAs amounted to `37.27 crore.  A review of business activities of th e B&DCs in 
the selected branches/ districts revealed that: 
• As on 31 March 2015, NPAs of B&DCs stood at 
`7.77 crore which increased to 
`40.34 crore by 30 September 2019, recording an increase of more than five times. 
• As on 31 March 2019, NPAs of top 10 B&DCs stood at `28.23 crore which 
constituted 76 per cent  of total NPAs as on 31 March 2019.  
• Even though the model agreement with B&DCs provided  for investigative audit as 
per discretion of the Company, no such reports were made available for scrutiny. 
Management replied (May 2019) that even though ther e have been no specific reports of 
investigation, high NPA cases under B&DC were cover ed under regular audit and business 
with such institutions had been put on hold. 
(a)  Retention of 
`` ``12.10 crore by B&DC, Chittoor 
The Company entered into an agreement (March 2013) with a B&DC namely, Society of 
Noble Oath & Welfare (SNOW), a registered society a t Chittoor, Andhra Pradesh.  On the 
recommendations of SNOW, the Company sanctioned loa ns of `19.62 crore in cash to 442 
SHGs during 2013-14 to 2015-16.  Examination of records revealed the following: 
• SNOW operated only in Somala Mandal in Chittoor dis trict and had got sanctioned a 
maximum loan amount of `20.40 lakh for 36 SHGs identified by it during 2006 -07 to 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
77  
2009-10. However, during the three years 2013-14 to  2015-16, a substantial amount 
of `19.62 crore, which was 95 times of the loans that w ere sanctioned during the 
previous four years, was sanctioned by the Company to SNOW. 
• After the loan of `19.62 crore was disbursed, SNOW took back major por tion of the 
loan from the SHGs.  The Company was unaware of thi s activity until the loans 
became NPA.  
• No periodic review was carried out by the Company after disbursement of loans.  As a 
result, an amount of `12.10 crore became NPA and the same was yet to be r ecovered 
(September 2019). 
Management replied (May 2019) that this was a fraud , where the agency had carefully 
designed a process to defraud the Company and the b orrowers.  Even though the loans were 
disbursed to beneficiaries in person, the agency ha d managed to obtain the loan proceeds 
(either fully or in part) through deceit.  The agen cy had ensured that the Company could not 
detect the fraud.  Management admitted that the Com pany should have been more vigilant 
and stated that the monitoring mechanism with respe ct to loans given had since been 
strengthened.  The investigation of the three crimi nal cases filed at Chittoor had been 
completed by the police and the matter was pending before the Court.  In addition to the 
criminal cases, the Company had filed civil suit ag ainst the NGO and its Board of Directors 
in Bengaluru City Court and civil suit had been fil ed against three SHGs at Chittoor for 
recovery.  Management further stated that credit wa s extended from time to time based on 
previous satisfactory performance of B&DC.  It assu red that now the Company was not 
making any cash disbursements and loans were being disbursed through bank accounts of 
beneficiaries.  
Reply of Management is not acceptable in view of th e fact that there was a total failure of 
appraisal systems and other allied internal control  systems during sanctioning and 
disbursement of loans which led to the non-recovery of loans. 
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that based on t he experience, the Company had put in 
place a strong monitoring mechanism and periodicity  of the audit had been increased to give 
early warning signals. 
5.3.6.4   Inadequate Post Disbursement Visits 
Para 3.13.1 of Chapter 3 of Operations Manual on Lo ans stipulated that Post Disbursement 
Visits (PDVs) were to be conducted periodically to ensure that the loan was utilised for its 
intended purpose and the same was not slipping into  NPA.  However, it was observed that 
PDVs were conducted only in 35.26 per cent  of cases during the last four years from 2015-16 
to 2018-19 as shown below: 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
78  
Table 5.3.4  
Year No. of loans 
sanctioned 
No. of PDVs to be 
conducted as per 
Operations Manual 
No. of PDVs 
actually 
conducted 
Percentage of actual 
PDVs conducted w.r.t 
PDVs to be conducted 
2015-16 36,367 1,45,468 41,585 28.58 
2016-17 39,633 1,58,532 52,336 33.01 
2017-18 41,576 1,66,304 1,31,875 79.29 
2018-19 2,26,661 7,52,192 2,05,231 27.28 
Total 3,44,237 12,22,496 4,31,027 35.26 
Source: Data provided by the Company 
Management concurred with the audit findings and re plied  that efforts were being made to 
increase the quantum of PDVs.  It was also stated ( September 2019) that 90 per cent  and 74 
per cent  of PDVs were conducted in I and II quarters of 2019-20 respectively.  
Ministry replied (January 2020) that the Company ha d linked the incentive policy to 
achievement of threshold limit of conduting PDVs.  
5.3.6.5    Loan collection mechanism 
In order to ensure timely recovery of outstanding a mounts from loan accounts and prevent 
them from becoming NPAs, the collection mechanism h as to be robust and effective.  The 
mechanism should also provide signals for early det ection/ identification of probable NPAs 
so that corrective actions can be taken in time.  F or this, the Operations Manual on Loans of 
the Company provided detailed procedure.   
(a) Monitoring System for early warnings of Portfol io at Risk 
Chapter 9 of the Operations Manual on Loans stipula ted that any loan account, overdue for 
30 days or more, had to be classified as Portfolio at Risk (PAR).  Any loan account entering 
into PAR category was a warning signal of incipient  NPAs.  These loan accounts were to be 
closely monitored and effective steps should be initiated to avoid slippage of any account into 
NPA category.  The details, as provided by the Comp any, of the number of accounts with 
overdues less than 30 days, 30-60 days and 60-90 da ys along with the number of such 
accounts contacted by the Company are at Annexure-VIII .  However, in the absence of any 
documentary evidence, Audit could not verify the existence of any such mechanism in place. 
Management replied (May 2019) that the mechanism of  collecting information regarding 
conduct of visits is carried over telephone on a regular basis by Stressed Assets Team at Head 
Office.  
Ministry replied (January 2020) that the Company ha d strengthened its Stressed Asset 
Management Section in order to follow-up with overd ue customers and address the issue of 
loan becoming NPA.  Special Recovery Team had been constituted to undertake field visit 
and recover the dues. 
The Company needs to strengthen their monitoring system to take prompt action as and when 
early warning signals are noticed.  
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
79  
(b) NPA management 
Chapter 10 of the Operations Manual on Loans laid d own the procedure regarding NPA 
management.  It stipulated, inter alia , that: 
• Within 30 days from the date of any account becomin g NPA, a written demand notice 
in vernacular language would be sent to borrower gr oups by the District Office.  The 
notices were to be preferably delivered in person b y the District Staff.  If there was no 
response for such notice, a second reminder would b e issued by the Head Office, 
within 60 days of account becoming NPA.  In case of  no progress in recovery even 
after these two stages, legal action would be initi ated by the Head Office of the 
Company. 
• Detailed investigative audit would be conducted in cases where the number of 
accounts with outstanding amount more than 
`1,000 per account, reached 20 per cent 
of total accounts linked through a B&DC.   
Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that out of 2360 loan accounts with NPAs of `33.32 crore 
as on 31 March 2018 in the selected districts (Annexure-IX), demand notice (first reminder) 
was issued by the District Offices in 71 per cent cases covering NPA amount of `29.20 crore 
(88 per cent ).  Further, the Company took steps to initiate leg al action in respect of 683 loan 
accounts (29 per cent ) covering NPA amount of `18.09 crore (54 per cent ) only. 
With respect to investigative audits, Management in formed (October 2018) during course of 
audit that they had undertaken field visits of B&DC s where NPA accounts had crossed 
20 per cent  of total accounts, but no specific reports were av ailable on investigative audits.  
This could, however, not be verified by Audit as no supporting documents were provided. 
Management replied (May 2019) that it had not been able to cover all the B&DC cases 
(where NPA had reached 20 per cent  limit) under investigative audit.  However, investigative 
audits had been conducted in respect of some import ant cases such as Society of Noble Oath 
& Welfare (SNOW), Mahatma Gandhi Trust (MGT), Manuv ikasa, and Rural Education & 
Environmental Development Service (REEDS).  Managem ent, however, did not furnish 
documentary evidence in support of the investigative audits stated to be undertaken.  
The Ministry in its reply furnished (January 2020) some of the investigative audit reports.  
From the investigative audit reports furnished by t he Ministry it was observed that 
(i) maximum loan was availed by a single member, (i i) loans were taken by members beyond 
their repayment capacity, (iii) loans were sanction ed despite poor grading given by Field 
Survey Officer, etc. Thus, it is evident that prope r due diligence was not made by 
Management in sanctioning of loans and post sanctio ning of loans which led to loan amounts 
becoming NPAs. 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
80  
(c) Non-recovery of decreed amount in cases decided  by Lok Adalat 
In order to expedite recoveries from NPA accounts, the Company evolved a policy to 
approach the Lok Adalat 27  to amicably settle the outstanding loans with the borrowers.  The 
guidelines of the Company regarding settlement before the Lok Adalat stipulated that:  
• The Company was authorised to forego accumulated in terest fully or partially based 
on the NPA amount;  
• Managing Director of the Company was authorised to waive upto 50 per cent  of the 
total principal outstanding in exceptional cases by recording reasons; 
• On receipt of the decree from Lok Adalat, the amoun t of sacrifice to be made by the 
Company shall be arrived at and approval of Competent Authority would be obtained; 
and  
• In case repayments were not regularised even after two months, the Stressed Assets 
Team should initiate legal proceedings and reverse the settlement benefits accorded to 
the borrower. 
Accordingly, the Lok Adalat was approached in 108 c ases and settlement was arrived at 
through decree of Lok Adalat for an amount of `1.42 crore as on 30 September 2018.  As 
against this, only `0.19 crore was remitted by the borrowers and the ba lance amount of 
`1.23 crore was yet to be recovered (September 2019). 
Management replied (May 2019) that Execution Petitions (EPs) were filed against SHGs on a 
sample basis.  However, it was found that the women borrowers did not own enough physical 
assets, based on which recovery could be affected, even after EP decision came in favour of 
the Company.  In addition, undertaking such action had a huge reputational risk and political 
risk for the organisation. 
The reply is not acceptable since in the case of ju dicial decision in the form of a decree, the 
Company had no legal recourse except filing Executi on Petitions for their implementation.  
Thus, not initiating such action in all the cases o n the grounds of reputational/ political risk 
was not correct and would result in further accumulation of NPAs. 
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that against th e decreed amount of 
`1.42 crore, the 
Company recovered an amount of `0.26 crore as on 30 December 2019.  
However, an amount of `1.16 crore was pending for recovery as against the decreed amount 
of `1.42 crore, which needs to be watched. 
(d) Non recovery of dues under One-Time Settlement 
To expedite recoveries from chronic NPA accounts, t he Company decided (September 2018) 
to initiate One-Time Settlement (OTS) with borrower s.  The OTS scheme was valid during 
the period from 15 December 2015 to 14 June 2016.  During this period, the Company 
                                                           
27   Lok Adalat is one of the alternative dispute redr essal mechanisms; it is a forum where disputes/ cas es 
pending in the court of law or at pre-litigation st age are settled/ compromised amicably.  The award 
(decision) made by the Lok Adalats is deemed to be a decree of a civil court 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
81  
pursued OTS in respect of 938 NPA accounts of SHGs with an outstanding principal amount 
of `10.16 crore, whereby it agreed for waiver of outsta nding interest to the extent of 
`1.24 crore.  
It was observed that the borrowers did not honour t he agreed timelines of OTS.  There were 
defaults in remitting the agreed amount as only `0.05 crore was remitted by the borrowers.  
Thus, the remaining amount of `10.11 crore remained unrecovered . 
Management replied (May 2019) that the OTS agreemen t or verbal understanding was 
between the SHGs and the Company.  In case the borr owers did not go by the agreement, the 
Company also did not give any kind of benefit, as h ad been agreed upon.  The legal action 
initiated did not yield any substantial results in terms of recovery, including cases where 
Executive Petitions had been filed and upheld.  Man agement further stated that the assets 
held by the beneficiaries were not worthy of recovering the loans, e.g., cattle and poultry, etc.  
Ministry in its reply (January 2020) reiterated views of the Management.  
From the above replies, it is evident that the OTS mechanism was ineffective and did not 
yield the required results. 
(e) Non-remittance of amounts collected by B&DCs 
Examination of records revealed that during the yea rs 2015-16 to 2017-18, there were 10 
cases (other than the SNOW) of fraudulent activitie s by B&DCs wherein they had collected 
`1.85 crore as monthly instalments from the borrower s but did not remit the same to the 
Company. The details are given below: 
Table 5.3.5 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl.No. State Name of B&DC Amount involved 
1. Tamil Nadu Krupalaya, Villupuram 42.41 
2. Karnataka Social Education Activity for Rural Ch ild Health 
Development Society, Bagalkot 
37.29 
3. Karnataka Karnataka Integrated Development Servi ces, 
Tumkur 
26.74 
4. Karnataka Mahatma Gandhi Trust, Kodagu 19.09 
5. Karnataka Social Welfare and Rural Development S ociety, 
Tumkur  
17.64 
6. Karnataka Abhivruddhi Society for Social Develop ment, 
Tumkur 
14.53 
7. Karnataka Sneha Sampanmula Samasthe, Kolar 8.41 
8. Karnataka Sree Soogoreshwar Seva Sangh, Vijayapu ra 7.59 
9. Maharashtra  Swayam Shasan Bahudeshiya Mahila Sanstha, 
Washim 
6.82 
10. Karnataka Sadhana Education & Rural Development  Society, 
Mysore 
4.87 
  Total  185.39 
Management replied (May 2019) that the Company was continuously pursuing with the 
B&DCs for recovery of the misappropriated funds to avoid time consuming process of filing 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
82  
fidelity insurance claims.  They were able to recov er an amount of `0.95 crore as of 
31 March 2019. However, `0.90 crore was yet to be recovered. 
The Ministry in its reply (January 2020) reiterated views of the Management.   
5.3.7 Conclusion 
The Company incorrectly included the thrift of memb ers of SLIs in the calculation of their 
net worth while determining their loan eligibility.  Consequently, loans aggregating to 
`299.80 lakh were sanctioned to six SLIs, even thoug h five of them were not eligible for any 
loan and one was eligible for a loan of `0.15 lakh only against `50 lakh sanctioned to it.  
There were deficiencies in appraisal of loans as th e list of book debts provided by the SLIs 
were not certified by the auditor and the third par ty guarantees or personal guarantees of 
promoters were not obtained.  The findings of inves tigative audits of B&DCs were not 
properly recorded.  Post disbursement visits in res pect of loans disbursed were not conducted 
as per the Operations Manual of the Company.  The f ollow-up mechanism in respect of the 
NPA accounts was weak and needed to be strengthened. 
5.3.8 Recommendations 
1)  The Company may establish a robust appraisal system  with the objective of assessing 
creditworthiness of prospective borrowers, in order  to avoid sanctioning of loans to 
ineligible borrowers and to prevent slippages of loans into NPAs.  
2)  The Company may evolve an effective system to recor d the findings of investigative 
audits and ensure follow-up action thereon. 
3)  Post Disbursement Visits in respect of all disburse d loans may be conducted to ensure 
that the loans are utilised for intended purpose.  
4)  Field operations should concentrate on identifying early warning signals for loans 
slipping into NPAs and prompt corrective action in such cases should be taken. The 
information collected during field visits and follo w-up with borrowers should be 
recorded in computerised system to facilitate proper storage, analysis and retrieval.  
5)  The Company should continuously engage with the NPA  accounts in order to effect 
recoveries promptly. 
6)  The Company may review the position in all the bran ches/ district offices in all the 
States taking into consideration the audit observat ions and take necessary remedial 
action. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
83  
National Insurance Company Limited 
 
5.4  Review of Underwriting of Group Mediclaim Insu rance Policies 
 
5.4.1 Introduction 
National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), nationalised in 1972, has been servicing in the 
general insurance industry.  NICL with its Head Off ice (HO) at Kolkata, operates through 33 
Regional Offices (RO), 377 Divisional Offices (DO),  584 Branch Offices (BO) and 740 
Business Centers (BC) across the country and provid es services to its policyholders in fire, 
marine, motor, engineering, health and miscellaneous sectors of general insurance. 
Health insurance portfolio of NICL is broadly categ orised into “Individual Mediclaim” and 
“Group Mediclaim” policies (GMPs).  GMP is further sub-divided into Tailor-made 
28  policy 
and Standard Group Mediclaim 29  Policy.  Corporate Entities, Banks, Government and  semi-
Government organisations accept GMPs for health cov erage of their employees, members, 
customers etc. 
Insurance companies undertake risks in consideration of premium to protect the financial loss 
of the insured by payment of claim subject to fulfi lment of agreed policy terms.  In the 
insurance sector, incurred claim ratio (ICR) 
30  is an important parameter for evaluating the 
financial performance of any portfolio, as reduced ICR represents more profitability of the 
portfolio.  Audit observed that during 2014-15 to 2 018-19, NICL earned maximum premium 
income in health insurance business (after motor in surance business) which ranged between 
`3,388.41 crore and `3,893.45 crore.  However, the performance of health  portfolio was 
adverse with ICR ranging between 104 per cent  and 128 per cent during the same period . 
Audit made a comparative analysis of the premium in come and ICR of GMPs (excluding 
government sponsored schemes) of NICL vis-à-vis  Private Sector Insurance Companies as 
per IRDA data during the last five years ending 2018-19 as given below: 
Table 5.4.1 
(Premium in `` `` crore and ICR in percentage)  
Source: IRDA website  
                                                           
28   A policy where coverage, terms and conditions are  customized according to the policyholder’s 
requirements and premium derived accordingly 
29   A policy where coverage, terms and conditions are  fixed and applicable for all policyholders. 
30   Claims paid plus claims outstanding at the year e nd minus claims outstanding at the beginning of the  
year over premium earned 
Years  
NICL  Private Insurance Companies  
Total 
premium for 
Health 
portfolio  
Premium and ICR of 
Group Insurance 
Schemes excluding Govt. 
Sponsored Schemes  
Total 
premium for 
Health 
portfolio  
Premium and ICR of Group 
Insurance Schemes excluding 
Govt. Sponsored Schemes  
Premium ICR Premium ICR 
2014-15 3,589.09 1,649.27 128.00 5,485.56 2,123.53 96.12 
2015-16 3,893.45 1,680.97 127.50 6,675.20 2,484.25 88.86 
2016-17 3,746.73 1,702.40 150.00 8,122.04 3,042.11 87.76 
2017-18 3,743.53 1,695.06 125.00 10,401.24 4,053.63 85.39 
2018-19 3,388.41 1,704.40 115.00 14,652.10 6,462.81  87.88 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
84  
It is evident from Table 5.4.1 that the share of pr emium income of GMPs (excluding Govt. 
sponsored schemes) to total premium income of healt h portfolio of NICL ranged between 
43.17 per cent  and 50.30 per cent  during 2014-19.  Corresponding ICR was consistentl y 
adverse over the years and ranged between 115 per cent  and 150 per cent .  
Therefore, a Complianc Audit was undertaken to revi ew the performance of underwriting of 
GMPs (excluding government sponsored schemes) in NICL during 2014-19. 
 5.4.2  Audit objectives and scope    
The objectives of audit of GMP were to assess whether NICL: 
• adopted effective mechanism/ followed IRDA guidelines for pricing of products; 
• followed prudent underwriting practices, adhering t o relevant rules, regulations and 
guidelines; and, 
• put in place an effective control mechanism for mon itoring of underwriting practices 
of GMPs for sustainability of health portfolio. 
Audit test checked the GMPs issued for a period of five years ending 2018-19  at the HO, 
Kolkata and eight ROs of NICL across the country.  ROs were selected for scrutiny based on 
the maximum number of policies involving premium in come of `3 crore or more.  The 
sample selection under RO was made based on the pre mium amount of `3 crore or more, 
more than `50 lakh but less than `3 crore and less than `50 lakh at 100 per cent , 10 per cent  
and one per cent  respectively, adopting Stratified Random Sampling method. 
5.4.3  Audit findings  
The audit findings are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.  
5.4.3.1   Pricing of product 
As per IRDA (Health Insurance) Regulation 2013, all  particulars of any product shall, after 
introduction, be reviewed by the company at least o nce a year.  If the product is found to be 
financial unviable, or is deficient in any particul ar aspect, the company may revise the 
product appropriately.  
In the light of high ICR experienced in health port folio, Audit Committee of NICL instructed 
(February 2014) its Health Department to prepare a focused action plan for reduction of ICR.  
The committee took (May 2014 and February 2015) the  note of the action plan submitted to 
it, which inter alia  included actions initiated to revise prices of all  policies, including bank 
tie-ups, considering the burning cost 
31  plus  other expenses.  Audit, however, observed that 
revision of product pricing was not undertaken desp ite the ICR of GMPs being consistently 
adverse from 2014 to 2019.  
While accepting the audit observation, Management replied (March 2020) that the revision of 
GMP was long overdue.  They also stated that GMP pr oducts would be revised following 
                                                           
31   Estimated cost of claims in the forthcoming insur ance period calculated from previous years’experien ce 
adjusted for change in the numbers insured, the nature of cover and medical inflation 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
85  
IRDA directives on certain modifications and inclus ions, and along with such changes, the 
product price was also proposed to be reviewed and revised.  
5.4.3.2   Underwriting 
 
i)  Issuance of policies without approval of HO  
NICL mandated (February 2013) for approval of HO fo r all proposals of policy renewal 
where the claim experience in expiring policy was more than 70 per cent.  Such  policies were 
to be referred to HO for approval.  
Test check of 820 policies revealed that 344 polici es (41.95 per cent ) were renewed by the 
concerned operating offices without obtaining approval of HO.  
Audit also observed that there was no monitoring system available in HO of NICL to identify 
the policies due for renewal and required approval of HO.  Further, there was no control to 
check whether the operating offices issued the poli cies as per terms and conditions approved 
by HO and collected the approved amount of premium.  
Management replied (February 2020) that it was time  and again emphasised to all ROs that 
no tailor made GMP be accepted without approval of HO.  But due to operational issues, at 
times ROs failed to refer proposals on time to HO a nd such non-references were generally 
procedural lapses on the part of ROs and operating offices.  They also claimed that “approval 
process has been more streamlined now”.  Entry of HO approval numbers in the system while 
underwriting tailor made Group Health Policies had been made mandatory, since December 
2018.  NICL also stated that they have introduced a lert mails in their system to monitor 
underwritten policies without HO approval number.  
However, no such documentary evidence in support of  the system introduced was made 
available to audit.  NICL also needs to ensure that  polices issued by operating offices 
complied with the rate, terms and conditions as approved by HO. 
ii)  Under recovery of premium 
HO instructed (April 2011) that policies renewed by  the operating offices/ ROs without 
approval of HO, be referred to HO for ratification.   In case, the amount of premium collected 
was found to be inadequate or any deviations were m ade from the approved terms and 
conditions of the policy, the offices concerned wer e to collect the additional premium within 
a specified time line, failing which the policy was to be cancelled after notification.  
Test check of 820 policies in audit revealed that i n 111 cases (13.54 per cent ) the operating 
offices collected lesser amount of premium than the  premium amount approved by HO.  
These policies were also not cancelled as per the d irectives.  Non-compliance of approved 
terms resulted in loss of premium amounting to `42.35 crore ( Annexure-X). 
Management replied (February/ March 2020) that guid lines of HO were generally followed 
by the ROs but due to market conditions, ROs were c ompelled to collect lesser premium in 
order to retain their renewals.  However, the audit  observation has been noted and intimated 
to ROs so that premium would be collected as approved by HO. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
86  
iii)  Short charging of premium due to non-imposition of desired loading  
HO instructed (February 2012) that premium of polic ies due for renewal involving ILR 32  
above 70 per cent,  need to be computed on outgo basis 33 .  Further, for reduction of high ICR 
in health portfolio, Audit committee of NICL, in th e action taken note (May 2014), 
considered factors like claim outgo, medical inflat ion, TPA charges, intermediaries 
commission and management expenses in underwriting of renewals of GMPs.  Further Health 
Insurance Underwriting Policy, 2016 of NICL also st ipulated that necessary loading be 
imposed during renewal of GMPs experiencing adverse claim with the objective of recouping 
the burning cost.  Besides, Ministry of Finance (Mo F) directed (June 2017), to take into 
account likely increase in quantum of claims due to  ageing of covered group, increase in size 
of group and other associated factors in addition to the above during renewals. 
Audit test checked 820 policies and observed that i n 238 policies (29 per cent ), desired 
loading was not imposed during renewal despite having high claim experience in the expiring 
policies resulting in loss of premium income amount ing to `372.27 crore ( Annexure-XI ) 
during 2014-15 to 2018-19.  
As per HO instructions (February 2013), the premium  was further to be loaded at a fixed 
percentage for coverage of family floater, pre-exis ting diseases, maternity benefit, corporate 
buffer etc .  Audit however observed that during 2015-16, a ne w GMP 
34  policy was issued 
without imposing desired loading for additional ben efits viz . family floater coverage, pre-
existing diseases, maternity benefit etc ., which resulted in loss of premium income amounting 
to `0.68 crore.  
While accepting the audit observations, Management replied (February/ March 2020) that 
they have been taking necessary measure for pricing  in most of the policies in the financial 
year 2019-20 and issued a circular on 21 February 2 020 focusing on the importance of 
keeping the GMP at a sustainable level. 
In this context, reference is invited to the C&AG’s  Report No. 9 (Commercial) of 2017 
wherein repeated instances of undercharging of load ing and non-collection of additional 
premium ( 
`89.29 crore) on account of adverse claim ratio rang ing between 181 per cent  and 
398 per cent  during 2011-12 to 2015-16 in respect of GMPs issue d to Kolkata Police were 
highlighted.  Though, NICL discontinued the policy from 2018-19, however, focused action 
was found lacking in the organisation to streamline the imposition of loading during renewals 
of GMPs having adverse claim experience, for which NICL is incurring losses over the years.  
iv)  Avoidable loss due to non-revision of bank tie-up health insurance policies  
As per IRDA (Health Insurance) Regulation 2013, all  particulars of any product shall, after 
introduction, be reviewed by the company at least o nce a year.  If the product is found to be 
financial unviable, or is deficient in any particul ar aspect, the company may revise the 
product appropriately.  
                                                           
32   Incurred loss ratio 
33   Projected claim outgo of an expiring policy inclu ding claim incurred but not reported (IBNR). 
34   Policy No. 10060046158500000254 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
87  
NICL entered into agreements with various leading b anks like Bank of Baroda, Bank of 
India, Nainital Bank, etc . and introduced health policies for the account ho lders and their 
family members.  Premium rates under these policies  were fixed for individual account 
holders and their family members on the basis of su m insured.  Loading of 25 per cent  on 
premium was, however, applied for the account holders above 65 years of age. 
Due to consistent adverse ICR, NICL in the action t aken note (May 2014) considered  for 
price correction in all policies including bank tie -ups.  Further, in Product Performance 
Review Meeting, IRDA pointed out (July 2014) that t he bank policies were loss making 
propositions for NICL. 
Audit observed that huge loss was incurred by NICL in the tie-up business with banks during 
the last five years ending 31 March 2019 as detailed below: 
Table 5.4.2 
(Premium, Incurred Claims and Loss - `` `` in crore/ ICR in percentage) 
Year 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Overall 
Premium Income 
(A) 98.83 
 118.47  130.96  147.28  103.70 599.24  
Incurred Claims (B) 197.74  246.37  275.40 309.78  397.12  1426.41  
ICR [(B) / (A) x 100] 200.08  207.96  210.29  210.33  382.95  238.04  
Loss (C) = (B) - (A) 98.91  127.90 144.44  162.50 293.42  827.17  
(The above loss has been computed without consideri ng Management Expenses, Medical Inflation, 
Commission, etc.) 
However, NICL continued the tie-up business for a c onsiderable period without any action 
for price correction and finally NICL decided (Sept ember 2018) to withdraw two tie-up 
health policies (Baroda Health Policy and Bank of I ndia National Swasthya Bima Policy) 
with effect from October 2018 citing high incidence of ICR.   
Thus, due to non-revision of bank tie-up policies i n time and continuing with the same 
despite having high ICR, NICL sustained loss of `827.17 crore during 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
Management replied (February 2020) that they were a ware of the low rates and losses and 
therefore discontinued two loss making co-branded h ealth polices with effect from 03 
October 2018.  NICL had offered alternate products National Parivar Mediclaim Policy (for 
family) and National Mediclaim Policy (for individu al) to the existing customers of both the 
bank policies and extended continuity benefits to p rotect the interest of the existing policy 
holders. 
However, the fact remains that due to delay in non- revision/ withdrawal of bank tie-up health 
policies, NICL had to suffer a loss of 
`827.17 crore. 
v)  Loss of premium due to imprudent underwriting of policies 
Audit observed instances of imprudent practice of u nderwriting group health polices due to 
non-adherence to the underwriting guidelines for GMPs as detailed below:  
• As per instructions issued (August 2010) by HO, ext ension of discount for low or 
young age profile, technical discount, etc. are prohibited.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
88  
Test check of 820 policies revealed that in 15 case s (1.8 per cent ), an amount of 
`7.61 crore was allowed as discount on account of lo w/ young age profile or as 
special discount which were not permissible (Annexure-XII ). 
• Age of the insured is a vital factor in computing t he premium. NICL issued 
(January 2016) a GMP 35  for covering the risk of the employees and the fam ily 
members of Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authori ty (KMDA).  Instead of 
considering the actual age of the insured, NICL cal culated the premium considering 
the average age of 45 years as declared by KMDA.  T hus, the consideration of 
average age of the employee instead of their actual  age for computation of premium, 
resulted in undercharging of premium amounting to `0.82 crore. 
• Calculation of premium during renewal is computed b ased on the incurred claim data 
of expiring policy received from TPA.  The process of renewal usually commences 30 
days prior to expiry of the policy.  In terms of in structions (February 2013) of NICL, 
the operating offices are required to cross check t he information submitted by TPA 
within 30 days of expiry of the current policy.  Th us, consequent to reconciliation of 
TPA data with actual incurred claim data, if comput ed premium is found less, the 
balance premium is to be collected in a given timeline. 
Test check of 820 policies revealed that in 10 case s (1.2 per cent ) the incurred claim 
data submitted by TPA before expiry of the policies  were not reconciled by the 
operating offices within the period of 30 days of e xpiry of the policies, which resulted 
in under recovery of premium income amounting to `21.95 crore (Annexure-XIII).  
No action was taken to collect the differential premium. 
While accepting the audit observations, Management in their replies assured to adhere to the 
instructions related to prudent underwriting practi ce and issued a circular on 21 February 
2020 in this regard.  
vi)  Excess payment of brokerage and commission  
Brokerage and commission are paid to the intermedia ries like brokers, agents for procuring 
business for the insurance companies.  NICL fixed t he percentage of agency commission and 
brokerage payable under health business.  Further, as per IRDA (Payment of Commission or 
Remuneration or Reward to Insurance Agents and Insu rance Intermediaries) Regulations, 
2016, no commission or remuneration is payable eith er to insurance agents or intermediaries 
in case the policies are procured directly.  
Test check of 820 cases in audit revealed that in 1 0 cases (1.2 per cent ) NICL procured the 
business directly from the Government organisations .  Notwithstanding this, 
`0.27 crore was 
paid towards commission or remuneration to the agen ts in contravention of the guidelines  
(Annexure-XIV) . 
Further, in 14 cases (1.7 per cent ), excess payment of `2.37 crore towards brokerage/ 
commission was made disregarding NICL guidelines (Annexure-XV). 
                                                           
35   Policy No. 103000/46/15/850000170 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
89  
Management (March 2020) replied that in their circu lar dated 21 February 2020, they have 
instructed in detail about the payment of brokerage / commission in the light of audit 
observation.  Management also stated that it would ensure that all offices strictly adhere to 
HO guidelines and instructions. 
vii)  Control and Monitoring  
a)  Non-compliance of directives, regulations and guidelines  
For controlling and monitoring activities of the in surance companies, Department of 
Financial Service (DFS), MoF and HO of NICL issued directives, regulations, circulars etc . 
from time to time.  Audit observed the following de ficiencies in the compliance of the above 
directives: 
• DFS, MoF directed (September 2012) that full detail s of all the Group Health 
Insurance Policies (whether standalone or part of t he overall insurance portfolio of 
any company/ corporate with other profitable segmen ts of business) needs to be 
brought to the notice of the Board of Directors of the Company every quarter without 
fail and the matter be reviewed periodically. 
• The Health Insurance Underwriting Policy (HIUP) 201 6 and 2017 of NICL stipulated 
that there should be an Underwriting Procedural Manual.  
Audit observed that the above directions/ stipulations were not adhered to. 
Management replied (March 2020) that NICL submitted  all the information as and when 
required by the Board of Directors and there was no  recent requirement from the Board to 
provide policy wise details.  Further, NICL issued internal circulars for underwriting of group 
health policies from time to time. 
The reply of Management is not acceptable in view o f the fact that non-submission of full 
details of group health policies on quarterly basis  before Board and its non-review 
tantamount to deficient adherence of Ministry’s ins tructions.  Further, in the context of high 
ICR of GMPs, non-existence of underwriting procedur al manual vitiates seamless adherence 
of good underwriting practices of health policies a nd instructions of HO by all the operating 
offices. 
b)  Non-implementation of Action Plan  
Due to consistent adverse performance of health ins urance portfolio over the years, an action 
plan was placed before the Audit Committee (May 201 4/ February 2015) highlighting 
measures for reduction of ICR which include tuning up of underwriting practices through 
centralised approval at HO, consideration of factor s like claim outgo, medical inflation, 
intermediary and management expenses, monthly revie w of the performance of ROs with 
high ICR and adoption of remedial measures, price c orrections of all policies including bank 
tie-up policies etc.  
Audit noticed deficiencies in implementation of the  plan.  Instances were noticed of non-
revision of prices of products, renewal of policies  having high ICR without having approval 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
90  
of HO, short charging of premium which have been hi ghlighted in the preceding paragraphs.  
The action plans were formulated to bring down the overall loss ratio in health portfolio, 
however, the benefits as envisaged in the action plan did not fructify.  
Management replied (March 2020) that over the years NICL had given considerable attention 
to the loss-making segment and company level strate gies were evolved.  All endeavors were 
made to arrest high ICR and to make the health port folio sustainable.  Loss control measures 
helped to achieve a progressive decline in net ICR in the group segment from 2016-17 to 
2018-19. 
The reply of Management is not acceptable as there was consistent adverse performance of 
group health insurance policies over the years.  Th e ICR still remained 115 per cent  in 
2018-19 which calls for strict adherence to the action plan for achieving the breakeven.  
5.4.4  Conclusion  
Despite growth in the volume of business of health portfolio, consistent adverse performance 
has been noticed under the health portfolio over th e years.  Instances were noticed having 
issuance of policies without approval of HO, non-re vision of prices of its products, short 
charging of premium, excess payment of brokerage/ c ommission and non-adherence to the 
circulars of IRDA and its own laid down norms and guidelines, which indicate deficiencies in 
the monitoring and control in the organisation. 
5.4.5  Recommenations  
NICL needs to: 
1.  ensure compliance of regulatory stipulations in rel ation to product pricing, 
underwriting of policies and review the adequacy of  pricing of product to achieve 
break-even in the GMPs; 
2.  take necessary steps to build health insurance data base for improving underwriting of 
policies;  
3.  develop a robust system for monitoring of underwrit ing performance of GMPs by 
various operating offices of NICL, and 
4.  review all the cases of GMPs taking into considerat ion the audit observations and fix 
the responsibility for lapses, wherever required.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in April 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
91  
5.5 Avoidable expenditure on rent due to delay in r elocation of offices  
 
Despite taking possession of office premises which was purchased in Scope Minar 
Building, Delhi in July 2016, National Insurance Co mpany Limited failed to relocate 
its offices till March 2019.  Delay in relocation of its offices from rental premises to the 
purchased premises resulted in avoidable rental outgo of `` ``8.53 crore. 
 
In order to minimise higher rental outgo of its off ices located in Delhi, National Insurance 
Company Limited (NICL), acquired (June 2016) office  premises, having super built area of 
24,576 sq.ft.36 , in Scope Minar Delhi from Tourism Finance Corporation of India Limited at a 
cost of `31.50 crore.  The possession was obtained by NICL i n July 2016.  NICL envisaged 
relocation of its three offices located in Delhi viz ., Delhi Regional Office-III (DRO-III), OD 
Claim Hubs (ODCH) and National Legal Vertical (NLV)  at vacant premises in the Scope 
Minar.  It was also decided to shift Delhi Regional  Office-I (DRO-I) to the premises of 
DRO-III (having lesser rent), once vacated.  NICL e stimated that the above relocation would 
entail an annual savings of `5.87 crore towards rental outgo. 
To undertake interior furnishing work at the purcha sed premises, NICL constituted a 
Committee in December 2016, after five months of po ssession.  The committee proposed 
(February 2017) to utilise the services of NBCC (In dia) Limited (NBCC), as Project 
Management Consultant to carry out the entire proce ss of interior furnishing.  Approval of 
the Board was accorded in July 2017.  A MoU was exe cuted in August 2017 between NICL 
and NBCC, which provided that the work was to be co mpleted in all respects within a period 
of six months (including two months for engagement of contractor by NBCC). 
In November 2017, it was noticed that area of the v acant space was insufficient to 
accommodate all the three offices as envisaged in i ts original plan and accordingly it was 
decided to shift only two offices, i.e . NLV along with DRO-III in December 2017.  However, 
in December 2018, NICL changed the decision and dec ided to relocate ODCH in place of 
NLV along with DRO-III.  Thus, NBCC had to execute necessary changes due to 
modification in the relocation plan.  NICL finally shifted its offices (i.e. DRO-III and ODCH) 
to Scope Minar in April 2019. 
Audit observed that despite having possession in Ju ly 2016, NICL failed to shift their offices 
from the rented premises to the Scope Minar till Ma rch 2019. Audit noticed lack of planning, 
indecisiveness and delays in decision making, grant  of administrative approval, formation of 
committee to oversee the tasks, firming up of the c onsultant and subsequent approvals of the 
Board.  
As per the negotiations, NBCC was required to compl ete the work in all respects within a 
period of six months.  Thus, even on conservative b asis, after allowing additional six months 
to complete the work, NICL should have completed re location of offices by July 2017 i.e. 
within one year from obtaining the possession of the purchased premises.  
Management in its reply (November 2019) stated that  NICL did not have any experience of 
handling work relating to interior furnishing and a greed that better planning could have been 
                                                           
36   Including 10,800 sq.ft. already occupied by Delhi  Regional Office-II of NICL on rental basis 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
92  
made in this regard.  It further assured that adequ ate care would be taken in all future 
exercises.  
Thus, lack of planning in relocation of offices and  delay in decision making resulted in 
avoidable payment of rent amounting to 
`8.53 crore 37  for the period from August 2017 to 
March 2019.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited (June 
2020).  
5.6  Failure to collect motor insurance premium fro m discontinued dealer outlets resulted 
in loss 
Despite having specific provision in the tie up agr eement, for daily collection of motor 
insurance premium from the dealer outlets of Hero C orporate Service Private 
Limited, National Insurance Company Limited failed to collect the premium in time.  
This resulted in a loss of `` ``16.58 crore which was recoverable from the dealer o utlets 
which had discontinued business dealings with NICL.  
National Insurance Company Limited (NICL), in pursu it of business expansion through 
partnership agreement with automobile manufacturers , executed (January 2004) a Service 
Level Agreement (agreement) for granting corporate agency to Hero Corporate Service 
Private Limited (HCSPL) under pan India auto tie-up  business.  The agreement was entered 
into initially for three years which was subsequently renewed from time to time. 
The agreement, inter alia , provided for the following: 
• HCSPL was to act as a corporate agent of NICL to pr omote, sell and distribute 
insurance policies being marketed by NICL from outl ets and/ or such other places as 
mutually agreed upon.  
• In consideration for the business generated by HCSP L, NICL was to pay to HCSPL, 
commission at such rates as may be mutually agreed from time to time, on monthly 
basis. 
• NICL was to implement appropriate technology so as to issue policy online at HCSPL 
specified outlets and handover the completed policy  to the customer instantly upon 
receipt of premium and necessary documents. 
• NICL was to arrange collection of all the documents  and instruments of payments 
pertaining to the business from specified HCSPL outlets on each working day. 
Audit observed that by virtue of the agreement, des ignated dealer outlets of HCSPL issued 
insurance policies on behalf of NICL from time to t ime and collected the policy premium 
from the customers.  However, the premium received by the dealer outlets from the 
customers, on sale of insurance policies, was not c ollected by NICL on daily basis as 
                                                           
37   Annual rental outgo of DRO-III ( `` ``    1,61,36,784) + ODCH ( `` ``    19,05,000) + `` ``    3,31,63,216 being the 
difference in annual rental outgo of DRO-I ( `` ``    4,93,00,000) and DRO-III ( `` ``    1,61,36,784) for shifting of 
DRO-I to the vacant premises of DRO-III = `` ``    5,12,05,000.  Rental outgo for 20 months (August 20 17 to 
March 2019) = `` ``    5,12,05,000/ 12 X 20 = `` ``    8,53,41,667 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
93  
provided in the agreement.  Consequently, amount of  premium outstanding towards the 
dealer outlets accumulated to `131.94 crore as on March 2019.  Audit further obser ved that 
the amount of `32.95 crore 38  which was outstanding upto March 2018, included `17.10 crore, 
recoverable from the dealer outlets who had discont inued business dealings with NICL.  
NICL, however, recovered only `0.52 crore during the first quarter of 2019-20, lea ving an 
amount of `16.58 crore pending for recovery (August 2019). 
Lack of internal control is evident from the fact t hat there was no provision in the agreement 
for obtaining security deposit/ bank guarantee from the dealers to protect the financial interest 
of NICL.  Audit also noticed that to ensure the rea lisation of premium, the Board of NICL 
approved (September 2012) opening of Escrow account s for collection of advance premium 
under tie-up business, so as to enable them to issu e policies only to the extent of advance 
payments available in the escrow account.  However,  NICL initiated action to open Escrow 
account only in October 2018.  The system was not implemented till August 2019. 
Management replied (September 2019) that: 
• The dealer outlets of HCSPL were spread across the length and breadth of the country 
and due to lack of infrastructure to implement the system in a foolproof manner, 
collection of premium could not be ensured. 
• Out of 
`17.10 crore receivable as pointed out by Audit, `7.64 crore was receivable 
from dealer outlets which were still working in the  tie-up but were not placing 
business with NICL and that NICL was pursuing for r ecovery of amount from these 
dealer outlets. 
• An amount of `15.16 crore existed in form of cash deposit ( `2.37 crore) and 
unidentified credits ( `12.79 crore) in respect of those dealer outlets whi ch could be 
utilised for the purpose of adjusting the amount re ceivables and that remained 
unadjusted for want of bifurcation of amounts in pa y-in slip and reconciliation 
respectively.  Management further stated that NICL implemented the system of 
premium payment by the dealer outlets through electronic mode from June 2019 so as 
to eliminate outstanding receivables from the dealer outlets in future.  
Management’s reply is not acceptable as the issue o f large network of dealers as stated in the 
reply was already factored in while fixing the peri odicity of collection of premium from 
dealer outlets, i.e.  on daily basis.  Further, claim of Management rega rding the amount 
receivable from dealer outlets which were still wor king in the tie-up is also not acceptable as 
the dealer outlets were not patronising NICL in the ir business dealings and are not placing 
any business with NICL.  With regard to the amount lying in cash deposit and unidentified 
credits, the reply is not acceptable as NICL is hav ing a total outstanding of `131.94 crore 
from the dealers outlets as on March 2019 and Manag ement has failed to reconcile the 
amount lying in cash deposit and unidentified credi ts even after considerable period of time 
(August 2019).   
                                                           
38  Since year 2012-13 onwards till March 2018  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
94  
Thus, NICL suffered a loss of `16.58 crore due to absence of provisions to secure its 
financial interests in the agreement, non-collectio n of premium in time and weak internal 
controls.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited (June 
2020).  
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited 
5.7  Imprudent underwriting and arrangement of inju dicious reinsurance cover leading 
to loss 
The Oriental Insurance Company Limited  accepted co-insurance share without 
having net retention capacity and further availed reinsurance cover on Excess of Loss 
basis which resulted into a net loss of `` ``6.60 crore. 
 
As per Reinsurance (RI) Programme of The Oriental Insurance Company Limited (OICL) for 
the year 2017-18, after placing obligatory cession of five per cent , the maximum net retention 
capacity for event insurance (sports) was `15 crore and beyond this it was required to arrange 
Facultative Reinsurance 39  arrangement.  The Company issued (June 2017) four Policies 
No.111700/ 48/ 2018/ 238 to 241 to M/s Oppo Mobiles  India Private Limited (Oppo) for the 
period from 7 June 2017 to 6 June 2018 covering the  risk of loss of sponsorship revenue due 
to event cancellation for 51 matches.  The total lo ss limit under these policies was `50 crore 
and after retaining `15 crore in net capacity of OICL, remaining `35 crore was placed with 
reinsurance arrangement. 
Another insurance company, The New India Assurance Company Limited (NIACL) issued in 
favour of M/s Star India Private Limited (September  2017) a Special Contingency Policy 
covering risk of loss of broadcasting revenue due to event cancellation of cricket match series 
for a period from 29 September 2017 to 28 September  2018 with sum insured of 
`543.52 
crore.  The policy covered three cricket match seri es having 23 Matches of T-20/ One Day/ 
Test to be played in different cities in India betw een India-Australia, India-New Zealand and 
India-Sri Lanka.  The same matches were already cov ered under policy issued to Oppo as 
stated above.  
Further, NIACL offered 
`138.68 crore of sum insured with a premium of `6.10 crore to 
OICL under a co-insurance arrangement.  Maximum lim it of liability under the policy was 
`45 crore per match (OICL share being `12 crore @ 26.67 per cent ) and policy loss limit was 
`150 crore (OICL share being `40 crore).  Since the net retention capacity of OIC L had 
already been exhausted in June 2017 on issuance of policies to Oppo, it invited quotes for 
proportionate facultative 40  re-insurance arrangement from General Insurance Co rporation 
(GIC) and JLT broker (i.e. a Private Firm).  GIC refused to quote and JLT broker demanded a 
premium at the rate of six per cent  of proportionate sum insured to be ceded.  Considering the 
                                                           
39   A reinsurance contract under which the ceding ins urer has the option to cede and the reinsurer has t he 
option to accept a specific risk of a specific insured. 
40  A type of Reinsurance Cover wherein claim loss is shared between insurer and reinsurer within 
predetermined proportion without any initial layer of loss 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
95  
rate of premium of 4.4 per cent 41  offered by NIACL under co-insurance arrangement, t he 
offer of JLT was not found viable.  Therefore, the company approached (September 2017) 
GIC to provide support on Excess of Loss (XOL) 42  basis for co-insurance share of `40 crore.  
However, GIC agreed to provide cover up to `30 crore in excess of `10 crore for a premium 
of `2.6 crore.  With the approval of the Chairman of th e Company, the offer of GIC was 
accepted.  Accordingly, the Company accepted the of fer of NIACL and issued (September 
2017) a policy no.530000/ 48/ 2018/ 256 in favour o f M/s Star India Private Limited for a 
period from 29 September 2017 to 28 September 2018 at a premium of `6.10 crore.  
In the instant policy, five claims amounting to `10.32 crore ( `10.02 crore paid and 
`0.30 crore outstanding) have been reported and afte r recovery from GIC against 
five per cent  obligatory cession (i.e. `0.52 crore), net claim was left at `9.80 crore (total claim 
of `10.32 crore minus obligatory recoverable of `0.52 crore) which was below `10 crore.  
The entire net claim of `9.80 crore was borne by the company. As the Company  has earned a 
net premium of `3.20 crore 43  after five per cent  obligatory cession and RI facultative cover 
on XOL basis, it incurred a net loss of `6.60 crore. (Net claim borne by the company of 
`9.80 crore minus `3.20 crore being net premium earned). 
Audit observed the following: 
• By accepting the offer of NIACL, risk against 23 ma tches was got covered twice as 
those 23 matches were already covered in the policy  issued to M/s Oppo Mobiles 
Private Limited.  Further, the company had underwri tten the policy beyond its net 
retention capacity. 
• By reinsuring risk on XOL basis, the Company increa sed its net retention by 
`10 crore, thereby increasing the exposure of losses .  Further all the claims were 
borne by OICL which could have been shared with rei nsurer in case of proportionate 
facultative cover.  It is worth mentioning that the  availability of adequate Reinsurance 
cover is an essential prerequisite for underwriting  any risk and if the company does 
not get a suitable and safeguarding reinsurance cov er, it is implicitly prudent not to 
accept such risks so that the commercial interests of the company could be protected.  
Thus, in the absence of proportionate facultative c over, the company should not have 
ventured to underwrite the risk in case of M/s Star  India Private Limited on XOL 
basis. 
Management replied (December 2019) that the accepta nce of risk was based on merits, 
prudent underwriting practices and a commercial dec ision to bring overall growth to the 
sports portfolio with profitability.  Further, the proposal was referred for proportional support 
from the reinsurers and international reinsurers wh ich considering their own experience were 
                                                           
41   6.10/138.68*100 = 4.4 per cent 
42  A type of Reinsurance Cover wherein Reinsurer agre e to share claim losses incurred beyond a 
predetermined limit up to a specified maximum last limit e.g. in this case XOL cover of `` ``    30 crore in 
excess of `` ``    10 crore means that Reinsurer will bear claim liabi lity only in excess of `` ``    10 crore and up to  
`` ``    30 crore maximum  
43   Net Premium `` ``    3.20 crore =Gross Premium of `` ``    6.10 crore minus `` ``    0.30 crore ceded to GIC towards 5 
per cet obligatory cession minus `` ``    2.60 crore premium ceded to GIC RI facultative cover on XOL basis 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
96  
able to rate it, though they were high as submitted  by JLT broker, evidently establishing that 
proposal is doable and merited in the terms provide d by insured.  Management further added 
that its experience under the policy for the year 2 016-17 was profitable and as a measure of 
abundant caution that additional loss beyond `10 crore could be protected, excess of loss 
arrangement was considered.   
Management reply is not acceptable as the fact that facultative rates quoted by JLT broker for 
proportionate cover were high and GIC refused to qu ote on proportional basis substantiates 
the audit contention that the risk was higher under  the instant case and it was not a prudent 
business decision to reinsure it through facultative cover on XOL basis.  It is also pertinent to 
mention that it is a case of double insurance viz. coverage of sponsorship as well as 
broadcasting risks for the same events.  It would h ave been prudent to reinsure the risk on 
proportional basis so that the commercial interest of the Company could be protected.  
Thus underwriting the risk without having net reten tion capacity and reinsuring the risk on 
XOL basis was an imprudent decision which caused avoidable net loss of 
`6.60 crore. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
SBI Global Factors Limited 
5.8 Non-liquidation of factoring facility to a clie nt despite clear signs of incipient 
sickness leading to non-recovery  
SBI Global Factors Limited sanctioned a factoring f acility of `` ``35 crore to a client and 
did not take timely action to reduce and liquidate the facility despite early warning 
signals of stress in the asset, leading to non-recovery of `` ``28.37 crore.  
SBI Global Factors Limited (Company), sanctioned (M arch 2014) Domestic Factoring 
Facility 44  to M/s. Fabtech Projects & Engineers Limited (FPEL ) with the maximum Funds in 
Use (FIU) 45  limit of `15 crore.  The FIU limit was increased (October 201 4) to `35 crore for 
six approved debtors 46 , which are companies in the energy sector.  The pe rformance of FPEL 
under the facility deteriorated from August 2015 on wards and the Company reduced the FIU 
limit to `30 crore in September 2017 and `25 crore in January 2018.  The Company, 
however, continued the factoring of invoices and th e amount of `25 crore turned into a 
Non-Performing Asset (NPA) in the books of the Comp any as on 31 March 2019.  The total 
amount due from FPEL as of August 2019 was `28.37 crore (Principal - `25 crore and 
Interest - `3.37 crore).  The Company has claimed (October 2019 ) the amount of 
`28.37 crore in proceedings before National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) and a decision 
                                                           
44   Domestic Factoring Facility is a financial servic e whereby the client gets orders from  domestic buy ers 
located within India, raises invoices for goods sup plied/ works executed, assigns the invoice to the 
Company and receives prepayment up to 80-90 per cen t (or as approved by the appropriate authority) of 
the invoice value immediately. At the end of the cr edit period (60 days) offered by the client to the buyer, 
the Company collects payment for the full value of the invoice from the domestic buyer (referred to as  
‘debtor’)  
45   The amount of funds disbursed by the Factor to th e Client against bills factored at any point of tim e is 
called Funds in Use (FIU) 
46   Approved Debtor means any debtor who is indebted in respect of receivables to the Client for supply 
contract(s)/ Purchase Order(s) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
97  
is awaited.  The post-dated cheques obtained by the  Company from FPEL bounced 
(April 2019) and a case in this regard is pending in the High Court of Mumbai.   
The compliance audit of SBI Global Factors Limited was conducted during February – 
March 2019.  Audit noticed that the Credit Manual o f the Company prescribed ‘Early 
Warning signals’ for detecting stressed assets and when such signals appear, the Company 
was required to put in place a gradual reduction-cu m-liquidation plan for the asset.  The early 
warning signals include ‘direct payments’ (wherein the client first gets payment from the 
Company by factoring the invoices and later collect s payments from the debtors also and 
eventually pays back the Company through direct pay ments called ‘seller cash’), 
downgrading of credit rating, delays in payment, ad verse remarks in Auditor’s report etc.  
The early warning signals started appearing in this  case from August 2015 onwards but the 
first reduction (by `5 crore) in the asset happened only in September 2017 i.e. after more than 
two years and all along the factoring of invoices continued up to the ceiling amount, as tabled 
below: 
Table 5.8.1 
 
Nature of warning signal 
(As per extant- Credit Manual) 
Earliest 
date 
noticed 
Invoices factored 
after this date 
(till December 
2018) 
Violation of extant  
Credit Manual 
No. Amount  
(` in 
crore) 
Chapter 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Clause 
No. 
Direct Payments/ Seller Cash  03.08. 2015  656 436.91 6 1 2 nd  bullet  
12 - - 
Delays in payment 
by 31 to 60 days  15.08. 2016  423 276.25 8 C a & e 
by 61 to 180 days  12.02.2017  326 224.90 8 C a & e 
Forged signatures on invoices 
submitted by client   
11.05.2017  241 166.14 12 1 1 
Adverse remark s in Statutory Auditor’s 
Report / Downgrading of external credit 
rating of client to ‘C Negative’ 
06.02.2018  112 73.18 
 
12 Table 1  5 
Further analysis by Audit revealed that Management failed to reduce and liquidate the asset 
and there were non-compliances, as discussed below: 
• The Conduct Report (July 2016) of the Debt Manageme nt Team of the Company on 
FPEL brought out instances of payments through sell er’s cash amounting to `24.79 crore for 
the past one year, delay in receipt of payment by 1 5-25 days for the last six months and non-
response on follow up for payment of overdue invoices.  However, instead of implementing a 
reduction cum liquidation plan, the Corporate Credi t Committee (CCC) of the Company 
allowed (December 2016) temporary enhancement in th e limit from `25 crore to `30 crore, 
for one of the debtors (BPCL) valid till 31 March 2 017, citing cash crunch faced by FPEL.  
The Company, thus unduly favoured FPEL by factoring  the additional invoices beyond the 
limit of `25 crore, applicable for the debtor and released `3.50 crore by way of funding 
against invoices and balance amount by way of non-factored cash. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
98  
• Earlier also, the Company offered relaxations to FP EL – when the FIU limit was 
increased from `15 crore to `35 crore in October 2014, instead of obtaining addi tional 
security, the prevalent security was diluted from s econd charge on fixed assets to residual 
charge.  Also, by the time FPEL executed the Deed o f Charge on 21 August 2015 (though it 
was due by December 2014), the early warning signal  of direct payments had started 
(3 August 2015). 
• The Direct Payments/ Sellers Cash during the period  from August 2015 to 
December 2018 in respect of the six debtors is given below: 
Table 5.8.2 
(`` `` in crore) 
Name of debtor Invoices factored Direct payments Percentage 
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount 
BPCL 283 193.99 80 66.10 28.27 34.07 
Cairn India Limited 1 0.52 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 
IOCL 94 45.40 71 35.34 75.53 77.84 
NPCL 5 0.99 5 0.99 100.00 100.00 
Numaligarh Refinery 
Limited 
42 18.74 15 9.74 35.71 51.97 
Oil India Limited 231 177.27 54 66.70 23.38 37.63 
Total  656 436.91 225 178.87 34.30 40.94 
 
The high level of direct payments by more than 50 per cent  in the case of three debtors 
indicates that the facility was becoming more of a lending business than a factoring facility.  
This was because the debtors were required to make payment to the Company and in case 
they fail to do so, the Company can collect payment  from the client as a recourse or a fall 
back option.  But the Company had to resort to the recourse option more often than not.  
• The client was required to get the invoices certifi ed by the debtors for claiming 
payment from the Company. One of the debtors (IOCL) , informed (May 2017) the Company 
that the signatures on the invoices were not of the ir Engineer-in-charge and are forged 
signatures.  The Company responded by terminating t he sanctions of the concerned three 
locations and discontinuing factoring in the IOCL’s  Debtor Account.  The Company neither 
corresponded with other debtors to ascertain the au thenticity of their invoices nor took any 
penal action against the client, indicating a muted  response to a grave transgression by the 
client.    
• The Company allowed concession/ discounts by way of  deferment of levies/ charges 
amounting to 
`2.63 crore 47  to FPEL despite their poor performance under the facility. 
• Due cognisance was not given to the early warning s ignals at the time of annual 
renewal of the facility and the ceiling amount was retained till Spetember 2017.  
• All payments under the facility were required to be  routed through an Escrow 
Account opened for the purpose.  The Escrow Agent ( State Bank of India, Parent of the 
                                                           
47   Discount Charges ( `` ``    1.50 crore), Factoring Charges ( `` ``    0.80 crore) and Facility Continuation Fee                
(`` ``    0.33 crore) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
99  
Company) suo motu diverted funds of `1.90 crore from the Escrow Account during 
September to October 2017 to another account of FPE L being maintained by them.  The 
Company took up (November 2017) the matter with the  Escrow Agent but the diversion 
continued and an amount of `19.39 crore was diverted from the escrow account du ring April 
to December 2018, for reducing the irregularities i n the other account of FPEL i.e. for 
reducing the bad debts of the Parent Bank.  Thus, the escrow mechanism also failed to protect 
the interests of the Company.  
• The Executive Committee of the Board of Directors ( ECB) in their Meeting (March 
2018) had approved for filing of Arbitration, Civil  Suit (s), NCLT and any other legal 
proceedings against FPEL for recovery of outstandin g dues to the Company.  However, the 
Company did not initiate any legal action against FPEL and instead continued the factoring of 
invoices till December 2018.  It was also known to the Company that the debtors released the 
payments for invoices directly to FPEL/ its vendors but FPEL was not making payment to the 
Company, citing cash crunch.  The Company directed (February and March 2019) FPEL to 
clear its dues through Seller’s Cash in a bid to pr event the asset becoming an NPA.  
Nevertheless, the asset became an NPA with effect f rom 31 March 2019 and only after the 
post-dated cheques of FPEL bounced, legal action wa s initiated by the Company.  Thus, too 
much leverage was given to the client by the Company, disregarding its own interest.  
It is evident from the above that the Company faile d to insulate its financial resources and is 
now dependent on legal remedies to recover its dues, the possibility of which appears grim.  
Management stated (June, November & December 2019 a nd June 2020) that they took steps/ 
initiatives to exit from the account and were able to successfully reduce the FIU limit to 
`24.27 crore in January 2018 from `35 crore sanctioned in October 2014.  Management 
added that they planned to implement further downwa rd capping to `20 crore, but it did not 
materialise since FPEL failed to submit plan for re duction due to their working capital 
constraints.  Management contended that had they st opped the factoring of invoices in the 
early stages, the entire amount of `35 crore would have become NPA and added that the 
main focus of the Company was to recover maximum as sets in a gradual way.  Management 
expressed the hope that they would recover the dues  through legal remedies which are 
underway. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that the  Company failed to take affirmative action 
to exit from the facility when the early warning si gnals appeared in August 2015.  Though 
eventually the Company could achieve a reduction of  
`10 crore, the bulk of the amount i.e. 
`25 crore along with interest of `3.37 crore became NPA in March 2019.  The fact that  the 
client was facing liquidity issues was well known a nd under the circumstances, it was not 
realistic on the part of the Company to expect that  the client would submit the reduction plan.  
Rather, the FIU ceiling should have been curtailed at least during the annual renewals, if not 
earlier, leading to liquidation within a definite t ime frame and adequate and effective 
collateral securities should have been obtained for the exposure until then.   
Thus, despite being aware of the incipient sickness of FPEL right from August 2015 onwards, 
the delay in taking timely action by the Company in  managing the factoring facility led to 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
100  
avoidable litigation and the possibility of recover ability of the dues is also remote as it is an 
unsecured creditor in the legal process. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
United India Insurance Company Limited 
5.9  Loss due to less charging of premium 
United India Insurance Company Limited (UIICL) did not adhere to the guidelines 
issued by the Ministry of Finance for pricing and w hile underwriting the group 
health insurance policies.  Consequently, the Compa ny suffered a loss of `` ``112.28 
crore due to less charging of premium during 2016-17 to 2018-19. 
In view of continued losses suffered by Public Sect or General Insurance Companies 
(PSGICs) in the group health insurance portfolio, D epartment of Financial Services, Ministry 
of Finance (MOF), Government of India (GoI) issued guidelines (July-2012/ September 
2012) for pricing of health insurance policies.  As  per the guidelines, the Group Health 
Insurance Policies (GHIPs) should be appropriately priced, duly considering the burning 
cost 48 , Management Expenses (ME), Medical Inflation (MI) etc. to ensure that the Combined 
Ratio (CR) 49  should be less than 95 per cent  of the premium charged.  Policies not 
conforming to this ratio should not be renewed.  It  was also emphatically laid down in the 
aforesaid guidelines (July 2012/ September 2012) th at  no discount would be given in the 
Standalone GHIPs where the CR was more than 100 per cent  and these guidelines were 
mandatory and no discretion in this regard was available to the PSGICs.  
The MoF, GoI, citing the reference to the violation s of aforesaid directions, reiterated 
(June 2017) and stressed the need for strict observ ance to the aforementioned directions in 
order to appropriately price the GHIPs and to avoid  uneconomical and unviable discounts 
causing unnecessary strain on financial health of the PSGICs.  
In pursuance of the aforesaid guidelines (July 2012/ September 2012) of the MoF, the 
Corporate Office of the United India Insurance Comp any Limited (UIICL) had also issued a 
Circular on 24 July 2012 (subsequently modified on 26 October 2012) for underwriting of the 
Health Insurance Policies which stipulates that the  pricing of “Standalone” GHIPs should be 
such that the combined ratio i.e. the expected clai m outgo, the acquisition cost, the TPA 
charges and Management expenses to the premium is below 95 per cent .   
Audit reviewed Standalone GHIPs having premium of `50 lakh and above underwritten or 
renewed by Delhi Regional Office (DRO)-I, Delhi Reg ional Office (DRO)-II, and Large 
Corporate Branch Office (LCBO), New Delhi of the UI ICL pertaining to the period from 
2016-17 to 2018-19. 
                                                           
48   Estimated cost of claims in the forthcoming insur ance period calculated from previous years’experien ce 
adjusted for change in the numbers insured, the nature of cover and medical inflation 
49   The Combined Ratio (CR) is the sum of annualised claim outgo (i.e. incurred claim) adjusted with 
proposed number of lives, TPA charges, commission/ brokerage, medical inflation and management 
expenses divided by the premium charged in the previous year  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
101  
Audit  observed that in case of 61 GHIPs, where claim rat io incurred was higher than 
100 per cent  (Annexure-XVI ), premium was not worked out to ensure that the CR was within 
95 per cent .  The Company considered only the previous year’s annualised claim outgo, 
adjusted with the proposed numbers of lives to be c overed, TPA charges and brokerage but 
did not consider ME and MI which stood at 4.57 per cent  (2016-17), 4.37 per cent  (2017-18) 
and 7.14  per cent  (2018-19) as per the consumer price index reports of the Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), GoI. 
While arriving at appropriate pricing of the GHIPs proposals, audit has considered all the 
pricing factors as per the aforesaid guidelines of the MoF and the UIICL except ME in the 
absence of any benchmark and compared with the actu al premium collected for the GHIPs 
under audit review.  The minimum premium thus worked out by Audit comes to 
`527.80 crore in respect of total 61 GHIPs (Annexure-XVII) considering the annualised 
claim outgo adjusted with the proposed lives, TPA c harges, Brokerage/ Commission and 
MI 50  only without considering ME (as there was no bench mark available).  Against this, the 
DRO-I, DRO-II and LCBO of UIICL charged premium of `415.52 crore only by violating 
the specific guidelines of the MoF/ UIICL, which le d to loss of the revenue due to less 
charging of premium  of `112.28 crore.  
Management replied (December 2019) that premium cannot be charged based on a fixed rate/ 
formula and various factors including the market co nditions and other premiums from the 
same source have to be taken into account.  That au dit has not taken into reckoning such 
factors in arriving at the ‘Minimum premium to be c harged’ and hence the perceived loss of 
premium of `112.28 crore reported is not real.  The premium has  been charged in accordance 
with the company’s health underwriting policy which has been framed taking into account all 
factors including the guidelines of the MoF.  Furth er, out of the 61 accounts cited by audit 
only 24 are currently on their books and remaining 37 have not been renewed.  
Management’s reply that premium cannot be charged b ased on a fixed rate/ formula is not 
acceptable as the Guidelines issued (July 2012/ Sep tember 2012) by the MoF for pricing of 
health insurance policies provide for the underwrit ing methodology and stipulates that such 
guidelines are mandatory and no discretion is avail able to the company.  Moreover, 
management’s reply that the premium has been charge d in accordance with the company’s 
health underwriting policy which was framed taking into account the guidelines of the MoF, 
is also not acceptable as the company charged the p remium in violation of its own health 
underwriting policy in all 61 GHIPs as pointed out by the audit.  In fact, the figure of loss 
would have been higher if ME were also factored in.   Further, management’s reply that other 
premium from the same sources have to be taken into  account while underwriting the GHIPs, 
is also not acceptable as the cases pointed out by audit are standalone cases wherein premium 
for health segment only, was collected by the compa ny.  Management’s submission that out 
of 61 cases as pointed by audit, 37 accounts have not been renewed by the company, is in line 
with and validates the audit contention.  
                                                           
50  A s per the consumer price index report of the Minist ry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MOSPI), Government of India  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
102  
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
IFCI Factors Limited 
5.10 Factoring and Loan Services by IFCI Factors Limited 
5.10.1   Introduction 
IFCI Factors Limited (IFL) is registered as a NBFC- Factor with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) 
and is primarily engaged in the business of factori ng 
51  and short-term corporate loans.  It is a 
subsidiary of IFCI Limited. 
Factoring is a continuing financing arrangement whe re a business concern (client) assigns its 
accounts receivable (debtor) to a third party calle d a “Factor” at an agreed discount rate and 
factoring/ service fee, which provides immediate li quidity to finance the operations of the 
business concern.  An entity requiring working capi tal finance in relation to a transaction 
involving receivables may avail of factoring. 
There are generally three parties involved in a factoring arrangement: - 
• the client, who is originally entitled to the accou nts receivables and requires 
immediate working capital; 
• the debtor, who is obliged towards such accounts receivable to the client; and 
• the factor, who agrees to liquidate the accounts receivable towards the client. 
 
Chart No.5.10.1 
Factoring Mechanism 
 
                                                           
51  As per Factoring Regulation Act, 2011, Factoring B usiness is defined as “the business of acquisition of 
receivables of assignor by accepting assignment of such receivables or financing, whether by way of 
making loans or advances or in any other manner against the security interest over any receivables" 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
103  
5.10.2   Financial Performance of the Company vis-à-vis oth er factoring companies in 
India 
Fund in Use 
Fund in Use (FIU) is the amount of facility utilise d by the client, out of the total sanctioned 
limit.  It includes both principal and interest.  I n the IT system 
52  of the Company, the interest 
is charged at the end of the month (like banks). 
Audit selected two Government owned/ controlled ent ities viz. SBI Global Factors Ltd and 
CanBank Factors Limited and one private entity viz India Factoring and Finance Solution 
Private Limited for comparison of performance of IF L and comparative position of FIU in 
these companies is shown in Chart given below: 
Chart No.5.10.2 
 
 Source of data: Annual reports of respective companies 
FIU of the Company decreased over the last three ye ars ending 2018-19.  FIU of CanBank 
has also decreased during the period from 2014-15 t o 2017-18 but increased in 2018-19, 
whereas FIU of SBI Global has increased during last five years ending 2018-19.  FIU of India 
Factoring (private company) decreased in 2015-16 bu t has increased during the last three 
years ending 2018-19. 
It was observed that the asset quality of the Compa ny has deteriorated over last five years as 
the gross NPA ratio has increased continuously for four years with slight decrease in 
2018-19.  Similarly, in case of CanBank the gross N PA ratio has increased continuously for 
four years with decrease in 2018-19.  However, the gross NPA ratio of SBI Global has 
continuously declined during the last five years en ding 2018-19.  In India Factoring the gross 
NPA ratio has declined during the period from 2014- 15 to 2016-17 but has increased in 
2017-18 and 2018-19 as shown in the Chart given below: 
 
 
 
                                                           
 52   Named IFL Trade Free System 
 
(Figures `` `` in crore) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
104  
Chart No.5.10.3 
 
5.10.3  Audit scope, objectives and criteria 
Audit inspected records at the Head Office/ Corpora te Office of the Company (Delhi) and 
two regional Marketing offices (Chennai and Kolkata ) for the period of five years i.e. 
2014-15 to 2018-19 wherein cases of sanctions and d isbursements of Factoring and Loans 
services, the Non Performing Asset (NPA) and writte n off cases were scrutinised with the 
following audit objectives to: 
• examine compliance with the annual credit policy and business plan of the Company, 
• review the credit appraisal mechanism and examine w hether due diligence has been 
exercised in sanction and disbursement of loans, and 
• examine the efficiency of credit monitoring mechanism. 
The audit criteria included Business Plan of the Co mpany, Credit Policy of the Company, 
Field Audit Survey Reports, internal Risk Rating Mo del of the Company, agreements entered 
into with the client and RBI prudential norms for provisioning in respect of NBFCs. 
5.10.4  Sampling Method 
Audit reviewed the cases of sanctions and disbursem ents of factoring and loan services 
approved during 2014-15 to 2018-19, written off cas es during 2014-15 to 2018-19 and the 
NPA cases (as on 31 March 2019). The sample selecti on has been done on the basis of 
stratified random sampling as under: 
Table 5.10.1 
Particulars  Total Population  Sample Selected  
Sanction & Disbursements  49 26(53 per cent ) 
NPA Cases 44 23(52 per cent ) 
Write Off Cases 21 11 (52 per cent ) 
Total  114 60 53  
                                                           
53   Out of total 60 cases, nine NPA/ write off cases were declared NPA prior to April 2014 and are not 
included in the Report 
(in percentage) 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
105  
5.10.5  Compliance with the annual Credit Policy and business plan of the Company 
 
5.10.5.1 Business plan 
The Company prepares an annual business plan specif ying the targets for sanctions, 
disbursement, recovery etc. for the ensuing year, w hich is then approved by the Board of 
Directors.  The plan also describes the actual performance of the Company against the targets 
set for the previous year and discusses the variances and reasons thereof. 
 
5.10.5.2 Targets and Achievements 
The targets and achievements of the Company during the last five years with regard to FIU 
and recovery are given as under: 
Table 5.10.2 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
Target and Achievement for FIU 
Target 850  1150  1000  1100  865  
Achievement  820  893.76  754.93  705.41  632.95  
Shortfall (-) 30  (-) 256.24  (-) 245.07  (-) 394.59  (-) 232.05  
Variation in 
per cent  
-3.53 
 -22.28  -24.50  -35.87  -26.83  
Recovery target and achievement thereof 
Target 25  62  30  32  50  
Achievement 11.01  58.57  27  41.25  39.11  
Shortfall -13.99  -3.43  -3 9.25  -10.89  
Variation in 
per cent  
-55.96 
 -5.53  -10  28.90  -21.78  
 
As can be seen from the above, the Company could no t achieve the targets fixed for FIU 
during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19.  In 2014-15, the shortfall was 3.53 per cent , which 
further increased from 22.28 per cent to 35.87 per cent during 2015-16 to 2017-18 and 
decreased to 26.83 per cent  in 2018-19.  Similarly, the Company also could not  achieve the 
recovery targets during 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 a nd 2018-19.  The target fixed for the 
year 2017-18 was achieved by the company, however, it was seen that targets of recovery 
were lower in 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 as compa red to 2015-16 despite NPA being 
higher 54 . 
5.10.6   Audit findings 
 
5.10.6.1  Compliance with the annual Credit Policy of the Company 
Board of Directors of the Company approves the cred it policy for each year based on which 
the facility is sanctioned to the borrowers. Before sanctioning of facility, proposal is reviewed 
by the credit team and the same is put up to the co mpetent authority for approval.  All the 
                                                           
54  NPAs during 2014-15 to 2018-19 were `` ``    219.25 crore, `` ``    319.08 crore, `` ``    353.59 crore, `` ``    381.96 crore and 
`` ``    335.51 crore respectively 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
106  
cases upto `5 crore would be considered for approval by the Cre dit Committee 55  (CC) and 
exceeding `5 crore would be put forth to Committee of Director s 56  (CoD), duly 
recommended by the CC.  CC is also empowered to app rove modifications in proposals 
sanctioned by CoD except for modifications relating  to pricing and security (Credit Policy 
2018-19).  
Audit reviewed 26 out of 49 cases of sanctioning an d disbursement approved during 2014-15 
to 2018-19.  Out of 26 approved cases, 20 proposals  (Annexure XVIII)  i.e 77 per cent  of 
proposals were approved with one to seven deviation s and in 10 cases monitoring as per 
credit policy was not adhered to.  Although the com petent authority (Managing Director/ CC/ 
CoD/ BoD) is empowered to approve the deviation but  it should be approved in exceptional 
circumstances.  Further, the credit policy is silen t regarding number of deviations and degree 
of deviation, which can be approved by the competent authority.  Four 
57  cases out of 26 cases 
selected for review turned into NPA.  
5.10.6.2 Sanction of corporate loan to an ineligibl e client  
As per the credit policy credit risk rating should be done before the proposal is placed before 
CC/ COD.  The Company assigns the final risk score on the basis of a model provided 
(December 2014) by ICRA Management Consulting Servi ces Limited (IMaCS) for the 
various factoring loans such as domestic sales bill  factoring (DSBF) 58 , export bill factoring 
(EBF), reverse factoring 59  (RF) and Advance against Future Receivables (AFR) 60 .  The same 
model was used for credit rating for providing corporate loans also.  IFL uses the AFR option 
to arrive at the final rating in case of sanction o f corporate loans.  The minimum final risk 
grade for a credit proposal to be eligible for sanc tion is stipulated as IFL5 which signifies 
moderate safety.  In case of internal risk rating f or AFR facility, the client rating is calculated 
and then the notch up/ upgrade based on comfort for  security is given to arrive at final 
account rating.  At the time of introduction (Decem ber 2014) of this rating model provision 
of security was not a necessary eligibility criteria for sanction of AFR facility.  However from 
the year 2015-16 onwards, provision of security was  made a necessary eligibility criteria for 
                                                           
55   The Credit Committee (CC) consists of Managing Di rector (MD), Heads of Marketing/ Operations/ Risk/ 
Credit departments and one nominee of IFCI Limited.  The MD is the head of CC 
56   The Committee of Directors (CoD) consists of four  members of the Board of Directors of IFL including  
MD. The Chairman of the Committee would be any Boar d member present in the meeting other than 
MD 
57   VNR Infrastrucuture Limited, Trend Flooring Priva te Limited, GHV India Private Limited and Navrang 
Roadlines Private Limited 
58   This is a credit facility whereby the client invoic es the goods to a domestic buyer located within Ind ia, 
assigns the invoice to Company and receives prepaym ent up to 80-90 per cent (or as approved by 
appropriate authority) of the invoice value immedia tely.  The DSBF is offered either as disclosed or a s 
silent/ non disclosed facility 
59    This is a credit facility provided to the client  wherein the purchases of raw materials etc. made b y the 
client are financed by IFL thereby facilitating pay ment directly to the suppliers for purchases made 
locally. This facility is intended only for top rated clients and backed by tangible collaterals and generally 
not extended on a standalone basis i.e. generally accompanied with sale bill factoring facility 
60   Credit facility/ Advance extended to a client rep ayable in monthly/ quarterly installments through c ash 
flows emanating from identifiable future receivable s of the client backed by Notice of Assignment or 
Debtor's confirmation to pay to the designated escrow account or under silent factoring 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
107  
sanction of AFR facility.  In case of sanction of c orporate loan, provision of security has 
always been a necessary eligibility criteria since its introduction (July 2010) as a credit 
product.  In essence, Company necessarily obtained collateral security for sanction of 
corporate loans. 
Audit observed that while sanctioning the loan in e ight cases (Annexure XIX) the Company 
unduly upgraded/ notched up the rating of the clien ts by two points (from IFL7 signifying 
‘inadequate safety’ to IFL 5 signifying ‘moderate s afety’ in seven cases and from IFL 8 
signifying ‘risk prone’ to IFL 6 signifying ‘inadequate safety’ in one case).  This notching up/ 
upgradation was done on the basis of comfort of sec urity (collateral security mortgaged) 
despite collateral security for an amount of at lea st twice the amount of loan, based on 
distress sale value of the property being basic and  essential eligibility criteria for sanction of 
Corporate Loans.  Even the credit policy of the Com pany did not provide for sanction of 
Corporate Loan without obtaining adequate security cover.  Thus notch up/ upgrade based on 
comfort of collateral security in the process of sa nction of corporate loan was improper as it 
was neither in line with the provisions of credit policy nor the risk rating model.  
Management replied (December 2019) that the Risk Model will be revisited and updated with 
the help of IMaCS to validate the products of corpo rate loan and advance against Future 
Receivables along with the factoring.  Further, the  rating model primarily caters to factoring 
facilities, where security is not mandatory.  Notch ing up of rating in case of security is a 
provision in the risk model, be it Domestic Factoring, AFR or Corporate Loan.  
Management further stated (January 2020) that risk rating model was developed for capturing 
various structures with primary focus on DSBF.  In case of AFR and corporate loan, 
provision of notching up was understood and agreed upon during the development of the 
model.  It may be noted that notching up happens ba sed on strength of security (in case of 
AFR and CL/ TL) as such provision has been allowed in the system.  Sanction with 
deviations is a part of commercial decision making.   A client fulfilling all the eligibility 
criteria is an ideal situation.  But, considering t he cost of fund of IFL, it has to make a trade-
off between an ideal client and a doable client wit h appropriate risk mitigation measures.  In 
this process, some of the decisions go wrong, somet imes because of wrong judgment and 
sometimes because of the external environment for a particular industry/ economy.  
Management accepted to revisit and update with the help of IMaCS to validate on the 
products of Corporate Loan.  Reply of Management regarding upgrading of rating needs to be 
viewed in light of the fact that as per the credit policy from 2015-16 onwards submission of 
security was a basic and necessary eligibility crit eria for sanction of AFR and therefore 
upgrading the rating considering the security offer ed was not in line with credit policy.  
Further, sanctioning of loan deviating the eligibil ity criteria may be the conscious business 
decision without compromising the financial interes t of the Company but determining the 
credit rating should be as per the credit policy of  the Company and therefore upgrading the 
rating considering security offered was not justified. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
108  
A review of the 26 sample cases revealed that the c riteria for sanctioning of credit facility 
were deviated/ relaxed and not timely monitored.  F ew illustrative cases of major relaxations/ 
deviations from eligibility criteria, poor monitoring and operation are discussed below:  
(i)   M/s VNR Infrastructures Limited (VNRIL) 
The Company sanctioned (December 2014) a corporate loan of `18 crore to M/s VNR 
Infrastructures Limited (VNRIL- the client) which w as secured by equitable mortgage of two 
parcels of land in Telangana and performance guaran tee (PG) of two promoters/ director.  
The loan was repayable in eight equal quarterly ins talments (30 April 2016 to 31 January 
2018).  The client paid the interest only for the p eriod from January 2015 to August 2015 and 
defaulted in repayment of all the principal instalments.  The account was classified as NPA in 
March 2016.  The total outstanding as on 31 March 2 019 was `33.85 crore (principal 
outstanding of `18 crore and interest of `15.85 crore).  Complaint has been filed by Company 
u/s 138 to 141 of Negotiable Instruments Act (February 2016).  Proceedings for liquidation of 
client was going on in NCLT, Hyderabad and claim of  the Company was admitted before 
liquidator provisionally (November 2017).  IFCI, th e parent Company, has lodged a 
complaint against client before CBI, Banglore including claim of the Company. 
Audit observed that the credit rating of the client  was CARE A3 61  which was lower than the 
stipulated credit rating of CRISIL P2 62 .  As per the credit policy, the minimum final risk  
grade for a proposal to be eligible for sanction is  stipulated as IFL5 (moderate safety).  In the 
instant case the client rating was LC07 (it is same  as IFL 7 and indicates inadequate safety) 
which was unduly upgraded by two rating grades to IFL5 (moderate safety) based on comfort 
of collateral security mortgaged despite the fact t hat requirement of mortgage of property 
providing security cover of two times was one of th e basic and necessary eligibility criteria 
for a proposal to be eligible for corporate loan.  
As per the initial valuation report (January 2015) the Fair Market Value (FMV) of the two 
collateral properties was 
`52.92 crore ( `33.77 crore and `19.15 crore respectively) which 
was arrived at by considering the per sq yard value  of `2,750 and `2,500 respectively.  The 
Distressed Sale Value (DSV) was considered as `38.23 crore.  This valuation was accepted 
by the Company despite the fact that the Government  value of land of these properties was 
`300 per sq yard only.  Accordingly, the total value  of mortgaged property considering the 
Government rate was `5.97 crore as against the accepted DSV of `38.23 crore. 
In view of default, the Company initiated (August 2 016) action under the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assests and Enforcement  of Security Interest (SARFAESI) Act, 
2002.  A fresh valuation (March 2017) was carried o ut by the company and FMV was 
assessed as `21.08 crore and the DSV was assessed as `18.02 crore.  Thus, the fresh 
valuation was 60.16 per cent  and 52.86 per cent  lower than the valuation at the time of 
sanction respectively.  In order to recover the out standing dues both the properties were put 
                                                           
61   Instruments with this rating are considered to ha ve moderate degree of safety regarding timely payme nt 
of financial obligations 
62   Instruments with this rating are considered to ha ve strong degree of safety regarding timely payment  of 
financial obligations. Such instruments carry low credit risk 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
109  
up for sale twice in October 2017 and March 2019.  However, the auction for the mortgaged 
property was not successful despite reduction in th e reserve price and thus Company could 
not manage to recover its outstanding dues amounting to `33.85 crore. 
Management replied (December 2019) that the long-te rm debt rating of the client at the time 
of sanction was ‘BBB+’, which is investment grade.  The rating notch up is given for tangible 
security in case of AFR and in a similar way notch up for tangible security is given for 
Corporate Loans.  
Management further stated (January 2020) that the s tipulated rating as per the prevailing 
credit policy was CRISIL equivalent minimum BBB and  P3 (short term).  Accordingly, there 
was no deviation as long term/ short term rating of  the client was ‘BBB 
+/ A3 +’.  The rating 
model of IFL is conservative as prudence demands th at, and therefore it is a normal 
phenomenon of rating upgrade with the consideration  of collateral in many other similar 
sanctions.  IFL fully depends on valuers’ report as  it has no expertise to carry out valuation 
and the entire valuation exercise was carried out b y APITCO (IFCI empaneled valuer).  IFL 
had taken up the matter of value climb-down with M/ s APITCO in a very stringent manner 
and IFCI Limited has blacklisted and de-empaneled i t.  IFL is still upbeat of getting a 
favorable response in the near future with some upt ake in market sentiment in the real estate 
sector for recovery through SARFAESI.  Also, there is a government initiated project, 
wherein land parcel is being acquired covering one of our mortgaged land also, which is 
underway. 
The reply of Management is not acceptable as the mi nimum short-term credit rating of P2 
was stipulated in the credit policy (2014-15) and n ot P3 as claimed by Company.  The notch 
up on the basis of tangible security for sanction o f corporate loan was improper because the 
credit policy clearly mentioned that tangible secur ity is a pre-requisite for a proposal to be 
eligible for sanction of corporate loan.  The Compa ny should have deliberated on the huge 
difference between Government rate of land and that  considered by the valuer and given 
proper justification for accepting the higher rate suggested by the valuer at the time of credit 
appraisal. 
(ii)   M/s Trend Flooring Private Limited  
The Company sanctioned (December 2017) Domestic Sal es Bill Factoring (DSBF) facility of 
`1 crore to a trader viz M/s Trend Flooring Private Limited, (client) on the security of 
receivables, Notice of Assignment (NOA) accepted by  its debtor viz. Vasisht Agencies Pvt 
Limited (debtor) and PG of two directors.  The Comp any appraised (Dec. 2017) and assessed 
the various criteria (minimum net worth, net sales,  profit making for last two years, credit 
rating etc.) stipulated in the credit policy for th e debtor based on financial statements of the 
debtor for the year 2014-15.  The debtor did not fu lfil the eligibility criteria as its networth 
was `1.82 crore and net revenue was `6 crore against the required net worth of `2 crore and 
revenue of `25 crore as per the credit policy of the Company.  Further, the debtor was also a 
trader and unrated against the requirement of CRISI L equivalent investment credit rating of 
minimum BBB and short-term rating of minimum A2.  T he prepayment limit of the client 
was capped at `0.50 crore.  The client made partial payment till D ecember 2018 with delay.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
110  
IFL reassigned 63  (December 2018) the overdue invoices by accepting the general reasons 
(GST related issue and other industry related reaso ns) given by client for non-payment 
against overdue invoices.  Despite reassignment the outstanding amount was not received and 
the account was finally classified as NPA on 30 Jun e 2019.  As on 31 March 2019, the 
outstanding dues were `48.08 lakh (Principal `45.55 lakh and interest `2.53 lakh).  
Audit observed that instead of insisting for the la test financial statements for last two years 
i.e. 2015-16 and 2016-17, the credit appraisal was made on the basis of Financials of 
2014-15.  Further, tangible security required to be  taken in case of an unrated debtor as per 
the credit policy was not obtained.  The facility w as sanctioned/ disbursed despite several 
adverse remarks 64  in the Field Survey Report (FSR) (1 November 2017)  of the client.  In the 
FSR, the debtor was assigned rating score of 4 and it was categorically stated to reject debtors 
where the score is above 3.  The Company ignored th e concerns raised by its risk department 
pertaining to client’s significant dependency on sa les to the debtor (being 57.7 per cent  of 
total sales) indicating high concentration risk and  client’s low Debt Service Coverage Ratio 
(DSCR) of 0.75.  Also, Company did not obtain debto r’s latest audited financials 
(FY 2015-16 and 2016-17) and status of filing of sa me with Registrar of Companies (ROC) 
before disbursement as strictly advised by its risk  department.  Reassignment of invoices was 
intended towards ever greening of the sales ledger/  financial statements to avoid the 
classification of account as NPA. 
Management replied (December 2019) that the financi als for 2014-15 were available on the 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) website, so the available financials were considered for 
analysis.  All the deviations including the debtor being an unrated one were approved by the 
CC.  The invoices were reassigned as balance paymen t was expected in coming days and the 
facility was allowed against new set of invoices du e to health issues of the promoter.  
Management further stated (7 January 2020) that the deviations are allowed and mentioned in 
the Credit Policy itself.  The facility was sanctio ned looking at the long business association 
between the client and the debtor and the strength of the transaction being backed by debtor’s 
Post-dated Cheques (PDCs).  The assigned score of 4  to debtor Vashisht Agencies Private 
Limited as mentioned in the FSR is a reflection of the deviation from the standard practices 
but does not mean negative about the client debtor relationship.  The lesser score of 4 as 
against acceptable score of 3 was due to the reason  of the specific trade between client and 
debtor.  Things went in the wrong direction only wh en health of the promoter deteriorated, 
which ended with his disability post brain haemorrhage.  
Management reply needs to be viewed against the fac t that the credit policy states that “to 
assess the bankability of the proposal, the credit proposal should conform to credit policy 
guidelines.  The proposal which does not fulfil the  criteria would be summarily rejected 
                                                           
63    When payment against factored invoices is not re ceived from the client/ debtor, the client offers n ew/ 
fresh set of invoices against the old invoices alre ady factored. This does not lead to fresh factoring  but 
alters the due date of payment of old invoices and is known as Reassignment of invoices 
64    No fixed credit terms between client and debtor,  the aging of debtors as provided by the client did  not 
match with the ledger balance of the buyer and ther e was huge deviation as per aging and ledger 
balance.No purchase order, invoice copy, detailed t rial balance, top suppliers ledger and related deta ils 
were provided to the surveyor 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
111  
giving specific reasons” .  In the meeting of the Board of Directors of IFL (30 April 2015), it 
was categorically stated that Company has learned f rom its past experience that major 
problems have been experienced in case of factoring  facilities sanctioned to purely trading 
Companies.  Despite this learning, the facility was  sanctioned though the client and debtor 
were both trading Companies.  The financials of the  debtor for the last two years should have 
been insisted for at the time of credit appraisal t o ascertain current financial health of the 
debtor, who was to make payments to the Company.  O btaining PDCs from the debtor was 
not a valid and safe recourse in view of the policy , which stipulated taking tangible security 
where debtors are unrated.  The Field Survey was done by an empaneled external agency who 
categorically stated to reject the debtor, which wa s finally approved. The reassignment was 
improper as it was done after a gap of almost five months from the due date of payment 
without assigning any specific reasons for the same. 
5.10.6.3 Examination of efficiency of credit monito ring mechanism 
Credit policy of the company approved by the Board envisages a broad procedure for 
monitoring of credit portfolio which includes aggre ssive use of field audits, random 
verification of invoice and debtors account balance  through periodic interaction with debtors, 
unscheduled/ scheduled visit to clients as well as to the debtors (at least once in a year) and 
visit to the client to be made at least once in eve ry half year in case of sanction limits of `10 
crore and above, periodical verification of Notice of Assignment/ Escrow acceptance letter 
(at least once in a half year) etc.  
Audit reviewed 25 cases (17 NPA and 8 write off cas es) and observed non- compliance of 
credit policy in 21 cases (Annexure-XX ) with respect to sanctioning and monitoring of the 
facility which led to account turning into NPA/ wri te off.  Some issues observed by Audit are 
discussed in detail below: 
(i)   Debit note funding   
The IT system put in place by the Company for disbu rsement of funds against the invoices 
received from the client allows disbursement of fun ds till the invoices do not go into 
recourse 
65  (30 days after due date of payment) and/ or the cl ient has not availed the full 
prepayment limit sanctioned.  When the invoices alr eady factored become recoursed or the 
client utilises full prepayment limit, no further f actoring/ disbursement against invoices can 
be done through the IT system without special approval of MD.  
Audit observed that the Company continued to fund t he clients despite invoices being in 
recourse, by way of debit note funding with the app roval of the Competent Authority (MD).  
In this practice of debit note funding, the client first makes partial payment to the Company 
against overdue invoices and also submits fresh inv oices for further funding.  This payment 
received from client is returned to the client in a  short period (0 days to 6 days) after 
deduction of a certain percentage from the amount r eceived from the client.  This practice 
                                                           
65   In a DSBF facility if payment of an invoice is no t received within prescribed period (due date plus 30 
days) from debtors the further recovery action shif ts on client instead of debtor and invoice is said to 
have gone into recourse  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
112  
leads to knocking off/ settling of the old overdue/  recoursed invoices and allows funding 
against the new invoices received.  Thus, this prac tice leads to rotation of money between 
client and the Company and in essence delays the classification of an account as NPA thereby 
ever greening the accounts.  The Company generally takes legal action after the account is 
declared as NPA.  Since NPA recognition is delayed it leads to delay in initiation of legal 
action.  During audit it was noticed that IFL resor ted to funding through operation of debit 
note in 13 cases (Annexure XXI ). 
(ii)   Non-compliance with RBI Guidelines on NPA classifi cation 
As per the RBI guidelines for an NBFC-Factor, a rec eivable acquired under factoring which 
is not paid within six months of due date as applic able, shall be treated as NPA.  Further RBI 
circular stipulates that “In respect of accounts where there are potential t hreats to recovery 
on account of erosion in the value of security and existence of other factors, such as frauds 
committed by borrowers, such accounts should be str aight away classified as doubtful asset 
or loss asset, as appropriate, irrespective of the period for which it has remained as NPA”. 
Audit observed that the Company did not classify th e account as NPA in 16 cases 
(Annexure XXII ) where the overdue were more than six months.  Furt her, Account of 
M/s Navrang Roadlines Private Limited was not decla red NPA even after it was established 
(July 2019) that a fraud had been committed by the client.   
Management replied that it follows the practice of recognising an account as NPA at the end 
of accounting period (quarterly).  However, as per advice of RBI, Company is now 
classifying an account as NPA on the date when it c rosses 180 days, but if the same is 
regularised before the closure of books, the account would be treated as standard asset.  
The reply of management is not acceptable as the RB I Master Directions (September 2016 as 
updated from time to time) for an NBFC-Factor, clea rly states that a receivable acquired 
under factoring which is not paid within six months  of due date as applicable, shall be treated 
as NPA; and once an account is declared as NPA, it can be treated standard only after a 
period of one year from the commencement of the fir st payment of interest or principal, 
whichever is later. 
5.10.6.4 Fraud cases resulting in loss/ doubtful re covery  
Out of 51 sample cases (after excluding nine cases where facility was declared NPA before 
March 2014), in four cases company reported a fraud  committed by the client/ debtors 
whereby company had to incurre a loss (doubtful rec overy) of `50.3366  crore. The major 
lapses on part of the company which resulted in fraud are: - 
• Sanctioning the credit facility to the client who d id not meet the eligibility criteria as 
laid down in the credit policy for the client and the debtors. 
• Lack of due diligence at the time of sanctioning and addition of new debtor. 
                                                           
66  (i) M/s Navrang Roadlines Private Limited- `` ``    9.11 (ii) M/s Leeway Logistics ltd – `` ``    21.61 crore (iii) M/s 
Kalyani Engineering Works–`` ``    6.73 crore and (iv) M/s Accurate Transformers Limited-`` ``    12.88 crore 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
113  
• Non-monitoring of the account as per the procedure laid down in the credit policy. 
• Delay in declaration of the account as NPA by reass ignment of invoices and debit 
note funding.  
• Non-compliance with the terms of sanction as per sa nction letter, disbursement 
condition and waiver of crucial pre-disbursement condition. 
Three cases where major shortcomings were noticed o n the part of management allowing 
the clients to commit fraud are discussed below and  one such case is included in 
Annexure XXIII. 
(i)  M/s Leeway Logistics Limited   
The Company sanctioned (January 2011) DSBF facility  to Leeway Logistics Limited 
(LLL-the client) of 
`5 crore, which was enhanced (May 2013) upto `18 crore in relaxation to 
the eligibility criteria.  The Total Outstanding Liabilities/ Total Net Worth (TOL/ TNW) ratio 
was 9.33:1 instead of maximum TOL/ TNW ratio of 6:1 , and existence of the client was only 
one year instead of required minimum three years an d profit making for last two years.  As 
per sanction letters, notice of assignment of debt (NOA), duly accepted by approved debtors 
was submitted by LLL wherein it was agreed that debtors were required to make all payments 
against the invoice raised by LLL in favor of the C ompany.  The conduct of account initially 
remained satisfactory.  However, when the factored invoice remained unpaid beyond the 
stipulated credit period and the account became NPA  in September 2016, the client and the 
debtors were approached several times for payment o f the outstanding amount, but no 
payment was received.  Company took legal action ag ainst client and debtors by filing a case 
with Delhi Police under Negotiable Instruments Act and invoking arbitration clause. 
When the Company approached the debtors for payment  of outstanding dues, all the debtors 
alleged that the outstanding invoices were fake, forged and fabricated.  One of the debtors i.e.  
M/s Berger Paints India Limited replied that all th e outstanding invoices demanded have 
never been raised on them, the stamps and signature  used in invoices had never been used by 
them, billing address shown in bill was the office which had been closed in 2012.  Further, 
the LLL has changed its corporate office address on  30 December 2013 but the address 
mentioned in the invoices was of old address of the company till 2016.  
Scrutiny of realisation statement further revealed that payments were received from the 
debtors either within the credit period or with del ay from January 2011 to May 2013 but after 
May 2013 most of the payments were received from cl ient which is against the practice 
followed in factoring facility (DSBF) and which sho ws that either the debtor was making 
payment to client directly in violation of NOA or f orged invoices were factored by the 
Company.  It is evident that random verification of  invoices, personal visit to debtors/ client 
and monitoring as per credit policy was not done wh ich led to fraud of `21.61 crore 
(principal `12.85 crore and interest `8.76 crore). 
Management replied (7 January 2020) that deviations  were approved looking at the business 
model, management capability, strength of the trans actions between LLL and the debtors 
which were A rated companies and MNC’s, having long  standing in the market. As 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
114  
deviations were allowed in the Credit Policy by res pective sanctioning authority, this was not 
a violation of Credit Policy.  Periodic visit to th e debtors were not stipulated in the policy.  In 
case of subject client, since payments were coming from the debtors in the escrow account as 
seen from escrow statement, periodic physical verif ication of debtors was not done.  The 
client visit could not be undertaken due to the ove rdue position and focus to reduce the 
overall exposure in the account. The escrow stateme nt shows regular payments from the 
debtors in FY 2016 as well. 
Management reply is to be seen in light of the fact  that deviations from the Credit Policy 
should have been resorted to in exceptional cases, but it was done as a routine as most of the 
cases selected were sanctioned in deviation of cred it policy.  Further, periodic visits of 
debtors/ clients were required to be made as per cr edit policy.  Non-visit to the client/ debtors 
indicates lackadaisical approach by company in moni toring of factoring account.  As per 
realisation statement made available to audit, most
67  of the payments were made by the client 
and not the debtor in the year 2016. 
(ii)   M/s Navrang Roadlines Private Limited  
Company sanctioned (January 2013) DSBF facility of 
`1.5 crore to Navrang Roadlines 
Private Limited (NRPL- client) which was enhanced ( November 2017) to `9 crore.  As per 
sanction letter, an escrow agreement was entered in to amongst the client, the Company and 
HDFC Bank Limited, whereby it was agreed that all t he receivables accruing from the sales 
to approved debtors or any other debtors by the cli ent shall be deposited in the Escrow 
Account only and the company was the sole beneficia ry of the said escrow account.  In 
pursuance thereof, escrow letters duly accepted by all approved debtors were submitted by 
the client to the company.  The client was making p ayment till December 2018 against the 
factored invoices, but after that no further paymen t was received against the invoices of 
`9.11 crore factored during January-March 2019.  When the company enquired/ contacted the 
debtors regarding payment of pending invoices, the debtors informed that the pending 
invoices were fake and forged and never raised on t hem.  The company filed (July 2019) a 
police complaint regarding cheating and forgery aga inst the client and its directors.  
Proceedings in NCLT have also been started against the client wherein IFL has also filed its 
claim (March 2020). 
Audit observed that at the time of enhancement of c redit limit to 
`9 crore the external rating 
of the client was not available and the internal ra ting of the client was IFL 7 which was not 
acceptable as per credit policy, however, internal rating of IFL 4 was assigned on the basis of 
credit rating of client and approved debtors.  More over, the rating of debtors was considered 
without proper verification of their actual busines s with the client e.g. in case of Fine Tech 
Corporation Limited, credit rating of Reliance Industries Limited was considered.  
                                                           
67  Out of a total of 252 invoices for which payment w as received during 2016, payment for only 9 invoice s 
was made by the debtors 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
115  
It was also observed that the monitoring as per cre dit policy was not adhered to as two 
debtors 68  denied that they ever signed the NOA/ Escrow Account.  Further, no periodical visit 
was made to debtors and no field audit conducted du ring the period of 2014 to 2019.  As per 
the records of M/s Carrier Air Conditioning and Ref rigeration limited only `7 lakh was due 
to the client against `2.94 crore outstanding as per the company. 
Further, the company did not (30 September 2019) de clare this account as NPA in violation 
of RBI’s guidelines although it had the replies of debtors dated 2 May 2019 and 17 June 2019 
in which they had denied the acceptance of invoice and Escrow letter. 
Management replied (December 2019) that verificatio n of Escrow Acceptance letter was 
done through e-mail and mobile from the person who had signed the letter.  There was some 
connivance between the borrower and the debtors, wh ich was difficult to trace out especially 
when the borrower had a relationship with IFCI for more than six years with impeccable 
track record of making timely payment.  Learning le ssons from this fraud, IFL has made its 
debtor verification system more robust.  The client  was doing business since 2013 and never 
observed any misconduct in their account.  Payments  of factored invoices from debtors were 
being received well within time limit.  FCL being a  RIL group company, rating of the same 
was thought to be significant as there was strong p arentage by way of RIL.  In July 2019, it 
was conclusively established that the client had co mmitted fraud.  Accordingly, in terms of 
RBI guidelines, the entire outstanding principal is  being provided for in four equal quarterly 
instalments, the first of which ( `2.25 crore) has been done in September 2019 quarter  and the 
remaining will be done in December 2019, March 2020 and June 2020 quarters. 
Management further stated (January 2020) that after  detection of this fraud, IFL has made 
changes to the Credit Policy and made physical veri fication of Escrow Letter with the person 
who has signed the same at their office/ plant comp ulsory, by company’s RM/ Credit 
Manager, before the first client disbursement.  Ver ification of Escrow Acceptance Letters 
was always conducted through Email and Mobile phone , from the person who had signed the 
letter, as per the guidelines of the prevalent credit policy. 
Management reply needs to be seen in light of the f act that even if the verification was done 
through e-mail, the genuineness of the e-mail ID sh ould have been verified before accepting 
the escrow letter.  Though, management has accepted to make changes in its credit policy, the 
same has not been done yet.  Further, as per RBI ci rcular in the case of fraud entire amount 
should be straight away classified as NPA.  
(iii)    M/s Kalyani Engineering Works 
The Company sanctioned (August 2012) DSBF facility of 
`5 crore (enhanced to `7.50 crore 
in February 2013) to M/s Kalyani Engineering Works (KEW – the client) despite the fact that 
the client did not meet eligibility criteria pertai ning to TOL/ TNW ratio in terms of credit 
policy (2012-13).  The TOL/ TNW ratio was 4.59:1 as  against the stipulated maximum of 
                                                           
68  (1) M/s TVS logistic Services Limited (o/s `` ``    3.46 crore) informed (2 May 2019) that the person w ho 
signed the Escrow letter is not an employee of comp any (2) M/s Carrier Air conditioning Refrigeration 
limited (o/s `` ``    2.94 crore) informed (17 June 2019) that no one fro m Carrier office had signed and 
stamped on Escrow account 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
116  
4:1.  The facility was for factoring of invoices dr awn on Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
(BHEL) at Haridwar and Bhopal.  
As per the sanction letter dated 30 August 2012, ea ch factoring transaction was to be 
supported by the following documents. 
• Notice for transfer of Receivables (NTR) 
• Copy of purchase order 
• Certified true copy of invoice duly acknowledged by the debtor. 
• A copy of lorry receipts/ delivery challan/ gate pass 
• Inspection and dispatch certificate by BHEL appointed third party or BHEL 
• Material receipt duly acknowledged by the debtor to  be submitted within 25 days of 
the invoice date.  
The transaction structure between the client and BHEL was such that once the final product is 
manufactured as per the buyer’s specifications, buy er’s engineers or a third party appointed 
by the buyer would visit for Pre-delivery Inspectio n (PDI) and clear the goods for delivery.  
Once inspection report is obtained, client delivers  the goods to the prescribed location of the 
debtor along with relevant invoice by road mostly t hrough buyer’s approved transporter.  
Before the facility could take off, the Company wai ved the condition of “Inspection and 
dispatch certificate by BHEL appointed third party or BHEL”  citing the reason that it was 
not possible for the client to provide inspection r eport with each set of invoices and revised it 
with material receipt duly acknowledged by the debt or to be submitted within 45 days of the 
invoice date (snapshot of the online BHEL portal du ly evidencing as due for payment/ 
material receipt for the invoices provided for factoring was to be treated as material receipt).  
The Company factored 32 invoices amounting to 
`6.73 crore (20 invoices amounting to 
`4.09 crore raised on BHEL, Bhopal from 22 October 2013 to 20 June 2014, and 12 invoices, 
amounting to `2.64 crore, raised on BHEL, Haridwar from 1 Novembe r 2013 to 9 January 
2014) without complying with even the revised facto ring conditions.  Out of the 20 invoices 
submitted by the client, the material against six i nvoices were rejected and 12 invoices were 
not received by BHEL Bhopal.  Though payment agains t two invoices was stated to have 
been made by BHEL but it was not received by the Co mpany.  Similarly, 12 invoices made 
on BHEL Haridwar were not received and accordingly,  no payment was due against these 
invoices.  
Audit observed that non-compliance with the revised  terms of sanction letter resulted in 
avoidable fraud by the client which led to a loss o f 
`6.73 crore as the account was declared 
NPA in September 2014.  Complaint u/s 138 to 141 of  Negotiable Instruments Act was filed 
by Company (October 2015).  A case on alleged cheat ing and forgery was also filed (August 
2017) by the Company before CBI, New Delhi for regi stration of FIR.  Response was not 
received from CBI. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
117  
Management accepted (January 2020) the audit observ ation of non-compliance of eligibility 
criteria regarding TOL/ TNW ratio.  Further, the di sbursement against invoices was made 
upon approval of the competent authority.  The fact  of non-receipt of invoices, material 
rejection against invoices etc. from BHEL was subse quently brought out when IFL took up 
the matter with BHEL pertaining to non-receipt of payments.  
The reply of Management needs to be seen against th e fact that the Company factored and 
financed invoices of the client raised on BHEL, Bho pal and Haridwar without even receiving 
acknowledgment from the debtor or snapshot of the o nline portal duly evidencing as due for 
payment/ material receipt for the invoices provided  for factoring  as per revised factoring 
condition.  
5.10.6.5 Deviations and relaxation in monitoring an d operation (NPA/ write off cases) 
A review of the sample cases of NPA/ write off reve aled that the criteria were deviated from/ 
relaxed and monitoring/ operation as per the policy  was not adhered to.  Out of 25 cases 
(sample), audit observed deviations in 15 cases out  of which nine cases of major relaxations/ 
deviations from eligibility criteria, monitoring an d operation are discussed below and 
remaining six cases are included in the Annexure XXIV .  Recovery of `212.31 crore was 
doubtful in these 15 cases. 
i)   M/s Archon Engicon Private Limited 
The Company sanctioned (April 2011) DSBF facility o f 
`7.50 crore to M/s Archon Engicon 
Private Limited (AEPL – the client) which was incre ased (December 2013) upto 
`17.50 crore.  Facility was secured by NOA duly accepted by the approved debtors and PDCs 
for the facility along with PG of promoters.  The client account was in stress since May 2014.  
Due to non-receipt of payment from debtors, Company  inquired (March 2015) about the 
balance payment of invoices of `13.01 crore from a debtor (M/s Diamond Power 
Infrastructure Limited), who stated that the entire  lot was rejected and returned to client long 
time back and the same was intimated to the Company .  Audit observed that initially 
payments were received from the debtor (M/s Diamond  Power Infrastructure Limited) but 
during May 2014 to September 2015 most of the payme nts were received from the client.  
However, no efforts were made to know the reasons o f non-receipt of payments from debtors 
directly. 
Audit further observed that instead of taking actio n against the client or said debtor 
(M/s Diamond Power Infrastructure Limited), the Com pany modified (June 2015) the facility 
wherein the facility was reduced from 
`17.50 crore to `15 crore and also included AFR (as 
sublimit) of `12.50 crore.  Security against the said facility wa s equitable mortgage of land 
(valuing `81.48 lakh) and PG of promoters.  
Moreover, payment against AFR and DSBF from another  approved debtor i.e. GETCO was 
not received since November 2015.  Accordingly, the  facility was declared as NPA in March 
2016 and company filed a case under section 138 r/w 141 of Negotiable Instrument Act. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
118  
Audit observed that the credit policy of the Compan y stipulates that in the case of AFR 
facility the security coverage should be 1.5 times of the sanctioned facility and the same 
should be in the form of immovable property or pled ge of listed shares.  However, Company 
collected security of land of `81.48 lakh only.  Had the company collected the sti pulated 
security against the AFR facility of `12.50 crore, the outstanding amount could have been  
recovered by sale/ disposal of that security. 
Audit further observed that payment against invoice s of 
`31.72 crore of GETCO are overdue 
since November 2015 despite having POA (Power of At torney) issued to GETCO by the 
client which stipulates that 80 per cent  payment against the invoices shall be made to the 
Company and rest 20 per cent  payment will be made to client if the request is n ot routed 
through the Company.  Further, Company did not rais e the issue with GETCO to recover the 
outstanding dues of `24.88 crore (principal `13.12 crore and interest `11.76 crore) as on 
31 March 2019 despite a lapse of more than four years. 
Management replied (January 2020) that periodical v isits to the client and debtors were made 
for the purpose of client plant/ office visit, invo ice ledger verification with debtors etc. 
Company was following up with both the client and t he debtors.  POA was the arrangement 
for the AFR facility from GETCO and Company officia ls followed up the matter with 
GETCO by visiting personally and through other communications.  
Management reply needs to be viewed against the fac t that records related to visits and 
invoice ledger verification with debtors were not m ade available to audit.  The Company 
never enquired about the reason for non-receipt of the payment from debtors.  POA cannot be 
treated as collateral security as the policy requir es tangible security/ listed shares. No 
correspondence/ records were made available to audi t which shows that efforts were made to 
realise the dues from GETCO. 
ii)   M/s Elder Pharmaceuticals Limited 
The Company sanctioned (August 2010) factoring faci lity of 
`15 crore ( `15 crore DSBF 
facility and `5 crore PBF) to M/s Elder Pharmaceutical Limited (E PL-the client) subject to 
satisfactory field audit.  The factoring facility w as to be secured by security cheques, PG of 
Directors, NOA and transaction backed PDCs.  Initia lly 10 debtors were approved (including 
four unrated debtors).  In September 2010, conditio ns of the facility were modified wherein 
DSBF facility changed to silent basis and field aud it was also waived off.  The Company 
approved (February 2011) addition of new debtor M/s  Kash Medicare Private Limited with 
credit line of `5 crore which was enhanced up to `15 crore during February 2012 to 
September 2012. The client became irregular in making payments from March 2013 onwards.  
The total overdue was `16.48 crore in April 2013.  The client agreed to co nvert silent 
factoring into disclosed DSBF facility (April 2013) .  The Company facilitated the client 
through debit note funding during July 2013 to Augu st 2016.  The Company renewed the 
facility in August 2013 for further one year.  The account was declared NPA on 
30 September 2016.  The total outstanding as on 31 March 2019 was `25.61 crore (principal 
`15 crore and interest `10.61 crore). 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
119  
Audit observed that the Company approved PBF facili ty without obtaining collateral tangible 
security in contravention of credit policy.  Furthe r M/s Kash Medicare Private Limited who 
was an unrated debtor (distributor and trader of ph armaceuticals) was added as debtor in 
contravention of credit policy which stipulates tha t DSBF (silent basis) deals pertaining to 
well accredited clients where the debtors being Gov ernment entities/ large corporates do not 
acknowledge Notice of Assignment or Escrow arrangem ent and the collection of debts is 
done directly by the client. 
Further, the Company renewed the account of the cli ent without proper monitoring even 
though the client account was in stress since March  2013.  In August 2013, it was decided to 
monitor the account closely and efforts to be made to reduce the exposure with better 
transaction structure.  However, instead of reducin g exposure in the stressed account, the 
Company continued to fund it through Debit Note Funding.  
Management replied (January 2020) that Credit Polic y prevalent then, permitted silent 
factoring and unrated debtors on the basis of the f inancial strength of the client; which was 
fairly good.  It was purely a business decision to improve the topline of IFL with adequate 
risk mitigations.  We have since made our policy mo re stringent and as of today, we do not 
accept debtors below ‘BBB+’ rating.  The RMs and Cr edit Department used to regularly and 
closely monitor all client accounts and its debtors , as per policy, usually over phone and 
emails.  The Company aimed to continuously reduce t he overall FIU and exposure and 
recover as much money from the client between 2013 and 2016, as was practically possible. 
Management reply needs to be seen in light of the f act that as per credit policy the field audit 
is required for DSBF and PBF and may be waived off in the case of BG backed DSBF only.  
Though Management made its policy more stringent th e fact remains that the company did 
not comply its own credit policy regarding criteria  relating to financial strength of M/s Kash 
Medicare Private Limited which led to non-recovery of 
`25.61 crore. 
iii)   M/s Era Infra Engineering Limited 
The Company sanctioned (15 February 2010) DSBF faci lity of `7.5 crore on silent basis to 
M/s Era Infra Engineering Limited (EIEL-the client)  which was enhanced (June 2011) to 
`15 crore.  The account became irregular (May 2013) and outstanding overdues was in the 
range of 40-69 days.  The company renewed (July 201 3) the facility for another 12 months, 
despite the conduct of account not being satisfacto ry.  Further, the company continued the 
facility despite the fact that the rating of the cl ient was downgraded (October 2013) from 
CARE BB+/ A4 to CARE D (Instruments with this ratin g are in default or are expected to be 
in default soon).  
The renewal of facility was till 30 June 2014 and f unding was done through operation of 
Debit Note from December 2012 to January 2016 and t he account was classified as NPA in 
March 2016.  The company waived off the penal inter est amounting to 
`1.36 crore 
(31 December 2014) and `0.29 crore (28 September 2015).  The complaint u/s 138 to 141 of 
Negotiable Instruments Act was filed by the Company in February 2016. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
120  
The Company wrote to NTPC (approved debtor) (eight invoices of `13.15 crore) and 
Bhartiya Rail Bijlee Company Limited (approved debt or) (BRBCL) (five invoices of 
`12.63 crore) in March 2016 for confirmation of stat us of the payment(s) due against the 
invoices raised by EIEL.  In response to these lett ers, NTPC Moudha and BRBCL replied 
that mentioned invoices are settled and no further payment is to be made.  The client was 
under corporate insolvency resolution process w.e.f . 8 May 2018.  The claim of the company 
amounting to `22.58 crore was admitted by the Interim Resolution Professional against the 
dues of `25.47 crore as on March 2019.  The insolvency proce ss was under way 
(December 2019).  
Audit observed that field audit was not conducted in this case on the ground that EIEL was an 
existing client having satisfactory financials and whose conduct was satisfactory.  
Management replied (January 2020) that the field su rvey was waived, since it had an existing 
relationship (purchase bill discounting) with IFL, having satisfactory track record.  Levying 
of penal charges for a stressed account is primaril y to discourage any default and for the 
purpose of adherence to the sanctioned term and conditions and the penal interest was waived 
off to keep the account standard while ensuring tim ely servicing of interest and repayment of 
principal.  The renewals were done despite irregula r conduct & stress, to keep the account 
regular with a hope to salvage the account. 
  The funding through debit note was not to delay 
the reporting of account as NPA, rather to support the company/ client in its tough times. 
The reply of Management needs to be viewed against the fact that existing relationship 
cannot be the ground for waiver of field survey, mo re so when the new facility (DSBF) was 
different from the existing facility.  Further, as the account was already in stress and payment 
was not coming from the client, waiver of penal int erest was not justified and even after 
waiver the account was not regularised.  As per the  conditions of sanction, in the event of 
default by the client on the payment of the outstanding dues or payment of interest on the due 
dates, the company shall have an unqualified right to disclose the name of the client and its 
directors as defaulters to the RBI/ CIBIL and take necessary action to recover the outstanding 
dues.  However, the company did not comply with the  conditions of sanction but renewed the 
facility despite irregular conduct & stress in the account.  
iv)   Concast Steel and Power Limited (CSPL) and Concast  Exim Limited (CEL)  
The Company sanctioned (August 2011) DSBF facilitie s of `15 crore to CSPL (a subsidiary 
of Concast Group).  The factoring facility was to b e secured by PDCs, PG of promoters and 
NoA duly accepted by debtors.  The facility was ren ewed by the Company from time to time. 
The payments were received from debtor/ client regu larly till October 2014 thereafter the 
payments were delayed by the debtors. 
Similarly, DSBF facility of 
`10 crore sanctioned (January 2012) to CEL (a subsid iary of 
Concast Group).  This client account became irregular/ stressed after December 2014. 
Subsidiary companies of Concast Group were amalgama ted with Concast Steel and Power 
Limited under the scheme of amalgamation in Decembe r 2015.  After September 2017, no 
further payment was received against the factored i nvoices, therefore, the client account was 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
121  
declared NPA in December 2017.  The total outstandi ng amount as on 31 March 2019 was 
`32.23 crore 69 . 
Audit observed that the Company continued the facility till September 2017 despite irregular/ 
part payment received, NPA declared (March 2016) by  the parent company (IFCI Limited) 
and information received (September 2014) from other lenders about the default of the client.  
Review of accounts of the client also revealed that  Company made two payments ( `67 lakh 
and `60 lakh) to the IFCI Venture Capital Limited direct ly on the request (June 2016) of 
client. 
Further, the Company released capping of 
`4 crore (July 2015) on the request of CSPL and 
continued facility even though the client suffered loss during 2013-14 and 2014-15.  Union 
Bank of India (UBI) also furnished (Nov 2015) the c redit status of CSPL wherein overall 
assessment of the client was shown as below par.  U BI also informed that the client has not 
served interest since July 2015 and the promoter of  Borrower Company was charge sheeted 
by CBI.  
On merger of subsidiary companies under Concast gro up, the Company’s exposure ranged 
between 17.83 per cent to 57.62 per cent  of its Net Owned Fund (NOF) 
70  against the 
exposure norms of 15 per cent  fixed by RBI/ Company.  It was further revealed fr om records 
that the client was not able to serve principal and interest timely against the factored invoices, 
therefore, company facilitated the client funds thr ough debit note from December 2015 to 
September 2017.  
Management replied that (January 2020) post-merger of both the companies, the exposure on 
combined entity went more than the sanctioned/ pres cribed exposure.  Also by that time the 
company was in stress, it became difficult to immed iately call off the facility as the company 
was facing difficulties in its operations.  The com pany was not in a position to close the 
account immediately, so efforts were made to reduce  the exposure.  Payments to IFCI 
Limited and IFCI Venture Capital Funds Limited were  done at the request of the client.  IFL 
made all efforts for regularisation of the account,  since during the period mentioned in 
observation client had paid more than 
`3 crore towards discount and factoring charges.  
Facility sanctioned by IFL is nowhere related to fa cility sanctioned by IFCI Limited.  Both 
the companies are different and so are their facili ties.  The facility was subsequently partly 
secured to protect the interest of IFL.  No undue f avour was given to the client by funding 
through debit note.  In many instances, IFL has bee n able to reduce the exposure in the stress 
clients and in fact closed some accounts through debit note transactions.  
Management reply needs to be viewed against the fac t that as the account was in stress the 
company should have made efforts to reduce the expo sure to comply with the RBI guidelines 
and therefore, the request of the client to make pa yment to IFCI Venture Capital Funds 
Limited should not have been accepted.  The value o f security (land) obtained being 
`6.7 crore against the facility of `25 crore was not sufficient.  Further, instead of t aking 
                                                           
69   ( `` ``    19.34 crore (CPSL) and `` ``    12.89 crore (CEL)) 
70   Net Worth plus Perpetual Debt minus Intangibles 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
122  
action to disclose the name of the company/ client and its directors as defaulters to the RBI/ 
CIBIL and stop further funding, the company continued funding. 
v)  M/s Arch Pharma Labs Limited 
The Company sanctioned (May 2011) DSBF facility of `10 crore and PBF facility of 
`6 crore to Arch Pharma Labs Limited (APLL - the cli ent).  The factoring facility was to be 
secured by PDCs, PG of promoters and NOA duly accep ted by proposed debtors.  The 
account was in stress since May 2012.  The client w as not in a position to serve principal and 
interest timely against the factored invoices, but the Company continued the facility through 
debit note funding from December 2012 onwards.  The client informed (July 2013) that it had 
applied for Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) and requested Company's support for the 
same.  The Company (September 2013) accepted the CD R proposal.  As per CDR proposal, 
total outstanding including interest was to be conv erted as Working Capital term Loan 
(WCTL) and Funded interest term Loan (FITL) against  which a security in the form of first 
pari passu  charge on current Assets (CA) and second pari passu  charge on Fixed Assets (FA) 
was to be obtained.  Meanwhile, the account was dec lared as NPA in September 2013.  A 
master restructuring agreement was executed in Dece mber 2013.  The client again defaulted 
in payments, therefore, Company declared the accoun t as NPA in September 2015.  The total 
outstanding was `19.05 crore as on 30 September 2016.  Against which  JMFARC 71  offered 
total consideration of `3.13 crore which includes cash contribution of `0.47 crore and 
`2.66 crore as Security Receipts.  The proposal of s ale of NPA to JMFARC was approved by 
the Board of Directors of the Company in December 2016. 
Audit observed that facility of `6 crore was approved for PBF without obtaining any tangible 
security as required under credit policy of the Com pany.  Credit policy of the company also 
envisaged a broad procedure of monitoring of client  account. However, no such monitoring 
was done by the Company as it became evident from t he fact that when the company 
enquired about the balance payment of invoices from  the debtor (Dr. Datsons Labs Limited) 
(May 2014), it was intimated that the material sent through mentioned invoices were returned 
due to quality issue and thereafter fresh supplies never came to them.  It was further observed 
that before sale of account to JMFARC, Company did not explore other legal options to 
recover the maximum outstanding dues. 
Management replied (January 2020) that the facility of PBF was not on a standalone basis but 
was in addition to the 
`10 crore of DSBF.  As the client was one of signifi cant 
pharmaceutical companies of India, being assigned t he highest credit quality, call was taken 
to waive security requirement.  Problems started ma inly after the renewal with liquidity 
issues affecting both the client as well as the app roved debtor (Aanjaneya Lifecare Limited) 
resulting in stress and overdues.  The liquidity cr unch forced the company/ client Arch 
Pharma to approach its lenders for being considered for CDR. The duly debtor acknowledged 
LR from client was received with all other supporti ng documents based on which fund was 
released to client.  Later, as the material was fou nd not as per the quality standard, debtor 
‘Datsons Labs Limited’ had sent the material back t o client.  The incident was neither 
                                                           
71  J M Financial Asset Reconstruction Company  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
123  
informed by client nor the debtor.  The matter came  to light during overdue invoice payment 
follow up with the debtor.  Immediately, the client  was contacted for the same, when the 
client refused the blame of quality issue imposed b y debtors.  The company was already 
facing a plethora of other liquidation issues through its other lenders, which would have made 
recoveries a very bleak prospect, had IFL not gone the ARC mode. 
Management reply needs to be viewed against the fac t that Credit policy of the company 
(2011-12) stipulated that the PBF was intended only  for top rated clients and should be 
backed by tangible collaterals.  The invoices again st which there were quality issues 
pertained to August 2012, whereas it was noticed by  Management in May 2014, which 
indicates poor monitoring. Further, the fact remain s that no alternative option was explored 
except sale of account to JMFARC. 
vi)   M/s Ind-Swift Limited 
The Company sanctioned (July 2011) DSBF facility of  
`10 crore on silent basis to Ind- Swift 
Limited (ISL- the client) which was secured by PG o f two promoter directors and PDCs of 
`10 crore.  The factorable debtors included eight ra ted debtors and 10 unrated debtors having 
total credit line of `7.75 crore and `13 crore respectively.  The client serviced its acc ount as 
per the terms of sanction from July 2011 to June 20 12 after which the account became 
irregular due to default by client.  The account wa s classified as NPA on 30 June 2016.  
Against outstanding dues (31 March 2018) of `15.48 crore (principal- `10.50 crore and 
unrealised interest/ other charges- `4.98 crore) which was entirely on part of unrated d ebtors, 
Company entered (13 April 2018) into One Time Settl ement (OTS) with the client for 
`6 crore.  
Audit observed that company credit policy (2011-12) states that silent factoring means DSBF 
pertaining to well accredited clients where the deb tors would generally be listed Companies, 
blue chip Companies, PSUs, Central/ State Governmen t entities and MNCs which should be 
profit making in last two years and should be in existence for minimum three years. 
However, the 10 unrated debtors approved by Company did not fall in any of the above listed 
parameters as they were mainly C&F agents/ distribu tors of the client who were partnership/ 
proprietorship concerns whose details/ financials w ere not readily available.  Despite field 
audit/ examination being vital aid in pre sanction appraisals, it was not conducted on the 
ground that the client had satisfactory financials and a group Company of the client was an 
existing client whose conduct was satisfactory.  
The prepayment limit was initially capped (8 June 2 012) at 
`9 crore and subsequently 
reduced to `8 crore (29 June 2012).  Due to liquidity issues fa ced by the client, the Company 
decided (July 2012) to reduce the exposure to the c lient gradually by deducting 20 per cent  
from each payment till the facility is fully repaid  which was reduced (Nov 2012) to 
10 per cent .  However, capping on prepayment limit was lifted and limit was increased 
(3 July 2013) to `8.50 crore and subsequently (27 February 2015) to `10 crore after which an 
ad hoc  limit of `1 crore was also sanctioned (26 May 2016) on the re quest of the client.  The 
capping on limit was removed and ad hoc  limit sanctioned despite the fact that the account  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
124  
had become highly irregular (since July 2012) and t he conduct of account was not 
satisfactory due to which the Company decided to re duce the exposure.  Further, the client 
had already undergone restructuring of its debts un der the CDR mechanism (December 
2012), had incurred net losses during 2011-12 to 20 14-15/ 2015-16 and was referred (August 
2015) to BIFR under provisions of Sick Industrial C ompanies (Special Provisions) Act 1985.  
As a result of removal of capping on sanction limit  the FIU which was `8 crore in June 2012 
eventually increased to `11.32 crore in June 2016 when the account turned NPA. 
The client availed factoring of invoices raised on six debtors which included five unrated 
debtors and only one rated debtor though there were  eight approved rated debtors. The 
invoice value of six debtors which were factored fr om July 2011 to November 2012 (before 
start of debit note funding in December 2012 72 ) amounted to `53.04 crore of which invoices 
of rated debtor amounted to `1.65 crore only which was 3.11 per cent  of the total invoice 
value factored till November 2012.  
The Company charges penal discount charges at the r ate of four per cent  over the sanctioned 
discount charges in case of delay in payments. Acco rdingly, the Company levied 
(1 April 2013 to 1 March 2015) penal charges amount ing to 
`45.81 lakh out of which an 
amount of `34.36 lakhs was waived (May 2015) which was against the terms of sanction. 
Company increased the credit limit of one unrated d ebtor (Justin Pharmaceuticals) 
periodically from `1.5 crore (4 July 2011) to `4.5 crore (29 August 2011) and then from 
`6.5 crore to `10 crore (December 2012) in absence of laid down no rms/ parameters for the 
same. The payments from this debtor were not realised later. 
Company resorted to debit note funding for a period  of more than 41 months (13 December 
2012 to 27 May 2016) despite the invoices being ove rdue and lack of timely payment by the 
client after which it was finally classified as NPA.   
While considering and approving the proposal for OT S, Company neither considered nor put 
on record the personal net worth of the promoter directors to assess the repayment capacity of 
the promoter directors as it was a security offered  at the time of sanction of facility.  Further, 
OTS was done without initiating legal action though  the approval note stated that “recovery 
suit against Company and guarantors has to be filed  before Delhi High Court” .  The 
Company only filed (September 2016) a case under se ction 138 and 141 of the Negotiable 
Instrument Act, 1881 which was withdrawn (15 April 2019) after the completion of OTS.  
The credit policy of the Company did not have any c lause/ provision which sets out the 
criteria for fixation of prepayment limits of the c lient and the credit line extended to the 
debtors.  Company neither adhered to the monitoring  criteria and its timeline mentioned in 
the prevalent credit policy, nor took updated net w orth statements of the promoter Directors 
at the time of annual renewal. 
Management replied (7 January 2020) that at the tim e of sanction, Ind Swift Limited was a 
corporate of decent size and good business standing .  Looking at the client’s strong profile 
                                                           
72   The payments released at the time of debit note f unding are not assigned to a specific invoice numbe r but 
are factored on any invoices present in the sales ledger 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
125  
and satisfactory payment track record, the facility  was sanctioned.  Satisfactory conduct of 
account of group company and its conduct of account  with IFCI Limited was considered 
while sanctioning of facility with waiver of field survey.  The limits were capped at `8 crore 
in the year 2012 due to delays in payments from the  debtors as the company had met with a 
fire incident in its manufacturing facility during that time and the whole pharma industry was 
going through a bad phase.  On the basis of past re lationship, support from IFL was provided 
so that the company may come out of its tough phase  during that time and the limits were 
uncapped to support the company towards its revival  as it had inherent strengths in terms of 
brands and manufacturing facilities.  The waiver pr ovided to the client and funding was 
allowed as the client was showing its intention to maintain the account and its closure in 
future.  During the time between year 2012 and 2016 , it was a management decision to 
continue with the funding through debit note and IF L recovered around `6.25 crore (approx.) 
during that period by way of interest and factoring  charges.  It was a management call (with 
the ultimate objective of recovery of money) that w ent wrong in case of Ind Swift Limited 
and that is going right in case of Ind Swift Labora tories Limited.  Before OTS was approved, 
the promoters’ PG was invoked and cases were going on in the court of law.  All the bankers 
had also explored the personal guarantee option and had finally assigned their debt to ARC at 
20 – 35 per cent  of the total debt.  In fact, the OTS done by IFL w as at a higher amount as 
compared to clients OTS/ Assignment done with other bankers. 
Management reply needs to be viewed against the fac t that credit policy clearly stipulated 
separate selection criteria for client and debtor.  Sanction of facility solely on basis of client 
strength was in deviation from credit policy.  The waiver of field audit on the basis of 
satisfactory conduct of group company and its condu ct with IFCI Limited did not serve its 
stipulated purpose.  The uncapping of limit and san ction of ad hoc limit was not in best 
interest of Company as client was going through str ess, referred to BIFR and it was already 
decided to reduce the exposure.  Funding by way of debit note for more than 41 months 
indicates the inability of the client to honor the outstanding payments.  Recovery of interest 
and factoring charges to the extent of `6.25 crore in effect led to waiver of huge unrealis ed 
amount at the time of OTS due to practice of DNF.  IFL itself never filed a suit against the 
promoters invoking their personal guarantee though personal guarantee had been provided. 
vii)  M/s Critical Mass Multilink Pvt Limited 
The Company sanctioned (September 2015) Advance aga inst Future Receivables (AFR) 
facility of `7.50 crore to Critical Mass Multilink Limited (CMML - the client) which was 
secured by equitable mortgage of one industrial and  two residential properties situated in 
Kutch, Gujarat; pledge of 69.46 lakh shares of Guja rat NRE Coke Limited (listed Company); 
pledge of 5 crore equity shares of Gujarat NRE Mine ral Resources Limited (unlisted 
Company).  The factorable debtors in this facility were M/s Bajrang Bali Coke Industries 
Limited and M/s NRE Metcoke Limited.  The client an d both the debtors were part of the 
same group whose flagship Company was Gujarat NRE C oke Limited (GNCL).  The tenure 
of facility was three years and repayment were to b e done from 30 June 2017 to 
30 September 2018.  Due to short payment received a gainst the first instalment of principal 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
126  
repayment, the account was classified as NPA in September 2017.  As on 31 March 2019, the 
total outstanding amount was `4.84 crore (including principal and interest).  
Audit observed that the Company considered provisio nal figures instead of audited figures 
for the year 2014-15 at the time of credit appraisa l (September 2015).  As against the 
stipulated minimum net worth of `25 crore, the Company considered net worth of the c lient 
as `356.95 crore without considering the adjusted tangi ble net worth (ATNW) 73  which was 
negative (`31.95 crore).  Even during the years 2011-12 to 201 3-14, ATNW of the client was 
`0.29 crore, `0.31 crore and `0.17 crore respectively.  As against the clients st ipulated 
minimum turnover of `50 crore, the actual turnover was `0.48 crore (provisional figures of 
2014-15).  Further, during 2011-12 and 2012-13 turn over was `1.22 crore and `1.36 crore 
respectively and there was no revenue from operatio ns during 2013-14.  As against the 
requirement of client having past track record of m inimum two years with the debtors or 
should have provided such service to other customer s with regular track record of payments, 
the relationship between client and debtor was new relationship and there was no track record 
of payments received by client on providing such se rvice to other customers.  As against the 
stipulation that debtor should be profit making for  last two years, both the debtors were loss 
making.  As against the stipulated minimum internal  rating of IFL5, the proposal was 
sanctioned even though the internal rating was IFL 6 which meant inadequate safety.  This 
rating was arrived at after giving two notches up based on strength of collateral property even 
though the mortgage of property was a basic and nec essary criterion for sanction of AFR 
facility. 
This sanction was accorded (September 2015) on the basis of service agreements (2010) 
between the client and debtors (related parties) ac cording to which client was nominated as 
technical consultant by both the debtors and in con sideration thereof it was to receive  
`1 crore per quarter as royalty, payments for which were to start from 1 January 2015.  This 
date was mutually extended by client and debtors to  1 April 2016.  However, the Company 
did not ascertain the quantum of work that had alre ady been executed and did not place on 
record the detailed works schedule or the nature of  work which was further required to be 
performed by the client under the general service a greements signed five years back.  No 
royalty payments were received thus indicating that  the agreements were on paper only 
considering the fact that both the debtors were sha reholders of the client and both client and 
debtor were part of the same group. 
The Company did not take into account the fact that  both the debtors were in the process of 
amalgamation (30 March 2015) with the flagship Comp any (GNCL) even before sanction 
(September 2015) of AFR facility which in turn mean t that the client was to ultimately 
receive the cash flows under the service agreements  from GNCL which had already 
undergone CDR in March 2014 due to deteriorating ca sh flow position and ultimately the 
credit facilities of GNCL had turned NPA.  Company was aware of the NPA status of GNCL 
account and it still accepted pledge of equity shar es of GNCL as one of the securities despite 
                                                           
73  the networth of a Company reduced by the investmen ts/ loans to subsidiary/ affiliate Companies 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
127  
the fact that the share price of GNCL had consisten tly and steeply fallen during the period 
2009 to 2015 from high of `79.9 per share in 2009 to `3.04 in 2015.  
As CMML could not fully repay (30 June 2017) the fi rst principal instalment, the account of 
CMML was classified (30 September 2017) as NPA afte r which the facility was rescheduled/ 
restructured (November 2017) considering the projec ted cash flows of the client (September 
2017 to September 2019) by way of advance from grou p Companies/ sale of investments.  
However, these cash flows did not emanate from iden tifiable future receivables on the basis 
of which an AFR facility is sanctioned.  The agreem ents entered into by the client for these 
cash flows were not found on record.  The reschedul ement was in deviation from the credit 
policy (2017-18) as the maximum tenor of AFR facili ty was in any case not to exceed three 
years but the Company extended the same to four years. 
One of the pre disbursement conditions in the present AFR facility was creation of security to 
the satisfaction of Company.  However, disbursement  of `7.50 crore was made without 
execution of mortgages of properties as the documents of properties/ securities which were to 
be mortgaged/ pledged with the Company for this AFR  facility were in the custody of IFCI 
Limited.  Thus even though the AFR was sanctioned t o CMML to whom the amount should 
have been disbursed, the Company disbursed the sanctioned amount of `7.50 crore directly to 
the loan account of GNMRL with IFCI Limited.  In th is regard the Statutory Auditor in its 
report (FY 2016-17) stated that it is apparent that  “this has been done to accommodate/ save 
the NPA of group Companies of the borrowers”  in the books of IFCI Limited.  Thus, this 
sanction of AFR was meant for ever greening the accounts of IFCI Limited.  
The client did not fully honor the repayments even as per the terms of reschedulement 
according to which the principal repayment was to b e done from 30 June 2017 to 
30 September 2019.  The instalments of `1.25 crore each due in March/ June/ September 
2019 has not been received till date.  There was la ck of timely action in selling the pledged 
shares at the time of default in repayment (June 20 17).  Instead it resorted to reschedulement 
(November 2017) after which the shares of GNCL were  suspended (February 2018) from 
being traded on the stock exchanges.  Company did n ot initiate any action under SARFAESI 
Act in respect of mortgaged properties though it go t coverage under SARFAESI Act from 
August 2016 74 .  
Management replied (7 January 2020) that provisiona l financials of FY 2014–15 were 
considered as audited financials were not available  then as last date of filing audited Balance 
Sheet was 30 September 2015.  Details of debtors we re mentioned in the credit proposal, out 
of last two years there was profit in one year henc e it was not continuous loss.  Moreover, in 
last FY mentioned in the proposal turnover of debto rs were much better than previous year, 
which was more than three times.  The Internal Risk  rating of the client was done as per the 
Board Approved Risk Rating Model.  The proposal was  rated as IFL 6 by the Risk 
Department and was sanctioned by the COD on the bas is of the justifications mentioned in 
                                                           
74  SARFAESI Act was extended to certain NBFCs, includ ing IFL, vide Ministry of Finance notification 
no. 6/1/2014- Recovery dated 5 August 2016 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
128  
the proposal. The notch up by two grades on the bas is of the tangible security was as per the 
AFR structure and not a wrong practice.  Here it is  observed that agreement between client 
and buyers was made five years back for payment of royalty hence it may be difficult to 
judge that these agreements were made for the sake of taking loan only five years before 
taking the facility from IFL.  The fact that both t he buyers were from same group was 
mentioned in the proposal and it might be difficult to judge the court’s final order before hand 
as order of amalgamation came in the year of 2016 a lthough sanction was made in 2015.  All 
the facts and figures w.r.t.  client and debtors (being group companies and poss ible merger) 
were mentioned in the proposal.  
The reply of Management needs to be viewed in light  of the fact that credit policy does not 
mention that provisional figures can be taken where  audited figures were not available on 
date of sanction.  The various parameters for clien t and debtor selection did not meet those 
specified in the credit policy.  The notch up on ba sis of tangible security was improper as 
credit policy mentioned that tangible security was basic requirement of sanction of AFR.  
Internal rating of IFL6 indicated inadequate safety  and was below the minimum rating for 
sanction of proposal.  Credit policy states that in  AFR, the payments are made from cash 
flows emanating from identifiable future receivable s which in the instant case were not 
identified as even after lapse of five years the qu antum of work done to enable receipt of 
royalty payments was not put on record.  The Board of the GNCL had approved the merger 
of debtors with itself in March 2015 i.e. before th e sanctioning of the facility.  The fact 
regarding possible merger of debtors with flagship Company was not stated in the sanction 
proposal and was thus overlooked.  
viii)    M/s Jakhau Salt Company Private Limited 
The Company sanctioned (October 2009) DSBF facility  of 
`5 crore to M/s Jakhau Salt 
Company Private Limited (JSCPL - the client).  The approved debtor under the facility was 
Travancore Cochin Chemicals Limited.  Besides, the company approved (23 March 2011) the 
PBF facility of `5 crore with credit period of 120 days within the e xisting approved 
prepayment limit of `5 crore.  The company enhanced (03 August 2011) the  prepayment 
limit in case of DSBF facility (Silent Basis) from `5 crore to `10 crore on the approved 
debtors (as previously approved) including PBF sub limit of `5 crore.  Similarly, maximum 
prepayment limit on the PBF facility was also enhan ced (February 2012) from `5 crore to 
`10 crore, with full interchangeability between DSBF  and PBF without obtaining any 
collateral security as required under credit policy of the company which states that the PBF is 
intended only for top rated clients and backed by tangible collaterals. 
The account was serviced regularly by the client ti ll June 2013; thereafter defaulted in 
payment of principal and interest.  The company res orted to debit note funding from 
December 2013 to August 2017 and the account was de clared NPA in September 2017.  The 
company approved (10 July 2018) OTS for a total val ue of `4.25 crore as against the 
outstanding amount of `7.20 crore (principal: `7.09 crore and interest: ` 0.11 crore) thereby 
waiving off `2.95 crore (principal `2.84 crore and interest `0.11 crore) on the plea that 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
129  
JSCPL was sanctioned the facility without any colla teral security.  The client made full and 
final payment on 29 September 2018 to honour the OTS agreement. 
Audit observed that field audit was not conducted i n this case citing the reasons of 
satisfactory credentials/ financial of the client a nd proposed debtor.  The company extended 
PBF (Reverse Factoring) facility to the client on t he purchases made by it from its group 
company (Bharat Salt Refineries Limited) which was not in the best interest of the company 
and lacked due diligence on part of the company.  
Management replied that facility was sanctioned on the basis of satisfactory credit conduct 
with IFCI Limited and approval of competent authori ty.  Since the conduct of the account 
with IFCI Limited and with Company was satisfactory , the PBF facility was sanctioned by 
the competent authority, without obtaining any collateral security.  
The reply needs to be viewed against the fact that satisfactory credit conduct with IFCI 
Limited can neither be the ground for waiver of fie ld audit which is stipulated in the BoD 
approved credit policy nor for waiver of such a cru cial condition of obtaining collateral 
security for purchase bill factoring facility, whic h is stipulated in the BoD approved credit 
policy. 
5.10.7  Conclusion  
As the Company is a Non Banking Finance Company – F actor (NBFC- Factor) registered 
with RBI, it is essential that rigorous standards o f appraisal, diligence and monitoring are 
followed and due consideration is given to its own financial/ commercial interest during the 
process of appraisal and extension of Factoring/ Loan facilities. 
The review of sanctioning, disbursement and monitor ing of Factoring/ Loan facility extended 
by company to several borrowers revealed that the c ompany did not observe the highest 
standards of due diligence in credit appraisal whil e sanctioning, disbursing and monitoring 
accounts.  It did not adhere to its own Credit Poli cy in several instances and relaxed various 
stipulated eligibility criteria pertaining to minim um security cover, financial ratios, stipulated 
credit rating etc.  Audit observed that there was d elay in enforcement of security and there 
were instances of non-enforcement of security.  Aud it also observed violation of Guidelines 
of RBI on declaring the account as NPA. 
5.10.8   Recommendations 
1.  The credit appraisal mechanism should be strengthened. 
2.  The Company should strictly adhere to its Credit Po licy and should not take recourse 
to deviations as a matter of routine. 
3.  The Company should assess the financial position of  the borrower company and the 
debtors from time to time. 
4.  Company may put in place a mechanism/ policy/ proce dure in place to ensure that 
intimation about rejection of material or non-accep tance of any invoice due to any 
other reason by debtors is given to Company in case of disclosed factoring.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
130  
5.  Parameters to be considered for fixation of prepaym ent limit of the client and credit 
limit of debtors should be clearly laid down.  
6.  Adequate security should be collected to safeguard the interest of company. 
7.  Extensive monitoring should be done to avoid fraud or loss to the company. 
8.  The Company should strictly comply with the RBI gui delines applicable to Non-
Banking Financial Companies. 
9.  Audit findings reported in the para are based on se lected sample, but Ministry/ 
Management is requested to get entire population examined/ investigated to assess the 
prevalence of the problem and fix the responsibilit y, wherever required. Cases with 
indications of mala-fide, if any, may be referred t o professional agencies for further 
examination. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
131  
CHAPTER VI: MINISTRY OF HEAVY INDUSTRIES AND PUBLIC 
ENTERPRISES 
 
 
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited 
6.1 Loss due to non-performance under a contract 
BHEL suffered a loss of Euro 3.83 million ( `` ``28.35 crore) due to failure to deliver 
performance as per the contractual provisions and r esultant invocation of bank 
guarantee by the client.  
Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL) entered int o (21 April 2015) a contract with 
Electrik Uretim AS Genel Mudurlugu (EUAS), Turkey, for rehabilitation and upgradation of 
eight units of Keban Hydroelectric Power Plant at a  price of Euro 63.86 million (approx. 
`472.56 crore) with completion period of 2,552 days (seven years approximately).  The 
proposed date of commencement of work was to be the  same as the date of opening of Letter 
of Credit (LC). 
As per provisions of the above said contract, BHEL issued (21 April 2015) a Performance 
Bank Guarantee in favour of EUAS for an amount of E uro 3.83 million ( 
`28.35 crore).  After 
signing the contract in April 2015, BHEL submitted (10 July 2015) the L 2 schedule (i.e. 
detailed timelines and sequence of project activiti es) to EUAS with the proposed initial date 
of commencement of work as 30 August 2015 for appro val.  However, the work could not be 
commenced by BHEL as scheduled on account of variou s technical glitches like, correctness 
of drawing/ documents collected by BHEL from EUAS, work related to intake gates to be 
made capable of emergency closure, work related wit h stator frame, rehabilitation of spare 
transformer before shutdown etc.  While finalising the contract with EUAS, BHEL did not 
ensure that the responsibilities of EUAS to provide  updated drawings and design data of 
existing equipment were incorporated in the contrac t.  Subsequently, BHEL submitted 
(23 September 2015) the revised L 2 schedule with proposed date of commencement of wor k 
as 01 November 2015 for approval.  
The LC was opened by EUAS on 07 March 2016, when th e zero date for commencement of 
work also became effective.  However, even thereaft er, BHEL was unable to start the work 
on account of non-availability of necessary drawing / documents including inspection and 
physical measurement of units during shutdown perio d.  This was mentioned in the agreed 
Minutes of Meeting (MoM) between EUAS and BHEL in N ovember 2016.  However, EUAS 
informed BHEL in the same meeting that they had alr eady provided all available drawings/ 
documents.  It was also agreed in this meeting (8 -  10 November 2016) with EUAS that 
BHEL would submit the documents related to preliminary planning activities.  
EUAS issued notices (13 December 2016 and 10 Februa ry 2017) to BHEL stating failure of 
BHEL to submit the requisite design details, detail ed technical specifications, quality 
assurance plan, sub-contracting list, list of manuf acturers, etc., even after one year of the 
opening of LC by them and requested BHEL to submit the requisite documents/ plans within 
10 days.  Finally citing inability of BHEL to provi de requisite documents, EUAS terminated 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
132  
the contract on 07 March 2017.  The performance gua rantee of Euro 3.83 million 
(`28.35 crore) was finally encashed by EUAS on 04 December 2017. 
This order was also of the highest rating R&M works  of Hydroelectric Power Project for 
BHEL and was opportunity to gain experience of new area for future references.  This 
opperunity was lost due to non completion of the pr eliminary planning activities which 
resulted in encashment of performance guarantee of Euro 3.83 million ( `28.35 crore). 
Management replied (20 September 2019) that  
• drawings provided by EUAS during site visit were ve ry old and it was not certain 
whether the changes made from time to time on the p owerhouse had been 
incorporated in the drawings or not.  As such, list  of inputs required from EUAS for 
start of Design & Engineering activities was sent t o EUAS.  Based on inputs gathered 
and discussion with EUAS revised schedules were prepared.  
• BHEL could have submitted the requisite documents o nly after checking the 
correctness of available data which was to be deter mined by physical measurement of 
existing equipment for which EUAS had committed to provide shutdown of machines 
during 12 July 2017 to 25 August 2017 and then agai n from 11 September 2017 to 
20 October 2017.  However, without even waiting for shutdown to occur, EUAS went 
ahead and terminated the contract on 07 March 2017.  
Reply of Management is not acceptable because 
• Despite lapse of two years from the date of signing  the contract, BHEL was unable to 
complete the preliminary planning activities and su bmit the requisite documents to 
EUAS.  Even after opening of LC by EUAS in March 20 16, no tangible action 
(barring a meeting in November 2016), was taken by BHEL till March 2017 when 
EUAS finally terminated the contract due to non-performance of BHEL. 
• In response to the notices issued by EUAS, BHEL did  not intimate the former, its 
inability to submit documents due to non-provision of shutdown of the machines by 
EUAS.  Moreover, as opined by the legal counsels, B HEL did not have a valid legal 
case to prove wrongful encashment of bank guarantee by EUAS. 
Thus, BHEL had lost not only Euro 3.83 million ( 
`28.35 crore) due to unable to complete the 
preliminary planning activities but also lost the o pportunity to gain experience of new area 
for future references. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
133  
6.2 Avoidable payment of sewerage cess 
The Heavy Power Equipment Plant, Hyderabad of BHEL failed to avail the rebate in 
sewerage cess extended by Hyderabad Water Supply an d Sewerage Board, which 
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of `` ``21.24 crore during January 2012 to 
March 2019.   
The Heavy Power Equipment Plant (HPEP), Hyderabad, a unit of Bharat Heavy Electricals 
Limited (BHEL) sources the water required for its F actory and Township from Hyderabad 
Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (HMWSS B) as per tariff determined by 
HMWSSB from time to time.  The HMWSSB revised (Nove mber 2011) the Water & 
Sewerage Tariff effective from 1 December 2011 whic h included levy of 35 per cent  
sewerage cess on monthly water charges.  The tariff  order provided a rebate of 50 per cent  
(i.e. 17.5 per cent ) in sewerage cess for bulk consumers to encourage them to set up their own 
sewerage treatment plant.  
The HPEP, by then, had already established its own Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) and 
Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) for its Factory and Township for treating the industrial and 
domestic effluents.  The HMWSSB reiterated (January  2012) to the Company that the 
incentive is applicable only when the entire quanti ty of water consumed including the bore 
well water is treated and recycled for other usages .  Further to this, HMWSSB formulated 
(31 October 2013) guidelines for certification of t he consumers who had established STPs 
and fulfilled the requirements to avail the rebate.   It stipulated, inter-alia, that all the 
consumers who have established STPs were required to furnish the STP information once in a 
month in the prescribed proforma besides furnishing  the certificate from Environmental 
Protection Training & Research Institute (EPTRI) once in six months for availing the rebate.  
Audit observed that HPEP, though stated to have tre ated all the water used by it and 
obtaining the EPTRI test reports regularly for both  STP and ETP plants, did not furnish the 
six monthly certificate of EPTRI and  the requisite data in the prescribed monthly profor ma 
(relating to STP and ETP) to HMWSSB to establish th at the entire quantity of water 
consumed including the bore well water was treated and recycled for other usages as per the 
guidelines for availing the rebate.  As a result, H PEP paid an amount of 
`42.48 crore 
(`13.82 crore for factory and `28.66 crore for township) towards sewerage cess cha rges at 
35 per cent  during the period January 2012 to March 2019.  Sin ce the Company failed to 
furnish the requisite data to HMWSSB, it could not avail the 50 per cent  rebate in sewerage 
cess allowed by HMWSSB amounting to `21.24 crore from January 2012 to March 2019. 
Management replied (November 2019) that:  
• The unit had its own STP and Effluent Treatment Pla nt and was maintaining these 
plants on its own. HMWSSB started levying 35 per cent  sewerage cess from March 
2009 onwards.  The payment of sewerage cess was pai d under protest for the period 
from March 2009 to December 2011.  The unit filed a  writ petition in August 2012 
challenging the levy and demand of sewerage cess on  the grounds that the STP and 
ETP were being operated on its own.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
134  
• Since, the writ petition had not come up for hearin g, the matter was taken up with 
HMWSSB for resolving the issue.  At the time of ent ering the new agreement in 
May 2019, HMWSSB accepted to allow the 50 per cent  rebate and adjust it in future 
water bills.  Accordingly, in the month of February  2019, the claims for rebate of 
sewerage cess were submitted for the period from July 2009 to December 2018.  
The reply of Management is not acceptable in view of the following:  
• As per the tariff order notified by HMWSSB, the reb ate in sewerage cess was 
applicable from January 2012 onwards for the bulk c ustomers who operate their own 
STP and ETP.  Hence, the claim of the company for w aiver of 100 per cent  sewerage 
cess was not valid. The writ petition filed by the Company in August 2012 has not 
been admitted by the Hon’ble High Court of Telengana till date.  
• The new agreement entered between BHEL and HMWSSB i n May 2019 did not state 
that HMWSSB would adjust the rebate in sewerage cess in future water bills.  Further, 
there was no documentary evidence showing the willi ngness of HMWSSB for 
adjustment of rebate in future water bills. 
• As per the circular issued (October 2013) by the HM WSSB, the bulk users having 
their own STP should submit the STP details on mont hly basis duly certified by 
EPTRI once in six months in the prescribed format.  However, while submitting the 
claim in February 2019/ April 2019, the Company sub mitted the details of STP for a 
period of six months instead of each month that too  without the counter signature of 
EPTRI, as required.  
Thus, failure on the part of BHEL HPEP, Hyderabad i n furnishing the data relating to STP 
and ETP to HMWSSB for availing rebate in sewerage c ess resulted in avoidable extra 
expenditure of `21.24 crore during the period January 2012 to March  2019.  The opportunity 
forgone by BHEL to claim the benefit of 50 per cent  rebate on sewerage cess during the said 
period also meant that the benefit of a third-party  assurance on effectiveness of the 
functioning of the STP could not be derived and the  risk of non-performance of the STP as 
per standards may not have been adequately mitigated. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
HEC Limited 
6.3 Township and Land Management  
6.3.1 Introduction 
Heavy Engineering Corporation Limited (HEC or Compa ny) is one of the leading suppliers 
of capital equipment in India for steel, mining, ra ilways, power, defence, space research, 
nuclear and strategic sectors. Government of Bihar (GoB) allotted 7,199 acres of land to HEC 
during 1958-59 (2,312 acres free of cost to install  a Foundry Forge Plant (FFP), Heavy 
Machine Building Plant (HMBP) and the Heavy Machine  Tool Plant (HMTP) and other 
ancillary and allied purposes and 4,887 acres at a cost of 
`2.75 crore for township and other 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
135  
allied purposes).  HEC established FFP, HMBP and HM TP and has 11,109 quarters in its 
township apart from other buildings like hostels, hospital, school buildings, shop etc.  
A study on land and township management in HEC was conducted to assess whether land 
and township services were effectively managed, exi stence of policy and adherence thereof 
for leasing of land to other parties, leases were r enewed on time, estate dues were recovered 
and adequate and effective system was in place to i dentify and remove encroachment of land 
and buildings.  Records relating to land and townsh ip management of HEC was examined 
during April and May 2019 for a period of three years from 2016-17 to 2018-19. 
6.3.2    Audit Findings 
6.3.2.1   Land Management 
i)   Utilisation of Land 
The status of the Company’s land as on 31 March 2019 is as shown below.  
 
Table 6.3.1: Status of land acquired by HEC as on 31 March 2019  
 
Audit noted that though land was granted to HEC for the specific purpose of construction and 
establishment of its plant, township and other anci lliary and allied purposes, the company 
utilised only 36 per cent  of land (729.27 acres for factory, 1,839.88 acres for township 
including land in pockets inside township) for this  primary purpose.  44 per cent  of land 
(2,849.44 + 313.31 acres) was transferred to other agencies and it had 20 per cent  of vacant 
land (as on 31 March 2019). 
In view of the large amount of unutilised land avai lable with the Company, threat of 
encroachment of vacant land and to meet its fund re quirement, 126.37 acre of land was 
marked for transfer to government/ other agencies.  The Company also did not have any 
Particulars Land in 
acre 
Per cent  
of total 
land 
Land used for Factory, Residential area, Other area  and Land in pockets 
inside township  
(Factory Area 729.27, Residential Area 772.96, Othe r Area (Drainage 
Township) 166.92, Land in Pockets inside Township 900)  
2569.15 36 
Land transferred to GoJ (2691.44 acre) and CISF (158 acre) 2849.44 40 
Land to be transferred to GoJ [306.86 acre (land un der encroachment) 
+19.13 acre] 
325.99 5 
Land leased/ given to various agencies on Lease (SA IL/ RDCIS, NIFFT, 
Educational Institutions, JSCA, Petrol Pumps, BSNL,  Garden Reach 
Shipbuilders and Engineers Limited) 
313.31 
 
4 
Land proposed for Transfer (requests received during February 2016-May 
2018) to ONGC, SIB, CBI, UIAI-Adhar, TVNL, CWC, EES L (pending 
till Jan 2020) 
126.37  1 
Land under encroachment 73.05 1 
Remaining vacant land of HEC 942.20 13 
Total 7,199.51 100 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
136  
profitable land use plan for the remaining 942.20 a cres valuing `1,036.42 crore 1.  The 
Company received various proposals during (February  2016 to May 2018) for allotment of 
land to the extent of 136.645 acres from CBI, CISF,  Oil PSUs and Indian Army etc.  Though 
the matter was raised (December 2016 to April 2018)  by the Company with Department of 
Heavy Industries (DHI), it remained pending finalis ation (March 2020). Audit noted that the 
Board of HEC also noted (June 2014) the tremendous threat of encroachment, if land 
remained unutilised in the light of limited manpower for security.  
Management replied (January 2020) that 84.14  per cent  of land had been utilised and 
1,068.57 acres of land was available for future use  of HEC.  The reply of Management may 
be seen in the light of the fact that land was allo tted to HEC to set up industry, township and 
other ancilliary facilities whereas, over the years it had to transfer significant chunk of land to 
different agencies to meet its working capital requ irement and outstanding dues and also as it 
was unable to secure the land from encroachment. Co mpany does not have any profitable 
plan to utilise the remaining available land of 942.20 acre. 
6.3.2.2   Leasing and Encroachment of Land 
i)  Non-recovery of 
`` ``75.30 crore from Government of Jharkhand due to 
encroachment of land 
As per revival package approved by the GoI (Septemb er 2008), 2,342 acres of encroachment 
free land was to be transferred by HEC to the Gover nment of Jharkhand (GoJ) and HEC was 
to get `250 crore.  HEC transferred 2,035.14 acres of land to GoJ and the remaining 306.86 
acres was not transferred because the same was under encroachment.  GoJ paid `174.70 crore 
to the company leaving a balance of `75.30 crore. 
Audit observed that GoJ assured (April 2009) to pro vide administrative support to HEC to 
ensure time bound eviction of encroachment in the r emaining land.  The company, however, 
did not take up the matter with the State Governmen t for eviction of the encroached land at 
regular intervals.  After 2009, the matter was take n up in 2012 i.e. after three years.  HEC 
approached (2015) DHI, but the ministry took no ini tiative to resolve the issue.  Due to 
inability of HEC management to evict encroachers fr om 306.86 acres of land and hand over 
encroachment free land to the GoJ, `75.30 crore ( `48.97 crore plus `26.33 crore) could not 
be realised.  
Management replied (January 2020) that as per DHI o rder (21 October 2019), 107.28 acres 
out of 306.86 acres of land would be utilised under  Pradhan Mantri Aawas Yojana and 
remaining 199.58 acres would be taken by GoJ on ‘as  is whereas basis’.  GoJ would pay 
proportionate amount of 
`48.97 crore to HEC.  The revised amount was yet to be received by 
the company. 
6.3.2.3 Leasing of land 
The company had not made any policy for leasing of land. Land was allotted to different 
organisations at different rates and there was no u niformity in lease renewal charges. 
                                                           
1  Considering rate of `` ``    1.10 crore per acre for transfer of land to the GoJ 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
137  
Management replied (January 2020) that new policy f or leasing of land was under process. 
Some issues relating to leasing out of land by the Company are discussed in subsequent 
paragraphs.  
i)  Non-realisation of `` ``48.92 crore from GRSE 
HEC allotted 62 acres of land to Garden Reach Shipb uilders and Engineers Limited (GRSE) 
to set up a Marine Diesel Engine Plant (MDEP) for a n initial period of 30 years from 1966.  
HEC did not charge license fee or lease rent.  HEC approached GRSE (August 1999) for a 
fresh agreement w.e.f. April 1996 for the aforesaid  land assuming that original agreement for 
30 years had lapsed.  One time lease premium of `14.88 crore (@ `0.24 crore per acre) and 
10 per cent  plus annual lease rent of `1.48 crore was payable as per HEC.  GRSE demanded 
copy of lease agreement from HEC and refused to ent er into any lease deed stating that by 
their long years of possession over the land in question, they had acquired right and title.  
HEC obtained legal opinion (2012), who recommended that immediate steps be initiated 
under the Public Premises (Eviction of un-authorise d Occupants) Act, 1971.  HEC requested 
DPE (April 2013), to nominate a sole arbitrator for  the case.  The matter was referred 
(June 2015) to the Permanent Machinery of Arbitrati on which concluded that due to non-
availability of signed formal lease agreement, the instant case did not fall under Arbitration 
and needed to be settled by both the parties.  HEC approached (April 2018), the Court of 
Estate Officer and filed a case for eviction.  GRSE  obtained (August 2018) stay against the 
same.  
Audit observed that HEC was not in possession of lease agreement or any record to show that 
the lease was entered into by HEC until the year 19 99, when the matter came into notice of 
the company.  Thus, in the absence of legal documen ts 62 acre of HEC land was under 
unauthorised occupation of GRSE and the dispute was  yet to be mutually settled with GRSE.  
The company could not receive the lease rent and le ase renewal charges amounting to 
`48.92 crore [ `14.88 crore as one time lease premium plus lease re nt `34.04 crore 
(`1.48 crore x 23 years)] as per the rates fixed by the company.   
Management replied (January 2020) that agreement be tween HEC and GRSE could not be 
signed for want of Deed of Conveyance between HEC a nd Government of Bihar.  A joint 
committee with members from HEC and GRSE had been m ade to settle the issue.  The reply 
did not address inaction on part of the Management in view of the fact that deed of 
conveyance for entire land was registered in Februa ry 1996, but lease agreement with GRSE 
was not signed immediately thereafter.  
ii)  Non-renewal of lease  
As mentioned in para 2.3 above, the Company had not  made policy for leasing of land.  As 
per the common terms and conditions of the lease ag reements entered into by HEC with the 
third parties, the lessee was required to pay one t ime lease premium for the period of lease 
and 10 per cent  of the premium as rent every year in advance.  The  lease would be renewable 
as per mutual consent of the parties after payment of one time lease premium and lease rent.  
Cases of non-renewal of lease noticed during the course of audit are given below:  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
138  
• National Institute of Foundry & Forge Technology  
HEC leased 57.47 acres of land to National Institut e of Foundry & Forge Technology 
(NIFFT) at Hatia in June 1968 for 30 years at a rat e of `0.26 lakh per annum.  The lease 
agreement was signed on 31 March 1987.  After expir y of the lease period in June 1998, one 
time lease premium was fixed by HEC at `3.45 crore and annual lease rent of `0.34 crore.  
NIFFT refused to pay the revised lease premium on t he plea that it was a non-profit 
organisation and continued to pay at the old rate u pto 2012-13.  It also stated that the matter 
was raised (March 2000) with Ministry of HRD, GoI f or raising it with Ministry of Industry.  
Audit noted that HEC did not follow up the matter t hereafter with NIFFT till October 2012 
followed by letters sent in October 2014 and February 2019.  The lease was not renewed even 
after lapse of 21 years of expiry of lease.  NIFFT started paying lease rent of `0.51 lakh per 
annum from 2013-14 onwards.  Thus, due to failure o f the company to renew the lease, 
`10.69 crore ( `3.45 crore as one time lease premium plus `7.24 crore on lease rent) could not 
be realised from NIFFT.  
Management replied (January 2020) that the matter w as continuously pursued with NIFFT.  
The reply points to inaction of Management in final ising and renewing the lease agreement 
leading to loss of lease charges. The Management al so did not reply to reasons called for in 
Audit for not taking up the matter with the Ministry.  
• Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited  
HEC allotted  1.38 acre of land to BSNL on 21 April 1985 at the r ate of `0.03 lakh per annum 
for 30 years without any lease agreement.  Even aft er expiry of initial period of allotment of 
30 years (i.e. in 2015), no action was taken by the  parties for revision of rate.  Further, recent 
digital survey conducted (October 2016) by an indep endent agency 2 revealed total land under 
possession of BSNL was 1.43 acres.  Thus, BSNL was in possession of company’s land 
without paying the revised charges since four years  and also encroached 0.05 acre of land.  
The company requested (July 2017) BSNL for renewal of lease after lapse of two years after 
expiry of initial period of allotment of 30 years ( i.e. in 2015).  The company did not make 
any correspondences thereafter with BSNL. 
Management replied (January 2020) that settlement of the issue was under process. 
6.3.2.4 Township Management 
HEC has a township to facilitate its employees/ ex- employees to reside near its plant.  The 
company also developed shopping places to fulfil th e requirements of its employees.  Other 
organisations like Banks, Education institutions, o ffices of the State Government, Jharkhand 
State Electricity Board (JSEB) offices also reside in periphery of HEC township.  
                                                           
2  Samarth Engineers 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
139  
i)   Unauthorised occupation of quarters 
Status of available quarters, vacant quarters and quarters under unauthorised occupation as on 
2 May 2019 in HEC Township is summarised as under: 
Table 6.3.2  
Number of 
quarters 
Quarters 
allotted 
Number of 
vacant 
quarters 
Damage/ 
Unfit 
quarters 
Quarters under 
unauthorised occupation 
(by ex-employee) 
Quarters under 
unauthorised 
occupation (by 
others) 
11,109 10,433 395 160 9 3 112 4 
From the above table it is seen that 395 quarters w ere vacant, 160 were damaged and 121 
quarters (112+9) were under unauthorised occupation .  Audit observed that the company 
could not recover `2.81 crore (as on March 2019) in respect of 69 quar ters under 
unauthorised occupation by outsiders.  It was noted  that out of above 69 quarters, 46 quarters 
are under unauthorised occupation for more than 20 years and data in respect of the 
remaining 43 quarters (112 - 69) was not available with the management.  
Audit observed that the Company filed cases in resp ect of only six quarters under the Public 
Premises (Eviction of un-authorised Occupants) Act,  1971 during 2015-19 out of which 
eviction order was passed in respect of two quarter s and remaining four cases were under 
process.  Action was not taken by management to vac ate the quarters under unauthorised 
occupation, which resulted in non-realisation of `2.81 crore (69 quarters) which would 
increase with the passage of time.   
Management replied (January 2020) that all such una uthorised occupants had been served 
vacation notices to vacate the quarters.  Reply of Management may be seen in the light of the 
fact that management had issued notices only to its  nine ex-employees who had occupied the 
quarters unauthorisedly.  Moreover, the Company con tinues to sustain loss on account of 
unauthorised occupation of quarters 
.  
ii)   Non-realisation of estate dues     
Audit noted that huge amount was outstanding agains t various agencies towards house rent, 
electricity charges and water charges as mentioned below: 
Table 6.3.3: Statement showing outstanding estate dues of HEC as on 31 March 2019  
Particulars 
Outstanding amount (`` ``    in crore) as on 
31.03.2016 31.03.2017 31.03.2018 31.03.2019 
Quarters given on lease to employees (Leave & 
License) 
0.06 0.11 0.14 0.07 
Quarters allotted to the dependent of the 
deceased employees on Compassionate Ground 
0.19 0.23 0.26 0.28 
Quarters given on Long Term Lease to the 
retired employees of the company 
1.37 1.62 1.16 1.03 
Non Residential Building 0.40 0.61 1.53 2.79 
                                                           
3  since July 2014 onwards 
4  since more than 20 years 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
140  
Buildings allotted to outside agencies i.e. other 
than company employee  
4.25 4.85 5.53 6.14 
Jharkhand State Electricity Board (JSEB) 1.02 2.25 1.18 1.80 
Shops allotted by the company 1.31 1.48 1.68 5.00 
Employee unions of HEC (UNI) 0.00 0.01 -- -- 
Total 8.60 11.16 11.48 17.11 
The outstanding dues increased from `8.60 crore as on March 2016 to `17.11 crore as on 
March 2019.  Out of the above, management had made provision for doubtful recovery for 
`6.62 crore in the accounts.  
Management replied that regular allottees were depo siting their dues whereas defaulters had 
been served notices, as such outstanding dues again st shops of `5 crore was a pre-mature 
estimate.  Audit noted that as per records of reven ue department of HEC, total dues against 
the Shops as on 31 March 2019 was `5 crore. 
Significant cases of non-realisation of outstanding dues are elaborated below- 
• HEC receives drinking water in bulk from the GoJ an d delivers it to the doorstep of 
consumers in township.  Audit noted that GoJ revise d water charges with effect from 
31 May 2006 and started billing HEC with effect from 1 August 2009 at the rate of `5 per KL 
(`22.75 per Kilo Gallon).  GoJ asked HEC to pay `13.23 crore for water charges for the 
period between August 2009 and May 2013.  The amoun t recovered by HEC from 
beneficiaries was however only `4.25 crore for this period.  
Audit observed that though the GoJ charged HEC at a  certain rate for consumption of water 
but the company recovered water charges at a flat r ate.  The company did not even charge for 
the maintenance, distribution and transmission cost that it incurred towards supply of water to 
households although the Company was charged at reta il rates by the GoJ.  This resulted in 
wide gap between procurement price and realisation of water charges and HEC could not 
recover `2.68 crore from various agencies/ residential build ing occupiers (as on 31 March 
2019).  Further, HEC was required to pay `25.17 crore on water charges as per demand 
(August 2009 to March 2019) from GoJ.  
Management replied that shortfall in collection of water charges was mainly due to defaulting 
allottees and inflated figure of intake claimed by GoJ, ignoring loss that occurred during 
supply because of reasons like leakages etc.  The r eply is to be viewed against loss sustained 
on account of shortfall in collection of water char ges from the allottees.  Further, flow meters 
required to measure the water supply were not insta lled and quantity of water supplied by 
GoJ could not be reconciled even after lapse of around 15 years.  
• 29 quarters were allotted to various clubs, samitee s and HEC consumer co-operative 
society for which the company charged House rent, e lectricity and water charges from these 
organisations.  Audit observed that `1.38 crore against co-operative society and `0.34 crore 
against clubs and samitees was outstanding (31 Marc h 2019).  Due to lack of adequate 
monitoring and effective management, HEC could not realise outstanding amount from these 
clubs, samitees and HEC co-operative society.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
141  
Management replied (January 2020) that authenticity  of allotment of premises under the 
possession of various clubs, samitees and consumer cooperative societies would be verified 
followed by realisation of dues or eviction of unau thorized occupants as per the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act 1971. 
• Six buildings were allotted to Postal Department, t o run post offices, by the company.  
The rent was revised in May 2009 by HEC and revised  rent was claimed (December 2013) 
for above premises.  Postal Department disputed the  revised bills and requested HEC to 
examine the issue afresh which was not accepted by the Management.  Since the Postal 
Department was not willing to pay the revised bills , the outstanding dues accumulated to 
`1.40 crore (31 March 2019).  HEC cancelled (Februar y 2015) the allotment of buildings.  
However, Postal Department had neither vacated the premises nor paid the enhanced bills.  
Management replied (January 2020) that Postal Authorities have been reminded regularly.  
• Four office buildings and five residential quarters were allotted to BSNL (as discussed 
in above para).  The Company could not realise `0.32 crore from BSNL.  The dues were 
outstanding for a period ranging from March 2008 to  July 2017.  Audit observed that HEC 
management had not made any correspondences with BSNL after July 2017.  
Management replied (January 2020) that after servin g final notice for making payment of 
dues, if amount remained unpaid, notice of demand o f damages as per Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauthorized occupants) Act 1971 would  be served.  
Thus, lack of suitable action by Management, `17.11 crore could not be realised and was 
outstanding as on 31 March 2019.  
6.3.2.5 Delay in handing over drinking water distri bution system to RMC  
Municipal services like supply of drinking water, s ewage disposal system, sewage treatment 
is maintained by HEC within its township.  Audit no ted that storage tanks were not 
serviceable and many of the pipelines were leaking which could contaminate drinking water.  
In view of its inability to maintain water supply a nd sewage disposal system, and to recover 
cost of services provided from the users, and also since 85 per cent  users were not employees 
of the company, HEC Board decided (December 2013) t o hand over the entire water supply 
network to Ranchi Municipal Corporation (RMC).  The  Board directed to put up a proposal 
along with terms and conditions of such transfer to  the Ministry (DHI) for its consideration 
and approval.  However, Audit noted that, even afte r lapse of six years since the direction of 
the Board, no such proposal was submitted (January 2020) by the company to DHI.  
Management replied that the matter was pursued with the GoJ.  Audit noted that management 
took up the matter (September 2017) with GoJ i.e. a fter four years from the decision of the 
Board to hand over the entire water supply network to RMC.  The Urban Development and 
Housing Department of GoJ was approached only in Ja nuary 2019.  Management reply was 
silent on the compliance of Board directives to sub mit proposal for transfer of water supply 
network to the Ministry (DHI) for approval.  Thus, due to delayed action of Management, it 
continued to incur losses being unable to recover c ost of services provided.  Further there is 
risk of supply of contaminated water to the residen ts in view of old and unserviceable 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
142  
pipelines.  HEC Board also failed to monitor compli ance of the decision taken by them six 
years back.  
6.3.2.6 Non-furnishing of information to State auth orities for calculation of Holding 
Tax 
As per the agreement with RMC in July 1991, HEC was  paying a lump sum amount of 
`0.08 crore/ annum as Holding Tax (HT).  It was also  agreed that the RMC would not levy 
any tax on constructions authorised or unauthorised  directly or indirectly without a 
representation and specific agreement with the HEC.   RMC communicated (November 2016) 
that, after enactment of the Jharkhand Property Tax  (Assessment, Collection and Recovery) 
Rules 2013, assessment of HT payable with effect fr om April 2016 at revised rates was to be 
completed within three months.  HEC was requested t o provide details of buildings in whose 
respect the company was required to pay HT by 14 Dec 2016.  
Audit noted that the company intimated (February 20 17) RMC, only about the number of 
buildings and quarters.  RMC served notice (8 March  2018) to HEC and asked to provide 
detailed information with regard to buildings locat ed in HEC township in order to calculate 
HT.  HEC did not provide the complete information a nd, therefore, RMC calculated HT for 
the entire area under HEC factory and office.  The revised HT was fixed at `1.77 crore per 
annum for the office buildings in HEC area.  Intere st and penalty were also applicable on the 
balance amount.  Total demand by RMC for 2016-17 to  2019-20 was `10.09 crore 
comprising of HT of `7.06 crore and `3.03 crore as interest and penalty.   
Audit observed that instead of providing details of buildings and segregating the buildings for 
which the company was liable to pay HT, the company  filed a writ petition in the Jharkhand 
High Court contesting the revised demand.  This was  quashed by the High Court on 8 July 
2019.  The court opined that since HEC had entered into an agreement with RMC, it was duty 
bound to provide details sought for by the respondent.  
Thus, failure of HEC management to submit requisite  details to RMC led to imposition of 
penalty and interest amounting to `3.03 crore which could increase further.  The compa ny 
was yet to identify (January 2020) and communicate the buildings for which they were liable 
to pay the HT.  Further, such demand may arise in r espect of residential buildings in the HEC 
area where HEC employees occupied only 15 per cent  of the quarters. 
Management replied that the agreement made between RMC and HEC in July 1991 was still 
in motion and an appeal had been filed in September  2019 before Appellate Authority under 
the Jharkhand Property Tax (Assessment, Collection and Recovery) Rules, 2013 against the 
demand notices.  Audit noted that management did no t provide the requisite information with 
regard to buildings located in HEC township to RMC despite reminders. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
143  
Tungabhadra Steel Products Limited 
6.4  Avoidable payment of income tax  
Incorrect treatment of waiver of Government of Indi a loan and other liabilities in the 
books of accounts by Tungabhadra Steel Products Lim ited resulted in avoidable 
payment of income tax of `` ``55.38 crore and further tax liability of `` ``41.18 crore.  
The Income Tax Act, 1961 recognised sick industrial  companies covered under Section 17(3) 
read with Section 18 of the Sick Industrial Compani es (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (SICA) 
and provided certain reliefs/ concessions such as e xemption from capital gains tax and 
permission to set-off capital gains, if any, agains t the accumulated losses on fulfilment of 
certain conditions, etc.  These reliefs/ concession s are allowed only after approval and issue 
of appropriate orders by the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT). 
Tungabhadra Steel Products Limited (Company) was re ferred to the Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in 2004 under SICA 5 as it had been incurring losses for a 
long period.  The Administrative Department, i.e., Department of Heavy Industries (DHI) 
conveyed (January 2016) the decision of the Governm ent of India (GoI) for closure of the 
Company. Ministry of Labour and Employment also acc orded permission (February 2017) to 
close the Company with effect from 9 February 2017.  
Meanwhile, CCEA approved (December 2015) infusion o f funds of `35.55 crore towards 
discharge of liabilities and permitted to write off  the GoI loan of `115.84 crore and interest 
accrued thereon amounting to `315.92 crore in lieu of transfer of right over immovable assets 
of the Company.  Later, DHI conveyed (January 2018)  the GoI approval for sale of entire 
Company’s land of 82 acres 37 cents at the rate of `66 lakh per acre to Karnataka Housing 
Board (KHB)/ Government of Karnataka (GoK).  Furthe r, it was decided that the transfer of 
land to KHB was to be done after receipt of funds a nd then the Company was required to be 
handed over to the liquidator for its winding up. 
Later, GoK issued a notification (September 2018) f or the purchase of land belonging to the 
Company for its KHB operations measuring 82 acres 1 2 cents 
6 at a total value of 
`54.20 crore. It was also decided that 57 acres 8 ce nts of land (factory area) would be 
registered in Phase-I and balance land of 25 acres 4 cents (residential) would be registered 
after evicting the residents.   
During the financial year (FY) 2016-17, the Company  brought the waiver of GoI loan 
together with interest thereon ( 
`467.07 crore 7) and others ( `5.22 crore) totalling 
`472.29 crore into the books of accounts and treated  as Profit on Sale of Assets 
(extraordinary income) in Profit and Loss account f or the FY 2016-17.  It e-filed Income Tax 
(IT) Return for the Assessment Year (AY) 2017-18 (F Y 2016-17) by declaring a capital gain 
                                                           
5  Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Ac t, 1985 was repealed by Sick Industrial Companies 
(Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003 with effect f rom 1 December 2016. As a result, Government 
dissolved BIFR and referred all pending proceedings  to the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) 
and National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT)  as per the provisions of Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016 
6  Excluding 25 cents said to be encroached out of 8 2 acres 37 cents 
7    `` ``    467.07 crore consists of GoI loan of `` ``    151.15 crore together with interest of `` ``    315.92 crore 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
144  
of `471.35 crore and total income of `321.23 crore after adjusting allowable current year loss 
of `145.79 crore.  
Central Processing Centre of Income Tax Department processed the above return under 
Section 143(1) of the Income Tax Act (IT Act), 1961  and raised (September 2018) a net tax 
demand of `93.38 crore (Income Tax: `75.16 crore + Penalty for delayed return: `3.76 crore 
+ Default in payment of Advance Tax: `15.98 crore - Adjustment of taxes paid: `1.52 crore).  
Subsequently, the Income Tax Department froze the C ompany’s bank account and collected 
(January 2019) a sum of `55.38 crore towards income tax. Later, the Income Tax Department 
served (February 2019) a notice for balance outstanding amount of `41.18 crore (Outstanding 
balance: `38 crore and interest under section 220(2) of the IT Act, 1961: `3.18 crore).  
In this regard, Audit observed that: 
• The GoK had notified the transfer of land to KHB on  19 September 2018 and the 
Company completed the sale formalities and received  cash on account of sale of land 
on 5 January 2019.  Therefore, the Company should h ave recognised the same as 
Capital Gain in the Financial Year 2018-19, for whi ch the Company would be 
required to pay Capital Gain Tax of `11.04 crore at the rate of 20 per cent  of Capital 
Gain on sale consideration of `55.23 crore 8 together with penalties/ interest, if any.  
The capital gains tax of `11.04 crore would also have further reduced to `7.60 crore 9 
after taking into account the net loss of `17.21 crore declared by the Company during 
the year 2018-19.  However, the Company wrongly rec ognised capital gains of 
`471.35 crore during the FY 2016-17 itself without c ompletion of the sale transaction 
of land.  As a result, in view of the irregular adj ustments in the books for FY 2016-17 
itself, the Company was forced to pay income tax am ounting to `55.38 crore and to 
incur an additional liability of tax amounting to `41.18 crore (as per Assessment 
Order).  
• Had the Company not recognised the capital gains of  `471.35 crore during the  
FY 2016-17, it was supposed to pay a corporate tax of `2.13 crore only on the net 
profit of `7.13 crore (subject to the deductions, if any, allo wable under Income Tax 
Act) against the total tax liability of `96.56 crore assessed by the Income Tax 
authorities.  
• Incorrect accounting by the Company in the FY 2016- 17 was pointed out by Audit in 
June 2018.  However, the Company did not rectify its accounts. 
Management replied (January 2020) that the allowed time to revise the Income Tax Return 
had already expired and whatever rectification poss ible, had been attempted including an 
appeal with the Principal Commissioner. 
                                                           
8  Sale of 82 acres 37 cents as disclosed to CCEA pl us 1 acre 31 cents at Survey No. 427 inadvertently 
missed. Thus, total land sold to KHB is 83 acres 68  cents and amount realised is `` ``    55.23 crore. After 
deduction of TDS of 1 per cent on `` ``    55.23 crore, net amount credited to the Company on 5 January 2019 
was `` ``    54.68 crore 
9  Total capital gain of `` ``    55.23 crore – net loss of `` ``    17.21 crore = `` ``    38.02 crore, on which net capital gain 
payable works out to `` ``    7.60 crore being 20 per cent of `` ``    38.02 crore 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
145  
Audit, however, observed that the Company had lost the opportunity to file appeal before the 
Commissioner (Appeals) of IT Department as the stip ulated time of 30 days under Section 
249(2) of the Income Tax, 1961 had already lapsed b y 24 October 2018.  Further, even 
though the Company was already referred to BIFR, it  had not filed any application with the 
BIFR/ NCLT or CBDT for grant of reliefs and concess ions available under Insolvency and 
Bankruptcy Code, 2016.  Hence, the chances of recov ery of tax amount of `55.38 crore 
already paid are extremely remote.  
Thus, due to incorrect treatment of GoI loan and in terest thereon in the books as Capital Gain 
without transfer of immovable property, the Company  had to pay avoidable Income Tax of 
`55.38 crore besides incurring further tax liability of `41.18 crore. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
146  
CHAPTER VII: MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS  
 
NBCC (India) Limited 
7.1 Unauthorised payment to employees  
Additional financial benefits given to employees of  NBCC (India) Limited on 
achievement of “Navratna” status without there bein g any supporting statutory 
provisions, Presidential Directives or approval of Administrative Ministry/ DPE for 
the same resulted in unauthorised payment of `` ``7.69 crore in the form of additional 
increment alone. 
NBCC (India) Limited (Company/ Management) was inco rporated as a public limited 
company in November 1960 under the aegis of Ministr y of Housing & Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA).  It was conferred with the “Navratna” stat us by Government of India on 
23 June 2014. 
The Board of Directors (BoD) of the Company in its 437 
th  meeting (31 July 2015) on 
achievement of “Navratna” status approved awarding of one additional increment w.e.f.  
01 August 2015 to the regular employees on roll of the Company as on 23 June 2014 as a 
token of recognition on account of elevation of the  company to the status of “Navratna”.  
Employees who joined/ separated after 23 June 2014 were not eligible for additional 
increment. 
In this regard, Audit observed that the decision to  grant additional increment to regular 
employees on the roll of the Company was without an y supporting statutory provisions, 
Presidential Directives or approval of Administrati ve Ministry/ DPE for the same.  This has 
resulted in unauthorised payment amounting to 
`7.69 crore (for Group A and B employees 
computed upto December 2017 and for Group C and D e mployees computed upto 
March 2018) 1 to the employees of the Company in form of additional increment alone.  
Unauthorised payment to the employees in respect of  enhanced perquisites and allowances, 
due to grant of additional increment, payable to Ex ecutives and Non-Executive employees 
was not furnished to Audit despite repeated requests. 
Management  in its reply (December 2018/ December 2 019) stated that in order to keep 
morale of the employees high, to acknowledge the co ntribution of the employees so as to 
motivate them for further elevation of the Company and to prevent unrest among the 
employees due to huge gap between pay scales of NBC C and other PSUs,  the additional 
financial benefits given to them on achievement of “Navratna” status were justified and such 
payment did not violate any DPE guidelines/ rules or any other rules in force.  
Reply of Management is not acceptable as payment of  additional financial benefits to 
employees, not warranted by any law/ rule/ guidelin es for the time being in force, on 
achievement of “Navratna” status rendered such paym ent unauthorised.  On this issue, 
MoHUA also sought clarification from DPE and DPE vi de letter dated 13 December 2018 
                                                           
1  Upto the date of implementation of pay revision i n NBCC (India) Limited 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
147  
clarified that providing additional increment by NB CC to its employees on achieving 
Navratna status is not in line with DPE guidelines.  
The arbitrary action of Management, in granting thi s additional increment is also seen in the 
fact that just prior to this event, the Board of Di rectors of the Company in its 435 th  meeting 
(13 February 2015) approved, on achievement of “Nav ratna” status, enhancement of 3-5 
percentage of perquisites and allowances payable to  Executives and Non-Executives 
employees, retrospectively, with effect from 23 Jun e 2014.  As per DPE OM dated 
26 November 2008, the BoD of each CPSE would be required to consider the proposal of pay 
revision based on their affordability to pay and su bmit the same to Administrative Ministry 
for approval.  However, Audit did not find any evid ence of the Company conducting any 
such exercise prior to granting these additional pe rks and allowances and without there being 
any supporting statutory provisions, Presidential d irectives or approval of Administrative 
Ministry/ DPE for the same.  
Management justified these additional perks and all owances stating that there was disparity 
with the other Navratna PSUs.  While the percentage  of enhancement was subject to the 
ceiling of 50 per cent  of Basic Pay, nonetheless, Management did not prov ide Audit with the 
details of the financial implications of the decision despite repeated requests. 
Thus, additional financial benefits given to employ ees of NBCC (India) Limited on 
achievement of “Navratna” status without there bein g any supporting statutory provisions, 
Presidential Directives or approval of Administrati ve Ministry/ DPE for the same resulted in 
unauthorised payment of 
`7.69 crore in the form of additional increment alone.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
148  
CHAPTER VIII: MINISTRY OF MINES  
 
Hindustan Copper Limited  
8.1 Unfruitful investment in acquisition and loss f rom operation of  Gujarat Copper 
Project  
Hindustan Copper Limited (Company) acquired Gujarat  Copper Project (GCP) 
(erstwhile Jhagadia Copper Limited, Gujarat) without ensuring the availability of raw 
materials and the plant remained almost wholly unut ilised since commissioning which 
led to unfruitful investment of `` ``303.18 crore and loss from operating GCP amounting 
to `` ``102.49 crore. 
Hindustan Copper Limited (Company) was engaged in m ining of copper ore and processing 
of the same for production of final product i.e. Co pper Cathode.  The copper ore is primarily 
processed in Concentrator Plant for production of M etal in Concentrate (MIC) which is 
further processed in Smelter for producing Copper A node and the same is finally refined in 
the Refinery Plant for production of Copper Cathode .  The Company was approached 
(August 2014) by the Asset Reconstruction Company ( India) Limited, Mumbai (ARCIL) 
seeking the interest of the Company in the acquisit ion of the plant of Jhagadia Copper 
Limited, Gujarat (JCL).  JCL had the facilities of a Secondary Copper Smelter and Refinery 
(Secondary denotes processing of scrap copper) for an annual production capacity of 50,000 
Metric Tonne Per Annum (MTPA) of Copper Cathodes an d had commenced commercial 
production from May 2006.  However, the operation o f JCL was suspended from 
September 2009 for want of working capital.  
The Consultant, appointed (October 2014) by the Com pany to prepare the detailed feasibility 
report for the investment in the proposed acquisiti on, indicated that the Secondary Smelter 
Plant of JCL had the facility to process copper scr ap only and as such there was no scope for 
processing of MIC therein.  It was also indicated t hat the Refinery Plant could be operated by 
sourcing the Copper Anode from elsewhere.  The Cons ultant, however, also stressed that the 
availability and sourcing of the raw materials was to be ensured for optimum utilisation of 
JCL, as it was a major risk for success of such acq uisition.  The Company finally decided 
(November 2014) for acquisition of JCL.  The Compan y proposed to source copper scrap by 
procuring it from the open market (19,200 MTPA) and  from that generated in its other units 
(800 MTPA).  The Company also projected to source C opper Anode by tolling 
1 of imported 
MIC through Hindalco 2 (from 20,000 to 30,000 MTPA) as well as tolling of  its own MIC 
through other Copper producers (7,000 MTPA).  The C ompany further assessed that it could 
utilise 22,000 MT of copper scrap laying in the Sta te Trading Corporation (STC) godown 
located in the JCL plant. 
The Company acquired (February 2015) JCL plant at a  price of 
`210 crore (Plant & 
Machinery including leasehold land) from ARCIL as a  single bidder by taking a term loan of 
                                                           
1  A transaction by which MIC will be converted into  Copper Anode by a Copper producer 
2  A private sector copper producing company 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
149  
`200 crore.  JCL was renamed as Gujarat Copper Proje ct (GCP) and its commercial 
production was commenced from October 2016.  It was , however, seen that the capacity 
utilisation of GCP was very low since its acquisiti on and it could produce only 24,007 MT of 
copper cathodes during the period from November 201 6 to March 2019 which was only 
20 per cent  of the total capacity of the plant.  Such low capa city utilisation of GCP was 
primarily due to non-availability of raw materials i.e. copper scrap as well as Anode.  In the 
meantime, the Company made a total investment of `303.18 crore in GCP (including 
acquisition cost) till March 2019. 
In this connection Audit noticed as follows: - 
• The projection of the Company regarding availability of copper scrap from the market 
to the extent of 19,200 MTPA was not at all realistic, since the Company was not able 
to source any copper scrap from the market during the period from November 2016 to 
March 2019.  Management also realised that sourcing  of copper scrap indigenously 
was difficult due to unorganised market and there w ere quality issues also.  Further, 
Management did not properly assess the status of the of copper scrap lying in the STC 
godown as the same was sub-judice and not readily available for processing.   
• The Company proposed to source Anodes (20,000 MTPA to 30,000 MTPA) by 
tolling imported MIC through Hindalco.  However, th e Company did not enter into 
any agreement with Hindalco for such tolling to ens ure sustainable availability of 
Anodes.  Further, the Company did not have any prio r experience for import of MIC 
and tolling of the same through another copper prod ucer.  In this connection it is also 
worth mentioning that Hindalco did not have any spa re smelting capacity for such 
tolling as the capacities of its smelter and refine ry were same. This is also 
corroborated with the fact that the Company was not  able to source any Anode 
through Hindalco by such tolling.  
Audit, therefore, observed that the projections mad e by the Company towards availability of 
raw materials for sustainable operation of both Sme lter and Refinery plant of GCP were not 
at all realistic and supported by proper due dilige nce.  As a result, the GCP was utilised with 
a very low capacity and did not yield any benefit.  On the other hand, the Company has been 
suffering recurring loss from operation of GCP. Thu s, the decision of the Company for 
acquisition of GCP without obtaining firm commitmen t from the sources projected for 
availability of raw materials was not prudent which  led to unfruitful investment of 
`303.18 crore.  Further, the Company suffered a loss  of `102.49 crore during the period from 
November 2016 to March 2019 by operating GCP. 
Management while accepting the Audit observations r eplied (October 2019) that projections 
made at the time of acquisition on availability of raw material for sustainable operation of 
GCP was miscalculated.  It was also stated that the  Company never imported MIC for tolling 
it to anode and GCP was acquired without any firm c ommitments regarding availability of 
raw materials and finally, the Company was unable t o ensure continuous operation of the 
plant due to difficulty in sourcing raw material. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
150  
Hence, acquisition of GCP without ensuring the avai lability of raw materials led to unfruitful 
investment of `303.18 crore and loss of `102.49 crore from operations of GCP.  Further, the 
company will continue to incur such a loss till it develops a viable future plan for GCP 
utilisation. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in October 2019; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
151  
 
 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited 
9.1 Irregular payment of Performance Related Pay 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited paid `` ``15.54 crore as PRP to the 
executives of GAIL in violation of the DPE guidelin es which also led to additional 
outgo of `` ``4.62 crore from GoI towards capital subsidy. 
The Government of India (GoI) approved (April 2006)  the Assam Gas Cracker Project.  
Accordingly, a joint venture agreement was entered into (October 2006) between GAIL India 
Limited (GAIL), Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL), Oil India Limited (OIL) and 
Government of Assam (GoA) for implementation of the  above project.  GAIL would be the 
main promoter with 70 per cent  equity contribution.  The remaining promoters woul d 
contribute 10 per cent  each.  Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (th e Company) was, 
therefore, formed in January 2007 for the above pur pose.  The cost of the project was 
estimated at `5,461 crore (May 2006) with capital subsidy of `2,138 crore by GoI.  The 
project cost was subsequently revised (July 2016) t o `9,965 crore with capital subsidy of 
`5,239.45 crore.  As per the joint venture agreement , the promoters would provide 
management and technical support for implementation  of the project by way of deputation of 
their qualified personnel in the Company.  Accordin gly, GAIL being the major promoter has 
been deputing its own executives to the Company sin ce 2007-08 as per the requirement of 
implementation of the project.  
The Company reimbursed the salary and allowances et c. of such deputed executives to GAIL 
which also included Performance Related Pay (PRP) o f such executives applicable for GAIL.  
The project was commissioned in January 2016.  The Company received capital subsidy of 
`5,088.80 crore (upto May 2019) from GoI (including net interest of `56.15 crore earned on 
such capital subsidy) which was 51 per cent  of the approved project cost. After 
commissioning of the project, the Company did not e arn any profit till 2017-18 and its 
accumulated loss was `919.70 crore upto 31 March 2018.  It, however, earn ed a net profit of 
`68.97 crore during 2018-19. 
DPE, GoI while revising the pay scale of below Boar d level and Board level executives as 
well as non-unionised supervisors in CPSEs w.e.f. 0 1 January 2007 issued directives 1 
indicating that PRP to the executives of CPSEs shou ld be directly linked to the profit of 
CPSEs and performance of the executives with refere nce to Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) rating of CPSE.  It was also clarified  that the executives, who were on deputation to 
other CPSEs, were entitled to draw the PRP applicable to the borrowing CPSEs. 
In view of the above, PRP was not applicable to the  executives of the Company during the 
period from 2007-08 to 2017-18 as the project was under implementation stage (upto 2015-16) 
and there was no generation of profit for the two-y ear period of 2016-17 and 2017-18.  
                                                           
1   Vide O.M. No. 2 (70)/08-DPE (WC)-GL-XVI/08 dated  26 November 2008 
CHAPTER IX: MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
152  
Further, the Company did not frame any PRP policy f or 2018-19 and no PRP was, therefore, 
paid to its executives. 
Audit, however, observed that the Company reimburse d a total amount of 
`15.54 crore to 
GAIL during the period from 2007-08 to 2018-19 towa rds PRP of the executives of GAIL 
worked on deputation of which `9.06 crore (upto January 2016) was capitalised as p art of the 
project cost.  The above PRP of the deputed executi ves attributed on the basis of the profits/ 
performances of their respective positions in GAIL. 
The executives of GAIL who worked in the Company on  deputation were entitled to PRP, if 
any, applicable to the executives of the borrowing Company as per the directives of DPE vide 
O.M. dated 26 November 2008.  Since the Company’s o wn executives were not entitled to 
any PRP during the period from 2007-08 to 2018-19, the reimbursement of `15.54 crore by 
the Company to GAIL as PRP in respect of the execut ives worked on deputation during the 
above period was, therefore, not in line with the a bove directives of DPE.  In this connection 
it is worth mentioning that had the above PRP not b een paid by the Company to GAIL the 
project cost would have been lower by `9.06 crore and thereby the capital subsidy by GoI 
would also have been lower by `4.62 crore (51 per cent  of `9.06 crore). 
Thus, the payment of `15.54 crore by the Company to GAIL as PRP to the ex ecutives of 
GAIL who worked on deputation, was in violation of DPE guidelines and, therefore, 
irregular.  Further, this has also resulted in addi tional outgo of `4.62 crore from GoI towards 
capital subsidy.  
Management replied (August 2019) that the executive s of GAIL were deputed at the 
Company for successful commissioning of the project  and the PRP was paid as per the 
prevalent circular of GAIL.  
The contention of Management is not acceptable sinc e the executives of GAIL deputed in the 
Company were not entitled to PRP as per the directi ves of DPE.  Further, payment of PRP by 
the Company on the basis of GAIL’s circular was not acceptable as a circular cannot overrule 
the directives of DPE.  
In this regard, DPE clarified (March 2020) that the  executives on deputation from a holding 
company to a subsidiary company or vice versa  would be entitled to draw allowances and 
variable pay/ PRP as applicable to borrowing CPSE a nd the Administrative Ministry/ 
Department of CPSEs should take necessary action to  implement the guidelines issued vide 
OM dated 26 November 2008.  
Hence, the payment of PRP amounting to 
`15.54 crore to the executives of GAIL was in 
contravention to the DPE guideline. It is recommend ed that irregular payment made to 
ineligible employees may be recovered. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in October 2019; their response was awaited (June 2020). 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
153  
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited 
 
9.2 Follow up IT Audit of the Financial and Control ling (FICO) modules 
9.2.1  Introduction 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), a p ublic sector undertaking in the field of 
exploration and production of oil and gas, initiated a project  called Information Consolidation 
for Efficiency (ICE) in October 2003 to realign its  business processes under a common 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system.  Project  ICE envisaged utilisation of all 10 
modules 2 of SAP and the system was implemented across the C ompany between October 
2003 and January 2005.  The main objective of ICE p roject was to optimise and standardise 
business processes for integrated information avail ability on real time basis and to eliminate 
duplication of activities to increase efficiency an d transparency by capturing data at source 
point.  The current version used by the Company is SAP ECC 6.0 EHP 7 3.  
Audit reviewed Accounts Payable, Asset Accounting a nd Cost Centre Accounting sub-
modules of the Financial and Controlling (FICO) mod ules in Eastern and Northern regions of 
the Company in 2007.  The findings of audit were included in the CAG’s Audit Report No.10 
of 2008 (Chapter VII).  The assurances provided dur ing the previous audit were not acted 
upon.  The current IT audit is a follow up audit on  the recommendations of the previous 
report.  
9.2.2  Past Audit Coverage 
Audit Report No.10 of 2008 (Chapter VII) pointed ou t deficiencies in customisation, input 
controls and migration of data from legacy system. It was recommended in the Report that 
the Company should review and rectify the deficiencies by: 
• strengthening input controls, validation controls a nd internal control procedures to 
ensure accurate, pertinent and complete capture of the data. 
• mapping business rule relating to allocation of costs to respective cost centre. 
• cleaning of migrated master data to rectify the err ors that have crept into the ERP 
system and establishing comprehensive procedures fo r periodical review of master 
data. 
• organising regular training programme to raise the level of user awareness and 
minimize errors of data input. 
9.2.3  Audit objectives  
Audit reviewed implementation of the recommendation  of previous Report as instances of 
incorrect and incomplete data in the system were no ticed in Audit.  The current follow up 
audit of FICO module of SAP was conducted to ascertain whether: 
                                                           
2  Financial (FI), Controlling (CO), Material Manage ment (MM), Plant Maintenance (PM), Project 
Systems (PS), Investment Management (IM), Asset Man agement (AM), Treasury (FM), Sales & 
Distribution (SD), Business Information Warehouse (BW) 
3  ERP Central Component 6.0 Enhancement Package 7 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
154  
• input controls, validation controls and internal co ntrol procedures were strengthened 
by the Company to ensure accurate, pertinent and complete capture of data; 
• business rules relating to allocation of costs to r espective cost centre were adequately 
mapped into the system; 
• master data migrated was cleaned to rectify the err ors that had crept into the ERP 
system and whether comprehensive procedures for per iodical review of data had been 
established; 
• regular training programmes were organised to raise  the level of user awareness and 
minimise errors of data input; and 
• recommendations of the independent audit and CAG wi th respect to FICO Module 
have been complied with. 
9.2.4  Scope of Audit  
The current audit covered three sub-modules viz., A ccounts Payable, Asset Accounting and 
Cost Centre Accounting  out of six  sub-modules of Financial and Controlling modules (t wo 
modules out of ten) for the period 2014-15 to 2017-18 for all Company Codes 4 of ONGC.  
ONGC had appointed (August 2017) M/s KPMG to conduc t functional audit on user 
authorisation management process and automated cont rols (inherent and configurable) for 
FICO modules.  Audit obtained the Company’s assuran ce and corrective action taken on the 
recommendations of M/s KPMG and thus, the issues br ought out by the functional auditor 
have not been covered in the present audit.  
9.2.5  Audit methodology 
IT audit was conducted by adopting the following methodology: 
• Entry conference was held with Management in August 2018. 
• The table data of FICO and other related modules pe rtaining to the audit period, as 
furnished by the Company, was analysed using CAATs 5. Data analysis included 
merging of certain data tables on common keys to id entify issues. Data was also 
extracted using standard SAP reports and customised  reports to corroborate the 
analysis of table data.  The output files were shar ed with Management along with 
screen shots of Audit analysis while seeking response to Audit observations.  
• Discussions, correspondence and questionnaire issue d to Management and the 
feedback received. 
Audit acknowledges Management’s efforts in extracti ng/ sharing the table data.  Exit 
Conference was held with Management on 01 May 2019.   Report was issued to the Ministry 
on 06 May 2019 and the response obtained on 29 Augu st 2019, which has been considered 
while preparing this report.  Audit appreciates the positive response of Management/ Ministry 
                                                           
4   Company code refers to smallest organizational u nit of external accounting for which a complete, se lf-
contained set of accounts can be created such as th e balance sheet and the profit and loss statement. It 
could also be a separate, but not independent, comm ercial place of work. ONGC has multiple company 
codes based on the organizational structure (Asset/ Basin/ Geographical location).  
5  Computer Assisted Audit Techniques 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
155  
in viewing the Audit observations from systemic poi nt and for conducting detailed review 
based on indications emanating from the audit exercise.   
9.2.6  Audit criteria 
• Manuals/ Guidelines/ Circulars of the Company  
• Accounting policy, Statutory requirements  
• Business rules as per business blueprint and ICE reference manual for FICO modules   
• IT Industry standards and best practices 
9.2.7  Limitations of Audit 
The data used for analysis is not from live environ ment, but from the table data provided by 
the Company.  Audit, therefore, could not test dumm y data to evaluate input controls/ 
validation controls comprehensively.  Audit could n ot analyse the data vis-à-vis  the 
Company’s business processes and system requirement s as envisaged in the Business 
Blueprint 6 as it was not made available to Audit.  Management  during Entry Conference 
stated that the Business Blueprint was an implement ation stage document.  The process 
documents provided later by Management was a user r eference manual which was not as 
comprehensive, as the updated Business blueprint wo uld have been to understand the 
business rules, requirements and the mapping in the ERP system.  
9.2.8  Audit findings 
The Company is mainly using three sub-modules of FI CO module i.e. Asset Accounting, 
Accounts Payable and Cost Centre Accounting.  The A sset Accounting sub-module is used 
for managing and supervising fixed assets with the SAP System.  In Financial Accounting, it 
serves as a subsidiary ledger to General Ledger pro viding detailed information on 
transactions involving fixed assets.  Accounts Paya ble sub-module manages and records 
accounting data for all the vendors.  Payables are managed as per the payment program and 
the payments can be made using cheques, electronic transfers, etc.  All the postings made in 
the Accounts Payable are updated in General Ledger simultaneously and the system 
maintains/ forecasts and generates standard reports  that can be used to keep track of all the 
open items.  Cost accounting in the company is faci litated by Controlling (CO) module in 
SAP which determines allocation of costs pertaining  to acquisition, exploration, 
development, production, support activities etc.  C ost center is the lowest unit for collecting 
costs.  
The analysis of the table data pertaining to the ab ove three sub-modules and audit findings 
emerging from such analysis are discussed in the following paragraphs.  
 
 
                                                           
6  Business Blueprint is a detailed description of t he Company’s business processes and system 
requirements. It documents the business processes a t the time of implementation of the ERP, containing  
the relevant business scenarios, business processes  and process steps organized in a hierarchical 
structure 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
156  
9.2.8.1    Master data deficiencies 
i)   Non-capturing of asset location in Asset Master ta ble  
The Asset Master table in SAP-ERP contains time-dependent asset allocation information  and 
the asset location field in the table contains the details of the location where the asset is held. 
Location details of fixed asset are required to be maintained in the system to track fixed 
assets for the purposes of financial accounting, pr eventive maintenance and theft deterrence.  
Review of data in the table revealed that out of to tal 11,23,188 records, location field was 
blank in 7,48,521 records (66 per cent ) and the Plant ID and location field was not avail able 
in 3,31,493 records (29  per cent ).  In the absence of this information, location-wi se tracking 
of fixed assets and proper compliance of handing ov er/ taking over of assets in cases of 
custody transfers could not be ensured in the system. 
Ministry replied (August 2019) that out of 7,48,521  records in which the location field was 
blank, 3,81,393 records have been corrected, Plant ID and location fields have been filled in 
3,27,947 records as on 06 August 2019; continuous e fforts are being made to update 
remaining records.  
The assurance of updating provided during the previ ous audit was not acted upon.  Audit 
noted the corrective action taken at the instance of Audit and assurance of the Ministry.  
ii)   Non capture of Asset in-charge  
Asset in-charge field 
 in ANLA 7 table denotes the custodian of the asset under who se charge 
the asset lies.  It was observed that in 3,651 reco rds out of 5,49,298 records, the field was 
either blank or the employee ID number was zero.  A bsence of this information in the system 
could lead to control gaps in monitoring the assets .  The assurance provided for updating the 
data during the previous audit was thus not carried out.  
Management replied (April 2019) that a report has b een developed in the system to identify 
assets with invalid indenter/ custodian.  Ministry replied (August 2019) that out of 3,651 
records, corrective action has been taken for 2,150  records as on 6 August 2019 and 
continuous efforts are being made to update the res t.  For future cases, the Ministry replied 
that a system control has been put in place to ensu re that the custodian field in the asset 
master will not be blank.  
Management may ensure completeness of asset locatio n and asset custodian information in 
master data to utilise system functionalities for tracking and monitoring of assets. 
iii)   Incorrect classification of Assets  
Audit noticed the Asset Master table upon joining w ith Asset Description table (ANKT 
8), 
using asset class field that the same assets were a ppearing under multiple classes.  Test-check 
of few assets revealed the following:  
                                                           
7  ANLA is a standard SAP table which is used to sto re Asset Master Record  Segment information 
8  ANKT is a standard SAP table which is used to sto re Asset classes: Description information 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
157  
• ‘Mobile’, ‘Solar Assets’, ‘DG Sets’ etc. were appea ring in multiple asset classes 
varying from production, furniture, office equipmen t, oil & gas production equipment 
etc.  
• In one case, Solar Power CP station at KV School wa s found appearing under Asset 
Class 10414 – Engine & Compressor, which would norm ally govern Production 
Equipments.  
Management replied  (October 2018/ April 2019) that  classification of asset is dependent 
upon its area of usage; the asset, ‘Solar CP statio n’ was inadvertently capitalised under 
Production Equipment (asset class 10414), which has  since been corrected and reclassified 
under ‘Renewal energy device’.  Incorrect classific ation of Assets was pointed out in the 
earlier report.  The assurance provided in the previous Audit has not been acted upon.  
Audit recommended that considering the impact on th e accounts, Management may 
conduct a detailed location-wise review of assets t o ensure uniformity in asset 
classification.  
Ministry accepted the recommendation and replied (A ugust 2019) that a thorough review of 
the classification of assets is being undertaken across all units/ locations. 
iv)   Non-capture of Responsible cost centre/ Cost centr e  
The SAP system uses the cost centre assignment in t he asset master record to determine the 
cost centre affected when the asset postings like f ixed asset, depreciation, gain/ loss from 
asset sales are done.  The responsible cost centre is responsible for the physical asset but 
would not carry the depreciation cost.  Review of a sset master table data revealed that out of 
11,23,188 records, in 39,582 records the cost centr e as well as responsible cost centre were 
blank. 
Management replied (November 2018) that all the uni ts have been advised to ensure that 
responsible cost centres are updated wherever internal order has been used in the asset master 
as cost object and cost centre is not blank.  It fu rther replied that (May 2019) the responsible 
cost centre field has been made mandatory for old a nd new assets. Ministry replied 
(August 2019) that out of 39,582 records, correctiv e action has been taken for 33,031 records 
and continuous efforts are being made to update remaining records.  
The corrective action initiated at the instance of Audit is noted. 
9.2.8.2    Control gaps 
i)   Ex-employees continue as custodian of asset  
Asset custodian is the field in Asset Master which denotes the custodian of capital assets who 
is responsible for safe custody, physical verificat ion and movement etc. of the assets.  Audit 
analysed the data where the custodian name is menti oned in the Asset master table to see if 
any of the retired employees still continue to appe ar as custodian.  To this end, the database 
of Asset master containing the assets custodian det ails was joined with that of SAP report on 
ex-employees based on the field Custodian/ ex-emplo yee name.  It was observed that 571 ex-

Report No. 18 of 2020  
158  
employees (retired before 01 April 2014) continued as custodians in case of 11,369 assets 
valuing `87.43 crore.  
Audit recommended that management may ensure approp riate controls in place to check 
the continuance of retired employees as custodians of assets.  
Management/ Ministry replied (April 2019/ August 2019) that 441 out of 571 records pointed 
out by Audit have been removed as custodian of asse ts and a system based control for 
automatic transfer of assets lying in the employee’ s account and issuance of no objection 
certificate/ relieving order through system has bee n advised.  Ministry further added that 
adequate controls are in place to check the continu ance of retired employees as custodians 
and report has been provided to the locations for c orrective actions for discrepant custodians 
in the asset masters.  
The corrective action initiated at the instance of Audit is noted. 
ii)   Non/ Incorrect capturing of Bank Details of Vendor  Master 
The vendor master database contains information about the vendors that supply an enterprise.  
This information includes vendor name, vendor accou nt number (vendor ID), 
 bank account 
number etc.  A review of the data of bank details o f vendor master revealed that out of 
1,57,804 records, the account holder’s name was not  captured in 2,206 records and the bank 
account number was not captured in 1,176 records.  In two cases, it was noticed that the 
unique vendor ID was linked to more than one person  and with different bank account 
numbers.  
For enabling digital payment, bank key is used for identifying the individual branches for 
electronic banking in India, which is either MICR c ode (9 digits) or IFSC code (11 digits).  
Audit observed that in seven records under country code IN, the bank keys are neither in 
MICR code format nor in IFSC code format. 
In 457 records, the vendor name and address were sa me though the vendors’ IDs were 
different, indicating presence of duplicate vendors .  The risk of fraud/ incorrect payments is 
accentuated by the presence of duplicate vendors/ f ictitious records in the vendor master.  
Thus, the assurance provided during the previous au dit on cleaning of duplicate vendors has 
not been acted upon.  
Management replied (April 2019) that the bank detai ls of the vendors having invalid bank 
key (IFSC) or blank bank account number have been r eviewed and removed from vendor 
masters and vendors having blank account holder nam e have been blocked.  Bank Account 
numbers of two vendors were rectified on the basis of HR master, being employee vendors.  
Further, a proper centralised process for creation of vendors has been put in place.  It has the 
required validations for preventing duplicate vendo rs, different vendors with same address, 
same bank detail with valid IFSC etc.  
Audit recommended Management to take a comprehensiv e review and address incorrect/ 
incomplete entries in master records by placing appropriate controls.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
159  
Ministry accepted (August 2019) that in 457 records , vendor name and address were same 
though vendor IDs were different indicating presenc e of duplicate vendors.  Work centres 
were advised to review the records and block the ve ndor codes which are duplicate.  Ministry 
further stated that corrective action has been take n after a comprehensive review of the 
vendor masters and appropriate and adequate control s for vendor masters have been ensured 
through Vendor Management System.  
The corrective action taken at the instance of current Audit is noted. 
iii)   Overdue payments without block or justification  
Payment block keys 
9 denote the reasons for which the payment is kept p ending/ being an 
open item.  Similarly, blank entry in the payment b lock key means those items which are free 
for payment.  During the scrutiny of open items per taining to vendors in BSIK table for the 
year 2014-16 10 , it was observed that 1,850 records (out of 40,91,895 records) had no payment 
block keys but were still pending for payment of `165.17 crore.  The ageing of the payment 
dues from the posting date to a threshold date (31 March 2017) ranged from 90 to 1,096 days.  
Amounts lying as open items without payment block f or such long periods is an indicator of 
ineffective controls on account payables. 
Management replied (April 2019) that all the work c entres have been advised to review open 
overdue payments list, to reverse the liability if the payments are not required to be made and 
to insert appropriate payment block if the payments  are still to be made with the reason for 
holding such overdue payments. 
Audit recommended that Management may consider impl ementing necessary checks to 
auto-review the open items at appropriate level through the system. 
Ministry accepted the audit recommendation and repl ied (August 2019) that a serious view 
has been taken by ONGC and all work centres have be en suitably advised.  Ministry stated 
that only 60 items amounting to 
`15.54 lakh are pending as on 19 June 2019 for which  
necessary action is being taken.  Besides, a mechan ism has been developed wherein mail/ 
SMS alert with list of overdue payment on open item s is provided to respective heads of 
finance on monthly basis to review such cases. 
The corrective action taken at the instance of Audit is noted. 
iv)   Delay in posting data  
As per the Finance Manual of the Company, maximum time allowed to post the documents is 
within 7 
th  day of the succeeding month.  During closure of ac counts at the financial year end, 
accounts are kept open for posting adjustment and c losing entries normally for two more 
accounting periods (till 31 May).  Audit noticed th at out of 19,703 records for which 
difference between the posting date and entry date was more than 30 days, 3,134 records 
amounting to `750.38 crore related to the document types pertaini ng to Bank Payment/ 
                                                           
9  e.g. A- blocked for payment, D- block for old cas es, R – CVP rejection block, Stale cheque block and   
X – APP payment block 
10   as data pertaining to 2017 FY could not be combin ed due to the data type discrepancies 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
160  
Receipt, Vendor Invoice, G/L Account, and CV Paymen t Posting.  The delay in posting 
transactions showed that the control system on ensu ring timely posting of financial payment 
document is not sufficient. 
Ministry replied (August 2019) that corrective acti on has been initiated by the company for 
monthly closing of accounts to ensure that there is  no undue time lag in the posting and entry 
date of documents as pointed by Audit.  Corrective action initiated is noted.  
v)   Multiple usage of one time vendors   
One time vendors supply the Company only once or ve ry rarely.  Master records are not 
created each time for such vendors and collective a ccounts are set up for them.  These 
accounts are also referred to as one time accounts which do not contain any vendor-specific 
data.  Therefore, data such as address, salesperson , bank details etc. must be entered at the 
time of purchase or invoice verification.   
Audit analysed the data related to one time vendors  in BSEC table (2,88,909 records).  The 
records containing the one time vendors were joined  with vendor master table and matched 
for the name and city.  It was observed that some o ne time vendors had multiple matching 
records ranging from two to 86 and in same company code.  This indicated that the one time 
vendor method is being used rather than creating ve ndor master data for regular vendors, 
which is not advisable.  Repetitive payments to one -time vendors indicated presence of fraud 
risks.  Management may like to focus on the company  codes – MHN (Mehsana), SBS 
(Shibsagar), AMD (Ahmedabad) with more than 350 rec ords of one time vendors and KKL 
(Karaikal), RJY(Rajamundhry) and DLI (Delhi) having more than 150 records each.  
Management replied  (April 2019) that necessary instructions have been issued to all the units 
for not using one-time vendor code for regular type of payments. 
Audit recommended that Management may customise the  controls to ensure one time 
vendor payment facility is not utilised for regular  payments and put a limit on number of 
payments 
 to one time vendor in a system.   
Management accepted the recommendation in Exit Conf erence. Ministry stated 
(August 2019) that a system control has been put in  place whereby a warning message is 
given, whenever a one time vendor is used and payme nt to one-time vendor is allowed only 
once based on unique identity like PAN/ Aadhar number.  
vi)   Continuing Non-Digital payments 
ONGC is using Bank Communication Management (BCM) t ool for making electronic 
payments with house bank SBI which are digitally si gned.  Internal guidelines of ONGC 
stipulated to make all payments through digital mod e.  Cheque payments, if necessary, were 
to be made with approval of Head of Finance.  Analy sis of data related to cheque payment 
during the period 1 April 2014 to 31 March 2018 revealed the following: 
• Total 1,88,971 records (other than void cheques) va luing more than `2.50 lakh crore 
indicated that cheque payments still continue.  Max imum cheques were issued at 
Company codes - Mehsana, Ahmedabad and Rajahmundry.   In 7,399 records, the 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
161  
payment was made on weekends (Saturday and Sunday),  of which more than 1,000 
cheques were paid by four users valuing `9,069 crore.  In 6,327 records, the vendor 
number is blank which included payments to private parties (other than statutory 
authorities/ banks).  
• With regard to void cheques, it was found that in 2 34 records of total 14,363 void 
cheques, there was no reason recorded in the respec tive field.  A standardised narration 
strengthens internal control.  
Management replied (December 2018) that:  
• Out of total 1,88,971 items, 1,153 items comprising  of 
`2.025 lakh crore (approx.) are 
from Delhi and Dehradun units which belong to categ ories other than vendor payments.  
These payments related to investments and dividends , remittance to statutory bodies/ 
trusts, internal fund transfer, JV payments etc.  F urther, as per guidelines, cheque is also 
issued in favour of bank for payments to LCs, remit tances, other forex payments etc. 
which are made through RTGS mode.  
• Void reason no. 11 in system is without TEXT.  Syst em mapping has been initiated to 
make it specific as ‘Others’. 
Audit recommended that considering the repeated nat ure of transactions involved with the 
House bank and the feasibility, Management needs to digitise foreign exchange payments. 
Management accepted the Audit recommendation and st ated (April/ May 2019) that the 
possibilities of digitising the forex payments and investments are being looked into.  Ministry 
stated (August 2019) that forex payments across all  units and investments, repayments of 
loans/ interest are made through either digital mode or authority letters.  
vii)   Non-capturing of Item Text  
Narration (item text) helps in bringing more object ivity and clarity to records which are 
captured in accounting documents.  In the BSIK tabl e (containing 40,91,895 records during 
the period 2014-16), the narration field of the transactions were blank in 8,517 records. 
Management/ Ministry replied (April 2019/ August 20 19) that instructions have been issued 
to the units to ensure that proper narration is mai ntained at the time of creating entry in the 
system.  
viii)  Non/ incorrect capturing of payment details  
PAYR is a repository table containing the details o f cheque payments made to vendors etc.  
On review of data (PAYR table) as furnished by the Company, Audit observed that out of 
17,330 records where cheque encashment date is Nil,  2,422 records pertained to cheques 
which were not voided and more than three years old valuing 
`5,492 crore.  
Management replied (April 2019) that detailed analy sis was done and it was seen that 297 
records pertained to LC/ Forex arrangement payments , 1,344 records were statutory 
payments made through online banking and 1,130 reco rds pertain to OVL/ OBV Company 
codes.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
162  
Audit recommended Management to review the cases wh ere online payments have been 
made but still appearing under cheque payment in the PAYR table.  
Ministry replied (August 2019) that system check ha s been put in place, whereby cheque 
encashment date will not be blank.  With regard to the online payments appearing in PAYR 
table, it was stated that cheque is also issued in favour of banks for payments to LCs, 
remittances, other forex arrangement payments etc. which are made through RTGS mode to 
prevent the possibility of duplicate payment.  
The corrective action taken at the instance of Audit is noted.  
9.2.8.3    Customisation deficiencies   
i)   Inconsistency in Statistical Key Figure (SKF) usag e  
A statistical key figure is a number providing info rmation about non-monetary data relating 
to organisational units.  These figures can be in r eporting and in allocation and represent 
statistics in internal orders, cost centres and pro fit centres which are measured in quantity or 
time units and are used for allocation of costs.  
To review the consistency in adoption of SKF across  company codes and across the period, 
the tables COKA, COKP, COBK, COEPR, CSKU and SKF 11  were joined using the common 
fields and the following were observed:  
• Description is blank in 63 cost centre groups and t here were 66 cost centre groups 
which are likely duplicates and would need a review.  
• There is no uniform practice across the Company for  adoption of SKF for drilling 
costs.  
Management/ Ministry assured (April 2019/ August 20 19) corrective action in respect of 
blank description fields and for ensuring uniformit y in cost allocations and stated that 
necessary changes will be taken in the SKFs during cost cycle 2019-20. 
9.2.8.4    Validation checks and Input Controls 
i)  Lack of input control and validation of data  
Input controls are application controls which ensur e and protect the accuracy, integrity, 
reliability, confidentiality and completeness of information. 
a)   Asset accounting 
System automatically picks the date of server as the entry date of the document.  Transactions 
are normally posted after receipt of documents (for e.g. bills/ invoices). 
It was observed that: 
                                                           
11   These are controlling module tables which contain  details of object number, cost element and statist ical 
key figures 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
163  
• In 3,06,057 records, the document date was after th e posting date.  In eight records, 
document date is greater than the current date of a udit i.e. September 2018 (e.g. 
28 November 2018, 30 September 2019, 30 September 2201, 07 November 2201).  
• 52,856 records indicated delay in posting the docum ents with the delay ranging 
61 days to more than 10 years.  
Management replied (April 2019) that the delay in t imely posting the documents was mainly 
due to implementation of IND-AS and quarterly/ annu al closing of accounts.  It further stated 
that efforts are being made to minimise the gap by closing the accounts on monthly basis.  
Ministry stated (August 2019) that system check has  been introduced where document date 
cannot be after system date and corrective action initiated for monthly closing of accounts.  
b)   Cost centre accounting 
COBK is the document header data table of controlli ng object.  A review of the data records 
(91,64,158 records) revealed that in 1,73,595 recor ds, document date is greater than the 
system date i.e. 31 March 2018 (e.g. 22 May 2041, 2 5 April 2201, 23 May 2314, 
02 December 2020 etc.).  In 12 records, document da te is not in order and another six 
records; document dates pertained to 2001-2011 whil e entry date/ posting date pertained to 
2014-18. 
Audit suggested Management to consider validating the document date entry. 
Management replied (April 2019) that a validation w ill be put to the effect that document 
date is not after the system date by 30 April 2019.   Ministry stated (August 2019) that system 
check has been introduced where document date cannot be after system date. 
The corrective action taken at the instance of Audit is noted.  
9.2.8.5   Segregation of duty  
The segregation of duty principle requires that con trols be built to ensure that there is proper 
segregation of duties for data entry and there are compensating controls in place where 
segregation of duty is not possible.  It is general ly accepted that creation, change and deletion 
of master records be vested in different individual s to ensure security of data and to avoid/ 
reduce potential damage from actions/ inactions of any one person.  During scrutiny of the 
table, it was seen that in 1,30,733 records, master  data has been created and changed by the 
same person.  
Management/ Ministry replied (April/ August 2019) that two separate roles have been created 
for creation of asset and change in the Asset.  Min istry further stated that the existing 
assignment of roles will be automatically removed with effect from 01 June 2019.  
9.2.8.6   Training efforts 
End user/ refresher training details to raise the l evel of user awareness and to minimise errors 
of data input were called for from Management.  Man agement stated (April 2019) that every 
year refresher training is imparted to the end user s.  It was also explained that e-Learning is 
available through the web portal for benefit of the users.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
164  
Audit recommended that updated training engagement of users needs to be ensured to 
facilitate error free inputs to the system. 
Ministry stated (August 2019) that action has been initiated for inclusion of SAP FICO 
Module trainings in annual calendar. 
9.2.8.7     Conclusion  
CAG’s Audit Report 10 of 2008 (Chapter VII) pointed  out deficiencies in customisation, 
input controls and migration of data from legacy sy stem.  It was recommended in the Report 
that the Company should review and rectify the defi ciencies by strengthening the controls, 
mapping business rule relating to allocation of cos ts and periodical review of master data.  
Audit observed that some of the issues pointed out in the report were rectified by 
Management and some issues still persisted (details  in Annexure-XXV ) despite assurances.  
Ministry had rectified the lapses only after they w ere pointed out again.  Most of the issues 
pointed out in this report pertained to control gap s which included new issues also. Though 
periodical review of master data had been recommend ed, deficiencies still persisted in Asset 
Master Tables.  Further, few issues on input contro ls and standardisation of cost allocation 
also still persisted.  
These issues can be addressed by placing appropriat e controls in addition to rectification of 
existing errors.  Updated training engagement of us ers to enable error free inputs to the 
system also needs to be ensured.  Consistency and u niformity across the organisation are 
desired in the financial procedures through the system.   
Management may like to view these findings as indic ative and conduct a systematic and 
periodic review.  Ministry stated (August 2019) tha t post audit observations, ONGC has 
taken continuous efforts to take corrective measures and rectify the deficiencies.  
9.3  Loss of revenue due to sale of crude oil containing  Basic Sediments & Water above 
the norms as per sales agreement 
Failure of ONGC to upgrade and create facilities within the approved time schedule to 
contain the basic sediments and water in the crude oil supplies within limits resulted 
in loss of revenue of `` ``27.06 crore. 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC) ente red (April 2002) into a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) with Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) and Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited (BPCL) for sale of crude oil.  The sale price was subject to discount at 
slab rates, in case Basic Sediment & Water (BS&W) c ontent in the crude oil exceeded 
0.2 per cent  by volume as detailed below: 
Table 9.3.1  
Discount for BS&W (volume in per cent ) Discount (US$ per barrel) 
Less than 0.2 per cent  Nil  
0.2 to less than & equal to 0.5 per cent  0.10 
0.5 to less than & equal to 1.0 per cent  0.15 
For every increase of 0.5 per cent  0.05 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
165  
ONGC’s oil fields in Assam are situated in Geleki, Lakwa, Rudrasagar and North Bank.  
Crude oil produced in these fields is collected at Central Tank Farms (CTFs) at Lakwa and 
Geleki fields, which is sent to Custody Central Tan k Farms (CCTF) at Moran and Jorhat.  
The crude oil is finally supplied to Guwahati & Bon gaigaon refineries of IOCL and 
Numaligarh Refinery of BPCL through pipeline of Oil  India Limited (OIL).  The oil 
produced from these fields has high BS&W content, d ue to which further processing of crude 
oil is required to bring down the BS&W content level below 0.2 per cent  before supply to the 
refineries.  In this regard, Audit observed that: 
• Assam Renewal Plan (ARP) - Plan A, ‘Revamping & Opt imisation of Surface 
installation & Gas lift/ Pipeline network for Lakwa  and Lakhmani fields and Moran 
CTF’ with an estimated cost of 
`2,465.15 crore, was conceptualised way back in 
December 2005.  One of the major deliverables of th e project was to control the BS&W 
level below 0.2 per cent .  The project was awarded in March 2009 with sched uled 
completion in March 2013; the project is still not completed.  
• As against the targeted five GGS 12 , four GGSs could be revamped under Plan – A; 
however, the revamped facilities failed to improve desired quality of crude oil as 
average BS&W content was around 0.2 to 1.799 per cent  from 2015-16 to 2019-20 (till 
October 2019).  
• ONGC envisaged additional steps viz., cleaning and repairing of tanks, to reduce the 
BS&W content in crude oil. However, Audit observed that out of 168 oil and effluent 
tanks installed in Assam Asset, 49 storage tanks ar e in Lakwa and Lakhmani fields 
which would be taken up for cleaning and repairing only after the ARP project is 
completed.  In respect of remaining 119 13  storage tanks, only 40 tanks were cleaned and 
repaired till November 2019.  
• Crude oil supplied from Assam Asset contained BS&W ranging from 0.164 to 0.417 
per cent  during the period April 2013 to October 2019 (the period subsequent to March 
2013, scheduled completion of the project) resultin g in price discount/ loss of revenue 
to ONGC amounting to `27.06 crore. 
ONGC/ Ministry stated (November 2019/ March 2020) that: 
• Revamping of one more installation (LKH GGS-5) has been completed and put in 
operation since May 2019.  LKW GGS-1 has been commi ssioned in December 2019 
and under trial run; LKW CTF is under progress.  Ho wever, many times it becomes 
difficult to achieve the desired quality due to dyn amic process conditions and CTF 
plays an important role as better settling and sepa ration in CTF results in lesser BS&W 
in crude.  
• Cleaning/ repairing of storage tanks is not a direc t measure for BS&W reduction.  
However, cleaning/ repairing of tanks provide more ullage and more time for water to 
settle that indirectly facilitates to achieve bette r water separation and lesser BS&W 
                                                           
12    GGS- Group Gathering System- Here emulsion along  with associated gas produced from the wells is 
collected, where liquid and gas is separated through Separator 
13    Out of 119 tanks, six are new tanks, seven tanks  are not in use and five tanks are under repair. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
166  
content.  Further, 40 tanks have been cleaned upto 15 November 2019, work is in 
progress for five tanks and for the remaining tanks , the expected date of completion is 
April 2023. 
• Assam Asset was striving hard to reduce BS&W in ref inery dispatch and the consistent 
efforts have resulted in reduction of discount paid  from `4.49 crore in FY 2017-18 to 
`1.91 crore in FY 2018-19.  The range of BS&W was 0. 297 to 0.164 per cent  during 
the FY 2018-19 which reveals a significant improvement. 
• Desired quality could not be achieved in the recent  past due to (i) mixing of crude from 
revamped and under-revamped installations, (ii) Hea ter Treater equipments being more 
than 35 years old and needed to be replaced, (iii) repairing and cleaning of tanks in the 
running installations is a tedious and continuous p rocess and can be done only 
sequentially linking refineries shutdown, (iv) more  volume had to be dispatched to 
refineries to create ullage in GGSs/ CTFs leading to rise in BS&W in oil dispatch due to 
lesser settling time for final separation, etc.  
The reply needs to be viewed in the light of the following: 
• The LKW-GGS-1 has been commissioned in December 201 9 (against the scheduled 
completion date of March 2013) and trial run comple ted (January 2020). The facilities 
on LKW - CTF is still in progress.  Thus, the ARP, conceptualised way back in 
December 2005, is still not completed even after a period of more than 15 years. 
• Desired level of BS&W content could not be achieved  in all the four completed GGS, 
which was in the range of 0.2 to 0.584 per cent  since commissioning. 
• Additional steps viz., cleaning and repairing of ta nks, use of oil soluble demulsifiers 
etc., could not bring down BS&W content in the Assam crude to the desired level. 
• During the period of 2019-20 (till October 2019), t he BS&W content was above the 
desired level of 0.2 per cent  in all the months and ONGC sustained loss of reven ue of 
`2.86 crore during the period.  The expenditure on r evamping to the extent of achieving 
the desired level of BS&W content has thus been rendered infructuous. 
• ONGC should have addressed the issue in a time boun d manner so as to ensure supply 
of quality crude to the OMCs.  
Thus, ONGC sustained loss of revenue of `27.06 crore during the period April 2013 to 
October 2019, due to delay in implementing the Assa m Renewal Project and resultant failure 
to maintain the BS&W contents within the prescribed norms. 
India Oil Corporation Limited, Bharat Petroleum Cor poration Limited and Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited 
 
9.4   Implementation of de-regulation of pricing regardi ng major Petroleum Products 
9.4.1  Introduction 
Government of India (GoI) used to control prices of  petroleum products through 
Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM) since July 197 5. In 1997, it was decided to 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
167  
dismantle APM in a phased manner based on the recom mendations of Strategic Planning 
Group on Restructuring of the Oil Industry (‘R’ gro up). In 1998, Fuel Oil, Low Sulphur 
Heavy Stock (LSHS) and Naphtha were de-regulated fo llowed by Aviation Turbine Fuel 
(ATF) in 2001. Motor Spirit (MS) and High-Speed Die sel (HSD) were de-regulated with 
effect from midnight of 25/ 26 June 2010 and 18/ 19 October 2014 respectively.  
Consequent to de-regulation, the prices of petroleu m products are market determined and Oil 
Marketing Companies (OMCs) are free to determine th e prices. Prices of MS/ HSD, which 
were being revised fortnightly, are being revised d aily across all retail outlets in the country 
from 16 June 2017.  
 
9.4.2  Audit Objectives and Scope  
The objectives of the compliance audit were to report broadly on the following:  
• Implementation of daily pricing mechanism and its monitoring by OMCs. 
• Whether the de-regulation brought-in market competi tion in respect of MS/ HSD 
prices. 
This audit mainly covered the period from 2014-15 t o 2017-18 i.e. post de-regulation of 
HSD.  
9.4.3  Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria included the provisions of: 
• GoI policy and circulars issued to de-regulate Reta il Sales Price (RSP) of MS and 
HSD. 
• The monitoring mechanism of daily pricing implement ed by OMCs since 16 June 
2017 . 
9.4.4  Audit Methodology 
Entry conference was held with senior management of  OMCs on 20 July 2018 wherein audit 
objectives, scope and methodology were discussed. T he field audit was conducted during the 
period from August to November 2018. This included collection of statistical data from 
Retail Headquarters of OMCs and visits of audit tea ms to selected Retail Outlets (ROs) and 
offices controlling ROs. Out of total 55,013 ROs (a s on 31 March 2017), 188 ROs were 
selected on sampling basis for detailed audit. 
9.4.5  Audit Findings - Implementation of daily pri cing on MS/ HSD and its 
monitoring by OMCs 
OMCs effected daily change in the RSP of MS and HSD  on trial basis in five cities with 
effect from 1 May 2017 and across the country from 16 June 2017 as against fortnight 
revision being followed till then. The decision was  implemented through automated and non-
automated ROs. The price changes are affected at th e automated ROs through central server 
at 6 a.m. every day by generating price file, which  gets updated in the system. In case of 
failure to update, the dealer manually updates the prices based on communication received 
through SMS, emails, web portal, mobile app etc. In  case of non-automated ROs, the dealers 
change the prices daily on the basis of communication received from OMCs.   

Report No. 18 of 2020  
168  
There were 55,013 retail outlets under the control of three OMCs 14   as on 31 March 2017, of 
which 22,014 were automated 15  and 32,999 were non-automated 16  retail outlets. Audit 
selected 188 ROs (automated - 61 and non-automated - 127) for test check based on 
statistical sampling. Detailed checking of daily pr ice change along with bills was conducted 
for the months of January and May 2018 in respect o f the selected ROs. Further, Inspection 
Reports of ROs (conducted by OMCs) for the year 201 7-18, audit trails, registers including 
complaints etc. were also scrutinised during field visit. 
Scrutiny of relevant records and information obtain ed from MoPNG and OMCs along with 
discussion held with concerned officers led to the following observations in areas of  
preparedness, implementation and monitoring by OMCs.  
9.4.5.1   Adequacy of preparedness  
Lack of automation of ROs and absence of sustained connectivity   
• Automation of ROs with price push application along  with sustained connectivity 
ensures prompt and correct change of prices as it e liminates manual intervention. 
OMCs had automated only 43 per cent  of ROs in June 2017 at the time of 
implementation of the policy indicating lack of pre paredness. As per directives 
(November 2017) of MoPNG, automation of all ROs wer e supposed to be completed 
by December 2018. However, only 80 per cent  ROs were automated by three OMCs 
by December 2018 with a capex of `1,487 crore.  
Due to slow progress of automation, MoPNG included this as a parameter in the 
MOU targets for OMCs for the year 2018-19.  IOCL an d BPCL could automate 98 
and 93 per cent  of ROs respectively by March 2019 and HPCL could a chieve 
complete automation   after 20 months from implementation of daily pricing.  
• In case of HPCL and BPCL, some of the ROs, which we re compliant for daily price 
push, could not successfully receive the pushed pri ce mainly due to lack of sustained 
connectivity.  Review of data of HPCL for the perio d 16 June 2017 to 30 June 2018 
showed that daily failure rate ranged between 9 and  88 per cent  and for BPCL (from 
20 June 2017 to 30 June 2018) the failure rate rang ed between 59 and 93 per cent . 
None of the eight automated ROs of IOCL visited by Audit staff had sustained 
connectivity resulting in manual price change by the dealers.  
• Daily RSP was changed by the dealers manually at th e automated ROs instead of 
being pushed automatically by the central server du ring field visit of Audit staff.  
Details in this regard are tabulated below:  
                                                           
14   IOCL – 25,951, HPCL – 14,992 and BPCL – 14,070 
15   IOCL – 9,925, HPCL – 5,033 and BPCL – 7,056 
16   IOCL – 16,026, HPCL – 9,959 and BPCL – 7,014 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
169  
Table 9.4.1: Instances of manual changing of RSP at automated ROs  
• It can be seen from the above that manual price cha nges were rampant in respect of 
the outlets at Bhopal RRO, despite it being an auto mated one. In case of IOCL, the 
extent of manual intervention in automated ROs coul d not be ascertained for want of 
data relating to dissemination of daily prices by t he server. However, in one of the 
ROs under the Gurugram Divisional Office of IOCL, t he dealer intervened manually 
on 131 and 132 occasions before and after 6 a.m. for HSD and MS respectively during 
the period July 2017 to September 2018 in spite of successful auto price push. 
OMCs attributed (April 2019) manual change of price s in automated ROs to lack of 
connectivity. HPCL stated that with the implementat ion of VSAT the problem will be 
addressed. MoPNG stated (February 2020) that the au tomation of ROs was not linked with 
the daily pricing which was implemented since June 2017. It facilitated the auto price push 
and in other ROs the daily pricing was implemented on manual basis. At present feasible and 
operative ROs have been automated and most of them have been provided with connectivity. 
Though there were manual operations in automated ROs, correct prices were charged. 
The reply is to be viewed against the fact that imp lementation of daily pricing required 
automation of ROs with sustained connectivity to en sure prompt and correct charging of 
prices by the ROs. In its absence, mechanism to ens ure correct change of pricing by the 
dealer and monitoring by the field officers was req uired. However, at the time of 
implementation of daily pricing, the OMCs lacked bo th and took time to achieve automation 
target which resulted in charging of incorrect pric es to the consumers, as pointed out in 
para 9.4.5.2. 
9.4.5.2    Change of daily prices by dealers  
i)   Lack of promptness in changing the prices by deale rs 
Audit scrutiny of records relating to revision of p rices (price change reports/ logs) by the 
dealers at the selected ROs revealed the following: 
• There were 3,463 instances in 91 out of 188 ROs (IO CL-40, HPCL-35 and BPCL-16) 
when dealers were not prompt in changing the prices  at the prescribed time of 6 a.m. 
The daily prices were manually revised within the r ange of 587 minutes before 6 a.m. 
OMC Name of 
controlling 
office 
Auto 
mated 
ROs 
(Nos.)  
No. of automated ROs 
where daily prices were 
changed manually on 
the day of visit 
Automated 
ROs where 
daily prices 
were changed 
manually (in 
per centage) 
No. of ROs having 
more than 51 
instances of 
manual price 
changes since 
implementation 
HPCL Bhopal RRO 177 78 (03 September 2018) 44 104 
Indore RRO 200 32 (08 October 2018) 16 37 
Mumbai RRO 87 36 (16 October 2018) 41 Data not avai lable 
BPCL Surat TO 189 111 (27 August 2018) 59 --do-- 
Indore TO 179 102 (29  September 2018)  57 --do-- 
Gwalior TO 106 73 (25 October 2018) 69 --do-- 
Manmad TO 196 72 (31 October 2018) 37 --do-- 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
170  
and 1,078 minutes after 6 a.m. However, the timing of working hours of most of the 
ROs was displayed as 7 a.m. to 11 p.m. Thus, overch arging from customers by the 
dealers at such instances could not be ruled out. 
• There were 95 instances (IOCL- 41, HPCL-54 and BPCL -nil) when prices were 
revised on higher side than the prevailing RSP for the day by the dealers resulting in 
overcharging which is a major irregularity in terms  of Marketing Discipline 
Guidelines (MDG). 
IOCL/ HPCL stated (February 2019/ April 2019) pract ical difficulties like greater number of 
dispensing units involved in change of prices, lack of connectivity, operation of ROs in shifts, 
repairing of printers, and automation of ROs etc. B PCL stated (April 2019) that corrective 
action such as issuing of detailed SOPs, guidelines  to field officers and dealer network etc. 
has been initiated. BPCL further stated that work i s underway for modifying the RO 
Inspection Report (ROIR) to ensure that the Sales O fficer takes a print of the price log and 
attaches the same along with the ROIR. 
MoPNG (February 2020) stated that currently auto pr ice push with VSAT & Real Time 
transfer has been implemented at 68 per cent  of the total automated ROs and will meet 100 
per cent  target by December 2020. It does not allow manual intervention. Even when manual 
intervention is required in case of connectivity fa ilure, the system implements the revised 
price after the connectivity is re-established. 
The instances pointed out by Audit indicate lack of  monitoring of price change by the field 
officers of OMCs which resulted in delay in price c hange and charging of incorrect prices by 
the dealer. Recurrence of such cases is possible as  the new system has not been implemented 
at all ROs. Audit appreciates that BPCL decided to bring in a procedure where the sales 
officer takes a print of the price log and attaches the same along with ROIR.  
ii)   Incorrect charging of prices by dealers 
As per clause 1.6 (i) of the MDG applicable to OMCs  effective from 8 January 2013, RO 
dealer should ensure charging of correct price. Scr utiny of transaction reports at the 
automated ROs, cash/ credit bills issued by dealers  and daily sales record revealed cases of 
incorrect charging of prices. From the record made available at ROs visited by audit, 19 out 
of 86 ROs (IOCL), 2 out of 53 ROs (HPCL) and 2 out of 49 ROs (BPCL) had instances of 
over/ undercharging as detailed below: 
Table 9.4.2: Instances of over/ undercharging 
 OMC  No. of 
ROs test 
checked 
No. of ROs where 
over/ under 
charging noticed  
Percentage of ROs 
where over/ under 
charging noticed 
Instances of 
overcharging 
Instances of 
undercharging 
IOCL 86 19 22 109 104 
HPCL 53 2 04 04 nil 
BPCL 49 2 04 06 nil 
Total 188 23 12 119 104 
Source- Data furnished by the Management 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
171  
OMCs accepted incorrect charging of prices pointed out by audit. IOCL attributed (April 
2019) incorrect charging of prices to wrong prices communicated by the company to the 
dealers, absence of malafide intention by dealers, practical difficulties involved in changing 
of prices and that the dealers were cautioned for t hese errors. HPCL stated (April 2019) that 
new application viz., ‘Retail Automation Dashboard’  has been developed for monitoring/ 
tracking price change at the ROs through system. Mo PNG stated (February 2020) that the 
extent of incorrect price changes was marginal whic h rules out wrong intention on the part of 
the dealers. However, the dealers were counseled in these cases. In one case, action was taken 
on the dealer in terms of the MDG guidelines. In fu ture, the improvements in the automation 
and connectivity will take care of these lapses. 
The cases of incorrect charging of prices were only  indicative and were noticed at the ROs 
inspected on sample selection basis. These cases sh owed lack of proper monitoring by 
OMCs. 
iii)    Overcharging due to flaws in Automation system 
Audit observed that overcharging occurred at an aut omated RO, under Mumbai DO of IOCL 
due to discrepancy in communication of rates throug h mail and server. The dealer 
implemented the rate communicated through auto gene rated mail which was higher than the 
rate pushed by the server, as detailed below: 
Table 9.4.3: Details of overcharging due to system flaw  
Bill No. Date Product Rate charged to the 
customer 
 (`` ``/ ltr) 
Applicable rate 
(`` ``/ ltr) 
64606 01 June 2018 MS 85.85 85.81 
64606 01 June 2018 HSD 72.28 72.25 
64573 01 June 2018 MS 85.85 85.81 
64572 01 June 2018 HSD 72.28 72.25 
64568 01 June 2018 HSD 72.28 72.25 
Source- Data furnished by the Management 
Further, the rate communicated through mail must ha ve been implemented at all non-
automated ROs and automated ROs where dealers manua lly changed the price due to 
connectivity issue.  
Management accepted (April 2019) the discrepancy in  communicating the rate by IOCL; 
however, the reply was silent about corrective acti on and impact of this discrepancy on non-
automated and automated ROs where there was no conn ectivity. MoPNG did not offer any 
comment. 
iv)    Change of HSD prices on multiple occasions during  the day   
It was noticed at an automated RO under Goa Divisio nal Office of IOCL that the prices were 
changed on multiple occasions on the same days in M ay 2018 by the dealer using two 
different log-in IDs as the system break-down was f requent. Hence, charging of incorrect 
prices cannot be ruled out during those days as detailed below:  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
172  
Table 9.4.4: Instances of change in HSD prices on multiple occasions during the day 
No. Date Actual price  
(`` `` per litre) 
Time of pushing 
the prices  
Prices changed by the 
dealer  
(`` `` per litre) 
1 20 May 2018 71.00 08.29 hrs 71.00 
20.48 hrs 71.05 
2 21 May 2018 71.25 6.02 hrs. 71.25 
21.11 hrs 71.30 
3 22 May 2018 71.52 6.11 hrs 71.52 
23.37 hrs 71.65 
4 23 May 2018 71.79 6.03 hrs 71.79 
21.43 hrs. 71.80 
   Source- Data furnished by the Management 
From the table it can be observed that the price ch anges by the dealer were on higher side 
which resulted in charging of incorrect prices. 
IOCL stated (April/ May 2019) that the case was exa mined by a committee which reported 
(May 2019) that as the system break-down was freque nt, the dealer used the Admin login 
shared by the vendor to avoid sale loss and custome r inconvenience. Further, during May 
2018 the dealer suffered minor loss due to net over / under charging. MoPNG reiterated 
(February 2020) the management reply and added that  the new automation system and 
connectivity has been installed at the subject RO t o ensure auto price push and the dealer has 
been counseled for maintaining correct price in case of failure of the system. 
Though the dealer might have suffered net loss duri ng a particular month, fact remains that 
consumers were charged at incorrect prices in these instances. Further, these are the results of 
test checked cases and are indicative. 
v)   Non availability of  transaction reports in the au tomation system 
In case of IOCL, price change reports were not avai lable in respect of an automated RO 
under M.P. State Office and two automated ROs under  Gurugram DO. Hence audit could not 
verify promptness in change of prices and charging of correct prices by the dealers. The 
information was also not available in the Marketing Headquarters. 
Management stated (April 2019) that the price chang e report was not available at these three 
outlets due to technical problem and the automation  vendor has been cautioned to keep a 
backup. MoPNG did not offer any remarks.  
vi)   Incorrect display of RSP in HPCL and BPCL App/ Mob ile number 
 HPCL and BPCL have developed mobile applications ca lled “My HPCL App” and “Smart 
Drive” respectively for assistance to customers. Th ese apps play important role for the 
customers in verification of the rates charged by t he dealers. Audit test checked functioning 
of these ‘Apps’ and observed that: 
• The RSP of MS and HSD at one of the ROs under East Zone of HPCL was showing 
as 
`77.87 per litre and `73.72 per litre respectively in the App on 31 Augus t 2018 
against the RSP of `78.14 per litre and `74.20 per litre which was higher by `0.27 per 
litre and `0.48 per litre respectively. HPCL stated (April 201 9) that the mistake 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
173  
happened due to technical problem and corrective ac tion would be taken through 
Information System. 
• The BPCL App could not detect two ROs under East Zo ne and could not show the 
prices of petroleum products.  It showed a message “No outlet found”.  BPCL stated 
(April 2019) that the problem occurred due to connectivity issue at that location. 
Audit test checked facility provided to customers b y BPCL to verify the correctness of 
RSPs of products on mobile number through SMS, at t hree ROs at Bhatinda and Dehradun.  
However, no reply was received for 7 out of 12 SMSs 17 .  BPCL stated (April 2019) that it 
happened during initial phase due to some integrati on issues and the same have been 
addressed. MoPNG did not offer any remarks.  
Malfunctioning of the Apps and SMS facility needs a ttention since it would improve 
confidence level of customers regarding the price charged. 
9.4.5.3     Inspection of  ROs by OMCs  
Minutes of the Industry meeting held on 9 January 2 013 prescribed minimum frequency of 
inspection of ROs by field officers of OMCs, which ranged from twice a year to four times a 
year depending on extent of automation.   In the ca se of BPCL, 176 out of 14,762 ROs had 
shortfall in such inspections, while 2,454 out of 1 5,604 ROs in HPCL had shortfall in 
inspections.  In the case of HPCL, 7 per cent  of ROs had never been inspected and 9 per cent  
of ROs, had been inspected only once. IOCL did not provide the necessary data.  
Further, field officers were required to report in the prescribed format about the charging of 
correct prices by the dealers during the mandatory inspections, but the formats did not require 
reporting of delays in change of prices.  This has resulted in continued over/ under charging 
from costumers. Scrutiny of Inspection Reports reve aled that field officers of 25 ROs of 
IOCL and 10 ROs of BPCL did not verify and report o n the promptness in changing of RSPs 
and correctness of the price charged by dealers. 
OMCs accepted the observation. BPCL stated (April 2 019) that corrective action such as 
issuing of detailed SOPs, guidelines regarding updation of daily pricing, modifying the Retail 
Outlet Inspection Report etc. have been initiated.  
 
MoPNG stated (February 2020) that suitable advices have been issued to step up the RO 
inspections. 
 
                                                           
17   Sent on 04 September 2018, 05 September 2018, 08 September 2018, 09 September 2018, 10 September 
2018 and 11 September 2018 
Conclusion:  
Lack of automation and sustained connectivity adver sely impacted daily price change 
mechanism at ROs.   
 Lax implementation of daily pricing by dealers and  non -monitoring on the part of OMCs 
led to charging of incorrect price to customers.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
174  
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited   
9.5 Additional expenditure on energy charges 
Visakh Refinery of Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited failed to install the 
capacitor banks to achieve unity/ near unity power factor, which resulted in payment 
of excess energy charges of `` ``18.01 crore from April 2011 to March 2019. 
Visakh Refinery (VR) of Hindustan Petroleum Corpora tion Limited (HPCL) entered 
(June 1986) into an agreement with Eastern Power Di stribution Company of Andhra Pradesh 
Limited (EPDCL 18 ) for import of power with Contracted Maximum Deman d (CMD) of 
13 19  Mega Volt Ampere (MVA).  The demand/ energy charge s payable to EPDCL were as 
per tariff regulations issued by Andhra Pradesh Ele ctricity Regulatory Commission 
(APERC).  
Prior to April 2011, consumers were billed on activ e energy consumption measured in kWh 
(Kilo Watt Hour). kWH represents the active energy consumed and converted into useful 
work, whereas Kilo Volt Ampere hours (kVAh) represents the apparent power 
20 .  The ratio of 
active power to apparent power is called as Power F actor (PF).  A surcharge/ penalty was to 
be collected whenever PF was less than 0.90 until 3 1 March 2009, which was subsequently 
increased to 0.95 with effect from 1 April 2009.    
APERC, vide tariff orders dated 22 July 2010, directed the licensees to explore the possibility 
of implementing kVAh based tariff (in place of kWh- based tariff) for all the High Tension 
(HT) consumers from 2011-12 onwards.  In line with the directions, EPDCL introduced 
kVAh based billing from 2011-12 onwards to reduce t he reactive power drawal from the 
system thereby ensuring better system management.  The revised billing methodology was 
intended to drive the consumer to reach unity PF an d to provide commercial disincentive for 
reactive energy indiscipline of consumers.   
The consumers had to install power capacitors 
21  at their end which would minimise the kVAh 
generation.  If the capacitors were not installed o r were not in proper service, the apparent 
power drawn would be in excess of active power.  This would result in additional expenditure 
due to billing of energy on apparent power consumed in kVAh.   
Audit observed that the Visakh Refinery of HPCL did  not maintain unity or near unity PF.  
The active power drawn ranged between 81 per cent  and 100 per cent  of the apparent power 
transmitted by EPDCL during the period April 2011 t o March 2019, despite the fact that the 
Refinery was to pay for the apparent power transmit ted.  It was further observed that though 
HPCL had already installed and commissioned Capacit or Voltage Transformer (CVT) at 
                                                           
18    Erstwhile Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board  
19    The CMD was enhanced to 24 MVA from May 2017 onw ards 
20    Electrical energy has two components viz. Active  Energy (kWh) and Reactive Energy (kVArh). Vector 
sum of these two components is called as Apparent Energy and is measured in terms of kVAh  
21   Capacitor is an electrical facility used for gene ration of reactive power. A capacitor helps to impr ove the 
power factor by relieving the supply line of the reactive power 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
175  
132 KV level to have a good PF and PF correction, it did not install the four capacitor banks 22  
purchased (April 2012) in downstream substations.  As a result, the Refinery paid 
`18.01 crore excess energy charges during the period April 2011 to March 2019.  
Management replied (November 2019) that:  
• Prior to 2010, surcharge was levied if PF was recor ded below 0.90.  This implies that 
0.90 was an acceptable value considering vide range  of industries and applications.  
Considering PF of 0.90, the excess energy charges w ould be 
`4.58 crore only for the 
period April 2011 to March 2019.  
• The available capacitor banks were put online from October 2019 based on relay 
settings received from the consultant, which improv ed the PF to above 0.90.  Final 
report of consultant was awaited.  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following. 
• Levying penalty based on PF had been withdrawn by A PERC from April 2011. 
APERC revised the method of billing energy charges from KWh to KVAh based 
billing since April 2011 and accordingly, the energy user (the Company) was required 
to maintain unity PF. Otherwise, the user was to in cur extra expenditure if the active 
power was less than apparent power.  
• Though the Company purchased four capacitor banks i n April 2012 and received 
them in 2013, it put these capacitor banks online t o use during October 2019 only 
after being pointed out by Audit. Had they been put  to use immediately after 
purchase, the Company could have avoided the payment of excess energy charges.  
The Ministry replied (March 2020) that: 
• It was not practically possible to maintain unity P F considering various factors, viz., 
types of loads, application and dependency on grid behaviour.  However, PF of 0.90 
and above was the desirable PF for industries. Loss  was computed hypothetically 
assuming a condition of unity PF. 
• The Refinery maintained PF more than 0.90 for most of the period when Gas Turbine 
Generators (GTGs) were running in island mode 
23 .  However, to avoid losses due to 
tripping of Diesel Hydro Treater (DHT) and other pr ocess units, the parallel 
operations of GTGs were commenced from April 2016 d ue to which the PF was less 
than 0.90.   
• As part of DHT project, a purchase order was placed in April 2012 for procurement of 
capacitor banks and same were received in 2013.  Ho wever, DHT unit came into 
continuous service in 2015 and was fed by grid in i sland mode.  Parallel operation 
was commenced in April 2016 only.  Hence capacitor banks were not put to use 
immediately after purchase.  Charging of capacitor banks while unit is online was not 
                                                           
22    Capacitor bank is a group of several capacitors that are connected in a series or parallel with eac h other 
to store electrical energy 
23   Power Plant is said to be in ‘Island Mode’ if it is disassociated from the Distribution System or Power 
Grid 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
176  
appropriate. So, it was decided to put these capaci tor banks in continuous service 
during planned shutdown of DHT units.   
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable in view of the following:  
• Since APERC revised the PF surcharge from 0.90 to 0.95 from 1 April 2009 onwards, 
PF of 0.95 and above was the desirable PF for indus tries and not PF above 0.90, as 
stated by the Ministry.  Further, after change of b illing methodology from April 2011, 
the consumers were supposed to maintain unity PF.  The loss computed was not 
hypothetical but actual additional expenditure incu rred due to drawal of apparent 
energy in excess of actual energy.  
• Despite knowing the fact that charging of capacitor  banks during operation of DHT 
was not appropriate, the Company did not install th e capacitor banks along with 
commissioning of DHT (2015) and the same defeated t he very objective of 
purchasing capacitor banks.  Non-installation of th ese four capacitor banks purchased 
along with DHT lacked justification and resulted in  additional energy charges.  
Management reply that PF was improved after install ation of capacitor banks 
confirms the audit observation. 
• Audit observation is not on operation of GTGs eithe r in island mode or parallel mode 
but on non-installation of capacitor banks purchase d along with DHT.  Had the 
capacitor banks been installed along with DHT, it c ould have improved the PF during 
operation of GTGs either in island or parallel mode. 
Thus, failure to install the available capacitor ba nks in a timely manner led to drawal of 
apparent power in excess of active power, which res ulted in additional expenditure of 
`18.01 crore towards excess energy charges. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
177  
 
 
Damodar Valley Corporation  
10.1 Avoidable loss due to under-recovery of capaci ty charges 
Decision of Damodar Valley Corporation towards redu ction of the quantum of power 
of PPA with Kerala State Electricity Board in respect of RTPS-I resulted in loss due to 
under-recovery of capacity charges, amounting to `` ``78.15 crore during the period 
May 2016 to March 2019.  
Damodar Valley Corporation (Corporation) decided (J une 2006) to set up Raghunathpur 
Thermal Power Station Phase-I (RTPS-I) with two uni ts (Unit-I & II) having capacity of 600 
MW each.  The Commercial Date of Operation (COD) of  Unit-I and Unit-II were scheduled 
in November 2010 and February 2011 respectively.  T he Corporation entered (2006) into 
Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) with Punjab State Electricity Board (PSEB), Haryana 
Power Generation Corporation Limited (HPGCL) and Ke rala State Electricity Board Limited 
(KSEBL) for supply of 300 MW, 100 MW and 150 MW of power respectively from RTPS-I 
for a period of 25 years.  
However, the commissioning of RTPS-I was delayed an d it was anticipated (February 2015) 
that the COD would be achieved in July 2015 and Aug ust 2015 for Unit-I and Unit-II 
respectively.  The Corporation proposed (March 2015 ) to KSEBL to shift the quantum of 
power (150MW) of RTPS-I in the above PPA, to its ot her operational units with the 
anticipation of further delay in commissioning of R TPS-I and thereby fixation of higher tariff 
by Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) for the same, due to increased project 
cost.  KSEBL accepted (July 2015) the above proposa l.  However, it was mutually agreed 
(July 2015) to reduce the quantum of power from RTP S-I in respect of the above PPA from 
150 MW to 50 MW considering the operational aspect of inter-state transmission system of 
power.  The Corporation also proposed to KSEBL to e nter into a supplementary PPA in 
respect of such reduced 50 MW of power for RTPS-I a nd a fresh PPA for supply of 100 MW 
of power from its existing MTPS units.  However, no  such PPAs were entered into with 
KSEBL.  
It was seen that  both the units of RTPS-I were commissioned in March 2016.  The scheduling 
of power from RTPS-I was commenced from May 2016 an d the Corporation started raising 
invoices on KSEBL for capacity charges 
1 of RTPS-I, corresponding to the mutually agreed 
quantum of power of 50 MW from May 2016.  Thus, the  Corporation was not in a position to 
recover capacity charges in respect of RTPS-I corre sponding to 100 MW of power from 
KSEBL as no supplementary PPA was signed with KSEB for 100 MW.  
Management contended (November 2019): 
• It was not justified to co-relate the date of one-time achievement of full load operation 
with probable COD target with uncertainty of establ ishment of Rail and Water 
                                                           
1   Capacity Charges are based on the highest amount  of energy estimated to use during  month by 
beneficiary 
CHAPTER X: MINISTRY OF POWER 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
178  
Corridors.  Further, as per terms of PPA, Long Term  Access 2 (LTA) charges payable 
for transmission of power was to be borne by the Co rporation in case of delay in 
scheduling of power from RTPS-I. 
• The availability factor of RTPS for the period from  April 2016 to March 2019 varied 
in the range of 22 per cent  to 32 per cent  approximately which clearly indicated that 
RTPS-I was not in a position to deliver stable gene ration due to different technical 
constraint to recover the full fixed charges. 
• Whatever generation was achieved, after allocation of KSEBL in the proportion of 50 
MW, rest of the quantum was sold to the firm consum ers as pool power, from where 
fixed charge component was also recovered in due proportion. 
The above contentions of Management are not acceptable in view of the following: 
 Achievement of full load operation was an indicator that the concerned unit was ready 
for commissioning soon.  Issue of non-completion of  rail corridor is not relevant, as it 
was not even ready at the time of COD of the Unit I .  Further, Management did not 
express its concern about delay in COD of RTPS-I in  respect of PPAs with PSEB and 
HPGCL.  Further, as per PPA, the Corporation was not liable to pay any LTA charges 
for delay in scheduling of power from RTPS.  
 The Plant Availability Factor (PAF) i.e. Declared C apacity (DC) has already been 
considered by audit while arriving at the loss due to non-recovery of capacity charges.  
 If the quantum of power in respect of PPA with KSEB L was not reduced, the 
Corporation could have supplied such power from RTP S to KSEBL.  On the other 
hand, the Corporation could have supplied equivalen t quantum of power to the firm 
consumers from its other units which were having un tied power.  In that event, the 
Corporation could have recovered capacity charges c orresponding to the power 
supplied from RTPS as well as such other units. 
Thus, decision of the Corporation for reduction in the quantum of power in respect of RTPS-I 
for PPA with KSEBL has resulted in loss due to unde r-recovery of capacity charges 
amounting to `78.15 crore (Annexure-XXVI ) during the period from May 2016 to March 
2019.  Additionally, the Corporation has to absorb recurring loss of `3.53 crore per month till 
new consumer for purchasing of 100 MW of power is firmed up. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
 
                                                           
2  The right to use the inter-state transmission sys tem for a period exceeding 12 years but not exceedi ng 25 
years 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
179  
NTPC-SAIL Power Company Private Limited 
10.2  Undue favour extended by NSPCL in award of co ntracts on nomination basis  
Undue favour was extended by the NTPC SAIL Power Company Limited to a private 
party by awarding routine maintenance work valuing `` ``129.76 crore during 2013-14 
to 2018-19 on nomination basis at a profit margin o f 10 per cent  of the contract price 
disregarding the CVC guidelines/ public procurement regulations.  
NTPC SAIL Power Company Limited (NSPCL), a Joint Venture Company of NTPC Limited 
and Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) is a po wer generating Company, presently 
having its power stations at Bhilai, Durgapur and R ourkela.  NSPCL Board decided 
(August 2007) to enter into Power Station Maintenan ce Agreement (PSMA) with M/s Utility 
Powertech Limited 3 (UPL) to undertake various maintenance and miscellaneous works in line 
with the agreement made by NTPC.  PSMA was finalise d with UPL in January 2008 for 10 
years but the same was terminated on 31 May 2016 on  mutual understanding of both the 
parties.  Subsequently the company signed a new PSM A with UPL for a period of five years 
in May 2016.  NSPCL Bhilai, Rourkela and Durgapur g ot 346 works executed by UPL 
(including its sub-contractors) during 2013-19 for which it paid `129.76 crore to UPL 
including `11.53 crore profit margin .  Out of above, 75 works valuing `4.58 crore 4 only were 
executed by UPL itself and remaining 271 works valu ing `125.18 crore were executed 
through the sub-contractors. 
Audit noted that Para 5 of the Public Procurement B ill 2012 envisaged inter alia that, ‘the 
procuring entity shall, in relation to a public pro curement, have the responsibility and 
accountability to (i) ensure efficiency, economy an d transparency; (ii) provide fair and 
equitable treatment to bidders; (iii) promote compe tition’.  Further, as per the CVC order 
(July 2007), tendering process or public auction is  a basic requirement for the award of 
contract by any Government agency as any other meth od, especially award of contract on 
nomination basis, would amount to a breach of Artic le 14 of the Constitution guaranteeing 
right to equality, which implies right to equality to all interested parties.  The Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India in its judgment (Special Leave Petition Civil No. 10174 of 2006) also 
held that the awarding of Government contract be do ne only through public auction/ tender, 
the prime objective being to ensure transparency in  the Government Contracts as well as to 
weed out corrupt/ irregular practices.  The Judgmen t also stipulated a departure from the 
afore mentioned rule only in exceptional cases such  as natural calamities where a 
Government Contract may be awarded on nomination ba sis.  The above Judgment was also 
circulated (5 July 2007) by CVC to all the CVOs.  C VC reiterated (December 2012) their 
earlier instruction for strict implementation.  NSP CL, being engaged in public procurement 
on behalf of Government of India, has the responsib ility to ensure compliance of the above 
regulations. 
Audit observed that the company awarded the works t o UPL on nomination basis without 
inviting tender which was against the Public Procur ement Bill, CVC guidelines and Supreme 
                                                           
3 A joint venture of NTPC and Reliance Infra Limited  
4 Bhilai - `` ``    0.73 crore (22 orders), Rourkela - `` ``    1.33 crore (5 orders) and Durgapur- `` ``    2.52 crore (48 
orders) 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
180  
Court Judgement (2006) and the same was also agains t the interest of the company.  Further, 
as per the practice, assignment letter for any job with an estimated cost was issued by NSPCL 
to UPL over which 10 per cent  profit was payable to UPL.  Audit observed that, f inal 
contract price on which 10 per cent  profit was paid to UPL was the price on which the 
contract was awarded by the UPL to its sub-contractor instead of the contract price mentioned 
in the Assignment Letter.  Since the sub-contractor  will also factor the profit element in the 
bid submitted, the value of the contract was higher  than the estimated value provided by 
NSPCL.  Audit further observed that, significant po rtion of the work (96 per cent  of the total 
works) were executed by the sub-contractors instead of executing it by UPL.  Management of 
NSPCL should have considered awarding the work thro ugh tendering instead of nomination 
basis which could have avoided the payment of 10 per cent  profit above the contract value to 
UPL which was merely acting as middleman.  
NSPCL replied (November 2019) that (i) the system of assigning work through M/s UPL was 
adopted in NSPCL was a corollary to the adoption of  NTPC System, (ii) The maintenance 
works of Power plant is not a routine work as it re quire agencies having adequate experience 
in the area with skilled manpower,(iii) Inviting te nders directly from vendors does not ensure 
saving in margin, since vendor can quote at a price  which is more than margin given to UPL 
and (iv) UPL ensures proper tendering process and b eing the principal employer, the party is 
fully responsible for the assigned works. 
The reply of Management was not acceptable as (i) N SPCL is a separate commercial entity 
and therefore before adopting any system prevalent in its promoter company (NTPC) it 
should have ensured its financial interest, (ii) Ma intenance works contracted was of routine 
nature which involved mainly upkeep of floor and wall, removal of garbage, cleaning of road, 
equipment cleaning etc which are not exceptional wo rk eligible to be awarded on nomination 
basis, (iii) Inviting bids from the vendors is mand atory being a government company which 
will also ensure transparency and fair competition,  and (iv) Since significant portion of the 
work (96 per cent  of the total works) were executed by the sub-contr actors instead of directly 
by UPL, NSPCL should not have nominated UPL at 10 per cent  profit for routine nature of 
works but directly executed the works through tendering.  
Thus, NSPCL extended undue favour to a private party in award of routine maintenance work 
for 
`129.76 crore during 2013-19 on nomination basis at a profit margin of 10 per cent  of the 
contract price disregarding the CVC guidelines/ public procurement regulations.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
181  
CHAPTER XI: MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT AND 
HIGHWAYS 
 
 
 
 
National Highways Authority of India 
11.1  Improper contract management by NHAI resulted  in loss of revenue  
Failure of National Highways Authority of India to enforce the contractual 
obligation of Operate, Maintain and Transfer agreem ent resulted in undue payment 
of `` ``28.92 crore to concessionaire on account of short r ecovery of toll.  Further NHAI 
had not maintained the highway after termination of  agreement with concessionaire 
resulted in loss of revenue of `` ``20.38 crore. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) entered  (April 2013) into an Operate, 
Maintain and Transfer (OMT) agreement (agreement) w ith M/s. Raima Toll Road Private 
Limited (Concessionaire), for the stretch from Madu rai to Kanyakumari section (243.170 
Kms) on NH-7.  This included construction of project facilities and Operation & Maintenance 
of the project highway for a period of nine years f rom 22 September 2013 i.e., the scheduled 
Commercial Operation Date (CoD).  The agreement pro vided for payment of concession fee 
of  `117 crore for the first year with an escalation of 10 per cent  every subsequent year.  In 
respect of the Concession Agreement, following was observed:  
11.1.1   Undue favour to the concessionaire by accepting in admissible claim   
Article 22.1.1 of the agreement delegated the sole and exclusive right to the Concessionaire 
to collect the user-fee from the road users through  four toll plazas namely Kappalur, 
Nanguneri, Salaipudur and Etturvattam.  Article 22. 8 of the agreement authorises the 
concessionaire to levy liquidated damages for unaut horised use of the project highway at its 
own risk and cost and NHAI would not, in any manner , be liable on account of the vehicles 
using highways without payment of toll dues.  
The Concessionaire took over the project highway and started collecting toll (four toll plazas) 
from September 2013.  The Concessionaire, however, defaulted in remittance of full 
concession fee from the first instalment and failed  to maintain the project highway and other 
project facilities as per the agreement.  The Conce ssionaire also failed to collect toll from the 
buses of Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation (TNSTC) from CoD.  Due to these failures, 
NHAI foreclosed the contract and took over (August 2016) the operation & maintenance of 
the project highway, including the toll plazas. 
After takeover of project highway by NHAI, the Conc essionaire submitted four claims to 
NHAI including a claim towards recovery of short-re alisation of toll dues from TNSTC.  
NHAI referred the matter to the committee of three Chief General Managers (3CGMs) for 
dispute settlement which accepted (September 2017) the claim of 
`28.92 crore towards short-
realisation of toll from TNSTC buses and recommende d to adjust the same against the total 
dues recoverable ( `62.52 crore) from the Concessionaire. 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
182  
Audit observed that the Concessionaire failed to co llect and remit full toll dues from TNSTC 
buses from the CoD and failed to maintain the proje ct highway as per the agreement.  Even 
though the responsibility of collection of toll due s from TNSTC buses remained with the 
Concessionaire, NHAI accepted the claim of `28.92 crore which was not permissible as per 
the article 22.8 of the agreement.  
Management in its reply stated that after due consi deration of all the aspects in the agreement 
and analysing various claims preferred by the Conce ssionaire, the 3CGMs Committee 
recommended (September 2017) to accept the claim of  
`28.92 crore as part of amicable 
settlement and foreclosure of the agreement.  Furth er, the recommendations of 3CGMs 
Committee were approved by the Independent Settleme nt Advisory Committee (July 2018) 
and Executive Committee (November 2018) of the NHAI .  NHAI was also endeavouring to 
recover the said amount of `28.92 crore (toll amount short realised from TNSTC buses) from 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH). 
The reply of the NHAI confirmed its failure to enfo rce the contractual conditions regarding 
toll collection.  Further, the decision of the Exec utive Committee to recover the dues from 
MoRTH did not have the Ministry’s concurrence.  Thu s, the scope of recovery appears 
remote. 
11.1.2   Loss of toll revenue due to non-maintenance of str etches 
After the foreclosure (August 2016) of the agreemen t, NHAI took over the operation and 
maintenance of the project highway, including toll plazas.  In September 2017, a Public 
Interest Litigation (PIL) was filed for non-mainten ance of 50 km stretch under Kappalur toll 
plaza (one of the part of the whole project highway  under agreement).  In December 2017, 
NHAI engaged M/s Yoga & Co. for overlay and repair work of the said stretch.  The Hon’ble 
High Court of Madras (Maduri Branch) ordered (Janua ry 2018) NHAI to reduce the rate of 
toll, by half, for the above stretch of project hig hway until the road was repaired.  
Accordingly, NHAI collected toll at half the rate i n Kappalur toll plaza amounting to 
`20.38 crore (03 February 2018 to 15 October 2018).  The repair work was completed in 
September 2018 and NHAI was permitted to collect toll at full rates.  
Audit observed that after foreclosure (August 2016)  of the agreement, NHAI failed to 
maintain the said stretch of the project highway wh ich resulted in a PIL and subsequent 
interim order of Hon’ble High Court of Madras for r educing the toll rates by half, which 
resulted in loss of `20.38 crore (50 per cent  toll revenue loss).  
Management in its reply submitted that NHAI taken immediate steps to carry out repair of the 
project highway including overlay in the affected s tretch and after approval (October 2017) 
of the Competent Authority, competitive bids were i nvited and the maintenance and repair 
work was awarded (December 2017) to M/s Yoga & Co.  On completion of overlay work, 
favourable orders were obtained from Hon’ble High C ourt of Madras for collection of toll at 
full rate.  
The reply of Management is not acceptable as even a fter foreclosure of the agreement in 
August 2016, NHAI took 15 months to award (December  2017) the work i.e. after a PIL was 
filed in September 2017.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
183  
Thus, failure of NHAI to enforce the contractual ob ligation and acceptance of inadmissible 
claim resulted in undue favour to concessionaire am ounting to `28.92 crore and 
non-maintenance of project highway led to a revenue loss of `20.38 crore. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
11.2 Undue benefit to contractors 
NHAI gave undue benefit of `` ``14.53 crore to contractors by providing advance at 
lower rates. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) entered  into agreements with various 
contractors 1 on 27/ 28 August 2015 for development of Six Lane Eastern Peripheral 
Expressway (EPE) on Engineering Procurement and Con struction (EPC) basis in six 
packages.  The Appointed date for all these package s was fixed as 14 September 2015 with 
scheduled date of completion as 11 March 2018.  
The contractors (package I to VI), requested NHAI f or revising the payment schedule to 
improve the cash flow.  The Executive Committee (EC ) granted approval (285 
th  meeting 
dated 28/ 29 June 2016 and 06 July 2016) for monthl y interim advance payment for work 
done as an ‘Interest bearing advance’ and decided t o charge interest rate at ‘SBI PLR’ plus 
two per cent  or 10 per cent  per annum, whichever was higher’.  But the contractor of package 
I and II i.e. M/s Sadbhav Engineering Limited reque sted (July 2016) NHAI to reconsider the 
interest rate as the ‘SBI PLR’ plus two per cent  was on the higher side affecting its liquidity 
and which would eventually affect the progress of work.  
Based on the request of contractor of package I and  II, NHAI again took up the matter in the 
292 nd  meeting of EC (03 November 2016) wherein the appro val for ‘Base Rate’ plus two per 
cent  or 10 per cent  per annum, whichever was higher, was sought with j ustification that ‘SBI 
PLR’ was inadvertently mentioned earlier and the ‘B ase Rate’ was contractually/ practically 
appropriate interest rate.  Contrary to the approva l sought, EC, considered and approved the 
interest rate as ‘Bank Rate’ 2 plus two per cent based on one-time Fund Infusion Policy of 
NHAI. 
Audit observed that the decision of EC to further r educe the interest rate to ‘Bank Rate’ plus 
two per cent  was imprudent in view of the following: 
• NHAI, in its proposal submitted to EC, considered ‘ Base Rate’ as contractually and 
practically appropriate as the contract agreement p rovided for charging ‘Base Rate’ 
plus two per cent  in case of delayed payment made by Authority to contractor (Clause 
19.9.2) (i.e. in case where NHAI was at fault).  Fu rther, contractor (package I and II) 
who had requested to charge lower interest rate, ha d undertaken to pay interest at the 
rate of Base Rate or 10 per cent  per annum  interest rate.  However, EC suo-motu 
                                                           
1  M/s Sadbhav Engineering Limited (Package – I and II), M/s Jai Prakash Associates Limited (Package 
III), M/s Ashoka Buildcon Limited (Package IV), M/s  Oriental Structural Engineers Private Limited 
(Package V) and M/s Gayatri Projects Limited (Package VI) 
2  Bank Rate is the standard rate at which the Reser ve Bank is prepared to buy or rediscount bills of 
exchange or other commercial papers 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
184  
decided to charge ‘Bank Rate’ plus two per cent which was not justifiable and 
resulted in undue favour to the contractor.  
• Also, the decision of EC to charge interest at ‘Ban k Rate’ plus two per cent as given 
in one-time Fund Infusion Policy of NHAI was not ju stified as Fund Infusion Policy 
(June 2015) was one time measure specifically appro ved (13 May 2015) by the 
Government of India (GoI) to revive and physically complete languishing BOT 
projects. 
• Only one contractor, who was executing package I an d II, had made the request for 
reduction in interest rate.  However, EC granted th e benefit of reduced interest rate to 
all contractors without analysing the cash flows of  other four projects i.e. package 
III to VI.   
• The decision of the EC regarding amendment in payme nt terms as agreed under 
Schedule H of the Contracts tantamounts to post ten der relaxation of terms of the 
contractor, which is against the fundamental principles of Contracts. 
• As regards liquidity of contractor, NHAI released i nterest free mobilisation advance 
of `441.79 crore to contractors of package I to VI duri ng the period November 2015 
to June 2016.  
• Even after approval by EC for charging interest at ‘Bank Rate’ plus two per cent , 
NHAI continued charging interest at ‘Base Rate’ plu s two per cent  till completion of 
project, which was not objected to by the contracto rs until submission of final bills 
(July 2018 to December 2018) and the differential i nterest of `14.53 crore 3 was 
refunded only after completion of project.  Thus, it was seen that charging ‘Base Rate’ 
plus two per cent  had not affected the cash flow of contractor/ prog ress of work and 
they were also granted bonus of `129 crore for early completion of work.  
Thus, the decision of EC to charge ‘Bank Rate’ plus  two per cent  instead of ‘SBI Base Rate’ 
plus two per cent  or 10 per cent , whichever is higher’ was imprudent and resulted i n loss to 
NHAI/ Exchequer to the tune of `14.53 crore as ‘Bank Rate’ remained around 6.5 per cent  
per annum  whereas ‘SBI Base Rate’ remained in the vicinity of 9 per cent per annum.  
Management, in its reply (October 2019) referred to  other clauses of the contract agreement 
pertaining to interest rate and stated that ‘SBI PL R’ was nowhere mentioned in the contract 
agreement, whereas, interest was payable at ‘Base R ate’ plus two per cent for delayed 
payments by either party and SBI ‘Base Rate’ was di scontinued w.e.f. 1 April 2016.  
Management further stated that NHAI’s Fund Infusion  Policy (NHAI Circular dated 
9 June 2015) provides for financial assistance to c ontractor on loan basis at ‘Bank Rate’ plus 
two per cent  interest.  Accordingly, EC decided that interest r ate is to be charged at ‘Bank 
Rate’ plus two per cent after examining the provision of interest as per co ntract agreement 
and existing fund infusion policy of NHAI. 
                                                           
3  Package I- `` ``    2.64 crore, Package II- `` ``    2.13 crore, Package III- `` ``    0.39 crore, Package IV- `` ``    3.45 crore, 
Package V- `` ``    1.99 crore &Package VI - `` ``    3.93 crore. The package wise amount were arrived on  the basis 
of refund made by NHAI in final running bill 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
185  
The reply of Management is not acceptable in view o f the fact that in the contract agreement 
only 10 per cent , 18 per cent  and ‘Base Rate’ plus two per cent interest rates were provided 
whereas interest rate of ‘Bank Rate’ plus two per cent had not been mentioned, but was 
subsequently approved by the EC to be charged from the contractor.  Further, the decision of 
EC to change its own decision of charging the inter est rate from ‘SBI PLR’ plus two per cent  
or 10 per cent , whichever is higher’ to ‘Bank Rate’ plus two per cent  was an undue favor to 
the contractor in view of the fact that the proposa l moved in the agenda for approval sought 
for charging interest at ‘‘SBI Base rate’ plus two per cent  or 10 per cent , whichever is 
higher’.  
As regards NHAI circular relating to Fund Infusion, the terms of the circular were considered 
and approved by GoI on 13 May 2015 in respect of on e time fund infusion to revive and 
physically complete languishing BOT Projects and hence, was not applicable to EPC projects 
i.e. EPE package I to VI.  The reply of Management regarding discontinuance of ‘Base Rate’ 
by SBI is also not acceptable as the base rate was still being continued. 
Thus, the injudicious/ suo-motu decision of EC to reduce interest rate from ‘SBI P LR’ plus 
two per cent  or 10 per cent , whichever is higher’to ‘Bank Rate’ plus two per cent  by not 
considering the proposal for charging interest at ‘ SBI Base Rate’ plus two per cent  or 10 per 
cent , whichever is higher’ resulted in adverse financia l impact to NHAI/ exchequer and 
undue financial advantage to the contractors to the tune of 
`14.53 crore.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
11.3 Less receipt to Consolidated Fund India due to  delay in collection of User fees 
The Authority inordinately delayed in commencement of collection of user fees 
leading to less receipt to the Consolidated Fund India by `` ``11.59 crore. 
National Highways Authority of India (Authority) en tered (September 2015) into an 
agreement with M/s GR Infraprojects Limited (Contra ctor) for rehabilitation and upgradation 
of existing road in Jowai-Meghalaya/ Assam Border h aving contract value of `468.27 crore 
with a completion schedule by 16 May 2018.  The wor k being a public funded project was 
executed in EPC 4 mode.  The Highway consisted of two Toll Plazas (T P) i.e., toll plaza-I 
(TP I) and toll plaza-II (TP II).  The work was, ho wever, completed prior to the scheduled 
completion period and the contractor requested (Mar ch 2018) to issue the Provisional 
Completion Certificate (PCC).  The Authority issued  (26  July 2018) the PCC w.e.f. 
31 March 2018.  
The National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 (Fee Rules), 
stipulated that the collection of user fee should c ommence within 45 days from the date of 
completion of the section of the Highway in case of  a public funded project.  Hence, the 
collection of toll for the above Highway should hav e commenced from 10 September 2018 
(i.e. 26 July 2018 + 45 days).  The remittance as received from the toll collections is deposited 
in the Consolidated Fund of India in case of a public funded project.  
                                                           
4  Engineering, Procurement and Construction 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
186  
It was seen that the concerned Project Implementation Unit (PIU 5) of the Authority submitted 
(28 December 2017) draft fee notification to its Re gional Office (RO).  The same was 
approved by Ministry on 24 October 2018.   The fee notification of both the toll plazas was 
published on 09 January 2019 and finally, the toll collections at TP I and TP II were started 
from 01 March 2019 and 25 February 2019 respectivel y.  Thus, the collection of toll was 
started at TP I and TP II after delays of 171 days and 167 days respectively from the 
scheduled dates due to excess time taken at various stages of approval as stated below: 
Table 11.3.1 
Particulars Date Time 
taken in 
days 
Regional Office (RO) forwarded draft notification to NHAI 
Hqrs (Received by RO on 28.12.2017) 
15. 01. 2018  18  
Draft notification by NHAI to Ministry  18 .06.2018  154  
Approval of Ministry  24.10.2018  128  
File received by NHAI for Hindi Translation  16.11. 2018  23  
With Hindi translation, the file was resubmitted to Ministry   26.11.2018  10  
Approval of Hon’ble Minister of Shipping   03.01.20 19  38  
Publication of fee notification of both the toll plazas 09.01.2019  6 
Commencement of toll collections at TP I and TP II  01.03.2019 and 
25.02.2019  
47 and 
52  
Audit observed that abnormal delays at various stag es of approval for finalisation of 
notification for collection of toll, resulted in corresponding delay in collection of toll from the 
users of the Highway which led to less receipt to t he Consolidated Fund India by 
`11.59 6 crore.  
Management while admitting the fact of delay in com mencement of collection of users fees 
stated (October 2019) that this was not due to defa ult of any individual but an instance of 
procedural delay. 
Management’s reply is not acceptable as procedural delays were within the control of 
Management and could have been avoided to prevent such loss. 
Thus, inordinate delay in commencement of collectio n of user fees by authority led to less 
receipt to the Consolidated Fund India by 
`11.59 crore.  Audit recommends that the 
maximum time limit at different levels of approval should be fixed so that collection of toll is 
commenced within 45 days from the date of completion of the Highway.     
The para was issued to the Ministry in November 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
 
 
                                                           
5  PIU Shillong 
6  `` ``    11.59 crore = (171 days x `` ``    2.99 lakh)+  (167 days x `` ``    3.88 lakh) based on the actual toll collections at 
TP I and TP II of `` ``    2.99 lakh per day and `` ``    3.88 lakh respectively 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
187  
11.4 Short remittance of additional concession fee  
Authority incurred a loss of `` ``4.37 crore due to short remittance of additional 
concession fee by concessionaire to Authority as th e concessionaire did not collect fee 
from overloaded vehicles as per the amended Fee Rules  
 
National Highways Authority of India (Authority) en tered into a Concession Agreement 
(CA) with Soma Isolux Kishangarh Beawar Tollway Pri vate Limited (Concessionaire) on 
18 May 2009 for six laning of existing road on Kish angarh-Ajmer-Beawar section of 
National Highway No. 8 in the state of Rajasthan on  BOT mode under NHDP Phase III.  As 
per the CA, the scheduled date of completion of con struction of the project was the 910 th  day 
from the appointed date 7 and the concession period was to commence from the  appointed 
date, i.e. 14 November 2009.  The scheduled Commerc ial Operation Date (COD) 8 was 
12 May 2012, however, the concessionaire achieved t he COD on 28 April 2015 with a delay 
of 1,081 days.  
Audit examination revealed that as per Article 27.1 0 of the CA, the concessionaire was to 
recover a fee from overloaded vehicles at the rate applicable to the next higher category of 
vehicles.  However, the Government of India vide Ga zette Notification dated 
16 December 2013 amended the National Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and 
Collection) Rules, 2008 by charging from the overlo aded vehicles, a fee equal to 10 times of 
the fee applicable to such category of overloaded vehicles.  
However, the Concessionaire charged fee from overlo aded vehicles at the rate applicable to 
next higher category of vehicles upto 31 March 2016  and from 1 April 2016 fee at double the 
rate applicable to the category to which overloaded  vehicle pertained instead of charging fee 
equal to 10 times as per Gazette Notification dated  16 December 2013.  This had adverse 
implication on remittance of Additional Conession Fee (ACF) to Authority, and, accordingly, 
the ACF was short remitted by `4.37 crore (October 2015 to September 2018). 
Management replied (September 2019) that fee was be ing collected by the concessionaire as 
per the provisions of CA.  Further, the concessiona ire was unable to collect fee at 10 times 
and had collected the additional user fee for overl oaded vehicle to the extent of two times 
only w.e.f. 1 April 2016. 
Management has accepted the Audit contention in res pect of short remittance of ACF of 
`4.37 crore on account of short collection of fees on overloaded vehicle by the concessionaire 
to Authority.  
Thus, short collection of fees by concessionaire on  overloaded vehicles as per the amended 
Fee Rules had resulted in short remittance by conce ssionaire to Authority with consequent a 
loss of revenue to Authority/ Exchequer of 
`4.37 crore.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
                                                           
7  Appointed date is a date of start of concession p eriod and construction work of the project. 
8  COD is the date from which the Concessionaire has  the right to start toll collection 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
188  
dustandesh 
 
Dredging Corporation of India Limited 
12.1 Non-safeguarding of financial interests under dredging contract 
Dredging Corporation of India Limited failed to saf eguard its financial interests 
under a dredging contract entered into with Kamaraj ar Port Limited, which resulted 
in avoidable extra expenditure of `` ``18.73 crore.  
Dredging Corporation of India Limited (DCIL) obtain ed (18 October 2014) a Capital 
Dredging Contract from Kamarajar Port Limited (KPL) for deepening of its Coal berths (CB1 
and CB2) at Chettinad International Coal Terminal o f Ennore Port at a total contract price of 
`46.35 crore ( `36.45 crore towards capital dredging and `9.90 crore towards charges for idle 
time of dredgers).  As per the agreement, DCIL was to dredge 3 lakh cubic meters (cum) of 
soft soil upto a depth of 16.0 meters (m) and 7.50 lakh cum of stiff clay/ hard soil from 
16.0 m to 18.50 m depth, aggregating to 1.05 millio n cum quantity with a variation of plus or 
minus 20 per cent .  The contract was to be executed within eight mon ths to be reckoned from 
30 th  day of the date of issue of Letter of Award (LoA),  i.e., by 18 July 2015.  The contract 
provided for levy of liquidated damages for delayed  completion of work at the rate of 
0.5 per cent  per week of the total value of contract subject to  a maximum of 10 per cent  of 
the contract value.  DCIL intended to use Trailing Suction Hopper Dredger (TSHD 1) for 
removing soft soil and Cutter-Suction Dredger (CSD 2) for removing stiff clay/ hard soil.  At 
the time of contract, KPL turned down the proposal of DCIL to pay the mobilisation/ 
demobilisation charges for deployment of dredgers o n the ground that the proposed dredgers 
were already at the seashore of KPL.  Further, the contract stipulated that in order to 
minimise the idle time, DCIL should deploy CSD with prior approval of KPL. 
DCIL completed the dredging contract by 30 October 2015, with a delay of more than three 
months and dredged a quantity of 1.04 million cum a gainst the agreed quantity of 1.05 
million cum and claimed an amount of `36.37 crore.  As KPL did not accord permission to 
deploy CSD, DCIL deployed three TSHDs instead of on e TSHD and one CSD earlier 
intended to complete the entire dredging work and i ncurred an amount of `47.58 crore 
against `36.37 crore claimed as per the contractual terms.  DCIL also incurred an amount of 
`3.81 crore for mobilisation/ demobilisation charges  for deployment of dredgers for 
execution of the contract.  Further, due to delay i n execution of contract, KPL recovered an 
amount of `3.71 crore towards liquidated damages. 
                                                           
1  A trailer suction hopper dredger (TSHD) trails it s suction pipe when working.  The pipe, which is fi tted 
with a dredge drag head, loads the dredge spoil int o one or more hoppers in the vessel.  When the 
hoppers are full, the TSHD sails to a disposal area  and either dumps the material through doors in the  
hull or pumps the material out of the hoppers  
2  A cutter suction dredger’s (CSD) suction tube has  a cutting mechanism at the suction inlet.  The cut ting 
mechanism loosens the bed material and transports i t to the suction mouth.  The dredged material is 
usually sucked up by a wear-resistant centrifugal p ump and discharged either through a pipeline or to a 
barge  
CHAPTER XII: MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
189  
Audit observed that:  
• Prior to issue of LoA, though DCIL had expressed it s intention to use CSD for 
removal of hard soil, it agreed to incorporate a te rm in the contract which stipulated 
requirement of prior permission of KPL for deployme nt of CSD.  When DCIL 
approached for permission, KPL denied the permissio n for deployment of CSD.  As a 
result, DCIL had to dredge the stiff clay/ hard soi l with the TSHDs which were meant 
for removal of soft soil.  
• Due to poor dredging capability of TSHDs, DCIL coul d not complete the contract 
within the scheduled contract period and had to inc ur liquidated damages of 
`3.71 crore. 
• Despite acceptance of terms and conditions by both the parties in May 2014, KPL 
issued the LoA on 18 October 2014.  In the meanwhil e, DCIL de-mobilised its TSHD 
in April 2014 to take up another assignment at Hald ia.  Despite this, DCIL did not 
insist for inclusion of mobilisation charges in the contract.   
• Further, due to not giving permission to deploy CSD  by KPL, the existing CSD was 
withdrawn from the KPL for dry dock works in May 20 15.  In order to execute the 
KPL’s contract, DCIL deployed three TSHDs during th e contract period.  In 
connection with mobilisation and demobilisation of these dredgers, DCIL incurred an 
amount of `3.81 crore which was not reimbursed by KPL.  
Thus, due to deployment of TSHDs for dredging the s tiff clay/ hard soil, DCIL incurred an 
extra expenditure of `11.21 crore (actual expenditure of `47.58 crore less amount of 
`36.37 crore realised as per contractual terms) on e xecution of work, along with `3.71 crore 
towards liquidated damages for delayed completion o f work and `3.81 crore towards 
mobilisation/ demobilisation charges.  
Management replied (November 2019) that: 
• KPL did not agree for deployment of CSD as there wa s no facility for shore pumping, 
no reclamation area and there was no place for doub le handling by TSHD due to 
shipping.  As CSD occupies more space with anchors and other ancillary equipment, 
it would have become a hindrance to the shipping mo vement and other commercial 
operations.  
• Though CSD was required to be deployed to dredge ha rd strata soil, DCIL had 
deployed TSHDs so as to maintain cordial relations with KPL.  As a result, it took 
excess time and expenditure.  
• DCIL could not insist for mobilisation and demobili sation charges since there was no 
such component in the contract. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following:  
• The agreement between KPL and DCIL did not stipulat e double handling of TSHD 
and CSD.  DCIL intended to use TSHD for removal of soft soil upto 16 m for the 
initial two months period of contract.  Thereafter,  it intended to use CSD for removal 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
190  
of hard soil/ stiff clay.  DCIL should have impress ed upon KPL for granting 
permission of deployment of CSD by explaining that without CSD it would take 
much more time and require deployment of more TSHDs .  The payment terms should 
also have been arrived at accordingly.  
• DCIL re-deployed the dredgers available at KPL to t ake up dredge works at another 
port due to delay in issue of LoA by KPL.  However, it did not insist for inclusion of a 
clause in the contract for payment of mobilisation charges. 
• During the pre-award discussions (26 March 2014), s ince the earmarked dredgers 
were available at Ennore Port, KPL did not agree fo r the payment of mobilisation/ 
demobilisation charges.  However, as there was cons iderable delay in issue of work 
order (October 2014) by KPL and DCIL had already re deployed the dredgers to other 
Ports, DCIL should have renegotiated the terms with  the KPL and sought for 
reimbursement of mobilisation/ demobilisation charges incurred.  
The Ministry replied (November 2019) that:  
• DCIL intended to use both CSD and TSHDs as per the requirement and contract rates 
were inclusive of mobilisation and demobilisation c harges.  TSHDs were meant for 
removal of hard soil also.  
• Since the dredgers which would have been idle other wise were efficiently utilised for 
dredging and earned revenue, the cost of dredging cannot be considered extra. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following  
• DCIL intended to use TSHD for removal of soft soil and CSD for removal of hard 
soil/ stiff clay.  However, due to denial by KPL for deployment of CSD, the Company 
had to deploy TSHDs for removal of hard soil/ stiff  clay which resulted in extra time 
and cost.  
• Due to deployment of more TSHDs, the Company incurr ed additional expenditure of 
`11.21 crore than the revenue realised amounting to `36.37 crore, apart from 
imposition of liquidated damages of `3.71 crore and non-realisation of mobilisation/ 
demobilisation charges of `3.81 crore.  Further, for keeping the CSD harboured  at 
KPL port idle during 2014-15, it incurred `7.71 crore towards operation expenses and 
overhead without earning any revenue.  
Thus, DCIL’s failure in safeguarding its financial interests under the dredging contract with 
KPL resulted in incurring of avoidable extra expenditure amounting to `18.73 crore.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
191  
CHAPTER XIII: MINISTRY OF STEEL  
 
MECON Limited 
13.1 Loss due to termination of contract and encash ment of BG by the client 
Delay in commencement of work by MECON Limited and inability to ensure 
submission of Bank Guarantee (BG) by its foreign as sociate, to execute External Coal 
Handling Plant Project awarded by NTPC, resulted in  termination of contract and 
encashment of BG by NTPC and loss of `42.26 crore to MECON. 
NTPC Limited invited bids for External Coal Handlin g Plant (ECHP) for North Karanpura 
Super Thermal Power Project (NKSTPP) in January 2015.  Since MECON Limited (MECON 
or company) was not meeting the eligibility criteri a for the above work, it arranged a pre-
tender tie up with M/s Northern Heavy Industries Gr oup Co Limited, China (NHI) and M/s 
JMC Projects (India) Limited (JMC) to submit the bid for above work.  The company entered 
into Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with its foreign associate NHI for Pipe Conveyor 
work and with the Indian Associate, JMC for Civil works in June 2015.  
NTPC awarded the work of ECHP for NKSTPP to MECON i n February 2017 at a cost of 
`394 crore 1 to be completed by June 2019.  Contract was signed  between NTPC and 
MECON on 7 March 2017.  MECON awarded the work orde r for design, manufacture, 
supply and commissioning of Pipe Conveyors for `100 crore (October 2017) to NHI and 
Civil works of the project to JMC (September 2017).  MECON was responsible for Detailed 
Engineering, Soil investigation, Site survey etc. 
• As per clause 34.1 & 34.2 of Instruction to Bidders , MECON was required to furnish 
a Bank Guarantee (BG) for 10 per cent  of the contract value and its associates were to 
furnish BG (2 per cent  for NHI and 0.63 per cent  for JMC) for faithful performance 
within 28 days of the placement of order failing wh ich, NTPC had the right to annul 
the tender. 
• As per the GoI OM (April 2015), prior approval of c omptent authority was required 
for entering into MoU with any foreign agency.  
Audit observed that MECON took five months upto 11 July 2017, to seek approval of Board 
of Directors for placement of order to NHI, China.  Meanwhile in a meeting held 
18 May 2017, a Government Director raised the issue  of requirement of prior approval of 
comptent authority for entering into MoUs with any foreign agency.  MECON sought 
exemption (17 July 2017) from Ministry of Steel for  pre-tender tie up with NHI, which was 
granted by the Ministry vide letter dated 20 Septem ber 2017 (approx two months from the 
date of receipt of the proposal).  Audit noted that  there was no progress upto May 2017 and 
only some engineering work was done by MECON wherea s, NTPC kept issuing letters and 
reminders for submission of BG.  
                                                           
1  Considering 1USD equivalent to `` ``    66.98 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
192  
Audit also noted that, MECON submitted BG of `39.12 crore in October 2017 (seven months 
delay) despite being requested several times by NTPC to adhere to timelines.  JMC submitted 
BG of `2.48 crore in January 2018 (nine months delay).  NH I requested MECON to submit 
BG of `7.88 crore on their behalf (with back to back BG to be submitted by NHI to MECON) 
because in absence of any direct contract between N TPC and NHI, banks in China were not 
ready to furnish BG to NTPC.  This, however, was no t accepted by MECON.  MECON 
thereby exposed itself to risk, as NHI had neither submitted its part of BG nor carried any of 
the contractual obligations. 
In view of persistent failure of MECON and its asso ciates to discharge their contractual 
obligations and non-submission of BG, NTPC terminat ed the contract in February 2018 and 
encashed the BG of MECON for 
`39.12 crore and BG of JMC for `2.48 crore as per 
provisions of the contract.  MECON approached the H igh Court of Jharkhand where both the 
parties being PSUs agreed (July 2018) to get the di spute resolved through Administrative 
Mechanism for Resolution of CPSEs Disputes (AMRCD).   The company pleaded before 
AMRCD that NTPC had unfairly terminated the contrac t and therefore should refund 
`62.26 crore 2 incurred by it on the project.  AMRCD opined (Octo ber 2019) that termination 
of contract and forfeiture of BGs by NTPC was justi fied, but NTPC should pay `20 crore 
towards cost incurred by MECON against works carrie d out by them and loss suffered due to 
invocation of BG.  All claims and counter claims of  parties stood settled and accordingly, 
NTPC paid `20 crore to MECON on 30 November 2019. 
MECON replied (April 2019) that arrangements to com mence the work and measures to 
ensure timely delivery of the project were taken im mediately and excavation work 
commenced in February 2018.  It further stated that  the process to obtain approval from 
Ministry was initiated only after knowing the requi rement of GoI’s approval for entering into 
MoU with foreign partners. 
Ministry reiterated (March 2020) the views of the Management  
Reply of Management/ Ministry was not acceptable in view of the fact that  
i)  Survey work by MECON was scheduled to be completed by May 2017 whereas 
MECON placed the order for survey only in October 2 017 and the survey report was 
submitted in December 2017 with a delay of seven mo nths.  MECON started soil excavation 
only after issue of contractual notice by the clien t in February 2018 (after 11 months of the 
award of work) and could excavate only 10,000 cum ( 8.45 per cent ) when the contract was 
terminated by NTPC.  Pipe Conveyors were not supplied by NHI as per agreed schedule, and  
ii)  Guideline for prior GoI’s approval was issued in Ap ril 2015 i.e. well before entering 
into MoU. MECON should have obtained such prior approval, whereas it sought the approval 
of Ministry of Steel for pre-tender tie up with NHI , in July 2017, which delayed the placing 
of work orders thereby delaying the whole project a nd finally leading to the termination of 
the project.  
                                                           
2  Comprising of `` ``    41.73 crore for guarantees encashed, `` ``    20 crore towards cost of design & engineering, 
rasgeotechnical investigation work, civil works etc and `` ``    0.53 crore incurred on site mobilization 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
193  
Due to delay in award and commencement of work and inability of Management to ensure 
timely submission of BG by its associate, the company suffered a loss of `42.26 crore. 
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited 
13.2  Energy Management 
13.2.1  Introduction  
Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, Visakhapatnam (RINL)  incorporated (February 1982) under 
the administrative control of Ministry of Steel (Mo S), established an Integrated Steel Plant 
with an installed capacity of 3.0 Million Tonnes Pe r Annum (MTPA) of liquid steel to 
produce and sell iron and steel products.  It comme nced full-fledged operations in phases by 
August 1992.  As of 31 March 2019, capacity expansi on of the plant from 3.0 MTPA to 6.3 
MTPA and subsequently to 7.3 MTPA through upgradati on/ modernisation was substantially 
completed except development of Madharam Mines 3 and revamping of Sinter Machine 2 4. 
To meet the power requirements (prior to 31 March 2 014), RINL set up a Thermal Power 
Plant (TPP) with five Turbo Generators (TGs) and Au xiliary Power Generating Units with an 
overall installed capacity of 388.60 5 Mega Watt (MW).  To meet additional power 
requirement towards capacity expansion, the capacit y of captive power generation was also 
enhanced in phased manner to 542.48 6 MW as of 31 March 2019. 
13.2.2 Organisation set up 
RINL is governed by Board of Directors headed by th e Chairman-cum-Managing Director 
(CMD) who is assisted by five Functional Directors looking after Operations, Commercial, 
Projects, Finance and Personnel.  General Managers are in-charge of TPP and Distribution 
Network and report to Executive Director (Works) wh o in turn reports to Director 
(Operations). 
13.2.3 Scope of Audit 
Audit scope included generation, purchase and distr ibution of energy covering the period of 
five years ending March 2019.  
13.2.4 Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted to examine whether: 
• overall power generation performance was as per norms and targets; 
                                                           
3  Expected to be completed by December 2019 
4  Expected to be completed during 2020-21 
5  (a) 315 MW of TPP by synchronising 3 TGs of 60 MW  each between March 1989 and December 1990 
and 2 TGs of 67.5 MW each in May 1996 and November 2013; (b) 15 MW (2 X 7.5 MW) of Back 
Pressure Turbine Station (BPTS) - 1 & 2 in December  1990; (c) 24 MW (2 X 12 MW) of Gas Expansion 
Turbine Stations (GETS) - 1 & 2 in February and Aug ust 1993 respectively; (d) 14 MW of Coke Oven 
Battery (COB) - 4 Plant in April 2012; and (e) 20.6  MW of Sinter Heat Recovery Power Plant (SHRPP) 
in March 2014 
6  153.88 MW by commissioning (i) 14.88 MW of Top Re covery Turbine (TRT) in June 2014; (ii) 120 MW 
of Gas based Captive Power Plant (CPP) - 2 in March  2016; (iii) 14 MW of COB-5 Plant in May 2018; 
and (iv) 5 MW Solar Power Plant in December 2016 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
194  
• consumption of required materials/ inputs was economical; 
• captive generating units were operated effectively,  ensuring their optimum use and 
maximising power generation there from; and 
• energy conservation and distribution mechanism were effective. 
13.2.5 Audit criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from Sustainability Pla ns, Memoranda of Understanding entered 
into by RINL with Administrative Ministry i.e., Min istry of Steel, Notifications of Central 
Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC), operation al efficiency of other steel plants, 
Minutes of meetings of Board of Directors, etc. 
13.2.6  Audit methodology 
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records rela ting to periodical reports on generation 
and distribution of power and steam, outages of gen erating units, interaction and discussion 
with Management, issue of audit requisitions, solic iting records/ data/ information and issue 
of audit observations and the draft audit report to RINL (in December 2019). 
13.2.7     Audit findings  
 
13.2.7.1    Captive Generation Capacity of RINL  
Electricity power requirement of 228 MW at 3.0 MTPA  was revised to 546 MW at 
7.3 MTPA on expansion/ upgradation.  Captive power generating capacity through TPP 
(315 MW), Solar Power Plant (5 MW) and Gas based CP P-2 (120 MW) stood at 440 MW.  
To convert waste heat generated in production proce ss into electrical energy, RINL also 
commissioned Auxiliary Power Generation units with a capacity of 102.48 MW 7, thereby 
increasing the total captive power generating capacity of RINL to 542.48 MW as of 31 March 
2019.  Besides captive generation, RINL also had an  agreement (August 2014) with Andhra 
Pradesh Eastern Power Distribution Company Limited (APEPDCL) to purchase power with 
Contracted Maximum Demand (CMD) of 1,85,000 KVA whi ch was further enhanced 
(April 2018) to 2,35,000 KVA.  
i)  Operational efficiency  
The details of the installed capacity, targets for power generation, actual power generation, 
power purchased and cost of generation and purchase  during the five years from 2014-15 to 
2018-19 are given below: 
                                                           
7 (a) 15 MW BPTS-1&2; (b) 24 MW GETS-1&2; (c) 14 MW each of COB-4&5 Plants; (d) 20.6 MW 
SHRPP also called as New Energy and Industrial Tech nology Development Organisation (NEDO) 
Project; and (e) 14.88 MW TRT 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
195  
Table-13.2.1: Cost of power generated vis-à-vis power purchased 
Year Installed 
Captive 
capacity 8 
(MW per 
hour) 
MOU 9 
target 
(MW 
per 
hour) 
Target as per 
sustainability 10  
plan 
(MW 
per hour) 
Actual 
Captive 
generation 
(MW per 
hour) 
Shortfall with 
ref. to installed 
capacity 
(MW per hour) 
Purchase 
from 
APEPDCL 
(MW) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (2-5) 7 
2014-15 342.10 252.50 261.39 206.92 135.18 50.45 
2015-16 356.98 269.70 273.60 217.08 139.90 64.91 
2016-17 356.98 256.90 249.67 207.75 149.23 78.17 
2017-18 476.98 338.54 338.54 294.20 182.78 58.32 
2018-19 476.98 366.99 366.99 332.69 144.29 49.49 
Year Consumption 
(MW) 
 
Total captive power 
generation during the year 
(MWH) 
Total power 
purchased 
during the 
year (MWH) 
Overall annual 
average 
variable cost of 
generation  
(`` `` per MWH ) 
Energy 
charges & 
electricity 
duty for 
purchase  
(`` `` per MWH) 
1 8 9 10 11 12 
2014-15 277.19 18,12,820 4,41,954 4,592 5,511 
2015-16 304.38 19,06,991 5,70,162 4,623 5,789 
2016-17 326.24 18,20,011 6,84,729 5,358 5,900 
2017-18 374.60 25,76,875 5,10,860 5,290 6,111 
2018-19 407.65 29,14,248 4,33,500 5,286 6,111 
  1,10,30,945 26,41,205   
It can be seen from the above table that in all the  years, actual captive generation was lower 
as compared to the installed capacity as well as MO U targets and RINL’s Sustainability Plan.  
Shortage in captive generation was met significantl y by purchase from APEPDCL and such 
purchase of power showed an increasing trend up to 2016-17 and reducing trend in 
subsequent years mainly due to stabilisation of 120  MW Gas based CPP-2 from 
September 2017. 
Shortage in captive generation was attributable to various factors such as shortage of boiler 
coal, low performance of boilers of TPP, outages of boilers/ auxiliary power generation units, 
higher consumption of process steam, delayed genera tion of power from TRT and forced 
outage of new TG-5.  These issues have been discussed in detail in the succeeding paras. 
Management replied (January 2020) that (a) only 50 MW power could be generated in TG-5 
as against the installed capacity of 67.50 MW with the balance steam after meeting the steam 
requirement of Turbo Blower-4 & process steam; and (b) power generation from Auxiliary 
Power units was linked to the performance/ heat rec overy from various units such as Coke 
Oven & Coal Chemical Plant (CO&CCP), Blast Furnaces  (BFs), Sinter Machine etc., which 
contributed to low Plant Load Factor (PLF).  
                                                           
8  Excluding BPTS-1&2 (15 MW), COB-4&5 (28 MW) for 2 014-15 to 2018-19 as arriving shortfall in 
power generation without considering the actual gro ss coke produced may not be appropriate; Solar 
Power Plant (5 MW) for 2014-15 to 2018-19; CPP-2 (1 20 MW) for 2014-15 to 2016-17 as it was stated to 
be stabilized from September 2017; and TRT for 2014 -15 as it was commissioned in June 2014. Installed 
Capacity of TG-5 is taken as 50 MW only instead of 67.50 MW based on Management reply 
9  Target of power generation as per the Memorandum of Understanding entered with MoS  
10  Target of power generation as per the Sustainabili ty Plan, which is prepared annually by RINL 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
196  
The reply is not acceptable.  Even after considerin g the installed capacity of TG-5 as 50 MW 
and excluding BPTS-1&2, COB-4&5 for the entire peri od of 2014-19 and CPP-2 for the 
period 2014-16, there was still shortfall in genera tion of power ranging between 135.18 MW 
(2014-15) and 182.78 MW (2017-18) with reference to  their installed capacities.  
Commissioning of SHRPP without carrying out capital  repairs to the 25 years old Sinter 
Machine was the main reason for not getting suffici ent heat required for generation of 
auxiliary power from SHRPP. 
ii)  Low Plant Load Factor (PLF) of Thermal Power Plant  
One of the parameters to measure efficiency of TPPs  is Plant Load Factor (PLF) 
11 .  As per 
CERC’s notification (2014-19), PLF norm for operati on of TPP is 85 per cent.  Against the 
norm of 85 per cent , actual PLF achieved by the 315 MW Main TPP of RINL during 2014-15 
to 2018-19 was low and ranged between 67.16 (2016-1 7) and 74.66 per cent (2018-19) as 
detailed below: 
Table-13.2.2: PLF achieved by Thermal Power Plant 
Sl. Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
a Total captive power 
generated (MWh) 17,82,716 18,76,396 17,50,120 18,34,687 19,45,763 
b Total captive power capacity 
(MW per hour) 
12  297.50 297.50 297.50 297.50 297.50 
c Total calendar hours during 
the year 8760 8784 8760 8760 8760 
d Average hourly generation 
(MW per hour) (a/c) 203.51 213.62 199.79 209.44 222.12 
e Combined PLF percentage 
((d/b) x100) 68.41 71.80 67.16 70.40 74.66 
A statement showing the loss of generation due to l ow PLF is at Annexure-XXVII.  It could 
be seen from Annexure-XXVII that as against the stipulated norm of 85 per cent of PLF, 
total shortfall in generation by Main TPP during th e years 2014-15 to 2018-19 was 18,92,312 
MWh valuing `130.44 crore.  The reasons for lesser production of  power from captive plants 
have been discussed in detail in the subsequent paragraphs.  
Management replied (January 2020) that even when al l machines were available for 
generating power from TPP and Auxiliaries Units, ge neration was restricted sometimes in 
those units in order to comply with minimum compuls ory import of 7,400 MVAH per month 
in lieu of CMD (minimum 88,800 MVAH per year).  Und er such a scenario, PLF of the plant 
could not be compared with other power generating u nits, which generally did not have such 
type of limitations.  Hence, PLF for TPP was not co mparable with CERC norm.  It was also 
stated that Plant Load 13  met by RINL was in excess of 76 per cent  during the last five years . 
 
                                                           
11  PLF is the ratio between the actual energy generat ed by Plant and maximum possible generation for 
actual operating hours at installed capacity 
12   Installed Capacity of TG-5 is taken as 50 MW only  instead of 67.50 MW based on Management reply 
13  Plant Load met by RINL was arrived by dividing ave rage captive generation in MWs with average Plant 
Load in MWs (i.e., average captive generation + average power purchased) 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
197  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• PLF norms were operational for all TPP units and we re to be considered as 
benchmark to ensure efficient operations. Further, while replying to a previous draft 
Report, the Ministry had stated (March 2017) that C entral Electricity Authority kept a 
norm for PLF as 80 per cent  in respect of power plants of steel industry.  Eve n 
considering the PLF as 80 per cent , and also considering the minimum import of 
power from APEPDCL, the overall shortfall in power generation by TPP as well as 
the avoidable purchase of power from APEPDCL during  2014-19 was 12,40,430 
MWh valuing `85.48 crore. 
• To assess the operational efficiency of TPPs of ste el industry like RINL, PLF should 
have been considered and not the plant load met by captive generation, as stated by 
Management. 
Thus, captive power generation needs to be increase d by improving PLF to at least 80 per 
cent, which would result in reduction in expenditure on purchase of power. 
iii)  Low power generation by TPP due to shortage of boiler coal 
As per the targets laid down in the RINL’s Sustaina bility Plan and considering the targeted 
power generation, annual boiler coal requirement du ring 2014-15 to 2018-19 was estimated 
between 22.17 lakh tons (2016-17) and 26.47 lakh to ns (2015-16).  In order to get coal 
required for TPP, RINL entered (June 2008) into a F uel Supply Agreement (FSA) with 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited (MCL) which was valid u p to June 2013 with Annual 
Committed Quantity (ACQ) of 16.80 lakh tons.  The F SA was renewed (November 2013) for 
another five years for the same quantity. 
As MCL was not supplying ACQ of boiler coal, RINL purchased a total quantity of 7.22 lakh 
tons of boiler coal from Singareni Collieries Compa ny Limited (SCCL) during 2014-19, 
including 1.27 lakh tons purchased under e-auction during 2017-18, and imported 7.94 lakh 
tons of boiler coal during 2015-19.  Besides, FSA f or supply of 3 lakh tonnes per annum for 
four years from April 2018 was finalised with SCCL.   The details of boiler coal purchased 
during 2014-15 to 2018-19 from various sources are given below: 
Table-13.2.3: Boiler coal purchased during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(Quantity in lakh tonne) 
Year 
Requirement of 
boiler coal 
projected as per 
Sustainability Plan  
Boiler coal 
linkage 
from MCL  
Boiler coal 
purchased  
from MCL  
Boiler coal 
purchased 
from SCCL  
Boiler 
coal 
imported  
Total 
boiler 
coal 
receipts 
2014-15 24.00 16.80 14.35 0.41 0 14.76 
2015-16 26.47 16.80 14.20 0.95 0.47 15.62 
2016-17 22.17 16.80 14.00 2.94 0.51 17.45 
2017-18 25.00 16.80 14.52 1.27 2.56 18.35 
2018-19 25.00 16.80 12.08 1.65 4.40 18.13 
From the above table, it may be seen that in all the years, there was shortfall in receipt of coal 
when compared to the coal requirement projected as per Sustainability Plan, though the 
shortfall was in reducing trend.  Due to shortage o f boiler coal during 2014-19, TPPs were 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
198  
operated at partial loads during 11 months 14  resulting in shortfall in generation of power of 
2,78,952 MWh.  Though boiler coal from lone long-te rm supplier (viz. MCL) was erratic, 
RINL did not make adequate efforts to make up the s hortfall in supplies by procuring boiler 
coal from other sources.  Consequently, RINL had to  purchase 5,70,737 MWh from 
APEPDCL in the above months out of which purchase o f 2,64,828 15  MWh was avoidable 
with resultant expenditure of `16.78 16  crore. 
Management replied (January 2020) that in order to maintain sufficient coal requirement for 
power generation, Raw Material Department along wit h Material Management Department 
was regularly taking up the matter with various associated agencies like suppliers of coal, and 
Railways.  Material Management Department had also pursued with MCL about the poor 
supplies and requirement about meeting the FSA quantity. 
The reply is not acceptable.  When MCL failed to su pply required quantity of boiler coal, 
RINL neither explored the procurement of boiler coa l under e-auction from CIL units and 
SCCL, nor finalised a long-term MoU with other coal  suppliers for additional boiler coal 
during the period of 11 months pointed out by audit.  
iv)  Imprudent blending of costly medium coking coal with boiler coal 
Indigenous boiler coal was the prime material for p ower generation by TPP.  Boilers of TPP 
at RINL were designed to use indigenous boiler coal  with Gross Calorific Value (CV) of 
3,680-4,500 Kilo Calories (Kcal) per kg.  Due to sh ort receipt of boiler coal, RINL used 
Medium Coking Coal (MCC) with CV of 5,400 Kcal/ kg 17  and Imported Boiler Coal (IBC) 
with CV of 6,300 Kcal/ kg for blending with indigen ous boiler coal.  This was done as MCC/ 
IBC with higher CV could not be fired directly in T PP boilers.  Instead, indigenous boiler 
coal was blended with the above higher CV coals to ensure that gross CV was within the 
design range. 
Audit observed that SCCL was selling boiler coal th rough e-auction from December 2007 
and the subsidiaries of Coal India Limited (CIL) we re selling boiler coal under e-auction 
from August 2009.  Though the procurement of boiler  coal through e-auction was cost 
effective as compared to procurement cost of MCC, R INL failed to avail this alternative to 
meet the short supply of boiler coal from MCL.  The  average procurement cost of MCC was 
between 
`7,241 - `7,362 per ton as against `1,597 - `2,463 per  ton  under  e-auction rate of 
boiler coal during 2014-15 to 2016-17.  RINL consum ed 3,87,938 18  tons of MCC for 
blending with indigenous boiler coal during 2014-15 to 2016-17.  MCC was not blended with 
boiler coal during the years 2017-18 and 2018-19.  Considering actual CV of MCC vis-à-vis 
that of boiler coal, blending of costlier MCC of 3, 87,938 tons valuing `283.58 crore which 
                                                           
14  June to September 2014; and January, May, June, Ju ly, September, November & December 2017 
15  Considering shortfall in power generation and ener gy purchased, whichever is lower 
16  Considering excess of tariff for energy charges pl us electricity duty over annual average operating 
variable cost as per TPP cost sheet 
17   Purchased from Central Coalfields Limited 
18   1,62,884 tons, 1,45,224 tons and 79,830 tons for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
199  
was equivalent to indigenous boiler coal of 6,95,79 2 19  tons valuing `138.37 crore to generate 
same quantum of power resulted in avoidable expenditure of `145.21 crore 20 . 
Management replied (January 2020) that: 
• Usage of MCC was not due to shortage of boiler coal  but was due to receipt of high 
ash content of indigenous boiler coal, which did not meet the design limit of gross CV 
of the RINL’s Boilers. 
• IBC could be used as an alternative to boiler coal in case of short supplies but had to 
be handled carefully as it was highly susceptible to self-ignition. 
• Apart from logistics problems, high volatility in international market with reference to 
IBC prices was also taken into account for not contemplating the long-term agreement 
approach for IBC linkage. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• As against the requirement of boiler coal which ran ged between 22.17 lakh tons and 
26.47 lakh tons for the years 2014-15 to 2018-19, t he actual procurement of boiler 
coal ranged between 14.76 lakh tons and 18.35 lakh tons.  Hence, usage of MCC in 
the coal blend was due to shortage of boiler coal. 
• The Water Sprinkler System in Boiler Coal Bed was c ommissioned on 16 August 
2014 to avoid self-ignition in coal yards.  Further , it is also a replied fact that the 
logistic problem was addressed by RINL at tipplers,  by water quenching of materials 
while in wagons itself, before tippling, and hence, IBC could be carefully handled. 
• The average percentage of ash content in IBC ranged  between 9.24 and 11.55 during 
2014-15 to 2016-17 when compared to that of MCC, which ranged between 24.51 and 
32.93 during the same period.  Further, the Gross CV of IBC was also higher than that 
of MCC and was also cost effective.  Hence, inspite  of high volatility in international 
market with reference to coal prices, blending of I BC with indigenous boiler coal 
instead of MCC was economical.  Considering these a spects, disregarding MCC fully 
and blending indigenous boiler coal with IBC could have been explored. 
13.2.7.2  Steam production 
i)  Low performance of TPP Boilers 
TPP had five Boilers to produce High Pressure (HP) steam with capacity of 330 Tons Per 
Hour (TPH) each with firing of multi-fuels like Coa l, Coke Oven Gas (CO Gas), Blast 
Furnace Gas (BF Gas) and Furnace Oil which were als o used for start-up and for flame 
stability as and when required.  Boiler coal was pu lverised in Bowl Mills and fired in the 
                                                           
19  Considering annual average CV of MCC with that of indigenous boiler coal, 1 ton of MCC is equivalent 
to 1.60 tons, 1.73 tons and 2.30 tons of indigenous  boiler coal for the years 2014-15 to 2016-17 
respectively to generate same heat/ steam/ power; 
20  Considering difference between RINL’s annual avera ge procurement price of MCC and prevailing 
annual average price of indigenous boiler coal unde r spot e-auction for the years 2014-15 to 2015-16, 
computed as per Annual Report of Ministry of Coal for 2016-17. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
200  
Furnace.  Steam produced through Boilers was used i n four Turbo Blowers for BF and then 
largely for power generation.  To meet increased steam requirements of Plant after expansion, 
additional Boiler-6 of 330 TPH was commissioned in June 2013 increasing the total capacity 
to 1,980 TPH of steam. 
Of the six Boilers, one Boiler was kept as stand-by , and the balance five Boilers, in full load 
of operation, were capable of producing steam of 1, 650 TPH.  To conserve energy, the 
Boilers were required to be operated to produce ste am to the maximum extent, to generate 
required power and meet the process needs.  The det ails of hourly rate of steam production 
with reference to utilised hours by TPP Boilers during 2014-15 to 2018-19 are given below: 
Table-13.2.4: Hourly rate of steam generated by each Boiler  
Year 
MOU 
Target for 
Steam (T) 
Total TPP 
Steam (T) 
Hourly Rate of Steam Production (T) 
Boiler 1 Boiler 2 Boiler 3 Boiler 4 Boiler 5 Boiler 6 
2014-15 130,71,480 102,89,785 253.2 252.8 263.3 253 .7 273.1 275.1 
2015-16 135,78,000 107,71,645 239.8 233.1 223.4 231 .4 250.4 303.6 
2016-17 135,78,000 104,99,682 225.2 223.5 218.3 243 .2 257.5 319.2 
2017-18 128,33,400 106,78,349 242.4 213.1 225.5 229.8 240.1 313.1 
2018-19 130,61,868 112,14,754 231.5 221.7 237.9 241 .6 268.7 324.0 
It can be seen from the above  that the overall steam production was less when com pared to 
the MoU targets set with the Ministry of Steel.  Th e hourly steam production was decreasing 
in respect of Boilers 1 to 5 during the period 2014 -15 to 2016-17 and slightly increased / 
decreased during 2017-18 and 2018-19.  Further, ste am production by Boilers 1 to 5 reached 
a maximum of 273.1 TPH in the period of five years against a rated capacity of 330 TPH.  
However, the hourly rate of Boiler 6, being newly c ommissioned in June 2013, was 
improving during the period 2014-15 to 20108-19.  
Further, the efficiency of TPP boilers to produce H P steam was between 74.12 per cent 
(2017-18) and 79.09 per cent (2014-15) as under: 
Table-13.2.5: Boiler efficiency during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
Year Total steam produced by 
TPP with utilised hours (T) 
Overall average hourly 
steam production per Boiler 
for utilised hours (T) 
Boilers efficiency 
(3/ 330 x 100) 
(per cent ) 
1 2 3 4 
2014-15 102,89,785 261.0 79.09 
2015-16 107,71,645 247.7 75.06 
2016-17 104,99,682 248.7 75.36 
2017-18 106,78,349 244.6 74.12 
2018-19 112,14,754 256.8 77.82 
Management replied (January 2020) that the reductio n in steam was due to receipt of coal 
with high ash content and high moisture content in rainy season and also due to aging of 
equipment.  It was also stated that broad initiativ es for the improvement of performance of 
TPP Boilers 1&2 were taken during 2018-19 and 2019-20 and replacement of ducts would be 
taken up in other Boilers during their Electrostatic Precipitator (ESP) Revamping Project.  
The reply is not acceptable as concerted and fruitf ul efforts to sort out the issue of receipt of 
inferior boiler coal with high ash content from MCL , by taking up at the highest level and 
resolve the same proved inadequate.  It is evident from the reply that the Company belatedly 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
201  
took up the initiatives in 2018-19 for the improvem ent of 30-year-old Boilers 1&2.  Delayed 
action was the main reason for low performance of t he boilers, as evident from the better 
performance of Boiler 6, which was relatively newer.  
13.2.7.3    Performance of Thermal Power Plant and Auxiliary Power Generation Units 
i)   Performance of TPP (Boilers and Turbo Generators ( TGs))  
Capital repairs of Boilers were planned once in eve ry year for 30-35 days and capital repairs 
of Turbine Generators (TGs) were planned for 40 days every year on need basis.  Further, due 
to operational problems, Boilers and TGs would also  be under unplanned/ forced outages and 
repairs were to be carried out on urgent basis.  
(a)   Impact on steam production and power generation 
The details of average hourly generation of power f rom the turbine generators (TGs) during 
2014-15 to 2018-19 may be seen at Annexure-XXVIII, the abstract of which is given below:  
Table-13.2.6: Average hourly generation of power during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
Year TG-1 - 60 MW TG-2 - 60 MW TG-3 - 60 MW TG-4 - 67.5 MW TG-5 - 67.5 MW 
2014-15  45.8 49.2 48.6 48.9 59.1 
2015-16  45.4 44.1 38.2 44.5 51.1 
2016-17  48.9 36.5 41.6 43.9 51.3 
2017-18  47.6 36.9 45.9 44.4 53.6 
2018-19  48.5 50.8 48.5 55.7 58.6 
Further audit analysis revealed that: 
• The average hourly production of steam by TPP Boile rs during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
ranged between 213 TPH (Boiler 2 in 2017-18) and 32 4 TPH (Boiler 6 in 2018-19), 
against the installed capacity of 330 TPH.  Forced shutdown hours of TPP boilers for 
the years 2014-15 to 2018-19 ranged between 73 hour s (2016-17) and 780 hours 
(2014-15).  Due to forced outages of Boilers during  these years, the Company was 
unable to generate 3,17,910 tons of steam. 
• The average hourly generation by TGs 1, 2 and 3 ran ged between 36.5 MW (TG-2 in 
2016-17) and 50.8 MW (TG-2 in 2018-19) as against 6 0 MW capacity each and that 
of TGs 4 and 5 was between 43.9 MW (TG-4 in 2016-17 ) and 59.1 MW (TG-5 in 
2014-15) against 67.5 MW capacity each.  Forced shu tdown hours of TGs of TPP for 
the years 2014-15 to 2018-19 ranged between 89 hour s (2015-16) and 1,077 hours 
(2014-15).  Due to forced outages of TGs during the se years, the Company was 
unable to generate 4,65,485 MWh of power. 
• This apart, there was forced outage of TG-5 for 160  days during April to September 
2014 due to the negligence of the Technical Consult ant in identifying the defect 
during the supervision of the fixation of thrust co llar of rotor shaft at the time of 
commissioning of TG-5 in November 2013. 
(b)   Time taken for outages/ shutdown 
The details of the time taken for planned outages/ shutdown of Boilers and TGs for the years 
2014-15 to 2018-19 is at Annexure-XXIX , the abstract of which is given below: 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
202  
Table-13.2.7: Excess time taken for planned outages/ shutdown of Boilers and TGs  
(In number of days) 
Year 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total 
Boiler-1 29 22 18 21 246 336 
Boiler-2 18 34 27 29 - 108 
Boiler-3 51 25 8 7 - 91 
Boiler-4 43 38 26 - 37 144 
Boiler-5 11 31 - 25 - 67 
Boiler-6 - 30 7 4 - 41 
Total  787 
TG-1 - - - - 139 139 
TG-2 - - - - 25 25 
TG-3 - - 43 - - 43 
TG-4 - - - - - - 
TG-5 - - - - - - 
Total  207 
While reviewing the time taken on capital repairs d uring April 2014 to March 2019, from 
Annexure-XXIX, Audit observed that - 
• Out of the 24 planned capital repairs for TPP Boile rs, total excess time of 787 days 
was taken against the stipulated 35 days for each c apital repair in 23 cases, with 
excess time on each occasion ranging between 4 (Boi ler 6 in 2017-18) and 246 days 
(Boiler 1 in 2018-19); and   
• Out of the three planned capital repairs carried ou t in TGs, in all the cases, RINL has 
taken total excess time of 207 days when compared to the planned days.   
Management replied (January 2020) that the capital repairs to TG-1, 2 & 3 were taken up on 
an emergency basis due to sudden breakdown of the m achine and non-availability of spare 
rotor and inner casing at site as they were undergo ing repairs at BHEL.  It also assured that 
efforts were being made to minimise such delays in future. 
The reply is not acceptable as the delays in comple tion of capital repairs of TG-1&2 in 
2018-19 and TG-3 in 2016-17 were mainly due to non-availability of a spare rotor, other than 
a rotor procured as a two-year operational spare wa y back in 1988 and declared as beyond 
repair in May 2019.  Management’s reply was silent on the excess time taken on capital 
repairs to Boilers and failure of the Technical Con sultant to identify the defects during the 
commissioning of TG-5. 
Thus, excess time taken beyond planned shutdown for  annual capital repairs was causing 
reduced hours of utilisation of Boilers/ TGs with r esultant reduction in steam and thereby 
causing lower power generation with consequential p urchase from APEPDCL.  Since Boilers 
were taken down for planned capital repairs once in  every year, excess down time than that 
stipulated was avoidable. 
ii)   Performance of Auxiliary Power Generation units 
The following table  indicates the details of calendar hours, utilised h ours and hours lost by 
Auxiliary Power Generation units during 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
203  
Table-13.2.8: Utilised hours and hours lost by Auxiliary Power Generation Units  
Year Calendar 
hours 
BPTS-1  
(7.5 MW) 
BPTS-2 
(7.5 MW) 
GETS-1 
(12 MW) 
A ( per cent ) B A ( per cent ) B A ( per cent ) B 
2014-15 8,760 8,121 
(93) 47 7,421 
(85) 752 0 
(0) 0 
2015-16 8,784 8,657 
(99) 64 8,501 
(97) 181 0 
(0) 0 
2016-17 8,760 8,473 
(97) 184 8,348 
(95) 361 341 
(4) 0 
2017-18 8,760 7,168 
(82) 1,592 8,556 
(98) 204 6,749 
(77) 2,011 
2018-19 8,760 8,691 
(99) 69 8,164 
(93) 596 597 
(7) 8,213 
Year 
GETS-2 
(12 MW) 
COB-4 
(14 MW) 
NEDO Project 
(20.6 MW) 
TRT 
(14.88 MW) 
A ( per cent ) B A ( per 
cent ) B A ( per cent ) B A ( per cent ) B 
2014-15 6,057 
(69) 1,550 7,717 
(88) 359 1,424 
(16) 3,414 -- -- 
2015-16 2,341 
(27) 40 8,152 
(93) 551 602 
(7) 0 2,106 
(24) 130 
2016-17 0 
(0) 0 8,624 
(98) 59 1,591 
(18) 0 6,445 
(74) 882 
2017-18 1,070 
(12) 7,690 8,532 
(97) 228 942 
(11) 7,257 6,313 
(72) 2,447 
2018-19 5,076 
(58) 3,684 8,350 
(95) 410 75 
(01) 8,685 5,671 
(65) 3,089 
A – Utilized Hours ( per cent  to Calendar Hours); B – Hours Lost towards Planned/ Unplanned/ Forced Shutdown  
 
Note :  COB-5 was commissioned in May 2018, hence, not c onsidered in the analysis.  
Similarly, TRT was commissioned in June 2014, hence, not considered for 2014-15.  
The utilisation of Auxiliary Power Generation units  like GETS-1, NEDO Project and TRT 
was poor resulting in shortfall in generation of po wer with consequential purchase of power 
from APEPDCL.  The Auxiliary Power Generation Units  performance as scrutinised by 
Audit indicates that: 
• GETS-I (12 MW) – The top gas generated from Blast Furnace (BF)-1 i s routed 
through Gas Expansion Turbine for generation of pow er.  The power generated from 
this Plant is used for excitation and for drives.  The performance of GETS-I was poor 
due to the faulty design of Gas Cleaning Plant of B F-1 and breakdown of silencer 
supplied by Acoustics India Limited (GETS-1). 
• NEDO Project (20.60 MW) – During the course of sinter production in Sinter 
Machine, hot air is generated which is routed throu gh a Boiler Turbine Generator for 
generation of power.  The Project was initiated in May 2009 with an estimated cost of 
`95.76 crore with scheduled completion within 34 mon ths (February 2012).  The 
Project was commissioned in March 2014 and `174.09 crore had been incurred till 
March 2019.  RINL was unable to utilise the NEDO Pr oject due to generation of 
insufficient steam by the 25 year’ old Sinter Machi ne to run the NEDO Boiler for 
generation of power, making the decision to take up  the Project without carrying out 
capital repairs to the Sinter Machine and ensuring required heat input as imprudent. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
204  
• Top Recovery Turbine (14.88 MW) - The top gas generated from Blast Furnace-3 is 
routed through a Turbo Generator for generation of electricity.  The electricity 
generated is used by various associated devices and  excitation system.  The Plant was 
commissioned and trial run conducted in June 2014, however, the generation could 
start only by September 2015 with a delay of 15 mon ths.  The Plant could not be run 
efficiently as it was stated to receive insufficien t top gas pressure (1.6 kilogram/ 
square centimetre 21  (Kg/ cm 2)) from BF-3. 
Management replied (January 2020) that utilisation of Auxiliary Power Generation units were 
low for various problems on the side of production units to which they were connected such 
as: 
• GETS-1 associated with BF-1 was idle during the yea rs 2014-15 to 2016-17 due to 
vibration and noises at Gas Cleaning Plant (GCP) ne ar septum valve area and 
utilisation was low in 2018-19 due to GCP side sile ncer breakdown and high 
vibration; 
• Utilisation of GETS-2, associated with BF-2 was low  during the years 2015-16 to  
2017-18 due to BF-2 Category-2 repairs;  
• NEDO Project commissioned in 2014 was dependent upo n heat input coming from 
hot sinter and NEDO Boiler was not able to produce steam due to insufficient heat 
input.  A study to enhance power generation from NE DO Project was in progress and 
plan for its revival was on the anvil; and 
• Due to some teething problems in BF-3 immediately a fter commissioning of TRT, 
BF-3 top gas pressure was not reaching up to 1.6 Kg / cm 2, the minimum pressure 
required for power generation from TRT.  Because of  this, power generation from 
TRT was delayed by almost 15 months and TRT was res tarted on 25 August 2015 
after getting clearance from BF-3.  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• In case of GETS-I, though the BF top pressure was m ore than 1.5 Kg/ cm 2 for 245 
days (equivalent to eight months) of the 18 months during October 2015 to 
March 2017, the same could not be utilised for powe r generation due to faulty design 
of Gas Cleaning Plant of BF-1. Similarly, inspite o f higher BF top pressure for 172 
days (equivalent to six months) during 11 months fr om May 2018 to March 2019 
also, RINL failed to utilise the higher top pressur e for power generation due to failure 
of silencer supplied by Acoustic India for BF-1;  
• Though the utilisation of GETS-2 was low during the  years 2015-16 to 2017-18 due 
to capital repairs, its utilisation during the year s 2014-15 (69 per cent ) and 2018-19 
(58 per cent)  was also low; 
• Despite the known fact that Sinter Machines 1 & 2 w ere 25 years’ old and capital 
repairs were very much essential for implementation  of NEDO Project, the project 
                                                           
21   Measure for indicating the pressure of steam  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
205  
was commissioned with a capital cost of `174.09 crore without carrying out the 
necessary capital repairs to the 25 years’ old Sint er Machines and this was the main 
reason for not getting sufficient heat required for generation of power; and 
• TRT generated power of 7,496 MWh during the period September 2015 to January 
2016, even though the top gas pressure in BF-3 was lower than 1.6 Kg/ cm 2 during 
this period.  Thus, the contention of Management th at TRT could not be made 
functional due to insufficient top gas pressure of 1.6 Kg/ cm 2 is not acceptable. 
13.2.7.4  Energy conservation 
i)   Auxiliary Power Consumption  
Auxiliary Power Consumption (APC) is the internal c onsumption of power by the respective 
power generating units.  The percentage of APC by T PP steam boilers and power generators 
during 2014-15 to 2018-19 is given below: 
Table-13.2.9: Percentage of Auxiliary Power Consumption by Steam Boilers and Power 
Generators of Main TPP 
Year Total steam 
produced by 
TPP Boilers 
(Tons) 
Total energy 
consumed for 
generation of 
steam 
(MWh) 
Total power 
generated 
through TGs 
of TPP 
(MW) 
Total steam 
consumed 
for power 
generation 
through TPP 
(Tons) 
Total energy 
consumed for 
the steam 
used in TPP 
(MW) 
Percentage of 
APC for 
power 
generated 
through TPP 
1 2 3 4 5 6 = (5/2x3) 7 = (6/4x100) 
2014-15 102,89,785 3,52,225 17,82,716 69,74,830 2,38,752 13.39 
2015-16 107,71,645 3,85,732 18,76,396 72,63,903 2,6 0,120 13.86 
2016-17 104,99,682 3,85,373 17,50,120 66,84,690 2,4 5,350 14.02 
2017-18 106,78,349 4,00,250 18,34,687 69,16,868 2,5 9,261 14.13 
2018-19 112,14,754 4,07,667 19,45,763 73,14,651 2,65,895 13.67 
As per CERC notifications, norm for APC by power ge nerating stations was nine per cent .  
During 2014-15 to 2018-19, APC for generation of po wer by the TPP alone ranged between 
13.39 per cent  (2014-15) and 14.13 per cent (2017-18), which was way beyond the stipulated 
norm of nine per cent .  Excess APC, beyond the norm of nine per cent , resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of `230.56 crore. 
Management replied (January 2020) that in addition to catering to the need of power 
requirement of different units of steel plant, TPP & Boiler House also met the process steam, 
DM water, soft water, chilled water requirement of different units of VSP and most of these 
utilities were not the part of a Conventional Power  Plant.  Hence, this resulted in higher APC 
due to its complex nature. 
The reply is not acceptable.  Keeping in view the complex nature of TPP and Boiler House of 
RINL, the APC had been computed by considering the energy (power) consumed for the 
steam generated and used for the production of powe r by TPP only.  Audit did not consider 
the APC for the production of steam required for ot her process needs.  Hence, APC pointed 
out by Audit was very much comparable with CERC norm of nine per cent.  
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
206  
ii)   Impact of excess consumption of steam on cost of p ower generation 
Fuels and consumables were the major elements of co st for power generation. During 
2014-15 to 2018-19, total cost of power generation by TPP was between `5,791 per MWh 
(2015-16) and `7,036 per MWh (2018-19).  Steam was the major compo nent for power 
generation.  During 2014-15 to 2018-19, steam cost alone (towards HP steam consumption 
by TGs of the TPP) ranged between 87.13 per cent  (2014-15) and 91.53 per cent  (2016-17) 
of the total cost of power generation.  
Benchmark consumption of HP steam to generate one M Wh power in TPP was fixed by 
Management at 3.50 tons.  Audit observed that steam  consumption rate during  
2014-15 to 2018-19 varied between 3.91 tons/ MWh (2 014-15) and 3.76 tons/ MWh 
(2018-19) against the benchmark steam consumption r ate of 3.50 tons/ MWh.  Considering 
benchmark rate of 3.50 tons/ MWh, excess consumptio n of steam during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
accounted for 29,91,055 tons of steam which when co nverted to monetary terms valued 
`382.48 crore, taking into account only the variable  operating cost incurred for production of 
HP steam by TPP Boilers. 
Management replied (January 2020) that TGs of TPP d id not only generate power but also 
supply process steam which was extracted in the form of 13 ata 
22  and 4 ata from Turbine after 
certain stages of expansion and sent to plant network for process requirements.  
The reply is not relevant as Audit had pointed out the excess steam consumption by TGs (101 
ata steam) excluding the 13 ata and 4 ata steam ext racted from the TGs and sent to the 
network for process requirements.  
iii)  Transmission and Distribution Loss  
Power is distributed through a large and complex ne twork involving transmission lines, sub -
stations, transformers, cables and other equipment until it reaches the end users.  The 
difference between the power generated at power pla nts and received at sub-stations at the 
end user points is considered as Transmission and D istribution (T&D) loss.  Due care needs 
to be taken to reduce T&D loss.  
Audit analysed the distribution loss data from 2001 -02 onwards and noticed that the T&D 
loss was 0.60 per cent  in 2001-02 and 2002-03 and was on increasing trend  thereafter.  
During 2014-15 to 2018-19, the T&D loss ranged betw een 2.26 per cent  and 2.30 per cent  
with a total loss of 3,39,824 MWh.  
Management replied (January 2020) that longer trans mission circuits in the form of 
transmission lines and cable network were added wit h capacity increase, which was one of 
the reasons for increase in T&D loss.  Continuous e fforts were being made by RINL to 
contain the T&D losses by following the same concep t of electrical network as done earlier 
i.e., to provide the high voltage substation in clo se vicinity of the equipment minimising the 
T&D loss.  The Supervisory Control and Data Acquisi tion (SCADA) system was in place for 
energy monitoring and with the improvement in the s ystem, the accuracy of energy 
consumption could be monitored and the same would help in reducing the T&D losses. 
                                                           
22   ata (Atmosphere absolute) is a term used to measu re pressure of the steam.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
207  
The reply is not acceptable in view of the following: 
• As compared to large network of power distribution companies, network distribution 
of RINL is limited and hence distribution losses should have been below one per cent , 
as was maintained for six years during 2001-07;  
• Despite integration of both SCADAs to enable to account for energy consumption and 
take measures to reduce T&D losses, the losses cont inued to be on higher side during 
the years 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
Thus, Management needs to make concerted efforts to reduce the T&D losses.  
13.2.7.5  Energy Audit 
Energy audit analyses energy consumption pattern by  each user and suggests improvements 
for the conservation of energy.  It is a management  tool to achieve cost control by using 
energy effectively.  Energy audit for the first tim e was entrusted by RINL to National 
Productivity Council (NPC) in November 2014 after G oI issued notification in May 2014 
directing every designated energy consumer to condu ct Energy Audit by an Accredited 
Energy Auditor.  Accordingly, RINL got conducted energy audit during the period December 
2014 to September 2015.  
As per Bureau of Energy Efficiency (Manner and inte rvals of time for conduct of Energy 
Audit) Regulations, 2010, energy audit would be con ducted every three years from the date 
of the submission of the previous Energy Audit Repo rt.  However, RINL had not conducted 
the energy audit subsequently within the due date, i.e., by September 2018, as stipulated by 
the Regulations.  The next spell of audit was entrusted only on 2 November 2019. 
Management replied (January 2020) that it initiated  the process of engaging Accredited 
Energy Audit agency on 17 January 2018 and finalise d M/s. Development EnviroEnergy 
Services on 2 November 2019 to carryout mandatory E nergy Audit.  Energy Audit work was 
commenced by the Accredited Auditor.  
It was evident from the reply of Management that th e Company failed to take up the 
mandatory Energy Audit within the stipulated schedu le (i.e. by September 2018).  Further, as 
the subsequent Audit had not yet been completed, th e extent of compliance reported by 
Management in response to the previous Energy Audit  observations and suggestions/ 
recommendations could not be examined. 
13.2.8 Conclusion 
• PLF achieved by the Main TPP was less than the norm  prescribed by CERC.  Even 
assuming the operation of TPP at PLF of 80 per cent , savings to the extent of 
`85.48 crore would have accrued to the Company towar ds the cost of power imported 
from APEPDCL.   
• RINL curtailed TPP generation due to shortage of bo iler coal and blended high cost 
Medium Coking Coal with boiler coal without envisag ing for alternate source of 
procurement of boiler coal leading to increased cos t of power generation.  Savings to 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
208  
the extent of `145.21 crore were lost by the Company due to improp er blending of 
MCC with indigenous boiler coal.  
• The Company could not generate steam as per the rat ed capacities of the Boilers and 
Turbine Generators, which had an impact on the gene ration of power and for meeting 
the process needs. 
• The Company lost the opportunity to generate steam to the extent of 3.17 lakh tons 
due to forced outage of Boilers and also failed to generate power to the extent of 
4.65 lakh MWh due to forced outage of TGs.  Further , it took excess time than 
required for maintenance of Plant.  
• The utilisation of Auxiliary Power Generation units  like GETS-1, NEDO Project and 
TRT was poor due to faulty design/ insufficient hea t recovery from Sinter Machine/ 
insufficient top gas pressure resulting in shortfal l in generation of power with 
consequential purchase of power from APEPDCL. 
• Auxiliary Power Consumption, beyond the norms presc ribed by CERC, resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of `230.56 crore. 
• The excess consumption of steam during 2014-15 to 2 018-19, beyond the stipulated 
norms, accounted for 29.91 lakh tons of steam which  when converted to monetary 
terms valued `382.48 crore.  
13.2.9 Recommendations  
1)  RINL should strive to achieve operation of TPP with  allied Plants such as Boilers and 
Turbine Generators as per the standards/ norms fixed by CERC.  
2)  RINL should ensure regular supply of boiler coal by  entering into Fuel Supply 
Agreements with Coal Companies or through e-auctions.  
3)  RINL should initiate measures for optimal utilisati on of Auxiliary Power Generation 
Plants such as GETS-1, NEDO Project and TRT so that  the reliance on import of 
power from APEPDCL could be minimised. 
4)  RINL should minimise the time required for maintena nce of Plant to avert production 
losses. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
Steel Authority of India Limited 
13.3  Performance of Captive Mines of SAIL 
13.3.1   Introduction 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL or the Compa ny), a leading steel manufacturing 
company in India operates five integrated steel pla nts 23  and three special steel plants 24  and 
                                                           
23    Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) in Chhattisgarh, Bokaro  Steel Plant (BSL) in Jharkhand, Rourkela Steel Pla nt 
(RSP) in Odisha, Durgapur Steel Plant (DSP) and IISCO Steel Plant (ISP) in Burnpur, West Bengal 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
209  
produced 17.51 million tonne (mt) of Hot Metal (HM)  during 2018-19.  Iron ore, flux 
materials (limestone and dolomite) and coking coal are primary raw materials in steel making 
and constitute 50 per cent  of the total cost of production.  Availability of raw material at 
affordable price on sustained basis is essential fo r success in the steel industry.  The 
requirement of iron ore is met from the captive min es of SAIL which produced 28.35 mt in 
2018-19.  However, Company was not self-sufficient in flux and metallurgical or coking coal.  
SAIL took up Modernization and Expansion Plan (MEP)  in 2008 to enhance HM production 
capacity from 14.6 mt per annum  (mtpa) to 23.46 mtpa which would proportionately a lso 
increase the requirement of raw material. 
SAIL has 28 captive mines for iron ore, flux and co al in Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, 
West Bengal, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh.  Based o n proximity of mines with steel 
plants, mines are annually linked with steel plants for supply of mined material. 
13.3.2   Organisational set up 
Director (Raw Material & Logistic) heads the mining  activities of SAIL.  The responsibility 
for development, renewal and management of company’ s iron ore and flux captive mines is 
with Raw Material Division (RMD) 25  Kolkata, Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) 26  and Visvesvaraya 
Iron and Steel Plant (VISP), Bhadravati.  Coal mine s are under the control of Collieries 
division 27  Kolkata.  Corporate Raw Material Group (CRMG) at N ew Delhi liaises with 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (M oEFCC), Ministry of Coal (MoC), 
Ministry of Mines (MoM) and the State Government au thorities for acquisition of mines 
andgrant of statutory clearances.  SAIL had 28 capt ive mines 28  and 47 mining leases as on 
31 March 2019 (Annexure-XXX ).  
13.3.3   Audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology 
The audit objectives were to assess whether: 
• SAIL took adequate and effective measures to renew and develop its captive mines, 
• mines were effectively managed to achieve planned production; 
• production capacities were augmented to meet the en hanced raw material requirement 
of the steel plants after completion of MEP; and 
• adequate measures were taken to comply with safety and environmental laws.  
The Audit criteria used were Mines and Minerals (De velopment and Regulation) Act, 1957 
(MMDR 1957), Odisha Minerals Rule, 2007 (OMR 2007),  Forest Conservation Act, 1980 
(FCA 1980), Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (MCR 196 0), Environment Protection Act, 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
24   Alloy Steels Plant in Durgapur, W. Bengal, Salem Steel Plant in Tamilnadu, Visvesvaraya Iron and Steel 
Plant (VISP), Bhadravati  in Karnataka 
25   Iron ore mines at Kiriburu (KIOM), Meghahatuburu (MIOM), Bolani (BOM), Gua (GOM), 
Manohaprur (MOM), Barsua (BIM), Kalta (KIM), Taldih  (TIM); Kuteshwar (KTR) and Bhawanathpur 
(BNP) limestone mines, Purnapani Limestone & Dolomi te Quary (PLDQ), and Tulsidamar dolomite 
mines (TDMR) 
26   Iron ore mines at Rajhara, Dalli Mechanical-Jhara ndalli & Kokan east, Dalli Manual, Mahamaya & 
Dulki, Rowghat, KalwarNagur, Nandini limestone mines and Hirri and Baraduar Dolomite mines 
27   Chasnalla, Jitpur, Ramnagore and Tasra coal mines  
28   RMD-13, BSP-9,VISP-2 and Collieries-4  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
210  
1986 (EPA 1986), Annual Production Plan (APP), Prod uction records of mines, Mining Plan 
(MP) approved by Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM), Norm s for utilisation of equipment. Audit 
examined records of all captive mines, RMD HQ and CRMG of the Company for 2014-19.  
13.3.4    Audit findings 
 
13.3.4.1  Mining leases 
For mining operation in an area, a lessee should ha ve a valid mining lease. The activities 
involved in getting the mining lease and operations are given below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State Government forwards the application to the Government of India  (GoI)  
GoI sends its concurrence to the State Government  
State Government issues letter of intent to the applicant to grant mining lease  
Forest Clearance  Environment Clearance  
Application for mining lease (ML) to the State Government 
Stage I approval by GoI (condition to be 
fulfilled includes payment of NPV & CA) 
Stage II approval after compliance of 
Stage -I condition s 
Application to State Pollution Control Board and 
conduct of public hearing  
Preparation of Environment Impact Assessment  
Grant of Environment Clearance by GoI 
Mining Plan approved by the Indian Bureau of Mines 
Mining Lease awarded by State Government  
 
Approval of Consent to Establish by SPCB before commencement of construction activities 
Approval of Consent to Operate by SPCB prior to commencement of production 
Clearance on Safety issues by DGMS 
Start of Mining Operation 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
211  
During the course of audit, two instances were noti ced where SAIL did not apply technical 
due diligence and conduct Techno-Commercial Viabili ty Study (TCVS) to assess viability of 
project before acquisition of unviable coal mines.  These were subsequently surrendered and 
led to entire amount spent becoming infructuous.  A udit also observed two instances where 
SAIL failed to develop its mining leases by fulfill ing conditions for obtaining the requisite 
clearances in time.  This led to payment of dead re nt, stamp duty etc. on such mines.  Delays 
were also noticed in surrendering of closed mines t hat also led to avoidable expenditure on 
maintenance of these mines.  Instances of delays in  augmentation of production capacity of 
mines, low utilisation of Heavy machinery, less dep loyment of statutory manpower and 
environment and safety issues were also noticed.  T hese are discussed in detail in subsequent 
paras.  
13.3.4.2  Acquisition of unviable mines 
i)  Infructuous expenditure of `` ``123.66 crore on Parbatpur Coal Block 
SAIL applied (September 2015) to MoC for allocation  of Parbatpur Coal Block, with an area 
of 880 ha, keeping in view the requirement of coal after MEP, future capacity expansion and 
to overcome dependence on imported coal.  The coal block was allotted (March 2016) 
through Government Dispensation Route. 
Audit noted that the coal block was allocated with the condition to enter into a 
‘Co-development Agreement’ (CDA) with ONGC for simu ltaneous extraction of Coal Bed 
Methane (CBM) and coal because of overlapping of area with adjacent CBM block allotted to 
ONGC.  SAIL could not enter into CDA with ONGC as D irector General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) did not give permission (January 2017) for s imultaneous extraction of CBM and 
coal.  The area available to SAIL was reduced from 880 ha to 463.72 ha and reduction of 
geological reserve of coal from 273.86 mt to 147.3 mt.  Due to reduction of area and reserve, 
SAIL conducted a TCVS through MECON which suggested  (January 2018) that the project 
was not viable.  SAIL Board decided (March 2018) to  return the block to MoC 
(8 March 2018) and requested to refund the expendit ure incurred including the Performance 
Bank Guarantee (PBG) and also to allot potential coal block in lieu of Parbatpur block.  In the 
meantime, MoC issued show cause notice (June 2018) for slippage of milestone by SAIL.  
MoC further directed (September 2018) SAIL to re-ex amine the viability of the mines if 
complete lease area of 880 ha is given to SAIL.  Th e viability of the project was assessed 
again by MECON which suggested (March 2019) that it  was commercially unviable.  SAIL 
again requested (April 2019) MoC to surrender the mines. 
Audit observed that SAIL was aware of the adverse g eo-mining condition and high gas 
content while submitting application for the coal b lock.  SAIL was also aware that the scale 
of operation would be restricted to lower levels du e to the fact that the coal block overlapped 
with CBM blocks.  Despite these adversities, SAIL w ent ahead with allocation of the block.  
Audit noted that MoC terminated (December 2019) the  allotment and noted that SAIL had 
made very little progress in development of mine before taking the decision to surrender it.  It 
also directed the Bank to encash BG of 
`62.57 crore which was an additional loss to the 
Company. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
212  
Management replied (February 2020) that uncertainti es due to overlapping with Petroleum 
Mining Lease of ONGC and non-grant of exclusive Coal Mining Lease was not anticipated at 
the time of allotment. 
The reply is not acceptable as the coal block was a llotted on the request of SAIL and it was 
aware of the adverse geo mining condition and high gas content as it was mentioned in the 
application for allocation of the block. 
Thus, 
`123.66 crore 29  spent on Parbatpur Coal block upto March 2019 became infructuous.  
ii)  Infructuous expenditure of `` ``29.28 crore on Sitanala Coal Block  
Sitanala coal block comprising of 321 ha was alloca ted to SAIL (April 2007) to develop a 
high productivity mine to commence operation from A pril 2011.  The production did not 
commence due to delay in preparation of Detailed Pr oject Report (DPR) and non-creation of 
infrastructure.  In the meantime, Supreme Court can celled (August 2014) the allocation of 
coal block.  SAIL submitted application for re-allo tment of block (February 2015) and was 
re-allotted in March 2015.  Audit noted that, out o f 321 ha, only 214 ha was recommended 
(2017) by Government of Jharkhand (GoJ) because 66 ha came under Damodar river-bed and 
41 ha overlapped with CBM lease granted to ONGC-CIL.  
Audit observed that, TCVS conducted by MECON showed  (January 2018) that the project 
was unviable.  SAIL decided (March 2018) to surrend er the coal block and requested MoC 
(March 2018) to refund the BG amount.  MoC terminat ed (October 2018) the allotment and 
directed to appropriate the BG and other payments m ade by SAIL.  MoC while terminating 
the allotment stated that, SAIL being a prior allot tee was fully aware about the coal block 
being geographically disturbed due to presence of g assy seams and therefore, SAIL should 
have undertaken the TCVS prior to entering into the process of re-allotment.  Ministry further 
noted that very little progress was made by SAIL in  development of mine before its decision 
to surrender the mine and there was unjustified del ay on the part of SAIL.  Accordingly, 
Ministry appropriated all payments and BG submitted by SAIL.  
Audit noted that entering into re-allotment process of unviable coal block despite being aware 
of the adverse geo-mining condition and not conducting TCVS before re-allotment resulted in 
infructuous expenditure of `29.28 crore 30 .  
Management replied (February 2020) that, in view of  uncertainties due to non-grant of 
Mining Lease for 321 ha area by State Government, S AIL was drawn into a precarious 
situation which was not anticipated at the time of allotment. 
The reply is not acceptable as SAIL, was aware that  the coal block was geographically 
disturbed with gassy seams and should have undertak en TCVS before applying for 
reallotment of coal block.  
                                                           
29   `` ``    93.89 crore towards upfront amount, assets created by prior allottee, `` ``    7.25 crore on dewatering of the 
mines and `` ``    22.52 crore on power, security, consultancy etc. 
30    Comprising of amount spent on Geological report ( `` ``    10.18 crore), Other Project Expenses ( `` ``    7.78 crore, 
Upfront amount ( `` ``    0.89 crore), Performance BG ( `` ``    10.43 crore) 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
213  
13.3.4.3  Non development of Mining leases  
i)   Non-production from Baraduar dolomite mines:  Baraduar Dolomite Mine 
(BDM) allotted to SAIL in 1970 was closed in 1983 d ue to labour unrest and lease was 
cancelled (January 1993).  The lease was subsequent ly restored (1996) to SAIL and is valid 
upto December 2020.  SAIL was granted EC in Septemb er 2015.  FC is given in two stages 
(Stage I and II). SAIL, however, did not pay CA and  NPV and CA amount was revised to 
`59.19 crore based on April 2019 rates. 
Audit observed that SAIL did not pay CA and NPV on the grounds of non-receipt of revised 
LOI from Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG), which w as not valid, as payment of CA and 
NPV was pre-requisite for FC Stage-II and had no link with Letter of Intent (LOI).  The delay 
resulted in additional liability of `10.27 crore which was avoidable.  SAIL also spent 
`1.36 crore on dead rent and stamp duty on the mines .  In the absence of FC, mining from 
Baraduar mines was not started and BSP had to get i ts requirement of dolomite from sources 
other than its captive mines as discussed in para 13.3.4.10. 
Management replied (February 2020) that non-payment  of CA by SAIL was due to 
uncertainty with regard to extension of lease and a bsence of clear intent of GoCG for further 
extending mining rights of Dolomite to SAIL.  
The reply is not acceptable as BSP management itsel f requested (November 2017) GoCH to 
issue demand for CA and NPV.  The decision of BSP t o withhold the payment of CA and 
NPV for want of revised LOI was not justified as th ere was no link between receipt of LoI 
and payment of CA and NPV.  Further, the fact remai ns that, mining at BDM was not started 
due to unavailability of FC. 
13.3.4.4  Begunia coking coal mines 
The estimated capital cost to develop Begunia cokin g coal project with reserve of 4.24 mt 
was `97.37 crore (2009) which increased to `172.21 crore in January 2018.  With growing 
requirement of coal and consistent reduction in sup ply of coking coal from domestic sources, 
it was critical for the company to develop available coal mines.  
Audit observed that production from Begunia coal se am did not commence though the 
geological and conceptual reports were prepared in 2006 and 2008 respectively.  There were 
delays in preparation of mining plan, obtaining EC and engagement of Mines Developer and 
Operator (MDO) which resulted in non-commencement o f mining operation even after 15 
years.  Management constituted a committee only in February 2019 to review the tender 
document, mining plan, mine closure plan, engagemen t of MDO etc.  The Committee’s 
report (May 2019) inter alia  included recommendation for fresh techno economic study  
and engagement of reputed agency for preparation of  DPR.  MECON was awarded 
(December 2019) the work for preparation of DPR. 
The above delays resulted in cost overrun of 
`74.84 crore.  The company had also spent 
`8.95 crore on the feasibility studies as of March 2 019, besides the avoidable excess cost 
incurred on imported coking coal.  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
214  
Management replied (February 2020) that once DPR is  finalised further action for 
development of Begunia Project will be expedited. 
Management’s reply did not address the reasons for delay in development of the Project. 
13.3.4.5  Surrender of Mines  
i)   Avoidable expenditure due to delay in surrender of  Purnapani mines 
Mining lease at Purnapani (PLDQ) was allotted to SA IL in 1960.  Mining operation at PLDQ 
was stopped from March 2004 due to high silica content (six per cent) in the limestone. Audit 
noted that 3.61 lakh tonne of limestone worth `11.98 crore was lying in the mine since 2004.  
SAIL attempted twice to set up cement plant to util ise the reserve of PLDQ.  It formed a JV 
with JK Cement Limited in October 2008 to use slag from RSP and limestone from PLDQ 
but scrapped (August 2010) the project due to preva iling cost of slag and inability to hand 
over quarry.  Another attempt was made in May 2019 but setting up the cement plant was 
found economically unviable as available reserve wa s less than the minimum requirement of 
30 mt.  The company decided to surrender the lease in May 2019.  
Management replied (February 2020) that on approval  of Final Mines Closure Plan, the 
Purnapani lease would be surrendered. 
The fact however remains that, long delay in surren der of lease resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of 
`7.94 crore on maintenance, security and electricity  and  `5.22 crore on salary 
and wages during 2014-19. 
13.3.4.6  Delay in surrender of Bhawnathpur limestone mines  
Bhawnathpur Limestone Mine (BNP) with a capacity of  2.9 mtpa was not suitable for use in 
the steel plants due to high silica content in limestone (six to eight per cent ).  Production from 
BNP mines were reduced to five per cent from 2004 due to poor quality and high cost of 
production and was stopped from April 2013.  As per  MoEF notification (October 2004), it 
was mandatory for all mining projects with more than five ha lease area that had not obtained 
EC, to do so at the time of renewal of lease.  BNP applied for EC in January 2013.  MoEF, 
however observed (April 2013) serious violation as mining was continued without EC and 
therefore EC was not granted.  SAIL decided (May 20 17) to surrender the mine and advised 
to reduce CISF personnel from 85 to 65 to save `1 crore per annum.  The final closure plan 
was approved by GoJ in May 2019. 
Audit noted that though production from BNP was sto pped in April 2013, SAIL took four 
years to decide to close the mines which resulted i n payment of 
`1.14 crore as dead rent 
during 2014-19.  Further, it was only in November 2 014 that Management requested JSEB to 
provide domestic power supply at BNP township and t o disconnect industrial power supply.  
BNP procured 119.75 lakh unit electricity for `8.43 crore during 2014-19 at industrial rate for 
consumption in township and recovered only `0.62 crore from the occupants.  Further, 
`5 crore on security was spent annually at the closed mines.  
Management replied (February 2020) that SAIL tried to get Environment Clearance (EC) and 
Forest Clearance (FC) and Environment Impact Assess ment (EIA)/ Environment 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
215  
Management Plan (EMP) studies for the limestone lea ses were conducted.  Efforts were also 
made for conversion of Industrial power supply of BNP Mines to Domestic Supply.  
The reply is not acceptable as production from BNP mines was suspended from April 2013, 
therefore, efforts taken by Management for getting FC, EC and EIA/ EMP studies thereafter 
were not required.  Further, BNP did not pursue the  matter with JSEB after November 2014 
to avail domestic connection.  
13.3.4.7  Mining operation 
Mining operation involves excavation of Run off Min es (ROM) from mines, segregation of 
ROM into required size of Iron Ore Lumps (IOL) and Iron Ore Fines (IOF) through Crushing 
and Screening Plant (CSP), transportation of ores t o railway siding and dispatch to steel 
plants.  SAIL carries out mining operation either d epartmentally or through contractors by 
mechanised, semi-mechanised or manual means. 
13.3.4.8  Production performance 
Company fixed mine-wise Annual Production Plan (APP ) for iron ore, flux and coal 
considering annual steel production plan and prevai ling operating conditions.  The details of 
Annual Rated Capacity (ARC) of mines, APP, Annual P roduction (AP) and Annual 
Consumption (AC) of raw materials for the period 2014-19 are given below: 
Table 13.3.1: APP and AP of iron ore, flux and coal from captive mines 
(In million tonne) 
Year Iron ore Flux material Coal 
ARC APP AP AC ARC APP AP AC ARC APP AP AC 
2014-15 29.72 28.57 23.18 24.26 3.81 2.53 2.10 6.43 1.14 0.92 0.62 15.00 
2015-16 29.72 29.50 24.83 24.75 5.23 2.68 2.27 7.00 1.14 0.92 0.71 14.97 
2016-17 39.05 28.25 26.16 25.45 5.23 2.65 2.08 7.04 1.14 1.01 0.74 14.87 
2017-18 39.05 30.25 26.69 25.92 5.23 2.86 2.04 7.14 1.14 0.73 0.79 14.45 
2018-19 37.80 32.98 28.35 28.64 5.24 2.65 1.87 8.04 1.14 1.01 0.74 15.25 
Total 175.34 149.55 129.21 129.02 24.74 13.37 10.36  35.65  5.70 4.59 3.60 74.54 
From the table above, it can be seen that APP was fixed less than ARC and production of raw 
material was also less than APP during last five ye ars. Audit also noted that, though 
production of iron ore was sufficient to meet the r equirement of steel plants, BSP and RSP 
were linked to distantly located mines which entail ed extra expenditure of `295.39 crore on 
freight differential.  Further, shortfall in production of flux was met though procurement from 
market at extra expenditure of `136.33 crore as discussed below:  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
216  
iii)  Extra expenditure of `` ``235.12 crore on differential freight by BSP 
As per the APP of BSP, its requirement of iron ore was 39.80 mt during 2014-19 whereas, 
production from linked mines of Rajhara and Dalli w ere only 35.36 mt during the period.  
Audit observed that, the reasons for less production were increasing stripping ratio 31 , delay in 
finalisation of contracts at Dalli mine, underutilisation of equipment due to over-aging in both 
the mines etc.  BSP had to procure 2.84 mt iron ore  from distantly located mines which 
resulted in extra expenditure of `235.12 crore on account of differential freight.  
Audit also observed that the above shortfall in pro duction of iron ore could have been made 
good to the extent of 1.73 mt from Dalli manual min es and Jharandalli mines.  Audit noted 
that MoEFCC issued circular (March 2017) that all m ines should obtain EC by September 
2017 and in absence of EC mining activity would be ceased.  The Collector, Balod issued 
(December 2016) a show cause notice to BSP for non- availability of EC in Dalli mine.  As 
BSP had not applied for EC, mining operation was st opped from February 2017 and planned 
production of 0.63 mt during 2017-19 was not achieved.  
Audit further noted that, CSP at Jharandalli mines could not process the total iron ore feed 
from mines and therefore BSP placed an order (May 2 016) to install CSP and dispatch iron 
ore from August 2016 for two years (1.20 mt).  The contractor failed to execute the work as 
per schedule.  Consequently, there was shortfall of 1.10 mt during 2017-19.  Management did 
not take any action to issue fresh order for crushing and screening of ore.  
Management replied (February 2020) that transportat ion of IOF from RMD to BSP was a 
technical necessity to take care of techno-economic al parameters of steel making and the 
transportation cost was gainfully compensated by bl ending with poor quality of fines of BSP 
Group of Mines.  It also stated that closure of Dal li mine was not due to non-availability of 
EC but based on exhaustion of mineable ore. 
The reply of Management is not acceptable as in the  mining plan 0.628 million tonne of ore 
was proposed for excavation during 2017-18 and 2018 -19.  Moreover, 
 the fact remains that, 
due to less production than APP, iron ore had to be  transported from distantly located mines 
by incurring higher freight on transportation.  Fre ight on transportation of raw material from 
RMD during last five years ending 2018-19 ranged be tween 74 per cent  and 101 per cent of 
the landed cost of in-house production of iron ore at BSP.  Further, there were no records to 
support the claim that transfer of IOF was a techni cal necessity to take care of techno-
economical parameters of steel making. 
13.3.4.9   Extra expenditure of `` ``60.27 crore on differential freight at Barsua mines 
As per Section 2 of the FCA 1980, prior approval of  MoEFCC was required for use of forest 
land for non-forest purpose. 
Barsua Iron Ore Mine (BIM) in Odisha has two mining  leases.  Mining was carried out from 
ML-130 allotted in January 1960.  ML-162 (77.94 ha)  allotted to the company in April 1960 
comprised of forest land and mining was not carried  out but was used (since 1961) for 
                                                           
31   Stripping ratio refers to the ratio of the volume  of overburden (or waste material) required to be h andled 
in order to extract some tonnage of ore 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
217  
beneficiation and transportation of iron ore excava ted from ML-130 through conveyor belts, 
in violation of the above provisions.  BIM applied (February 2014) for diversion of 77.940 ha 
of forest land for development of mining infrastruc ture to which Stage-I FC was granted in 
February 2015 and Stage-II FC in October 2017. 
Audit observed that due to absence of FC of ML-162,  mining operation at ML-130 was 
stopped from May 2014 to May 2018 resulting in less  production of 5.704 mt iron ore.  
During this period, RSP procured 3.40 mt of iron or e from other distantly located mines of 
SAIL by paying avoidable differential freight of 
`60.27 crore.  Production at BIM was 
restored from 20 May 2018 after getting FC.  
Management replied that technically, no violation of FCA 1980 has been done prior to expiry 
of the first renewal period up to 28 April 2000.  
The reply was not acceptable as development of infr astructure on forest land without 
approval was a violation of the FCA.  Further, the GoO in its show cause notice (June 2013) 
also stated that, operation of ML-162 without prior approval was violation of FCA. 
13.3.4.10   Extra expenditure due to underutilisation of capacity at Hirri dolomite mines 
The annual requirement of dolomite of BSP is 1.30 m t which would increase to 1.60 mt after 
MEP.  The production capacity of Hirri mines is one  mtpa where excavation is done 
departmentally and other mining activities like cru shing, transportation and loading is 
executed through contractor.  Considering poor avai lability of machineries and future 
enhanced requirement of dolomite, SAIL prepared cap acity expansion plan from one mtpa to 
two mtpa for `13 crore.  EC for this purpose was granted in Febru ary 2009 but management 
did not execute the expansion plan.  
Audit observed that production of dolomite during 2 014-19 was only 3.09 mt against the 
production target of 4.40 mt whereas, the annual re quirement of Dolomite at BSP was more 
than the existing capacity of one mt.  Due to non-i mplementation of expansion plan of Hirri 
mines, BSP had to procure 1.33 mt of dolomite durin g 2014-19 at higher cost of 
`136.33 crore as compared to cost of captive production. 
Management replied that shortfall in production was  due to poor performance of contractor 
and also stated that purchase of required quantity of Low Silica Dolomite by BSP was a 
technical necessity to improve the techno-economic parameters of Blast Furnace.  
Management’s reply was silent on non-implementation  of expansion of the mines.  The 
estimated cost for expansion was `13 crore whereas BSP procured Dolomite worth `136.33 
crore during 2014-19.  Further, Management of third  parties is intrinsic to good project 
management. 
13.3.4.11  Compliance of statutory provisions 
i)   Avoidable expenditure of `` ``14.38 crore on penal NPV and CA by Barsua mines  
Stopping of mining at Barsua mines from May 2014 to  May 2018 in absence of FC has been 
discussed in para 13.3.4.9  above.  Audit noted that Section 2 (ii) of the FCA 1980 stipulated 
that prior approval of MoEFCC is required for use o f forest land for non-forest purpose.  In 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
218  
case of non-compliance, the state government would charge penal NPV and CA from the user 
agency. 
GoO noted (June 2013) that no mineral extraction wa s carried out by the company and the 
installations made in the lease area were for proce ssing and transporting iron ore excavated 
from ML-130, which was a clear deviation from the t erms and conditions of the lease deed 
and violation of provision of Section-2 of FCA 1980 .  Show-cause notice was issued 
(June 2013) by GoO for above violations.  BIM appli ed (February 2014) for diversion of 
77.940 ha of forest land for development of mining infrastructure to which Stage-I FC was 
granted in February 2015 and Stage-II FC in October 2017.  
Audit observed that non-compliance of FCA 1980 on u se of forest land for non-forest 
purpose without approval in ML-162 of Barsua mines led to avoidable expenditure of 
`14.38 crore as penal NPV and CA (NPV `12.27 crore and CA `2.11 crore). 
Management replied (February 2020) that the install ations within the forest land were made 
before enactment of FC Act, 1980 and that had opera tions been stopped, loss would have 
been multifold.  
The reply was not acceptable as mining activities w ere required to be undertaken in 
compliance with stipulated Act and Rules.  
ii)  Payment of royalty on iron ore at the highest rate by Bolani mines  
Rule 10(5) of OMR, 2007 stipulates that the lessee,  after proper dressing, stacking, grading 
and analysis of minerals would apply to the concern ed authority for removal of such 
minerals.  As per rule 10(7) of the OMR, 2007, if t he lessee declared to pay highest rate of 
royalty as prescribed, stacking and sampling would be dispensed.  
Audit observed that BOM management did not comply w ith the provisions of OMR, 2007 
and sought exemption (18 August 2012) from stacking  of ore on the grounds of its dynamic 
nature.  GoO exempted (23 August 2012) BOM with the  condition that lessee would pay 
highest rate of royalty for the iron ore dispatched  from the mine.  BOM has been paying 
highest rate of royalty w.e.f. August 2009 
32 .  Management cited reasons that sufficient space 
was not available at BOM to prepare stacks considering the volume of material loaded daily. 
Audit observed that BOM management did not make any effort to comply with the provisions 
of OMR 2007 since last 10 years and opted to get ex emption from stacking by paying royalty 
at highest rate.  Audit further observed that, in P anposh quary of BOM, mining was done 
through contractor who separates ROM into fines, lu mps and oversize lumps through mobile 
screen inside the lease area and transports them di rectly to respective stockpile of railway.  
Despite the fact that fines are separated from ROM inside the lease area of Panposh quary, 
separate stack of fines were not made within the lease area to avail the benefit of lower rate of 
royalty on IOF.  
                                                           
32   GoO notified (Sept 2010) to charge royalty on out put from mines at IBM rate of IOL or on the process ed 
form i.e. IOF and calibrated lump ore (CLO) whichever is higher w.e.f. August 2009 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
219  
Management replied (February 2020) that sufficient space was not available to prepare stacks 
of 4,000 tonne.  Since separate loading siding is n ot available, separate dispatches of fines 
from Panposh was also not feasible.  
Reply of Management was not acceptable as, whereas the total lease area of BOM was 
1,321.45 ha, Management had assessed requirement of  11.40 ha only for space for stacking.  
Further, management had not engaged any consultant or conducted feasibility study to 
comply with the provisions of OMR 2007 on stacking and grading of ores.  
Thus, Bolani mines continue to pay royalty on iron ores at highest rate which resulted in 
additional expenditure of 
`451.79 crore 33  on account of payment of differential royalty 
during 2014-19 which would increase with passage of time.  
iii)  Payment of additional royalty in Manoharpur iron ore mine (MOM) 
As per Jharkhand Mineral Transit Challan Regulation s, 2005 and Jharkhand Minerals 
(Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and s torage) Rules, 2017, all miners are 
required to obtain transit/ transport challan for d ispatch of iron ore from lease area.  For this, 
the mines had to maintain proper dressing, stacking  and grading of excavated iron ore and 
apply to District/ Assistant Mining officer (DMO/ AMO) enclosing analysis report along with 
proof of royalty paid.  The DMO/ AMO verified the q uality of ores and verification report 
within seven days to approve the transit challan.  However, no analysis report was required if 
the mines paid highest rate of royalty as declared by IBM (for ore of Fe 34  65 per cent  or 
more). 
Audit noted that MOM dispatched iron ore lump/ fine s of 62-65 per cent  grade and had been 
paying royalty (April 2016 to December 2017) based on ore quality dispatched.  However, Fe 
content in iron ore was declared as 65 per cent  or above (during January 2018 and February 
2019) on the plea of unavailability of mining inspe ctor and royalty was paid at highest grade 
(65 per cent  or above). This resulted in payment of additional royalty of 
`7.88 crore. 
Management replied (February 2020) that in absence of sampling by DMO, Chaibasa office 
and to avoid disruption in supply to Steel Plants, payment at highest rate of royalty was made 
during the period.  Since February 2019, all the ro yalty payment has been made on the actual 
quality analysed at Government Lab.  
The reply is not acceptable as the quality was decl ared at highest grade of ore (65 per cent ) 
than actual quality which did not require any sampling from the mining inspector. 
iv)  Payment of royalty on rejected limestone chips 
Nandini limestone mines were granted (1959) lease f or 526.34 ha with validity upto 
December 2028.  Audit noted that limestone chips mi ned from Nandini were with high silica 
content and were not suitable for making iron.  The  accumulated stock of rejected chips was 
10.05 mt (March 2019).  Audit further noted that ou t of above stock, 1.04 mt rejected chips 
were generated during 2006 to 2019 and 
`6.58 crore was paid as royalty on this stock.  
                                                           
33    Rate of royalty for the highest grade of Lump an d Fines has been considered 
34   Iron content 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
220  
Rule 64B (2) of MCR, 1960 provides that, if ROM min eral is removed from leased area to a 
processing plant located outside the lease area, ro yalty shall be chargeable only on 
unprocessed ROM.  Audit noted that CSP was located outside the mining lease area.  Since 
mineral was required to be taken outside the mining  lease area for crushing, royalty was paid 
on ROM including the rejected chips.  
Audit observed that SAIL did not take steps to exte nd the area of mining lease so that CSP 
would come within the mining lease areato avoid pay ment of royalty on rejected chips.  
Management belatedly applied (March 2015) for mining lease for additional 22.69 ha to bring 
CSP and stacking area within mining lease area whic h was pending (February 2020) with 
state authorities.  
Management replied (February 2020) that Expression of Interest was being floated to 
introduce new technology where in-pit screening wou ld be done to separate the chips of size 
0-10 mm from RoM and then transport only Lump to Pl ant to avoid unnecessary 
transportation of chips and payment of royalty on this account. 
The fact however remains that, delay in taking step s by Management resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of 
`6.58 crore as royalty for the rejected chips. 
v)  Mining without obtaining EC and Consent to Operate 
Section 21(5) of the MMDR Act, 1957 provides that e xtraction of any mineral without EC 
amount to illegal/ unlawful mining.  Supreme Court in its judgment (2 August 2017) in the 
Common Cause vs Union of India directed that if any  mining operation is conducted in 
violation of FC Act, EP Act or any other such legal  requirements, the mining operation was 
illegal or unlawful.  Production in the year 1993-94 was to be treated as basis for determining 
the capacity of EC.  Ore extracted in excess of qua ntity from 2000-01 onward permissible 
under the mining plan or EC would be termed as ille gal mining and will attract compensation 
equal to 100 per cent  cost of mineral recovered. 
Audit noted that mines under RMD produced 43.61 mt of iron ore and 0.40 mt of limestone 
from 2000-01 onwards beyond quantity permitted unde r EC/ CTO.  Considering this as 
illegal mining, GoO demanded (September/ October 20 17) `204.58 crore as compensation/ 
penalty for excess mining in BIM, KIM and BOM.  Further, GoJ issued eight demand notices 
between September 2017 and January 2018 for `1,425.60 crore for illegal mining in KIOM, 
MIOM, GOM, MOM and BNP.  SAIL paid (December 2017) `66.89 crore to GoO and 
`200 crore to GoJ as compensation.  However, SAIL ha s appealed against the entire demand 
in High Courts of Odisha and Jharkhand and has been  granted stay from payment of 
remaining amount.  
Audit observed that management was aware of excess mining in its captive mines under 
RMD and need for reconciliation of figures with Sta te Governments to arrive at the financial 
impact. Due to mining beyond required statutory clearance, SAIL not only paid 
`266.89 crore 
but also continues to undertake the risk of paying huge amounts as compensation on account 
of illegal mining.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
221  
Management replied that iron ore mining in excess o f limits prescribed under EC at the iron 
ore Mines of RMD as per the procedure suggested by CEC and recognised by the Supreme 
Court (i.e. actual production during 1993-94 is per missible production during each year till 
the mining lease did not have the EC) was only 7.77 mt.  
It is evident from the reply of management that the re was excess mining and that it needs to 
reconcile the figures with state governments, to ar rive at mutually agreed quantity of excess 
production.  Further, reply was silent on penalty imposed on mining of limestone. 
13.3.4.12    Contractual issues 
i)   Award of work to ineligible bidder in Tulsidamar m ines 
SAIL issued (June 2016) tender for two years compos ite mining work in Tulsidamar mines 
for raising and dispatch of 2.5 lakh tonne dolomite  and disposal of 78,000 cum waste per 
year.  Five bids were received, and the work orders  were awarded in the ratio of 60:40 to 
M/s Ashok Kumar (January 2017) and M/s R. S. Grewal  and Company (November 2016) for 
`28.78 crore and `19.19 crore respectively.  
As per section 2(1b) of the integrity pact signed b y bidders and SAIL, the bidder would not 
enter with other bidder into any undisclosed agreem ent or understanding, whether formal or 
informal to restrict competitiveness or to introduc e cartelisation in the bidding process.  
Further, Section 3 of integrity pact stipulates tha t if the bidder violated the above section, 
SAIL could disqualify the bidder or take action as per guidelines on ban of business dealings. 
Audit observed that two firms (M/s R.S. Grewal and Company and M/s Prograssive Constn 
Corpn) had two common partners (Mr. ShivpujanYadav and Mr. Abhay Prasad), in violation 
of provisions of integrity pact, which was noted (J uly 2016) by the Tender committee (TC).  
The legal section of the Company advised (August 2016) to consider eligibility in accordance 
with the terms of NIT.  Audit observed that the TC ignored the provisions of the integrity 
pact and advice of legal section and awarded (Novem ber 2016) the contract to M/s R.S. 
Grewal and Company.  Management did not apply due d iligence to prevent collusion and 
awarded the contract to a bidder who should have been disqualified. 
Management replied (February 2020) that inter-conne ctivity clause has now been made part 
of Eligibility Criteria so that such situation does not arise in future. 
ii)   Unfruitful expenditure of `` ``8.86 crore on Tailing pond project at Bolani 
The work for reclamation of water from tailing pond  was awarded (September 2011) to 
Kirloskar Brothers Limited (KBL) for `9.78 crore to be completed by February 2013.  Supply 
of equipment was completed by September 2016, but t here has been no progress in the work 
till date.  KBL requested (February 2017) for comme rcial closure of contract which was 
agreed by Management in November 2018. 
Audit observed that after supply of equipment, civi l and erection work could not start due to 
resistance from villagers residing near the working  site. Management noticed 
(September 2013) encroachment at site but were unab le to provide hindrance free site to 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
222  
contractor even after lapse of five years.  As a re sult, tailing dam work was not completed 
and `8.86 crore spent on the project remained unfruitful. 
Management replied (February 2020) that, they were making efforts for gainful utilisation of 
materials supplied by the party and for commercial closure of the contract.  Balance job 
would be taken up after the land dispute was resolved. 
Reply of Management needs be viewed in the light of  the fact that the guarantees for the 
material supplied had lapsed and the BG submitted by the party also was returned in February 
2019.  Management should have assessed the accessibility of land before awarding contract. 
13.3.4.13  Augmentation of production capacity 
SAIL decided to augment the capacity of the existin g mines under RMD to meet the 
enhanced requirement of iron ore after MEP.  The Co mposite Project Feasibility Report 
(CPFR) for KIOM, MIOM and BOM was prepared during 2 008-09.  Expansion plan for 
GOM was approved in March 2010.  Audit observed tha t the MEP projects were lagging 
behind the completion schedule and not completed as on 31 March 2019 as given below: 
Table 13.3.2: Status of MEP projects undertaken at mines 
Name of 
Mines 
Present 
Capacity 
(mtpa) 
Proposed 
enhanced 
capacity 
(mtpa) 
No of 
Packages 
Contract 
cost  
(`` ``    in crore)  
No of 
package 
completed 
Cost of 
completed 
work  
(`` ``    in crore) 
Cost 
remaining 
to be 
executed  
(`` ``    in crore) 
BOM 4.10  10.00  26  377.55  4 291.00  86.55  
KIOM 4.25  5.50  13  95.41  12  74.14  21.27  
MIOM 4.30  6.50  5 105.77  3 75.00  30.77  
GOM 2.40  10.00  5 1926.95  nil  26.06  1900.89  
Total 15.05  32.00  49  2505.68   19  466.20  2039.48  
The observations on augmentation of production capacity are discussed below: 
i) Bolani ore mine 
• SAIL approved (June 2008) enhancement of loading ca pacity of BOM from 4.10 to 
10 mtpa for 
`123 crore and awarded (August 2008) to Techpro Syst ems Limited 
(TSL) for `104.15 crore to be completed by February 2010. Audi t noted that Bucket 
Wheel Reclaimer which was part of the project, coll apsed in November 2013. A 
committee of Management found that the root cause o f the incidence was improper 
design of the Reclaimer structure and calculation o f counterweight and addition of 
counter weight bloom. Risk Purchase Notice (RPN) wa s issued in August 2014 and 
the balance work was split into 24 sub-packages out of which 19 were completed, two 
were under progress and tendering of three packages  was under process. So far SAIL 
had incurred `118 crore on this project and the same is yet to be completed.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
223  
Audit observed that TSL became insolvent in August 2017.  Management submitted 
(May 2018) claim for `18.99 crore before Interim Resolution Professional (IRP 35 ) 
which was rejected on the ground of being time barred. 
Management replied (February 2020) that matter was taken up with Corporate Law 
for further course of action.  
Management reply was silent on the reasons for non- submission of claims before IRP 
within the stipulated time.  
• A project to enhance the production capacity of BOM  from 4.10 to 10 mtpa was 
approved (November 2011) for 
`254.55 crore.  The major work of installation/ up-
gradation of conveyors and crushing/ screening buil ding was awarded to Techno Fab 
Manufacturing Limited (January 2012) for `104.24 crore to be completed by January 
2014.  Due to poor performance of the contractor, B OM issued (February 2017) RPN 
to the contractor and balance work was divided into  four sub-packages.  So far 
`173 crore has been spent on the project which was y et to be completed.  Audit 
observed that inability of BOM to provide working f ronts, lack of statutory clearance 
and delay in completion of linked packages resulted  in delay in completion of 
enhancement of production capacity.  
Management replied (February 2020) that statutory i ssues were not there at the time 
of conceptualisation of project and placement of or der.  Efforts were being made to 
finalise and complete the RPN packages so that clea r front is provided for linked 
packages.  Claim of 
`51.86 crore plus interest filed before the IRP was rejected and 
against the rejection, application was filed before  the NCLT, Kolkata for enforcement 
of the claim. 
Reply of Management is not acceptable because there  was delay on the part of BOM 
even before the statutory issues cropped up.  BOM h ad handed over a portion of D 
and Panposh area to the contractor in April 2014 ev en after expiry of scheduled 
completion date i.e. January 2014.  The liquidator rejected (January 2020) the claim 
of 
`51.86 crore on the grounds of the claim not being s ubstantiated, various cases 
being pending between the parties and substantial a mount being payable by SAIL to 
the other party. 
iii)   Meghahatuburu iron ore mines 
To achieve production capacity of MIOM to 6.5 mtpa,  management decided to implement 
five packages for `105.77 crore to be completed by May 2012.  Main pac kage work for 
Augmentation of Crushing, Screening, Downhill Conve yor System and Replacement of 
Reclaimer was awarded (May 2010) to M/s Tecpro Syst ems Limited (TSL) for `72.02 crore 
to be completed by April 2012.  TSL abandoned the w ork in August 2014 and `57.35 crore 
was paid to them.  The left-out work was awarded to  Hindustan Steelworks Construction 
                                                           
35   An adjudicating authority to make a reference to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India for 
recommendation of an insolvency professional under provision of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 
2016 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
224  
Limited (HSCL) in December 2015 and M/s Lepton Proj ect Private Limited (October 2017) 
under RPN which was also not yet completed.  
Audit observed that management took three years to award the entire contract under RPN 
which prevented the Company in taking legal action due to delay in finalising claim.  TSL 
became insolvent in August 2017 and SAIL filed a cl aim of 
`7.72 crore before IRP on 
30 May 2018 which was not considered being time barred.  
Management replied (February 2020) that the matter has been taken up with its Corporate 
Law Department for further course of action. 
iv)   Expansion of Gua ore mine 
SAIL approved (March 2010) expansion of GOM from 2. 4 to 10 mtpa with installation of 
Pellet plant of four mtpa for 
`2,952 crore.  The project was a priority project to  gainfully 
utilise dumped iron ore fines, slimes and rejects f rom future production at GOM to produce 
pellet.  The contract for installation of ‘Crushing , Beneficiation and Pellet Plant’ was 
awarded (April 2014) to L&T for `1,926.95 crore to be completed within 40 months.  
Audit observed that work was awarded without obtain ing Stage-II FC for GOM.  Site for 
preliminary jobs could not be handed over to L&T an d the contract was closed in October 
2018.  L&T claimed (January 2016) `93.08 crore being five per cent  of the total contract 
value for initial drawing, design and supply of pla nt, equipment and building structure which 
was not yet paid.  Management accepted the fact tha t L&T had incurred expenditure on jobs 
like mobilisation, soil investigation, test of mate rials at NMDC and foreign laboratory, 
engineering costs etc. for 44 months, for which a reasonable amount was to be paid.  
Audit also observed that `25.05 crore was paid to MECON for procurement assis tance 
services for installation of beneficiation and pelletisation facilities. 
Management replied that they were in the process of  making an amicable settlement with the 
consortium.  The expenditure on MECON could not be considered as infructuous as the base 
documents prepared were being referred by Centre fo r Engineering and Technology, SAIL 
for preparation of revised scheme.  
Audit noted that L&T claimed over 
`250 crore plus for jobs done by them and SAIL was i n 
process of amicable settlement with the party. 
13.3.4.14  Transportation of Raw materials 
i)   Avoidable expenditure due to delay in surrender of  excess land at Bolani mines 
Bolani mines acquired (April 2008) 38.504 acre of l and from Railway on license basis for 
Railway siding.  When land licensing fee was hiked by Railways, Management decided 
(March 2011) to engage RITES to submit new land lic ensing plan based on actual 
requirement and also to look into possibility of re ducing the area.  RITES arrived at 
(October 2011) land requirement of 19.016 acres of land instead of 38.504 acres acquired by 
the mines.  It suggested to BOM to carry out survey  of total land on which infrastructure was 
already installed.  BOM awarded (October 2017 ) the job for survey of railway land and 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
225  
assess the requirement of land for `0.07 crore after lapse of six years. The work sched uled to 
be completed in January 2018 was not completed till March 2019.  
Audit observed that structures were constructed by BOM at various locations for loading of 
iron ores on the railway land which were not taken into consideration by RITES because they 
were not marked on the plan.  Presence of unplanned  structures necessitated reassessment of 
requirement of land and non-surrender of excess lan d.  Had Management undertaken planned 
construction of structures to utilise land optimall y and taken decision to surrender surplus 
land at an early stage, payment of `27.37 crore during 2014-19 for surplus land could h ave 
been avoided. 
Management replied that land requirement of only 19 .016 acres for Railway siding could not 
be verified from the records/ correspondence available at the Mines.  
The reply was not acceptable as RITES had stated (2 0 October 2011) that required land for 
siding at Bolani mines was 19.016 acres. 
ii)   Avoidable expenditure due to delay in surrender of  excess land at MIOM 
MIOM entered into an agreement with Railways in Jun e 2005 for 9.072 acre of land for 
private siding at Karampada for dispatch of iron or e.  As per the agreement, SAIL was to pay 
license fees at six per cent per annum of the market value to be revised every f ive years.  
SAIL noticed that only 1.107 acre of land was being  used for rack movement and decided 
(July 2013) to surrender the unused 7.965 acres of land. Railway suggested (November 2013) 
to submit revised plan and SAIL appointed a consult ant in February 2017.  The consultant 
asked (May 2017) SAIL to submit copy of land agreem ent plan, siding agreement, land 
licensing agreement etc. to prepare the revised plan.  
Audit observed that SAIL was unable to submit the d ocuments as it did not have land 
agreement plan and the contractor requested to resc ind the contract.  The surrendering 
process of unused land is yet to be completed.  Ino rdinate delay in completing the 
surrendering process of unused railway land resulte d in avoidable expenditure of 
`14.17 crore during 2014-19 as license fees which would increase with passage of time. 
Management accepted (February 2020), that Land Agreement Papers required for preparation 
of DPR could not be traced, and in the meantime, th e validity of the appointed consultant 
expired and he left the job.  MIOM is exploring opt ions for appointment of an alternate 
consultant.   
iii)   Extra expenditure on transportation of coal in Jit pur collieries 
Coal from Jitpur colliery is transported to washery  plant at Chasnalla colliery by aerial 
ropeway with nine km running through inhabited area s thereby posing threat to the safety of 
inhabitants.  The cost of transportation of coal by  road ( 
`168 to `179 per tonne) was 
significantly less as compared to the cost incurred  ( `632 to `1,003 per tonne) during the 
period 2014-19 through aerial ropeway.  A committee  constituted by ISP in August 2007 
recommended discontinuance of ropeways and transpor tation through alternative route by 
constructing new road.  Transportation of coal at h igher cost was taken up by Audit earlier 
also and SAIL management in its reply (April 2013) had assured to undertake a fresh study 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
226  
under present condition for road transport through alternative routes.  It was, however, noted 
that no progress was made in this regard and coal transportation continued to be done through 
ropeways entailing additional expenditure of `25.74 crore in the last five years.  
Management replied (February 2020) that transportat ion of Jitpur Coal by ropeway to 
Chasnalla was necessary to comply with statutory norms.  
Audit could not find anything in records to support  the fact that transportation of Jitpur Coal 
by ropeway to Chasnalla was necessary to comply with the statutory norms. 
iv)   Payment of demurrage, overloading and under loadin g charges 
Railways recover demurrage from SAIL if wagons are not loaded within prescribed time and 
punitive charges for overloading of wagons.  Railwa ys also charges freight as per permissible 
carrying capacity even if wagons are loaded below p ermissible capacity. During 2014-19, 
SAIL paid `33.83 crore, `70.99 crore and `248.12 crore to Railway for demurrage, over 
loading and under loading charges respectively 
Audit observed that there were delays in starting c ontractual wagon loading at BSP mines, 
absence of rapid loading system at BOM, absence of proper dimension conveyor belt at 
KIOM, excess time consumed for loading which result ed in payment of demurrage.  Further, 
in absence of weighment system, loading was done on  eye estimation.  As a result, rakes 
were either overloaded or under loaded which attrac ted overloading and under loading 
charges. 
Management replied (February 2020) that belt weighe r at KIOM, MIOM & BOM is 
optimised to reduce the impact of under and overloa ding.  The reason for increased 
demurrage at Gua and BSP mines was due to reduction  in free time by Railways from five to 
three hours. 
The fact however remains that Management paid 
`352.94 crore on demurrage, overloading 
and underloading.  
13.3.4.15  Manpower and machineries 
i)  Irregular payment of `` ``94.22 crore as incentive to the employees 
Section 28 and 30 of Mines Act, 1952 stipulates tha t no person shall be allowed to work in a 
mine for more than six days or 48 hours in a week.  Further, as per Section 29(1), any person 
employed therein deprived of any of the weekly days  of rest shall be allowed compensatory 
days of rest. 
To build up the stock in mines to meet the requirem ent of steel plants, four 
36  iron ore mines 
under RMD and Collieries 37  deployed employees for entire week without any hol iday.  
Employees were compensated with extra wages as ‘Mak e-up’ incentive for their work on 
seventh day and paid `94.22 crore during 2014-19.  
                                                           
36   MIOM, KIOM, GOM and BOM  
37   Ramnagore and Chasnalla 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
227  
Audit noted that ‘Make-up’ incentive scheme was not  approved by SAIL Board.  Moreover, 
the APP of company (based on six working days in a week), is linked with the production 
linked incentive scheme, where actual production is  compared with the APP for payment of 
incentive and production of seventh day of the week  is also considered for payment of 
production linked incentive. The ‘Make-up’ incentiv e to employees was paid with approval 
of head of mines.  Thus, the company made irregular  payment of `94.22 crore during 
2014-19 to its employees, which would further increase.  
Management replied (February 2020) that in order to  meet increased demand from Steel 
Plants for fulfilling their annual target of produc tion, operation of RMD mines on holidays 
sometimes was necessary and the concerned employees  got paid in the form of ‘Make-up’ 
incentive.  Deployment of manpower in Collieries on  Sundays was approved by ED 
(Colliery) to overcome the threat of safety vis-a-vis  statutory compliance. 
The reply of Management is not acceptable as ED doe s not have delegated power to approve 
incentive or reward schemes.  Moreover, out of the total payment of ‘Make-up’ incentive 
made, only two per cent  was made to the statutory manpower in collieries. 
13.3.4.16  Utilisation of heavy earth moving machinery (HEMM) 
Mines use HEMM like dozers, drill machine, dumpers,  excavators, pay loaders, shovels etc.  
The norms for utilisation of HEMM are based on reco mmendations of two committees’ 38  of 
2008.  The status of utilisation of HEMM during 2014-19 is shown as under: 
Table 13.3.3: Utilisation of HEMM vis-à-vis norms at RMD and BSP mines 
(in percentage of working hours to scheduled hours) 
HEMM 
RMD Mines BSP Mines 
Norm Utilisation during 2014-19 Norm Utilisation during 2014-19 
Min Max Average Min Max Average 
Dozers 49 10 70 20 42 7 57 26 
Drill Machines  49 9 41 23 49 14 67 39 
Dumpers 56/ 68 8 34 24 53 20 37 31 
Excavators 68 10 51 27 39 4 79 32 
Audit observed the following: 
• Utilisation of Excavators (in percentage) at BOM ra nged between 22 and 25 per cent .  
Similarly, dozers were under-utilised (23 to 30 per cent ).  Management attributed the 
underutilisation to shortage of HEMM operator, proc urement of dozer (2014), 
excavator (2015) and three dumpers (2015) under aug mentation scheme of BOM 
though the expansion of mines was yet to be completed (March 2019). 
 
• In KIOM, three 100 tonne dumpers were added during 2014-17.  However, net 
utilisation decreased from 59.62 per cent (2014-15) to 28.70 per cent  (2018-19) due 
to less utilisation of old 50 tonne dumpers.  
                                                           
38   Committee for fixing fleet strength and equipment  size in RMD mines (August 2007) and a Committee 
(November 2006) for fixing norms for availability and utilisation HEMM for RMD iron ore mines 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
228  
• In MIOM, utilisation of dumpers increased from 29.9 5 (2014-15) to 36.93 per cent  
(2015-16) but after addition of two dumpers in 2016 -17, net utilisation decreased to 
30.50 per cent  (2018-19) due to non-availability of matching number of shovels.  
• At Gua mines, utilisation of HEMMs was less than 50  per cent due to delay in 
procurement of spares/ sub-assemblies due to financial limitations, ageing of HEMMs 
etc.  
• In Nandini mines of BSP, the percentage utilisation  of dumpers and dozers was very 
low between 22 and 51 due to underutilisation of CSP. 
Management replied (February 2020) that action has been taken to engage four attendant- 
cum-technician to operate HEMM in BOM.  In KIOM, 50  tonne dumpers had completed the 
economic life and were under process of survey off.   In MIOM, one shovel was shifted from 
KIOM to match the requirement of dumpers and shovel s.  In GOM, a shovel has been 
commissioned in September 2019 to increase dumper u tilisation and procurement action of 
spares/ sub-assemblies was under process.  In BSP m ines, mining operation is carried out in 
different locations and benches due to scattered ore body. 
The reply of Management needs to be viewed in the l ight of the fact that Management failed 
to assess the HEMM utilisation and take corrective action during 2014-19.  Moreover, the 
norms for equipment utilisation werebased on consid eration of all operational factors and 
condition of equipments and therefore the norms should have been achieved by mines. 
13.3.4.17  Environment and Safety Issues 
i)  Environmental hazards caused by overflow of Hitkasadam at BSP  
The tailings 39  generated from Crushing and Screening Plant ( CSP), Dalli mines in slurry form 
is deposited  in Hitkasa dam. 15.14 mt of slime was accumulated in the dam since inception 
(1978).  As per mining plan (2018-23) CSP would con tinue to discharge 0.75 mt of slime 
slurry annually.  These iron ore slimes with averag e Fe content greater than 45 per cent are 
suitable for use as blast furnace grade pellets aft er beneficiation.  The capacity for de-silting 
operation was not sufficient and therefore SAIL awa rded contracts for desilting of slime at 
Hitkasa dam for `42.03 crore from 2008-19.  
The proposals (2007 and 2013) for setting up iron o re beneficiation cum pellet plant of 
0.9 mtpa capacity and installation of 1.0 mtpa pell et plant along with Slime Beneficiation 
System (October 2014) did not materialise due to la ck of viable technical and commercial 
bids and the financial non viability.  SAIL engaged (April 2015) HSCL for `13.65 crore for a 
period of two years to de-silt Hitkasa dam.  HSCL e xecuted only half of the work for 
`6.95 crore and left the work.  Management estimated  `8.12 crore to complete unexecuted 
quantity but did not take RPN action against HSCL. 
Audit observed that red water had overflown from dam and damaged nearby paddy fields and 
therefore the Chhattisgarh Environment Conservation  Board issued a closure notice in 2009.  
                                                           
39   Tailings are the materials left over after separa ting the valuable fraction from uneconomic fraction  of an 
ore  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
229  
The work of desilting (Phase-V) of Hitkasa Damwas a warded to M/s. Technoblast.  Audit 
however observed that, desilted material was being stacked in Slime Dumps near Hitkasa 
Tailing Dam and the issue of red water degrading of agriculture soil still persists. 
Management replied (February 2020) that a consultan t has been appointed for survey/ 
assessment of condition of Hitkasa Tailing Dam.  Th e work has started from January 2020 
onwards.  After completion of technical study about  stock of slime, condition of dam and 
other risk factors would be known and it was expect ed that problems in Hitkasa Dam would 
be controlled. 
ii)   Non-development of tailing dam 
MIOM and KIOM are operating in same lease.  As per conditions of EC, mines had to 
maintain catch drains and siltation ponds to preven t run off of water and flow of sediments 
directly into river and other water bodies.  Furthe r, as per clause 6 of specific condition of 
CTE there shall be zero discharge from mines.  KIOM  and MIOM each has a tailing dam 
where wastewater (slime) generated was collected to  prevent contamination of surrounding 
water bodies and environment.  
Audit observed that tailing dam of KIOM was full an d there was no space for further 
collection of slime.  In MIOM, the dam was filled u pto height of 20 meters against maximum 
height of 23 meters.  RMD in its Environment Impact  Assessment/ Environment 
Management Plan report (April 2013) had proposed to  set up beneficiation plant to de-silt the 
tailing dam but no action was taken.  As tailing da m is constructed to prevent contamination 
of surrounding environment, delay in decision to de -silt the tailing dam may result in over 
flow of waste water to surrounding areas. 
Management replied (February 2020) that they have s ubmitted (September 2019) application 
to GoJ to grant permission to sell sub-grade minera l (tailings and sub-grade iron ore).  
Provision for excavation of tailings has been incor porated in Mining Plan 2020-25 and 
amendment of EC for excavation of tailings from KIO M & MIOM was also under 
consideration. 
iii)   Deployment of statutory manpower  
Laws governing the mining activities (Mines Act 195 2; Metalliferous Mines Regulations 
1961, MMDR 1957) stipulate deployment of manpower w ith prescribed skills and 
qualifications in mines, known as statutory manpowe r (Surveyor, Mine foreman, Mining 
mate, Blaster). Position of deployment of statutory  manpower in mines of SAIL on 
31 March 2019 is shown as under: 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
230  
Table-13.3.4 
Category of 
Statutory 
manpower 
RMD Mines BSP mines Collieries division 
Sanctioned 
strength as 
per statute  
Actual 
strength  
Short 
fall 
Sanctioned 
strength as 
per statute  
Actual 
strength  
Short 
fall 
Sanctioned 
strength as 
per statute 
Actual 
strength  
Short 
fall 
Surveyor 12 7 5 9 7 2 3 2 1 
Mine Foreman 80 61 19 62 53 9 49 36 13 
Mining Mate 119 69 50 78 47 31 95 25 70 
Blaster 18 2 16 21 15 6 0 0 0 
Total 229 139 90 170 122 48 147 63 84 
Audit observed that there was shortfall in deployme nt of required statutory manpower in 
every mine as on 31 March 2019.  Against requiremen t of 546 statutory manpower under the 
above four categories, the actual deployment was 32 4 (shortfall of 41 per cent ).  Running of 
mines without adequate statutory manpower is not only violation of statutory provisions but it 
also poses threat to safe mining operation. 
Management replied (February 2020) that process has  been initiated to fill up vacancies and 
to meet norms and future requirements against statutory positions. 
13.3.5  Conclusion  
SAIL did not apply due diligence and conduct techno -commercial viability study to 
assessviability before the allotment of Parbatpur and Sitanala Coal Block and which had to be 
surrendered subsequently.  The amount spent on deve lopment of these coal mines thus 
became infructuous. Production lower than the plann ed levels at Dalli, Rajhara and Barsua 
mines, led to transfer of iron ore from distantly l ocated mines by BSP and RSP with extra 
expenditure on freight differential.  At Barsua min es, the non-compliance of FCA 1980, on 
account of use of forest land for non-forest purpose, without approval led to payment of penal 
NPV and CA.  Non-compliance of OMR 2007 by Bolani m ines led to additional expenditure 
on differential royalty.  Additional royalty paymen ts were made at Manoharpur mine, as Iron 
ore was graded at the highest grade and at Nandini mines on rejected limestone chips that 
were not suitable for iron making.  GoO and GoJ dem anded compensation on account of 
mining beyond quantity permitted under EC/ CTO by t he Iron ore and Limestone mines 
under RMD.  Delay in surrender of excess Railway la nd at Bolani at Meghahatuburu mines 
led to avoidable expenditure.  There was 41 per cent shortfall in statutory manpower against 
the requirement in mines. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in January 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
13.4   Safety and Environment Management in SAIL 
 
13.4.1   Introduction 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL or the Compa ny), a leading steel-producing 
company in India produced 17.51 million tonnes (mt)  of hot metal during 2018-19.  The 
company has five integrated steel plants 40  and three Special Steel Plants 41 . 
                                                           
40   Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP), Bokaro Steel Plant (BSL ), Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP), Durgapur Steel Plant  
(DSP) and IISCO Steel Plant/ Burnpur (ISP) 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
231  
13.4.2  Audit Objectives and criteria 
The objectives of audit were to assess whether  
• the company’s safety policy, procedures and practic es conform to the norms/ 
standards as prescribed under Act/ Rules/ Regulatio ns and Standard Operating 
Practices (SOP);  
• adequate measures were taken on the recommendations  of various Committees and 
safety audit;  
• the company has Environment and Pollution Control P olicy, Environment 
Management Plan and System to discharge environment  related responsibilities like 
pollution control, management of waste and compliance with laws; and  
• adequate resources were provided for social respons ibility on environmental and 
pollution control, safety standards and application of the best industrial practices. 
The audit criteria used were the Factories Act 1948 , Safety Policy and SOPs of SAIL, Inter 
Plant Standard for Steel Industry (IPSS) 42 , National Environment Policy 2006, Environment 
(Protection) Rules 1986 amended in 2012 and EIA not ification 2006, Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act 1974 amended in 2011, Air  (Prevention & Control of pollution) 
Acts 1981 amended in 1987, National Ambient Air Qua lity Standard 2009, Bio-medical 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 amended in 2018, Solid  Waste Management Rules 2016, 
Guidelines and instructions issued by the Central and State Pollution Control Board (SPCBs).  
Audit examined the records relating to decisions, m anagement processes and activities 
relating to safety policy and environment managemen t in all the steel plants, SAIL Safety 
Organisation and Environment Management Division for a period of five years (2014-19). 
13.4.3  Audit Findings  
 
13.4.3.1  Safety Management in SAIL 
SAIL Safety Organization (SSO) was set up at Ranchi  to coordinate, monitor and facilitate 
the safety related activities of the Company.  SSO formulates safety policies, procedures, 
systems, action plans, guidelines and follows up th eir implementation to ensure accident-free 
work environment.  Safety Engineering Department (SED) in each steel plant implements the 
safety policy of the company. 
13.4.3.2  Non-compliance of Safety Policy and Safety Manual 
Corporate Safety Policy of SAIL stipulates safety a udit to assess compliance to safety 
standards, mitigating plans, develop improvement pl an and accountabilities for completion 
and follow up on timeline and recommendations.  Aud it observed that, SSO did not develop 
any plan or frame timeline to implement its recomme ndations.  Out of 686 recommendations 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
41   Alloy Steels Plant (ASP), Salem Steel Plant (Sale m) and Visweswaraiya Iron & Steel Plant/ Bhadravati    
(VISP) 
42   Inter Plant Standards in Steel Industry –issued b y the committee of different steel plants but mainl y 
finalised by SAIL. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
232  
made by SSO to different plants prior to 2018, 258 recommendations were yet to be 
complied.  
Management replied (February 2020) that it would en sure that all the recommendations were 
implemented in a phased manner.  
13.4.3.3  Non-achievement of zero accident 
Safety Policy and Safety Manual envisages zero accident.  As per Section 88 of The Factories 
Act 1948, notice in respect of any accident, in any  factory which causes death, or bodily 
injury due to which a person is injured or is preve nted from working for 48 hours or more 
immediately following the accident, shall be sent b y the manager of the factory to such 
authorities 43 , in the prescribed form and within the prescribed time.  In the event of 
occurrence of an accident in plant area, initial re port is prepared by the concerned plant shop 
and sent to Safety Department.  The Safety Departme nt reports only those cases, which meet 
the criteria for reporting, to the Factory Inspector.  
Audit noted that 85 fatal and 577 non-fatal acciden ts occurred in the company during 
2014-19.  Out of above 577 non-fatal accidents, 158  were reported to the authorities.  The 
company lost 5.34 lakh man days and paid `9.62 crore to the employees besides payment to 
contractual workers through ESIC.  Audit however ob served that, all cases of non-fatal 
accidents were not reported at BSL.  45 cases were reported as non-fatal accidents (2014-19), 
whereas as per the Incident Investigation Report pr epared by Safety Department, BSL there 
were 134 non-fatal accidents.  Audit also observed that the accidents occured due to non-
adherence to SOP, lack of communication, supervisio n and non-compliance of Inter Plant 
Safety Standards-Steel Industry (IPSS) 1-11-011-01.  
Management replied (February 2020) that strict adhe rence to safety measures and SOPs, 
awareness programmes and training of workers were being ensured to prevent accidents.  
It is recommended that, Management should ensure th at all reportable cases are reported to 
the statutory authorities as per the Factories Act, 1948. 
13.4.3.4   Accident in gaseous area 
As per (IPSS): 1-11-002-12, gas masks should be use d while working in hazardous gas area; 
workers shall carry portable Carbon Monoxide (CO) g as monitor; all workers should be 
trained. 
i)  Fire incident at BSP during De-Blanking job of CO Gas Line  
CO gas Line in BSP was installed to facilitate supp ly of CO gas to various shops.  A Blank 
Plate at Column C-50 of COB (Coke Oven Battery) #11 , separating the entire gas main into 
parts was causing pressure fluctuation.  To stabili se the gas network, Blank Plate of Column 
C-50 was required to be removed.  During this proce ss (9 October 2018), flames burst out 
and persons present on the spot got trapped/ exposed in the fire and 14 people died.  
Audit noted that, for safe working in the gas line,  jobs should be done after depressurising 
and purging the gas line by bleeding out the gas pr esent because blanking/ de-blanking job 
                                                           
43   Factory Inspector of the State Government 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
233  
done on charged gas lines was risky.  Audit observe d that, on many occasions, request for 
shutdown was turned down and the practice was to do  the de-blanking/ blanking jobs on 
charged pipelines without shutdown. BSP therefore d ecided to do the job under reduced gas 
network pressure and as a result the fire incident took place.  IPSS 1-11-030-2017 on Safety 
Standard for working on Gas line in Steel Industry specified positive isolation while working 
on gas lines, but the SOP and protocol of BSP in th is regard was not in line with the IPSS.  
Laxity in taking safety measures and unsafe practic e led to death of personnel, loss of 
production, payment of compensations of `30 lakh for each case and `15 lakh for each 
reportable injury.  
Management replied (February 2020) that possibility  of doing the job in non-gas conditions 
was also explored but could not be done due to tech nical difficulties.  Due to non-availability 
of positive isolation facilities, job was carried o ut on live gas condition.  Now all live Gas 
line Blanking/ De-blanking jobs are stopped and it is carried out by 100 per cent  positive 
isolations only. 
The reply was not acceptable because in all earlier  protocols at BSP for similar jobs, these 
were carried out after reducing the pressure only t o some extent.  Moreover, it was noted that 
other plants of SAIL carried out de-blanking job af ter complete isolation.  Management reply 
also did not elaborate the technical difficulties.  
ii)  Leakage of Gas at Pump House-2 of BSP 
Blast Furnace (BF) Gas generated in BSP, which cont ains highly poisonous Carbon 
Monoxide gas is carried through the pipeline to the  Gas Cleaning Plant (GCP) to clean them 
through water. Pump House-2 (PH) supplies water to GCP. On 12 June 2014, Water 
Management Department (WMD) noticed fall in the water pressure and huge accumulation of 
water in the PH due to leakage as Header Water Line -2 of PH supplying water to GCP 
ruptured between the Header Valves- 47 and 55 side.   BF gas leaked and spread in the PH.  
Six persons died due to the effect of the gas and 30 persons were affected.  
Audit noted that as per the show cause notice issue d (June 2014) by Dy Controller, Industrial 
Health and Safety, Government of Chattisgarh, the p ipelines in PH were not inspected and 
maintained and due to absence of non-reversible val ves in the water pipeline, BFG came into 
water pipeline and spread into PH through the ruptu red header.  Audit observed that despite 
knowing that the entire plant was a gas prone area,  Management had not installed adequate 
gas monitors and therefore, workers were not aware of the presence of poisonous gas and 
could not take precautionary measures like use of g as masks.  BSP gave compensation of 
`25 lakh for each worker who died.  
Management replied (February 2020) that design prov ision was not envisaged earlier for 
stoppage of reverse gas leakage from BF and gas leakage incidence was unprecedented. After 
the above incidence, non-return valves were install ed at all GCPs of BF and adequate 
numbers of CO Monitors were installed at the gas prone PHs.  
Reply of Management needs to be seen in the light o f the fact that, similar incident had 
occurred (January 2004) in Bulgaria’s largest iron and steel plant, Kremikovtzi when the 
pressure in the water pipeline supplying the blast furnace’s gas-purifying machinery fell.  The 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
234  
poisonous gases started leaking due to a rapid decr ease in the water level and the noxious gas 
killed three people.  Management should have gather ed knowledge from the incident and 
envisaged the possibility of such occurrence in their plants and taken necessary precautionary 
steps for system improvement. 
iii)  Fatal accidents occurred in DSP in December 2014 an d November 2017 due to work 
in gaseous area without carrying portable CO monito r.  Another accident occurred in ISP 
(September 2014) when CO gas leaked during cleaning the pre-heater tubes of COB#11.  The 
CO gas accumulated in a place with inadequate venti lation caused fire resulting in burn 
injuries to 24 persons, of whom 05 died. As per enq uiry report, the main reasons for accident 
were leakage of CO gas through pre-heater inlet valve, poor ventilation of pre-heater area and 
closure of inlet and outlet valves without making pre-heater CO gas completely free. 
Management replied (February 2020) that in DSP, mor e than 212 fixed CO monitors have 
been installed covering all gas prone areas of the plant to strengthen the safety of personnel 
working in gaseous areas.  In ISP, management has taken action like preparation of pre-check 
list, SOPs, SMPs, ensured cross ventilation around all gas prone areas etc. 
iv)  Accident due to fall from height 
Para 3.2 of IPSS 1-11-005-14 stipulates that before  start of work at height of two meters, all 
safety requirements (body harness, fall arrester, p rotective helmets, safety nets) should be 
applied.  Audit noted that absence of adequate safety measures and proper supervision thereof 
in steel plants of the company, led to many accidents due to fall from height.  
Five accidents relating to fall from height occurre d in BSP during 2014-17 due to slippage 
from height.  One accident each took place in ASP ( October 2015) because support of 
Trusses was not fool proof.  In RSP, a worker lost balance (March 2017) while working and 
fell as there was opening in the lower level of pla tform.  In BSL an accident took place 
(September 2017) because corrugated sheet on which work was to be done was not fixed.  In 
SSP an accident occurred (February 2018) due to non -covering of ladder of jib crane, lack of 
support for holding to reach the platform of jib crane.  
Audit observed that these accidents took place beca use the workers were not using body 
harness while working on height. 
Management replied (February 2020) that remedial me asures were being were taken. 
Trainings were provided and all safety appliances f or working at height were being ensured 
in ASP and BSL.  
v)  Availability of safety officers  
Clause 40B of the Factories Act, 1948 stipulates th at, State Government by notification in 
Official Gazette, may specify the number of safety officers to be appointed in each factory 
where the process or operation involves any risk of  bodily injury, health hazard etc.  The 
duties, qualifications etc. of safety officers shal l be such as may be prescribed by the state 
govt.  As per Bihar Factories Rules, 1950, the duti es of Safety Officer shall be to advise and 
assist the factory management in the fulfillment of  its obligations, statutory or otherwise, 
concerning prevention of personal injuries and main taining a safe and healthy working 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
235  
environment.  As per rules, 26 safety officers were  required in BSL as against which there 
were only 17 to 19 safety officers during 2014-19.  West Bengal Factories (Safety Officers) 
Rules, 1978 prescribed the number of Safety Officer s as six whereas, in DSP, only three 
safety officers were in place (March 2019).  Simila rly, 20 safety officers were available in 
September 2019 against requirement of 26 in RSP.  
Management while accepting the audit views replied (February 2020) that recruitment of 
required number of safety officers was under process in BSL, DSP and RSP.  
13.4.3.5  Fire Management 
The Factories Act, 1948 categorised integrated stee l industry as hazardous process industry.  
Section 38 of the Act stipulates that in every fact ory, all measures be taken to prevent 
outbreak of fire and its spread and to provide safe  means of escape in event of fire and 
necessary equipment and facilities for extinguishin g fire.  Audit noted that there were 1,405 
fire incidents in SAIL plants during 2014-18.  Out of these, 515 fire incidents took place in 
ISP, 268 in ASP, 192 in VISP and 190 in BSP.  Main reasons for the fire incidents were hot 
metal/ slag/ spark, overheating/ heat radiation and  electrical fault/ short circuit, non-cleaning 
of spillage of oil, non-working of fire detection etc. 
Management replied (February 2020) that measures we re being taken to prevent outbreak of 
fire.  
Reply of management needs to be seen in light of th e fact that despite taking measures, fire 
incidents continued to take place.  For instance, i n ISP, 60 fire incidents (2 major and 58 
minor) took place during 2019-20.  
13.4.3.6  Availability of fire hydrant and extinguishers 
BSL had procured 8,500 fire extinguishers till 2008 -09.  As per Bureau of Indian Standard 
(BIS) (IS: 15683-2006) implemented in 2012, all fir e extinguishers were to be replaced.  
Audit observed that only 5,100 fire extinguishers were procured till December 2019.  Further, 
number of specialised men in fire services was reduced from 97 as on March 2015 to 41 as on 
March 2019.  In DSP there was six operational fire tenders.  The stipulated life of the fire 
tenders is 10 years but two fire tenders were more than 30 years old and one was 16 years 
old.  Audit observed that requisite criteria was met at BSP, RSP and ISP. 
Management replied (February 2020) that in BSL, rem aining fire extinguishers would be 
procured and replaced during 2019-21.  In DSP, proposal to replace two fire tenders would be 
moved in 2020-21. 
13.4.3.7  Inadequate Fire detection and Alarm system  
BIS IS 2189:2008 stipulates that the purpose of fir e detection and alarm (FDA) system is to 
detect fire and give an alarm so that appropriate a ction can be taken.  Audit observed that 
FDA was not installed in all shops vulnerable to fire in BSL.  Further, automatic FDA system 
installed in the shops were not working (September 2019).  Automatic FDA system was not 
installed in DSP except those installed under MEP, power station areas and Computer and 
Information Technology.  In RSP, out of 82 FDA syst ems in various areas/ units of the plant, 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
236  
43 were not working and four were yet to be commiss ioned.  In ISP out of 71 automatic FDA 
systems, 33 were defective and in BSP out of 18 automatic FDA systems, 10 were defective.  
Management replied (February 2020) that, in many sh ops except Cold Rolling Mill-III, FDA 
systems in BSL were obsolete due to old technology and thus required replacement.  In DSP, 
to strengthen fire safety measures, Dry Chemical Po wder modular system with automatic 
detection and suppression mechanism would be instal led in old assets, vulnerable to fire and 
procurement action were initiated for retrofitting/ replacement of FDA Systems in RSP.  
13.4.3.8  Environment Management in SAIL 
As per Corporate Environment Policy, SAIL is commit ted to improve environmental 
performance.  Each steel plant has Environment Cont rol Department (ECD), which is 
responsible to monitor environmental issues and rep ort to the SPCB and CPCB.  
Environment Management Division (EMD) at Kolkata ca rries out functions related to 
environment and enactment of environmental laws. Mi nistry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MOEF&CC) is the nodal agency for pl anning, promotion, co-ordination 
and overseeing the implementation of environmental and forestry programmes.   
13.4.3.9  Non-renewal of environment clearance certificate for MEP 
Environment Clearance (EC) granted (October 2008) f or Modernisation and Expansion Plan 
(MEP) of BSL was valid for five years, which was ex tended upto October 2018.  Extension 
of EC for further period was not allowed.  Audit no ted that, MEP at BSL was not fully 
completed (October 2018) and BSL applied for fresh EC in February 2018 which was 
pending with MoEFCC.  Work for installation of new Sinter Plant and Up-gradation of SMS-
I packages was stopped (October 2018) on which `991 crore was spent due to non-
availability of EC.  Delay in issue of EC was mainl y due to non-fulfilment of conditions like 
disposal of fly ash dumps in project area, disposal  of slag dump, non-setting up of sewage 
treatment plant etc. 
Management replied (February 2020) that to obtain f resh EC, the process was started in 
February 2018 and EC was expected to be issued by M arch 2020.  Management further 
intimated (April 2020) the process for obtaining EC  was disrupted and would be resumed 
after lock-down.  
The reply of Management may be seen in the light of  the fact that the preconditions for 
issuing EC being the setting up of sewage treatment  plant over Garga River was yet to be 
approved by the company.  Further, reply was silent regarding disposal of fly ash. 
RSP started the work of installation of Hot Strip M ill (HSM) in September 2015 i.e. prior to 
obtaining EC, which was availed in December 2016.  Odisha SPCB directed RSP (April 
2016) to stop construction activity of new HSM till receipt of EC and as a result the work was 
suspended between May 2016 and September 2016.  The  contractor claimed 
`20 crore for 
compensation for idling of resources during that period. 
Management replied (February 2020) that RSP started tendering for enabling jobs parallely in 
anticipation of Public Hearing, which could be held in June 2016.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
237  
Management reply needs to be viewed in the light of  the fact that taking up enabling jobs 
without obtaining consent to establish from the Boa rd and EC was a violation of various 
Acts.  
13.4.3.10  Air Emission Management 
Steel industry accounts for 6-7 per cent  of the total Green House Gas (GHG) emissions in 
India.  CO 2 in steel plant is generated from burning of coke/ charcoal as fuel.  Blast Furnace 
gas (BFG), Coke Oven gas (COG) and LD 44 / BOF gases produced from BF, Steel Melting 
Shop and Basic Oxygen Furnace respectively.  These gases contain CO, CO 2 and Nitrogen, 
which are used as fuel for heating in steel making process, power generation or burnt in air. 
India, a signatory to the Paris Agreement under Uni ted Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) has committed to reduce the  emission intensity by 33 to 
35 per cent  by 2030 from 2005 level. Details of emission and r eduction of CO 2 by SAIL, 
RINL and TATA Steel during 2014-15 to 2018-19 is given below: 
Table- 13.4.1 
(Unit: Tonne/ Tonne of crude steel (t/ tcs))  
Year SAIL RINL TATA Steel 
2014-15 2.65  2.79  2.47  
2015-16 2.60  2.79  2.30  
2016-17 2.61  2.78  2.29  
2017-18 2.56  2.62  2.30  
2018-19 2.57  2.59  2.29  
Reduction during last 5 
years ( per cent ) 
3.01  7.17  7.29  
Audit noted that international standards for CO 2 emission  was 1.8-1.9 t/ tcs.  CO 2 emission in 
SAIL was higher as compared to the international st andards and also TATA Steel.  SAIL 
fixes plant wise norms for CO 2 emission yearly.  It was noted that among the steel  plants of 
SAIL, BSL, RSP and ISP achieved the target during a ll the years 2014-19.  BSP could not 
achieve the target for CO 2 emission during 2014-15 to 2018-19. DSP could not achieve the 
target in 2014-15, 2016-17 and 2018-19. 
Management replied (February 2020) that, BSP and DS P could not achieve the target due to 
delay in execution of MEP and non-stability of newl y added units respectively.  SAIL would 
be in position to achieve specific CO 
2 emissions of 2.43 t/ tcs by 2020-21 and 2.3 t/ tcs  by 
2030-31. 
Reply of Management is to be viewed in light of the  fact that the Ministry of Steel 
emphasised (July 2018) to achieve international benchmarks.  
13.4.3.11  Flaring up of gases in absence of Gas holder 
In an integrated steel plant, many gases are genera ted from BFs, Coke Ovens and Steel 
Melting Shops or Basic Oxygen Furnace.  These gases contain high amount of CO gas, which 
can be used as a fuel for different purposes.  Gas Holder helps in storage of useful CO gas, 
                                                           
44   Converter gas or BOF gas is also known as LD (Linz and Donawitz) gas 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
238  
which is otherwise flared into the atmosphere.  Audit noted instances of flaring up of gases to 
environment due to delay in completion of air pollution control system. 
(i)  SAIL decided (May 2007) to install a gas holder of higher capacity and new ID Fan at 
BSL with energy conserving mechanism to prevent fla re up of LD gases (mainly CO and 
CO 2 gas).  Contract for Gas Holder package and ID Fan Complex was awarded in August 
2008 and January 2013 respectively.  Though the gas  holder was completed in 2013, ID fan 
complex could be completed in April 2017.  During c ommissioning of gas holder, 
management found that most of the items fitted in i t were not functioning and required 
replacement or rectification as the same was idle f or about four years.  The gas holder unit 
was yet to be operationalised.  Thus, due to delay in completion of gas holder and ID fans, 
BSL vented out LD gas (6.68 lakh tonne CO 2 for `81.35 crore 45 ) between April 2017 and 
June 2019 causing air pollution, loss of saving of energy and excess consumption of coal.  
Management replied (February 2020) that though LD G as Holder project was available for 
use since 2013, the same was not commissioned due t o malfunctioning of various 
equipments.  National Safety Council (NSC) 46  has conducted Hazard and Operability 
(HAZOP) Study and Dispersion Modeling of LD Gas Hol der required for regular recovery of 
LD gas.  Recommendations of NSC for safe operation of the facilities were likely to be 
implemented by 31 October 2020.  
Audit noted that due to mismatch in planning and de lay in pre-commissioning activities of 
gas holder project, project was delayed which resul ted in venting of CO gas in air and excess 
consumption of coal.  
(ii)  BSP placed order (October 2008) for installation of  SMS-3 and Gas Holder on M/s 
GmbH Austria.  Production from SMS-3 started from M arch 2018 but the gas holder has not 
been completed till date.  In the absence of gas ho lder LD Gas was flared up in the air during 
2018-19 (0.40 lakh tonne CO 
2 valuing `4.91 crore).  
Management replied (February 2020) that, Gas Holder  was expected to be commissioned by 
September 2020.  
13.4.3.12  Dust emission management 
Steel making process produces huge amount of dust e specially in Sinter Plant (SP) and SMS, 
which can be recycled to produce sinter.  Capturing  of dust is made in two modes by 
Electrostatic Precipitation (ESP) and Battery Cyclone 47 .  Charter on Corporate Responsibility 
for Environmental Protection (CREP) 48  issued by the MoEF (March 2003) stipulated to 
reduce the fugitive emission by 100 per cent  by March 2008.  SAIL selected various projects 
not only to reduce dust within the current prescrib ed limit but also to meet higher standards 
                                                           
45   Calculated considering calorific value of LD gas and equivalent tonnage and value of coal  
46   National Safety Council – set up (1966) by the Mi nistry of Labour, Government of India with the  
mission of eliminating preventable deaths at work, in homes and communities, and on the road through 
leadership, research, education and advocacy 
47   ESP works in dry mode where dust are accumulated and reprocessed in SP and Battery Cyclone was of 
wet type dust collection system in which the slurry water is discharged to settling tank.  
48   MoEF launched (March 2003) CREP with the purpose to go beyond the compliance of regulatory norms 
for prevention and control of pollution through var ious measures including waste minimization, in-plan t 
process control and adoption of clean technologies.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
239  
applicable in future.  Audit noted higher emission of dust in air due to non-completion of the 
following schemes/ projects. 
(i)  BSL awarded (August 2007) project to replace batter y cyclone (BC) with six ESPs in 
Sintering Plant to reduce emission, which was to be  completed by August 2010.  Audit noted 
that out of the six planned ESPs, one ESP was commi ssioned in 2010 and emission from this 
ESP was within the envisaged project norm (<50 mg/ Nm3).  Due to non-commissioning of 
five ESPs, there was higher emission of PM ranging from 140 to 150 mg/ Nm3 in BCs.  
Thus, sinter dust of 3.08 lakh tonne could not be r ecycled/ reused and was flown to the main 
sludge compartment during last five years. 
Management replied (February 2020) that emissions w ere within existing norm of 150 mg/ 
Nm 3.  Erection of another ESP was expected to be compl eted by March 2020.  Remaining 
BCs would be replaced subsequently.  
The reply of Management may be seen in view of the fact that the project was finalised with 
the envisaged target of dust emission below 50 mg/ Nm 3, considering future revision of 
norms as well as deterioration in health of equipment.  
(ii)  Due to high stack emission at Refractory Material P lant (RMP) of BSL, CPCB 
directed (March 2011) to upgrade Air Pollution Cont rol Device (APCDs) in RMP by 2012.  
Due to non-adherence of timelines submitted by BSL for refurbishing the ESPs of RMP, 
CPCB forfeited the BG of `0.50 crore.  BSL decided (July 2014) to replace ESP s and 
awarded a contract in January 2017 with schedule co mpletion of April 2019.  Till date only 
three ESPs (out of six) could be refurbished.  Audi t noted that PM emission from new ESPs 
(1, 3 and 6) were within the envisaged project norm  (<50 mg/ Nm 3) but in remaining ESPs 
the emission was in the range of 140 to 150 mg/ Nm 3 which was more than the prescribed 
norm. 
Management replied (February 2020) that ESP 4 was c ompleted in January 2020 and job for 
balance two ESPs (2&5) would be completed by Septem ber 2020.  However, stack emission 
from these two ESPs was meeting existing norms of 1 50 mg/ m 3, hence there was no non-
compliance.  
Management reply may be viewed in light of the fact  that the envisaged emission norms for 
the project was <50 mg/ Nm 
3.  
(iii)  Sinter Machine-1 of SP-3 at BSP was installed initi ally to clean the waste gas up to 
maximum of 75mg/ Nm 3.  The norm of stack emission was reduced from 150 mg/ Nm 3 to 50 
mg/ Nm 3, which was not met through the existing systems.  B SP placed (September 2016) 
order for installation of the same with schedule da te of completion of October 2017.  
However, the project has not been commissioned resu lting in emission of dust in a range of 
65-80 mg/ Nm 3, which was more than the prescribed norm.  
Management replied (February 2020) that the Sinter machine-1 of SP-III is adhering to 
emission norms as prescribed by CECB i.e. below 50 mg/ Nm3 by regular maintenance and 
through process control.  The emission range stated  are sporadic instances of emissions 
exceeding norms for which corrective action was tak en immediately.  All efforts are being 
taken to complete the up gradation of ESPs by September 2020.  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
240  
The fact remains that the project taken up for upgrading of ESP was yet to be commissioned.  
(iv)  Dust extraction system at Ore Bedding and Blending Plant (OBBP) of RSP became 
defunct which was a serious concern to health and s afety risk to employees and environment.  
OSPCB granted (March 2014) consent to operate with the condition to install Dry Fog Dust 
Suppression (DFDS) to control emission of fugitive dust and comply with the norm of 100 
mg/ Nm 3 for PM emission.  OSPCB noted (May 2017) that PM 10  ranged from 121-155 mg/ 
Nm 3 against the norm of 100 mg/ Nm 3 and directed to complete the scheme by May 2019.  
Audit observed that the timeline given by OSPCB had  lapsed but RSP had not completed the 
system.  
Management replied (February 2020) that OSPCB had e xtended timeline for completion of 
Dry Fog Dust Suppression System in OBBP by 31 March  2020. The system was, however, 
yet to be commissioned (May 2020). 
13.4.3.13  Conservation of energy and natural resources 
i)  Specific Energy Consumption 
Specific Energy Consumption (SEC) is energy consumed in production of one tonne of crude 
steel. Energy consumption in SAIL, Tata Steel, RINL  and World Average during 2014-15 to 
2018-19 is given below: 
Table 13.4.2 
                                                                                (Unit-Gcal/ tcs) 
Year SAIL TATA 
Steel 
RINL World Average 
2014-15 6.53 6.01 6.37 4.5 to 5.0 
2015-16 6.51 5.77 6.40 
2016-17 6.60 5.67 6.39 
2017-18 6.38 5.67 6.05 
2018-19 6.50 5.69 5.98 
Decrease during 5 years 
(per cent ) 
0.46 5.32 6.12 -- 
From the above, it is seen that average SEC in SAIL was more than the world average as well 
as its peers like Tata Steel and RINL during the la st five years.  SAIL also lagged behind its 
peers with regard to reduction of energy consumptio n.  BSP, ISP and RSP could not achieve 
the self-fixed target of SEC during 2014-19, which resulted in excess consumption of 
112.63 lakh Gcal of specific energy which lead to i ncrease in GHG and adverse impact on 
environment.  
Management replied (February 2020) that there was n o annual statutory norm for SEC and 
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) set targets for S EC on a three-year cycle.  The overall 
SEC of SAIL has reduced and after stabilisation/ enhancement of production of new units and 
phasing out of older energy consuming Units, SEC was expected to reduce further.  
The fact remains that, higher consumption of SEC le ad to increase in GHG and adverse 
impact on the environment.  
 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
241  
ii)  Excess consumption of coke 
Coke is an important ingredient in iron making and coke rate is denoted by consumption of 
coke in producing hot metal. Lower coke rate indica tes better performance and lower 
emission of CO 2. 
Table 13.4.3: Consumption of coke during 2014-19 
                                                                                                                       (Unit: kg/ thm) 
Year SAIL TATA Steel RINL International 
Norm 
2014-15 504 443 543 275-350 
2015-16 489 380 543 
2016-17 473 360 490 
2017-18 456 348 459 
2018-19 452 352 465 
Decrease during 5 years ( per cent ) 10.32 20.54 14.36  
From the above, it could be seen that coke consumpt ion in SAIL was more than the 
international norm and Tata Steel but less than RIN L. SAIL could achieve only 
10.32 per cent  reduction in coke consumption during 2014-19. Furt her, all five integrated 
steel plants of SAIL could not achieve the target f or coke consumption during the period 
2014-19 which resulted in excess emission of 45.96 lakh tonne of CO 2 gas.  
Management replied (February 2020) that coke rate o f SAIL had improved during last five 
years and further reduction is expected with progre ssive upgrading of old BFs, closing down 
the old and inefficient BFs and up-gradation/ installation of new stoves. 
13.4.3.14  Solar Power management 
Solar power, a renewable energy helps in reduction of CO 2 emission by reducing 
consumption of fossil fuel.   GoI has committed to United Nations to increase share of electric 
power from non-fossil fuel-based resources to 40 per cent  by 2030. GoI also issued (January 
2016) notification to promote generation of electricity from renewable sources.  
13.4.3.15  Non-installation of solar power system 
SAIL committed (February 2015) to Ministry of New a nd Renewable Energy (MNRE) to 
install solar plants of 200 MW by 2019 and decided to install 162 MW of solar projects by JV 
Companies NSPCL and BPSCL 49 .  The Company, however ascertained (March 2018) th at 
the projected tariff of solar power ( `3.59/ unit) was high and decided not to pursue thro ugh 
the JVs.  SAIL Board accorded (February 2019) ‘In-p rinciple’ approval for installation of 
solar power plants of total 240 MW in a new JV to b e selected through tariff-based bidding 
process.  Tendering was under progress with estimated cost of `972 crore. SAIL has to invest 
26 per cent  of ownership in the JV to ensure status of captive power plant.  
Audit noted that as per business plan of SAIL for 2 018-19, out of 10,700 million units (MU) 
of power required by the company, only 6,700 MU was  expected to be generated by own 
captive power plant and rest to be purchased from g rid.  The cost of grid power ranged 
between `4.50 to `7.60/ kwh which was considerably higher than the co st from solar 
(`2.50 to `3/ kwh).  Thus, due to delay in taking decision to install solar power plant, the 
                                                           
49   NTPC-SAIL Power Company Limited and Bokaro Power Supply Company Private  Limited  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
242  
Company lost opportunity to save cost of energy and  also emitted 3.30 lakh tonne of CO 2 gas 
annually in the atmosphere. 
Management replied (February 2020) that proposal to  provide land to the proposed JV in this 
regard has been submitted to MoS for approval.  
MNRE emphasised (July 2018) that roof solar sector had tremendous potential for generating 
solar power and to reduce energy bills by utilising  available rooftops, vacant areas in the 
premises of public and private buildings.  MNRE adv ised MoS to issue necessary directions 
to install roof top solar projects in all public bu ildings.  Audit noted that BSP installed a 
Rooftop Solar Photovoltaic (0.2 MW) at Bhilai Niwas  in 2013 for 
`2.44 crore which was 
inoperative from March 2018. BSL, RSP and ISP insta lled (2015/ 17) roof top solar system 
of two MW, 10 KW and 160 KW respectively. No roof t op solar system was installed in 
DSP. 
Management replied (February 2020) that tender for the project for installation of about 
6.195 MW capacity Rooftop Solar Plants across SAIL Plants under MNRE’s ‘Award-cum-
Incentive Scheme’ had been taken up.  Rooftop Solar  Photovoltaic system at Bhilai Niwas 
would be operative by July 2020. Tendering for inst allation of Rooftop Solar system at DSP 
was under process.  
13.4.3.16  Shortfall in meeting Renewable Energy Purchase Obligation (RPO)  
The Electricity Regulatory Commissions of various s tates have notified RPO. Under this, the 
power distribution licensees, users of captive powe r and those utilising power through open 
access have obligation to utilise specified percent age of renewable energy or purchase 
renewable energy certificates from energy exchange. 
(i)  The Odisha Electricity Regulatory Commission (OERC)  published (2010) OERC 
(Renewable & Co-ordination Purchase Obligation and its compliance) Regulation, 2010.  As 
per the regulation, RSP being user of captive generation of electricity, was an obligated entity 
and had to purchase electrical energy under RPO fro m renewable sources.  As per stipulation 
it was to purchase, not less than five per cent of the total energy used from captive plants 
from the year 2011-12 which was subject to increase  of 0.5 per cent  every year till 2015-16.  
Further, out of five per cent  of RPO, 0.1 per cent  must be purchased from solar power plant.  
Audit noted that RSP treated the co-generation in C PP-I through gas/ steam generated in the 
steel making process as fulfilment of RPO obligations.  OERC had not granted (August 2015) 
any exemption to co-generation captive users and de manded `43.23 crore as RPO obligation 
from 2010-11 to August 2015.  RSP challenged (April 2016) the OERC order before Hon’ble 
High Court of Odisha which is pending.  
Management replied (February 2020) that High Court had stayed the implementation of order 
of OERC.  
(ii)  OERC published (September 2015) OERC (Procurement o f energy from Renewable 
sources and its compliance) Regulation, 2015 which states that every obligated entity should 
meet its RPO target from its own renewable sources or by way of purchase of Renewable 
Energy Certificates (REC).  If the obligated entiti es does not fulfil the RPO obligation during 
any year and also does not purchase the RECs, the C ommission may direct the obligated 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
243  
entity to deposit a penalty on the basis of the sho rtfall in units of RPO and the forbearance 
price decided by the Central Commission.  Audit observed that RSP has not fulfilled the RPO 
(332.32 MU) during 2015-16 to 2018-19 and liability against RPO was `64.94 crore.  
Management replied (February 2020) that in the ligh t of order of Ministry of Power 
(1 October 2019) relating to RPO for power plants c ommissioned before 2015-16, the RPO 
and corresponding liability was `54.21 crore.  Appropriate decision to purchase rene wable 
energy or REC would be taken based on the outcome o f the judgment.  Audit however noted 
that the liability would be `64.94 crore as per the revised order and RSP has no t yet 
purchased renewable energy. 
13.4.3.17  Waste management in steel plants 
Industrial solid wastes are source of toxic metals and hazardous wastes, which may spread on 
land and can cause harm to soil productivity.  Toxi c substances may leach or percolate to 
contaminate the ground water.  An inefficient solid  waste management system may create 
serious negative environmental impacts like infecti ous diseases, land and water pollution, 
obstruction and impact biodiversity.  Huge quantity of slag wastes from BF and BOF (or LD) 
are generated in steel making process.  BF slag is rich in silica, ferrous, lime, alumina, silicon 
dioxide, which can pollute air and water.  As per C harter of CREP 2003, 100 per cent  of BF 
and BOF slag were required to be to be utilised by 2007.  
13.4.3.18  Under-utilisation of BF slag in BSL and BSP 
CPCB directed BSL (March 2011) to install Cast Hous e Slag Granulation Plants (CHSGP) at 
BFs and utilise 100 per cent  BF slag by October 2012.  CPCB issued show cause n otice to 
BSL in June 2013 due to non-compliance of above.  S ince BSL was already having CHSGP 
in BF 4 and 5, it planned to install CHSGP in remai ning BFs (1, 2 & 3) under MEP.  Audit 
noted that only four out of six CHSGPs were install ed.  Due to delay in completion of 
CHSGP project, granulation of slag was 45 to 74 per cent, resulting in under-utilisation of BF 
slag.  MoEF during inspection (November 2018) found that a large dump of slag was lying in 
the project area which needed to be disposed in an environment friendly manner.  Audit 
observed that only current generation of BF slag we re being utilised.  MoEF&CC while 
granting EC (March 2008) for MEP of BSP imposed con dition to granulate all the BF Slag 
and to provide it to cement manufacturers.  Audit n oted that utilisation of BF Slag at BSP 
during 2014-19 was between 72 per cent and 90 per cent .  
Management replied (February 2020) that in BSL, CHSGP 4 had been commissioned in BF-2 
recently and CHSGP 2 was expected to be commissione d by March 2020.  Audit noted that 
due to delay in installation of CHSGPs, only 45 to 74 per cent  slag could be granulated by 
BSL.  In case of BSP, Management replied that, 100 per cent  slag from all working BFs was 
being granulated and sold regularly based on market  demand.  Audit however noted that 
stock of slag increased from 1.59 lakh tonnes as on  March 2018 to 5.54 lakh tonnes as on 
March 2019. 
13.4.3.19  Under-utilisation of LD slag in BSL, DSP and RSP 
BOF/ LD slags are generated in Basic Oxygen furnace  (BOF) during steel making.  Para 
4.10.4 of the National Steel Policy, 2017 stipulate d steel plants to set up SMS slag 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
244  
weathering/ steam ageing plants to enable them to s upply processed/ sized slag for road 
making, rail ballast etc.  However, during last fiv e years SAIL did not make efforts for 
alternate use of LD slag in road making or rail bal last or any other eco-friendly use.  The 
utilisation of LD slag in SAIL ranged between 56 and 84 per cent  during 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
• In BSL, for installation and commissioning of a pil ot scale steam ageing facility of 
LD slag, order was placed in May 2016.  However, th e same was not implemented and 
around 30-35 per cent  of slag generated was used in internal road making .  The utilisation of 
LD slag in railway ballast and external road making  processes was less than five per  cent .  
Ministry of Steel had requested SAIL (December 2016 ) for commercial availability of 
processed slag in rural road construction and setti ng up of pressurised steam ageing plant for 
reduction of free lime . However, no action was taken by Management in this regard.  
Management replied (February 2020) that consumption  of 0-5 mm processed LD Slag 
increased significantly in sinter making since Augu st 2019. Cost benefit analysis of steam 
matured slag vis-à-vis naturally weathered slag was being explored. 
• BSP could utilise 100 per cent  of BOF slag generated but utilisation of BOF slag in 
DSP, RSP and ISP ranged between 65 and 76 per cent, 15 and 58 per cent  and 22 and 
45 per cent  respectively during 2014-19.  In DSP, 10 lakh ton of BOF slag was lying 
(September 2018) in open yard.  DSP had not taken a ny initiative for utilisation of this waste.  
Gainful utilisation of slag helps not only in reduc tion of cost of steel production but also 
helps in reducing environmental hazards. 
Management replied (February 2020) that in BSP, BOF  slag was utilised in SMS-I, however, 
in other plants there were limited avenues for util isation.  Other avenues were being explored 
by BSL and RSP to increase the sale of slag.  In DSP initiative has been taken to utilise 
weathered slag in road making under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana.   
13.4.3.20  Other waste and hazardous waste in steel plants in SAIL 
i)  Under-utilisation of BOF sludge 50  
BOF sludge is the fine solid particles recovered af ter cleaning of gas emerging from LD 
convertors.  In BSL, BOF sludge had significant Fe content and could be used for sinter 
making. Audit noted that BOF sludge generated at BS L (24,500 tonnes annually) flowed to 
the mixed sludge compartment.  This remained unutil ised due to unavailability of dedicated 
pond for this purpose and absence of wastewater/ sl urry water treatment facility.  It also 
contributed in polluting the water and impacted the  soil condition.  The utilisation of BOF 
sludge, in other steel plants of the company ranged  between - RSP (32 per cent  and 
58 per cent), DSP (nil to 20 per cent ), ISP (seven and 15 per cent ) and BSP (2 per cent ) 
during 2014-15 to 2018-19.  
Management replied (February 2020) that to sort out  the issue, expert agencies had been 
roped in to explore the utilisation of BOF sludge a t BSL. RSP, DSP and ISP were taking 
steps to increase utilisation of BOF sludge. 
 
                                                           
50   Also called SMS sludge or LD sludge 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
245  
ii)  Non completion of hazardous pit  
As per Hazardous and other Wastes (Management and T rans-boundary Movement) Rules, 
2016 (HWMR), the waste generator is required to ens ure proper and safe collection, storage, 
treatment, transportation and disposal of hazardous  waste.  In BSL, on an average 1,700 
tonne of hazardous wastes (acid tar sludge, vanadiu m pentaoxide, sulphur sludge and 
decanter tar sludge etc) are generated annually.  We noted that two hazardous pits used (since 
2007) for disposal of hazardous waste in BSL were f illed up and were required to be closed. 
As a result, BSL disposed off the waste in open area in violation of the above rule . 
Management replied (February 2020) that hazardous w aste pits were filled up due to 
accumulation of rainwater which will evaporate gradually. Construction of new pit was under 
process.  
iii)  Accumulation of hazardous EAF dust in ASP 
Electric Arc Furnace (EAF) of ASP generates bag fil ter dust or EAF dust during production 
process. Being hazardous in nature, the disposal of  EAF dust was to be carried out under the 
provisions of HWMR, 2016.  As per Section 8(1) of t he Rule, on site storage of hazardous 
waste was not permitted beyond 90 days. Audit noted  that 174 tonne to 270 tonne per year of 
EAF dust was generated in ASP during 2014-19.   WBP CB also served (February 2018) a 
notice on ASP, for violation of disposal norm of hazardous waste. Non-disposal/ utilisation of 
EAF dust has resulted into accumulation of hazardou s waste polluting environment and 
violating the statutory guidelines . 
Management replied (February 2020) that ASP has red uced stock by 1,100 tonne during 
2014-19 and new avenues were being developed to uti lise EAF dust as per the SOPs issued 
by CPCB.  Audit however noted that, over 2,000 tonn e (31 March 2019) of EAF dust was 
accumulated and stored on site for more than 90 days in violation of rules.  
iv)  Management of Municipal Solid Waste 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) comprises of all waste/  garbage generated from domestic 
households, residential colonies and market areas.  MoEF&CC notified (September 2000) 
‘Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Ru les 2000’ (replaced by Solid Waste 
Management Rules 2016-SWMR, 2016) for collection, s egregation, transportation, 
processing, treatment and disposal of the MSW scien tifically.  Audit observed that the plant 
management did not take appropriate steps to fulfil  the legal and social requirements 
regarding environment and pollution control, as discussed in the following paragraphs:  
v)  Processing/ disposal of MSW  
BSP could not identify space for disposal and proce ssing of MSW even after 16 years of 
implementation of the MSW Rules. MSW was dumped at different places, which was 
stopped after protest by residents.  BSP initiated (December 2018) a proposal to establish a 
Solid and Liquid Resource Management Center at Jawa har Udyan (Bhilai) for processing of 
MSW by segregation of solid waste, composting, recy cle of plastic waste etc.  It entered into 
an agreement for installation of Baling Machine to make plastic balls for use at cement plants 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
246  
which was yet to be installed.  Audit also observed  that, there was no waste disposal centres 
for domestic hazardous waste in RSP.  
Management replied (February 2020) that RSP plans f or establishment of waste deposition 
centres for collection of domestic hazardous waste in coming year. 
vi)  ‘Waste to Energy’ plant and solid waste processing facilities not implemented 
Rule 21 of the SWMR, 2016 stipulated that non-recyc lable waste having calorific value of 
1500K/ cal/ Kg or more shall not be disposed of on landfills but utilised for generating energy 
either through refuse derived fuel or by giving awa y as feed stock for refuse derived fuel.  
Rule 22 stipulates that the local bodies and other concerned authorities may directly or by 
engaging agencies, set up solid waste processing fa cilities having one lakh or more 
population within two years from notification (8 April 2016) of this rule.  Audit observed that 
BSL, RSP, ISP and BSP have not set up solid waste processing facilities.  
Management replied (February 2020) that in BSL, a T echnology Selection Committee has 
been constituted to examine proposal to set up Soli d Waste Processing and Sanitary Landfill 
Facility.  In BSP, tendering for setting-up of Wast e to Energy plant was under process.  RSP 
was also exploring alternatives for setting up micro-compost facility.   
vii)  Bio-Medical Waste 
MoEF&CC issued (July 1998) ‘Bio-Medical Waste (Mana gement and Handling) Rules, 
1998’ for management of Bio-Medical Waste generated  in hospitals which was revised 
(March 2016) as Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 (BMW, 2016). 
viii)  Non-installation of Effluent Treatment Plant in Hospital  
Schedule I Rule-F of BMW, 2016 stipulates to instal l Effluent Treatment Plant  ( ETP) in 
hospitals.  Audit noted that BSP, BSL, and ISP have  not installed ETP in their hospitals.  
Effluents from these hospitals are drained to oxida tion pond and discharged into open nallah/ 
river. 
Management replied (February 2020) that, ETP at the  main hospital of BSP would be 
installed before December 2021.  BSL was planning t o construct Sewage Treatment Plant 
(STP) after completion of which no effluent from Bo karo General Hospital (BGH) would be 
discharged in Garga River. ETP at ISP was expected to be commissioned by March 2020. 
ix)  Water Conservation System 
CPCB and SPCB issued instructions to the steel plan ts to re-use/ recycle water, which is 
flown to the river by installing ETP/ STP with Zero  Liquid Discharge (ZLD). CPCB issued 
(January 2015) guideline on implementation of ZLD f or water polluting industries to recover 
clean water from wastewater.  
13.4.3.21  Non-installation of ETP and ZLD in plants 
BSP and DSP have installed ETP/ STP, however, ZLD h as not been installed fully in all the 
steel plants.  Cases of non-installation of STP/ ETP and ZLD are given below. 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
247  
i)  In BSL, total water requirement is about 30 million  gallons per day (MGD) for plant 
and township.  About 10 MGD sewage water was discha rged in oxidation ponds and 10 
MGD was discharged into Garga River.  CPCB issued ( September 2011) direction for 
installation of STP with ZLD by December 2012.  Sin ce it was not complied by BSL, show 
cause notice was issued (June 2013) to complete the  STP.  Jharkhand PCB also advised BSL 
to stop discharging sewage and waste water to river  without treatment.   Audit observed that 
management initiated (2015) project for treatment a nd recycling of sewage and waste water 
of BSL Township but thereafter no action was taken.   Due to non-installation of STP, BSL 
was losing 547.5 million gallons (approx.) of water  annually and draining water without 
treatment to Garga River polluting the water.  In p lant area, recycling of water was not fully 
achieved because one out of two outfalls were not c ompleted and water was discharged in 
Garga river which would have saved 3471 million gal lons of water annually.  Thus, BSL lost 
opportunity of annual saving of `11.05 crore 51  due to non-recycling of water.  
Management replied (February 2020) that setting up of STP in BSL township was at DPR 
stage. 
ii)  BSP  had committed to zero discharge from its outlets al ong with seven mt expansion 
plan to prevent environment pollution.  Out of thre e outlets for discharging industrial 
wastewater from plant, waste water was recycled in one outlet but was discharged into river 
in other two outlets. Chattisgarh Environment Conse rvation Board (CGECB) while renewing 
water consent instructed (August 2018) BSP to complete Water Recycling System for Outlet-
B and C.  BSP placed order (October 2014) for recyc ling of wastewater from Outlet-B to be 
completed in 15 months which was yet to be complete d.  Further, BSP placed order 
(May 2019) for Outlet-C to be completed by June 202 0.  Thus, due to delay in installation of 
Water Treatment Plant (WTP), BSP could not recover projected 16.43 Mm 
3 of water and 
gross margin of `12.22 crore annually on account of water savings. 
Management replied (February 2020) that target date  of completion for both projects were 
within revised timeline issued by CGECB (October 20 21).  The reply may be viewed in the 
light of the fact that for granting extensions for some Environmental Schemes, BSP had to 
submit BG of `27.25 crore to CGECB. 
iii)  DSP has STP in plants and township for treatment of  effluent water and treated water 
is discharged into river.  MoEF has given condition al clearance for MEP of DSP in 1996 that 
after modernisation, DSP would not discharge any ef fluent to downstream (ZLD).  DSP 
entered into an agreement with DVC (2016) for suppl y of water, which allowed incentive of 
20 per cent  on the water bill on taking measures for zero effl uent discharge.  DSP has not 
implemented the ZLD yet and treated water was still  discharged in river. DSP also suffered a 
loss of benefit of rebate of `3.81 crore annually.  
Management replied (February 2020) that actions to achieve ZLD was at proposal stage. 
iv)  In RSP, an average 6.5 MGD of domestic sewage gener ated by township and storm 
water is sent to three oxidation ponds for treatmen t, which is discharged in a river.  However, 
                                                           
51   547.5 million gallon plus 3,471-million-gallon x `` ``    27.50 being current cost of water treatment for 100 0 
gallon 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
248  
6.5 MGD of treated sewage water could be reused/ re cycled to achieve a zero discharge.  The 
proposal initiated (January 2015) to recycle domest ic sewage was yet to be completed.  Due 
to non-implementation of STP, the company is losing `10.51 crore per annum.  
Management replied (February 2020) that RSP is comm itted to implement the scheme of 
recycling the domestic sewage expeditiously. Reply was silent on the steps taken to 
implement the scheme. 
13.4.3.22  Non-compliance of ZLD in ISP 
ZLD was not started at ISP. Audit noted that the ag reement with DVC for supply of water 
provides for 20 per cent  rebate on ZLD certification from West Bengal PCB.  As per water 
audit report (February 2019) of FICCI, the quality of wastewater measured at point of 
discharge (Dihika) in respect of total dissolved solid, chlorides, hardness etc was very high in 
comparison to that at the point of intake.  Thus, d ue to delay in ensuring ZLD at ISP, the 
Company apart from causing water pollution was also  losing rebate on water of `0.47 crore 
annually (2018-19).  
Management replied (February 2020) that preparation  of Feasibility Report and Tender 
Specifications for ZLD at ISP was in progress.  
13.4.4    Conclusion 
SAIL Safety Organisation did not develop any plan o r frame time line to implement its 
recommendations.  Out of 686 recommendations, 258 w ere yet to be complied.  Rupture in 
pipelines in Pump House at BSP led to fall in  water pressure and BF Gas spread into PH 
causing death of six persons.  Laxity in taking saf ety measures and unsafe practice of doing 
De-Blanking job of CO Gas Line on charged pipelines  caused accident at BSP where 
14 people died.  There were less number of Safety O fficers posted in plants than the statutory 
requirement.  Non-disposal of fly ash and slag dump  and non-setting up of sewage treatment 
plant led to delay in issue of EC in absence of whi ch work for Sinter Plant and SMS-I 
packages at BSL was stopped.  CO 2 emission in SAIL was higher than international standards 
as well as TATA Steel. Delay in completion of air p ollution control system led to flaring up 
of gases in the environment.  Average Specific Ener gy Consumption in SAIL was more than 
the world average as well as Tata Steel and RINL.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in March 2020; their response was awaited (June 2020).  
13.5  Avoidable expenditure by SAIL/ RSP 
 
Failure of SAIL/ Rourkela Steel Plant to comply wit h Industrial Policy Resolutions of 
Government of Odisha regarding availing exemption f rom payment of electricity duty 
on captive power generation, led to avoidable payment of `` ``16.35 crore. 
Government of Odisha (GoO) introduced an Industrial  Policy Resolution (IPR) 2007 
(effective from 2 March 2007) to extend various inc entives to different Industries.  Para 20.2 
of IPR 2007 provided that new industrial units sett ing up Captive Power Plants (CPP) shall 
be exempt from payment of 50 per cent  electricity duty (ED) for self-consumption for a 
period of five years from the date of its commissio ning.  Department of Energy, GoO issued 
(8 August 2008) Operational Guidelines to enable th e eligible industrial units to avail the 

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
249  
above exemption.  Clause 6 of the guidelines stipul ated that the exemption claim shall be 
filed in the prescribed form within six months from  the date of commissioning of CPPs.  
Application received after the due date/ incomplete  in any respect was liable to be rejected 
and delay in filing application was not to be condo ned.  Further, clause 7 of the guidelines 
stipulated that the eligible industrial unit claimi ng exemption shall submit application to the 
concerned General Manager (GM)/ Project Manager (PM ), District Industries Centres (DIC) 
of GoO.  Receipt of application along with relevant  documents would be acknowledged by 
the department in prescribed form. 
GoO subsequently introduced IPR 2015 (effective fro m 24 August 2015) wherein Para 5.4.4 
(c) provided that new and existing industrial units  setting up CPP with non-conventional 
sources and bio-fuel shall be exempted from payment  of ED for five years from the date of 
commissioning as Green Energy Subsidy.  The procedu re to avail exemption from payment 
of ED was similar to that prescribed in operational  guidelines under IPR 2007 except that the 
applicant was required to submit the claim within a  period of one year from the date of 
commissioning of the unit.  
Three power generating units 
52  of different capacities were commissioned at SAIL/  Rourkela 
Steel Plant (RSP) in March 2014, December 2014 and March 2015 respectively for its 
captive use.  Another one MW Solar Power Plant (SPP ) was also commissioned in February 
2016 at RSP.  As per the Operational guidelines, th e application for exemption of ED was to 
be submitted by September 2014, June 2015, Septembe r 2015 and February 2017 
respectively.  
Audit observed that RSP submitted (July 2014), the application for exemption of ED under 
IPR 2007, in respect of 2x18 MW Steam Turbine Gener ators (STG) power plant.  The 
acknowledgement of receipt of application from the Department of Industry, GoO was 
however, not available in the records.  The Departm ent of Energy, GoO, in response to a 
correspondence from RSP, denied (April 2015) receip t of any communication from RSP for 
exemption of ED.  While applying for exemption from  ED in respect of STG (July 2014), 
Management had informed GoO in the forwarding letter, that ‘another 14 MW TRTG and 6.5 
MW BPTG’ were going to be commissioned soon.  Application for exemption of ED was not 
submitted (July 2019) in respect of TRTG, BPTG and SPP, in the prescribed format as 
stipulated by the Operational Guidelines by RSP.  
Audit also noted that generation of power started from STG and RSP started paying ED since 
November 2013.  In respect of TRTG and BPTG also fu ll payment for ED is being made by 
RSP since inception, whereas in respect of SPP, no payment of ED is being made.  Claim was 
raised (16 November 2018) by GoO regarding payment of ED from SPP and in response, 
RSP requested (28 November 2018) for exemption from  payment of ED.  GoO however, 
clarified (December 2018) that such exemption could  be availed only in case application for 
such exemption was made within prescribed time period as per IPR-2015.   
                                                           
52   2x18 MW Steam Turbine Generators (STG) at Power a nd Blowing Station, 1x14 MW Top Recovery 
Turbo Generator (TRTG) in BF-V complex and 1x 6.5 M W Back Pressure Turbo Generator (BPTG) in 
CO complex commissioned on 21/03/2014, 08/12/2014 and 15/03/2015 respectively. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
250  
Management replied (November 2019) that RSP applied  for exemption of ED for all the 
generating units (STG, TRTG and BPTG) for five year s on 21 July 2014 as per IPR 2007.  It 
further stated that the matter had been taken up by  the highest authority of RSP with the GoO 
to exempt all the generating units of PBS from the purview of ED.  
Reply of Management is not acceptable as: 
• Acknowledgement was not available in records regard ing the application for 
exemption from payment of ED filed for STG.  Moreov er, only reference of two other 
power plants was made in the forwarding letter for application for exemption of ED in 
respect of STG and separate applications in the pre scribed format were not submitted.  
Though correspondence was taken up (June 2015) by C EO, RSP with Principal 
Secretary, Department of Energy, GoO, seeking exemp tion from payment of ED for 
the first three power plants (STG, BPTG and TRTG), the matter was not followed up 
closely. After August 2015, the matter was only tak en up verbally and RSP continued 
to pay ED.  
• GoO did not accept the request of RSP regarding exe mption from payment of ED for 
SPP and while raising a claim of 
`3.47 crore including interest, it stated (December 
2018) that exemption could not be availed unless sa me had been applied for within 
prescribed time and obtained.  
Thus, the failure of RSP to comply with the Industr ial Policy Resolutions of Government of 
Odisha regarding availing exemption from payment of  Electricity Duty on captive power 
generation, led to avoidable payment of `16.35 crore between November 2013 and March 
2019 in respect of three power plants, which will i ncrease till the completion of five years 
since commissioning of BPTG 53 . Further, GoO raised (December 2018) demand for 
`3.47 crore on account of ED (including interest) wi th respect to the SPP which was yet 
(January 2020) to be paid.  
The para was issued to the Ministry in December 201 9; their response was awaited 
(June 2020).  
 
                                                           
53    BPTG (March 2020)  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
251  
CHAPTER XIV- RECOVERIES AND CORRECTIONS/ 
RECTIFICATIONS BY CPSEs AT THE INSTANCE OF AUDIT 
 
 
 
Air India Limited, Northern Coalfields Limited, Nat ional Highways Authority of India, 
Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Limited, Madras Ferti lizers Limited, Mahanadi 
Coalfields Limited, Oriental Insurance Company Limi ted, United India Insurance 
Company Limited, The New India Assurance Company Limited  
14.1  Recoveries at the instance of audit 
In 10 cases pertaining to nine CPSEs, audit pointed  out that an amount of `80.60 crore was 
due for recovery. Management of CPSEs had recovered an amount of `51.43 crore during the 
period 2018-19 as detailed in Appendix-I. 
Rashtriya Chemical and Fertilizers Limited, India O il Corporation Limited, Steel 
Authority of India Limited  
14.2 Corrections/ rectifications at the instance of  audit 
During test check, cases relating to violation of r ules/ regulations and deficiencies in the 
system were observed and brought to the notice of M anagement.  Details of the cases where 
corrective action was taken or changes were made by  Management in their rules/ regulations, 
etc. at the instance of audit are given in Appendix-II . 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
 
252  
CHAPTER XV 
 
 
Follow-up on Audit Reports (Commercial) 
Audit Reports of the CAG represent the culmination of the process of scrutiny of accounts 
and records maintained in various offices and depar tments of PSUs.  It is, therefore, 
necessary that appropriate and timely response is e licited from the executive on the audit 
findings included in the Audit Reports. 
The Lok Sabha Secretariat requested (July 1985) all  the Ministries to furnish notes (duly 
vetted by Audit) indicating remedial/ corrective ac tion taken by them on various paragraphs/ 
appraisals contained in the Audit Reports (Commerci al) of the CAG as laid on the table of 
both the Houses of Parliament.  Such notes were req uired to be submitted even in respect of 
paragraphs/ appraisals which were not selected by t he Committee on Public Sector 
Undertakings (COPU) for detailed examination.  The COPU in its Second Report (1998-99-
Twelfth Lok Sabha), while reiterating the above instructions, recommended: 
• Setting up of a monitoring cell in each Ministry fo r monitoring the submission of 
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of Audit Repor ts (Commercial) on individual 
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs); 
• Setting up of a monitoring cell in Department of Pu blic Enterprises (DPE) for 
monitoring the submission of ATNs in respect of Rep orts containing paras relating to 
a number of PSUs under different Ministries; and 
• Submission to the Committee, within six months from  the date of presentation of the 
relevant Audit Reports, the follow up ATNs duly vet ted by Audit in respect of all 
Reports of the CAG presented to Parliament. 
While reviewing the follow up by the Government on the above recommendations, the COPU 
in its First Report (1999-2000-Thirteenth Lok Sabha ) reiterated its earlier recommendations 
that the DPE should set up a separate monitoring ce ll in the DPE itself to monitor the follow-
up action taken by various Ministries/ Departments on the observations contained in the 
Audit Reports (Commercial) on individual undertakin gs.  Accordingly, a monitoring cell is 
functioning in the DPE since August 2000 to monitor  the follow up on submission of ATNs 
by the concerned administrative Ministries/ Departm ents.  Monitoring cells have also been 
set up within the concerned Ministries for submissi on of ATNs on various Reports 
(Commercial) of the CAG.  

   Report No. 18 of 2020 
253 
A review in Audit revealed that despite reminders, the remedial/ corrective ATNs on 54 
transaction audit/ compliance audit paragraphs/ reviews contained in the last five years’ Audit 
Reports (Commercial) and six Performance Audit Repo rt relating to the PSUs under the 
administrative control of various Ministries, as de tailed in Appendix III, were not received 
by Audit for vetting. 
 
 
New Delhi       (Shubha Kumar) 
Dated:  
Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
 (Commercial) and Chairperson, Audit Board 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                     (Girish Chandra Murmu)  
Dated:      Comptroller and Auditor General of Indi a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices & Annexures   

 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
255  
Appendix-I 
(Referred to in para 14.1) 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit during 2018-19 
    (Amount `` `` in lakh) 
Name of 
Ministry/ 
Department 
Name of the CPSE 
 
Audit observations in brief Amount of 
recovery pointed 
out by Audit 
Amount recovered 
by the Management 
Chemicals 
and 
Fertilisers 
Madras Fertilisers 
Limited 
Purchase of naphtha without obtaining assurance 
from Tamil Nadu Government regarding waiver 
of Value Added Tax.  
439  439 
 
Civil 
Aviation 
Air India Limited Non-compliance to penalty clauses of the 
contract resulting in non-levy of penalty from 
Caterers. 
8.81  8.81  
Coal  Northern Coalfields 
Limited 
Excess payment to Forest Department on 
account of transit fee. 
1874.29  218.81 
Coal Mahanadi Coalfields 
Limited 
Non recovery of interest for the period March 
2016 to March 2018 from NBCC in respect of 
advances given for CSR work. 
218 218 
Finance Oriental Insurance 
Company Limited 
Excess payment of commission to insurance 
agents and insurance intermediaries in violation 
of IRDA Regulations. 
9.51 4.99 
Finance  United India Insurance 
Company Limited  
Recovery of Marine cargo claim in favour of 
State Trading Corporation towards damage of 
urea occurred during collapse of two vessels.  
The claim was settled subject to obtaining letter 
of subrogation to effect recoveries from the 
vessel owners. 
1582 
 
333 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
256  
Finance The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited 
Excess payment of Commission. 16.46 8.56 
Finance  The New India 
Assurance Company 
Limited 
Excess payment of survey fee. 2.21 2.21 
Road 
Transport 
and 
Highways 
NHAI Non recovery of Mobilisation advance from 
contractor. 
1076 1076 
 
Road 
Transport 
and 
Highways 
NHAI Short recovery of damages from contractors. 3.00 3.00 
Petroleum 
and Natural 
Gas 
ONGC Non sharing of expenditure towards installation 
and commissioning of Vessel and Air Traffic 
System of East Coast from other project 
partners. 
2831 2831 
  TOTAL 8060.28 5143.38 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
257  
Appendix-II 
(Referred to in para 14.2) 
Corrections/Rectifications at the instance of Audit 
Name of 
Ministry/Department 
Name of the 
CPSE 
Audit observations/suggestions in brief Action taken by the Management 
Chemical and 
Fertilizers 
Rashtriya 
Chemicals and 
Fertilizers 
Limited 
Non provision of crèche facility under section 48 
of the Factories Act, 1948. 
The crèche facility was made 
operational from 14.12.2018. 
Petroleum and Natural 
Gas  
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited 
IOCL reimbursed the cost of spectacles/contact 
lenses to employees in respect of self and/or 
eligible family members upto the prescribed 
annual ceiling per financial year on self-
certification basis which is not permissible as per  
DPE guidelines. 
The company decided to discontinue 
the current provision of 
reimbursement of the cost of 
spectacles/ contact lenses with 
immediate effect 
Steel SAIL Durgapur Steel Plant, SAIL was making advance 
payment of electricity bill to DVC which was 
undue benefit to DVC and loss of interest to 
SAIL. 
Advance payment of bill to DVC 
has been stopped. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
258  
 
Appendix-III  
(Referred to in Chapter XV) 
Statement showing the details of Audit Reports (Commercial) upto to 2019 
for which Action Taken Notes were pending  
No. & year of Report Name of Report Para No. 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 1.1 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
15 of 2016 Compliance Audit Para 2.3 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 1.1 to 1.9 
Ministry of Coal   
12 of 2019 Performance Audit  
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 2.1 to 2.3 
Ministry of Finance   
21 of 2015 Compliance Audit Para 7.3 
15 of 2016 Compliance Audit Para 7.3 
9 of 2017 Compliance Audit   Para 7.1 
16 of 2017 Performance Audit     
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 5.1 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 3.1 to 3.4 
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises 
29 of 2017 Performance Audit  
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 6.2 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 4.1 
Ministry of Mines 
6 of 2016 Performance Audit  
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas   
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 9.4 
7 of 2019 Performance Audit  
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 6.1, 6.2, 6.5, 6.7 , 
6.9 and 6.12 
Ministry of Power 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 7.1, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 , 
7.6, 7.8 and 7.9 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 11.3, 11.5 and 
11.6 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 8.1 to 8.3 
Ministry of Steel 
5 of 2019 Performance Audit  
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 10.1 to 10.8 
Ministry of Textiles 
11 of 2018 Compliance Audit Para 13.1 
13 of 2019 Compliance Audit Para 11.1 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
259  
Annexure-I 
(Referred to in Para No.3.1)   
 
Statement showing year wise benefit derived by the contractor under the mining 
contract for power cost component 
 
Year Coal 
extrac 
ted 
 (in 
lakh 
tone) 
Mining 
fees  
(`` `` per 
tone) 
Cost for the power 
component 
included in the 
mining fees  
(`` `` per tone) 
Total cost paid to 
the contractor for 
power component 
as part of the 
mining fees 
 (`` `` in crore) 
Electricity 
charges actually 
recovered from 
the contractor  
(`` `` in crore) 
Benefit 
accruing to 
the contractor 
(`` `` in crore) 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) = [(b) x (d)] (f) (g) = [(e) – (f)] 
2012-13 
(from 1/ 
2013) 
44.51 155.55 2.84 1.26 0.15 1.11 
2013-14 167.80 165.77 3.40 5.71 0.76 4.95 
2014-15 197.44 178.10 4.07 8.04 1.29 6.75 
2015-16 235.62 178.27 3.71 8.74 1.48 7.26 
2016-17 250.00 171.87 4.08 10.20 1.70 8.50 
2017-18 262.50 191.07 4.08 10.71 1.55 9.16 
2018- 19 
(upto 12/ 
2018)  
200.62 198.77 4.35 8.73 1.29 7.44 
Total 53.39 8.22 45.17 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
260  
 
Annexure-II 
(Referred to in Para No.5.1.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
project  
Lead Bank Project 
Length 
(in KM) 
Amount of original 
sanction of Loan 
without cost overrun 
Sanction of Loan for Cost 
overruns 
Present Status 
of CA 
Amount outstanding 
as on 31.12.2019 
Quality 
of Loan  
Date  Amount 
(In ` ` ` ` Cr.)  
Date  Amount  
(In ` ` ` ` Cr.) 
Principal 
Amount  
(In ` ` ` ` Cr.) 
Interest 
Amount 
(In ` ` ` ` Cr.)  
 
1 IVRCL 
Indore 
Gujarat 
Tollways 
Limited 
Bank of India 155.15 08/03/2010 208 (24-3-2015, 
March-2016, 
Oct- 2016, 
May-2014) 
108.64 Not Terminated 299.71 130.79 NPA 
2 Barasat-
Krishnagar 
Expressway 
Limited 
Oriental Bank 
of Commerce 
84.317 06/07/2011 152 9/15/2015 8.6 CA Terminated 121.18 54.29 Written 
Off 
3 Bareilly 
Highways 
Project 
Limited 
State Bank of 
India 
151 01/12/2011 200 3/1/2016 58.69 CA Terminated 253 .46 99.90 Written 
Off 
4 Sidhi 
Singrauli 
Road 
Project Ltd 
Punjab 
National 
Bank 
102.6 08/01/2013 150   0 Not Terminated 142.91 23.91 NPA 
5 SEW LSY 
Highway 
Limited 
Punjab 
National 
Bank 
206 30/04/2011 240   0 CA Terminated 89.06 54.77 Wr itten 
Off 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
261 
6 Sai 
Maatarini 
Tollways 
Limited 
IDBI Bank 166.173 03/08/2012 280   0 CA Terminated 278.66 130.83 NPA 
7 Haridwar 
Highways 
Project 
Limited 
Axis bank 78.76 01/06/2010 105 24/03/2015, 
29/03/2017 
51.96 
 CA Terminated 156.96 53.36 Written 
Off 
8 Concast 
Path 
Bameetha 
Satna Road 
Projects Pvt. 
Ltd 
Oriental Bank 
of Commerce 
97 11/03/2013 45.72   0 CA Terminated 43.20 19.06 Written 
Off 
9 Sion-Panvel 
Tollways 
Private 
Limited 
Indian 
Overseas 
bank 
23.09 31/03/2011 160   0 CA Terminated 160.00 84.01  Written 
Off 
10 Barwa Adda 
Expressway 
Limited 
Bank of 
Baroda 
122.88 31/11/2011 400   0 Not Terminated 350.36 44.19 NPA 
11 Bansal 
Pathway 
Mangwan 
Chakghat 
Private 
Limited 
Allahabad 
bank 
52.071 08/12/2017 80   0 Not Terminated 71.61 0.00 Standard 
12 Biora 
Dewas 
Highway 
Private 
Limited 
Axis bank 141.259 09/06/2016 300   0 Not Terminated 295.30 0.00 Standard 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
262  
13 Navayuga 
Jhanvi Toll 
Bridge 
Private 
Limited 
SBH  50.943 31/03/2011 80   0 Not Terminated 39.15 1.27 Restructu 
red 
standard 
14 Pune Satara 
Tollroad 
Private 
Limited 
IDFC bank 
(later on Axis 
Bank) 
140.35 11/04/2014 200   0 Not Terminated 187.60 0.00 Restructu 
red 
standard 
15 DA Toll 
Road 
Limited 
SBI 179.5 26/03/2014 400   0 Not Terminated 398.00 21.16 Restructu 
red 
standard 
16 Yadeshi 
Aurangabad 
Tollways 
Limited 
IDBI bank 189.09 11/11/2014 400   0 Not Terminated 395.48 0.00 Standard 
17 Rayalseema 
Expressway 
Pvt. Ltd. 
IDFC bank 188.75 01/06/2010 240 17/12/2014, 
29/12/2015, 
30/12/2016 
137.59 
 Not Terminated 305.87 0.00 Standard 
18 Kaithal 
Tollway 
Private 
Limited 
IDBI 165.76 16/12/2014 200   0 Not Terminated 120.98 0.00 Standard 
19 AE 
Tollways 
Private 
Limited 
IDBI 123.87 29/03/2016 330   0 Not Terminated 300.2 9 0.00 Loan 
prepaid 
20 Navayuga 
Quazigund 
Expressway 
Private 
Limited 
SBI 15.25 27/10/2010 375   0 Not Terminated 0.00 0.00 Loan 
prepaid 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
263 
21 DBL Patan 
Rehli 
Tollways 
Limited 
State Bank of 
India 
86.6 01/03/2016 52   0 Not Terminated 49.66 0.00 St andard 
22 BSCPL 
Aurang 
Tollways 
Limited 
ICICI bank 150.4 03/08/2012 168   0 Not Terminated 164.64 1.24 Standard 
23 ACP 
Tollways 
Limited 
PNB 115 24/04/2012 240   0 Not Terminated 228.60 0. 05 Standard 
24 MEP 
Infrastructur 
e Project 
Limited  
Not 
applicable as 
it is a take out 
finance 
Not 
Applica 
ble (take 
out 
finance) 
03/02/2016 269.9   0 Not Terminated 501.38 15.64 Standard 
25 DBL 
Mangalwed 
ha Solapur 
Highways 
Private 
Limited 
(DMSHPL) 
IIFCL 56.5 21/08/2018 179.53   0 Not Terminated 58. 24 0.00 Standard 
26 Gawar 
Khajuwala 
BAP 
Highway 
Private 
Limited 
IndusInd 
Bank 
212.107 16/03/2019 80   0 Not Terminated #N/A #N/A Yet to 
disburse 
funds 
27 Apco 
Arasavalli 
Expressway 
Private 
Limited 
(AAEPL) 
Union bank 
of India 
54.19 21/08/2018 250   0 Not Terminated #N/A #N/A Y et to 
disburse 
funds 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
264  
28 Patel 
Sethiyahopu 
-
Cholopuram 
Highway 
Private 
Limited 
Punjab 
National 
Bank 
50.48 28/09/2018 250   0 Not Terminated #N/A #N/A Yet to 
disburse 
funds 
29 Hazaribagh 
Ranchi 
Expressway 
Limited  
Bank of India 71.16 08/02/2010 260 NA 0 NA 0 0 Loan  
Prepaid 
30 IRB 
Tumkur 
Chitradurga 
Tollway 
Pvt. Ltd. 
IDFC 114 05/10/2010 136 NA 0 NA 0 0 Loan 
Prepaid 
31 Ashoka 
Belgaum 
DhrawadTol 
lways Pvt. 
Ltd. 
IDFC Bank  79.36 23/03/2011 82.02 NA 0 NA 0 0 Loan 
Prepaid 
32 Oriental 
Nagpur 
Betul 
Highway 
Pvt. Ltd 
Axis Bank 176.7 09/05/2011 380 NA 0 NA 0 0 Loan 
Prepaid 
.

Report No. 18 of 2020  
265 
Annexure-III 
(Referred to in Para No.5.3.4) 
Details of selection of sample in the selected branches 
 
State Branch Product   Amount of NPA 
(Overdue) ( `` ``) No. of cases 
Karnataka 
Sirsi DL-SHG 4,324  1 
Loans to SHG   2,03,10,692  272  
Vijayapura 
DL-SHG 3,015  1 
Loans to JLG (Joint Liability 
Group)   16,362  1 
Loans to SHG 1,41,72,284  155  
Tumkur 
DL-SHG 5,001  1 
Loans to JLG 1,15,23,684  146  
Loans to SHG 20,36,845  7 
          
Tamilnadu 
Cuddalore Loans to SHG 23,24,855  87  
Dindugul Loans to SHG 65,60,486  80  
Madurai Loans to SHG 63,43,683  74  
Erode Loans to SLI 29,95,942  1 
          
Maharashtra 
Gondia Loans to SHG 3,06,76,987  194  
Yavatmal Loans to SHG 98,98,916  142  
Nanded Loans to SHG 77,23,595  162  
Amaravati Loans to SLI 6,81,027  1 
          
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Chittoor Loans to SLI 44,66,779  6 
Loans to SHG 56,39,966  76  
        
Telangana Warangal Loans to SLI 1,05,39,489  6 
    Total 13,59,23,932  1,413  
 
DL: Direct Lending 
SHG: Self Help Group 
JLG: Joint Liability Group 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
266  
Annexure-IV 
(Referred to in Para No.5.3.6.1) 
Details of Financial & Physical targets and Achievements of the Company for the years 
2015-16 to 2018-19 
 
(a) Financial Targets (loan disbursed): 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Details BDC Direct 
Lending 
SLI-NBFC/ 
MFI 
Skill 
Loans 
Total 
2015-16 Target 1000  - 20  - 1020  
Achievement 807.56  - 16.86  0.12  824.54  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
80.76  - 84.30  - 80.84  
2016-17 Target 950  - 50  - 1000  
Achievement 736.25  10.53  84.16  2.21  833.15  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
77.50  - 168.32  - 83.32  
2017-18 Target 1,070.00  100  100  - 1,270.00  
Achievement 1,046.08  88.38  81.13  2.09  1,217.68  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
97.76  88.38   81.13   - 95.88   
2018-19 Target 1,101.56  200  112  0 1,413.56  
Achievement 962.43  193.35  112.53  0 1,286.31  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
87.36   96.66   100.47   - 89.72   
 
(b) Physical Targets 
 
Year Details No. of SHGs 
to be covered 
No. of States 
to be  
Covered 
No. of Districts  
to be 
covered 
No. of BDCs to 
be 
 covered 
2015-16 Target 2,5000  5 85  255  
Achievement 2,0868  8 96  256  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
83.47   160.00   112.94   100.39   
2016-17 Target 23,000  10  100  290  
Achievement 22,192  10  109  406  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
96.49   100.00   109.00   140.00   
2017-18 Target 26,750  12  110  400  
Achievement 31,237  13  125  471 
Per cent of 
Achievement 
116.77   108.33   113.64   117.75   
2018-19 Target 25,000  15  135  485  
Achievement 31,250  16  131  479  
Per cent  of 
Achievement 
125   106.66   96.32  % 98.76   
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
267 
Annexure-V 
(Referred to in Para No.5.3.6.2) 
Statement showing the details of year wise and vert ical wise Non-performance Assets 
during the years from 2015-16 to 2018-19   
(`` `` in lakh) 
* due to upgradation of NPA accounts as standard accounts 
# from 2018-19, the segment ‘Post Tsunami Sustainable Livelihood Programme’ has been shown separately as Others. 
Year Details Name of the Vertical 
BDC Direct 
Lending  
Second 
Level  
Institutions 
Others 
# 
Total 
2015-16 Non-performing assets at the 
commencement of the year 
1,811.72  0.00  80.32  0.00  1,892.04  
Portfolio classified as NPA 
during the year 
2,052.56  0.00  80.10  0.00  2,132.66  
Recoveries made from the NPA 
accounts during the year 
321.71  0.00  50.36  0.00  372.07  
Prudential write-offs made during 
the year 
0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  
Non-Performing assets at the year 
end 
3,542.56  0.00  110.06  0.00  3,652.62  
2016-17 Non-performing assets at the 
commencement of the year 
3,542.56  0.00  110.06  0.00  3,652.62  
Portfolio classified as NPA 
during the year 
1,695.17  0.00  325.44  0.00  2,020.61  
Recoveries made from the NPA 
accounts during the year 
260.31  0.00  28.06  0.00  288.37  
Prudential write-offs made during 
the year 
430.23  0.00  0.00  0.00  430.23  
Non-Performing assets at the year 
end 
4,547.19  0.00  407.44  0.00  4,954.63  
2017-18 Non-performing assets at the 
commencement of the year 
4,547.19  0.00  407.44  0.00  4,954.63  
Portfolio classified as NPA 
during the year 
2,398.02  0.00  (-)24.31*  0.00  2,398.02  
Recoveries made from the NPA 
accounts during the year 
552.33  0.00  0.00  0.00  552.33  
Prudential write-offs made during 
the year 
2,786.83  0.00  0.00  0.00  2,786.83  
Non-Performing assets at the year 
end 
3,621.75  8.61  383.13  0.00  4,013.49  
2018-19 Non-Performing assets at the 
commencement of the year 
3,509.80  8.61  383.13  111.94  4,013.49  
Portfolio Classified as NPA 
during the year 
2,476.65  134.19  (-)75.47*  100.45  2,711.29  
Recoveries made from the NPA 
accounts during the year 
1,241.45  56.70  6.86  50.11  1,355.12  
Prudential write-offs made during 
the year 
0 0 0 0 0 
Non-Performing assets at the year 
end 
4,745.01  86.10  300.80  162.28  5,294.19  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
268  
Annexure-VI 
(Referred to in Para No.5.3.6.2) 
Statement showing the details of year wise and vert ical wise Non-performance Assets 
during the years from 2015-16 to 2018-19  
Age-wise analysis of Non-performing Assets as on 31 March 2019 
Period  Amount outstanding ( `` `` in lakh) 
From To 
90 days 180 days 737.54  
181 days  One year 1,017.80  
More than One Year Two years 1,584.54  
More than Two Years Three Years  1,523.18  
Above Three Years 431.13  
Total 5,294.19  
 
Details of total outstanding portfolio and accumula ted NPA amounts during the period 2015-16 
to 2018-19 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Year Outstanding 
portfolio as on 
31 st  March 
Per cent  of 
increase during 
the four years 
Accumulated 
NPA as on 31 st  
March 
Per cent  of 
increase 
during the 
three years 
Per cent of 
NPAs to 
outstanding 
portfolio 
2015-16 86,095.74  
67.72 
3,652.62  
133.02 
4.24 
2016-17 87,194.03 5,384.86 6.17 
2017-18 1,18,007.35 7,230.55 6.12 
2018-19 1,44,397.57 8,511.25 5.89 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
269 
Annexure-VII 
(Referred to in Para No. 5.3.6.3(i)(b)) 
Statement showing the details of outstanding amounts against second level institutions 
 
Sl 
No 
Name of 
District 
Name of SLI Loan 
sanctioned 
Amount 
Recovered 
up to 
31.03.2019 
Outstanding 
amount as on 
31.03.2019 
Remarks 
 
` in lakh 
1. Chittoor – 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Sri Soundarya 
Mahila 
Mutually 
Aided Thrift 
Cooperative 
Society 
25.00 10.18 14.82 The Company sanctioned (January 2015) a loan of `25 lakh to the 
SLI for onward lending to its members. In August 20 15, the 
borrower applied for a top-up loan of `35 lakh.  After receiving the 
application, the Company’s staff conducted a field survey of the 
borrower in which it was stated that the details of  savings, loan 
amounts required and the purposes of loans were not  matching 
when verified on the field. The details of share ca pital were not 
available with the borrower. 
 
As per the Company’s loan policy, it should obtain personal/third 
party guarantees of the borrowers before disbursing  the loan 
amounts to SLIs. However, no such guarantees were a vailable on 
record.  The Company did not make efforts to verify  the 
genuineness of the beneficiary members of the borro wer and the 
genuineness of the book debts list at any stage of the loan 
sanctioning/repayment collection process. The list of book debts 
was not certified by an auditor as required by the loan sanction letter 
of the Company.  
 
The utilization of the sanctioned loan amounts by the borrowers was 
not verified by the Company for ensuring that there  was no 
diversion of the sanctioned amount without distribu ting to the 
genuine beneficiaries. The borrower did not submit the details of 
transfers/withdrawals from its bank account out of the loan amount 
sanctioned.  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
270  
Even though the borrower’s repayment of principal and interest was 
not satisfactory since October 2016, the Company di d not take 
timely action towards pursuance for early clearance  of the 
outstanding amount. No correspondence was made with  the 
borrower from September 2017 to October 2018, excep t addressing 
a letter (March 2018) to recoup the payment consequ ent upon 
dishonor of a cheque. 
 
The Company stated (May 2019) that they are strengt hening their 
appraisal mechanism and exposure to such institutio ns is being 
avoided. In respect of non-certification of loans, it further stated that 
it obtained the details of some borrowers on a samp le basis and 
disbursements were made.   
 
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that the Compan y had filed 
cheque bounce case and summons was served through l ocal police 
by the order of Court. The same was being followed up through 
advocate. 
 
The reply is not acceptable as no progress was made  in recovery of 
accumulated NPA.  Had the Company done proper appra isal of the 
organisation regarding its financial position and c onducted post 
disbursement visits, it could have prevented the loan from becoming 
NPA. 
2. Erode – 
Tamil 
Nadu 
Kongunadu 
Vivasaigal 
Sangam 
98.00 66.83 31.17 The Company sanctioned a loan of `98 lakh to the SLI based on 
share capital (Capital Fund of `32.10 lakh).  The increase in share 
capital in a single year (from `1.20 lakh to `33.02 lakh) was not 
verified by the Company.  The Company did not take any proper 
care to verify its genuineness from the original bo oks, bank 
statements, etc. 
  
As per its Provisional balance sheet for the year 2 013-14, the bank 
overdraft (current account) of the borrower was `30.32 lakh, which 
was not verified by the Company. The Company did no t take 
adequate steps to verify the prevailing financial c ondition of the 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
271 
borrower for ensuring the genuineness of the loan r equirement for 
onward lending to the members of the borrowers and the prompt 
repayment capability of the borrower. The borrower stopped paying 
the monthly instalments (principal and interest com ponents) as per 
schedule and started to pay only part payments inte rmittently. The 
last repayment of `1.21 lakh (only the monthly interest component) 
was received from the borrower in April 2017. Since  May 2017, 
there have been no repayments from the borrower.  T he details of 
post disbursement verifications conducted by the Company were not 
available on record.  
 
As per the Company’s loan policy, it should obtain personal/third 
party guarantees of the borrowers before disbursing  the loan 
amounts to SLI. However, no such guarantees were av ailable on 
record.  
 
The Company did not make efforts to verify the genu ineness of the 
beneficiary members of the borrower and the genuine ness of the 
book debts list at any stage of the loan sanctionin g/repayment 
collection process. The list of book debts was not certified by an 
auditor as required by the loan sanction letter of the Company   
 
The utilization of the sanctioned loan amounts by the borrowers was 
not verified by the Company for ensuring that there  was no 
diversion of the sanctioned amount without distribu ting to the 
genuine beneficiaries. The borrower did not submit the details of 
transfers/withdrawals from its bank account out of the loan amount 
sanctioned.  
 
The Company did not take timely steps to persuade the borrower for 
early payment of the outstanding loan amount. Only in January 
2018, the Company issued a notice to the borrower f or immediate 
payment of the outstanding dues. There was no respo nse from the 
borrower against the notice. There was no correspon dence with the 
borrower from February 2018 to September 2019.    
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
272  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Company stated (May 2019) that they are strengt hening their 
appraisal mechanism and exposure to such institutio ns is being 
avoided. In respect of non-certification of loans i t further stated that 
it obtained the details of some borrowers on a samp le basis and 
disbursements were made.   
 
The Ministry replied (January 2020) that the Compan y was in the 
process of filing civil suit against this institution. 
 
The reply is not acceptable as no progress was made in the recovery 
of accumulated NPA.  Had the Company done proper ap praisal of 
the organisation regarding its financial position a nd conducted post 
disbursement visits, it could have prevented the loan from becoming 
NPA. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
273 
Annexure-VIII 
(Referred to in Para No. 5.3.6.5(a)) 
Statement showing the details of accounts contacted by the Company 
 
State  Name of 
the 
District 
PAR* < 30 days PAR 30-60 days PAR 60-90 days 
No. of 
accounts 
No. of 
accounts 
contacted 
Amount 
(`` `` lakh) 
No. of 
accounts 
No. of 
accounts 
contacted  
Amount 
(`` `` lakh) 
No. of 
accounts  
No. of 
accounts 
contacted 
Amount  
(`` `` lakh) 
Karnataka Sirsi 83 81 3.39 53 53 6.16 28 28 8.26 
Vijayapura  87 87 3.07 99 99 11.55 25 25 5.7 
Tumkur 622 601 6.63 80 80 13.44 20 20 9.27 
Maharashtra Gondia 75 75 3.86 18 18 3.33 14 14 5.11 
Yavatmal 145 145 3.84 37 37 4.5 25 25 4.68 
Nanded 1024 986 18.42 81 81 7.75 15 15 4.47 
Tamil Nadu Cuddalore 225 215 6.72 50 50 7.58 9 9 3.05 
Dindugal 66 66 1.97 11 11 1.61 5 5 1.08 
Madurai  3 3 0.01 4 4 0.92 1 1 0.67 
Telangana Warangal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Chittoor 120 115 2.16 22 22 3.88 4 4 0.73 
Grand Total 2450 2374 50.07 455 455 60.72 146 146 43.02 
*PAR: Portfolio at Risk 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
274  
Annexure-IX 
(Referred to in Para No. 5.3.6.5(b)) 
Statement showing the details of correspondence made by various levels of hierarchy with NPA account holders 
(`` `` in lakh) 
State Name of 
the District  
No. of loan 
accounts under 
NPA category as on 
31.03.2018 
No. of  cases in which 
first reminders were 
issued by District 
Office 
Percentage of  
reminders issued 
No. of cases in 
which second 
reminders were 
issued by Head 
Office  
No. of cases in which 
legal action was 
initiated  
No. of 
accounts 
Amount  No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount 
Karnataka Sirsi 306 390.53 203 330.89 66.34 84.73 306 390.53 27 69.51 
Vijayapura 173 190.84 76 123.50 43.93 64.71 173 190.84 38 78.76 
Tumkur 320 267.08 320 267.08 100 100.00 320 267.08 56 64.90 
Maharashtra Gondia 212 422.73 212 422.73 100 100.00 212 422.73 57 157.57 
Yavatmal 147 128.34 147 128.34 100 100.00 147 128.34 22 26.61 
Nanded 198 121.73 12 7.46 6.06 6.13 198 121.73 - - 
Tamilnadu Cuddalore 156 68.96 13 8.54 8.33 12.38 156 68.96 17 6.09 
Dindigul 132 131.49 179 194.94 135.61 148.25 132 131.49 10 10.58 
Madurai 180 169.18 40 37.10 22.22 21.93 180 169.18 - - 
Telangana Warangal 6 105.39 6 105.39 100 100.00 6 105.39 6 105.39 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Chittoor 530 1,335.93  460 ,.63 86.79 96.91 530 1335.93 450 1,289.80 
Total   2,360 3,332.20  1,668 2,920.60 70.68 87.65 2360 3,332.20 683 1,809.21 
or say 
`` ``18.09 
crore  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
275 
 
Annexure-X 
 (Referred to in Para No.5.4.3.2(ii)) 
Statement Showing Short Collection of Premium under Group Mediclaim Policies for the period from 01 April 2014 to 31 March 2019  
(Figure in  `` ``) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Policy No. & Year Name of the Insured Premium 
Approved/ 
Ratified by the 
Head office 
Premium Actually 
Collected by 
Operating office 
Short Collection of 
Premium 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) = (iv) - (v) 
1 100100/50/16/10001158 (2016-17) GE Power India Limited 65,00,000.00 56,52,174.00 8,47,826.00  
2 100100/50/17/10000116 (2017-18) Jindal Drilling and Industries Limited 25,00,000.00  20,00,000.00 5,00,000.00  
3 100100/50/18/10000087 (2018-19) Haldia Petrochemicals Limited 2,28,41,149.00 1,83,14,049.00 45,27,100.00  
4 100300/50/18/10007565 (2018-19) Durgapur Medical Centre Private Limited 62,14,031.00  47,94,944.00 14,19,087.00  
5 100600/50/16/10009585 (2016-17) Jadavpur University 1,75,00,000.00 1,72,74,439.00 2,25,561.00  
6 100600/50/16/10009595 (2016-17) Jadavpur University 1,88,00,000.00  1,25,24,857.00 62,75,143.00  
7 100600/50/17/10000191 (2017-18) Indian Explosives Private Limited 32,80,000.00 21,60,000.00 11,20,000.00  
8 100600/50/17/10001244 (2017-18) Linc Pen Plastic Private. Limited 12,35,766.00  11,00,000.00 1,35,766.00  
9 100600/50/17/10005492 (2017-18) Bandhan Bank Limited 6,98,88,000.00 6,76,00,000.00 22,88,000.00  
10 100600/50/17/10008711 (2017-18) Embee Software Private Limited 16,67,915.00  16,00,000.00 67,915.00  
11 101101/50/1610003627 (2016-17) RKM Provident Fund 1,45,79,599.41 1,43,39,460.00 2,40,139.41  
12 150403/50/18/10003668 (2018-19) The University Burdwan 62,29,188.00  57,24,022.00 5,05,166.00  
13 154300/50/18/10000453(2018-19) Magma Fincorp Limited 3,56,72,000.00 2,20,99,818.00 1,35,72,182.00  
14 251100/46/16/85000000650 (2016-17) M/s ICICI Lombard 10,90,00,000.00  9,75,00,000.00 1,15,00,000.00  
15 251100/50/18/10000076, 77 and 78 
(2018-19) 
Group of Intelenet  8,00,75,812.00 7,43,39,200.00 57,36,612.00  
16 251100/50/18/10000118 (2018-19) ECGC of India Limited GMEDI 78,56,945.00  73,00,000.00 5,56,945.00  
17 260501/50/18/10000494 (2018-19) Initiative Media (India) Private Limited 38,67,505.00 36,97,826.00 1,69,679.00  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
276  
18 260501/50/18/10000554 (2018-19) Interactive Avenues Private Limited 50,15,498.69  43,01,282.00 7,14,216.69  
19 260600/50/18/10000116 (2018-19) Future Generalli India Life Insurance Co. 
Limited 2,98,61,765.00 2,34,00,000.00 64,61,765.00  
20 260600/50/18/10000120 (2018-19) Future Generalli India Insurance Co.  
Limited 3,22,59,088.00  3,00,00,000.00 22,59,088.00  
21 261000/50/18/10000650 (2018-19) Roundglass Sports Private. Limited 3,16,825.00 3,00,000.00 16,825.00  
22 351500/50/18/10000425 (2018-19) Integral Biosciences Private Limited 27,51,877.00  26,50,000.00 1,01,877.00  
23 351500/50/18/10001372 (2018-19) Velocis Systems Private Limited 36,06,491.84 35,16,949.00 89,542.84  
24 351600/50/18/10001021 (2018-19) Indian Spinal Injuries Centre 61,50,000.00  61,00,000.00 50,000.00  
25 354301/50/18/10000697 (2018-19) M/s Plasser India Private Limited 54,02,231.00 45,45,000.00 8,57,231.00  
26 354500/50/18/10000664, 665, 666, 
667, 668, 669 & 671 (2018-19) 
Ericsson India Global Services Private 
Limited 33,91,41,416.00  32,83,80,562.00 
1,07,60,854.00  
27 355000/50/18/10000591 & 568 (2018-
19) 
Metlife Global Operations Support Centre 
Private Limited 2,43,30,225.00 2,39,12,180.00 4,18,045.00  
28 355000/50/18/10001794 (2018-19) Headstrong Services India Private Limited 1,44,49,345.00  1,08,63,410.00 35,85,935.00  
29 360700/50/18/10004016 (2018-19) M/s Select Infrastructure Private Limited 22,63,467.00 22,32,288.00 31,179.00  
30 360800/50/18/10001926 (2018-19) M/s Subros Limited 1,23,39,180.00  1,15,00,000.00 8,39,180.00  
31 361300/46/16/850000039  (2016-17) Taj Stats Air Catering Limited  41,85,193.00 30,00,000.00 11,85,193.00  
32 361300/50/17/10002979 (2017-18) M/s Amar Ujala Publication Limited 1,92,93,965.00  1,76,83,488.00 16,10,477.00  
33 366010/50/17/10000637 (2017-18) Public Health Foundation of India 39,09,824.00 37,30,678.00 1,79,146.00  
34 500400/50/18/10001375 (2018-19) Comstar Automotive Technologies Private 
Limited 54,46,072.00  52,13,172.00 2,32,900.00  
35 501700/50/18/10000981 (2018-19) M/s Beardsell Limited 26,00,000.00 22,14,296.00 3,85,704.00  
36 501800/50/18/10000145 (2018-19) India Garage 62,36,756.00  52,50,000.00 9,86,756.00  
37 602000/50/16/10001206 (2016-17) ITC Infotech India Limited 4,13,91,304.00 2,49,50,000.00 1,64,41,304.00  
38 602000/50/17/10000344 (2017-18) Exide Life Insurance Company Limited 2,44,03,000.00  2,27,33,089.00 16,69,911.00  
39 602000/50/17/10001221 (2017-18) M/s Star Health and Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 3,45,28,987.00 3,10,00,000.00 35,28,987.00  
40 602000/50/17/10001388 (2017-18) M/s Orient Cement Limited 82,73,885.00  75,00,000.00 7,73,885.00  
41 602000/50/17/10001942 (2017-18) Ashok Leyland Limited 7,06,69,290.00 6,01,64,195.00 1,05,05,095.00  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
277 
42 602000/50/17/10002418 (2017-18) UEI Electronics Private Limited 44,38,957.00  40,00,000.00 4,38,957.00  
43 602000/50/18/10000155 (2018-19) Micromatic Machine Tools Private Limited 35,47,653.00 31,35,593.00 4,12,060.00  
44 602000/50/18/10000345(2018-19) Exide Life Insurance Limited 2,74,27,135.00  2,23,82,755.00 50,44,380.00  
45 602000/50/18/10000565 (2018-19) Exide Life Insurance Limited 1,12,17,428.00 98,51,865.00 13,65,563.00  
46 602000/50/18/10001190 (2018-19) M/s Star Health and Allied Insurance 
Limited 5,68,14,524.00  4,70,00,000.00 98,14,524.00  
47 602000/50/18/10001191 (2018-19) ITC Infotech India Limited 6,98,88,645.00 3,69,08,658.00 3,29,79,987.00  
48 602000/50/18/10001382 (2018-19) M/s Orient Cement Limited 1,05,40,378.00  95,50,000.00 9,90,378.00  
49 602000/50/18/10001395 (2018-19) M/s Star Health and Allied Insurance 
Limited 5,06,92,122.00 4,89,00,000.00 17,92,122.00  
50 602000/50/18/10001423 (2018-19) ITC Infotech India Limited 2,95,58,260.00  2,36,31,356.00 59,26,904.00  
51 602000/50/18/1001907 (2018-19) Capital One Services India Private Limited 39,56,522.00 39,20,320.00 36,202.00  
52 602100/50/15/10000614 (2015-16) TUV Rheinland India Private Limited 64,98,348.00  63,00,000.00 1,98,348.00  
53 602100/50/18/10000447 (2018-19) Yes Bank 13,00,00,000.00 10,55,66,935.00 2,44,33,065.00  
54 602100/50/18/10000450 (2018-19) M/s Audience Communications Systems 
India Private Limited 59,39,158.00  54,29,777.00 5,09,381.00  
55 602100/50/18/10000625 (2018-19) Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran 
Private Limited 3,40,13,928.00 2,80,00,000.00 60,13,928.00  
56 602100/50/18/10000897 (2018-19) Logix Health Solutions Private Limited 64,25,586.00  62,65,782.00 1,59,804.00  
57 602100/50/18/10000914 (2018-19) Logix Health Solutions Private Limited 27,76,093.00 22,51,587.00 5,24,506.00  
58 602100/50/18/10001405 (2018-19) Yes Bank Limited 11,43,20,874.00  8,59,84,100.00 2,83,36,774.00  
59 602200/46/15/8500000207 (2015-16) Intuit India Porduct Development Center-
Unit II 1,22,85,709.00 1,13,20,000.00 9,65,709.00  
60 602200/46/15/8500000350 (2015-16) Waters India Private Limited 80,35,346.00  70,00,000.00 10,35,346.00  
61 602200/46/17/8500000272 (2017-18) Technip India Limited 6,59,89,173.00 5,17,26,187.00 1,42,62,986.00  
62 602200/46/18/8500000044 (2018-19) ANZ Support Services 7,28,89,551.00  5,81,11,534.00 1,47,78,017.00  
63 602200/50/18/10000218 (2018-19) Technip India Limited 8,72,38,027.00 7,18,98,221.00 1,53,39,806.00  
64 602200/50/18/10000220 (2018-19) Technip Global Business Services Private 
Limited 74,35,227.00  62,68,925.00 11,66,302.00  
65 60220046/18/85/10000157 (2018-19) Software AG Bangalore Technologies 
Private Limited 1,42,50,375.00 1,31,22,444.00 11,27,931.00  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
278  
66 602400/50/18/10000008 (2018-19) Bill Forge Private Limited 1,95,54,644.00  1,75,50,000.00 20,04,644.00  
67 602400/50/18/10000088 (2018-19) M/s Grundfos Pump Limited 92,17,373.00 69,51,225.00 22,66,148.00  
68 602400/50/18/10000104 (2018-19) Bank Note Paper Mill India Private Limited 48,76,077.00  40,06,168.00 8,69,909.00  
69 603805/50/18/10000503 (2018-19) Manipal Academy of Higher Education 8,68,39,436.00 6,87,70,100.00 1,80,69,336.00  
70 603900/50/15/10001762 (2015-16) Tata Power Strategic Electronics Division 2,30,00,787.00  1,93,00,000.00 37,00,787.00  
71 603900/50/18/10000397 (2018-19) Radiant System India Private Limited 20,27,551.05 18,22,500.00 2,05,051.05  
72 603900/50/18/10000697 (2018-19) Bisleri International Private Limited 55,62,388.00  42,50,000.00 13,12,388.00  
73 603900/50/18/10000758 (2018-19) Autoliv India Private Limited 1,71,54,454.00 1,37,50,711.00 34,03,743.00  
74 603900/50/18/10000829 (2018-19) Cvent India Private Limited 2,35,40,854.00  2,11,50,000.00 23,90,854.00  
75 603900/50/18/10000852 (2018-19) Micro Labs Limited 2,32,36,198.00 1,91,00,000.00 41,36,198.00  
76 603900/50/18/10000951 (2018-19) Valtech India Systems Private Limited 89,51,130.00  70,50,000.00 19,01,130.00  
77 603900/50/18/10001398 (2018-19) Tata Power Strategic Electronics Division 3,15,35,844.00 2,90,00,000.00 25,35,844.00  
78 603901/50/17/10001778 (2017-18) Goodrich Aerospace Services 4,47,60,250.00  3,88,00,000.00 59,60,250.00  
79 603901/50/17/10004897 (2017-18) Quess Corp Limited 2,82,81,171.00 2,73,00,000.00 9,81,171.00  
80 603901/50/18/10001541 (2018-19) Cypress Semiconductor Technology India 
Private Limited 1,69,83,859.00  1,42,80,495.00 27,03,364.00  
81 603901/50/18/10003391 (2018-19) Tata Advanced Materials Limited 1,10,36,532.00 1,06,50,332.00 3,86,200.00  
82 604100/50/16/10001303 (2016-17) M/s MTR Foods Private Limited   1,77,38,412.00  1,46,00,000.00 31,38,412.00  
83 604100/50/17/10000638 (2017-18) Pricewater House Coopers Service Delivery 
Centre Bangalore Private Limited 4,68,49,352.00 4,39,30,875.00 29,18,477.00  
84 604100/50/18/10001397 (2018-19) M/s MTR Foods Private Limited 1,79,05,086.00  1,72,42,657.00 6,62,429.00  
85 604100/50/18/10001494 (2018-19) M/s Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation 
Limited 3,48,33,312.00 3,32,50,000.00 15,83,312.00  
86 604100/50/18/10001583 (2018-19) M/s Altimetrik India Private Limited 2,88,89,318.00  2,22,59,566.00 66,29,752.00  
87 604100/50/18/10002398 (2018-19) M/s Syngene International Limited 3,71,22,014.00 3,36,56,000.00 34,66,014.00  
88 604200/50/16/10000170 (2016-17) M/s Yodlee Infotech Private Limited 1,71,05,960.00  1,02,43,009.00 68,62,951.00  
89 604200/50/16/10000358 (2016-17) M/s Make My Trip India Private Limited 2,59,97,373.00 1,62,01,345.00 97,96,028.00  
90 604200/50/17/10000190 (2017-18) M/s Yodlee Infotech Private Limited 2,35,89,100.00  1,91,30,435.00 44,58,665.00  
91 604200/50/17/10001136 (2017-18) M/s Reydel Automotive India 36,56,620.00 32,75,000.00 3,81,620.00  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
279 
92 604200/50/17/10001140 (2017-18) M/s Siemens Gamesa Renewable Power 
Private Limited 1,16,80,972.00  1,09,58,500.00 7,22,472.00  
93 604200/50/18/10000432 (2018-19) M/s Weir Minerals India Private Limited 1,02,97,711.00 95,40,000.00 7,57,711.00  
94 604200/50/18/10000481 (2018-19) Intellect Design Arena Limited 5,06,54,890.00  4,69,00,000.00 37,54,890.00  
95 604200/50/18/10001204 (2018-19) Siemens Gamesa Renewable Power Private 
Limited 1,90,22,271.00 1,33,36,700.00 56,85,571.00  
96 604400/50/16/10002000 (2016-17) Church of South India Karnataka Central 
Diocese 1,15,53,571.00  1,06,50,000.00 9,03,571.00  
97 604400/50/18/10000497 (2018-19) Vee Technologies Private Limited 15,26,258.04 13,49,972.00 1,76,286.04  
98 604400/50/18/10000665 (2018-19) Mann and Hummel Filter Private Limited 84,45,314.00  80,50,000.00 3,95,314.00  
99 604400/50/18/10000913 (2018-19) OSB India Private Limited 63,49,965.00 58,65,000.00 4,84,965.00  
100 604500/50/15/10002106 (2015-16) Advinus Therapeutics Limited   1,01,10,165.00  51,57,998.00 49,52,167.00  
101 604500/50/18/10002397 (2018-19) Euro Fins Advinus Limited 79,46,858.00 73,85,000.00 5,61,858.00  
102 604600/50/15/10000150 (2015-16) Akamai Technologies India Limited 3,04,99,581.00  2,75,00,000.00 29,99,581.00  
103 604600/50/15/10000213 (2015-16) Manhattan Associates India Dev. Centre 
Private  Limited 2,49,37,837.00 1,90,00,618.00 59,37,219.00  
104 604600/50/18/10000271 (2018-19) Societe Generale Global Solution Centre 
Private Limited 12,10,96,770.00  11,72,37,401.00 38,59,369.00  
105 604600/50/18/10000625 (2018-19) Tata ELXSI Limited 2,75,45,767.00 2,29,69,020.00 45,76,747.00  
106 604600/50/18/10000626 (2018-19) Tata Elxsi Limited 2,28,91,862.00  2,17,01,824.00 11,90,038.00  
107 604600/50/18/10000755 (2018-19) Sony India Software Centre Private Limited 2,06,98,020.00 1,98,00,088.00 8,97,932.00  
108 604600/50/18/10000773 (2018-19) Akamai Technologies India Private Limited 4,63,26,609.00  4,35,00,160.00 28,26,449.00  
109 604600/50/18/10000895 (2018-19) Manhattan Associates India Dev. Centre 
Private Limited 2,91,10,921.00 2,57,47,934.00 33,62,987.00  
110 604800/50/18/10000539 (2018-19) Baehal Software Limited 30,89,743.00  27,00,000.00 3,89,743.00  
111 605400/50/18/10000050 (2018-19) VMware Software India Limited 12,82,64,274.00 12,29,25,000.00 53,39,274.00  
Total  short collection of premium  3145007069.03  2721483050.00 42,35,24,019.03  
or say `` ``42.35 crore  
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
280  
 
Annexure-XI 
(Referred to in para 5.4.3.2(iii)) 
Statement Showing Short Charging of Premium due to Non-Imposition of Desired Loading in respect of Gro up Mediclaim Policies of NICL during 
the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Sl. 
No. 
Policy No. Name of the Insured Annualized# 
Claim Outgo 
including 
IBNR@ 
Brokerage TPA 
Charges 
Medical 
Inflation 
Total 
Premium 
Adjusted 
premium # 
Premium 
Actually 
Charged 
Short 
Charging of 
Premium 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viii) = Sum of 
(iv) to (vii) 
(ix) (x) (xi) = (ix) - (x) 
1 100600/50/16/10001748 Bandhan  Bank Limited 4,21,79,667.00 0.00 22,77,702.00 21,08,983.35 4,65,66,352.35 4,65,66,352.03 3,89,95,000.00 75,71,352.03 
2 100600/50/17/10005492 Bandhan Bank Limited 7,22,12,977.00 0.00 28,88,519.00 36,10,648.85 7,87,12,144.85 8,14,62,264.71 6,76,00,000.00 1,38,62,264.71 
3 100100/50/18/10000258, 
259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 
264, 265, 266, 267 to 268 
ATOS Group 
19,25,74,612.00 1,44,43,096.00 77,02,984.00 96,28,730.60 22,43,49,422.60 22,44,49,217.12 19,28,74,772.00 3,15,74,445.12 
4 100300/50/18/10018299 Department of 
Information & Cultural 
Affairs 
3,03,14,171.00 0.00 6,06,283.00 15,15,708.55 3,24,36,162.55 3,24,36,162.97 3,09,64,842.00 14,71,320.97 
5 103000/50/18/10003975 Kolkata Metropolitan 
Development Authority 2,09,37,796.00 6,28,134.00 11,30,641.00 10,46,889.80 2,37,43,460.80 2,17,39,237.26 1,94,09,678.00 23,29,559.26 
6 103000/50/17/10004257 Kolkata Metropolitan 
Development Authority 1,03,42,643.00 7,75,698.00 5,58,503.00 5,17,132.15 1,21,93,976.15 2,17,66,817.15 1,66,25,871.00 51,40,946.15 
7 100100/50/17/10000355, 
357, 370, 371 & 372 
ATOS Group 
16,74,70,274.00 58,61,460.00 75,36,162.00 83,73,513.70 18,92,41,409.70 18,92,41,409.62 11,30,55,297.00 7,61,86,112.62 
8 100100/50/16/10000425, 
426, 427, 429 & 430 
ATOS GROUP 
12,27,31,657.00 61,36,583.00 36,81,950.00 61,36,582.85 13,86,86,772.85 18,30,71,552.79 8,38,50,000.00 9,92,21,552.79 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
281 
9 101101/50/17/10003595 RKM Provident Fund 1,79,38,478.00 0.00 5,38,154.00 8,96,923.90 1,93,73,555.90 1,88,14,469.92 1,70,00,000.00 18,14,469.92 
10 100100/50/17/10000368 India Medtronic Private 
Limited 2,05,85,613.00 15,43,921.00 11,11,623.00 10,29,280.65 2,42,70,437.65 2,51,57,279.51 1,98,00,071.00 53,57,208.51 
11 100100/50/17/10000201 Electrosteel Steels 
Limited 3,10,80,093.00 11,65,503.00 6,21,602.00 15,54,004.65 3,44,21,202.65 3,44,21,202.73 3,07,53,247.00 36,67,955.73 
12 100600/50/16/10009585 Jadavpur University 1,74,98,556.00 0.00 9,44,922.00 8,74,927.80 1,93,18,405.80 1,93,18,406.12 1,72,74,439.00 20,43,967.12 
13 100600/50/16/10009595 Jadavpur University 1,87,63,975.00 0.00 10,13,255.00 9,38,198.75 2,07,15,428.75 2,07,15,428.58 1,25,24,857.00 81,90,571.58 
14 100700/46/14/8500000077 Director General and 
Inspector General of 
Police West Bengal 
19,80,43,385.00 0.00 1,06,94,343.00 99,02,169.25 21,86,39,897.25 21,86,39,896.90 17,66,97,223.00 4,19,42,673.90 
15 100700/46/15/8500000072 Director General and 
Inspector General of 
Police West Bengal 
28,19,23,345.00 0.00 1,52,23,861.00 1,40,96,167.25 31,12,43,373.25 31,12,43,372.56 17,28,94,101.00 13,83,49,271.56 
16 100700/50/16/10003874 Director General and 
Inspector General of 
Police West Bengal 
34,29,34,743.00 0.00 1,85,18,476.00 1,71,46,737.15 37,85,99,956.15 37,85,99,956.01 20,43,54,913.00 17,42,45,043.01 
17 100700/50/17/10006715 Director General and 
Inspector General of 
Police West Bengal 
40,57,60,994.00 0.00 1,62,30,440.00 2,02,88,049.70 44,22,79,483.70 44,22,79,483.46 15,02,55,084.00 29,20,24,399.46 
18 153501/46/15/8500000809 Indian Statistical 
Institute 1,12,16,241.50 0.00 6,05,677.04 5,60,812.08 1,23,82,730.62 1,23,82,730.62 1,04,75,608.00 19,07,122.62 
19 153501/46/15/8500000810 Indian Statistical 
Institute 74,96,830.00 0.00 4,04,828.82 3,74,841.50 82,76,500.32 82,76,500.32 76,24,392.00 6,52,108.32 
20 154400/46/16/8500000017 Cadence Design System 64,98,691.00 11,37,270.93 3,50,929.31 3,24,934.55 83,11,825.79 83,11,825.79 82,08,000.00 1,03,825.79 
21 154400/46/16/8500000019 Cadence Design System 1,27,31,353.00 22,27,986.78 6,87,493.06 6,36,567.65 1,62,83,400.49 1,62,83,400.49 1,60,80,000.00 2,03,400.49 
22 154400/46/16/8500000020 Tensilica Technology 32,68,347.00 5,71,960.73 1,76,490.74 1,63,417.35 41,80,215.82 41,80,215.82 41,28,000.00 52,215.82 
23 153501/50/16/10000924 Indian Statistical 
Institute 1,17,94,832.00 0.00 6,36,920.93 5,89,741.60 1,30,21,494.53 1,30,21,494.53 1,00,00,000.00 30,21,494.53 
24 153501/50/16/10000925 Indian Statistical 
Institute 81,32,397.00 0.00 4,39,149.44 4,06,619.85 89,78,166.29 89,78,166.29 68,16,957.00 21,61,209.29 
25 154400/46/16/8500000005 Cadence Design System 80,29,717.00 14,05,200.48 4,33,604.72 4,01,485.85 1,02,70,008.05 1,02,70,008.05 82,08,000.00 20,62,008.05 
26 154400/46/16/8500000007 Cadence Design System 2,11,77,792.00 37,06,113.60 11,43,600.77 10,58,889.60 2,70,86,395.97 2,70,86,395.97 2,16,48,000.00 54,38,395.97 
27 154400/46/16/8500000008 Tensilica Technology 41,32,252.00 7,23,144.10 2,23,141.61 2,06,612.60 52,85,150.31 52,85,150.31 42,22,553.00 10,62,597.31 
28 154400/46/16/8500000009 Cadence Design System 4,70,04,368.00 82,25,764.40 25,38,235.87 23,50,218.40 6,01,18,586.67 6,01,18,586.67 4,80,48,000.00 1,20,70,586.67 
29 153501/50/17/10004002 Indian Statistical 
Institute 86,40,358.00 0.00 4,66,579.33 4,32,017.90 95,38,955.23 95,38,955.23 90,00,000.00 5,38,955.23 
30 153501/50/17/10004003 Indian Statistical 
Institute 1,25,31,560.00 0.00 6,76,704.24 6,26,578.00 1,38,34,842.24 1,38,34,842.24 1,10,00,000.00 28,34,842.24 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
282  
31 154400/50/17/10000168 Cadence Design System 4,40,05,666.00 77,00,992.00 23,76,305.96 22,00,283.30 5,62,83,247.26 5,62,83,247.26 5,04,96,000.00 57,87,247.26 
32 154400/50/17/10000169 Cadence Design System 2,75,24,456.00 48,16,780.00 14,86,320.62 13,76,222.80 3,52,03,779.42 3,52,03,779.42 3,15,84,000.00 36,19,779.42 
33 154400/50/17/10000170 Cadence Design System 41,83,048.00 7,32,033.00 2,25,884.59 2,09,152.40 53,50,117.99 53,50,117.99 48,00,000.00 5,50,117.99 
34 153800/50/17/1000087 Indian Institute of 
Technology, Khargpur 1,71,66,281.00 0.00 9,26,979.17 8,58,314.05 1,89,51,574.22 1,89,51,574.22 1,74,20,101.00 15,31,473.22 
35 153501/50/18/10003994 Indian Statistical 
Institute 95,65,984.00 0.00 5,16,563.14 4,78,299.20 1,05,60,846.34 1,05,60,846.34 98,00,000.00 7,60,846.34 
36 154400/50/18/10000624 Cadence Design System 10,22,888.00 76,716.60 55,235.95 51,144.40 12,05,984.95 12,05,984.95 11,75,000.00 30,984.95 
37 154400/50/18/10000625 Cadence Design System 2,88,45,429.00 21,63,407.18 15,57,653.17 14,42,271.45 3,40,08,760.80 3,40,08,760.80 3,31,35,000.00 8,73,760.80 
38 154400/50/18/10000626 Cadence Design System 4,25,93,038.00 31,94,477.85 23,00,024.05 21,29,651.90 5,02,17,191.80 5,02,17,191.80 4,89,27,000.00 12,90,191.80 
39 154400/50/18/10000635 Cadence Design System 44,18,874.00 3,31,415.55 2,38,619.20 2,20,943.70 52,09,852.45 52,09,852.45 50,76,000.00 1,33,852.45 
40 602200/46/16/8500000221 Analog Devices India 
Private Limited 44,59,189.00 3,34,439.00 2,45,255.00 2,22,959.45 52,61,842.45 54,71,120.00 43,43,040.00 11,28,080.00 
41 602200/46/15/8500000195 Emc Software and 
Services 24,39,34,939.00 84,15,755.00 73,18,048.00 1,21,96,746.95 27,18,65,488.95 14,58,88,382.00 10,13,61,474.00 4,45,26,908.00 
42 602200/46/17/8500000007 Anz Support Services 
(India) Private Limited 5,86,58,398.00 14,66,460.00 24,92,982.00 29,32,919.90 6,55,50,759.90 6,40,99,289.00 5,81,47,600.00 59,51,689.00 
43 602200/46/18/8500000044 Anz Support Services 
(India) Private Limited 5,42,82,920.00 16,28,488.00 23,07,024.00 27,14,146.00 6,09,32,578.00 6,09,52,765.00 5,81,11,534.00 28,41,231.00 
44 602200/46/18/8500000136 Scientific Games India 
Private Limited 3,16,39,886.00 23,72,991.00 9,49,197.00 15,81,994.30 3,65,44,068.30 3,51,50,289.00 3,40,50,000.00 11,00,289.00 
45 602200/46/15/8500000350 Waters India Private 
Limited 76,16,442.00 5,71,233.00 3,61,781.00 3,80,822.10 89,30,278.10 89,30,278.00 70,00,000.00 19,30,278.00 
46 602200/46/15/8500000207 Intuit India Product - 
Unit II 1,26,43,384.00 9,48,254.00 6,95,386.00 6,32,169.20 1,49,19,193.20 1,34,96,778.00 1,13,20,000.00 21,76,778.00 
47 602200/46/16/8500000030 Terex India Private. 
Limited 77,34,180.00 5,80,064.00 4,25,380.00 3,86,709.00 91,26,333.00 85,24,884.00 67,81,414.00 17,43,470.00 
48 602200/46/17/8500000272 Technip India Limited 6,04,61,188.00 24,18,448.00 18,13,836.00 30,23,059.40 6,77,16,531.40 6,64,28,922.00 5,07,74,200.00 1,56,54,722.00 
49 602200/50/18/10000218 Technip India Limited 6,66,85,875.00 23,34,006.00 13,33,718.00 33,34,293.75 7,36,87,892.75 8,38,18,502.00 7,18,98,221.00 1,19,20,281.00 
50 602200/46/15/8500000018 Verisign Services India 
Private Limited 12,44,296.00 93,322.00 68,436.00 62,214.80 14,68,268.80 12,01,311.00 11,71,800.00 29,511.00 
51 604200/50/16/10001240 EVRY India Private 
Limited (Formerly Span 
Infotech (India) Private 
Limited) 
1,45,21,190.00 10,89,089.00 7,98,665.00 7,26,059.50 1,71,35,003.50 1,70,24,588.00 1,30,40,000.00 39,84,588.00 
52 604200/50/17/10000512 Intellect Design Arena 
Limited 3,45,22,425.00 13,80,897.00 12,08,285.00 17,26,121.25 3,88,37,728.25 3,98,56,391.00 3,60,00,000.00 38,56,391.00 
53 604200/50/18/10000481 Intellect Design Arena 
Limited 4,59,81,737.00 16,09,361.00 16,09,361.00 22,99,086.85 5,14,99,545.85 5,11,45,216.00 4,69,00,000.00 42,45,216.00 
54 604200/50/18/10000264 Raymond Limited 3,59,32,003.00 21,55,920.00 14,37,280.00 17,96,600.15 4,13,21,803.15 4,18,99,962.00 3,72,32,749.00 46,67,213.00 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
283 
55 604200/50/17/10000300 Raymond Limited 3,12,08,286.00 23,40,621.00 17,16,456.00 15,60,414.30 3,68,25,777.30 3,24,50,583.00 3,02,81,294.00 21,69,289.00 
56 604200/50/17/10001136 Reydel Automotive 
India Private. Limited. 34,22,733.00 0.00 1,88,250.00 1,71,136.65 37,82,119.65 37,82,120.00 32,75,000.00 5,07,120.00 
57 604200/50/16/10000170 Yodlee Infotech. 
Private. Limited. 1,62,14,180.00 12,16,064.00 8,91,780.00 8,10,709.00 1,91,32,733.00 1,96,35,780.00 1,02,43,009.00 93,92,771.00 
58 604200/50/17/10000190 Yodlee Infotech. 
Private. Limited. 2,23,59,337.00 13,41,560.00 12,29,764.00 11,17,966.85 2,60,48,627.85 2,56,59,012.00 1,91,30,435.00 65,28,577.00 
59 603805/50/17/10000483 Manipal University 
(Clusters) 5,95,86,160.00 0.00 17,87,585.00 29,79,308.00 6,43,53,053.00 6,43,53,053.00 5,61,06,366.00 82,46,687.00 
60 603805/50/18/10000503 Manipal Academy 
(Clusters) 6,84,25,973.00 0.00 20,52,779.00 34,21,298.65 7,39,00,050.65 7,90,01,068.00 6,87,70,100.00 1,02,30,968.00 
61 603901/50/18/10002125 Goodrich Aerospace 4,71,47,481.00 28,28,849.00 25,93,111.00 23,57,374.05 5,49,26,815.05 5,57,38,308.00 4,90,00,000.00 67,38,308.00 
62 603901/50/17/10001778 Goodrich Aerospace 4,02,90,513.00 30,21,788.00 22,15,978.00 20,14,525.65 4,75,42,804.65 4,74,48,909.00 3,88,00,000.00 86,48,909.00 
63 604500/50/15/10002106 Advinus Therapeutics 
Limited   95,83,094.00 7,18,732.00 5,27,070.00 4,79,154.70 1,13,08,050.70 1,15,60,420.00 51,57,998.00 64,02,422.00 
64 603900/50/15/10001602 M/s JDA Software India 
Private Limited 2,90,61,762.00 21,79,632.00 15,98,397.00 14,53,088.10 3,42,92,879.10 3,24,84,330.00 2,25,89,884.00 98,94,446.00 
65 603900/46/14/8500000057 Radiant Systems India 
Private Limited  5,20,045.00 39,003.00 28,602.00 26,002.25 6,13,652.25 7,44,774.00 6,14,097.00 1,30,677.00 
66 603900/50/15/10001762 Tata Power Strategic 
Electronics Division   2,18,01,694.00 16,35,127.00 11,99,093.00 10,90,084.70 2,57,25,998.70 2,85,72,098.00 1,93,00,000.00 92,72,098.00 
67 603900/50/17/10001469 Tata Power Strategic 
Electronics Division   3,55,00,146.00 26,62,511.00 19,52,508.00 17,75,007.30 4,18,90,172.30 4,03,93,320.00 3,45,00,000.00 58,93,320.00 
68 6039005/01/61/0000830 & 
831 
Tavant Technologies 
India Private Limited 1,24,55,330.00 9,34,150.00 6,85,043.00 6,22,766.50 1,46,97,289.50 1,59,18,161.00 1,32,00,000.00 27,18,161.00 
69 604400/50/16/10002000 Church of South India 
Karnataka Central 
Diocese 
1,09,51,253.00 8,21,344.00 6,02,319.00 5,47,562.65 1,29,22,478.65 1,29,08,881.00 1,06,50,000.00 22,58,881.00 
70 604400/50/15/10001754 RBL Bank Limited 4,43,04,001.00 33,22,800.00 24,36,720.00 22,15,200.05 5,22,78,721.05 5,64,88,158.00 4,35,00,000.00 1,29,88,158.00 
71 604100/50/15/10002185 Hilex India Private 
Limited 38,77,486.00 1,93,874.00 2,13,262.00 1,93,874.30 44,78,496.30 44,78,496.00 34,00,000.00 10,78,496.00 
72 604100/50/16/10002626 Biocon Limited 2,97,37,906.00 22,30,343.00 16,35,585.00 14,86,895.30 3,50,90,729.30 3,60,44,368.00 2,69,00,560.00 91,43,808.00 
73 604100/50/16/10001303 M/s MTR Foods Private 
Limited 1,57,21,913.00 11,79,143.00 8,64,705.00 7,86,095.65 1,85,51,856.65 1,85,51,857.00 1,46,00,000.00 39,51,857.00 
74 604100/50/15/10001097 Nvidia Graphics Private 
Limited 4,24,41,855.00 31,83,139.00 23,34,302.00 21,22,092.75 5,00,81,388.75 4,96,99,023.00 4,01,34,526.00 95,64,497.00 
75 604100/50/16/10001025 Nvidia Graphics Private 
Limited 5,25,12,679.00 39,38,451.00 28,88,197.00 26,25,633.95 6,19,64,960.95 6,61,12,294.00 4,75,46,300.00 1,85,65,994.00 
76 604100/50/17/10001044 Nvidia Graphics Private 
Limited 5,67,16,473.00 42,53,735.00 31,19,406.00 28,35,823.65 6,69,25,437.65 6,73,22,261.00 5,93,96,071.00 79,26,190.00 
77 604100/50/18/10001034 Nvidia Graphics Private 
Limited 6,80,96,773.00 37,45,323.00 23,83,387.00 34,04,838.65 7,76,30,321.65 8,17,56,117.00 7,70,77,985.00 46,78,132.00 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
284  
78 604100/50/17/10000638 Pricewater House 
Coopers Service 
Delivery Centre 
Bangalore Private 
Limited 
3,97,44,327.00 29,80,825.00 21,85,938.00 19,87,216.35 4,68,98,306.35 4,68,98,306.00 4,39,30,875.00 29,67,431.00 
79 604600/50/15/10000150 Akamai Technologies 
India Private Limited 2,95,75,351.00 22,18,151.00 13,30,891.00 14,78,767.55 3,46,03,160.55 3,72,99,222.00 2,75,00,000.00 97,99,222.00 
80 604600/50/16/10000636 Akamai Technologies 
India Private Limited 2,96,04,032.00 22,20,302.00 16,28,222.00 14,80,201.60 3,49,32,757.60 3,70,69,675.00 3,20,76,000.00 49,93,675.00 
81 604600/50/17/10000766 Akamai Technologies 
India Private Limited 3,80,34,536.00 28,52,590.00 20,91,899.00 19,01,726.80 4,48,80,751.80 4,93,48,901.00 4,07,86,200.00 85,62,701.00 
82 604600/50/18/10000773 Akamai Technologies 
India Private Limited 4,10,15,179.00 28,71,063.00 18,45,683.00 20,50,758.95 4,77,82,683.95 4,92,12,666.00 4,35,00,160.00 57,12,506.00 
83 604600/50/15/10000213 Manhattan Associates 
India Dev  Centre 
Private  Limited 
2,36,37,760.00 17,72,832.00 13,00,077.00 11,81,888.00 2,78,92,557.00 2,86,42,801.00 1,90,00,618.00 96,42,183.00 
84 604600/50/17/10000045 Applied Materials India 
Private Limited 1,90,84,788.00 14,31,359.00 8,58,815.00 9,54,239.40 2,23,29,201.40 2,23,29,201.00 1,81,58,328.00 41,70,873.00 
85 604600/5017/10000223 Sonus Networks India 
Private Limited 95,79,980.00 0.00 5,26,899.00 4,78,999.00 1,05,85,878.00 1,07,54,545.00 88,50,127.00 19,04,418.00 
86 604600/50/18/10000271 Societe Generale Global 
Solution Centre Private 
Limited 
11,02,02,512.00 0.00 52,34,619.00 55,10,125.60 12,09,47,256.60 12,31,33,874.00 11,72,37,401.00 58,96,473.00 
87 604600/46/15/8500000079 Tata Elxsi Limited 1,57,92,784.00 0.00 6,31,711.00 7,89,639.20 1,72,14,134.20 1,73,55,233.00 1,01,96,782.00 71,58,451.00 
88 604600/50/16/10000491 Tata Elxsi Limited 1,88,64,903.00 0.00 7,54,596.00 9,43,245.15 2,05,62,744.15 2,05,62,744.00 1,58,01,302.00 47,61,442.00 
89 604600/46/16/10000736 SAP Labs India Private 
Limited 13,77,85,963.00 0.00 65,44,833.00 68,89,298.15 15,12,20,094.15 15,12,20,094.00 14,86,73,250.00 25,46,844.00 
90 604600/50/17/10000768 SAP Labs India Private 
Limited 15,83,07,993.00 0.00 75,19,630.00 79,15,399.65 17,37,43,022.65 17,37,43,023.00 16,25,73,856.00 1,11,69,167.00 
91 604600/5018/10000869 SAP India Private 
Limited 7,02,44,978.00 0.00 21,07,349.00 35,12,248.90 7,58,64,575.90 7,54,78,871.00 6,39,02,061.00 1,15,76,810.00 
92 604600/50/1710000293 Amazon Development 
Center India Private 
Limited   
17,68,82,612.00 1,32,66,196.00 79,59,718.00 88,44,130.60 20,69,52,656.60 21,86,92,290.00 15,67,34,247.00 6,19,58,043.00 
93 604600/50/18/10000318 Amazon Development 
Center India Private 
Limited   
24,56,32,576.00 1,22,81,629.00 85,97,140.00 1,22,81,628.80 27,87,92,973.80 31,23,64,581.00 23,61,69,421.00 7,61,95,160.00 
94 604600/50/16/10001939 Ashok Leyland Limited 6,19,84,163.00 30,99,208.00 34,09,129.00 30,99,208.15 7,15,91,708.15 6,75,02,847.00 5,22,34,696.00 1,52,68,151.00 
95 604600/50/17/10001942 Ashok Leyland Limited 6,69,85,109.00 33,49,255.00 23,44,479.00 33,49,255.45 7,60,28,098.45 7,60,28,098.00 6,01,64,195.00 1,58,63,903.00 
96 602000/50/17/10000344 Exide Life Insurance 
Company Limited 2,31,31,343.00 0.00 8,09,597.00 11,56,567.15 2,50,97,507.15 2,72,51,932.00 2,27,33,089.00 45,18,843.00 
97 602000/50/16/10001206 ITC Infotech India 
Limited 3,92,33,463.00 19,61,673.00 21,57,840.00 19,61,673.15 4,53,14,649.15 4,53,14,649.00 2,49,50,000.00 2,03,64,649.00 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
285 
98 602000/50/18/10001191 ITC Infotech India 
Limited 3,62,19,775.00 12,67,692.00 10,86,593.00 18,10,988.75 4,03,85,048.75 4,34,46,083.00 3,69,08,658.00 65,37,425.00 
99 602000/50/17/10001388 M/s Orient Cement 
Limited 77,48,903.00 3,87,445.00 2,71,212.00 3,87,445.15 87,95,005.15 87,95,005.00 75,00,000.00 12,95,005.00 
100 602000/50/16/10001358 M/s Star Health and 
Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 
4,67,23,204.00 23,36,160.00 25,69,776.00 23,36,160.20 5,39,65,300.20 5,09,38,876.00 3,12,84,071.00 1,96,54,805.00 
101 602000/50/16/10001201 M/s Star Health and 
Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 
2,83,47,975.00 14,17,399.00 15,59,139.00 14,17,398.75 3,27,41,911.75 3,08,92,673.00 2,70,00,000.00 38,92,673.00 
102 602000/50/17/10001221 M/s Star Health and 
Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 
3,25,83,889.00 16,29,194.00 11,40,436.00 16,29,194.45 3,69,82,713.45 3,41,41,657.00 3,10,00,000.00 31,41,657.00 
103 602000/50/17/10001414 M/s Star Health and 
Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 
4,95,64,212.00 24,78,211.00 17,34,747.00 24,78,210.60 5,62,55,380.60 4,41,88,556.00 4,27,50,000.00 14,38,556.00 
104 602000/50/18/10001190 M/s Star Health and 
Allied Insurance Co. 
Limited 
4,38,67,807.00 17,54,712.00 10,96,695.00 21,93,390.35 4,89,12,604.35 5,02,38,005.00 4,70,00,000.00 32,38,005.00 
105 602000/50/15/10001288 Infineon Technologies 
India Private Limited 61,97,418.00 4,64,806.00 3,40,858.00 3,09,870.90 73,12,952.90 74,98,304.00 66,69,382.00 8,28,922.00 
106 602100/50/15/10000614 Logix Health Solutions 
Private Limited 33,08,684.00 1,98,521.00 1,81,978.00 1,65,434.20 38,54,617.20 1,00,22,004.00 25,50,000.00 74,72,004.00 
107 602100/50/15/10001445 Hospet Steels Limited 64,73,427.00 4,11,063.00 3,56,038.00 3,23,671.35 75,64,199.35 75,36,657.00 55,00,000.00 20,36,657.00 
108 602100/50/17/10001960 TUV Rheinl and India 
Private Limited 61,59,572.00 4,61,968.00 2,15,585.00 3,07,978.60 71,45,103.60 69,66,476.00 63,00,000.00 6,66,476.00 
109 602100/50/18/10001405 Yes Bank Limited 8,58,52,735.00 42,92,637.00 40,78,005.00 42,92,636.75 9,85,16,013.75 10,20,64,815.00 8,59,84,100.00 1,60,80,715.00 
110 604600/50/16/10000309, 
312 & 368 
Amazon India Group 
31,07,00,000.00 2,33,02,500.00 1,39,81,500.00 1,55,35,000.00 36,35,19,000.00 36,35,19,000.00 25,65,00,000.00 10,70,19,000.00 
111 501800/46/148500000002 Hyundai Motors India 
Limited 7,96,45,978.00 15,00,000.00 30,00,000.00 39,82,298.90 8,81,28,276.90 8,81,28,277.00 7,05,00,000.00 1,76,28,277.00 
112 501600/46/16/8500000015 M/s Flex Technologies 
India Private Limited 8,43,57,635.00 42,17,882.00 25,30,729.00 42,17,881.75 9,53,24,127.75 9,71,62,309.00 6,41,61,646.00 3,30,00,663.00 
113 501800/50/16/10000021 Hyundai Motors India 
Limited 10,04,45,554.00 22,00,000.00 37,00,000.00 50,22,277.70 11,13,67,831.70 11,19,33,396.00 8,40,00,000.00 2,79,33,396.00 
114 501800/50/17/10000009 Hyundai Motors India 
Limited 11,18,99,577.00 25,00,000.00 37,00,000.00 55,94,978.85 12,36,94,555.85 12,23,12,087.00 10,90,00,000.00 1,33,12,087.00 
115 501800/5018/10000023 Hyundai Motors India 
Limited 11,75,45,901.00 21,74,599.00 29,38,648.00 58,77,295.05 12,85,36,443.05 12,87,40,145.00 11,70,19,516.00 1,17,20,629.00 
116 500100/50/18/10000044 SRF Limited 29,78,403.00 0.00 89,352.00 1,48,920.15 32,16,675.15 29,89,372.00 27,68,313.00 2,21,059.00 
117 500400/50/15/10001563 Caterpillar India Private 
Limited 7,44,42,904.00 89,33,148.00 29,77,716.00 37,22,145.20 9,00,75,913.20 9,00,75,913.00 8,29,39,302.00 71,36,611.00 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
286  
118 500400/50/16/10001644 Caterpillar India Private 
Limited 7,97,49,895.00 95,69,987.00 31,89,996.00 39,87,494.75 9,64,97,372.75 10,27,49,316.00 8,76,92,830.00 1,50,56,486.00 
119 501800/50/16/10000069 Hyundai Motor India 
Engineering Private 
Limited 
1,01,01,357.00 7,57,602.00 5,55,575.00 5,05,067.85 1,19,19,601.85 1,19,19,601.00 85,00,000.00 34,19,601.00 
120 500102/50/18/10000511 Randstad India Private 
Limited 4,37,75,105.00 21,88,755.00 13,13,253.00 21,88,755.25 4,94,65,868.25 4,56,49,165.00 4,45,00,000.00 11,49,165.00 
121 500401/50/17/10002877 TPF Software India (P) 
Limited 29,90,297.00 59,806.00 1,64,466.00 1,49,514.85 33,64,083.85 33,64,085.00 24,00,256.00 9,63,829.00 
122 500102/501/61/0000612 Randstad India Private 
Limited 3,78,18,842.00 18,90,942.00 11,34,565.00 18,90,942.10 4,27,35,291.10 4,51,33,524.00 3,43,75,190.00 1,07,58,334.00 
123 500102/50/17/10000533 Randstad India Private 
Limited 4,41,74,139.00 22,08,707.00 13,25,224.00 22,08,706.95 4,99,16,776.95 5,07,75,728.00 4,16,40,197.00 91,35,531.00 
124 500400/46/13/8500000248 Apollo Tyres Limited 30,88,191.00 4,63,229.00 1,46,689.00 1,54,409.55 38,52,518.55 44,38,849.00 38,32,892.00 6,05,957.00 
125 500400/50/17/10000608 Caterpillar India Private 
Limted Thiruvallur 78,09,691.00 5,85,727.00 56,239.00 3,90,484.55 88,42,141.55 80,01,341.00 73,68,000.00 6,33,341.00 
126 501800/50/17/10000122 Mobis India Limited 38,72,329.00 2,90,425.00 2,12,978.00 1,93,616.45 45,69,348.45 50,83,636.00 40,25,000.00 10,58,636.00 
127 500400/50/17/10000330 The Madras Medical 
Mission 70,35,579.00 5,27,668.00 3,86,957.00 3,51,778.95 83,01,982.95 67,24,100.00 47,82,609.00 19,41,491.00 
128 500400/50/15/10001403 Williams Lea India 
Private Limited 2,02,88,983.00 15,21,674.00 11,15,894.00 10,14,449.15 2,39,41,000.15 2,37,78,457.00 1,31,25,000.00 1,06,53,457.00 
129 500600/46/14/8500000219 Valmet Technologies 
Company Private 
Limited 
7,12,389.00 53,429.00 39,181.00 35,619.45 8,40,618.45 7,48,008.00 7,37,985.00 10,023.00 
130 350200/46/14/850000376 IILM Institute of Higher 
Education 6,42,896.00 55,272.00 40,533.00 32,144.80 7,70,845.80 7,70,845.80 7,36,965.00 33,880.80 
131 351200/46/14/8500000207 M/s Steel Authority of 
India Limited 29,81,52,196.00 0.00 60,45,719.00 1,49,07,609.80 31,91,05,524.80 31,91,05,524.80 18,60,22,120.00 13,30,83,404.80 
132 351500/50/18/10000924 M/s Cargill India 
Associates 3,29,32,119.00 4,93,982.00 13,17,285.00 16,46,605.95 3,63,89,991.95 3,63,89,991.95 3,53,85,525.00 10,04,466.95 
133 351500/46/15/8500000065 Aon Services India 
Private Limited 4,85,98,356.00 26,72,910.00 26,72,910.00 24,29,917.80 5,63,74,093.80 5,63,74,093.80 5,39,44,176.00 24,29,917.80 
134 351500/46/16/8500000047 Aon Services India 
Private Limited 3,19,45,062.00 17,56,978.00 17,56,978.00 15,97,253.10 3,70,56,271.10 3,70,56,271.10 3,51,39,568.00 19,16,703.10 
135 351500/46/15/8500000063 Aon Services India 
Private Limited 3,63,38,390.00 19,98,611.00 19,98,611.00 18,16,919.50 4,21,52,531.50 4,21,52,531.50 4,03,35,612.00 18,16,919.50 
136 351500/46/16/8500000043 Aon Services India 
Private Limited 5,33,54,939.00 29,34,521.00 29,34,522.00 26,67,746.95 6,18,91,728.95 6,18,91,728.95 5,92,23,982.00 26,67,746.95 
137 351500/46/16/8500000373 Jagruti Club Limited 2,91,85,747.00 14,59,287.00 16,05,215.00 14,59,287.35 3,37,09,536.35 3,37,09,536.35 3,22,50,251.00 14,59,285.35 
138 351500/46/15/8500000352 M/s Glaxo Smithkline 
Consumer Healthcare 
Limited 
5,98,25,328.00 39,70,708.00 29,11,852.00 29,91,266.40 6,96,99,154.40 6,96,99,154.40 5,98,25,328.00 98,73,826.40 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
287 
139 351500/46/16/8500000345 M/s Glaxo Smithkline 
Consumer Healthcare 
Limited 
7,01,26,572.00 20,75,746.00 38,56,961.00 35,06,328.60 7,95,65,607.60 7,95,65,607.60 7,60,59,280.00 35,06,327.60 
140 351500/50/18/10002924 M/s Glaxo Smithkline 
Consumer Healthcare 
Limited 
6,63,50,711.00 25,00,000.00 36,49,289.00 33,17,535.55 7,58,17,535.55 7,58,17,535.55 7,25,00,000.00 33,17,535.55 
141 351600/50/17/10000061 Global Logic India 
Private Limited 3,54,95,988.00 25,57,500.00 18,76,000.00 17,74,799.40 4,17,04,287.40 4,17,04,287.40 3,41,00,000.00 76,04,287.40 
142 351600/50/16/10000292 Tata Tele Services 
Limited, TTML, MMPL 19,13,51,815.70 0.00 80,80,000.00 95,67,590.79 20,89,99,406.49 20,89,99,406.49 14,69,00,000.00 6,20,99,406.49 
143 351600/46/15/8500000038 KPMG 5,70,64,201.84 11,76,000.00 15,68,000.00 28,53,210.09 6,26,61,411.93 6,26,61,411.93 3,92,00,000.00 2,34,61,411.93 
144 351600/50/18/10000058 Globallogic India 
Limited 4,57,71,496.36 33,80,000.00 23,40,000.00 22,88,574.82 5,37,80,071.18 5,37,80,071.18 5,20,00,000.00 17,80,071.18 
145 351600/46/14/8500000256 M/s Max Healthcare 
Institute Limited 3,51,18,147.69 15,45,000.00 11,33,000.00 17,55,907.38 3,95,52,055.07 3,95,52,055.07 2,06,00,000.00 1,89,52,055.07 
146 351600/46/14/8500000243 Jay Bhart Maruti 
Limited 69,69,531.40 4,28,000.00 3,14,000.00 3,48,476.57 80,60,007.96 80,60,007.96 57,00,000.00 23,60,007.96 
147 351600/46/15/8500000039 KPMG Advisory 
Services Private Limited 1,88,79,000.87 2,95,000.00 3,94,000.00 9,43,950.04 2,05,11,950.91 2,05,11,950.91 98,44,000.00 1,06,67,950.91 
148 351600/46/14/8500000122 Jagatjit Industries 
Limited 61,56,407.97 1,97,000.00 1,44,000.00 3,07,820.40 68,05,228.37 68,05,228.37 26,20,000.00 41,85,228.37 
149 351600/46/14/8500000300 Neel Metal Products 
Limited 81,93,956.74 3,75,000.00 2,75,000.00 4,09,697.84 92,53,654.58 92,53,654.58 50,00,000.00 42,53,654.58 
150 351600/50/16/10000323 Puma Sports India 
Private Limited 57,92,291.44 4,13,000.00 3,03,000.00 2,89,614.57 67,97,906.01 67,97,906.01 55,00,000.00 12,97,906.01 
151 351600/50/17/10000506 M/s JMC Projects India 
Limited 1,53,10,422.00 6,05,000.00 6,66,000.00 7,65,521.10 1,73,46,943.10 1,73,46,943.10 1,21,00,000.00 52,46,943.10 
152 351600/46/15/8500000039 KPMG Advisory 
Services Private Limited 1,88,79,000.87 1,16,000.00 1,55,000.00 9,43,950.04 2,00,93,950.91 2,00,93,950.91 38,77,000.00 1,62,16,950.91 
153 351600/46/15/8500000171 Aidem Ventures Private 
Limited 19,71,525.36 1,24,000.00 91,000.00 98,576.27 22,85,101.63 22,85,101.63 16,50,000.00 6,35,101.63 
154 351600/46/14/8500000128 IFS Solutions 
India Private Limited 11,09,915.53 77,000.00 57,000.00 55,495.78 12,99,411.30 12,99,411.30 10,30,000.00 2,69,411.30 
155 351600/50/16/10000557 Neel Auto Private 
Limited 8,61,608.14 56,000.00 41,000.00 43,080.41 10,01,688.55 10,01,688.55 7,40,000.00 2,61,688.55 
156 351600/46/15/8500000094 Puma Sports India 
Private Limited 47,73,133.64 2,66,000.00 1,95,000.00 2,38,656.68 54,72,790.32 54,72,790.32 35,50,000.00 19,22,790.32 
157 351700/50/17/10000037 Fidelity Information Ser. 
India Private Limited 6,39,16,063.00 20,58,000.00 22,63,800.00 31,95,803.15 7,14,33,666.15 7,14,33,666.15 4,11,60,000.00 3,02,73,666.15 
158 351700/50/17/10000765 FIS Solutions India 
Private Limited 2,76,93,723.00 14,21,580.00 15,63,738.00 13,84,686.15 3,20,63,727.15 3,20,63,727.15 2,84,31,600.00 36,32,127.15 
159 351700/50/17/10000030 FIS Global Business 
Solution India Private 
Limited 
6,11,67,280.00 31,09,225.00 34,20,148.00 30,58,364.00 7,07,55,017.00 7,07,55,017.00 6,21,84,500.00 85,70,517.00 
160 351700/50/18/10000032 Fidelity Information Ser. 
India Private Limited 6,73,14,821.00 31,32,235.00 28,19,011.00 33,65,741.05 7,66,31,808.05 7,66,31,808.05 6,26,44,690.00 1,39,87,118.05 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
288  
161 351700/46/14/8500000238 HCL Technologies 
Limited-Iomc Division 22,45,13,786.00 54,76,772.00 40,16,299.00 1,12,25,689.30 24,52,32,546.30 24,52,32,546.30 7,30,23,625.00 17,22,08,921.30 
162 351700/50/18/10000031 FIS Global Business 
Solution India Private 
Limited 
6,87,56,787.00 38,21,490.00 34,39,341.00 34,37,839.35 7,94,55,457.35 7,94,55,457.35 7,64,29,790.00 30,25,667.35 
163 351700/50/18/10000684 FIS Solutions India 
Private Limited 3,65,94,796.00 18,53,380.00 15,31,053.00 18,29,739.80 4,18,08,968.80 4,18,08,968.80 4,02,90,864.00 15,18,104.80 
164 351700/50/17/10000151 Hotel Leela Venture 
Limited 1,00,74,378.00 6,00,000.00 4,40,000.00 5,03,718.90 1,16,18,096.90 1,16,18,096.90 80,00,000.00 36,18,096.90 
165 351700/50/16/10001613 Security and 
Intelligence Services 
India Limited 
1,40,10,340.00 10,54,015.00 7,72,944.00 7,00,517.00 1,65,37,816.00 1,65,37,816.00 1,40,53,533.00 24,84,283.00 
166 351700/50/17/10000038 FIS Payment Solutions 
and Services India 
Private Limited 
1,49,59,439.00 9,26,363.00 6,79,333.00 7,47,971.95 1,73,13,106.95 1,73,13,106.95 1,23,51,500.00 49,61,606.95 
167 351700/46/15/8500000281 M/s OCL Limited 1,10,00,000.00 6,00,000.00 4,40,000.00 5,50,000.00 1,25,90,000.00 1,25,90,000.00 80,00,000.00 45,90,000.00 
168 351800/50/17/10002368 M/s Birlasoft (India) 
Limited 3,98,42,577.00 17,25,000.00 10,35,000.00 19,92,128.85 4,45,94,705.85 4,45,94,705.85 3,45,00,000.00 1,00,94,705.85 
169 351800/50/18/10001965 M/s Birlasoft (India) 
Limited 3,06,94,946.00 13,12,000.00 9,84,000.00 15,34,747.30 3,45,25,693.30 3,45,25,693.30 3,28,00,000.00 17,25,693.30 
170 351800/46/14/8500003612 M/s Tata Housing 
Development Co. 
Limited and its 
Subsidiaries 
1,77,07,550.00 4,83,750.00 3,54,750.00 8,85,377.50 1,94,31,427.50 1,94,31,427.50 64,50,000.00 1,29,81,427.50 
171 351800/50/15/10000215 Metso India Private 
Limited 1,46,39,090.00 9,80,687.00 7,19,170.00 7,31,954.50 1,70,70,901.50 1,70,70,901.50 1,30,75,824.00 39,95,077.50 
172 351800/50/16/10001000 M/s Birlasoft (India) 
Limited 3,29,00,000.00 10,80,000.00 9,72,000.00 16,45,000.00 3,65,97,000.00 3,65,97,000.00 2,16,00,000.00 1,49,97,000.00 
173 351800/46/15/8500001668 M/s Cushman  
Wakefield Property 
Management Services 
India Limited 
2,07,54,486.00 1,98,351.00 1,09,092.78 10,37,724.30 2,20,99,654.08 2,20,99,654.08 19,83,505.00 2,01,16,149.08 
174 351800/46/14/8500006593 Aarti Industries Limited 23,07,429.00 92,130.68 67,562.50 1,15,371.45 25,82,493.62 25,82,493.62 12,28,409.00 13,54,084.62 
175 351800/46/14/8500005388 M/s Mastech Staffing 
Services Private Limited 15,63,431.00 1,17,731.63 86,336.53 78,171.55 18,45,670.70 18,45,670.70 15,69,755.00 2,75,915.70 
176 351800/50/18/10000539 Ashok Kathuria 1,74,220.00 1,701.53 1,247.79 8,711.00 1,85,880.31 1,85,880.31 22,687.00 1,63,193.31 
177 351800/50/16/10002597 Minda Automotives 
Solutions Limited 10,46,402.00 51,000.00 56,100.00 52,320.10 12,05,822.10 12,05,822.10 10,20,000.00 1,85,822.10 
178 351800/50/17/10004202 Manjeet Singh 1,93,522.00 1,475.10 1,081.74 9,676.10 2,05,754.94 2,05,754.94 19,668.00 1,86,086.94 
179 351800/50/16/10000842 Amit Khosla 9,48,594.00 4,217.15 1,325.39 47,429.70 10,01,566.24 10,01,566.24 24,098.00 9,77,468.24 
180 354302/46/16/8500000057 Hilti India Private 
Limited 1,42,82,404.00 9,79,112.00 7,18,016.00 7,14,120.20 1,66,93,652.20 1,66,93,652.20 1,23,50,000.00 43,43,652.20 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
289 
181 354501/46/15/8500000067 Eyme Technologies 
Private Limited 1,61,78,398.00 27,46,066.13 20,13,781.83 8,08,919.90 2,17,47,165.86 2,17,47,165.86 49,47,202.00 1,67,99,963.86 
182 354501/46/15/8500000186 Altisource Business 
Solutions Private 
Limited 
6,32,49,628.00 34,66,387.50 25,42,017.50 31,62,481.40 7,24,20,514.40 7,24,20,514.40 3,01,40,858.00 4,22,79,656.40 
183 354501/46/15/8500000234 Ernst & Young LLP 9,78,70,331.00 4,80,000.00 3,52,000.00 48,93,516.55 10,35,95,847.55 10,35,95,847.55 7,44,01,710.00 2,91,94,137.55 
184 354501/46/16/8500000159 Altisource Business 
Solutions Private 
Limited 
6,16,46,989.00 3,75,000.00 2,75,000.00 30,82,349.45 6,53,79,338.45 6,53,79,338.45 4,86,62,250.00 1,67,17,088.45 
185 354501/50/17/10001309 Altisource Business 
Solutions Private 
Limited 
5,65,87,627.00 1,65,000.00 1,21,000.00 28,29,381.35 5,97,03,008.35 5,97,03,008.35 3,66,94,550.00 2,30,08,458.35 
186 354501/46/16/8500000097 M/s GI Staffing 
Services Private Limited 4,59,459.00 2,03,752.35 1,49,418.39 22,972.95 8,35,602.69 8,35,602.69 4,60,000.00 3,75,602.69 
187 354501/50/17/10000114 B L Kapur Memorial 
Hospital  79,64,198.00 2,56,164.08 1,87,853.66 3,98,209.90 88,06,425.63 88,06,425.63 80,10,000.00 7,96,425.63 
188 354501/46/16/8500000084 Motilal Oswal Financial 
Services Limited and 
Subsidiaries Companies 
63,41,231.00 33,750.00 24,750.00 3,17,061.55 67,16,792.55 67,16,792.55 50,00,000.00 17,16,792.55 
189 354501/50/16/10000299 Ernst & Young LLP 13,25,34,271.00 1,42,500.00 1,04,500.00 66,26,713.55 13,94,07,984.55 13,94,07,984.55 5,06,42,578.00 8,87,65,406.55 
190 354800/46/15/8500000041 Fortis Healthcare 
Limited 16,29,78,327.00 64,06,556.00 46,98,141.20 81,48,916.35 18,22,31,940.55 18,22,31,940.55 8,54,20,749.00 9,68,11,191.55 
191 354800/46/16/8500000037 Fortis Healthcare 
Limited 16,33,80,938.00 33,46,365.00 24,54,001.00 81,69,046.90 17,73,50,350.90 17,73,50,350.90 4,46,18,200.00 13,27,32,150.90 
192 354800/46/14/8500000122 M/s Fortis Healthcare 
Limited 5,03,12,368.00 31,20,115.00 22,88,084.00 25,15,618.40 5,82,36,185.40 5,82,36,185.40 4,16,01,528.00 1,66,34,657.40 
193 354800/50/18/10000239 Fortis Healthcare 
Limited 10,87,38,267.00 14,75,624.00 19,67,498.00 54,36,913.35 11,76,18,302.35 11,76,18,302.35 4,91,87,462.00 6,84,30,840.35 
194 354800/46/14/8500000094 Indorama Synthetics 
India Limited 87,40,876.00 2,09,506.00 1,53,638.00 4,37,043.80 95,41,063.80 95,41,063.80 27,93,417.00 67,47,646.80 
195 354800/46/14/8500000065 Religare Health 
Insurance Company 
Limited 
1,47,89,868.00 4,86,207.00 5,34,828.00 7,39,493.40 1,65,50,396.40 1,65,50,396.40 97,24,141.00 68,26,255.40 
196 354800/46/14/8500000090 Omaxe Limited 1,69,54,832.00 3,72,932.00 4,10,225.00 8,47,741.60 1,85,85,730.60 1,85,85,730.60 74,58,640.00 1,11,27,090.60 
197 354800/46/15/8500000083 Indorama Synthetics 
India Limited 85,39,485.00 1,32,331.00 97,043.00 4,26,974.25 91,95,833.25 91,95,833.25 17,64,418.00 74,31,415.25 
198 354800/46/14/8500000064 Reycor India Services 21,200.00 843.00 618.00 1,060.00 23,721.00 23,721.00 11,242.00 12,479.00 
199 355000/46/14/8500000286 Wipro Limited 6,90,00,000.00 0.00 0.00 34,50,000.00 7,24,50,000.00 7,24,50,000.00 5,06,50,222.00 2,17,99,778.00 
200 355000/46/15/8500000173 LG Electronics India 
Limited 6,51,00,000.00 48,00,000.00 32,00,000.00 32,55,000.00 7,63,55,000.00 7,63,55,000.00 6,60,00,000.00 1,03,55,000.00 
201 355000/46/15/8500000098 Genpact India 16,00,00,000.00 1,60,00,000.00 88,00,000.00 80,00,000.00 19,28,00,000.00 19,28,00,000.00 16,36,00,000.00 2,92,00,000.00 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
290  
202 355000/46/17/8500000053 Genpact India Private 
Limited 18,48,71,366.00 1,38,65,352.00 1,01,67,925.00 92,43,568.30 21,81,48,211.30 21,81,48,211.30 20,82,58,564.00 98,89,647.30 
203 354801/46/14/8500000040 Stmicroelectronics 
Private Limited 3,74,00,000.00 28,00,000.00 20,00,000.00 18,70,000.00 4,40,70,000.00 4,40,70,000.00 2,57,08,824.00 1,83,61,176.00 
204 355000/50/18/10000033 Group C Honda Cars 
India Limited 2,36,00,000.00 9,44,000.00 37,760.00 11,80,000.00 2,57,61,760.00 2,57,61,760.00 1,09,47,434.00 1,48,14,326.00 
205 251100/46/14/850000171 M/s Essar Group of 
Companies  8,14,04,680.00 56,16,923.00 37,44,615.00 40,70,234.00 9,48,36,452.00 9,48,36,452.00 5,99,24,604.00 3,49,11,848.00 
206 251100/46/14/8500000605 IL&FS 6,40,80,501.00 14,73,852.00 12,17,530.00 32,04,025.05 6,99,75,908.05 7,89,01,063.86 6,57,67,546.00 1,31,33,517.86 
207 251100/46/15/850000132 M/s Essar Group of 
Companies 9,52,16,022.00 49,07,970.00 32,71,980.00 47,60,801.10 10,81,56,773.10 10,81,56,773.10 7,36,19,553.00 3,45,37,220.10 
208 251100/46/15/8500000548 IL&FS  9,26,40,291.00 13,83,365.00 11,66,366.00 46,32,014.55 9,98,22,036.55 10,77,14,897.85 9,54,58,154.00 1,22,56,743.85 
209 251100/46/16/850000094 M/s Essar Group of 
Companies 8,16,13,496.00 49,97,484.00 33,31,656.00 40,80,674.80 9,40,23,310.80 9,29,18,907.86 6,71,02,656.00 2,58,16,251.86 
210 251100/46/16/8500000081 ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Co. Limited  9,84,94,002.00 38,56,818.00 19,28,409.00 49,24,700.10 10,92,03,929.10 10,92,03,929.10 8,15,00,000.00 2,77,03,929.10 
211 251100/46/16/8500000650 ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Co. Limited 11,86,51,348.00 40,91,426.00 1,02,28,564.00 59,32,567.40 13,89,03,905.40 13,89,03,905.40 9,75,00,000.00 4,14,03,905.40 
212 251100/46/16/8500000380 Dr. Reddy Laboratories  20,71,32,203.00 0.00 62,00,000.00 1,03,56,610.15 22,36,88,813.15 22,36,88,813.15 13,00,00,000.00 9,36,88,813.15 
213 251100/46/16/8500000636 JDA Software Limited  3,31,45,697.00 8,11,197.00 14,60,155.00 16,57,284.85 3,70,74,333.85 3,70,74,333.85 3,02,30,555.00 68,43,778.85 
214 251100/46/17/850000059 M/s Essar Group of 
Companies  7,65,43,431.00 47,76,914.00 31,84,609.00 38,27,171.55 8,83,32,125.55 8,04,67,642.15 6,82,83,028.00 1,21,84,614.15 
215 251100/46/17/8500000201 IL&FS 9,01,77,489.00 15,00,738.00 15,89,017.00 45,08,874.45 9,77,76,118.45 10,15,86,578.26 8,80,85,870.00 1,35,00,708.26 
216 251100/46/17/8500000278 Dr. Reddy Laboratories  19,46,67,015.00 0.00 77,86,681.00 97,33,350.75 21,21,87,046.75 21,97,43,334.60 21,17,76,823.00 79,66,511.60 
217 251100/50/17/10000002 & 
3 
JDA Software Limited 3,64,85,186.00 14,28,683.00 14,28,683.00 18,24,259.30 4,11,66,811.30 6,07,06,937.81 4,09,14,407.00 1,97,92,530.81 
218 251100/50/18/10000094 Dr. Reddy Laboratories  24,82,34,953.00 0.00 50,66,019.00 1,24,11,747.65 26,57,12,719.65 25,61,48,489.09 25,30,00,000.00 31,48,489.09 
219 251100/50/18/10000077 M/s Intelenet Global 
Services Private 
Limited, offshore  
3,80,98,477.00 0.00 20,95,416.00 19,04,923.85 4,20,98,816.85 4,61,65,668.14 3,91,06,600.00 70,59,068.14 
220 251100/50/18/10000076 M/s Intelenet Global 
Services Private 
Limited, Onshore 
2,77,75,551.00 0.00 15,27,655.00 13,88,777.55 3,06,91,983.55 3,41,32,663.44 3,12,57,200.00 28,75,463.44 
221 251100/50/18/10000078 M/s Intelenet Business 
Services Limited  56,20,715.00 0.00 3,09,139.00 2,81,035.75 62,10,889.75 62,10,889.75 39,75,400.00 22,35,489.75 
222 260200/50/16/10000321 & 
322 
M/s Macleod 
Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
9,35,41,556.63 0.00 0.00 46,77,077.83 9,82,18,634.46 9,82,18,634.46 3,44,00,000.00 6,38,18,634.46 
223 260200/50/17/10000283 & 
284 
M/s Macleod 
Pharmaceuticals 
Limited 
10,06,85,928.72 0.00 0.00 50,34,296.44 10,57,20,225.16 10,57,20,225.16 8,16,00,000.00 2,41,20,225.16 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
291 
224 260200/50/15/10000065, 
192, 203 & 205  
M/s Schindler India 
Private. Limited 2,61,19,120.93 0.00 0.00 13,05,956.05 2,74,25,076.98 2,74,25,076.98 1,66,90,472.00 1,07,34,604.98 
225 260200/50/16/10000969, 
970, 1015 & 1081  
M/s Schindler India 
Private Limited 3,31,71,661.70 0.00 0.00 16,58,583.08 3,48,30,244.78 3,48,30,244.78 2,80,65,381.00 67,64,863.78 
226  260200/50/17/10000811, 
812, 813 & 814 
M/s Schindler India 
Private Limited 3,56,41,626.00 11,94,691.00 29,86,728.00 17,82,081.30 4,16,05,126.30 4,16,05,126.30 3,50,00,000.00 66,05,126.30 
227 260100/50/16/10000064 M/s Sanofi India 
Limited 4,41,01,637.10 0.00 0.00 22,05,081.85 4,63,06,718.95 4,63,06,718.95 3,52,06,540.00 1,11,00,178.95 
228 260100/50/17/10000112 M/s Sanofi India 
Limited 4,53,82,901.32 0.00 0.00 22,69,145.07 4,76,52,046.38 4,76,52,046.38 27,52,400.00 4,48,99,646.38 
229 260100/50/18/10000093 M/s Sanofi India 
Limited 2,90,36,725.53 0.00 0.00 14,51,836.28 3,04,88,561.81 3,04,88,561.81 2,83,64,132.00 21,24,429.81 
230  260501/46/16/8500000004 M/s Toyo Engineering 
(India) Private. Limited 4,09,91,253.64 0.00 11,10,000.00 20,49,562.68 4,41,50,816.33 4,25,18,079.26 3,90,00,000.00 35,18,079.26 
231 260501/46/17/850000016 M/s Toyo Engineering 
(India) Private Limited 3,88,20,183.35 0.00 18,42,528.00 19,41,009.17 4,26,03,720.52 4,01,02,746.68 3,80,00,000.00 21,02,746.68 
232 260501/46/18/850000031 M/s Toyo Engineering 
(India) Private. Limited 3,77,47,787.44 0.00 18,38,405.00 18,87,389.37 4,14,73,581.81 3,89,35,656.56 3,70,00,000.00 19,35,656.56 
233 260501/46/15/8500000169 M/s Mandke Foundation 3,01,09,253.80 0.00 0.00 15,05,462.69 3,16,14,716.49 3,16,14,716.49 1,51,59,889.00 1,64,54,827.49 
234 260501/50/16/10000515 M/s Mandke Foundation 2,64,20,795.12 7,64,521.00 7,64,521.00 13,21,039.76 2,92,70,876.88 2,67,86,049.01 2,17,12,977.00 50,73,072.01 
235 260201/50/16/10001511 M/s Indoco Remedies 
Limited 1,03,88,379.62 0.00 0.00 5,19,418.98 1,09,07,798.60 1,09,07,798.60 86,00,000.00 23,07,798.60 
236 260201/50/17/10001750 M/s Indoco Remedies 
Limited 1,07,68,826.25 3,02,208.00 5,03,681.00 5,38,441.31 1,21,13,156.56 1,16,11,748.93 1,08,79,500.00 7,32,248.93 
237 260201/50/1610002573 M/s Transocean Group 
of Companies 99,76,848.99 0.00 4,79,151.00 7,18,727.00 1,11,74,726.99 1,43,98,976.17 95,14,795.00 48,84,181.17 
238 260201/50/17/10002856 M/s Transocean Group 
of Companies 99,76,848.99 0.00 0.00 4,98,842.45 1,04,75,691.44 1,34,98,247.57 95,00,000.00 39,98,247.57 
Total Short charging of premium               3,72,26,89,863.58 
        or say  `` ``372.27 
crore  
# (Total Premium /No. of Lives covered in expiring policy) X No. of Lives to be covered at the time of renewal 
  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
292  
Annexure-XII 
(Referred to in para 5.4.3.2(v)) 
Statement Showing Avoidable Discount in respect of Group Mediclaim Policies of NICL during the from period 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Sl. No. Policy No. Name of the Insured Discount to be Allowed Discount Actually Allowed Avoidable Discount 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) = (v) - (iv) 
1 100600/46/15/8500000254 Bandhan Bank Limited 66,09,827.10  1,54,22,929.90  88,13,102.80  
2 104400/50/17/10001570 Howden Insurance Brokers 
India Private Limited 
0.00  4,23,122.17  4,23,122.17  
3 104400/50/17/10001571 0.00  1,42,548.23  1,42,548.23  
4 100100/50/17/10000368 India Medtronic Private Limited 0.00  15,37,822.00  15,37,822.00  
5 100600/50/17/10002963 Aconex India Private Limited 0.00  3,81,796.87  3,81,796.87  
6 355100/50/18/10000075  M/s Hero Motor Corp Limited  0.00  36,64,438.00  36,64,438.00  
7 154400/50/17/10000168 Cadence Design System 0.00  23,76,305.00  23,76,305.00  
8 154400/50/17/10000169 0.00  14,86,320.00  14,86,320.00  
9 154400/50/17/10000170 0.00  2,25,884.00  2,25,884.00  
10 361200/46/14/850000013  M/s OP Jindal Institute of 
Cancer and Research  0.00  50,304.00  50,304.00  
11 361300/46/14/8500000259  M/s Xavient Software Solutions 
India Private. Limited 0.00  5,92,000.00  5,92,000.00  
12 361500/50/17/10003917 M/s CBRE South Asia Private 
Limited 0.00  24,00,000.00 24,00,000.00  
13 251100/46/15/850000132 M/s Essar Group of Companies 0.00  2,10,06,522.00  2,10,06,522.00  
14 251100/46/16/850000094 0.00  1,17,58,787.00  1,17,58,787.00  
15 251100/46/16/8500000081 ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Co. Limited 0.00  2,12,12,498.00  2,12,12,498.00  
Total Avoidable Discount  66,09,827.10  826,81,277.17  7,60,71,450.07  
   or say `` ``7.61 crore 
 
 
   

Report No. 18 of 2020  
293 
 
Annexure-XIII 
(Referred to in para 5.4.3.2(v)) 
Statement Showing Loss of Premium due to non-reconciliation of data submitted by TPA in respect of Group Mediclaim Policies of  
NICL during the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19  
 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Sl. No. Policy No. Name of the Insured Actual Claims 
Paid and 
Outstanding of 
Expiring 
Policy 
Claims 
including 
IBNR 
considered at 
the time of 
Renewal 
Difference of claim 
not considered for 
the computation of 
premium 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) = (iv) - (v) 
1 101101/50/17/10003595 RKM Provident Fund 2,05,52,506.00 1,79,38,478.00 26,14,028.00 
2 100600/50/17/10013588 Jadavpur University 1,76,44,637.00 1,65,97,478.00 10,47,159.00 
3 100600/50/17/10013587 2,59,37,516.00 2,46,26,179.00 13,11,337.00 
4 100600/50/18/10012705 1,81,78,206.00 1,69,98,650.00 11,79,556.00 
5 100600/50/18/10012702 2,53,49,281.00 2,23,29,215.00 30,20,066.00 
6 100700/46/14/8500000077 Director General and Inspector General of 
Police West Bengal 
24,19,51,212.00  19,80,43,384.87  4,39,07,827.13 
7 100700/46/15/8500000072 32,73,45,885.00  28,19,23,344.71  4,54,22,540.29 
8 100700/50/16/10003874 44,58,30,429.00  34,29,34,742.76  10,28,95,686.24 
9 100700/50/17/10006715 41,92,53,726.00  40,57,60,994.00  1,34,92,732.00 
10 100700/50/16/10005015 Director General and Inspector General of 
Police (Police Sahayak) 2,27,25,023.00 1,80,83,643.00 46,41,380.00 
Total 1564768421.00 1345236109.34 21,95,32,311.66 
   Or say `` ``21.95 crore  
  

Report No. 18 of 2020 
294  
 Annexure-XIV 
(Referred to in para 5.4.3.2(vi)) 
Statement Showing Avoidable Payment of Commission under Group Mediclaim Policy for the period from 01 April 2017 to  
31 March 2019 
 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Sl. No. Policy No. & Year Name of the Insured Avoidable 
Commission Paid 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) 
1 103000/50/17/10004257 (2017-18) Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority 12,35,360.70  
2 103000/50/18/10003975 (2018-19) 6,31,731.17  
3 100300/50/17/10003340 (2017-18) West Bengal State Seed Corporation Limited 1,34,717.10  
4 100300/50/19/10000972 (2018-19) 82,258.33  
5 100300/50/17/10018034 (2017-18) Haldia Development Authority 33,210.56  
6 100300/50/19/10003529 (2018-19) 66,501.90  
7 104400/50/17/10003019 (2017-18) Indian Institute of Engineering Science & Technology 1,51,875.00  
8 104400/50/18/10003055 (2018-19) 1,36,652.55  
9 100300/50/17/10007165 (2017-18) Indian Institute of Science Education & Research 1,03,499.93  
10 100300/50/18/10009931 (2018-19) 1,12,347.38  
Total Avoidable Commission Paid 26,88,154.61  
 or say  `` ``0.27 crore  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
295 
 Annexure-XV 
(Referred to in para 5.4.3.2(vi)) 
Statement Showing Excess Payment of Commission / Remuneration under Group Mediclaim Policy for the period from 01 April 2014 to  
31 March 2019 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Sl. 
No. 
Policy No. & Year Name of the Insured Commission / 
Remuneration 
Approved by the 
Competent 
Authority 
Commission / 
Remuneration 
Actually Paid 
Excess 
Payment 
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi)=(v)-(iv) 
1 104400/50/18/10009370 (2018-19) M/s Khadim India Limited 6,18,054.40 9,27,081.60 3,09,027.20 
2 101800/50/17/10003536 (2017-18) M/s SV Social Welfare Association 37,769.22 62,948.70 25,179.48 
3 100900/50/17/10013697 (2017-18) M/s Maheshtala Municipality 56,546.45 84,819.68 28,273.23 
4 100900/50/17/10014217 (2017-18) Diamond Beverages Private  
Limited 1,09,823.65 3,29,470.95 2,19,647.30 
5 603900/50/15/10000996 (2015-16) GS Engineering Construction Delhi Private 
Limited (DO-04) 9,70,088.00 16,16,812.00 6,46,724.00 
6 604600/50/15/10000213 (2015-16) Manhattan Associates India Dev. Centre Private  
Limited 0.00 14,25,046.00 14,25,046.00 
7 351800/46/14/5000005371 (2014-15) Ciena India 21,04,789.00 49,11,175.00 28,06,386.00 
8 351800/50/16/100005590 (2016-17) 28,58,422.00 66,69,651.00 38,11,229.00 
9 355000/46/15/8500000098 (2015-16) Genpact India Private Limited 1,20,00,000.00 1,60,00,000.00 40,00,000.00 
10 355000/46/16/8500000070 (2016-17) 1,24,24,943.00 1,65,66,591.00 41,41,648.00 
11 355000/46/16/850000026 and 
355000/46/16/8500000261 (2016-17) 
Dell International 
1,41,02,393.00 1,78,63,032.00 37,60,639.00 
12 500400/50/15/10000444 (2015-16) Saint Gobain India Private Limited 4,68,197.00 10,92,459.00 6,24,262.00 
13 500400/50/16/10000422 (2016-17) 13,88,925.00 32,40,826.00 18,51,901.00 
14 361300/50/18/10001584 (2018-19) Genesis Colors Limited 79,900.24 1,49,812.95 69,912.71 
Total 47219850.96 70939725.88 2,37,19,874.92  
Or say  
 `` ``2.37     crore     

Report No. 18 of 2020 
296  
 Annexure-XVI 
(Referred to in Para 5.9) 
Statement showing calculation of ICR  
Sl. No. Insured Policy No. Incurred Claim 
Ratio (ICR) in 
per cent   
Previous year claim 
(Figure in `` ``) 
Previous year Premium  
(Figure in `` ``) 
 Delhi Regional Office (DRO)-I   
 Year-2016-17   
1 DSIDS 0405002816P1056563473 127 22986249 18107064 
2 Sunlife India Service Centre Pvt. Ltd. 0406002816P108510822 115 13100000 11400000 
3 Pearson India Edu Service Pvt. Ltd. 0407002816P116603496 123 16407901 13319484 
4 Jaquar & Company 0408002816P111490902 161 30904055 19135699 
5 OTIS Elevator (Two Policies) 0411002816P104241423 276 61800000 22403781 
6 Videocon Inds 412022816P102822921 152 19200000 12672062 
7 Philips 426002816P100143739 127 29120870 23000000 
8 BECHTEL 426002816P105595399 102 15623486 15324847 
9 Omega Health Care Management 426002816P110864299 129 9624507 7468466 
10 Compass India Support 042301286P105540076 135 14977785 11098636 
 Year-2017-18   
11 GKN Driveline ( India) Ltd. 0406002817P112179436 114 14584926 12800000 
12 The Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of India 
0406022817P103274737 134 6677469 4989825 
13 Dr. Lal Path Labs Pvt. Ltd. 0407002817P107818684 227 23943649 10546777 
14 Pearson India Education Services  
Pvt. Ltd. 
0407002817P118897052 143 17106856 12000000 
15 Steel Authority of India 0411002817P103305667 133 1251600000 943399810 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
297 
16 Otis Elevator Company (India) Ltd. 0411002817P104956212 116 47000000 40367484 
17 Videocon Industries Ltd. 0412022817P104012253 172 25816000 15050000 
18 Clues Network Pvt. Ltd. 0412022817P109998919 129 4908000 3800000 
19 Gujarat Fluorochemicals Ltd. (Dahej 
Complex) 
0413002817P104936313 115 8000000 6932643 
20 Compass India Support Services Pvt. 
Ltd. 
0423012817P106227727 120 14221038 11899942 
21 Home Credit India Finance Pvt. Ltd. 0426002817P104545081 180 11101502 6163802 
22 Bechtel India Pvt. Ltd. 0426002817P105858492 & 
0426002817P106075761 
104 22042320 21240166 
23 Philips Lighting India Ltd. 0426002817P101353611 137 30149068 22000000 
24 Proptiger Realty Pvt. Ltd. 0426002817P110868273 195 17973416 9219515 
 Year-2018-19   
25 Pyramid IT Consulting Pvt. Ltd. 0407032818P110823574 164 6221618 4000000 
26 Steel Authority of India 0411002818P102461147 121 1603249252 1321393646 
27 Apcer Pharma India 0425002818P109799691 121 4793169 3945285 
 Delhi Regional Office (DRO)-II  
 Year-2016-17  
28 Pine Labs Pvt. Ltd. 2214002816P101660101 185 7198000 3900000 
29 Everest Industries Ltd. 2220042816P109236923 114 5613000 4931000 
30 Max Life Insurance Company Ltd. 2222002816P112742412 & 
2222002816P112866598 
124 (35400000+29100000) = 
64500000 
(34200000+17800000) = 
52000000 
31 Verint System India Pvt. Ltd. 2222002816P108363624 265 7034000 2656000 
32 Munjal Showa Ltd. 2218002816P110202938 110 8263882 7500000 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
298  
 Year-2017-18 
33 Jade E-services Pvt. Ltd. 2210002817P103590654 118 6428542 5449067 
34 CEB India Pvt. Ltd. 2218002817P103488165 149 10742167 7198000 
35 Airplaza Retail Holdings Pvt. Ltd. 2219032817P104118695 160 12200000 7623000 
36 Vishal Megamart Pvt. Ltd. 2219032817P103559984 101 6086000 6050000 
37 IMT Ghaziabad 2220002817P104958231 122 5000000 4100000 
38 R Systems International Ltd. 2229002817P107551085 128 19845000 15447000 
39 Everest Industries Ltd. 2229002817P112161753 106 6003000 5678000 
 Year-2018-19   
40 M/s Saxo Group India Pvt. Ltd. 2220002818P109983923 120 9515089 7952508 
41 M/s Sentiss Pharma Pvt. Ltd. 2222002818P109499654 124 6141105 4950000 
42 M/s R Systems International Ltd. 2229002818P106549230 103 22200000 21500000 
 Large Corporate Branch Office (LCBO)   
 Year-2016-17   
43 Aviva Life Group 5003002816P101374250 
(total 2 policies) 
127 25300000 20000000 
44 Here Solutions India Pvt. 5003002816P103401691 129 32300000 25000000 
45 M/s Adobe Systems 5003002816P116395317 141 16683095 11798529 
46 M/s ABP News 5003002816P105741935 125 26200000 21000000 
47 M/s Luminous Power Ltd. 5003002816P117771664 124 14674629 11813762 
48 M/s Ramboll India Pvt Ltd. 5003002816P116162647 115 11600000 10100000 
49 Schneider Group Total 14 Policies 100 182500000 181700000 
50 M/s Konica Minolta Pvt. Ltd. 5003002816P110641364 
(total 2 policies) 
110 8325000 7600000 
51 M/s Denso India Pvt. Ltd. 5003002816P100545750 121 5256156 4354426 
52 Nokia Group Total 03 Policies 124 244100000 197300000 
53 M/s Class Agriculture 5003002816P105543112 (2 
Policies) 
167 11700000 7000000 
54 Sebic Group Total 03 Policies 128 15052901 11797834 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
299 
55 Marathon Electric India Ltd. 5003002816P106141987 125 9700000 7731000 
56 Yamaha Group (6 policies) 187 57198300 30506473 
 Year-2017-18  
57 Sebic Group Total 03 Policies 143 19964117 13988836 
58 M/s Shaweta Estates Total 03 Policies 112 5075000 4546273 
 Year-2018-19  
59 Schneider Group Total 13 Policies 118 216227926 183619027 
60 M/s Konica Minolta Pvt. Ltd. 5003002818P109818239 
(total 2 policies) 
126 11674547 9287075 
61 Marathan Group Total 11 Policies 101 21995084 21826844 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
300  
Annexure-XVII 
(Referred to in Para 5.9) 
Statement Showing short charging of premium in respect of Standalone Group Mediclaim Policies (GMPs) of the UIICL  for the period  
from 2016-17 to 2018-19  
Sr.  
No. 
Insured  Policy No. Incurred 
Claim 
Ratio 
(ICR) in 
Previous 
year (in 
per cent )  
Annualized 
Claim outgo 
adjusted with 
Proposed  No. 
of Lives  
Brokerage  TPA 
Charges 
Medical 
Inflation 
(MI) @ 
average 
monthly 
prevailing 
MI rate as  
declared 
by MOSPI 
Sum of (E) 
to (H)  
Minimum 
premium to 
be charged 
to maintain 
CR @95 %  
Premium 
Actually 
Charged  
Short 
Charging of 
Premium  
(A)  (B) (C)  (D) (E) (F) (G) (H) (I)  (J) (K)  (L) 
  Delhi Regional 
Office (Dro)-I 
                    
  Year-2016-17                     
1 Dsids 0405002816P1056563473 127 2,30,00,000 9,20,000 12,65,000 10,51,100 2,58,43,080 2,72,03,242 2,06,34,505 65,68,737 
2 Sunlife India 
Service Centre 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0406002816P108510822 115 1,44,00,000 14,40,000 7,92,000 6,58,080 1,73,43,048 1,82,55,840 1,29,11,739 53,44,101 
3 Pearson India 
Edu Service 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0407002816P116603496 123 1,55,59,031 11,66,927 8,55,747 7,11,048 1,86,88,417 1,96,72,018 1,69,38,990 27,33,028 
4 Jaquar & 
Company  
0408002816P111490902 161 2,42,16,887 18,76,809 13,31,929 11,06,712 3,02,49,885 3,18,41,984 2,57,99,951 60,42,033 
5 Otis Elevator 
(Two Policies)  
0411002816P104241423 276 6,18,00,000 37,08,000 33,99,000 28,24,260 6,97,84,440 7,34,57,305 3,95,00,000 3,39,57,305 
6 Videocon Inds 412022816P102822921 152 1,92,00,000 9,60,000 10,56,000 8,77,440 2,25,46,824 2,37,33,499 1,50,50,001 86,83,498 
7 Philips  426002816P100143739 127 2,91,20,870 14,56,044 16,01,648 13,30,824 3,28,92,555 3,46,23,742 2,20,00,000 1,26,23,742 
8 Bechtel 426002816P105595399 102 1,56,23,486 11,71,761 8,59,292 7,13,993 1,81,26,720 1,90,80,758 1,36,93,806 53,86,952 
9 Omega Health 
Care 
Management  
426002816P110864299 129 1,03,32,191 4,13,288 5,68,271 4,72,181 1,20,07,588 1,26,39,567 95,00,000 31,39,567 
10  Compass India 
Support  
042301286P105540076 135 1,51,82,478 11,38,686 8,35,036 6,93,839 1,71,56,200 1,80,59,158 53,69,208 1,26,89,950 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
301 
  Year-2017-18                     
11  GKN Driveline  
(India) Limited 
0406002817P112179436 114 1,41,29,147 1,41,291 5,65,166 6,17,444 1,54,53,048 1,62,66,366 1,56,00,000 6,66,366 
12  The Institute of 
Chartered 
Accountants of 
India 
0406022817P103274737 134 65,17,079 0 3,58,439 2,84,796 71,60,315 75,37,173 61,57,412 13,79,761 
13  Dr. Lal Path 
Labs Pvt. Ltd. 
0407002817P107818684 227 2,04,08,290 15,30,622 11,22,456 8,91,842 2,39,53,210 2,52,13,905 2,48,69,000 3,44,905 
14  Pearson India 
Education 
Services Private 
Limited 
0407002817P118897052 143 1,71,06,856 12,83,014 9,40,877 7,47,570 2,00,78,317 2,11,35,070 1,62,30,301 49,04,769 
15  Steel Authority 
of India 
0411002817P103305667 133 1,25,16,00,000 0 4,38,06,000 5,46,94,920 1,35,01,00,920 1,42,11,58,863 1,26,50,00,000 15,61,58,863 
16  Otis Elevator 
Company 
(India) Limited 
0411002817P104956212 116 4,70,00,000 35,25,000 25,85,000 20,53,900 5,51,63,900 5,80,67,263 4,90,00,000 90,67,263 
17  Videocon 
Industries Ltd. 
0412022817P104012253 172 1,66,59,000 6,66,360 9,16,245 7,27,998 1,89,69,603 1,99,68,003 1,54,50,000 45,18,003 
18  Clues Network 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0412022817P109998919 129 47,09,000 94,180 2,58,995 2,05,783 52,67,958 55,45,219 51,00,000 4,45,219 
19  Gujarat 
Fluorochemicals 
Ltd. (Dahej 
Complex) 
0413002817P104936313 115 80,00,000 6,00,000 4,40,000 3,49,600 93,89,600 98,83,789 7,702,524 21,81,265 
20  Compass India 
Support Services 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0423012817P106227727 120 1,42,21,038 10,66,578 7,82,157 6,21,459 1,66,91,232 1,75,69,718 1,39,27,029 36,42,689 
21  Home Credit 
India Finance 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0426002817P104545081 180 1,11,01,502 8,32,613 6,10,583 4,85,136 1,30,29,833 1,37,15,614 79,51,823 57,63,791 
22  Bechtel India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0426002817P105858492 
& 
0426002817P106075761 
104 2,20,42,320 11,02,116 12,12,328 9,63,249 2,53,20,013 2,66,52,645 2,19,99,909 46,52,736 
23  Philips Lighting 
India Limited 
0426002817P101353611 137 2,98,78,942 22,40,921 16,43,342 13,05,710 35,068,914 3,69,14,647 2,65,43,585 1,03,71,062 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
302  
24  Proptiger Realty 
Pvt. Ltd. 
0426002817P110868273 195 1,79,73,416 8,98,671 9,88,538 7,85,438 2,06,46,063 2,17,32,698 1,68,00,000 49,32,698 
  Year-2018-19                     
25  Pyramid It 
Consulting Pvt. 
Ltd. 
0407032818P110823574 156 58,04,878 4,35,366 3,19,268 4,14,468 69,73,980 73,41,032 71,30,004 2,11,028 
26  Steel Authority 
of India 
0411002818P102461147 121 1,60,32,49,252 0 5,61,13,724 11,44,71,997 1,77,38,34,972 1,86,71,94,708 1,31,09,18,592 55,62,76,116 
27  Apcer Pharma 
India 
0425002818P109799691 121 47,93,169 0 1,91,727 3,42,232 53,27,128 56,07,503 54,21,128 1,86,375 
  Delhi Regional 
Office (Dro)-II 
                   
  Year-2016-17                     
28  Pine Labs Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2214002816P101660101 185 77,27,000 3,86,350 4,24,985 3,53,124 88,91,459 93,59,430 50,00,000 43,59,430 
29  Everest Industries 
Limited  
2220042816P109236923 114 56,13,000 2,80,650 3,08,715 2,56,514 64,58,879 67,98,820 54,90,000 13,08,820 
30  Max Life 
Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
2222002816P112742412 
& 
2222002816P112866598 
124 6,45,00,000 41,92,500 35,47,500 29,47,650 7,51,87,650 7,91,44,895 6,89,62,774 1,01,82,121 
31  Verint System 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
2222002816P108363624 265 72,24,000 72,240 3,97,320 3,30,137 80,23,697 84,45,997 60,00,000 24,45,997 
32  Munjal Showa 
Ltd. 
2218002816P110202938 110 82,63,000 4,13,150 4,54,465 3,77,619 95,08,234 1,00,08,667 93,00,000 7,08,667 
  Year-2017-18                     
33  Jade E-Services 
Pvt. Ltd. 
2210002817P103590654 118 76,00,000 2,28,000 4,18,000 3,32,120 85,78,120 90,29,600 72,08,226 18,21,374 
34  CEB India Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2218002817P103488165 149 1,07,42,167 80,56,62.525 5,90,819 4,69,433 1,26,08,081 1,32,71,665 96,40,431 36,31,234 
35  Airplaza Retail 
Holdings Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2219032817P104118695 160 1,22,00,000 9,15,000 6,71,000 5,33,140 1,43,19,140 1,50,72,779 1,14,99,999 35,72,780 
36  Vishal 
Megamart Pvt. 
Ltd. 
2219032817P103559984  101 60,86,000 4,56,450 3,34,730 2,65,958 71,43,138 75,19,093 58,00,000 17,19,093 
37  IMT Ghaziabad 2220002817P104958231 122 53,95,103 2,42,780 2,96,731 2,35,766 61,70,379 64,95,136 51,00,000 13,95,136 
38  R Systems 
International 
Ltd. 
2229002817P107551085 128 2,05,20,000 10,26,000 11,28,600 8,96,724 2,35,71,324 2,48,11,920 1,96,00,000 52,11,920 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
303 
39  Everest 
Industries 
Limited  
2229002817P112161753 106 62,78,000 3,13,900 3,45,290 2,74,349 72,11,539 75,91,093 62,00,000 13,91,093 
  Year-2018-19                     
40  M/s Saxo 
Group India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
2220002818P109983923 120 88,92,224  6,66,917 4,89,072 47,618 1,00,95,831 1,06,27,191 93,22,034 13,05,157 
41  M/s Sentiss 
Pharma Pvt. Ltd. 
2222002818P109499654 124 61,41,105  4,16,981 2,95,387 29,772 68,83,246 72,45,522 72,54,602 -9,080 
42  M/s R Systems 
International 
Ltd. 
2229002818P106549230 103 2,22,00,000  14,43,000 7,57,020 1,03,030 2,45,03,050 2,57,92,684 2,44,00,000 13,92,684 
  Large 
Corporate 
Branch Office 
(LCBO) 
                    
  Year-2016-17                     
43  Aviva Life 
Group  
5003002816P101374250 
(total 2 policies)  
127 2,92,43,350 8,77,301 16,08,384 13,36,421 3,30,65,456 3,48,05,743 1,71,03,166 1,77,02,577 
44  Here Solutions 
India Pvt. 
5003002816P103401691 129 3,64,95,770 61,23,990 20,07,267 16,67,857 4,62,94,884 4,87,31,457 3,74,73,937 1,12,57,520 
45  M/s Adobe 
Systems  
5003002816P116395317 141 1,60,79,340 0 8,84,364 7,34,826 1,76,98,530 1,86,30,031 92,40,695 93,89,336 
46  M/s ABP News 5003002816P105741935 125 2,89,92,920 16,23,604 15,94,611 13,24,976 3,35,36,111 3,53,01,169 2,38,40,000 1,14,61,169 
47  M/s Luminous 
Power Ltd. 
5003002816P117771664 124 1,46,73,162 10,27,121 8,07,024 6,70,564 1,71,77,871 1,80,81,969 1,45,00,000 35,81,969 
48  M/s Ramboll 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
5003002816P116162647 115 1,15,21,120 6,91,267 6,33,662 5,26,515 1,33,72,564 1,40,76,383 1,20,00,000 20,76,383 
49  Schneider 
Group 
Total 14 Policies  100 18,31,93,500 1,09,91,610 1,00,75,643 83,71,943 21,26,32,695 22,38,23,890 17,49,05,033 4,89,18,857 
50  M/s Konica 
Minolta Pvt. 
Ltd. 
5003002816P110641367 
(total 2 policies)  
110 92,15,594 3,01,988 5,06,858 4,21,153 1,04,45,592 1,09,95,360 91,27,942 18,67,418 
51  M/s Denso 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
5003002816P100545750 121 56,78,229 4,25,867 3,12,303 2,59,495 66,75,894 7,027,257 59,98,839 10,28,418 
52  Nokia Group  Total 03 Policies  124 24,89,82,000 1,86,73,650 13,6,94,010 1,13,78,477 29,27,28,137 3,081,34,881 25,66,05,776 5,15,29,105 
53  M/s Class 
Agriculture  
5003002816P105543112 
(2 Policies) 
167 1,15,72,470 5,85,000 32,175 5,28,862 1,27,18,507 1,33,87,902 1,10,15,907 23,71,995 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
304  
54  Sebic Group  Total 03 Policies  128 1,43,92,079 10,79,406 7,91,564 6,57,718 1,69,20,767 1,78,11,334 1,38,00,000 40,11,334 
55  Marathon 
Electric India 
Ltd. 
5003002816P106141987 125 96,44,710 5,01,525 5,30,459 4,40,763 1,11,17,457 1,17,02,587 94,94,000 22,08,587 
56  Yamaha Group  (6 policies) 187 6,17,74,164 30,88,708 33,97,579 28,23,079 7,10,83,531 7,48,24,769 5,00,00,000 2,48,24,769 
  Year-2017-18                     
57  Sebic Group  Total 03 Policies  143 1,96,02,766 9,80,138 10,78,152 8,56,641 2,25,17,697 2,37,02,839 1,94,64,308 42,38,531 
58  M/s Shaweta 
Estates 
Total 03 Policies  112 55,85,038 4,18,878 3,07,177 2,44,066 65,55,159 69,00,167 59,75,000 9,25,167 
  Year-2018-19                     
59  Schneider 
Group 
Total 13 Policies  118 21,68,33,364  1,08,41,668 86,73,335 1,54,81,902 25,18,30,269 26,50,84,494 24,56,34,472 1,94,50,022 
60  M/s Konica 
Minolta Pvt. 
Ltd. 
5003002818P109818239 
(total 2 policies)  
126 1,24,96,435  4,99,857 5,87,332 8,92,245 1,44,75,870 1,52,37,758 1,38,00,000 14,37,758 
61  Marathan 
Group  
Total 11 Policies  101 2,27,61,655  13,65,699 12,51,891 16,25,182 2,70,04,427 2,84,25,713 2,72,54,613 11,71,100 
  Total                5,27,79,71,525 4,15,52,11,261 1,12,27,60,264 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
305 
Annexure-XVIII 
(Referred to in Para 5.10.6.1) 
Statement Showing deviations in respect of sanction and disbursement of loans  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
client 
Type of facility 
sanctioned, date 
and amount 
(In `` ``) 
No of 
deviations 
Require parameters Deviation Monitoring 
1 M/s PAS 
Enterprises LLP 
Corporate Loan 
(Sep-15) of  
` 14.50 crore 
7 (i) Minimum rating should be BBB/P 2  
(ii) Should be in operation for three years and pro fit 
making for last two years  
(iii) Minimum Net worth Should be `25 crore 
(iv)Should be private/public limited company  
(v) Security cover at least 2 times of the loan amount 
(vi) Maximum TOL/TNW ratio should be 3.5:1 
(vii) minimum Current Ration of 1.1:1  
(i) Rating was not available 
(ii) New entity  
 
(iii) New Entity 
(iv) It was LLP 
(v) one time as Bank Guarantee 
(vi) New entity 
(vii) New entity 
NA 
2 DCS Limited PBF (May-17) of  
` 5.0 crore 
5 (i) Minimum Net Worth(client)- `50 crore 
(ii)Minimum Turnover(client)- `100 crore 
(iii)client short term external credit rating shoul d not 
be below A 2  
(iv)The tenor of the various products offered by IF L 
will normally range from 45 days to 180 days except , 
exceptional cases in respect of parties of high cre dit 
rating, capital nature of goods, tenor of the facil ity can 
extend to 365 days  
(v)PBF facility is generally not extended on a 
standalone basis i.e. generally accompanied with 
DSBF facility. 
(i) Actual Net Worth- `27.42 
crore 
(ii) Actual Turnover- `90.47 
crore 
(iii)Short term external credit 
rating of the client was not put 
on record. 
(iv)Credit period of 360 days 
though the credit rating was 
CARE BB +   
(v)Extended on standalone 
basis. 
Monitoring using 
Field Audits, 
Unscheduled/ 
scheduled visits to 
clients and debtors, 
annual review of 
debtors etc. was not 
done 
3 Trend Flooring 
Pvt. Ltd. 
DSBF (Dec-17) of 
` 1 Crore 
4 (i) Minimum Net Worth (debtor)- `02 crore,  
(ii)Minimum Revenue of debtor- `25 crore 
(iii) Debtor should be rated minimum CRISIL BBB/ 
A2 
(iv) Tangible security/ any other expectable securi ty 
for client whose external rating is below A 2 
 
(i) Actual Net Worth- `1.82  
crore 
(ii) Actual Revenue- `6 crore  
(iii) unrated debtor 
(iv) No tangible security 
given/other expectable security 
obtained. 
Do 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
306  
4 M/s Indure Pvt. 
Limited 
PBF (Sep-17) of  
`6.5 crore 
4 (i) PBF should be sanctioned normally with DSBF and  
not on standalone basis 
(ii)Short terms external rating should not be below A 2  
(iii) Security coverage should be 2.00 times of the  
facility  
(iv) Disbursement would be made in respect of new 
clients pending receipt of satisfactory field audit report 
(i) Standalone 
(ii) rating was A 4  
(iii) security was one time only  
(iv) Disbursed made without 
field survey 
Do 
5 M/s Rithwik 
Projects Pvt. 
Ltd. 
PBF (Apr-17) of  
`21.00 crore 
 
4 (i) in exceptional cases in respect of parties of h igh 
credit rating, capital nature of goods, tenor of th e 
facility can extend to 365 days. 
(ii)Normally should be sanctioned with DSBF and not  
on standalone basis 
(iii) PBF facility to be extended to those clients whose 
short-term external credit rating is not below “A 2” 
(should be rated within last one year)  
(iv) security coverage shall be 2.00 times 
(i) External rating  was BB  
despite lower rating 360 days 
tenor was approved  
(ii)  Standalone 
(iii) Short term rating of the 
client was not considered.  
However, the long term 
external rating was BB  
(iv) Security coverage was less 
than 2.0 times (only `10 crore) 
Do 
6 M/s GJS 
Infratech Pvt. 
Ltd. 
PBF (Nov-18) 
`6.50 crore 
4 (i) normally should be with sales bill factoring an d not 
on standalone basis  
(ii) Borrower minimum net worth should be `50 crore 
(iii) Short terms external rating should not be below A 2 
(iv) Security coverage should be 2.00 times 
(i)  standalone facility 
(ii)  Net worth was `30.11 crore 
(iii)  BBB – 
(iv)   One times in form of BG  
Do 
7 M/s TC 
Healthcare Pvt. 
Ltd. 
(Enhancement) 
DSBF (Nov-17) 
Enhancement of 
facility from 4 to 5 
crore 
3 (i) Networth more than `1crore  
(ii) Current Ratio should not be less than 1:1.1  
(iii)TNW/TOL should not be more than 4:1 
(i)  (-`1.60 crore) 
(ii) 0.87   
(iii) (-)28.44  times 
Do 
8 M/s  Nitya 
Electrocontrols 
Ltd. 
DSBF (Oct-18) of 
`5.0 crore 
3 (i) minimum Current Ratio 1.1: 1  
 (ii) TOL/TNW should not be more than 3.5:1.  
(iii) debtors (GE T&D India Ltd) should be profit 
making for last 2 years 
(i) current ratio 1.08  
(ii) TOL/TNW 3.67 
(iii) not complied 
Do 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
307 
9 M/s Ganesh 
Housing Corp. 
Ltd. 
Corporate Loan 
(Sept-15) of   
`14.50 crore 
3 (i) CRISIL equivalent investment credit rating shou ld 
be minimum BBB and CRISIL equivalent short term 
instrument rating should be minimum P 2  
(ii) current ratio of the company should not be les s 
than 1.1: 1  
(iii) client rating was IFL5 
(i) external rating of GHCL was 
BBB – (ii) current ratio was 
0.63:1     (iii) client rating was 
IFL7 
NA 
10 M/s Omaxe 
Buildwell Ltd.  
Corporate Loan 
(Dec-17) of  
`10.00 crore 
3 (i)CRISIL equivalent investment credit rating shoul d 
be minimum BBB + and CRISIL equivalent short term 
instrument rating should be minimum A 2  
(ii)  Security in case of facility for Real estate industry 
should be minimum 2.50 times (in combination of 
tangible collateral and shares with the least 1.50 times 
as tangible collateral)   
(iii) Minimum net worth for real estate industry- `50 
crore 
(i) Rating of Omaxe Buildwell 
was not available and 
management considered rating 
of Omaxe Limited (promoter 
Company) which was BBB –/ A3 
(ii) tangible collateral was only 
1 time against the prescribed 
limit of 1.50 times (iii) `30.63 
crore 
NA 
11 M/s  Vatika 
Limited 
Corporate Loan 
(Dec-17) of  
`15 crore 
3 (i) Client's Minimum external credit rating - CRISI L 
BBB +  
(ii)Client's Maximum TOL/TNW ratio - 5:1   
(iii)Client should be profit making for the past 2 years   
(i) Actual credit rating was 
CARE BB  
(ii) Actual TOL/TNW ratio was 
13.52  
(iii)Client was not profit 
making for last 02 year 
NA 
12 M/s  GTM 
Builders & 
Developers Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Corporate Loan 
(Dec-16) of  
`5.0 crore 
3 (i)  Minimum credit rating of the borrowing 
Company should be CRISIL BBB and CRISIL A 2  
(ii)  Minimum Net Worth of the Client `50 crore  
(iii) Minimum Current Ratio 1.1  
(ii)  Actual credit rating was 
BWR B +/ A4  
(iii)  Net Worth -`14.70 crore  
(iii)  Current ratio was 1.02 
NA 
13 M/s Niraj 
Cement 
Structurals 
Limited 
Corporate Loan 
(Dec-17) of  
`15 crore 
2 (i) Tenor of AFR facility should be up to two years  but 
in any case not to exceed 3 years.  
(ii) At any point of time, the outstanding to any c lient 
shall not exceed 15% of IFL’s net worth (NOF) 
(i) Tenor of AFR facility was 5 
years in violation/deviation of 
the credit policy 
(ii) Company disbursed `15 
crore when the NOF of IFL was 
`44.03 crore (31.03.2018) as 
against the exposure ( `6.6 
crore, 15 % of NOF) that could 
be taken on one client  
NA 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
308  
14 M/s Ganesh 
Housing Corp. 
Ltd. 
Corporate Loan 
(Sep-15) of  
`5.0 crore 
2 (i) CRISIL equivalent investment credit rating shou ld 
be minimum BBB+ and CRISIL equivalent short term 
instrument rating should be minimum A 2  
(ii) IFL rating should be 5 
(i) external rating of GHCL was 
BBB – 
(ii) rating was IFL 7 
NA 
15 M/s Arfin 
Limited 
(Enhancement) 
DSBF (Jun-16) of 
`10.0 crore 
3 (i) Client TOL/TNW ratio should not be more than 
3.5:1.  
(ii) Debtor should be profit making for last 02 years. 
(ii) Exposure norms: -at any point of time, the 
outstanding to any client shall not exceed 15% of 
IFL’s net worth (NOF). 
(i) TOL/TNW ratio was 4.07 
(2014-15), 3.90 (2015-16)  
(ii) Debtor was not profit 
making for last 02 years. 
(iii) The outstanding from the 
client (FY 2018-19) exceeded 
the exposure limit of `6.6 crore 
(being 15% of the NOF) 
Monitoring using 
Field Audits, 
Unscheduled/ 
scheduled visits to 
clients and debtors, 
annual review of 
debtors etc. was not 
done 
16 M/s Navrang 
Roadlines Pvt. 
Ltd. 
DSBF (Nov-17)  
`9 crore 
1 Rating should be IFL 4 Rating was IFL7 Do 
17 M/s GHV India 
Pvt. Ltd. 
DSBF (Feb-17) of 
`21 Crore 
1 Tenure of the product normally ranges from 45 to 18 0 
days , in exceptional cases in respect of parties o f high 
credit rating, capital nature of goods, tenor of th e 
facility can extend to 365 days,  
Neither a high rated company 
nor in the business of capital 
nature of goods and Company 
approved tenure of 270 days 
Do 
18 M/s BPTP Ltd. Corporate Loan 
(Mar-19) of  
`5.0 crore 
1 CRISIL A 2 CRISIL A 3 NA 
19 M/s PAN India 
Infraproject Pvt. 
Ltd. 
Corporate Loan 
(Oct-15) of  
`14.50 crore 
1 Current Ratio should be more than 1.1 : 1  Current ratio was 0.25 NA 
20 M/s VNR Infra 
Ltd. 
Corporate Loan 
(Jan-15) of  
`18 crore 
1 Client's minimum short term credit external rating of 
client- CRISIL P 2  
Actual credit rating was CARE 
A3  
NA 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
309 
 
Annexure-XIX 
(Referred to in Para 5.10.6.2) 
Corporate Loan to ineligible client by giving notch up in Internal Credit Rating 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the client Corporate 
Loan amount 
Sanction 
date 
Deviation 
1. M/s BPTP Ltd.  `5.00 crore Mar-19 Upgraded from 
IFL 7 to IFL 5 
2. M/s Ganesh Housing Corp. Ltd.  `5.00 crore Sep-15 Do 
3. M/s Ganesh Housing Corp. Ltd. 
 `14.50 crore Mar-18 Do 
4. M/s  PAN India Infra Project Pvt. Ltd. `14.50 crore Oct-15 Do 
5. M/s Patil Constructions & Infrastructures Ltd. `14.70 crore Jul-15 Do 
6. M/s Vatika Limited  `15.00 crore Dec-17 Do 
7. M/s VNR Infra Ltd.  `18.00 crore Jan-15 Do 
8. M/s GTM Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd.  `5.00 crore Dec-16 Upgraded from 
IFL 8 to IFL 6 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
310  
Annexure-XX 
(Referred to in Para 5.10.6.3) 
Statement showing non compliance with credit policy with respect to sanctioning and lapses in monitoring of the facility 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
client 
Type of 
facility and 
amount 
sanctioned   
Date of 
Sanction 
No of 
deviations  
Require parameters Deviation Monitoring 
1 M/s 
Perpetual 
Inter Trade  
DSBF  
`5 crore 
Jun-16 4 (i) Net Worth- 1 crore  
(ii) Current ratio should not be less than 
1.1 :1  
(iii) Period of operation should be 
minimum 3 years  
(iv) Stipulated minimum combined 
rating - IFL 5 
(i) Net worth-  Rs 0.02 crore 
(FY 2015),  
(ii) Current Ratio- 1  
(iii)  Not in operation for 
minimum of 3 years  
(iv) Actual IFL6 
Monitoring of the 
account using the Field 
Audits, Unscheduled/ 
scheduled visits to 
clients and debtors, 
annual review of 
debtors etc. was not 
done as per credit 
policy 1 
2 M/s Leeway 
Logistics Ltd.  
DSBF of  
`18 crore 
Jan-11 3 (i) Maximum TOL/TNW ratio should  
be 6:1  
(ii)  Existence for minimum three year  
(iii) Profit making for last 2 years 
(i) TOL/TNW was 9.33:1 and   
(ii & iii) company was just 
one year old 
Do 
3 M/s Ennore 
Coke 
DSBF of  
`4 crore 
Mar-11 3 (i) Minimum Current Ratio - 1.1:1 
(ii) Maximum TOL/TNW - 6:1. Debtor 
(M/s Butterfly Sales Pvt Ltd). 
(iii) Should be in existence for 3 years   
(i) Actual current Ratio was - 
0.87:1  
(ii) Actual TOL/TNWwas- 
6.85:1  
(iii) not complied 
Do 
4 Accurate 
transformers 
Ltd. 
DSBF of  
`15 crore 
Aug-11 3 Debtors are generally state 
government/central government entities, 
blue chip companies, listed companies 
and MNCs who 
(i) should be profit making in the last 
two years,  
(ii)should be in existence for minimum 3 
years  
(i)MSEDCL was loss making 
and had accumulated losses 
in its balance sheet (2009-
10). South Bihar Power 
Distribution Company 
(debtor) was incorporated on 
29 June 2012 and was not in 
existence for minimum three 
Do  
                                                           
1  Audit observation is based on the fact that durin g review of files no record relating to monitoring as per credit policy was made available to audit. F urther, Audit 
requisitions and reminders were also issued to furnish the same but management did not furnish the same  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
311 
(iii)should have no accumulated losses years at the time of addition 
(13 June 2014). Further 
DVVNL was a loss making 
entity and had large 
accumulated losses in its 
balance sheet. 
5 M/s Elder 
Pharmaceu-
ticals Ltd. 
DSBF & 
DPBF of  
`15 crore 
Aug-10 2 (i)  PBF facility should be backed by 
tangible collaterals  
(ii) In silent factoring client should be 
well accredited where the debtors are 
generally listed company, Blue chip 
companies, PSU's, State/Central govt. 
entities and MNCs 
(i) No such security was 
collected  
(ii) M/s Kash Medicare was 
unrated debtor 
Do 
6 Ind- Swift 
Limited 
DSBF of  
`10 crore 
Jul-11 2 (i) In silent factoring debtors would 
generally be listed Companies, blue chip 
Companies, PSUs, Central/State 
Government entities and MNCs  
(ii) field audit 
(i) The 10 unrated debtors 
were mainly C&F 
agents/distributors of the 
client and were 
partnership/proprietorship 
concerns whose financials 
were not readily available.  
(ii) filed audit waived 
Do  
7 M/s Arch 
Pharmalabs 
Limited 
DSBF and 
PBF of  
`15 crore 
May-11 1 PBF to be backed by tangible collaterals  No security was collected  Do 
8 M/s Bharat 
Salt 
Refineries 
limited 
DSBF of  
`5 crore 
Jun-09 1 Pre sanction field audit/examination  Not done Do 
9 M/s Archon 
Engicon Pvt. 
Ltd. 
DSBF & 
AFR of  
`15 crore 
Apr-11 1 Security coverage for AFR facility 
should be 1.50 times of the sanctioned 
facility in the form of immovable 
property or pledge of listed shares 
Ssecurity of `69.20 lakh only 
against the AFR facility of 
`12.50 crore 
Do 
10 M/s Kalyani 
Engineering 
Works 
DSBF of  
`5 crore 
Aug-12 1 Maximum TOL/TNW ratio - 4:1  TOL/ TNW ratio was 4.59:1 Do 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
312  
11 Era Infra 
Engineering 
Ltd 
DSBF of  
`7.5 crore 
Feb-10 1 Pre sanction field audit/ examination  Not done Do  
12 M/s Concast 
Exim Ltd. 
DSBF of  
`10 crore 
Jan-12 1 Existence at least for three years Existence for 02 years and 10 
months 
Do 
13 M/s Jakhau 
Salt Co. Pvt. 
Ltd.  
DSBF of  
`5 crore 
Oct-09 1 Pre sanction field audit/ examination  Not done Do  
14 M/s Shivam 
Minerals 
Limited 
DSBF of  
`10 crore 
Mar-11 Nil Nil Nil Do 
15 M/s Apex 
Buildsys Ltd  
DSBF of  
`15 crore 
Nov-09 Nil Nil Nil Do 
16 M/s Concast 
Steel and 
Power 
Limited 
DSBF of  
`15 crore 
Aug-11 Nil NA NA Do 
17 Maxx Mobile 
Communica-
tions Limited  
DSBF of  
`15 crore 
May-11 Nil NA NA Do  
18 M/s Core 
Projects & 
Technologies 
Ltd.  
DPBF of  
`15.00 crore 
Jan-11 Nil - - Do  
19 Empee 
Distilleries 
DSBF of  
`10 crore 
Oct-10 NA NA NA Do  
20 Critical Mass 
Multilink 
Ltd. 
AFR of  
`7.5 crore 
Sep-15 5 (i) Client’s stipulated minimum networth 
of `25 crore,  
(ii) Clients stipulated minimum turnover 
of `50 crore  
(iii) Requirement of client having  past 
track record of minimum 2 years with 
the debtors or should have provided such 
service to other customers with regular 
track record of payments,  
 
(i)Company considered net 
worth of the client as  
`356.95 crore though the 
adjusted tangible net worth 
was negative ( `–31.95 crore).  
(ii) The actual turnover was 
`0.48 crore  
 
 
NA 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
313 
(iv) Debtor should be profit making for 
last two years,  
(v) Minimum internal rating of IFL5 
(iii) New relationship, no 
track record of payments 
received by client on 
providing such service to 
other customers.  
(iv) Both the debtors were 
loss making  
(v) Client rating was IFL 6  
21 M/s MVL 
Limited 
Corporate 
Loan of  
`16 crore 
May-14 2 (i) Credit rating of the borrower 
company for STL was to be CRISIL 
equivalent investment credit rating of 
minimum BBB and CRISIL equivalent 
short term instrument rating of minimum 
P2  
(ii) Security cover should be at least 2.0 
times 
(i) Rating was  not 
considered  
(ii) One time only 
NA 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
314  
Annexure-XXI 
{Referred to in Para 5.10.6.3 (i)} 
Details of debit note funding 
Sl. No. Name of the client Debit note funding period NPA declared  
1. M/s Bharat Salt Limited (BSL) August 2014 to March 2017 Sep-17  
2. M/s Concast Exim Limited (CEL) June 2015 to March 2017 Dec-17  
3. M/s Concast Steel and Power Limited 
(CSPL)  
February 2015 to September 
2017 Dec-17  
4. M/s Arch Pharma labs Limited (APL) December 2012 to January 
2013 Sep-15  
5. M/s Elder Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (EPL)  July 2013 to August 2016 Sep-16  
6. M/s Maxx Mobile Communications 
Limited (MMCL) August 2012 to June 2013 Sep-15  
7. M/s Ind- Swift Limited (ISL) December 2012 to May 2016 June-16  
8. M/s Ennore Coke Ltd. (ECL) August 2012 to March 2016 June-17  
9. M/s Jakhau Salt Co. Pvt. Ltd. 
(JSCPL) 
December 2013 to August 
2017 Sep-17  
10. M/s Core Projects & Technologies 
Ltd. (CPTL) November 2012 to March 2014 Dec-14  
11. M/s Accurate Transformers Limited 
(ATL) 
February 2013 to December 
2015 Mar-16  
12. M/s Shivom Minerals Limited (SML) June and July 2016  Sep-17  
13. M/s Era Infra Engineering Ltd. 
(EIEL) 
December 2012 to January 
2016 Mar-16  
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
315 
Annexure-XXII 
{Referred to in Para 5.10.6.3 (ii)} 
Non-compliance cases of RBI Guidelines  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the client Delay in 
declaration of 
NPA 
Date of NPA 
as per 
realisation 
date 
Date of 
declaration of 
NPA 
1 M/s Rithwik Projects Pvt. Ltd. (RPPL) Yes 28.01.2019 Not declared 
NPA 
2 M/s Navrang Roadlines Pvt. Ltd. 
(NRPL) Yes 02.07.2019 31.07. 2019 
3 M/s GHV India Pvt. Ltd. (GHVIPL) Yes 03.08. 2019 31.08.2019 
4 M/s DCS Ltd. (DCSL) Yes 07.08. 2018 Not declared 
NPA 
5 M/s Shivam Minerals Ltd. (SML) Yes 27.03. 2017 30.09. 2017 
6 M/s Apex Buildsys Ltd. (ABL) Yes 20.03.2014 31.03. 2016 
7 M/s Arch Pharmalabs Limited (APL) Yes 05.07. 2013 30.09.2015 
8 M/s Archon EngiconPvt. Ltd. (AEPL) Yes 28.09.2015 31.03. 2016 
9 M/s Concast Exim Limited(CEL) Yes 09.12. 2017 31.12. 2017 
10 M/s Ennore Coke Ltd. (ECL) Yes 03.03. 2016 30.06. 2017 
11 M/s Jakhau Salt Co. Pvt. Ltd. (JSCPL) Yes 07.10. 2014 30.09. 2017 
12 M/s Core Projects & Technologies Ltd. 
(CPTL) Yes 02.09. 2013 31.12. 2014 
13 M/s Ind- Swift Ltd. (ISL) Yes 12.03. 2014 30.06. 2016 
14 M/s Accurate Transformers Ltd. (ATL) Yes 23.04.2015 31.03.2016 
15 M/s Empee Distilleries (ED) Yes 16.04.2014 31.12. 2017 
16 M/s Trend Flooring Pvt. Ltd. (TFPL) Yes 03.12.2018 30.06.2019 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
316  
 
Annexure-XXIII 
(Referred to in Para 5.10.6.4) 
Shortcoming noticed where the client committed fraud  
 
Name of 
Client 
Date & 
Amount 
of 
Sanction 
Total 
Dues as 
on 
31.03. 
2019 
Audit Observation Management Reply and Rebuttal 
M/s 
Accurate 
Trans-
formers 
Limited 
August 
2011,  
`15 crore 
(silent 
basis) 
`19.85 
crore 
Ineligible debtors were initially approved (Maharas htra State 
Electricity Distribution Company Ltd) and subsequen tly 
added by the Company in violation of the credit pol icy which 
stipulated that in silent factoring the debtors are  generally 
state/central  government entities, blue chip companies MNCs 
which should be profit making in last two years and  should 
have no accumulated losses. MSEDCL was approved as 
debtor despite it being loss making and having accu mulated 
losses in its balance sheet (2009-10). The Company added 
(December 2013 to February 2015) 4 other debtors (s tate 
government electricity entities) on silent basis. A udit 
observed that South Bihar Power Distribution Compan y 
(debtor) was incorporated on 1 November 2012 and wa s thus 
not in existence for minimum three years at the tim e of 
addition (13 June 2014). Further Dakshin Vidyut Vit taran 
Nigam Ltd (DVVNL) was a loss-making entity and had large 
accumulated losses in its balance sheet. 
The Company resorted to debit note funding between 6 
February 2013 to 29 December 2015 despite the invoi ces 
being overdue/ recourse and lack of timely payment by the 
client.  
The company reassigned (24 December 2015) two facto red 
invoices due for payment on 25 July 2015 with two n ew 
invoices due for payment on 28 January 2016 (raised  on 
Management stated that the debtors were mostly Stat e 
Government electricity boards, which had similar 
profile, risk & credit wise and on the basis of the  
creditworthiness of client and the debtor profile t he 
proposal was approved with or without deviations. 
Reassignment of invoice/s is carried out with an 
endeavor to salvage the account conduct and looking at a 
possibility of arresting the overdues position. Thi s 
practice is used across the factoring industry, and  it’s a 
subjective call depending upon multiple factors. Th e 
account was regular till July 2014 and debit note funding 
started from August 2014 till December 2015. The rating 
was suspended owing to non-furnishing of informatio n 
by the client, which is not necessarily due to some  
nosedive in client’s creditworthiness. But, it is c orrect 
that the account was in stress. The prepayment 
percentage and limit is decided upon the repayment 
track record of the debtors being proposed, busines s 
cycles being witnessed in similar industries etc. I n line 
with the efforts to regularize the account, it was capped 
at 13.50 crore, which was done to assess one or two  
repayment cycles before uncapping the same. The sam e 
got uncapped in Feb 2015 with the inclusion of DVVN L 
which was at that point of time having significant 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
317 
DVVNL) thereby shifting the due date of payment. Th is 
reassignment was not justified as the only reason g iven for 
this reassignment was that payment against the invo ices will 
not be coming to the client account without giving any reason 
for the same.   
Company had capped (13 June 2014) the prepayment li mit at 
`13.5 crore against sanction limit of `15 crore. This capping 
on limit was removed (February 2015) despite invoic es being 
overdue/recourse and issue (Dec 2014 & June 2015) of notice 
of demand to clear outstanding dues. Company disbur sed 
(May to Sept 2015) an amount of `14.73 crore against 
invoices raised by client on DVVNL.  
Complaint u/s 138 to 141 of NI Act was filed (Decem ber 
2015). The account was reported (July 2016) as frau d to 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on the grounds of cheat ing and 
forgery as the invoices raised by the client on DVV NL were 
never received by the debtor. CBI complaint was als o lodged 
(November 2016). The Company entered (February 2017 ) 
into OTS with the Client wherein the latter was to pay (22 
February 2017 to 25 March 2018) an amount of `14.73 crore 
as against outstanding amount of `17.48 crore (principal 
`14.73 crore and unrealised interest `2.75 crore). The terms 
of OTS were not honored as client paid only `4.6 crore while 
the entire OTS amount was to be paid by 25 March 20 18. 
Thus, an amount of `12.88 crore was doubtful of recovery. 
Client Company was wound up and Official Liquidator  was 
appointed (April 2018). 
business with client.  
The reply of the management is not tenable as the c redit 
policy clearly stipulates non commencement of busin ess 
with loss making debtor. The reassignment of invoic es 
after almost 6 months from due date of payment was 
improper as the same was done without giving specif ic 
reasons. The practice of debit note funding is not in line 
with the spirit of financing by way of factoring as  the 
funds remain in rotation between the client and fac tor 
transit and in essence is used to evergreen the sal es 
ledger thereby delaying the initiation of legal act ion and 
recognition of account as NPA. As per client statem ent 
the debit note funding took place from 6 Feb 2013 t o 29 
Dec 2013. The criteria quoted by management for 
setting the prepayment limit should be clearly defi ned in 
the credit policy to strengthen the internal contro l 
mechanism. The uncapping of prepayment limit was no t 
in the best interest as the account was already in stress as 
stated by management. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
318  
 
Annexure-XXIV  
(Referred to in Para 5.10.6.5) 
Deviations and relaxation in monitoring and operation (NPA/write off cases) 
 
Sl. 
no. 
Name of 
the client 
Date and 
amount 
of 
sanction 
Total 
dues/loss 
as on 
31.03.2019 
Audit observation Management reply and rebuttal 
1. M/s 
Apex 
Buildsys 
Ltd. 
November 
2009 
DSBF 
facility of 
`10 crore 
`27.25 
crore 
•      Client was not a blue chip/ listed company 
even then the waiver of field audit was 
approved on the basis of financials and 
sales ledger of the client in deviation to 
credit policy (2009-2010).  
•      On 25 March 2014 out of total over dues 
invoices of `19.08 crore, `14.30 crore  
were overdue for more than 180 days. 
However, the client facility was not 
declared NPA in contravention of RBI 
guidelines.  
•     Company approved one more debtor M/s 
West Haryana Highway Projects Pvt. Ltd 
(WHHPPL) who submitted (on 23 
December 2014) the NoA of Debts wherein 
M/s WHHPPL agreed to make all 
payments against all sales invoices only to 
the Company. Subsequently M/s WHHPPL 
remained the only debtor since November 
2014 against which company factored 
numerous sale bill invoices. However, it 
was observed that not a single payment 
was received from the debtor rather all 
payments of the factored invoices were 
paid by the client even before the due date. 
Management stated (7 January 2020) that despite the  
company was not blue chip/listed company the debtor  
companies which were approved were listed 
companies of ERA group. Being a silent factoring 
proposal, the possibility of debtor visits & verifi cation 
was not possible. So was the case with field survey  as 
there was no need to engage a third party and the 
prime activity of field audit in the form of debtor  
ledger analysis was done in-house. The client 
communication/ correspondence is what is done in th e 
case of silent factoring and that was being maintai ned 
on a regular basis by the RM and the same is eviden t 
while looking at the credit file as well. 
Management reply is not tenable because The debtors  
(WHHPPL) whose invoices were unpaid till last was 
not a silent debtor rather it furnished NOA.  

Report No. 18 of 2020  
319 
All the receivable invoices pertaining to 
M/s WHHPPL was unpaid till last. Receipt 
of payment were from the client (instead of 
debtor) was a red flag indication to the 
Company that the fair practice was not 
being followed by the client. Even then the 
company did not verify the debtor 
cautiously with due care as required by the 
credit policy which led to loss of `27.25 
crore.  
2. M/s 
MVL 
Limited 
May 2014 
STL  of  
`16 crore 
`21.91 
crore • As per the credit policy of the Company, 
the credit rating of the borrower company 
for STL was to be CRISIL equivalent 
investment credit rating of minimum BBB 
and CRISIL equivalent short term 
instrument rating of minimum P2 and the 
security cover should be at least 2.0 times 
of the loan amount. However, in the said 
case the rating of client was not 
considered and the value of security cover 
was only 1.00 times. Further the major 
part of security was in the form of second 
charge which was around 0.63 times of 
total security. It was further observed that 
neither the second charge was created nor 
any other top up was given by the client. 
Thus the actual security cover was only 
0.37 times of the total loan.  
• The tenor of the loan was 3 years. The 
payment schedule was October 2014 to 
September 2017.  MVL Limited after 
availing the STL facility paid only one 
installment of `10 lakh (Nov. 2014) and 
thereafter defaulted and accordingly the 
Management stated (07 January 2020) that the 
decision of the competent authorities is justified in 
light of the options available to IFL at that point  of 
time. And the most plausible defence in favour of t he 
decision remains the fact that IFL’s exposure went on 
to become partially secured (corporate loan to MVL 
Ltd) It may be submitted that litigation matters by way 
of recovery suits are extremely lengthy affair and 
uncertain in nature by way of outcome, and entails a 
substantial cost to IFL. The OTS proposal along-wit h 
the upfront payment of `2 crore is largely due to the 
criminal proceedings that IFL initiated with the 
assistance of EOW, Delhi Police. There were 
payments to the tune of `2.5 crores which happened in 
the account of Noesis Industries Ltd at the time of  
sanction of corporate loan to MVL Ltd . It is evide nt 
from the above explanation, that the grant of corporate 
loan to MVL instead of continuing with factoring 
facility of Noesis, was a prudent move under the 
circumstances prevailing, improving IFL’s chances o f 
recovery of its dues.  
Management reply (7 January 2020) is not tenable 
because MVL was already defaulter against the 
factoring facility extended therefore extension of 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
320  
account was declared NPA in June 2015. 
Complaint u/s 138 to 141 of NI Act was 
filed (April 2015). Police complaint with 
EOW was also filed (May 2017). 
• Hon'ble Delhi High Court (December 
2018) decreed for `24.91 crore and also 
permitted Company to file the actual cost 
within four weeks. However, Company 
did not file the same due to OTS proposal 
(March 2019) of `8 crores along with 
upfront payment of `2 crore. Company 
(August 2019) accept the OTS proposal 
against the total outstanding as on March 
2019 which was `29.91 crore which is yet 
to be materialized. Had the company 
secured/collected two times security, the 
outstanding amount could have been 
recovered. Further the Company could 
have avoided the OTS of ` eight crore 
against total amount of `29.91 crore 
(`15.86 crore principal and `14.05 crore 
interest thereon), if it had security. 
corporate loan without adequate security was not 
justified. 
3. Maxx 
Mobile 
Commu-
nications 
Limited  
May 
2011) 
DSBF 
facility of 
`15 crore 
Converted 
to STL of 
`14 crore 
(April 
2014)  
`13.54 
crore 
(Loss) 
• The Company sanctioned DSBF to Maxx 
Mobile Communications Limited 
(MMCL). The facility was for factoring of 
invoices drawn on its dealer M/s Balaji 
Mobitech Pvt. Ltd.(debtor) which was an 
unrated debtor and as per the field audit 
report there were two way (purchase) 
trade transactions between the debtor and 
the client in the previous years. 
•  The facility was renewed in September 
2012, despite the  adverse observations on 
revenue and profit in the statutory 
The management stated that it was well captured in 
the approval note that the proposed debtor is an 
exclusive distributor of MMCL, having satisfactory 
business relationships for more than 5 years. The t wo 
way trade transactions were accounted as purchases 
from the debtor and payment for the same was 
separately made by MMCL. Also, the contents of 
NOA guarded against the instances of trade-offs, 
should there be two way trade. The  process of debit 
note funding is generally followed to keep the 
account regular with a hope to salvage the 
account. The exposure was fully utilized and 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
321 
Auditors report (17.08.2012) on MMCL. 
Further, the account was stressed on the 
renewal date. Company resorted to debit 
note funding between August 2012 to 
June 2013 despite the invoices being 
overdue and delayed payment. The 
monitoring of the account using the Field 
Audits, Unscheduled/ scheduled visits to 
clients and debtors, annual review of 
debtors etc. was not done by the company 
in contravention of the credit policy of the 
company. 
• In April 2014 the CoD sanctioned STL of 
`14.00 crore to Maxx Moblink Private 
Limited (MMPL) (subsidiary of MMCL) 
by converting the DSBF of `15.00 crore 
sanctioned to MMCL, into a STL of 
`14.00 crore to MMPL. The proceeds of 
this loan were to be used to close the 
DSBF account of MMCL.  
• The facility of Loan to MMPL was 
backed by collateral security (immovable 
property) with distress value of `8.00 
crore. MMPL defaulted in the payment of 
installments and therefore loan account 
was declared NPA in September 2015. In 
March 2018 Company sold the property 
mortgaged at `5.13 crore. In August 2018 
BoD approved the OTS proposal of `2.25 
crore with waiver of `13.54 crore. The 
OTS scheme is yet to be fully honoured 
by the client.  
there was hardly any incremental funding 
which happened. The whole process was done 
to reduce the exposure in the particular stressed 
(at that point of time) account and maximize 
the recovery without any malafide intention. 
The management stated that w ith a view to 
strengthen the monitoring process on the 
existing clients, IFL has started reviewing / 
renewing all the accounts since the last FY 
2012-13 and the same has been incorporated in 
the Credit Policy 2014-15. 
The reply is not tenable as the fact that client is having 
a satisfactory relationship with the debtor does no t 
mitigate the risk associated with factoring the fac ility 
on a debtor who is an exclusive distributor of the 
client and with whom there was a two way trade 
transaction. Further, if the transaction structure and 
financials of the client and debtor would have been  
strong the facility would have not gone into stress  just 
on first renewal.  
 
The reply of the management that the facility was 
renewed looking at the overall satisfactory conduct  of 
the account as payments were coming on time is not 
correct as  there were adverse observations on revenue 
and profit by the Auditors of MMCL and account was 
stressed on the renewal date.  Further, IFL could n ot 
reduce the maximum prepayment limit on the facility  
to achieve a limit of `10.00 crore as per the condition 
of renewal of facility.   
Debit note was also used as a tool for evergreen it s 
account by the company. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
322  
4. M/s 
Ennore 
Coke 
Ltd. 
March 
2011 
DSBF 
facility of 
`4 crore 
`4.09 crore • The factorable debtor for the facility was 
M/s Butterfly Sales Pvt Ltd. The company 
included (August 2012) M/s Wellman 
Coke India Ltd. (WCIL) as debtor with 
credit line of `4.50 crore. WCIL and 
client were the subsidiary companies of 
M/s Haldia Coke and Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. 
The addition of WCIL as debtor (in place 
of M/s Butterfly Sales Pvt Ltd.) was done 
in spite of overdue in the account. The 
account became stressed and irregular in 
the first cycle itself with payment overdue 
up to 114 days from the invoice due date. 
The facility was reviewed in August 2012, 
December 2012 and December 2013 and 
significant delays were noticed in receipt 
of payments. However, in spite of overdue 
in the account the funding was allowed by 
use of debit note funding (August 2012 to 
March 2016) which resulted in delay in 
declaration of account as NPA (June 
2017) and initiation of legal action. The 
NCLT, Chennai vide its order dated 23 
March 2018 ordered for initiation of 
liquidation proceedings of Ennore Coke 
Ltd and appointed the official liquidator.  
• It was observed that client and debtor did 
not meet the 3 eligibility criteria for 
sanction as stipulated by the credit policy.  
• WCIL was included as debtor which was 
not justified as both the client and debtors 
were the subsidiary companies of the 
same holding company (M/s Haldia Coke 
Management’s reply that the detailed financials and  
deviations (financial ratios) were approved by the 
competent authority and Butterfly sales was 
considered as approved debtor at that point of time  
since no other debtor of Ennore coke was under open  
account sales, is not acceptable as the deviation 
approved by the competent authority should have been 
approved as an exception and non-availability of 
eligible debtor  under open account sales cannot be the 
ground for addition of ineligible debtor.  
The management has further stated that Wellman 
Coke was added at the request of the client on the 
hope of better recovery prospect and since there we re 
delays in payment from Butterfly sales in spite of 
repeated follow ups, Wellman coke was added as 
another debtor.   The reply is not tenable as all t he 
outstanding in the account amounting to ` 4.09 crore 
was against the invoices raised on M/s WCIL and the  
payments were received from M/s Wellman Coke 
with delays. Further, non receipt of payment from o ne 
debtor cannot be the ground for addition of another  
debtor.  
It is also stated by the management that time was 
allowed to the client by way of debit note funding 
since the client had made capital investment in 
restructuring the coke manufacturing process. The 
reply of the management is not acceptable as the 
conditions of sanction stipulates that in the event  of 
default by the client on the payment of the outstanding 
dues or payment of interest on the due dates, the 
company shall have an unqualified right to disclose  
the name of the client and its directors as default ers to 
the RBI/ CIBIL and take necessary action to recover  
the outstanding dues. However, the company did not 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
323 
and Chemicals Pvt. Ltd.) because of the 
inherent risk (manipulation in sales) in 
such transactions. The outstanding in the 
account amounting to `4.09 crore was 
against the invoices raised on WCIL 
• The monitoring of the account using the 
Field Audits, Unscheduled/ scheduled 
visits to clients and debtors, annual review 
of debtors etc. was not done by the 
company in contravention of the credit 
policy of the company. 
comply with the conditions of sanction but renewed 
the facility despite irregular conduct & stress in the 
account and funded through operation of Debit Note. 
Although, the company, b y operation of debit note 
could earn some interest but had to suffer a doubtf ul 
recovery and delayed the declaration of account as 
NPA and favored the client. 
5. M/s 
Bharat 
Salt 
Refineries 
Limited 
June 2009 
`5.00 
crore 
(DSBF) 
`2.31 crore  
(Loss) • Company waived off field audit on the 
ground of the existing relationship in 
another group company with IFCI Limited 
and the strength of debtor. As the client 
was new for factoring facility, therefore, 
the field audit should have been carried 
out.  
• Though the conduct of Account was not 
satisfactory since 2012-13 and was in 
stress since November 2012 yet the 
company renewed the facility of the client 
time to time. The funding was continued 
through debit note during August 2014 to 
March 2017 which delayed the initiation 
of legal action and declaration of the 
account as NPA.  
• Payments against the invoices were being 
received from BSRL directly instead of 
debtor. Had the company carried out 
Aggressive Field Audits, random 
verification of Invoice and/or Debtor 
Management stated that field survey was waived off 
by the Competent Authority on the basis of 
satisfactory conduct of account with IFCI Limited. 
The conduct of account was satisfactory till the ye ar 
2012. The company had a long satisfactory 
relationship with IFCI Limited, this is the reason IFL 
supported the company in its tough times. Funding the 
fresh invoices submitted were allowed since the 
company was paying interest and management saw 
the possibilities of reduction in exposure. In fact  the 
company paid `3.5 Cr (approx.) as interest payment 
starting year 2012 till the time the account became  
NPA with IFL. Frequent client visits and follow up 
was done with the client and as a result of that an OTS 
was entered with the client.  
Management reply is not tenable as both the 
companies are separate and the business of both the  
entities is also different and credit policy specif ically 
also stipulates that Field audits are required as p art of 
the analysis package for new clients. As per sancti on 
letter, in the event of default on the payment of t he 
outstanding dues or payment of interest on the dues , 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
324  
Account Balance through periodic 
interactions with Debtor/s the reasons for 
not receiving payment from debtor would 
have been noticed and suitable action 
could have been taken to secure the 
facility.  
• Company just wrote a letter to debtors 
(M/s Jakhau Salt Company Private 
limited) for clearing the outstanding dues 
in September 2017 but thereafter not 
initiated any further action against the 
debtors for clearance of outstanding dues.  
• Company approved (July 2018) a 
settlement of outstanding dues at `3.50 
crore against total dues of `5.81 crore and 
waived off `2.31 crore ( `1.46 crore 
principal and `0.85 crore interest). 
the IFCI Factors, shall have an unqualified right t o 
disclose the name of the company/client and its 
directors as defaulters to the RBI/CIBIL and take 
necessary action to recover the dues. However, 
company continued funding to the client even after 
account became stress/ irregular in November 2012, 
thereafter continued funding through debit note and  
avoided the facility to be declared as NPA. 
Management itself stated (12 December 2019) that 
due to heavy rain in the year 2012-13 company 
renewed the facility and no export activity was carried 
out by debtor supports the audit contention that th e 
aggressive monitoring was not done and invoices were 
factored even after that. As most of the payments were 
outstanding from M/s Jakhau Salt but only one lette r 
was written to the debtor in Sept. 2017 thereafter no 
efforts were made to recover the dues and later on 
OTS offer accepted by the Company. 
Thus due to lack of due diligence in sanctioning/ 
monitoring and non-adhering to credit policy 
Company had to suffer loss of `2.31 crore. 
6. 
 
M/s 
Shivom 
Minerals 
Limited  
March 
2011 
`10 crore 
(DSBF) 
`1.83 crore  
(Loss)  
• The conduct of Account was in stress and 
not satisfactory since March 2016 despite 
that the company continued the facility to 
the client.  
• Payments against the invoices were being 
received directly frosm client since June 
2016 instead of debtor. Had the company 
carried out random verification of Invoice 
and / or Debtor Account Balance through 
periodic interactions with Debtor/s the 
reasons for receiving payment from client 
instead of debtors would have been 
noticed by the company and suitable 
Management stated that scheduled visits were done 
during tenor of facility. Company used to take mail  
confirmation from debtor for invoice verification. On 
12 May, 2016 Company’s team visited the client’s 
office and came to know that there was a delay of 
payment from its buyer due to industry stress for 
which client offered to repay its due and in action  
Company stopped discounting of invoices of this 
debtor further. However other debtors have made 
payment of their own. Monitoring of account was in 
force as Company officials used to visit the office  and 
factory of the client at least once in a year along . As 
soon as the account went into stress Company offici al 

Report No. 18 of 2020  
325 
action would have been taken to secure 
the facility.  
• Company on the request of the client 
agreed for OTS offered by the client 
without assessing the best possible 
recovery from client and debtors through 
legal process. Moreover, Company failed 
to assess the net worth of the promoters 
before approving the OTS.   
• No OTS policy in the company.  
 
 
 
followed up with the client and also met their debt ors. 
However, the client after the meeting cleared their due 
charges and their debtors cleared the overdue invoi ces 
hence the operations of facility continued. Other 
Banks and another factoring company settled the due s 
at 75% we being an unsecured lender settled the fin al 
dues at 86%. At the time of OTS of the facility, th ere 
was no OTS Policy.   
Management reply is not acceptable, though the clie nt 
visit was done and the invoices were also verified by 
the Company but the field audit, client visit (ever y 
year) and verification of the debtors account throu gh 
periodical interaction with debtors was not done as  
envisaged in the credit policy. Supporting document  
(for the period 2011 to 2016) regarding half yearly  
client visit, debtor verification etc. was not made  
available. Further before any settlement Company 
should explore all other means to recover full amou nt 
as Company had to pay interest on credit line to th e 
banks. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
326  
 
Annexure-XXV 
(Referred to in Para No. 9.2.8.7) 
Statement showing Issues still persisting despite assurance by Management in last Audit  
 
Para of 2008 Report Status during the Follow-up Audit 
 
Deficiencies in customization 
‘Logistics costs’ were not allocated to maintenance  
cost centre in forward base at Cachar though it als o 
received logistics services.  
Such cases not noticed in current audit. 
There was lack of uniformity in the basis of alloca tion 
of similar costs. For example, while drilling, rig hours 
were used in allocation of drilling costs in Assam asset, 
rig operations hours were used for allocating the cost in 
Assam & Assam Arakan basin.  
Issue still persisting and commented 
vide Para 9.2.8.3(i) Inconsistency in 
SKF usage. Ministry/Management has 
assured that corrective action would be 
taken.  
Ratio for bifurcation of civil engineering and C&M 
engineering costs between capital and revenue costs  
fixed during initial implementation of ERP system i n 
October 2004 continued to be adopted in Assam asset  
and Assam & Assam Arakan basin without being 
updated.  
Such cases not noticed in current audit. 
Statistical key figures for allocating captive powe r 
plant cost in Assam to various installations fixed 
during initial implementation of ERP system in 
October 2004 were not updated resulting in 
unreasonable allocation ratio. The Management needs  
to review Allocations Maintenance Programs across 
the Company for taking necessary corrective action 
and also put in place procedures for their periodic al 
review and updating. 
As mentioned above, SKF issues were 
commented vide Para 9.2.8.3(i) 
Input controls and validation checks 
Eight financial accounting documents involving `11.74 
lakh were mapped to incorrect cost centres. 
  
Such cases not observed in the current 
audit.  
Information on asset class entered in the master 
records, which determines the General Ledger accoun t 
to be automatically updated by the system when 
transactions were carried out in Asset Accounting 
module, was incorrect resulting in wrong classifica tion 
and accounting of fixed assets in respect of 43 ass ets 
valuing `13.69 crore.  
Deficiencies in the Asset classes 
persisted and discussed in Para 
9.2.8.1(iii) (Incorrect classification of 
Assets) of the current Audit report. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
327 
Information on location and custodian of assets 
necessary to keep track of physical location and th e 
person responsible for the custody of the assets was not 
properly populated in master records as these field s 
were not being updated by the users. Data on locati on 
and the custodian of assets was not available in th e 
system in 19,655 asset records valued at `276.54 crore. 
Due to non availability of this information, locati on-
wise and custodian-wise tracking of inventory and 
proper compliance of handing over and taking over o f 
assets in cases of custody transfers could not be 
ensured in the system.  
Location and Custodian of assets 
deficiencies persist and included in Para 
9.2.8.1(i) (Non-capturing of Asset 
location in Asset Master Table), Para 
9.2.8.1(ii) and in Para 9.2.8.2 (i) (ex-
employees continue as Custodian of 
Asset) 
Master record of one helicopter was created in the 
system without following the system requirement viz . 
creation of a Goods Receipt document before creatio n 
of a master record and financial posting therein. 
Further, the helicopter which was in operation at N ew 
Delhi remained capitalised in the books of Mumbai 
asset. It was evident that validation checks built into 
the system that translated business procedures of t he 
Company were bypassed by manual intervention. 
Such cases not observed in the current 
audit.  
Migration of data from legacy system 
Migration of master records with wrong asset class 
description resulted in incorrect asset classificat ion in 
respect of 123 assets valuing `7.45 crore.  
Such cases not observed in Current 
audit. However, difference between 
posting date and document date were 
noticed and commented vide Para 
9.2.8.4(i). Ministry stated that system 
check has been put in place to avoid its 
recurrence.  
 
While one unique master record was required to be 
maintained for each vendor, multiple master records  in 
respect of vendors for material and services existe d. It 
was noticed that 476 vendor records existed in the 
system in respect of 235 external vendors and 
transactions in respect of 40 such vendors were pos ted 
in 81 vendor records during 2005-07. Multiple vendo r 
records made the system complex and created risk fo r 
manipulation and errors.  
Multiple vendor accounts were 
observed for same vendor and discussed 
in the draft report vide Para 9.2.8.2(ii) 
(Non/incorrect capture of Bank details 
of vendor master). 
For proper vendor management, master records of 
vendors are classified in distinct vendor account groups 
in the system; it was found that eight foreign vend ors 
were wrongly grouped in indigenous vendor account 
group and 17 indigenous vendors were included in 
foreign vendor account groups.  
This issue was not observed during 
current audit. 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
328  
Details of city and address of vendors in master records 
were not properly uploaded. It was observed that 
details of city of the vendor was entered as ‘unkno wn’ 
in 2246 vendor records, in 463 vendor records the 
address field was found blank 
Blank or incorrect details of vendor 
name, address, account number, bank 
details were included in Para 9.2.8.2(ii) 
Management stated with introduction of 
Centralised Vendor cell such issues 
were now taken care of in new vendor 
creations. 
Balances in respect of 259 transactions involving 
`14.55 crore pertaining to 2004-05 and 34 transactio ns 
for `2.5 lakh pertaining to 2005-06, respectively 
against 43 vendors were found uploaded from the 
legacy UFSO system and remained un-reconciled as of  
May 2007 for want of complete details. 
  
Such cases not found in the current 
audit. However, cases where payments 
were pending without payment block 
have been included in the Draft report 
(para 9.2.8.3(iii)). 
134 vendor records existed in master with superfluo us 
vendor names such as ‘**’, ‘unknown’ and ‘aaa’.  
Incorrect details of Vendor name, 
account number, bank details were 
included in Para 9.2.8.2(ii). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
329 
Annexure--XXVI 
(Referred to in Para No.10.1) 
Statement showing loss due to under recovery of capacity charges 
 
(`` ``    in lakh) 
Period  Declared 
capacity 
(MWH) 
Scheduled 
Energy 
(MWH) 
Percentage 
of actual 
schedule 
total 
capaicty 
charges for 
RTPS for 
the said 
month           
Capacity 
charge 
claimed 
from 
KSEBL  
Capacity 
Charge 
recoverable 
at 12.5% 
scheduling 
as per PPA 
Loss of 
capaicty 
charges 
due to 
low 
recovery 
of fixed 
charges 
Total loss 
of 
capacity 
charge 
after 
rebate of 
@2 % 
A B C D E F G H (G-F) I 
May-16 2,12,870 19,748.82 9.28 3,906.015 362.478 488.252 125.774 123.258 
Jun-16 2,57,410 29,772.75 11.57 4,770.725 551.795 596.341 44.546 43.655 
Jul-16 1,27,413 14,504.63 11.38 (-)322.625 -36.727 (-)40.328 (-)3.601 (-)3.529 
Aug-16 1,72,040 19,523.73 11.35 2,369.47 268.935 296.184 27.249 26.704 
Sep-16 2,35,410 27,012.74 11.47 3,325.73 381.461 415.716 34.255 33.570 
Oct-16 2,20,750 26,892.19 12.18 3,045.95 370.997 380.744 9.747 9.552 
Nov-16 2,61,736 30,773.24 11.76 3,698.58 434.953 462.323 27.370 26.822 
Dec-16 57,056 6,459.81 11.32 757.56 85.756 94.695 8.939 8.760 
Jan-17 1,43,130 15,738.05 11.00 1,963.01 215.931 245.376 29.445 28.856 
Feb-17 2,42,025 20,398.06 8.43 3,581.198 301.895 447.650 145.755 142.840 
Mar-17 2,49,685 20,713.22 8.30 3,452.999 286.599 431.625 145.026 142.125 
Apr-17 73,392 6,104.94 8.32 1,021.88 85.021 127.735 42.714 41.860 
May-17 3,82,756 34,175.19 8.93 5,225.23 466.56 653.154 186.594 182.862 
Jun-17 1,71,872 14,576 8.48 2,401.34 203.66 300.168 96.508 94.577 
Jul-17 2,81,437 11,774.38 4.167 3,807.02 158.64 475.878 317.238 310.893 
Aug-17 2,44,813 10,283.48 4.167 3,301.376 137.568 412.672 275.104 269.602 
Sep-17 2,14,337 8,960.13 4.167 2,987.23 124.478 373.404 248.926 243.947 
Oct-17 41,590 1,733.26 4.167 4,430.935 184.637 553.867 369.230 361.845 
Nov-17 2,31,400 9,676.94 4.167 3,865.679 161.083 483.210 322.127 315.684 
Dec-17 2,51,220 10,479.47 4.167 4,080.918 170.015 510.115 340.100 333.298 
Jan-18 1,97,160 8,228.75 4.167 3,191.992 133.010 398.999 265.989 260.669 
Feb-18 2,06,195 8,591.46 4.167 3,678.680 153.290 459.835 306.545 300.414 
Mar-18 2,10,352 8,765.43 4.167 3,409.425 142.071 426.178 284.107 278.425 
Apr-18 3,73,250 15,568.76 4.167 6,238.100 259.941 779.763 519.822 509.425 
May-18 2,75,397 11,463.91 4.167 4,424.982 184.389 553.123 368.734 361.359 
Jun-18 1,41,631 5,901.935 4.167 2,399.658 99.993 299.957 199.964 195.965 
Jul-18 2,57,180 10,716.08 4.167 4,156.134 173.186 519.517 346.331 339.404 
Aug-18 1,70,463.75 7,104.38 4.167 2,736.779 114.041 342.097 228.056 223.495 
Sep-18 186,615 7,775.63 4.167 3,133.279 130.563 391.660 261.097 255.875 
Oct-18 165,191 6,882.97 4.167 2,655.782 110.666 331.973 221.307 216.881 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
330 
Nov-18 1,86,285 7,765.31 4.167 3,121.786 130.084 390.223 260.139 254.936 
Dec-18 2,46,255 10,260.62 4..167 3,988.805 166.213 498.601 332.388 325.740 
Jan-19 2,69,050 11,148.19 4.167 4,360.677 181.709 545.085 363.376 356.108 
Feb-19 3,83,983 15,992.315 4.167 6,630.769 276.304 828.846 552.542 541.491 
Mar-19 4,93,042 20,546.21 4.137 8,051.218 335.494 1,006.402 670.908 657.490 
Total       1,23,848.286 7,506.689 15,481.036 7,974.347 7,814.860 
         
Total Loss due to under-recovery of capacity charges = `` `` 7814.86 Lakh  say `` ``    78.15 crore                                                                         
Average recurring loss per month due to non-ecovery capacity charges = total of capacity charges 
during 2018-19 after rebate/12 =  `` ``3.53 crore (approx.) 
  
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
331 
Annexure-XXVII 
{Referred to in Para No.13.2.7.1 (ii)} 
Statement showing loss of generation due to low PLF 
 
Sl. No. Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total  
1.   Total captive power generated  (MWh) 17,82,716 18,76,396 17,50,120 18,34,687 19,45,763 91,89,682 
2.   Total captive power capacity (MW per 
hour) 2 
297.50 297.50 297.50 297.50 297.50   
3.   Total calendar hours during the year 8760 8784 8760 8760 8760  
4.   Average hourly generation (MW per hour) 
(1/3) 
203.51 213.62 199.79 209.44 222.12  
5.   Combined PLF percentage ((4/2)x100) 68.41 71.80 67.16 70.40 74.66  
6.   Total captive power generation considering 
85% of PLF (MWh) (2 x 8760 x 85%) 
22,15,185 22,21,254 22,15,185 22,15,185 22,15,185  
7.   Total captive power gene ration   
considering 80% of PLF  (MWh)    (1/5 x 
80) 
20,84,880 20,90,592 20,84,880 20,84,880 20,84,880  
8.   Shortfall in total captive generation with 
reference to PLF at 85% MWh (6-1) 
4,32,469 3,44,858 4,65,065 3,80,498 2,69,422 18,92,312 
9.   Shortfall in total captive generation with 
reference to PLF at 80% MWh (7-1) 
3,02,164 2,14,196 3,34,760 2,50,193 1,39,117 12,40,430 
10.   Annual average variable operating cost of 
captive power generation as per TPP  
(per MWh)  
4,562 4,535 5,557 5,577 5,744  
11.   Energy charges and electricity duty charged 
by APEPDCL (per MWh) 
5,511 5,789 5,900 6,111 6,111  
12.   Excess of APEPDCL charges over variable 
operating cost of captive generation (11-10) 
949 1,254 343 534 367  
                                                           
2  Installed Capacity of TG-5 is taken as 50 MW only  instead of 67.50 MW based on Management reply 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
332  
13.   Value of shortfall in captive power 
generation with reference to PLF at 85% 
(` in crore) (8 x 12) 
41.04 43.25 15.95 20.31 9.89 130.44 
14.   Value of shortfall in captive power 
generation with reference to PLF at 80% 
(` in crore) (9 x 12) 
28.68 26.86 11.48 13.36 5.10 85.48 
15.   Total power purchased from APEPDCL 
(MWH) 
4,41,954 5,70,162 6,84,729 5,10,860 4,33,500 - 
16.   Unavoidable purchase or Minimum billing 
energy units MWh (50 x CMD i.e., 135 x 50 
= 6750 pm upto July 2014 and from August 
2014 to March 2018 = 185 x 50 = 9250 pm 
and from April 2018 = 235 x 50 = 11750 
pm) 
1,01,000 1,11,000 1,11,000 1,11,000 1,41,000 - 
17.   Avoidable purchase MWh (15-16) subject 
to shortfall of power generation mentioned 
in item 9 
3,02,164 2,14,196 3,34,760 2,50,193 1,39,117 12,40,430 
18.   Avoidable purchase 
(` in crore) (17 x 12) 
28.68 26.86 11.48 13.36 5.10 85.48 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
333 
Annexure-XXVIII 
{Referred to in Para No.13.2.7.3 (i)(a)} 
 
Statement showing average hourly generation of power during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
Year TG-1 - 60 MW TG-2 - 60 MW TG-3 - 60 MW TG-4 - 67.5 MW TG-5 - 67.5 MW 
A B C A B C A B C A B C A B C 
2014-15 8049 368,255 45.8 8448 415,276 49.2 8574 416,378 48.6 7268 355,484 48.9 3848  227,323 59.1 
2015-16 8636 392,308 45.4 8729 384,992 44.1 7755 296,071 38.2 8149 362,451 44.5 8626  440,574  51.1 
2016-17 7954 388,855 48.9 8700 317,494 36.5 6247 259,956 41.6 7801 342,406 43.9 8608  441,409 51.3 
2017-18 8736 415,567 47.6 7157 264,036 36.9 8725 400,173 45.9 7853 348,617 44.4 7580  406,294  53.6 
2018-19 3772 182,892 48.5 6880 349,706 50.8 8678 420,979 48.5 8751 487,216 55.7 8611  504,970 58.6 
A – Utilized Hours (Hrs); B – Total Power Generated (MW); C – Average Hourly Generation (MWh) (B/A) 
 
 
 
Statement showing percentage of Utilized Hours to Calendar Hours during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
Year Boiler 1 Boiler 2 Boiler 3 Boiler 4 Boiler 5 Boiler 6 TG 1 TG 2 TG 3 TG 4 TG 5 
2014-15 80 75 75 87 83 50 92 96 98 83 44 
2015-16 82 79 85 79 82 88 98 99 88 93 98 
2016-17 79 71 75 77 98 80 91 99 71 89 98 
2017-18 82 80 90 88 77 87 100 82 100 90 87 
2018-19 37 94 96 86 93 94 43 79 99 100 98 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
334  
 
Annexure-XXIX 
(Referred to in Para No.13.2.7.3(i)(b)) 
 
Statement showing time taken for planned outages/ shutdown of Boilers and TGs for the years 2014-15 to 2018-19 
 
Item 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total No. of 
excess days A B C A B C A B C A B C A B C 
Boiler 1  35 64 29 35 57 22 35 53 18 35 56 21 35 281 246 336 
Boiler 2  35 53 18 35 69 34 35 62 27 35 64 29 - - - 108 
Boiler 3  35 86 51 35 60 25 35 43 8 35 42 7 - - - 91 
Boiler 4  35 78 43 35 73 38 35 61 26 - - - 35 72 37 144 
Boiler 5  35 46 11 35 66 31 - - - 35 60 25 35 23  - 67 
Boiler 6  - - - 35 65 30 35 42 7 35 39 4 - - - 41 
Total  787 
TG-1 - - - - - - - - - - - - 40 179 139 139 
TG-2 - - - - - - - - - - - - 40 65 25 25 
TG-3 - - - - - - 40 83 43 - - - - - - 43 
TG-4 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
TG-5 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
Total  207 
A – Planned no. of days; B – Actual no. of days taken; C – Excess no. of days taken 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
335 
Annexure-XXX 
 (Referred to in Para No.13.3.2) 
Details of Captive mines, mining lease, type of mineral, area, reserve, date of lease granted, lease validity, Grant of FC&EC and Status 
of operations 
Serial 
No. 
Name of the 
Mine 
Name/No. of 
the mining 
lease 
Type of 
Mineral 
Area  
 (in ha.) 
Reserve 
 (MT) 
Date of 
Lease 
granted 
Lease Valid 
up to 
Latest FC 
Stage-II 
granted 
Latest EC 
granted 
Status 
(Working/Not 
working) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
Iron Ore 
1 Barsu and 
Talidih mines 
 ML-130 Iron Ore 2486.38 359.58  01.06.1960 05.01.1930 06.03.2013 30.03.2016 Working 
2  ML - 162 Non-
mineralised 
77.94 Infrastructure 29.04.1960 28.04.2030 23.10.2017 30.03.2016 Working 
3 Kalta Iron 
Mines 
ML-139 Iron ore 25.98 0.219  17.01.1975 16.01.2025 N.A. N.A. Not Working 
4 ML-227 Iron ore 3.34   18.01.1984 17.01.2004 
(Expired) 
N.A. N.A. Not Working 
5 Gua Ore 
Mines  
Duarguiburu Iron Ore 1443.76 183.12  21.02.1949 21.02.2039 22.08.2014 25.03.2013 Working 
6 Jhillingburu-I Fe & Mn Ore 210.56 1.74 25.03.1953 24/04/2033 Awaited Awaited Not Working 
7 Jhillingburu-II Fe & Mn Ore 30.54 0.95  12.05.1950 05.05.2029 Awaited 10.12.2018 Not Working 
8 Topailore Iron Ore 14.16 6.58 09.03.1970 05.05.2029 Awaited 17.08.2015 Not Working 
9 Manoharpur Ajitaburu Iron Ore  323.89 381.54  07.12.1947 04.12.2026 NA 31.03.2011 Not Working 
10 1Dhobil  Iron Ore  513.04 217.03 08.03.1948 07.03.2038 21.10.98 24.01.2012 Working 
11 SukriLuturburu Iron Ore  609.55 54.02  25.03.1949 11.03.2028 NA 10.06.2013 Not Working 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
336  
12 McLellan- 
Budhaburu 
Iron Ore  823.62 930.07 08.12.1945 08.11.2024 NA 23.03.2011 Not Working 
13 Ankua Iron Ore  67.18 NA  14.06.1982 08.06.2031 NA NA Not Working 
14 Tati Buru  Iron Ore  38.85 NA 01.09.1949 23.08.2028 NA NA Not Working 
15 KIOM/ MIOM Lease-1 Iron Ore 1936.04 39.34  28.03.1960 27.03.2030 26.11.2014 23.09.2014 Working 
16 Lease-2 Iron Ore 879.44 Infrastructure 06.02.1973 27.03.2030 11.04.2005 23.09.2014 Working 
17 Lease-3 Iron Ore 82.00 Infrastructure  01.10.1973 27.03.2030 11.04.2005 23.09.2014 Working 
18 Horomotto Iron Ore 1052.00   01.01.1970 10.02.1988 
(Expired) 
No Fc No EC Not Working 
19 BOM 5.10 Sq. Mile Iron  1321.45 241.35  11.04.1960 09.04.2030 12.11.2014 21.12.2012 Working 
20 6.60 Sq. Mile Fe & Mn Ore 1786.74 1.352 14.11.1962 13.11.2022 NA 21.12.2012 Working 
21 Dalli Manual Dalli Forest 
Range 
Iron ore 100.00 1.26  27.08.1963 26.08.2023 06.04.2004 Pending Working 
22 Rowghat Rowghat Iron ore 2028.78 511 15.09.2009 22.09.2029 03.08.2009 04.06.2009 Not Working 
23 Kalwar KalwarNagur Iron Ore 938.06 7.22  01.04.1975 31.03.2025 07.01.2008 Pending Not Working 
24 Rajhara Pandridalli Iron ore 220.42 39.11 01.06.1958 27.04.2023 06.04.2004 Pending Working 
25 DalliMech Rajhara Iron ore 29.25 719.6  01.06.1958 31.05.2023 06.04.2004 30.09.2013 Working 
26 Mahamaya Mahamaya Iron ore 1522.67 16.46 04.11.1971 03.11.2021 07.08.2015 26.03.2015 Not Working 
Flux           
27 BIM  ML - 232 Bauxite 117.44 0.43 18.08.1969 07.04.2016 
(Expired 
w.e.f. 1985) 
NA NA Not Working 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
337 
28 PL DQ  PLDQ Limestone & 
Dolomite 
230.53 24.62  06.01.1960 05.01.2020 No forest 
land 
involved 
NA Not Working 
29 Bhadigund ML No:2660 Limestone 40.12 10.167 01/04/1963 31.03.2023 Not granted 13.04.2011 Not Working 
30 Kenchapura  ML No:2307 Dunite 4.45 0.12  19.05.2001 18/05/2021 No forest 
land 
involved 
01.08.2011 Not Working 
31 Kuteshwar  Right Bank  Limestone 
Dolomite 
944.89 88.161 10.06.1971 11.03.2033 No forest 
land 
involved 
02.09.2015 Working 
32  Left Bank   91.14 0.488  15.05.1982 17.01.2033 No forest 
land 
involved 
17.08.2015 Working 
33 Tulsidamar Tulsidamar Dolomite 118.72 118.72 30.10.1969 31.03.2020 Not granted 24.03.2015 Working 
34 Bhawanathpur Ghagra Limestone 675.46 3.74  23.10.1972 31.03.2020 Not granted NA Not Working 
35 Gorgaon Limestone 228.46 2.16 23.10.1972 31.03.2020 Not granted NA Not Working 
36 Saraiya Limestone 275.00 1.51  31.03.1966 31.03.2020 Not granted NA Not Working 
37 Baraduar Baraduar Dolomite 407.41 121.27 26.12.1970 Deemed Not granted 02.09.2015 Not Working 
38 Nandini Nandini Limestone 526.34 101.43  01.01.1959 31.12.2028 Not required Pending Working 
39 Hirri Pendidih Dolomite 128.77 12.7 06.05.1959 05.05.2019 Not required 05.02.2009 Working 
Coal           
40 Chasnala Chasnala 165 Coal  348.18 10.2 27.04.1938 27.04.2688 NA NA Working 
41 Het Kandra 167 Coal 81.38 

Report No. 18 of 2020 
338  
42 Jitpur Jitpur (108) Coal  163.69 19.33 28.05.1902  28.05.2893  NA NA Working 
43 Noonudih (109)     22.05.1901 22.05.2892 NA NA Working 
44 Tasra Tasra Coal  450.00 251.9 10.06.2002 Expired NA 13/10/2009 Not Working 
45 Ramnagore ML-1035 Coal 212.87 27.998  17.03.2008 16.03.2907 NA NA Working 
46 ML-2586 Coal 731.27  17.04.1890 16.04.2889 NA NA Working 
47 ML-9094 Coal 204.38  12.04.1984 11.04.2024 NA NA Working 
 
 
 
 
 
 