ES जयते

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March 2011

(Report No. 4)

on.

XIX Commonwealth Games - 2010

Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March 2011

on

XIX Commonwealth Games - 2010

Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi


Table of Contents

Page No.
Preface
Executive Summary i
1. Introduction 1
2. Finances, Planning and Monitoring of Execution 5
3 Venues Developed by NDMC and PWD |_]1 | 1
4. Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG 37
Venues
5 Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi 73
6 Road Signages | 9 |
7. City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers 103
8 Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place 123
9 Other Infrastructure Development Activities 135
10 Health Services for CWG-2010 165
11 Conclusion 179
Annexures 180

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Preface

In the meeting of the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) General Assembly in November
2003 at Montego Bay, Jamaica, Delhi won the bid to host the XLX Commonwealth Games 2010.
Having won the bid, the host city contract was signed in November 2003 by the CGF, Indian
Olympic Association, Government of India (Gol) and the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) with the Organising Committee (OC) (which was constituted later),
becoming a subsequent signatory. The XTX Commonwealth Games were successfully held in
Delhi from 3 to 14 October 2010.

Post completion of the Games it was decided to conduct an Audit of the expenditure incurred for
the Games, which was comprehensive in nature, combining both compliance and performance
telated issues across multiple Ministries and Departments of Gol, GNCTD, Government of
Maharashtra, the OC and various other bodies. This Report was tabled on 5 August, 2011 in the
Parliament.

Meanwhile a separate Report covering the activities relating to CWG carried out by the GNCTD
and its agencies including execution of project and venue development has been prepared. This
Report contains the results of the audit in respect of the GNCTD, covering the period from May
2003 when the initial bid was made for hosting the games to December 2010 when most of the
Games related projects and activities were completed. The expenditure figures have been
brought up to date (to July 2011). Other issues and concerns which focus on agencies specific
aspects would be reported separately through other audit and inspection reports depending upon
their materiality and significance.

The replies of GNCTD to audit findings were received on 15 December 2011. Due consideration
has been given to the responses of the government and its agencies to the observations made
during the course of the audit. The audit exercise for every department and agency was signed
off by an exit conference attended by the heads of the departments. In the finalisation of the audit
findings, all agencies audited have been given adequate opportunity to provide clarification or
state their side of the facts.

This Audit Report for the year ending March 2011 on the expenditure incurred by the
Government of NCT of Delhi on XIX Commonwealth Games has been prepared for submission
to the Lieutenant Governor of NCT of Delhi under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Executive Summary

India hosted one of the most successful Commonwealth games in Delhi from 3 to 14
October, 2010. These Games represented the biggest international multi-sport event
held in the country. India gave its best ever performance in the Commonwealth
games. The Games were also a remarkable show case of the nation’s managerial and
sporting capabilities that despite a multitude of adversities India emerged successful
both as hosts and as competitors.

The right to host CWG-2010 was awarded in November 2003 to Delhi on the basis of
the May 2003 bid of the Indian Olympic Association (IOA), and the guarantee of
Government of India (Gol), in conjunction with the Government of the National
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) to bear the financial liability for hosting the
Games, including underwriting any shortfall between revenues and expenditure. As a
signatory to the Host City Contract (HCC) the GNCTD became responsible for
extending courtesy facilities for the Games Family, officials and aides, besides getting
the Games infrastructure ready.

The initial budget projected in the IOA bid was highly conservative and unrealistic
which led to revisions of estimates at very short intervals even upto September 2010.
This evidenced a piecemeal approach for consideration/ approval of individual cost
elements. The other major reason for increased costs/ estimates was delays at different
stages (including delays in grant of approvals by Gol), resulting in bunching of
activities towards the end and consequential increase in cost.

There were delays relating to venue development at all stages — planning delays on
account of late preparation/ approval of venue briefs, return briefs, and concept
designs; delays in tendering and contract award; as also in works execution and
handover. In the absence of in-house design skills, the venue owners/ implementing
agencies were dependent on external design consultants.

In a large number of cases, contractors including consultants were selected by not
adhering to the eligibility criteria. There were also considerable variations in the
performance of these consultants. The pre-qualification of bidders separately for each
venue led to inconsistencies in eligibility criteria and delayed the process of award
and execution. There were several deficiencies in the process of “justification”. In
most cases, the costs at which works were finally awarded were substantially higher
than the estimated costs. The awards were then “justified” within a band of 10 per
cent through calculation of justified costs (based on market assessment of the majority
of items) post- financial bid opening. Instances of deviations (quantity deviations,
extra items, and substituted items) from the original scope of work, with adverse
implications in terms of increased cost and delays were noticed. PWD, GNCTD
awarded most of its works on percentage rate tenders. This method of tendering is
acceptable only when major portion of work is on account of items included in the
Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR), which was not the case in most of the venue
development works. Competition was not ensured as the departments/ agencies
resorted to short tendering, calling of limited tenders, accepting single tenders,
adopting restrictive conditions in the NIT and awarding contracts on nomination
basis.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) (i)


Third Party Inspection/Quality Assurance (TPIQA) Agencies were engaged to
provide an independent assessment, al various stages of the construction. While the
TPIQA Agencies should be held accountable in its own right for poor quality of
execution of the works, the implementing agencies were not able to closely monitor
the work of the TPIQA Agencies to gain the necessary assurance from their work.
Suitable penalties were not imposed in cases of failure to perform. In all seven audited
roads and flyovers projects Contractor’s Profit and Overhead Charges (CPOH) of 37.5
per cent for the bridge/ flyover components in contrast to CPOH of 15 per cent
stipulated by CPWD was adopted. This resulted in increasing the justified cost,
worked out by the department after opening of the financial bids. There were also
instances of delays in achieving the milestones listed in the contracts. Compensation/
liquidated damages for delays have not been levied on the contractors in most cases.

Although the project for renovation and restoration of Connaught Place (CP) was
envisaged in April 2004, it was plagued by undue delays. The approved DPR for the
project was submitted only in February 2008, and it was, therefore, unreasonable to
expect that the project could have been completed in time for the Games, especially in
view of the constraints of traffic management considering the importance of
Connaught Place to Delhi’s life.

While procuring the TETRA network for common communication services covering
not only the Games period but also a seven year legacy period, a proper assessment of
the requirements of Delhi Police (the main user) and other public agencies as well as
the replacement of existing networks with TETRA was not carried out.

The final bills for 40 projects are yet to be settled by the implementing agencies, even
after nine months of conclusion of the Games.

(ii) Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


—

1.1 Commonwealth Games - 2010

The Commonwealth Games (CWG) is a multi-sport event held every four
years among the Commonwealth Countries. The XTX Commonwealth Games
(CWG-2010) were successfully hosted in Delhi from 3 to 14” October 2010.
These games represented the biggest international multi-sport event held in
India.

1.2 | Award of CWG-2010 to Delhi

Delhi won the right to host the Games at the Commonwealth Games
Federation (CGF) General Assembly in November 2003 in Montego Bay,
Jamaica. A Host City Contract (HCC) was signed in November 2003 between
the Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF), Indian Olympic Association
(104), Government of India (Gol), Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi (GNCTD), with the Organising Committee (OC) becoming a
subsequent signatory in March 2005.

The chronology of events leading upto to the award of the XIX


Chapter 1: Introduction

Commonwealth Games, 2010 to Delhi is summarised below:

Table 1.1 - Chronology of events leading to award of XIX CWG to Delhi
June-July
2002

TOA submitted a formal bid for the Games to the CGF

Guarantees given by Gol, Lt. Governor (LG), Delhi and
2003 Chief Minister (CM), GNCTD to bear all costs and
underwrite any shortfall between revenues and expenses

ovember
3

The HCC was signed on 13 November 2003 between the CGF, IOA, Gol,
GNCTD and the OC. According to it the OC, IOA, Gol and GNCTD would
be jointly and severally responsible for all commitments, including, without
limitation, financial commitments relating to the organization and staging of
the Games in accordance with the constitution and Protocols and Regulations
of the CGF.

1.3 Role of LG, Delhi and GNCTD

The Group of Ministers (GoM) in its third meeting, in January 2005, decided
that the LG would be overall responsible for the Games with specific
reference to security, law and order and matters under Delhi Development
Authority (DDA). The CM, GNCTD would look after all issues under the
jurisdiction of GNCTD. The main areas of activity for GNCTD were:

* City infrastructure by Public Works Department (PWD), GNCTD,
New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) and Municipal Corporation of
Delhi (MCD);

« Venues under PWD, GNCTD, and NDMC; and
* City improvement projects under PWD, GNCTD, NDMC and MCD
1.4 Audit Objectives

The main objectives of the audit so far as it relates to GNCTD, were to assess
the following:

* Adequacy and effectiveness of budgeting and financial management,

« Effectiveness and efficiency of agencies in planning, executing and
delivering the Games and associated infrastructure projects

2 Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter!: Introduction

* Propriety, economy, transparency and probity (including compliance
with relevant rules and regulations and accepted best practices) in
procurement of goods.

1.5 Audit Scope and Coverage

A report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on CWG-2010 has
already been tabled in the Parliament on 5 August, 2011. The scope of
present audit covered activilies related to CWG games carried out by GNCTD
and its agencies for the period from May 2003 (submission of the bid for
hosting the XLX Commonwealth Games) to December 2010 with expenditures
updated to July 2011. The main activities and agencies covered in this audit
are summarised in Table 1.2.

Table 1.2 - Agencies Covered in Audit

Area gencies Covered

Overall Planning and
Management
Venue Development Venue owners (GNCTD, MCD, NDMC, )

Jeti) PWD, Deptt. of Information Technology (IT),
NDMC, MCD, Delhi Jal Board (DJB), Delhi
Transport Corporation (DTC) , Delhi Tourism
& Transport Development Corporation
(DTTDC) , Pragati Power Corporation
Limited(PPCL), Delhi Transco Limited (DTL).

Dstt Hath बनना बा.

1.6 Audit Methodology

The field audit was conducted between October and December 2010. An entry
conference was held with the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports (MY AS)
and representatives of GNCTD and other agencies (except the OC) on
1 November 2010.

Audit methodology covered scrutiny of records and documents of different
agencies, interviews with concerned officials and persons. and physical
inspection of sites, including collection of photographic evidence. Audit
requisitions were issued, seeking records, information and clarifications
(where necessary). Preliminary audit observations were communicated to the
agencies al appropriate levels, seeking their responses.

Draft agency-specific audit findings were communicated through “Statements
of Facts” (SOFs) in January-February 2011 to the concerned agencies for their

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 3


Chapter!: Introduction

responses. Exit Conferences were also held with the concerned agencies! to
discuss the main audit findings. The responses of the GNCTD and its
agencies’ at various levels have been examined and considered, as
appropriate, in this report.

For the purpose of the present report, the departments and agencies were
revisited during August and September 2011 to bring the expenditure figures
up to July/August 2011. We acknowledge the co-operation and assis
extended by the Departments and other agencies of the GNCTD during the
conduct of this audit.

1 Public Works Department (1-2 February 2011), Department of Health & Family Welfare
including 5 hospitals (1 February 2011), IT Department (11 February 2011), Delhi Jal Board
(24 January 2011), Delhi Tourism And Transport Development Corporation (३ February
2011), Delhi Transport Corporation (28 January 2011). Delhi Transco Limited (20 January
2011), Municipal Corporation of Delhi (28 January 2011), New Delhi Municipal Council
(17 February 2011)

? PWD (February, 2011), NDMC (February, 2011), MCD (February, 2011), DJB (January,
2011), DoHFW incuding 5 hospitals (March, 2011), IT Deptt .( February, 2011),
DTTDC (February, 2011 ), DTC (February, 2011 ), DTL (February, 2011 ), DGPS (March,
2011) and GNCTD’s reply of December 2011

4 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


2.1. Financial Outlay — A Macro Overview

The initial budget estimate for hosting and conducting CWG-2010 projected
in the Indian Olympic Association (IOA) bid document of May 2003 was just
₹ 1200 crore, as summarised in the table given below:

Table 2.1 Budget Estimates indicated in May 2003 IOA bid
@ in crore)

Projected Expenditure [Sources of Finance |

Capital/ repair and 1,050 Revenue Surplus from 205
renovation expenditure on conduct of Games (revenues
stadia of % 840 crore, offset by

operating expenses of हैं. 635

crore)

Sale of residential flats 477
City beautification and 150 Grants 518
additional services
Total 1200 Total 1200

Note: USS figures in 104 bid converted @, %45/ USS

The estimated expenditure for the Games Projects increased to 13,566 crore
by July 2009 and further to € 18,532.31 crore by December 2010. This
excludes investments by other agencies - notably Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC) and Airports Authority of India (AAD/ Delhi
International Airport Limited (DIAL) etc.

The Agency-wise profile of budget estimates is given below:

Figure 2.1 - Agency wise Budget estimate
(Rs. in Crore)



Chapter 2: Finances, Planning and Monitoring of Execution

2.1.1 Analysis of Cost

Analysis of the cost estimates', as considered by or intimated to the Gol,
reveals the following increasing trend:
Figure 2.2 — Increasing trend of cost estimates

(Tin. crore)
14000

11687,25

12000

1000

8000

6000

4000

2000

28 88382 88883888688888554
PGPPF PITS ET ATT ATT ASAE

There were seven upward revisions in budget estimates from April 2007 to
September 2010 at very short intervals, representing a three-fold increase
(from = 3566 crore to हैं 11,687.25 crore). This was the outcome of a
piecemeal approach adopted in planning in the initial stages.

2.1.2 Financial Outlay - for GNCTD

An agency-wise profile of approvals/ sanctions by GNCTD (including
approvals for MCD, NDMC and other bodies) is given below:

Table 2.2 — Agency-wise profile of Approvals for GNCTD

@ in crore)
Pw | ass

DTC 1,173

NDMC 1,016
ep [se

1 Including = 2800 crore for GNCTD and हैं 351 crore for Government of Maharashwra

| Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 2: Finances, Planning and Monitoring of Execution

“Sane Ameo
Dus «
न
हु न
7

6

sane

Delhi Plant and garden (DPGS)

‘rand Total

*This includes funding from Gol - (a) components of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM): ₹ 761 crore and (b) Additional Central Assistance for CWG-
related projects: Ry 2800 Crore.

(Details are given in Annexure 2.1)
2.1.3 Outstanding Liabilities

Audit observed that the final bills for most of the projects had not been made
until August 2011 by the implementing agencies, even afier nine months of
conclusion of the Games. Details are given in Annexure 2.2.

2.2 Planning
2.2.1 Delayed Finalisation of Plans for City Infrastructure

One of the objectives of CWG-2010 was to develop state of the art city
infrastructure. [t was thus, essential that a comprehensive, overarching plan
identifying the requirements of city infrastructure for hosting the Games be
prepared and approved at the highest level.

GNCTD stated that it had taken up the issue of the need for a specific
allocation of funds to fulfill the requirements of the city government for
CWG-2010 with the Finance Minister (GOI) in 2004. This was followed by a
letter in May 2005 to Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, indicating
department-wise details of the requirement of funds and its justification. In the
9" meeting of the GoM in January 2006, it was decided that GNCTD should
include all its requirements covering city infrastructure and venue
infrastructure in its proposal to the Planning Commission. Subsequently, a
committee including representatives of GNCTD headed by Member
Secretary, Planning Commission finalised a list of infrastructure projects
which was presented at the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) meeting held on
12 December 2006. GNCTD informed that the presentation titled “Preparing
Delhi for 2010 and Beyond - Making it a world class capital” made to the
CoS constituted a comprehensive city development plan for CWG-2010.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 7


Chapter 2: Finances, Planning and Monitoring of Execution

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that the presentation to the CoS in the
meeting of December 2006 could, at best, be termed as an approach to an
infrastructure development plan for CWG-2010, without the necessary level
of detail and rigour. The detailed planning was done in an ad hoc fashion
without an integrated perspective and without a “bottom-up” assessment of
needs and requirements. It was also substantially delayed.

Delayed planning was a key reason for many infrastructure projects not being
completed in time. Further, it also resulted in non-availability of adequate
time required for statutory clearances from various agencies e.g. Delhi Urban
Art Commission (DUAC), Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Ministry of
Environment & Forest (MoEF) / Forest Department etc. (given the normal
time required for due diligence of proposals by these agencies).

2.3 Co-ordination Committees

Planning, monitoring and oversight of the CWG-2010 Project, as well as co-
ordination of activities across organizations / agencies, was conducted through
a host of co-ordination committees at various levels.
The following table depicts the committees created at different points of times
for the Games Project:

Table 2.3- Main Co-ordination Committees

Committee [Function sd | Period of Functioning ——_| of g

Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi

*Empowered To monitor construction of Decided in Octob
Committee under required infrastructure within never constituted
LG specified time; to include

representatives of central

ministr tate Government

agencies
*Chief Minister’s To look atier all i s that Decided in January 2005
Sub Committee come unde isdicti constituted

of GNCT

constitution

Empowered Facilitation of clearances by | From September 2006 onwards
Committee under | various agencies of CWG
cs related projects

Steering Committee | To approve venue-wise plans | From February 2009 onwards
for installation of Closed
Circuit Television (CCTV)
cameras and access control
equipment; covered all
venues, including ex-Delhi
venues, irrespective रण
ownership

*Note: These committees were disbanded before hosting of the Games in October 2010

8 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Chapter 2: Finances, Planning and Monitoring of Execution

> Empowered Committee under the Chief Secretary, Delhi

In September 2006 an Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of
Chief Secretary, GNCTD, was set up to expedite clearances by various
agencies in a time bound manner. The Committee met 27 times between
October 2006 and October 2010. However, it was not empowered to issue any
sanctions or approvals, which were issued through normal
organizational/departmental channels. These decisions were processed
through the established Departmental channels e.g. Works Advisory Board/
Technical Committee etc, and later subject to scrutiny by the GNCTD
Expenditure Finance Committee, before submission to the Cabinet for
approval and subsequent issue of work orders.

> Steering Committee

The Steering Committee set up in September 2009 prepared the security plans
for venues and deployment of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear
(CBRN) measures for the CWG.

Apart from these committees, Unified Traffic and Transportation
Infrastructure (Planning and Engineering) Centre (UTTIPEC) was also
formed by a September 2008 circular of the LG, Delhi. This Centre was
responsible for the preparation of transport plans for the Games family and
spectators for six stand alone venues, the Games Village, linkages from
airport to the Games Village, India Trade Promotion Organisation (ITPO) and
other venues where the Games family was to be accommodated.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (5



3.1. Introduction

The NDMC and PWD, GNCTD developed competition/training venues at
Thyagaraj, Talkatora, Shivaji, and Chhattrasal Stadia and Government Model
Ludlow Castle School.

The venue wise major works, their tendered cost and the contractors’ details
are given in Table 3.1 below:

Table 3.1 — Works at other Venues
@ in crore)

Work Consultant Estimated | Tendered | Contractor
cost cost

Talkatora Indoor Stadium

Construction of new M/s Raja Aederi 28.18 52.98 | M/s Simplex
sports facility block Consultants Pvt. Projects
with basement parking | Lid Limited
Addition and 10.60 | 19 | M/s Simplex
alteration of existing Projects
stadium Limited
Shivaji Outdoor Stadium
Construction of two M/s Raja Aederi 80.85 160.27 | M/s China
hockey pitches, Consultants Pvt. Railway
stadium, new sports Ltd Shisiju
facility block with two Group
level basement parking Corporation

Thyagaraj Stadium

Package 1 Peddle Thorp 95.33 103.96 | JMC Projects
Arch. Melborne in (I) Ltd
Package 2 00 een 89.01| 108.80 | IMC Projects
Associates
() Lid
Chhattrasal Stadium Benjamin 50.68 60.26 | Era Infra
Benjamin & Vats Engg. Ltd.
Ludlow Castle A.G. Krishna 8.50 11.25 | Arora
Menon Construction

Co(P) Lid.



Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

3.2 Venues developed by New Delhi Municipal Corporation
(NDMC)

3.2.1 Selection of Raja Aederi Consultants Pvt. Ltd as Architect
consultant

In April 2006, two separate NITs were issued for appointment of Architect
Consultant for improvement/upgradation of Talkatora Indoor Stadium (TIS)
and Shivaji Stadium, with the key eligibility parameter of experience in
providing services for sports venues of prescribed contracted value'. Three
bids” were received and the tenders opened on 23 May 2006. Based on
technical bids, only two applicants were found eligible and the contract was
awarded to Raja Aederi Consultants Pvt. Ltd., being the L1 bidder, for which
letter of intent (Lol) was issued on 3 July 2006 and contract signed in October
2006.

Audit observed that none of the three bidders were technically eligible. While
Arkitkturel Grids, was rejected for non submission of requisite documents, the
technical bids submitted by Kothari & Associates and Raja Aedeti
Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd, were also deficient. Kothari & Associates submitted
merely a list of completed works without any certificates. Raja Aederi
Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd’s technical bid was also ineligible on the following
points

« It had submitted the bid on the basis of an unregistered Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) (written on an ordinary paper) with Sterling
Engineering Consultancy Services Pvt. Ltd. dated 18 May 2006,
signed five days before the opening of the bid ie. 23 May 2006.
Interestingly, the original last date of submission of bids was 16 and
17 May 2006, which was extended on the request of the potential
bidders;

* Raja Aederi Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd., as such, had no independent
experience in providing architectural services for sports venues of the
prescribed contracted value; and

* Sterling Engineering Consultancy Services Pvt. Lid. provided an
undated experience certificate issued by another architect Shashi
Prabhu & Associates, instead of the client, stating that the former had
rendered Structural and Design Engineering services for an indoor
stadium project of National Sports Club of India.

' Three completed similar works not less than हैं. 15 crore or two similar works not less than &
20 crore or one similar work not less = 25 crore in the last 5 years
? Arkitkturel Grids, Kothari & Associates and Raja Aederi Consultants (Pvt) Ltd.

12 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

Thus, none of the applicants were technically eligible. Considering that the
tender had been called in May 2006 when venue briefs were still to be
received’, there was still scope for retendering and seeking an agency suitable
for executing the services required, rather than choosing from a pool of
ineligible bidders.

Further, the scope of work was increased from improvement/upgradation of
the stadium to designing for major new construction at the stadium with an
additional fee @ 3 per cent of estimated cost or actual cost whichever is less
with a maximum of & 4.25 crore (in addition to € one crore already awarded
for the work relating to renovation and upgradation). As of September 2011
an amount of & 4.26 crore was paid to M/s Raja Aederi Consultants (Pvt.) Ltd.

This was a violation of tendering practices as the scope of work had
completely changed and had increased (November 2007) from improvement/
upgradation of both the stadia projects to designing for major new
construction at the stadium based on the Venue Brief given by the M’s EKS at
an approximate project cost of ¥ 204 crore for both stadia projects as against
the earlier project cost of हैं 30.45 crore for upgradation of both stadia. The
revised construction programme envisaged a new five storey building with
two basements and Renovation/improvement/upgradation of the existing
stadia of Central Public Works Department (CPWD).

NDMC while confirming the facts stated that the evaluation of technical bid
was cartied out by a team of officers comprising of Engineer-in-Chief
(E-in-C), Chief Architect of NDMC and Addl. Director General (ADG) rank
officers of CPWD. If the appointment of fresh consultant were considered for
revised scope of work, it would have delayed the whole work by one year due
to procedural timeframe involved. To meet the target date of CWG, NDMC
decided to continue with the same consultant for which necessary approval
from the competent Authority was taken.

The reply is not tenable because from October 2006 to May/November 2008,
there was sufficient time to retender and since M/s Raja Aederi was ineligible
for a project valuing = 30.45 crore, the award of consultancy work with
project cost of = 204 crore to the firm lacked justification.

3.2.2 Shivaji Stadium
3.2.2.1 Selection of China Railway Shisiju Group Corporation
(CRSGO) as contractor for Shivaji Stadium

In February 2008, NIT for the composite contract for improvement/
upgradation works at Shivaji Stadium was issued. Six agencies* submitted

3 Venue brief was received for Talkatora Indoor Stadium in November 2006 and that of
Shivaji Stadium in May 2007

* China Railway Shisiju Group Corporation; Abulwalia Contracts (India) Ltd., IMC Projects

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 13


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

their bids and after opening the technical bids on 24 March 2008, all were
technically qualified. On 10 April 2008, the financial bids were opened and
CRSGC was declared the L1 bidder and the LOT issued on 19 May 2008.

Audit observed that CRSGC, a foreign company, with no existing established
base in India was engaged and bid should have been rejected at the technical
evaluation stage itself for the following reasons:

* No global tender was issued: the NIT was only published in national news
papers, loaded on NDMC website and circulated to a panel of 18 Indian
contractors;

« The primary eligibility condition was experience of execution of
construction of new multi-storied block of Central Government or State
Government departments/ Municipal Boards / Autonomous Bodies
PSUs, indicating an Indian context. CRSGC produced similar experience
of working in China instead of India;

* CRSGC did not produce requisite registration certificates from competent
authorities for local taxation and registered place of business in India.
These were produced only after opening of the financial bid; and

« Generally, when foreign participation is envisaged, formation of JV with a
local company or creation of a separate legal entity in India is insisted
upon to ensure compliance with local laws, familiarity with local
conditions and facilitate settlement of legal disputes, if any. No such
provisions were made in this NIT

The CRSGC should have been declared ineligible in the first instance.
Further, its inability to deliver in Indian conditions and its reliance on Simplex
Project Ltd., a sub-contractor for material and labour, finally reflected in the
project not being completed in time for the Games. However, the exact extent
of sub-contracting of the composite work by CRSGC to Simplex Project Ltd.
is not known.

NDMC stated that the tenders were uploaded on NDMC and Delhi
government websites and notice was forwarded to the President Contractor
Association of Northern Railway, PWD & DDA, DIB for displaying on notice
boards and also to 18 reputed firms. The documents submitted by CRSGC
were attested by Indian Embassy at China. Eligibility of the firm was
evaluated and approval of competent authority on evaluation of technical sub
committee was accorded. The eligibility condition for experience did not
mention that the experience of the firm had to be necessarily in India.

(India) Lid., Nagarjuna Construction Co. Ltd, YMC Buildmore एच. Lid. and Unity
Infraproject Ltd.

14 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

The reply is not acceptable in view of the aforementioned conditions
mandatory for executing a project under a Joint Venture.

Barricading in the names of main/sub-coutractor at worksite

3.2.2.2 Inflated item rates in justified cost

NDMC while preparing the justified cost, to assess the reasonableness of the
offer of L1, did not prepare it based on the most reasonable prevailing market
rates available. Out of total 99 items of building structure (Justified cost
₹ 111.54 crore), six high value Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR) items
(Justified cost of हैं 69.50 crore) constituting 62 per cent of the justified cost,
were test checked in Audit using the coefficients/rates of material from
CPWD Common Schedule of Rates (CSR) 2007, duly updated by price
indices. This revealed that these items rates were inflated by 20.3 per cent
resulting in extra cost of € 14.11 crore.

NDMC teplied that justification was prepared for 90 per cent of higher value
items as per para 19.4.3.1 of CPWD Manual. The quotations were collected
and enclosed wherever it was possible. In case the quotations were not
available, the rates were verified from the market and for some common items
the rates prevailing in the department were considered. The overall rate
structure was prepared in consultation with Architect consultant and was duly
scrutinized at various levels. Comparison of market rates and DSR rates plus
enhancement was not considered as particular make and specification were
incorporated in NIT. The method adopted by audit does not reflect true picture
of prevailing market rate.

The reply is not acceptable as Audit has kept in mind provisions of Para
19.4.3.1 of CPWD manual while making calculations. In order to ensure that
the justification is based on genuine market rates, written quotation is
mandatory. Alternatively actual rates of similar work in other Divisions could
also have been adopted. There was no evidence produced regarding such an
exercise having been conducted at the time when justification was prepared.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 15


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

NDMC has itself agreed on non-availability of quotations. In such a case the
method of updating rates with price indices adopted by Audit is correct.

3.2.2.3 Avoidable expenditure on specialized items of Electrical
works

As per CPWD manual 2007 (Para 5.6) to ensure quality, specialized works
should be executed through specialized agencies. In the tender for Shivaji
Stadium, items such as air conditioning plant, transformers, diesel generating
sets, security system, firefighting equipments, etc. were included in a
composite tender. It was however observed that around the same time NDMC
invited separate tenders for such specialized works for Talkatora Stadium and
due to direct participation of specialized agencies, the tender rates for the
works of Talkatora Stadium were || to 45 per cent below the tendered rate of
composite work of Shivaji Stadium even after considering 22.4 per cent
discount offered by the contractor for Shivaji Stadium. Had separate tendering
approach been followed in case of Shivaji Stadium also, an estimated saving
of = 2.23 crore could have been achieved.

NDMC teplied that composite tender was floated in compliance with para No.
15.3 of CPWD Manual 2007 which states that system of composite tender
shall be followed for works where sanctioned amount is more than = 10 crore;
and to ensure co-ordination among various agencies and in view of time
constraint. The delay in completion of Shivaji Stadium project was due to
pending case in court of law for vacation of the site. The reply is not
acceptable since the stated coordination was not achieved and works of
Shivaji stadium could not be completed but Talkatora stadium was ready in
time for CWG-2010 despite separate tenders being floated. Further, NDMC’s
contention that delay in completion of Shivaji Stadium project was due to
pending court case is not acceptable as site was clear of all hindrances in
March 2009, and by taking 18 months from March 2009, the work should
have been completed by August 2010. However, the same has not been
completed so far (November 2011).

3.2.2.4 Unfruitful expenditure on Integrated Security System

M/s Electronics Corporation of India Limited (ECIL) was to install an
Integrated Security System with CCTV Cameras at the Shivaji Stadium. The
contract with ECIL for = 2.21 crore was signed on 8 December 2009 by
NDMC comprising of ‘Legacy’ and ‘Non-legacy’ items. The division had
paid an advance of % 1.18 crore on 23 December 2009 as per clause 6.6 of the
agreement.

Audit observed that at the time of signing of contract and grant of advance
only the work of foundation of the stadium was in progress and the integrated
security system was required to be fixed just before the finishing of the

16 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

stadium and facility block. Hence work order was unnecessarily issued much
in advance. Further there was contradiction in the condition for reckoning of
time limit for completion of the work of security system which was 3 months
or 30 June 2010 from the date of signing the contract and handing over the
site with readiness whichever is later whereas the condition for grant of
advance was immediately on signing the agreement. Had the condition of
grant of advance been subject to handing over of the ready site then the
blocking of funds of हैं 1.18 crore in undue procurement of material would
have been avoided.

NDMC stated that ECIL was awarded the work as per directions of Ministry
of Home affairs. The material brought by ECIL was in the safe custody of
NDMC. The advance payment of € 1.18 crore has been made as per condition
of agreement approved by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).

The reply is not tenable as due to faulty conditions in the agreement, advance
payment was made prematurely to ECIL, resulting in blockage of funds.

3.2.2.5 Non-completion of the training stadium in time for
CWG-2010

The venue brief for the stadium was received in May 2007, the architect was
engaged in October 2006 and the composite contract for the work was
awarded in May 2008, with the scheduled date of completion as November
2009. Of the major works only one hockey pitch could be prepared. The other
pitch, two level basement parking, multi-storeyed facilities building and the
stadium still remain incomplete (September 2011).

Audit observed that despite very close monitoring by the Empowered
Committee of GNCTD, headed by the Chief Secretary, and repeated
assurances by Chairman, NDMC, the facility could not be made available for
CWG-2010. The main reason was the inability of NDMC to provide
hindrance free site till March 2009 due to litigation with existing occupants of
the restaurants and kiosks within the stadium complex. Despite, the decision
to upgrade the stadium in July 2005, it is inexplicable why NDMC waited till
the last minute to ensure vacation and availability of a hindrance free site.

The contractor also failed to deliver within the scheduled time of 18 months
i.e. by September 2010 even after handing over of the clear site in March
2009.

NDMC replied that due to lack of hindrance free site, restricted project site
and rains the work was delayed. Responsibility of contractor for failure to
deliver the venue in time shall be dealt with as per provisions of agreement
and extension of time shall be regulated with or without levy of compensation
on merit of the case and in terms of the relevant clause of the agreement.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 17


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

The reply is not acceptable as NDMC was well aware of the cited reasons.
Hindrance free site was available from March 2009. Moreover responsibility
for failure to deliver the venue in time needs to be fixed.

3.2.3 Talkatora Indoor Stadium (TIS)

Talkatora Indoor Stadium - Boxing

3.2.3.1 Engagement of Simplex Projects Ltd as the main
contractor

There were two major civil works to be undertaken at TIS. The tendering

process for each is summarised below:

Table 3.2 — Tendering process for award of works

Work Tendering Time line Work Tendering Time line
Process Process
Sports NIT issued August 2007 | Addition and 1" Call November
Facility Alterations Tender 2007
Block opened December

rejected due | 2007
tohighrate | January 2008

Tender September 2" Call January 2008
opened 2007 February
Tender 2008
opened
Work December Work April 2008
Awarded 2007 Awarded

18 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

Audit noticed that though the tender was advertised in the newspapers,
NDMC website and circulated among the panel of contractors, in both
contracts only one bidder, Simplex Projects Ltd. responded. While NDMC
chose to retender the contract for additions/alterations, it decided to accept the
single bid for the construction of the sports facility block. It is pertinent to
note here that the period of execution of the contract was 18 months (sports
facility block) and 12 months (addition/alteration work), and, therefore, there
was scope for rebidding. Further, on analysis of justified rates of items
constituting 27 and 44 per cent of the justified cost of the two buildings
works, Audit observed that these were respectively 19 and 16 per cent higher
than CPWD DSR rates applicable. Under the circumstances, it was desirable
to re-bid and test the market once again.

It was also found that in sports facility block an amount of हैं 2.40 crore @
5.24 per cent of the justified cost was added to provide for future price rise of
materials due to absence of price escalation clause (10CC) in the agreement,
without any supporting provision in the CPWD manual for such ad hoc
percentage.

In the absence of competitive bidding and difference in the justified costs and
those worked out in audit on a test check basis, it is difficult to conclude that
the best price was determined for the work in a competitive market.

NDMC stated that the justified cost was prepared as per para 19.4.3.1 of
CPWD Manual 2007 and in addition various factors like conveyance charges,
labour and costs of engineering establishment deployed, plant and tools etc
were also considered while accepting the tender and together had a financial
effect of 5-10 per cent. Rates of non schedule items were considered by
verification from specialized agencies. CPWD DSR prices indices are
circulated for complete DSR and not for individual items. Rates for few items
are available in Delhi Government web site also.

Further re-tendering would have consumed time which would effect the target
date of completion of competition venue and there was probability of getting
even higher rates in future besides loss of precious time. In respect of flooring
material a sub committee has been ordered to verify the market rates and
adjustment if any would be made before paying final bill.

Reply is not acceptable as the item rates adopted by NDMC were not based on
quotations in writing/actual invoices of other similar works hence cannot be
relied upon as prevailing market rates. Further, the total cost of transportation
of labour to worksite trom the labour camp would be very negligible as
compared to total cost of the work. This was accepted by NDMC in its reply
of December 2011. The contractor’s overhead and prolit covers the other
miscellaneous expenditure. The price indices adopted by Audit are for specific
material released by Economic Advisor and not that of CPWD. Compliance
on flooring material needs to be watched.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 19


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

3.2.3.2 Quality assurance for Talkatora Indoor Stadium and
Shivaji Stadium

In November 2008, NDMC engaged SGS India Pvt. Ltd. as the Third Party

Inspection/Quality Assurance (TPIQA) agency for ongoing construction/ up

gradation works at Shivaji Stadium and Talkatora Indoor Stadium for a

lumpsum fee of हैं 1.06 crore. The following deficiencies in the quality of

works and TPIQA services were noted:

* — TPIQA was engaged in November 2008, six months after the work had
commenced in Talkatora Indoor Stadium with 30 per cent overall
achievement of work which was unsupervised by the TPIQA;

* Though the TPIQA was required to conduct quality tests of input
material, it only reviewed the testing facilities of the contractors and
NDMC and the reports submitted by them. It did not review the test
registers maintained by NDMC;

* NDMC also did not take effective action on the suggestions put forth by
TPIQA in its periodical reports; and

. CTE, CVC also found several deficiencies in the quality of work
executed. Both the cube test and core test of Talkatora Indoor Stadium
failed; cement consumption was also reported as low in Talkatora Indoor
Stadium. NDMC had sent clarifications regarding method of checking of
cement quantity, but CTE had not dropped its observations.

The quality of construction works, particularly in Talkatora Indoor Stadium,
was compromised despite the engagement of SGS India Pvt. Ltd. as TPIQA.
However, NDMC gave an “excellent grading for technical proficiency” to
SGS India Pvt. Ltd., even before the completion of work.

The lump sum fees of % 1.06 crore to M/s SGS for both stadia projects was
not to be increased due to time and cost overrun as per clause 13 of tender
documents, however, NDMC paid % 1.09 crore to M/s SGS upto June 2010
despite the fact that the construction work of Shivaji Stadium was not
completed.

NDMC replied that TPIQA was appointed to assist NDMC in ensuring quality
of work as per contract. Extra payment beyond agreement amount shall be
recovered from agency. NDMC further stated that necessary action shall be
taken on the basis of the final findings of CTE. At the time of award of work
18 months for Shivaji Stadium and 12 months for Talkatora stadium were
considered, however, the work was delayed and the period of TPIQA was
extended. TPIQA has been paid for the period which they have rendered
services and sufficient bank guarantee is lying with NDMC for affecting
recovery. The reply is not acceptable as TPIQA failed to ensure the quality of

20 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

work. The fact remains that the excess payment made to M’s SGS has not
been recovered till December 2011.

3.2.3.3 Excess payment of €0.82 crore on substituted chairs

As per clause 12 of the contract read with para 23.3 of CPWD Manual the
contractor should propose revision in the rate of substituted/extra item
supported by proper rate analysis within 15 days of cropping up of the said
item. Under the agreement for the work, item No.98 of supplying and fixing
of stadium chairs with high density plastic (HDPE 5502) seat and back with
load bearing capacity of seat 200 kg, back 80 kg, of dimension 450 mm x 400
mm x 400 mm, with eight years warranty was included in the original scope
of work. The contractor had quoted his rate @ % 2190 per chair, whereas the
justified cost was arrived at % 1393.80 per chair.

This item was substituted by HBYC-33 model Tanglong make chairs with
high density plastic HDPE 5502 seat and back of dimension 420 mm x 420
mm x 420 mm. The cost of substituted chair was claimed by contractor @ हैं
6500 and quantity was also increased from 3000 to 3150 chairs. Approval in
principle of the Chairman, NDMC was obtained on 9 April 2010.

The rate of the substituted item was stated to be based on market rates but no
analysis, invoice, quotations, etc. was found on record hence reasonableness
of rates could not be verified. Further payment for the work started from 9"
RA bill (October 2009) before approval(April 2010) in principle of the
Chairman, NDMC. Approval of quantity and rates has not yet been obtained
(December 2011). The substituted rate was about 2.97 times the tendered rate
and the increase in cost duc to the substitution was % 1.36 crore’. However
even though the contractor could not produce documentary proof of rates
claimed by him yet payment of हैं 1.35 crore for 2704 chairs fixed to the
maximum capacity of the stadium was released @ ₹ 5000 each as per 13" R
A bill ( May 2010). It was observed by Audit that in case of Siri Fort stadium
the landed cost of imported (May 2010) China make similar type of tip-up
chairs was हैं 2081.25 each inclusive of Delhi VAT @ 12.5 per cent and by
framing its rate analysis, the substituted rate per chair worked out to ~
2634.56. Thus even considering the part rate of = 5000 per chair an excess
payment of € 63.96° lakh was made to the contractor.

Further though the said item was for providing and fixing chairs, payment for
the extra 446 chairs brought to site but not fixed was also made (May 2010)
@ % 4000 per chair which was irregular as there was no use of extra chairs.
As the contractor did not produce any proof of rate of chairs even secured
advance was also not payable. This has resulted into an avoidable excess

5 [(Rs 6500 - Rs 2190) x 3150].
5 [(5000-2634.56) x 2704]

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 21


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

payment of % 17.84 lakh at part rate. Thus total excess payment accounted for
2 0.82 crore.

NDMC stated that excess payment if any would be recovered with interest.
After the audit no payment has been released to the agency till date as such
recovery has not been affected. Sufficient due of contractor is pending with
department for affecting such recovery. Estimates was prepared considering
the original number of seats later on as per observation of fire department less
number of seats provided.

The reply was not acceptable as adequate efforts had not been made to obtain
source document of purchase. Further had fire safety norms been kept in mind
while framing the estimates, the additional expenditure on extra chaits could
have been avoided.

3.2.3.4 Irregular framing of rate analysis for deviated/
substituted /extra items

While determining the market rate for the purpose of regulating the claim of
the contractor (Simplex Projects Ltd) for deviated/substituted! extra items, 10
per cent over the cost of the material and labour was to be allowed to cover
contractor’s overhead and profit as per the contract.

In 21 of the 85 cases of claims of deviated/ substituted’ extra items reviewed
by Audit it was found that the contractor’s overheads and profit was taken as
15 per cent instead of 10 per cent applicable. This resulted in overpayment to
the contractor of = 1.17 crore and corresponding extra liability of = 0.86 crore
to NDMC. Details are given in Annexure 3.1.

In addition, in the claim for the substituted item of fixing structural glazed
curtain wall system/space frame glazing system, while calculating the market
rate of the tendered item, the justification rate that was determined three years
ago was adopted, instead of adjusting it to the current price index or obtaining
fresh rates from the market. This resulted in an undue benefit to the contractor
of € 0.64 crore, based on tendered rates adjusted with price index.

NDMC accepted that due to oversight excess payment has been made but till
now only part payment has been made. The same will be corrected while
obtaining the approval of rates of competent authority. The fact is that the
part payment is more than the payment due.

3.2.3.5 Irregular payment before sanction of extra item rates

As per clause 12 of the agreement read with para 23.3 of CPWD Manual the
contractor should propose revision in the rate of substituted/extra item
supported by proper rate analysis within 15 days of requirement of the said
item and Engineer-in-Charge (EIC) shall within one month of the receipt of

22 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

the claim supported by analysis after giving consideration to the analysis of
the rates submitted by the contractor, determine the rates on the basis of the
market rates and the contractor shall be paid in accordance with the rates so
determined. However there is no provision in the contract to make any
payment unless the rates are sanctioned by the competent authority.

In the following cases payment to the contractor released in 13" R.A. bill
(May 2010), pending sanction of extra item rate, which was % 0.88 crore more

than the amount payable resulting in undue favour to the contractor as given
in table 3.3.

Table 3.3: Irregular payment on extra items/substituted item
Unit| | Upto Rate Rate Difference

Excess

date paid | sanctioned | inrate | payment
quantity
executed
6. 4tnm ACP for sqm 860.32 14500 8798 5702 4905545
HVAC duet
10. 4mm ACP for (sqm 1180.48 | 10000 7332 2668 © 3149521
outer column
cladding
12. Gypsum sqm 2237.61.._ 179850 1449.33 349.17 781306
Partition

TOTAL 8836372

In reply it was stated that on account part rate payment has been made for
extra items. The final approval could not be completed as the work is under
investigation with CBI and all the original records are with them. Further
payment/recoveries shall be affected after approval of the statements from
Competent Authorities.

The reply was not tenable as approval in principle to extra items was obtained
(July 2010) after actual payment which was more than those approved rates.
The final approval of rates has not yet been obtained (December 2011).

3.2.3.6 Avoidable expenditure on ready mix lean concrete for
filling in pit of column

As an engineering practice, column pits are filled with earth excavated on site,
which was also envisaged in the contract. Instead, in the instant case, the
contractor was permitted to fill it with a much more expensive option of ready
mix lean concrete resulting in avoidable extra cost of € 1.39 crore. In addition,
र 0.16 crore was also paid to remove the excavated earth from site.

In its reply, NDMC stated that no space was available at the construction site
to store the excavated earth and the gaps were filled up with lean
concrete/Ready Mixed Concrete (RMC) with pumps for early completion of
work. The picture shown by Audit was old and of the area on which building
has been constructed.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 23


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

Reply is not acceptable as planning failure in timing of the works caused
delay. The site had adequate space for temporary stacking. The picture below
indicates the space available at the construction site and relates to the time
when the column footing work was in progress and construction of building is
a later event.

Picture of the construction site at Talkatora Indoor stadium
indicating space available for construction activity.

3.2.3.7 Single tender for electrical work of DG sets

For the work of supplying, installing, testing and commissioning of a 1000
KVA diesel generating set at TIS only one contractor (M/s Sudhir Power
Projects, Gurgaon) had submitted bid for the work. Accordingly, the work
was awarded to the agency at a cost of & 2.06 crore (i.¢., 1.67 per cent below
estimated cost of = 2.09 crore). The work was awarded on 40 July 2008 with
stipulated completion period of nine months (i.e., till 03 April 2009) and
contractor has been paid हैं 1.73 crore uptill now (September 2011), the
completion certificate and final bill of the work was pending.

As completion of civil work of Talkatora stadium to a certain extent was
imperative for installing the DG sets, Audit observed that the work period of
this tender had to be extended for a total period of 207 months, on nine
instances (each extension of two to three months) till 03 December 2010.
Thus pending completion of civil work, there was adequate time (20 months)
at the disposal of tender inviting authority to go in for a second call so as to
bring in more competition in this case.

In reply NDMC stated that the offer was less than the estimated cost put to
tender hence was accepted. As lot of infrastructure works of CWG were in the
pipeline, hence there was every possibility of getting higher rates on re-
tendering. The site for installation for DG sets was not ready and to keep the
contract alive the extensions were given.

7 (3.4.2009 to 3.122010)

24 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

The reply was not acceptable as the offer of the single bidder, even though
below the estimated cost, cannot be said to be competitive. Had re-tendering
been adopted more competitive rates could have been obtained.

3.2.3.8 Non-levy and recovery of compensation for delay in
completion of work

All contracts awarded by NDMC for CWG-2010 indicated stipulated dates of
start and completion of work specifying that time was essence of the contract.
All agreements provided for recovery of compensation @ 1.5 per cent per
month of delay in completion ef work, computed on per day basis, not
exceeding 10 per cent of the tendered value of work. Agreements for major
works also included milestones indicating stages of work for achievement by
the contractor. In case of failure of the contractor to achieve the contracted
milestone, specified percentage of tendered amount was to be withheld from
contractors’ bills for adjustment against any recovery due from contractor for
slow progress and delay in completion of work. Regarding grant of Extension
of time (EOT), the CPWD Manual stipulates that based on the Hindrance
Register where adequate and proper grounds exist, the Engineer-in-charge can
grant extension of time. Remedies for delayed completion’ inferior
workmanship at disposal of the Government include levy of compensation,
termination of contract, award of unexecuted work to another contractor after
giving notice to the contractor, forfeiture of earnest money’ security deposit/
performance guarantee etc.

In four cases of NDMC in which provisional EOT had been granted Audit
found that no compensation was levied despite delays being attributable to
inadequate manpower and lack of management on the contractor’s part; and
delays in providing drawings for the consultancy contract. In these cases
extension of time had not been decided. The maximum amount of
compensation that could have been levied but short recovered or not
recovered in these four cases amounted to हैं 18.75 crore as detailed in
Annexure 3.2.

NDMC assured that due consideration would be taken for lapses on the part of
the contractor at the time of final extension of time/bill and compensation
levied. NDMC confinned the facts in its reply of December 2011.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 25


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

3.3. Venues constructed by PWD, GNCTD
3.3.1 Construction/ Upgradation of Thyagaraj Stadium

Thyagaraj Stadium

3.3.1.1 Overview
Construction/ upgradation of Thyagaraj Stadium involved:

. Construction of a multipurpose air-conditioned indoor stadium with a
seating capacity of 5000, which could be used for various sports;

. Two warm up courts and one competition court for net ball; and
. Synthetic track of 400m x 8 lane for athletics (training venue).

3.3.1.2 Planning and Award

Peddle Thorp Melbourne (Australia), in joint venture with Kapoor &
Associates, was appointed as the design consultant at a cost of = 5.98 crore in
December 2006. The preliminary estimated cost of the stadium of % 297.45
crore was approved by the GNCTD Cabinet in September 2007, and detailed
estimates for 23 works were approved by PWD, GNCTD for % 250.86 crore
from September 2007 to January 2010. Against awarded cost of % 297.98
crore of these works, payment of = 307.69 crore had been made to the
contractors till October 2011.

The main works for structures under packages I and II were awarded to JMC
Projects (India) Ltd. at costs of = 103.96 crore and % 108.80 crore. The work
of package-I was completed in April 2009 at a total expenditure of हैं 112.09
crore while under package-II, an amount of & 112.29 crore had been paid till
October 2011.

26 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

3.3.1.3 Inflation of costs in detailed estimates

The CPWD Manual provides that percentage rate tenders should be resorted
to only when the major part of the estimated cost put to tender is based on the
DSR, irrespective of the value of the tenders. However, PWD, GNCTD
adopted a percentage rate tender, although more than 80 per cent of the cost
for the two packages were for non-DSR items. Since the bidder is asked to
quote a single percentage rate and does not have an option of quoting different
percentages for different items, any error leading to an increase in the
estimated cost of an item cannot be easily factored into consideration by the
bidder. Consequently, an inflated cost estimate provides a higher baseline for
potential bidders. The following instances of inflation of costs in the detailed
estimates were observed:

Table 3.4 — Instances of inflation of costs in the detailed estimates
(% in crore)
mn in Cost

Te

Adoption of incorrect exchange rate (% 43/ US$ instead of
% 40.28/ US$) in computing cost of imported structural steel

Adoption of higher wastage rate of 10 per cent (instead of 5 2.14
per cent) for fabrication and commissioning of trusses
Inflated estimation for Kalzip roofing @ हैं 5627.77/ sq.m. 0.87

The contractor engaged another agency to execute the item
@ 4393/ sqm. Even after including CPOH* of 10 per cent,
the actual market price would be only हैं 4832.30/ sqm.

GNCTD stated in its reply that there is no inflated estimation; however, the
estimated rates cannot affect the quoted rates which the contractors quote on
the basis of their own assessment of the market. As such, there is no loss to
the government. The reply of GNCTD is not acceptable as this was a
percentage rate tender, and the estimate was prepared based on market rate
which itself was inflated. Accordingly contractor quoted rates on the basis of
these estimates resulting in loss to government.

3.3.1.4 Higher cost item for detailed estimates/ execution

Audit found the following instances of adoption of higher cost items for
detailed estimates and execution from among the options provided by the

* Contractor's Profit and Overheads

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 27


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

consultant in the preliminary estimates (which included lower cost items):

Table 3.5 - Instances of adoption of higher cost items
& in crore)

Item Escalation in
Cost
Estimate
Use of costlier acoustic false ceiling (Sonapanel brand) costing 1.85

% 4208.30 / sqm against the alternative costing & 1650/ sqm

Use of more expensive nylon, fire retardant carpet (of “Milliken” 0.70
make), rated as moderate duty, costing % 5464.30/ sqm against the
estimated cost of € 1539.70/ sqm for heavy duty usage

Use of costlier toilet partitions (Merino Titan Series Cubical boxes) 1.00
costing हैं 19,556’ sqm against the estimated cost of particle board

partitions of हैं 792.60/ sqm and laminated glass partitions costing

% 18,300/ sqm.

Installation of composite panels of paper towel dispenser, hand dryer 0.37
and waste paper bins (D-Line make) in toilets @ & 2.42 lakh

GNCTD stated that it is their responsibility to examine technically the options
proposed by the consultant on relative merits and demerits instead of blindly
choosing the cheaper option and they had executed items found more suitable.
Reply of the GNCTD is not convincing, as the appointed consultant had
proposed the items after considering the suggestions given by the OC in their
venue brief and also considering all technical aspects of the items. The
department had however chosen to go with the costlier item, thus not ensuring
economy.

3.3.1.5 | Overpayments to the contractor (JMC Project)
Audit observed the following overpayments to the contractor:

. There was inadmissible payment of % 3.03 crore separately for plates,
nuts and bolts in steel work (trusses), in addition to payment for actual
length of pipe, which already included costs of plates, nuts and bolts.
The GNCTD stated that bearing and truss are different structural
elements and as such the sliding plates and bolts are payable separately.
The agency had claimed = 150.38 per kg for these elements vide their
letter. However, after pursuance by the department, the agency had
agreed to execute this part under item 8.1 हैँ 133 per kg, which is on
the lower side, claimed by the contractor as extra item. The reply is not
acceptable as being a complete item the “other component” is included
in the rate for truss. The version of department is not evident from

28 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

nomenclature or any other provision of the agreement and the letter for
extra item from the contractor is a later development, not on record at
the time of audit.

. There was avoidable payment of हैं 2.51 crore for plates, nuts and bolts
in other item of steel works (purlins) due to not specifying the mode of
measurement for payment, as was done in the case of steel work for
trusses; and non adoption of uniform mode of measurement and
payment. GNCTD stated in its reply that payment for steel structures has
been correctly made under this item as per the special conditions
attached with the agreement and no over/avoidable payment has been
made. The reply is not acceptable as both the items are related to
structural steel and difference was only in the origin i.e., one was Indian
and the other imported. By adopting two types of measurement methods
department suffered a loss of € 2.50 crore.

e Para 2.4 of minutes of pre-bid meeting for phase —I (structure) works
held in September 2007 states that-““The quoted rate shall be inclusive of
all duties and taxes applicable on the date of receipt of tender. If there is
any increase in duties or taxes after date of receipt of tender, it shall be
reimbursed on production of documentary evidence if actually paid by
the contractor, If there is any decrease in duties or taxes after last date of
receipt of tender, same shall be recovered from the contractor’s bill”.
However, audit revealed that the custom duty on steel was reduced in
the Finance Act 2008-09, but no deduction for such reduction of duty
was made from the contractor. This has resulted in an excess payment of
% 0.33 crore to the contractor on account of reduction in customs duty on
steel. GNCTD stated that the amount recoverable was only हैं 0.29 crore
but no documentary evidence was produced to Audit.

3.3.1.6 Specifying a richer/ higher specification
Audit scrutiny revealed that costlier acoustic wall panelling (using perforated
ACP) was executed even outside the Field of Play (FOP) over the corridor and

external concourse, instead of applying plaster and plastic paint (as done in
the VIP area); this resulted in extra cost of € 1.24 crore.

In its reply GNCTD stated that the selection of type and location of wall
panelling has been done judiciously, considering the requirement of acoustics,
type of users of a particular area and its surrounding area. Reply of the
GNCTD is not acceptable as department executed the acoustics wall panelling
on both sides of the wall. The FOP area was fully covered with costly Sona
panel and acoustic doors to prevent noise level from outside. Thus, the use of
high cost acoustic paneling on wall of open area (concourse/corridor) was not
justified.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 29


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

3.3.1.7 Procurement of Items by specifying a single Brand

Audit scrutiny revealed that 31 items valuing = 24.28 crore (Annexure 3.3)
were included in the detailed estimates by specifying either a single brand by
name, or stating the requirement as brand “X” or equivalent. These items
were included as per the recommendations of the consultant and rate of these
items decided/ analysed on the basis of single quotations. No justification was
recorded for specifying the brand. Some examples of rates of single brand
used for preparation of estimates are as under:

Table 3.6 - Examples of rates of single brand used for preparation of

estimates
S.No. Name of item Brand of Rate of
item procurement
@ per unit)
1 | Hall wall hung WC. pan, seat with cover, | Roca 21,067
2 Concealed cistern Geberit 8,254
3 Duo fix mounting element Geberit 6,213
| | Single urinal basin with PVC 6 Its. auto Roca 34,524
flushing cistern
F Wash basin including Sensotronic sensor | Roca, 27,540
faucet Duravit,
Jaguar
| Paper towel dispenser, Iland dryer, Waste | D-line 2,41,813
paper bin
7 Blower/ hand dryer GEM or 24,356
equivalent
| | Paper towel dispenser D-line or 33,835
equivalent
|! | Paper waste bin D-line or 30,445
equivalent

Further, payment of रैं 18.22 crore was made on execution of 23 items of the
same brand as specified in the Bill of Quantity (BOQ) and three items worth
% 3.50 crore were executed as equivalent brands. Five items specilied with the
brand name were not executed. Thus, restricting these items to specific brands
resulted in reduced competition with consequential increases in project cost.

In its reply GNCTD stated that while granting sanction to the Project, the
Cabinet of GNCTD had directed that the venue should be constructed with
world class spe tions. Accordingly, based on the importance of the area,
the specifications were decided. The reply of the GNCTD is not convincing as

30 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

department used richer specification in case of ACP panelling, toilet partition
and fitting, carpet, flooring tiles, roofing, wooden blinds etc. in common area
also.

3.3.1.8 Blockage of funds of ¥ 22.14 crore on installation of
gas turbine

The venue brief for Thyagaraj stadium stipulated power supply from two
independent feeders and power backup for critical supplies. Instead,
PWD went in for two additional power generation units ic. Solar power
plant and dual-fuel gas turbine. Audit of the projects revealed the
following deficiencies:

« A 2.5 MW dual-fuel gas turbine was awarded at a cost of = 19.58 crore
and an add-on Vapour Absorption Machine (VAM) at a cost of हैं 2.83
crore; in addition, these works were awarded on single tender basis to
Turbomach India Pvt. Ltd.

. Along with turbine, decision was also taken to install VAM, an energy
efficiency booster, which could work only with gas turbine, taking total
capital investment cost to हैं 22.41 crore. The stated reason for selection
of gas turbine was the green attribute, environmental friendly nature of
gas turbine.

* The VAM increases the etficiency of the turbine by extracting heat from
the exhaust. The VAM can save electricity of about 650 KW, equivalent
to हैं 3,380 per hour’. However, during each hour of operation, the
turbine also incurs a loss of = 1740 per hour'® by generating power at a
rate of € 6.07 against grid supply of = 5.2, making the whole installation
including VAM of & 22.41 crore, uneconomical.

. Since commissioning of turbine, 121075 KWH units have been fed to
the grid (November 2010). No Power Purchase Agreement for the power
generated was in place.

In its reply GNCTD also stated that the government is promoting environment
friendly technologies and green building construction. Use of Gas Turbine
Generating Set in combination with VAM which provides air conditioning by
use of exhaust smoke {rom gas turbine) is a step in furtherance to the same
policy. The fact is that the gas turbine was run only during the Games and
since then not a single unit had been generated from the gas turbine. Further
without VAM when the air conditioning is not used the rate of power
generation would be higher at हैं 8.73.

°% 5.20 per unit cost of electricity from grid X 650 KW which is net power saved by VAM=%
3380 per hour

10३ 6.07-5.2=% 0.85 per KW X 2000 KW /hr=% 1740 per hour

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 31


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

3.3.2 Construction of Chhattrasal Stadium

Chhatrasal Stadium

3.3.2.1 Overview

Chhatrasal stadium was to be upgraded as a training venue for athletics. The
estimated cost of = 83.00 crore was approved by the GNCTD Cabinet in
August 2008, and detailed estimates of € 55.87 crore were approved by PWD
in December 2008. Benjamin, Benjamin and Vats were appointed in March
2008 as the design consultant at a cost of € 1.33 crore. The main work for the
structure was awarded to Era Infra Engineering in January 2009 for हैं 60.26
crore. Payment of ~ 55.37 crore had been made up to October 2011 to the
contractor.

3.3.2.2. Appointment of consultant

Audit observed the following in the appointment of Benjamin, Benjamin and
Vats as the design consultant:

* The condition of relevant experience vis-a-vis sports venues in the
NIT was removed at the Press Notice stage;

« Different weightages for criteria for technical evaluation were used for
the Chhatrasal Stadium (as compared to the Thyagaraj Stadium).

* Four firms participated and two firms with the minimum qualifying

32 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

marks of 70 qualified as given below:

Sl. | Points evaluated | M/s Enarch Mis M/s AG. Mis
No. for Consultants | Benjamin Krishna | Kapoor &
Pvt. Ltd. Benjamin & Menon | Associates
Vats
1 Firms’ relevant 22 15 13 7
experience and
strength (25)
| । Experience of the 12.5 10.5 12.5 12.5

key personnel
deployed (15)

a Technical 20 495 46.5 30
proposal
(Presentation)
(60)
Total | 545 | 75 72 | 595 |

It was observed that that department had used the same technical parameters
for evaluation of consultant in Thyagraja stadium, but used different
weightages. A comparative tabulation of weightage is shown below:

S.No. Points evaluated for Thyagraja Stadium | Chhatrasal Stadim
1 Firms? relevant experience 25 25
and strength
2. Experience of the key [७ | 15
personnel deployed
3 Technical proposal 15 60
(Presentation)

Less weightage was given to experience of key personnel as can be seen from
the table. If the weightages had been adopted as for Thyagaraj Stadium,
Benjamin, Benjamin and Vats would not have been technically qualified.
GNCTD stated that the criteria fixed for evaluation of technical bid was
approved by E-in-C and the word “sports venue” was inadvertently left out in
condition of NIT. However, this had no effect on the biding process as the bid
documents were sold to the intending bidders based upon the eligibility
criteria mentioned in the press notice. In addition to use of different eligibility
criteria, GNCTD stated that as the requirements of the two venues were quite
different, same criteria for evaluation could not be applied. The reply is not
acceptable as consistent criteria should have been adopted for consultant
evaluation in the interest of transparency which would have resulted in
selection of a consultant who had experience in sports venues.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 33


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD.

3.3.3 Construction of Training Venue at Ludlow Castle

Training venue at Ludlow Castle School

Government Model Ludlow Castle School No. 2 was selected as a training
venue for wrestling. AG Krishna Menon was appointed as the design
consultant at a cost of हैं 0.60 crore in December 2007. Estimated cost of
% 20.33 crore was approved by the GNCTD Cabinet in November 2008, and
detailed estimates of € 9.34 crore approved by PWD in December 2008. The
work was awarded (January 2009) to Arora Construction Company Private
Ltd. भरें 11.25 crore.

Audit observed that for award of design consultancy, procedure of calling
Expression of Interest was not followed and limited tenders were called, on
account of shortage of time. However, although the consultant appointment
committee had approved the proposal for appointment in August 2007, the
work was awarded to AG Krishna Menon only in December 2007, belying the
sense of urgency.

In its reply GNCTD stated that the short listed consultants/architects were
quite capable of providing the consultancy of such type of building.
Therefore, the offer from the panel of approved architects was called. The
reply of GNCTD is not acceptable as even though limited tender process
was adopted due to shortage of time, yet the department had spent about six
months in the process of award of work only.

Further, Audit observed that the tendered amount of construction work
% 11.25 crore was 32 per cent above the estimated cost of हैं 8.50 crore. For
this purpose, a justified cost of हैं 10.50 crore was arrived at. Audit found
undue inflation of the justified cost by हैं 0.96 crore on account of
miscellaneous charges (already included in CPOH) and higher justification

34 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 3: Venues developed by NDMC and PWD

rate of structural steel (compared to the same items for Chhatrasal stadium).
Thus, the work was awarded at 17.92 per cent above the justification cost.

GNCTD stated that the time period was kept as eight months for the work, to
be completed well before beginning of Commonwealth Games to start
training etc. in time. The addition of extra cost for working at odd hours, over
and above the rates is also supported by paragraph 19.4.3.1 of CPWD Works
Manual-2007. The reply of the GNCTD is not convincing as adding the extra
amount in justification cost on account of miscellaneous charges in addition
to 15 per cent contractor’s profit (includes 7.5 per cent amount of
miscellaneous charges) is not correct and expenditure on providing the staff
car, telephone etc. to PWD staff should be met out of the contingencies of the
work. On higher justification rate of structural steel the GNCTD stated that
the market rate of similar items of both the stadia was same and justification
prepared by the department was correct. The reply is not acceptable, as Audit
had compared the justification rate of only DSR items of both the agreements
and department has adopted the justification rate of non DSR items of
Chhatrasal stadium.

3.4 Extra expenditure on extra, substituted and deviated
items on venues

The extent of extra, substituted and deviated items in the seven works (with
tendered cost of € 516.71 crore) reviewed by Audit, is summarized below:

(in crore)
Catego Amount
Extra items 15.13
Substituted items 8.34
Deviated items 43.72

The details of extra items, substituted items and deviated items in different
works, along with audit remarks, are given in Annexure 3.4.

In both Talkatora Stadium and Shivaji Stadium atleast six extra/substituted
items worth & 9.97 crore (Annexure 3.5) were executed because the architect
consultant had not prepared the design and estimates correctly. Adequate
penal provisions had not been incorporated in the agreement as per Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines to exercise control over the
consultant.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 35


Streetscape generally refers to urban roadway design and conditions as they
impact street users and nearby residents. Streetscapes are an important
component of the public spaces where people interact, which helps define a
community’s aesthetic quality, identity, economic activity, health, social
cohesion and opportunity and not just its mobility.

Streetscaping programmes are an important component of the efforts to
redevelop urban areas and include changes to the road cross section, traffic
management, sidewalk conditions, landscaping (particularly tree cover), street
furniture (utility poles, benches, garbage cans ete.), building fronts, improving
signages, and materials specifications.

4.1 Planning for streetscaping/beautification in Delhi

4.1.1 Lack of overarching vision

One of the objectives of CWG-2010 was the development of city
infrastructure. GNCTD decided in 2004 to implement streetscaping and
beautification of Delhi roads before CWG-2010. The project remained more
or less dormant till May 2008, when GNCTD initiated the process for the
selection of consultants.

Audit found no evidence of GNCTD having conducted detailed studies of
experiences/ of streetscaping projects in Indian/ world cities, and their impact
on the local community. Further, although preserving, developing and
maintaining the aesthetic quality of urban and environmental design within
Delhi is clearly within the remit of the Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC),
GNCTD did not consider it necessary to obtain clearances from DUAC for
implementation of the streetscaping/ beautification project. Also, considering
that traffic management is a key component of strectscaping projects, there
was no evidence of consultation with the Traffic Police at an appropriately
early stage to assess and co-ordinate the impact of this project on the
management of the huge volumes of Delhi traffic.

Thus, the streetscaping and beautification project was conceived without a
broad vision and purpose. The project was implemented at an average
awarded cost of % 4.8 crore/Km.

The scope of the project expanded enormously from 2004 to 2008. Initially, it
was decided to implement the project in 10 sites around games venues
covering 20 km through engagement of consultants. A Board of Assessors
(BoA) was constituted in October 2004 who shortlisted (2004) 19 consultants
for the job. The scope of the project was subsequently widened,
accommodating several roads covering 73.48 km pertaining to:


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

* PWD - 41.08 km;

* MCD - 22.90 km;

* DDA-2kn;

* NDMC- 3.80 km; and
* DIMTS - 3.70 km.

The streetscaping works were split up into 16 packages (PWD: eight, MCD:
two and NDMC: six). Four consultants were engaged for nine packages'. The
scope of work involved survey, preparation of plan/ designs, cost estimation
and construction supervision. The consultant selection was finalised as late as
May -October 2008, after four years, which, created a situation of urgency in
execution of the works.

The venture was a consultant-driven project as department did not provide any
common design guidelines, with corresponding budgetary estimates per km of
work. The consultants were to draw up designs and estimates for the packages
allotted to them.

The department set the target for completing the project before CWG
(October 2010) .The works were not fully completed before CWG-2010.

In reply the GNCTD stated that DUAC clearance was unnecessary as it was
concerned only with aesthetics of structures and all works were done as per
street design guidelines issued by the UTTIPEC with active coordination with
the Traffic Police. The reply is not convincing because for a project of this
magnitude involving beautification of roads of approximately 72 kms, there
was no visible overarching plan document.

The GNCTD further maintained that all works were substantially (95 to 100
per cent) completed before the Games.

4.2 Selection of Consultants
4.2.1 Arbitrariness in selection of Consultants

Four consultants were selected (May 2008-October 2008) through four rounds
of tenders/negotiations, as evidenced by the chronology of events given
below:

Table 4.1 — Chronology of events leading to selection of consultants

| Date | Events/Activities

02 May 2008

1 There were 9 packages for the consultants. However, these were re-grouped into 16
packages for award of work.

38 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Events/Activiti

31 May 2008

07 October
2008

12 November
2008 - 11
December
2008

2 Now including Parekh Associates

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 39


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Events/Activities

In all, Pradeep Associates and Sikka Associates were alloted four and three
packages respectively Parekh Associates and Oasis Designs one package
each’. Audit observed that Sikka Associates and Pradeep Associates submitted
bids at the behest (12 November 2008) of the BoA for the additional packages
(13 November 2008) in one day’s time. No technical bids were submitted. The
negotiated rates were approved by the CAC without any preliminary
estimate/justification of rates and conceptual plan; these negotiated rates for
the six packages ranged between & 10.39 lakh and हैं 12.50 lakh per km. In all,
the consultants were engaged for the streetscaping works at a cost of = 9.20
crore (averaging % 12.5 lakh/km). The Administrative Approval and
Expenditure Sanctions were accorded by Government on post contract stage
(December 2008/April 2009). Although the process of short listing of
consultants was initiated in 2004, the process was unduely delayed up to
December 2008. On the ground of urgency, consultants were then selected by
direct negotiation. The extra cost on engagement of consultants at variable

3 There were 9 packages for the consultants. However, these were re-grouped into 16
packages for award of work.

40 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

rates, excess payment on account of less execution of work and non-levy of
LD was ® 1.65 crore.

Thus, the selection of the consultants was arbitrary and non-transparent, since
six packages were assigned simply on the basis of financial quotations and
negotiation with two consultants, that too, without specifying the technical
works to be done.

GNCTD stated that in view of the urgent need to appoint the consultant
quotations were obtained from M/’s Sikka Associates and M/s Pradeep
Sachdeva Designer Associates on 13 November 2008 for the packages for
which they had not bid earlier. Thus the facts have been accepted by the
Government.

Reply is not convincing as the shortlisting of the consultants was completed in
2004 whereas actual selection was commenced as late as in May 2008. Thus,
the urgency is not justifiable. Moreover, as per Manual of policies and
procedure of Employment of Consultant, the appointment of consultant
through direct negotiation does not provide the benefits of competition with
regards to quality, cost and transparency.

Regarding extra cost on engagement of consultants at variable rates, it was
stated that the rates of different stretches cannot be identical as the work
required in different stretches was different and that the minimum rate of M/s
Sikka was exceptional. The rates were consistent with the rates received from
the earlier call of tenders. The reply is not acceptable because while tendering
no differentiation was made between different stretches and rates were
received in general per km of road. If stretches were to be treated differently
the department should have called the tenders with appropriate specifications.
Therefore the decision itself was unsound as the consultants had not
communicated their designs and the department was unaware of the specifics.

Regarding non-levy of LD it was stated that levy of compensation is subject to
decision of the authority competent to extend time and final action is yet to be
taken in this regard.

4.3 Cost estimation for works

Out of the total estimated cost of € 209.14 crore for the eight packages (PWD
portion), 49 per cent (% 101.71 crore) of the cost was on items with costs
based on the Delhi Schedule of Rates (DSR) and remaining 51 per cent
(® 107.43 crore) on items with costs on Market Rates (MR)/Analysis of Rates.
It was found that the MR were generally not supported by any quotation,
indicating that the estimates were not a true reflection of the prevailing market
rates and thus, were not reliable.

As pointed out earlier, the department did not provide any common design
guidelines with corresponding target budgetary estimate per km_ of
streetscaping work. The consultants formulated plans / designs and

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 41


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

specifications for the works. The CEs while according technical sanction, did
not undertake a comparative examination of the plan/design and cost estimates
(prepared by the consultants) across the cight packages with a view to
bringing in a broad level of uniformity in design/specification and cost of
execution. This resulted in adoption of different specifications and rates for
identical items of works.

The retired Directors of CPWD appointed as Advisor to the PWD observed
that the consultants had not gone into the engineering details and suggested
dispensing with various unnecessary/unwarranted works during
implementation of the Projects. This was not accepted, and the projects were
implemented as suggested by the Consultants.

Audit observed that due to lack of uniformity in specifications,
furnishings'compouents and rates between the estimates, the per km cost of
the works ranged between % 3.14 crore (roads around various games venues)
and हैं 8.27 crore (Ring Road from Ashram to Bhairon Marg Crossing).

The streetscaping works were finally awarded at per km costs ranging from
& 3.63 crore to हैं 9.75 crore with an average cost of % 5.32 crore. By contrast,
NHAI adopts an estimated cost of = 9.50 crore/ km for construction of a four-
lane highway, and Indian Railways’ estimated cost of construction of a
railway track is around % 4.1 crore/ km. Clearly, costs of this magnitude spent
on streetscaping and beautification were prohibitive and represented a waste
of public money.

Incidentally, the per square metre cost of surfacing the footpath varied
significantly between roads, averaging हैं 717 for paving with normal paver
blocks, हैं 1450 with vitrified tiles and = 2679 with polished granite.

Department stated that estimates were prepared by consultants and were duly
scrutinised by the department before accord of technical sanction by the
respective competent authorities. Reply is not tenable because as per
paragraph 2.5 of CPWD Manual 2007, a technical sanction amounts to a
guarantee that the proposals are technically sound and that the estimates are
accurately prepared and are based on adequate data. Also, streetscaping was
one project and it was the prime responsibility of the departmental engineers
to comply with the above rule in assessing the actual rates and specifications
required for the items and follow common specifications and technical
parameters across all the packages to ensure economy, efficiency and
effectiveness in execution of the project, especially since external consultants
had been engaged for providing the streetscaping design. Further, since all the
zones were under the technical control of EIC, comparison across the zones
should have been administratively ensured.

GNCTD stated (December 2011) that cost per km cannot be compared
package-wise. It will vary for different roads as per work required to be done
in the same package and also for different reaches on the same road. As

42 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

different designs were approved for different consultants/ packages, hence
uniform design was not adopted for all packages. It was also stated that
compatison with altogether different works like highways of NHAI would not
be fair.

GNCTD’s views can be appreciated as far as difference in design and
requirement of work to be done on different roads is concerned. However,
considering the scope and volume of the work, government should have
conducted a preliminary study and issued general guidelines for the designs to
be adopted for ensuring economy in the work. Moreover, as per paragraph 2.5
of CPWD Manual 2007, a technical sanction amounts to a guarantee that the
proposals are technically sound and that the estimates are accurately prepared
and are based on adequate data. Also, it was the prime responsibility of the
departmental engineers to comply with the above rule in assessing the actual
rates and specifications required for the items and follow common
specifications and technical parameters across all the packages to ensure
economy, efficiency and effectiveness in execution of the project. Further,
since all the zones were under the technical control of EIC, comparison across
the zones should have been administratively ensured.

4.3.1 Adoption of Richer Specifications/ Higher Rates/Short
Recovery

Audit observed that consultants increased the cost of the project at the
estimation stage by providing richer specifications and higher rates for various
items of work, overlooking/by-passing the provisions’specifications of DSR,
MoRTH, CPWD Manual and IS codes.

The consultants’ estimates were cleared by the various levels upto the CE.
High cost bids were approved by the Works Advisory Board (WAB) by way
of irregular justification of the quoted rates at the tender stage. This resulted in
loss of € 59.60 crore to the Government as summarised in Table 4.2:

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 43


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Sl
No

Item of
work

Use of
granite and
vitrified
tiles for
footpath

Table 4.2 - Adoption of Richer Specifications

Audit Finding

Granite Paving

GNCTD decided (July, 2008) that the pavement
for pedestrian walking should be constructed
with coloured cement concrete (CC) paver
blocks. The consultants, however, proposed for
use of gang saw cut mirror polished machine
cut granite prescribed in the DSR for kitchen
platforms, vanity counters, window sills and
similar locations. The basic cost of granite in
the market (February, 2011 ) was around
%1022/ square metre, against which the
estimates adopted were ~ 1500/ ₹ 1765 per
square metre. Also against 5 per cent wastage
admissible as per DSR for all granite work, the
consultants considered the wastage at 15 per
cent.

44

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

SI Item of Audit Finding
No work

Vitrified paving tiles

They also proposed vitrified tiles for paving, in
some packages even specifying a particular
brand i.e. “Pavit”. The CEs did not point out the
discrepancies for rectification before putting the
works to tender. This increased the cost of the
item of construction of the pavement. The
finished rate of Pavit brand tile (16 mm) taking
into account the market cost, wastage,
overheads and other factors was = 965.24 per
square metre (April, 2010), whereas the
estimates adopted was ~ 1854.16 per square
metre,

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 45


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Sl
No

Ttem of
work

Cement
Concrete
paver
block

Cement concrete paver

As per the specifications prescribed for such
work under CPWD and IS code, factory made
50 mm thick paver blocks of RMC M-30 were
to be fixed on 50 mm thick coarse sand spread
over a hard base. The consultants proposed for
fixing factory made CC paver blocks of richer
specifications and of excess thickness.

Kerb stone

Director General (Works), CPWD acting as
Advisor, PWD, observed that the CC kerb
stones on the central verge and the footpaths
were in good condition and need not be
replaced. The option was ignored and the kerb
stones were replaced as suggested by the
consultants in nine* packages.

Audit observed that the estimates provided for
fixing the CC kerb stones of richer
specifications deviated from the specifications
as per MoRTH,

4.36

+ YSC, Africa Avenue etc, Dr Karni Singh, CWG Village, Mall Road, Kisan Ghat etc,
Bhairon Marg and two packages of MCD.

46 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


SI Item of
No work

Non
Motorised
Vehicle
lane

Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Audit Finding

NMV lane with obstruction

The Non Motorised Vehicle (NMV) lanes were
executed at a total cost of हैं 9.36 crore. The
designs had deviations from the guidelines
issued by UTTIPEC on street design. The NMV
lane also did not fully meet the intended
objectives due to lack of continuity throughout
the length of the roads on account of
obstructions like bus stops, plaza and road
crossings in the middle of the NMV track.
Audit observed that while four’ estimates
provided for its execution in 150 mm thick CC,
roads around CWG village/Mall Road were
executed with richer specification of 200 mm
thick CC.

5 | Bituminous
Mastic
wearing
course

While the estimate for the work of roads around
CWG Village provided for mastic wearing
course for 25 mm on the carriageway as per the
MORTH and CPWD specifications, five® other
estimates provided it for 40 mm thickness over

3.40

5 Dr Karni Singh Shooting Range’ Bhairon Marg to ITO Fly Over/ Ashram Crossing to
Bhairon Marg/roads around various games venues

© Kishan Ghat, Bhairon Marg, Ashram Crossing, Mall Road and Dr Karni Singh Shooting

Range

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 47


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

SI Ttem of Audit Finding
INo work

the carriageway. Audit scrutiny revealed that
such work was executed on Mall Road as an
extra item at higher rates.

Dense The estimates for roads around Yamuna Sports 2.10
Bituminous | Complex (YSC) and roads around various
Concrete Games venues (Africa Avenue) provided for
(DBC) execution of DBC in carriageway and service
roads using 60/70 grade bitumen. However, the
estimates for four’ other works provided for
using higher specification of bitumen (Polymer
Modified Bitumen and Crumb Rubber Moditied
Bitumen) for the carriageway and service roads.
Besides, the DBC was executed at variable
thickness ranging between 40 mm and 50 mm.

Total 51.33

GNCTD in its reply stated that richer specifications were adopted only at few
places to add the element of diversity and meaningful aesthetics and that
different consultants put their creative best efforts in utilizing the constrainted
road space for roads users. It further gave its view on specific audit
observation as follows: -

On granite paving it was stated that there was nothing on record about the
decision of GNCTD of July 2008 to use coloured paver block, although there
was a proposal of the government to that effect. Granite, as proposed by the
consultants, was used in the footpath surface where pedestrian density was
high, with the approval of the highest authority of the GNCTD. It was also
stated that most of the granite has been used for plaza, ramps, table top, entry,
auto lane and planters to highlight the features. Regarding 15 percent
wastages, it was stated that the percentage was taken where granite was used.
in curved pattern and that such work had not been actually executed at site,
though taken in estimates. Regarding use of Pavit brand tiles it was stated that
the estimate has used the words ‘Pavit or equivalent’ in all except one
package. It was further stated that Audit had used the cheapest available group
of tiles whereas the consultant has adopted the costlier tiles in view of quality.

The reply is incorrect because as per the minutes of meeting chaired by CS on
16 July 2008 (item no. 2) clearly showed the decision of Delhi Government in
this regard. Moreover of the total quantity of the granite of 90,684 square

7 CWG Village, Mall road, IG Stadium and Dr Karni Singh Shooting Range

48 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

metre, the area covered in plaza, as per estimate, was for 4782 square metre
(5 per cent) pertaining to Bhairon Marg to ITO (1102 Sqm) and Ashram
Crossing to Bhairon Marg (3680 Sqm). Thus, 95 per cent of the granite was
proposed by the consultants for the footpaths and items related to it, which is
against GNCTD’s specific decision to use coloured cement concrete paver
blocks. The contention of the government on wastage is weak, as taking 15
percent wastage in estimates had increased the total estimates even if the work
‘was not actually executed. The contention of the government regarding use of
Pavit tiles is also not acceptable as economy was not considered while using a
specific brand.

On Cement Concrete paver block GNCTD stated that CPWD Manual
provided factory made precast paver block of M 30 or otherwise specified
grade to be used and as per IS code thickness 60 mm, 80 mm,100mm and
120mm would be considered as standard thickness under this specification
and that different specifications of paver blocks were prescribed by the
consultants depending upon traffic category and merger of cycle track with
service lane/main carriageway. However during audit it was noted that the
specifications of cement concrete base, granular sub base and
thickness/strength of paver blocks significantly varied across the packages
irrespective of the nature of traffic.

On Kerb Stone GNCTD stated that at many places, different stretches of same
roads were having different profiles of kerb stones. To give uniform and
pleasant look along various stretches of the road, Consultants’ proposals for
improvement in central verge was approved to maintain uniformity. Reply is
not acceptable in view of the fact that as per the views of the Advisor most of
the kerb stones were in good condition.

On Non Motorised Vehicle Lane GNCTD stated that 90 per cent of the
construction of NMV was in light of UTTIPEC guidelines, Delhi Master plan
etc. to the extent of. The reply of the department confirms the factual
position mentioned in the para.

On Bituminous Mastic Wearing Course GNCTD stated that mastic asphalt
courses have been provided as per MORTH Specifications which provided
thickness ranging from 25 to 50 mm. It further added that Mall Road package
did not provide for mastic wearing course item and extra items rates were
decided strictly as per the agreement. The reply is not acceptable as different
thickness of the mastic wearing course were adopted for different roads
without valid justification.

On Dense Bituminous Concrete (DBC) GNCTD stated that work had been
executed in different contracts as scope and specifications contained therein
after freezing the requirements and specifications and that costing was work
based. It further added that PWD was introducing new technology in phased
manner. Adoption of technologies as advanced by the government is not

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 49


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

tenable without reasonable justification as the works were executed during the
same period and goals were the same. Rather this had resulted in lack of
uniformity in specification in execution of works apart from avoidable extra
cost.

Table 4.3 — Adoption of Higher Rates/ Short Recovery

SI Ttem of Audit obs: i Financial
No work

Kerb Compared to the rate of CC kerb channel 0.25
Channel adopted in the estimate of Yamuna Sports
Complex, the estimates for five’ projects
adopted higher rates.
2 | Granular Sub | Tn five” packages, It was found that the rates 0.83
Base and for GSB and WWMM were provided at higher
Wet Mix rates compared to the rate adopted in the

Macadam Estimate for Mall Road, compounded by a
calculation error resulting in an even higher
rate.

3 | Application | The rates for the tack coat on bituminous 0.54
of tack coat | surface/sub base were provided at higher rates
in six” estimates compared to the lower rate

adopted in Mall Road.
4 | Reinforced | The rates of hume pipes were higher in three’! 0.93
Cement estimates compared to the rates adopted in the
Concrete estimate in Mall Road.
Hume Pipes
5 | Dismantling | The rates for dismantling the existing works 0.83
items were provided at variable and higher rates in
the estimates of YSC and various Games
venues (Africa Avenue) compared to other
estimates.
6 | Aluminium | The rate for fabricating, supplying and 0.76
Composite installing Aluminium Composite Panel for the
Panel roads around IG Stadium (Bhairon to ITO and
Ashram crossing to Bhairon) was incorrectly
computed at higher rate.
7 | Cement The analysis was incorrectly derived in six” 0.54
Concrete estimates and fixed at higher rates due to
items calculation error.

* Ashram to Bhairon Marg, Bhairon Marg to ITO, Mall Road, CWG Village and Dr Karni
Singh Shooting Range

” 1G Stadium-3 packages, M B Road and Afvica Avenue.

10 [6 Stadium-3 packages, Yamuna Sports Complex (YSC), CWG Village and MB road

"'1G Stadium, Dr Karni Singh Shooting Range and Yamuna Sports Complex

50 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

SI Item of Audit observation Financial
No work

| Short The cost of the useful materials retrieved out 3.19
recovery for | of the dismantled works was to be deducted
retrieved from the dues of the contractors. This was
materials cither not done, or done at a lower rate in
five'’ estimates.
| Geo textile | Three'’ estimates adopted a higher rate for 0.40
fabric Geo textile fabric membrane in place of lower
rate used in estimate of roads around IG
Stadium.
Total 8.27
Grand Total | 59.60 |

GNCTD stated (February 2011) that the inaccuracies in the estimated rates
cannot affect the rates quoted by the contractors, as such, no loss can be
attributed. The arguments are not tenable as in a percentage rate tender, the
bidder can quote only a single figure (per cent above or below) for all the
items, unlike in an item rate tender where each item is quoted for individually.
This makes it essential that the base cost for the items put up for percentage
rate tender are consistently and accurately assessed. The CPWD manual also
prescribes use of percentage rate tender only in case where most of the items
are based on DSR where the costing of the various items has been done by a
panel of experts. Any discrepancy in the base rate of an item in a percentage
rate tender cannot be easily factored in by the bidder, as he does not have the
flexibility of quoting separate rates for different items. A higher cost estimate
for any given item will lead to the advantage being passed on to the bidder
along with his quoted percentage premium.

Further, the streetscaping work, though executed as multiple packages, was a
single project and il was the prime responsibility of the Chief Engineers to
follow common rates across all the packages for identical items, especially
since multiple external consultants had been engaged for providing the design.

4.4 Tendering process
4.4.1 Use of percentage rate tender instead of item rate in PWD

CPWD Manual provides that percentage rate tenders should be resorted to
only when the major part of the estimated cost is based on the Delhi Schedule
of Rate (DSR), irrespective of the value of the tenders.

2 1G Stadium (three packages), M B Road, various games venues and YSC
8 CWG Village. YSC. Mall Road, Dr Karni Singh Shooting range and Attica Avenue
“4 Mall road, CWG Village and MB Road

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 51


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Of the estimates for %. 209.14 crore for the eight packages under PWD, 49 per
cent of the value of the works was estimated at the DSR and the remaining 51
per cent at the Market rates’Analysis of rates. Despite the above position,
which did not favour the call of percentage rate tenders, the CEs chose to
adopt percentage rate tenders.

GNCTD stated that around 62 per cent of the items are based on DSR and
balance items are based on market rates analysis. Hence, major part of
estimated cost put to tender is based on DSR items. It was stated that Audit's
contention is based on provisions of CPWD Works Manual 2010 which was
issued after commencement of the work under Audit and that CPWD works
Manual 2007 also stipulates use of percentage rate tender form for
development works. Since the works under audit are development works, use
of percentage rate forms is codal and hence justified and percentage rate
tenders are easy to award and easy to operate.

Reply of the government that percentage rate was adopted for easy award and
operation of the contracts was factually not correct since the department
admitted in its reply that the estimate contained (a) DSR items which
contributed to almost 50 per cent (b) derived on rates of DSR (labour and
cement) which contributed to almost 10 per cent and (c) derived on market
rates which contributed to 40 per cent. The DSR component as assessed in
audit was 49 per cent. Further, major components of the analysis of rates
(10 per cent stated by the Government) were based on the adoption of market
rates. In view of the above, the remaining items were taken under market rate.

GNCTD stated that percentage rate versus item rate tender is a matter of
debate. Also the preface to the CPWD Works Manual 2007 mentions one of
the salient features of the revisions as “encouraging percentage rate tenders”.

4.4.2 Irregularity in award and evaluation of tender

Audit observed that repeated efforts were made to deny the award of a
streetscaping and beautification package (Ring Road, Bhairon Marg to ITO
Flyover) to Swadeshi Construction Company, until it chose not to bid:

« In response to the NIT (October, 2009) for execution of the streetscaping
and beautification, Swadeshi Construction Company, quoting Civil Works
19.41 per cent above, Electrical 4.8 per cent above and Horticulture 4.8
per cent above the estimated cost, was the lowest. The NIT stipulated that
in case variable percentages were quoted, the minimum of the percentages
would be taken for calculating the cost of the tender. The Executive
Engineer (EE), Superintending Engineer (SE) and the CE, accordingly,
considered the bidder as L1 and conducted negotiations.

* Works Advisory Board (WAB), however, rejected (October, 2009)
Swadeshi’s tender on the ground that they had quoted component wise

52 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

rates and directed calling of fresh financial bids from those who were
technically qualified in the call notice floated in October 2009.

* Financial bids were called again (October, 2009) and Swadeshi
Construction quoting 16.40 per cent above was the lowest, but the WAB
again rejected it on the ground that the firm refused to negotiate the rates
and directed for retendering.

«* The work was finally awarded to Sharma Construction at 9 per cent above
the estimated cost on fresh tender (wherein Swadeshi Construction did not
participate). This resulted in a loss of %. 1.19 crore compared to the initial
valid offer of Swadeshi Construction.

GNCTD stated that Swadeshi Construction had quoted three different rates for
civil, electrical and horticulture components. Considering these rates, the
company was not L1 and hence its bid was rejected. The reply is factually not
correct since, as per the NIT clauses, the lowest of the three different quoted
rates was binding for all the components. The Executive Engineer,
Superintendent Engineer and Chief Engineer accordingly, considered
Swadeshi Construction the L1 bidder and conducted negotiations. Therefore,
subsequent rejection of the bid by the WAB was unjustified.

4.4.3, Non-adherence to prescribed criteria

The CPWD Works Manual 2007 provided that one of the criteria for selection
of the contractor for the work was that his average annual turnover during the
last three years should not be less than 30 per cent of the estimated cost of the
work and that 14 days lead time should be provided for submission of tenders.
The CEs, however, enhanced the limit of average annual turnover to 45 per
cent. Lead time between 4 days and 10 days were provided in seven of the
eight packages. The works were also floated to tender by the before they
were technically sanctioned by the CE. The EEs did not follow electronic-
tendering despite specific instructions by government.

GNCTD stated that the annual turnover had to be enhanced because
completion period of the streetscaping works had to be squeezed to finish
them well in time for the Games. The reply is not tenable as due to increase
of annual turnover, scope of competition was restricted and technical sanction
could not be given in the absence of administrative approval and expenditure
sanction.

4.4.4 Irregular justification of the quoted rates

CPWD Manual provided for comparing bid values with justified cost to assess
the reasonability of the bids. The justified costs are to be arrived at by taking
market rates of labour, materials and cartage, other valid charges etc. Any
other suitable method can also be adopted in arriving at the justified cost
depending upon the kind of work. Bids received at more than 10 per cent
above the justified costs are not to be accepted.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 53


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

The department worked out the justified rates for the various works between
% 41.82 crore and %. 19.46 crore and justified that the lowest bids were
varying between minus 16 per cent and plus 3 per cent of the justified costs
(Annexure-4.1).

Audit observed that the justified costs were not supported with evidence of
correctness of the rates. Therefore, Audit adopted alternate method for
arriving at the justified costs, taking into account the cost index prevailing
then and found that the quoted rates of the contractors in five'* packages were
more than 10 per cent of the actual justified costs and thus, the bids were
liable for rejection. The department, however, accepted the tenders
considering them between 16 per cent below to 3 per cent above of the
justified costs worked out by them. Thus, the tenders were accepted at high
cost.

GNCTD stated that the justified rates were arrived at based on market rates, as
per the provisions of CPWD Manual and the tenders were evaluated and
accepted accordingly. It was further stated that normally it is not possible to
collect quotations for each and every component as traders generally do not
provide the same in the absence of firm commitment of placement of orders
and if quotations were taken, their reliability can always be doubted.
Therefore certificate given by the EE after market verification were taken.

Audit, however, did not find documentation in support of the market
rates/analysis of rates. For this reason, as mentioned above, Audit arrived at
the justified rates using the prevailing cost index on the date of tender (August
2009) and found that the five tenders were accepted beyond the permissible
limit of acceptance.

4.5 Physical target vis-a-vis achievements

The works split up in 16 packages were awarded (October-November, 2009)
to 10 contractors at a cost of हैं 332.45 crore (Table 4.4) for completion by
September 2010.

'S Kisan Ghat, Ashram to Bhairon Marg, Mall Road, Dr Kami Singh Shooting range and
Africa Avenue

54 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Table 4.4 — Award of Streetscaping Work

@ in crore)
[1 | Satya Prakash & Brothers (PWD: Four) | 4 | 124.69
2 MBL Infrastructure (PWD: One and MCD: 3 85.08
Two)
3 SAM (India) Built Well (PWD) 1 41.95
4 Sharma Constructions (PWD) 1 31.01
5 Ralhan Construction (PWD) 1 24.42
[6 | Devi Construction (NDMC) 1 6.56
7 India Guniting Corporation (NDMC) 1 6.48
(8 | Raunag Construction (NDMC) 2 5.28
[9 | KBG Engineers (NDMC) 1 5.17
[10 | Raghav Engineer (NDMC) 1 1.81

While the department reported (December 2010) to have completed all the
streetscaping works, Audit, however, observed that the works were not
completed before the CWG (October 2010) on account of delays in
execution of works by the contractors and non-providing of designs on time
by the consultants. Evidently, the objective of streetscaping and beautifying
the roads around CWG venues was not fully achieved.

Despite non execution of the works as per the milestones and non
completion of the works by the stipulated date, LD of upto € 25.96 crore
was not realised.

GNCTD stated that the realization of Liquidated Damages, if any on
account of delays attributable to the contractor would be decided by the
competent authority after analysis of submissions made by the contractor. It
was also stated that the main streetscaping work had been completed and
only paid horticulture maintenance component is in progress.

4.6 Contract management

Under the project, the works were awarded to the contractors in PWD on the
agreements finalized on percentage rate tender. The management of the
contracts was the responsibility of the Engineers-in-Charge and the officers
supervising the works. The terms and conditions of the agreements were
violated on several issues leading to excess payment and undue benefits to the
contractors, besides extra and excess expenditure of = 8.14 crore beyond the
cost of the projects as discussed in Table 4.5:

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 55


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Table 4.5 - Instances of Poor Contract Management

@ in crore)

Bet आना 9, audit

The scope of the contracts included provision for all safety
measures for traffic, pedestrian workmen, machinery etc. Nothing
extra was payable to the contractors on this account.

It was noticed that in eight packages, an item was included in the
BOQ for barricading (traffic safety), resulting in extra payment to
contractors.

|

Red Sand Stone Bollard Precast Cement Conerete Bollard

In most of the landscaping works, precast CC cylindrical bollards
were used in Non Motorised Vehicle lane. However, in Mall
Road, precast CC bollard was replaced during execution with
more expensive red sand stone readymade bollards.
3

Granite stone Block Haryana Quartzite

Audit found during execution of footpath of Mall Road, Haryana

56 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Quartzite stone was replaced with granite stone/slab.

4 The scope of the work of Mall Road did not provide for execution 1.23
of Dense Bituminous Macadam (DBM) in the entire stretch of the
road. The contractor, Satya Prakash & Brothers Private Limited,
however, executed DBM in the entire stretch.

It was noticed that during the identical time period, the tendered
item rates for DBM in other works were lower than his tendered
rate. The execution of the item through him at higher rate
translated to an additional financial advantage.

As per conditions of the contracts, the contractors were to remave 3.49
the malba at their cost and risk. Despite the above specific
provisions, the agreements provided an item in the BoQ for
removal of malba, enabling extra payment to the contractors.
Audit observed that Satya Prakash & Brothers Private Limited
did not remove the malba from the work sites of roads around
YSC and roads around CWG Village. The department removed
malba through IL&FS but did not recover the cost from the
contractor. IL&FS was paid %. 280.32 per MT of malba against
& 73.42 per MT as per the agreement rate for Satya Prakash &
Brothers.

Total | 8.4 |

On payment for barricading GNCTD stated that the conditions were general in
nature and are kept in the contract to ensure that contractors did not make
extra claims over and above the items included in the schedule of quantities.
Further, it is also a term of the contract that schedule of quantities supersedes
other conflicting provisions of the contract. The reply is not acceptable
because in keeping with the conditions of the contract the item of barricading
should not have been provided in the schedule of quantities.

On replacing CC bollard with red sandstone ready-made bollards, it was stated
that red sandstone is the signature stone of Delhi and was used to give an
aesthetic and the characteristic Delhi look. The reply is not acceptable
because if that were the case then the item should have been provided
originally itself instead of as an extra item.

On Haryana Quartzite, it was stated that nowhere has this stone been replaced
by Granite as the latter was executed as per drawing of the consultant and
within the provision of the agreement. The reply is not tenable because as per
estimate for the work of Mall Road, 48 per cent of the footpath stone paving
for pedestrians was to be constructed with Haryana Quartzite which was
replaced with the costlier granite stone.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 57


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Reads around CWG Venues

Regarding use of DBM on Mall Road it was stated that the requirement was
based on the expert technical recommendation of IIT, Roorkee. The reply
however does not address the audit observation that the work had been
allowed to be executed though not in scope of work and the work had been
executed by the contractor though the EE had directed (February 2010) him
not to execute the DBM beyond the scope of the agreement. No programme
was submitted to the Engineer-in-Charge by the contractor for approval before
executing the DBM.

Regarding removal of malba, GNCTD agreed that there was a condition in the
agreement about removal of malba by the contractor at his own cost. It was
intimated that a recovery of हैं 7.46 lakh in this respect had been made from
the contractor. The remaining cost of malba belonged to malba dumped by
local people or otherwise. The reply is not tenable as it is not supported with
documentary evidence that additional malba was dumped by local people or
otherwise.

4.7. Third Party Quality Assurance/Control (TPQC)

The agreements provided for Third Party Quality Control (TPQC) for the
projects either by the Delhi College of Engineering (DCE)/CRRI/IT, Roorkee
or any other agency appointed by the EIC for independent quality
assessment/control. Necessary tests of the materials and specifications were to
be conducted in the laboratory of DCE/PWD/CRRI/IT Delhi/IIT Roorkee or
any other laboratory approved by the EIC.

The TPQC works were entrusted (March/April, 2010) for four packages each
to the DCE (Dr S K Singh for three packages of IG Stadium and roads around
various Games venues) and IIT Roorkee (Dr $ § Jain for the Yamuna Sports
Complex, around the Games Village, M B Road and Mall Road) after lapse of
about 50 per cent of the period of the agreements. While the scope of the
works for Dr Singh covered the civil works in entirety, for Dr Jain it covered
only the bituminous and concrete items.

Audit observed that the team led by Dr Jain visited the work sites for two days
each and submitted job mix reports of bituminous items for three packages
and rated the standard of work as very good. Dr Singh conducted site visits
between eight to 14 days for four packages and submitted two-three page
reports for each package broadly indicative of visual work supervision
suggesting minor improvements in finishing items. The amount of supervision
provided by TPQC, and the quality and quantity of output by the consultants
leads one to the conclusion that the TPQC had actually failed to provide
independent quality assurance to the management of the specifications and
materials used in the works rendering the expenditure of = 1.47 crore (Dr. SS
Jain: हैं 0.48 crore and Dr. S K Singh: % 0.99 crore) on TPQC wasteful.

GNCTD stated that reports submitted by third party were prepared alter
extensive inspection and testing by them. Since all the test reports as well as

58 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

the work were found to be satisfactory, they have suggested minor changes,
wherever required. So, engagement of third party for quality control by the
Government was a conscious decision to ensure the quality. As regards their
frequency of inspections, they were comparable to those done by quality
assurance wing of CPWD or CTE wing of CVC. Quantity of time devoted by
these units and third party consultants on inspection of works is similar and
hence there is no laxity on their part. The reply is not acceptable because the
stated quality assurance would not have been achieved given the inadequate
quantities of time devoted by the consultants for these works. Further the
TPQCS were awarded after 50 per cent of the period of the agreements had
elapsed.

4.8 Horticulture Works

4.8.1 Adoption of different rates in the estimates for identical
items

As pet CPWD Works Manual, the detailed estimate should be based on the
rates given in the DSR for those items of work covered by it and by analysing
market rates for the remaining items. Audit noticed significant variations
between rates adopted in the estimates for identical items of horticulture work
across the packages under PWD. The variations ranged between 12 and 400
per cent. The adoption of variable rates for same items without considering
the minimum possible rate/DSR rate led to extra cost of हैं, 1.08 crore as
shown in the table in Annexure 4.2.

GNCTD in its reply attributed the adoption of different rates in the estimates
to differences in specifications of lead, size of plants and other charges. The
reply is not acceptable because estimates should be consistent and justified.
The differing specifications should have been justified in the estimates itself
which was not the case. Therefore, the reply given by the government is an
alierthought. The difference arose because of different consultants adopting
different estimates. The department on its part did not independently study
them even when estimates were approved at almost the same time. As has
already been emphasized, percentage tender is a one line tender wherein the
contractor can quote either above or below the estimate. Therefore through
percentage premium the benefit will go to the contractor.

4.9 Unwarranted Costly Electrical Furnishing

The consultants suggested design for electrical lighting work by specifying
costly electrical furnishing, some of which were imported. The quotations for
the items were also obtained by them. The estimates were technically
sanctioned by the CEs without verifying the actual cost of the items prevailing
in the market. The possibility of procuring such items from indigenous
companies was not explored.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 59


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Audit observed one instance where electrical fittings costing over हैं 50 lakh
were installed in a small area of 10m x15m.

Fittings worth over रैं50 lakh installed opposite 1G Stadium

A few high cost electrical fixtures are given in Table 4.6. Each of these items
was specified by brand name without giving a generic description, thereby
favouring a particular manufacturing company. Further, these high cost items
were included in a percentage rate tender, whereby the true cost of
procurement cannot be easily assessed. Examination of some invoices
suggested that the costs of the fixtures were far less than the costs adopted in
the estimates. Due to adoption of high cost, undue benefit of € 0.83 crore
(Annexure-4.3) for these items alone was passed on to the contractors and the
government was burdened by this expenditure.

60 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Table 4.6 Instances of high cost electrical items

Ttem Rate Amount Photograph of the item

per @in

unit crore)
@in

lakh)

Nemo
Torch

Keselec
Schreder
(Roads
around IG
Stadium)

क्‍ Trapeze 4.54 0.33
Pole

Keselec
Schreder
(Roads
around IG
Stadium)

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 61


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Item Amount Photograph of the item

@in
crore)

Decorative
Street light-
JUNIPER,
Bajaj
(Roads
around [IG
Stadium)

क्‍ Nemo Pole | 0.75

Keselec
Schreder

(Roads
around IG
Stadium)

62 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Item

Berlin
Lamp &
Pole

Philips/Bajaj

(Roads
around IG
Stadium)

Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Rate | Amount Photograph of the item

pee in
unit
crore)

@in
lakh)

TS Light
fixture

ATL

(Roads
around IG.
Stadium)

Bollard

Keselec
Schreder
(Roads
around IG
Stadium)

0.28 0.48

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 63


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

| Item Rate | Amount Photograph of the item

per P
unit Att
@in
lakh)

Schreder-

CFL36 Watt

(Safdarjung

Flyover)

GNCTD stated that the consultant suggested design for electrical work by
specifying suitable electrical furnishing keeping in view the importance and
use of the area around IGT stadium and the Delhi Secretariat. In the area
Bhairon Road, a Plaza was constructed and the consultant constructed the
fittings accordingly. The quotations for the items were obtained by the
consultants from the respective manufacturer/ authorized dealers/ distributors
of the fittings. Tt was further stated that in the tender document atleast two
other options of equivalent make were also available for the contractor to
choose from. The fact remains that the recommendations of the consultant
were accepted without exploiting the indigenous options.

4.10 Street furniture in the vicinity of Games venues
4.10.1 Planning for Street Furniture

Street Furniture (SF) is a collective term for objects and pieces of equipment
installed on streets and roads for various purposes. As part of city
infrastructure upgradation, the streetscaping and beautification consultants
(appointed between May 2008 to November 2008 by different agencies) also
prepared the street furniture plans for the three agencies (MCD, PWD and.

64 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

CPWD). The street furniture items to be put up included information kiosks,
police booths, vending kiosks, public toilets, tree guards, bus queue shelters,
dust bins, information panels, benches and free standing panels. The
consultants provided street furniture drawings containing nature, quantum and
location of the SF items in accordance with their overall landscaping plan for
identified roads.

NDMC was appointed as the nodal agency in August 2008 for the project.
DIMTS was appointed as the Transaction Advisor (June 2009) on nomination
basis for evaluating EOI submissions; data collection and project structuring;
and preparation of bid documents and bid process management.

Street furniture - Public convenience

The SF project was to be implemented on BOT basis, with advertisements on
the street furniture created and revenue from operations during the contract
period in the form of quarterly concession fee (QCF) being the revenue
source.

To achieve uniformity in design of SF items around a particular venue,
DIMTS, in consultation with NDMC/MCD/ PWD grouped roads around the
Games venues into five clusters - Delhi University, IGI Stadium, R.K.
Khanna Tennis Complex, Siri Fort Sports Complex and Dr. Karni Singh
Shooting Range, and the Games Village and Yamuna Sports Complex.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 65


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

The chronology of events for the planning and award of contracts for street
furniture is summarised below:

Table 4.7 — Chronology of Events for Award of Street Furniture Contracts

August 2008 NDMC appointed as nodal agency

May-November 2008. Streetscaping consultants appointed by different agencies
May 2009 EOI called by NDMC

June 2009 DIMTS appointed as Transaction Advisor

[sune2009 | 2009 Short listing of bidders

November 2009 Street furniture requirement report by DIMTS.

January 2010 Issue of REP by MCD for 3 clusters

April 2010 Issue of RFP by DTTDC (on behalf of PWD) for 5 clusters

February/May 2010 | Opening of financial bids by MCD and DTTDC/ PWD

March/ June 2010 Award by MCD for clusters 2,3 and 4 for concession period of
7 years
May/ June 2010 Award by DITDC/PWD for clusters 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 for

concession period of 15 years

4.10.2 Tendering irregularities

Out of cight companies that responded to the Eol floated in May 2009 by
NDMC, five companies fulfilled the criteria of net worth given in the Eol
document and were also pre-qualified for issuing of RFPs.

J.C.Decaux Advertising Pvt. Ltd.
Graphisads Pvt. Ltd.

Laqshya Media Pvt. Ltd.

Adlabs Films ltd.

Hindustan Publicity Pvt. Ltd.

A sixth company, MEC, did not fulfil the net worth criteria, but was
irregularly pre-qualified on the strength of its parent company.

66 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Street furniture - Traffic police booth

Audit found the following deficiencies in the tendering procedure adopted by
the agencies:

* Selection of six bidders merely on the basis of net worth fixed for each
cluster was restrictive. The value of work in the desired field in the last
few years was not considered at all. Further, DTTDC (which
implemented the project on behalf of PWD) and MCD increased the net
worth criteria fixed by NDMC (differently for different clusters), making
it even more restrictive.

The DTTDC stated that the net worth method is a more scientific parameter to
decide the financial capabilitics of the agencies. It was also stated that the
estimated expenditure to be incurred on the installation of the street furniture
for each cluster was worked out by DIMTS for PWD and the net worth
required for each cluster was based on these calculations.

The reply of the DITTDC management is not acceptable because when the
tenders were invited by NDMC for selection of bidders for all the projects to
be undertaken by PWD, CPWD, MCD, NDMC and DDA, the limit of
minimum net worth required was * 1 crore only. NDMC also had, at that time,
with the help of DIMTS, indicated the specification of street furniture items
and the cost per unit and the cluster-wise estimated project cost. However
when the DTTDC issued the RFP it had not indicated the project cost in it at
all. As far as transferring the risk is concerned, the contractor is liable only up
to the performance bank guarantee provided. Also the fact that weightage of
80 marks was given for the technical bid shows that work experience was
important and should have been specifically enquired about specially when

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 67


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

DTTDC itself in reply said that operation and maintenance of street furniture
is a specialised activity.

* Six bidders quoted for four clusters in case of DTTDC/ PWD. In the
technical evaluation by the Board of Assessors, the minimum qualifying
marks were fixed as 70 for the technical bid. Two agencies, MEC and
Hindustan Publicity Pvt. Ltd. scored less than 70 marks and their financial
bids were not opened. Thus, in three out of four clusters, single bids were
received/ remained.

« Bids for cluster 5, 1.6. Games Village and Yamuna Sports Complex were
re-tendered by DITDC with modified numbers of street furniture items,
modified net worth and bid security required from the three eligible
bidders, giving them 7 days for bidding. The work was awarded to the
sole bidder Adlabs Films Ltd (Reliance Media World).

« All the four bidders who had qualified the technical bids for DTTDC
PWD, secured one contract each. There was no need for urgency for re-
tendering for cluster 5, since the stipulated time for completion of four
months from the Letter of Award fell beyond the date of conclusion of the
Games.

* In case of MCD too, single bids were received for three clusters -
Graphisads for IGI and JLN Complex cluster and R.K. Khanna cluster,
and MEC for the Siri Fort Sports Complex cluster. The single bids were
accepted on the ground that the captioned projects related to the CWG.
The works were awarded just three and a half months before the Games,
with a completion period of three months

The agencies had not estimated the revenue expectation from the clusters, and
no reserve price was fixed. Since nearly all 7 out of 8 were single bids, there
was lack of competitive tension, and there is no assurance regarding
generation of maximum revenue.

The table below shows wide variations between the monthly concession rates
(calculated on a per sq.m basis) across different agencies, which further
confirms inadequate exploitation of the full revenue potential and
corresponding undue favour to the bidding contractors.

68 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapier-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

Table 4.8 - Wide range of monthly concession rates for street furniture items

(Range of rates in ₹ per sq.m)
PWD/ DTTDC CPWD Other

benchmarks

Rone Minimum Minimum | Maximum |
Public 54 714 238 472 270 | MCD High
toilets End Toilets
Vending 32 | *| 33 152 | statement):
Kiosks 1291
Police 32 303 20 48 161 | pip" 2985
booths DTC - 796
Information 16 1816 91 439 380 to 1592
Panels
Free 124 629 97 850 692
standing
panels
Auto pre 32 397 | | | | 159
paid booths

The rates for PWD/DTTDC and MCD are comparatively lower, despite the
concession period of 15 years and 7 years (against the original period of three
years indicated in the EOI). The long term revenue loss would be large
although it cannot be fully quantified in the absence of reliable and
comparable benchmarks.

The revenue from advertisements is singularly based on the location of such
advertising displays taking into account the importance of the road, visibility
of the panels, traffic density in the area, stoppage time, etc. Comparing the
location of the panels at TTO with Mehrauli Badarpur Road (Majedia to
Prahaladpur) or Yamuna Sports Complex in East Delhi will be an irrational
exercise and have no relationship with the Opportunity to See (OTS)

॥ Department of Information and Publicity

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 69


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

mechanism of revenue generation prevailing in the industry. The DTTDC
stated that the agreement is also based on a dynamic revenue sharing model
under which the concessionaires have to share 16 per cent of the revenue
generated with DTTDC. As per the conditions of the agreement the
concessionaire has to operate the entire project only through an exclusive
account, to be audited by DTTDC on quarterly basis. This provision of the
agreement would provide full details of the revenue generation to DTTDC and
would safeguard the interest of DITDC in case of any higher generation of
revenue at a later date or from any particular cluster.

The averment of Audit is that the agencies at the time of RFP had not worked
out the estimated revenue (reserve price). Further the percentage of share of
revenue of 16 per cent is on the overall revenue generated. This does not
safeguard revenue of the government because not all furniture items ate public
utility items having a high maintenance cost. While it is alright to fix a lesser
percentage for public utility items like toilets, in case of items like free
standing panels the share should have been 50:50 like in the case of MCD
which takes 50 per cent of revenue from the DTC, being the land owning
agency. Basically revenue should be decided unit-wise, of a smaller
percentage where capital cost is more and of a larger percentage where capital
cost is less. The audit point is further borne out by the fact that the DTTDC
has made changes, post tender, in the area given for advertisements in favour
of generation of more revenue for the concessionaire. The DTTDC in its note
dated 2 July 2010 stated and approved that “as per the agreement conditions
the area of advertisement on information panels shall not be more than 50 per
cent of either side. However, in a meeting taken by Chief secretary this issue
was discussed with the preferred bidder and it was agreed that this provision
can be relaxed to have full advertisement on one side and public messages on
other alternate panels.” In another note dated 15 September 2010 the
dimension/height of police booth/ auto booth was increased to 4.16 meters
instead of 3 meters provided in the agreement, that has resulted in additional
advertisement space due to increased heights of the booths. The DTTDC itself
has noted that the matter of additional revenue from additional advertisement
space would be decided afier the CWG.

70 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter-4 Streetscaping and Beautification of Roads around CWG Venues

4.10.3 Status of work

The delayed planning and award of SF contracts for different clusters meant
that most were not ready in time for CWG-2010. Most of the SF clusters for
DTTDC/PWD (which were awarded later than MCD) were incomplete,
ranging from 60 - 90 per cent for 4 clusters, with only one cluster complete as
of March 2011. The MCD cluster had, however, been completed as of March
2011.

The DTTDC replied that the provision of street furniture involves procuring
the equipment, installing the same on prepared foundations, providing
services like water supply, sewage, electricity etc. The progress of the work
was directly dependent on the co-operation of different departments/
organisations like PWD, DJB, BSES, NDPL, etc. Thus, wherever PWD had
completed the street scaping work, decision was taken on a case to case basi
to provide or not to provide the furniture. In July 2010, the GNCTD, in view
of the incessant rains in the unusually strong monsoons, decided to stop all
earth/foundation works and no digging/earth work was allowed after 31 July
2010. In addition the area immediately around the Games Venues was taken
over by the security agencies of CWG, which did not allow entry to any other
agencies to execute any kind of work.

The reply is not acceptable because the purpose of beautification before the
Games was not served. Lack of coordination should not be an issue as there
were high powered committees set up only to coordinate. Further J C Decaux
and Adlabs had specifically informed that they would not be able to complete
the work because they were importing the street furniture items and excessive
time would be taken in their shipment which shows that the implementation
plan portion at the time of technical evaluation was not ensured. In this
connection, DTTDC stated that as already pointed out, provision of street
furniture was not restricted to Commonwealth Games only but these facilities
are meant to continue for use of the public for the coming 15 years as
provided in the agreements.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 71


5.1 Introduction

The project for “Modernisation of Delhi Street Lighting System” was
conceived by GNCTD in June 2006 for completion within 2 years.
Accordingly, standards for integrated street lighting project for Delhi were
released in October 2006 by GNCTD and were subsequently revised in
November 2006, after considering suggestions’ observations of vendors and
implementing agencies. The standards were to be followed by all the agencies.
The lighting standards were designed to meet the following objectives:

* To adopt the latest technology in street lighting based on international
standards adapted to Delhi’s conditions.

© Use of energy efficient electrical equipments.

* Use of automatic switching on and off and monitoring of street lights, thus
saving energy consumption and enabling quick maintenance of equipments.

* Improving the urban landscape of Delhi

* Prepare for Commonwealth Games, 2010.

The standards prescribed the technical specifications like the type and wattage

of lamps and luminaries, the height of electric poles, maximum spacing

between the poles and desired illumination levels for various types of roads
(Dual/single carriageway, service road, slip road etc.) but were brand neutral.

Modernised Street Lighting in Delhi

The standard also gave guidance on the contractual obligations to be fulfilled
by various agencies in implementing the lighting systems and maintenance of
these systems.


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

The work was implemented by PWD, MCD and NDMC. The details of length
of road and tendered cost for the works under the three agencies are tabulated
below:

Table 5.1 — Summary of Street Lighting Works
@ in crore)

Sl. Agency Road Length Total Tendered Cost
No. (km)

1 | PWD 444.39 154.95

2 |MCD 258.56 96.53

3. | NDMC 86.00 34.40

Audit acknowledges the improvement in illumination levels of Delhi roads,
brought in by the implementation of a well prepared lighting standards
document, which has contributed to an overall consistency in implementation
and marked improvement in urban landscape and city infrastructure.

5.2. Use of imported luminaries
5.2.1 Decision on use of imported luminaries

The initial proposal for street lighting in PWD was sent for government
approval in November 2006 but was not sanctioned on account of change in
scope of work. A revised estimate involving use of indigenously manufactured
luminaries was sent in May 2007 and was accorded approval in June 2007, but
the approval was withdrawn in the same month.

Meanwhile, the Chief Minister (CM) desired (July 2007) that while PWD was
implementing a comprehensive plan for street lighting, such lighting may be
demonstrated on at least one or two roads in time for Diwali 2007. PWD
invited spot quotations to install street lighting on a sample stretch of roads.
The sequence of events is as detailed below:

Table 5.2 - Chronology of Events for Street lighting on Sample Road

Period Event

July 2007 *® Spot quotation from three firms using indigenous
luminaries for a sample stretch of roads was invited.

August 2007 | * Second call for spot quotation was invited from the same
three firms on the same conditions. The bidders now
quoted for imported and indigenous luminaries. While
Philips quoted only for indigenous luminaries, Trilux
quoted for imported luminaries and Keselec-Schreder
quoted for both indigenous and imported luminaries.

September « Third call for spot quotation from same three firms
2007 invited in two separate sections, one each for imported

4 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

and indigenous luminaries. The work was however not
executed.

* Sample luminaries of some of the leading manufacturers
were displayed before the CM in September 2007.

October .
2007

Indigenous and imported luminaries installed on a
sample stretch were inspected by the CM, and also by the
PWD minister.

Based on the inspection and approval of CM, PWD decided to use imported
luminaries on ‘A’ category roads, a mix of imported and indigenous luminaries
on ‘B’ category roads, and only indigenous luminaries on ‘C’ category roads.

It may be noted that this ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ categorisation of roads was not
specified in the lighting standard. Thereafter, PWD revised the preliminary
estimate by incorporating use of imported along with indigenous luminaries.

The GNCTD in its reply stated that there was no alternative lefi with PWD but
to purchase imported luminaries in order to meet the Standards of Integrated
Street Lighting Committee (SISLC), besides having adequate competition
among global leaders in luminaries.

The reply is not acceptable as the objective of the department to meet the world
class lighting standards as required by SISLC could have been met through
indigenous luminaries which was evident from the department’s third party test
reports of both indigenous and imported luminaries which did not differ in any
aspect.

Further, the decision of PWD on use of imported luminaries on ‘A’ category
roads was also adopted by MCD and NDMC. NDMC specified all of its roads
as ‘A’ category, and called tenders for imported luminaries only.

A total of = 41.37 crore was spent as on July 2011 on procurement of imported
luminaries, with ~ 24.52 crore by PWD, % 6.51 crore by MCD and हैं 10.34
crore by NDMC.

The imported luminaries were procured at a cost much higher than the price at
which indigenous luminaries were procured, leading to avoidable extra
expenditure of हैं 28.12 crore (July 2011) across the three agencies (PWD,
NDMC, MCD) as tabulated below:

Table 5.3 — Avoidable Expenditure on Imported Luminaries
@ in crore

Agency Number ofimported | Average costof | Additional expenditure
Name __| luminaries (provisional) procurement incurred*
PWD 9,063 27,235 16.89
MCD 2,337 27,824 4.50
NDMC 4,166 24,758 6.73
[Total [ 15,637 [_._. ?8.2 |

* Against average procurement cost of indigenous luminary (400 W and 25097 of ₹8600 in

MCD

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 75



Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

The GNCTD stated that the expenditure on imported luminaries worked out to
45 per cent and 15 per cent of the total cost of the luminaries and total cost of
the project respectively. The fact however remains that the opportunity for
economy was lost.

Differentiation between indigenous and imported luminaries is starkly
exemplified in the case of a luminary of Keselec-Schreder make (Ambar-3),
procured by PWD as an indigenous luminary at = 15,160 but by MCD as an
imported luminary at over twice the cost at हैं 32,000.

Ambar-3, Imported (MCD), Price: & 32,000 Ambar-3, Indigenous (PWD), Price: € 15,160

5.2.2 Enrolment of imported luminaries

The technical specifications for both imported and indigenous luminaries were
identical, and technical test reports of the imported and indigenous luminaries
supplied by the various firms were equally compliant with specifications for
luminaries given in the lighting standards.

PWD selected and enrolled as approved, the models demonstrated by the
bidders, except SpaceAge which was later declared qualified. No techno-
economic evaluation of the options offered by the bidders in support of such
selection was available in the records. Consequently, models of various
companies of different repute and of different price ranges were selected at the
same level.

In the case of selection of luminaries of General Electric (GE) and Al-Babtain
brands offered by SpaceAge, no evidence of any on-site demonstration was
found on record. Further, at the time of award of work to SpaceAge, the Works
Advisory Board (September 2008) had desired that luminaries of GE make
should be used by SpaceAge. PWD was unable to enforce the same, and could
not prevent SpaceAge from installing luminaries of Al-Babtain make in place
of GE. Further no information is available in the M-3 Division.

In reply to the audit observations on use of imported luminaries leading to
avoidable expenditure of € 10.02 crore discussed in para 5.3.1, PWD stated that
these were specified for use on selected roads on account of the imported
luminaries having the following advantages over the indigenous ones: The

76 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

GNCTD in its latest reply (December 2011) stated that Board of Assessors
(BoA ) had approved both imported and indigenous fittings to be used in
different categories of city roads. The reply is not tenable as there was no
evidence on record.

* 10 to 15 per cent more efficiency as measured by the higher light output
ratio

* Better aesthetic appearance and finish

« Lower maintenance cost

The department’s reasoning regarding superiority of imported luminaries on
account of higher light output ratio is not acceptable. If light output ratio was
considered such a critical performance parameter, it should have been included
in the lighting standard issued by GNCTD, and also specified by PWD as a
requirement for imported luminaries, which was not done. Further, product
brochures of none of the luminaries used in PWD (indigenous or imported)
speak about the light output ratio, let alone state its value. Of the luminary test
reports supplied by the department, Audit observed that the light output ratio of
imported luminaries varied from 78.4 to 88.9, while for indigenous luminaries,
it varied from 75.3 to 89.5. This is at variance with the department’s assertion
that imported luminaries were having efficiency greater than the indigenous
luminaries by 10 to 15 per cent.

No documentary evidence has been provided regarding lower maintenance
costs for imported luminaries. In any case, all luminaries are under a six year
comprehensive maintenance contract, and none of the bidders were asked to
quote separately for maintenance of indigenous and imported luminaries, as
should have been the case if the maintenance costs were known to be
substantially different.

5.3 High Cost of procurement of luminaries

Audit found that the procurement process did not ensure procurement at
competitive rates, as explained below:

5.3.1 High cost procurement of imported luminaries

Audit scrutiny of the actual price of the imported luminaries that had been
installed by the successful bidders, as ascertained from the invoices, revealed a
wide gap between the imported price, including cartage, supply, installation.
testing and commissioning (SITC), cost of bulb, contractor profit of 10 per cent
for PWD and 15 per cent for MCD and NDMC and cost of maintenance during
Defect Liability Period (DLP) and the price paid by the department for

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 77


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

the same fittings, is given in the table below:

Table 5.4 - Gap between import price and price actually paid for imported
luminaries and extra profit thereof
(Amount in हैं)

Name of Make & Brand Cost Contracted | Higher | Extra
executing including | procurement | price paid | profit ©
agency mark up price per in
(fair price) luminary | crore)
Trilwc: Lumega 900 26,222 28,242 2,020 0.79
PWD, Zone M2 | Schreder: Maya-Maxi 16,325 26,371 10,046 3.53
Sapphire 3
PWD, Zone M3__| Al-Babtain- 9,318 25,704 16,386 2.68
stnart /05
MCD Schreder: Ambar 3 11,082 31,328* 20,246 1.01
MCD Philips: Modena 22,660 26,421* 3,761 0.62
NDMC Philips: Modena 22,386 24,819* 2,433 139
Total profit on account of price premium (¥ in crore) | 10.02 |

* Weighted Average Cost of procurement

The cost of procurement by all agencies was substantially higher than the
imported price including cartage, SITC, cost of bulb, contractor profit of 10 per
cent for PWD and 15 per cent for MCD and NDMC and cost of maintenance
during Defect Liability Period (DLP) being higher by 8 per cent to 183 per cent.
The selection of imported luminary make and fixure of their base price at high
levels, particularly in case of SpaceAge and Keselec Schreder(176 to 183 per
cent), was in violation of financial propriety. A price premium was being paid
simply on account of the luminaries being imported. Consequently, contractors
managed to earn extra profit of = 10.02 crore.

The GNCTD stated that the justification statement which was prepared at the
time of award, was now superimposed with the rates worked out in the report
by CAG for item No.12(a) and 13{a) i.e., for imported fittings in all the three
tenders with overhead and profit duly modified from 10 per cent to 15 per cent.
Even by considering the rates assumed/adopted by Audit as justified rates, the
total quoted amount in each case is within permissible limits for award of work.
The effect of this item is only 5 per cent to 10 per cent of the total tendered
amount and therefore the difference in rates worked out by CAG has got
negligible effect on the tendered amount.

The reply is not acceptable because the justified statement was not prepared at
the time of award of contract in October 2008 and hence did not depict the
market rate at the time of acceptance of the tender.

78 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

5.3.2 High cost of procurement of indigenous luminaries in
PWD

Audit noticed that both PWD and MCD had used a combination of indigenous
and imported luminaries for their street lighting projects. The analysed rate for
providing and fitting of indigenous luminary by PWD was हैं 15,522 per unit
(Philips Velocity 400W) based on a single quotation, whereas these (Model
MC3 by Keselec-Schreder and Model Velocity by Philips) were supplied in
MCD by two leading manufacturers at हैं 9100 per unit.

Thus, the execution of items of the same make at higher rate by PWD resulted
in an extra expenditure of 5.59 crore as of December 2010.

5.4. Restrictive and non-competitive conditions in tendering
5.4.1 Conditions in Expression of Interest (EOI)

The lighting standards prescribed pre-qualification criteria for the prospective
bidders. Both PWD and MCD prescribed more restrictive eligibility criteria for
financial and technical capability, while NDMC used the list of vendors
declared eligible by PWD.

*® Audit found that PWD kept the required annual turnover at % 40 crore in
place of % 20 crore indicated in the lighting standards, thereby restricting
participation. The limit also exceeded 30 per cent of estimated cost criteria
of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). MCD made the pre-qualification
criteria for both the phases stricter by fixing the condition of average annual
turnover at 30 per cent of estimated cost during the last seven years instead
of three years.

* The lighting standards stipulated that “the main contractor shall procure
items from respective manufacturers.” However, both PWD and MCD in
their EOL specifically stated that the bidder should be a manufacturer of
luminaries of international repute. This severely restricted the competition.

The parameter of being a luminary manufacturer of “international repute” did
not specify how the clause would be assessed and was very selectively applied.
While initially, SpaceAge Switchgear India Limited was found as ineligible,
and later found eligible during reassessment done when the firm represented to
the CM, its compliance with requirement of being a manufacturer of luminaries
of international repute was never assessed. The vendor installed luminaries
from a Saudi Arabian firm, Al Babtain, with whom the vendor had no declared
standing relationship, putting to question the eligibility of the vendor as a
manufacturer of luminaries of international repute.

The restrictive clause led to rejection of two firms, Street Scape, Australia and
Utkal Galvanizers Ltd on the grounds that they did not have luminaries’
manufacturers as lead partners.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 79


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

PWD, in its reply, stated that the competent authority, Chief Engineer, had
taken the decision that luminary manufacturers should be made the lead partner
for execution of work for the following reasons:

* proper maintenance of the luminaries during the 6 year maintenance period.
* genuineness of the supplies

* their perception that only a few reputed luminary manufacturers are
equipped for providing design work for illumination,

In case of MCD, the Government stated that the main objective of framing pre
qualification criteria was to obtain best quality of work, timely supply of
material, healthy competition and reasonableness of rates. The EOI also
allowed not only individual company but also joint ventures. The main goal of
addition of criterion of luminaries manufacturer of international repute was
based on -() its support required at the stage of survey, design, O&M, (ii)
uninterrupted availability of spares (iii) bleak possibility of contractor backing
out in the middle as he had his reputation on stake.

The reply is not acceptable as both PWD and MCD did not comply with the
comprehensive guidelines framed by the Government itself. The benefits of
increased competition could have been brought in by complying with the
GNCTD prepared lighting standards requirement of the main contractor
procuring the luminaries from the manufacturers. Such benefits would have
been far in excess of the perceived benefits stated by PWD.

5.5 Division of work in PWD

The street lighting work in PWD was divided into three parts (August 2007) on
the grounds of administrative convenience and early completion, but with the
apparent intention of giving one work each to each of the three shortlisted
(initially) firms. Further, Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) stipulated that only one
work alone would be given to one contractor. In this situation, the pre-qualified
vendors were not given equal opportunity in the financial bidding in all the
three divisions of PWD resulting in lesser competition among the pre-qualified
vendors as only one among the four pre-qualified bidders ran the risk of not
winning any bid.

5.5.1 Irregularities in assessing qualification of a firm in PWD

Spaceage Switch Gears Ltd. submitted (July 2007) EOT as a manufacturer of
luminaries of international repute, and of poles in India. The bid by the firm
was neither as a Joint Venture (JV) nor as a consortium, but was in the name of
Spaceage Switch Gears Ltd.

The Board of assessors (BoA) disqualified (November 2007) the firm on the
following grounds:

* Non supply of imported as well as indigenous fittings

80 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

* Non clarification of works done by their foreign concern

« The firm could not obtain the required qualifying marks of 75 out of 100,
scoring only 48 marks out of 85.

On being disqualified by the BoA, the firm appealed (November 2007) to the
CM for inclusion as a tenderer for the work. The vendor’s plea to the CM was
forwarded to the E-in-C. Subsequently, a re-assessment of the eligibility of the
firm was done by the BoA, who, this time, found the firm to be qualified.

Audit found that the following aspects of the re-evaluation, leading to an
increase in the score from 48 to 67 (out of 85), as unreasonable:

* The score for experience in similar class of work increased from 10 to 15
(out of 15), though the relevant work was done by another firm, related by
having a common majority shareholder, but which was in fact, a separate
legal entity, and not a part of the bidding entity as a IV or consortium
member.

® The firm did not submit any new financial statements in support of the
required average annual turnover, yet its score increased from 10 to 19 (out
of 19).

* The firm did not submit any new documents relating to personnel,
establishment, and plant and equipment, yet its score in this regard
increased from 10 to 12.

« The score on presentation before the BoA was also increased from 13 to 16

Subsequently, the financial bid of Spaceage was the lowest for M3 zone but the
Works Advisory Board (WAB) constituted for acceptance of tender did not
approve the award of work in March 2008 and called for retendering, on the
grounds that the firm had already been rejected by the BoA, and the
reassessment and subsequent inclusion was improper. Incidentally, two of the
members forming the BOAs were also members of the WAB, but both the
boards took the diametrically opposite decisions unanimously regarding the
firm's eligibility.

The firm approached (May 2008) the Hon’ble Delhi High Court which quashed.
the decision of WAB of rejection of tender (July 2008). In view of urgency of
work, the Government decided (September 2008) to award the work to the
firm.

Consequently, the ineligible firm got the work despite being rejected by the
WAB. The department’s case was greatly weakened by the irregular increase of
marks by the BoA in December 2007, qualifying the firm.

The firm, SpaceAge, went on Lo supply low cost imported luminaries of Saudi
make, costing हैं 5,040, and charging & 25,704 for the same and in the process
earning a profit of € 2.68 crore.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 81


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

The GNCTD in its reply stated that the unprecedented worldwide recession and
economic depression in the international market which started in September
2008, October 2008 and persisted quite long as the reason for the huge price
variation of the fittings. However, no documents in support were furnished.
The reply is not tenable because, the PWD accepted and awarded the contract
to M/s SpaceAge only in October 2008 at the negotiated cost of = 55.16 crore,
which was 4 per cent above the estimated cost. The rates could have been
reduced before accepting the tender as per se 16 of NIT. The justified cost
was not prepared at the time of contract in October 2008 and hence did not
depict the market rate at the time of acceptance of the tender.

5.6 Deficiencies in tendering and award of work

All the agencies followed different approaches for calling of tenders. PWD
called tenders based on percentage rate, MCD adopted item rate tender, while
NDMC called for design based tenders.

5.6.1 Deficiency in tendering in PWD

5.6.1.1 Incorrect use of percentage rate tender by PWD

The estimates for the street lighting work prepared by PWD was based on
market rate, but PWD resorted to percentage rate tendering instead of item rate,
in contravention to the provisions of the (CPWD) manual.

The costs of the following items were over-cstimated by PWD with direct

implication on the final cost of procurement:

* Imported luminaries: The estimated rate for imported luminaries was kept
at % 27,000 per unit against the average cost including cost of bulb, cartage,
one year maintenance and contractor profit of imported luminaties actually
used being % 17,288, while the minimum cost was just हैं 9,318.

« Indigenous luminaries: The estimated cost taken by the department for
indigenous luminaries was & 15,522, but the same fittings were supplied in
MCD at rates of = 8000 to हैं 9200 per unit.

* Pole (12 m): The base rate of = 26,750 taken for estimation of cost of 12
metre pole was inclusive of all charges for fabrication, supply and erection
ete. but the same was again loaded, thereby inflating the cost of a pole to
31,502.

82 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

5.6.2 Deficiency in award of work in MCD

5.6.2.1 Avoidable expenditure of = 2.54 crore due to non-
compliance with design specifications
It was noticed in audit that the lighting standards were not complied with on

many dual carriageway roads, where 10 metre poles had been used in place of
the prescribed 12 metre poles. (Annexure 5.1 and Annexure 5.2).

This led to an estimated avoidable extra expenditure of approximately हैं 2.54
crore due to use of larger number of poles and luminaries. It was also seen that
in Phase-I of execution, the offered price of a 10 metre pole (% 28974) was
more than the price of a 12 metre pole (% 28358) apparently due to post bid
tampering. Installation of a 10 metre pole was more lucrative to the contractor
than the 12 metre pole.

The GNCTD, in its reply stated that the designing was done by the agency
concerned based on site conditions, and that approval of the competent
authority, E-in-C, was taken for installing 10 m poles on 80 feet (24 m) wide
road.

The reply is not acceptable because such approval, taken without a techno-
commercial evaluation of the impact, and in violation of the already issued
lighting standard was incorrect.

5.6.2.2 Extra cost of % 0.48 crore due to specifying decorative
luminaries using lamps of a particular brand in MCD

The lighting standards provided for use of 150 watt HPIT (Metal Halide) lamps
for pedestrian crossing. slip roads and bus bays. However, MCD specified
decorative luminaries using 140-watt lamp of a particular brand, Cosmopolis,
in the agreement. As per records, a total of 670 such Cosmopolis lamp fittings
at a cost of = 15,000 per unit were used, whereas comparable 150-watt High
Pressure Sodium Vapour (175५) fittings were available at हैं 7800. In these
fittings, the HPSV lamps could have been replaced with 150-watt metal halide
lamps for providing white colour light, as done by PWD. Thus, specifying
decorative luminaries with Cosmopolis lamps in place of standard luminaries
with metal halide lamps resulted in extra cost of € 0.48 crore.

In reply the GNCTD stated that the decorative luminaries were to be provided
by the firm from the preferred make mentioned in tender document and that it
is clearly mentioned in the item that the fitting suitable for Cosmopolis lamp
without mentioning any brand was to be provided. Further, the Cosmopolis is
latest Technology for white light having benefit over conventional HPIT (Metal
Halide) lamp.

In Audit’s opinion the reply is not convincing as MCD cannot justify the extra
expenditure on Cosmopolis lamps when the desired illumination could have

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 83


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

been achieved by using standard luminaries with metal halide lamps as
provided in lighting standards. Also the final revised version (November,
2006) of the lighting standards approved by GNCTD had removed reference to
Cosmopolis lamps thereby making them brand neutral. The phrase ‘new
generation light sources like Cosmopolis lamps’ was replaced with ‘new
generation light sources’.

5.6.2.3 Apparent post-tender alteration in price bids in MCD

As per the CPWD manual, the officer opening the tenders should encircle all
corrections, cuttings, conditions and over-writings, number them and attest
them in red ink on each page of the price bid itself.

These conditions were violated in the tendering for both phases of the work in
MCD. The winning bid of Sweka Powertech for Phase-I and Phase-IT had large
number of over writings/ corrections/ alterations. In neither of the bids did the
contractor fill up the column for ‘Amount’ in the schedule of quantity, and the
total for the bid was struck and recorded only in one case (2156-11).

The matter is under investigation by Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).
Photocopies of the records were obtained from CBI for the purpose of audit.

A scrutiny of price bid for Phase-I revealed that the certificate recorded by the
accountant either did not tally with the number of corrections made in the page
or the certificate itself had cuttings/overwriting. The final effect of overwriting
and corrections in rates was to enhance the quoted price and not vice versa.
Further, the corrections had not been assigned separate numbers as required.

Another correction noted was in the discount offered by the firm in the form of
a note which read-“payment will be released within 10 days afier submission of
the RA bill, then we are ready to give discount of Nil per cent on the total
amount”. In this case also, there was apparent correction, by changing | per
cent to Nil per cent by prefixing ‘Ni’ to | per cent.

The possibility of these alterations at post tender stage cannot be ruled out. The
total result of enhancement of quoted amount by such alterations was हैं 3.63
crore.

A similar pattern of alteration of bids was seen in Phase-II also. Scrutiny of
price bid of M/S Sweka Power Tech Engineers Pvt. Ltd. (1-1) revealed that
there were cuttings/over writings’corrections in the quoted rates of several
items. The corrections made in the quoted rates against the above said items
were not encircled, numbered and attested individually.

The Department in its reply intimated that the divisional accountant wrote all
rates in his own handwriting on bids tendered with red ink wherever he found
any cutting or overwriting; all cuttings were duly encircled and signed by the
divisional accountant. Further representatives of all the bidders were present at
the time of opening of bids. The stand of MCD is not acceptable as the

84 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

cuttings ‘over writings in price bids were not numbered serially as required
under provisions. Even the certificates recorded at the end of the page were
tampered/corrected (Phase-I). The column meant for filling amount was not
filled in both the phases. This gave rise to the suspicion that rates were
tampered with after opening the bids.

It is apparent that the corrections in two items have been made after opening of
tenders. The net effect of corrections/overwriting was evident from the
enhancement of tendered amount by हैं 3.34 crore, while still keeping it below
the next higher bidder (L-2) by % 4.69 crore.

The details of the alterations are shown in Annexure 5.3 and 5.4.

The GNCTD stated that the matter was under investigation with CBI and the
action against the defaulting officials would be initiated as per the outcome of
the final investigation of CBL

5.6.3 Deficiency in tendering/award of work in NDMC

5.6.3.1 Calling of design based tender by NDMC and consequent
loss

NDMC opted for a “design based approach”, wherein each bidder was asked to
submit road wise design and compute the quantity for cach item required to
meet the target illumination level and to quote the rates for items required. The
GNCTD’s lighting standards of 2006 did not provide for calling tenders on
design basis.

While the design based tender does not ensure procurement of items at the
lowest cost, it also actually placed Philips at an advantageous position
compared to other bidders, as despite quoting higher (item wise) for each of the
key items, Philips managed to be lowest (L-1) bidder due to proposing use of
lower quantities of various items.

Philips was the lowest with tendered amount of % 34.40 crore against हैं 37.32
crore quoted by Spaceage (second lowest) as detailed below:

Name of item | Ranking | 1.1 Vendor Rate Rate Item cost as
ot M/s for the item | quoted by | quoted | percentage
Philips Philips | by Li | of total cost

11 m pole L3 M/s Bajaj 39602 | 25877 | 29.16 per

cent
10m pole L3 M/s — Space 33619 | 28000 | 1.82 per cent
age
8m pole 14 Mis Bajaj 26925 | 17791 | 5.57 percent
400W HPSV L2 M/s Keselec 25071 | 24900 | 17.61 per

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 85


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

Schreder cent
250W HPSV_ | L2 M’s Keselec 24445 | 24000 | 11.55 per
Schreder cent
PVC insulated | L4 Mis Bajaj 49 35. | 0.58 per cent
copper
conductor
HDPE pipe | 13 Mis Bajaj 297 194 | 2.24 per cent
120mm
Laying DWC | L3 M’s 1256 800 | 2.37 per cent
110mm Spaceage
HDPE pipe | L3 Mis 239 160 | 7.34 per cent
90mm Spaceage
HDPE pipe | L3 M's 1269 600 | 10.20 per
100mm Spaceage cent

A scrutiny of rates of 10 major items forming 88.44 per cent of gross tendered
cost (of Philips) of हैं 35.46 crore revealed that in none of these items Philips
was the lowest bidder. The overall bid amount of Philips was lowest only due
to their proposed design involving lower consumption of various items. For
instance, the design proposed by Philips involved use of 3815 poles and 4166
luminaries against the estimated quantity of 6364 and 9329 respectively, while
the quantities quoted by second lowest bidder were 6492 poles and 7126
luminaries.

Even the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) was unable to assess the
different designs due to wide variation in number of poles and other
infrastructure offered to be installed by the bidders. It finally recommended that
the price bids may be opened alter obtaining an undertaking from all the four
bidding firms that they would not charge for any extra work/ infrastructure
required to be provided in case the required levels of illumination as per NIT
specification were not met with their design.

Audit observed that the second lowest bidder ice. SpaceAge at the quoted
quantity of Philips could have executed the work at € 28.69 crore, which is less
than the amount quoted by Philips by हैं 6.77 crore.

In reply, NDMC stated that design based tenders rather than conventional mode
were invited keeping in view the special needs of the NDMC area with its
dense tree cover.

The “design” could have been either done in-house or could have been
executed as a separate consultancy assignment, thereby providing a level
playing field to obtain competitive rates for each item of work. This could have

86 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

saved a premium of % 6.77 crore, which was otherwise earned by Philips on the
basis of their design.

5.6.3.2 Irregular award of work in NDMC under deviation clause
leading to loss

Chairman, NDMC gave approval for additional work of 18.445 km for 14
roads and service/ slip roads which were not part of the original agreement. The
works were awarded on the same rates as the existing contract for street
lighting with Philips (awarded in August 2009) under the deviation clause
stating that the increase in quantity was under the deviation limit of 25 per cent.
In this case, the additional work valuing % 7.38 crore was for new roads not
covered by the original agreement, and hence could not be construed as
deviation in quantity alone. This did not have the approval of the Council, the
competent authority. NDMC intimated that the Council in its meeting held
subsequently on 23 February 2011, ratified the expenditure. Audit found that
the agenda note put up for approval of the Council in this regard made no
mention of the audit objection communicated to NDMC. Thus giving
inadequate information led to the wrong decision on deviation by the Council.

Loss to NDMC on account of award of additional work under deviation clause

e The existing agreement with Philips was design based, where the work was
awarded on account of the bid being of lowest total cost, and not
necessarily the lowest in unit cost of the items. Thus, award of additional
work to Philips at its quoted (higher) item rates led to an additional loss of
₹ 1.45 crore {® 7,37,89.874 X (design premium of हैं 6,77,00,520/net
contract amount of © 34,40,46,038) =% 1,45,20,187} when compared with
the rates of second lowest bidder.

* The NDMC calculated the prorata cost while awarding the additional work
to M/s Philips as हैं 7.38 crore. By applying the design parameters
proportionately for the additional work, the executed quatily as per the
tentative data provided by NDMC, the cost was in excess by हैं 1.30 crore,
as detailed in Table 5.5:

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 87


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

Table: 5.5 Excess cost due to excess execution beyond proportionate quantity by M/s
Philips for 14 roads excluding slip road
Item Quantity | Rate | Prorataqty. | Actual | Excess of | Value of excess
quoted | quoted | for 14 roads | qty. for 14) actual qty. | qty. evecuted
15.946/86 km | roads over pro | over pro rata
rata qty qty. in&
11 m Pole 2611 | 39602 484 543 59
10 m pole 192 [| 33619 36 24 =12
8m pol 734 26925 136 374 238
400 W HPSV 2491 | 25071 462 44 [48 | -12,03.408 |
250WHPSV | 165 [24445 311 552 241 58,911,245
Total 1,30,29,077

* It was observed that NDMC while awarding additional work, only
specified that the payment for additional work is to be governed by “the
deviation clause of agreement or site whichever is lower”. As a result, M/s
Philips had no incentive to optimise the design and conversely,
maximising the use of poles and luminaries was to the advantage of M’s
Philips on account of higher item rates. Accordingly, the contractor had
submitted a claim of % 12.06 crore (bill of 2.5 km of road length awarded
in October 2010, with pro-rata cost estimate of हैं | crore has not yet been
submitted hence there is a difference between bill amount of € 11.05 crore
and claim of 12.06 crore) for additional work, thus entailing total loss of
% 6.13 crore ( 12.06 crore - हैं 7.38 crore = % 4.68 crore add loss of हैं 1.45
crore = % 6.13 crore).

NDMC, in its reply, stated that payment for additional work would be restricted
on pro-rata basis or on the actual quantity executed, whichever was lower.

5.7 Delay in project initiation and completion
None of the agencies could complete the project within two years as planned.

5.7.1 Delays in PWD

PWD planned in June 2007 to complete the project by February 2009. The
project was executed as 3 separate packages in three PWD zones, but the work
was finally completed by September 2010 after a delay of about 19 months.
There was delay at every stage, with delay in awarding of work itself of about
11 months. There were delays in execution too, as the work stipulated to be
completed by January 2010 was also delayed by about eight months.

Further, PWD has not decided the penalty to be imposed on account of delay,
as none of the three contractors had submitted their final bills (though they
have been issued physical completion certificate in August/ September 2010).

5.7.2 Delays in MCD

The stipulated date of completion for Phase-I was 9 July 2009. However, a
certificate was issued (January 2011) indicating provisional completion on

88 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 5: Upgradation of Street Lighting of Roads in Delhi

2 August 2010. MCD neither sanctioned EOT, nor recovered liquidated
damages of € 3.45 crore for a delay of 55 weeks.

GNCTD stated that the EOT would be decided after getting back the relevant
records from the CBI.

After lapse of the stipulated date of completion of 7 July 2010 for Phase II, the
contract value was enhanced from % 60.74 crore to हैं 73.36 crore by awarding
additional work on 24 July 2010 with stipulated date of completion extended to
December 2010. The total work was subsequently restricted to हैं 61.99 crore
for a total road length of 160.5 km on 05 August 2010, but the stipulated date
of completion was not changed. Though the certificate for provisional
completion of work was issued on 24 September 2010, no time extension was
sanctioned. There was a delay in completion by 50 days, with a corresponding
LD of % 4.25 crore, which has not been levied by MCD.

GNCTD stated that EOT would be decided after taking a balanced view of the
delays on the part of the contractor and recovery, if any, effected after approval
of the competent authority.

5.7.3 Delays in NDMC

After approval of estimate (December 2007), NDMC delayed the tendering
process. Tenders were invited in March 2009 after a delay of 14 months, and it
took another five months to award the work. The contractor was given
additional work for 18.45 km between December 2009 and October 2010,
which would imply a proportionate increase in the time period up to November
2010. The execution of work was delayed by more than two months, and
NDMC had neither issued completion certificate nor recorded the final
measurement. Further, compensation for delay valuing = 1.25 crore was also
not levied. The Department in its reply stated that the installation work had
been completed on 30 August 2010. The street lights are functioning
satisfactorily since then. Minor rectification works and final measurements are
in progress. Final bill had not been made out as yet. Any deduction or the
recovery becoming due and recoverable will be adjusted in the final bill.
Sufficient due payments to the contractor for the work done, was available for
any eventual recovery.

This implies that the work was not completed as the measurement was under
process. (Reply of 3 April 2011). As of July 2011, the payment was not made
the effect of which will be visible in later years.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 89


6.1 Introduction

In February 2006, the Chief Minister (CM), Delhi desired that the entire city
of Delhi should have state of the art road signages with appropriate structural
system for the forthcoming CWG 2010. A presentation was made by 3M India
Limited before the CM on the signage system to be developed in Delhi. In
keeping with the CM’s direction, a stretch of road was selected between Tilak
Marg and Raj Ghat and a feeder road going up to Delhi Secretariat for a pilot
project in April 2006 at an estimated cost of हैं 1.77 crore. The pilot project
was taken up (May 2008) using ASTM! Type XI retro-reflective (RR) sheets
and was completed in December 2008 by the authorised converters of 3M
India Limited and Avery Dennison, the two leading manufacturers of RR.
sheets of type-IX and XI.

GNCTD accorded in principle approval, in March 2009, for the work of
installation of RR signages using type-IX (based on pilot study of NDMC
using Type IX Retro Reflective sheet), though the pilot study by PWD was
conducted using Type-XI sheeting. The type of support structure (M.S.
Pipes/Tubes) and colour of signages (blue coloured sheet with white Ictters)
was also decided.

The improvement brought to the look of Delhi by the consistent
implementation of the road signages project and the aesthetic and utilitarian
upgrade by the use of these signages is commendable.

Cantilever mounted signage

1 American Society for Testing and Materials


Chapter 6: Road Signages

Road name — double arrow signage Cautionary and directional shoulder

The road signages work was carried out by NDMC and PWD in their own
areas. PWD divided its work in three zones for separate tendering and
awarded them in October 2009 at a total contract amount of & 53.13 crore. As
on 5 August 2011, the works were not completed and an amount of हैं 40.52
crore was paid which included provisional payment of € 7.61 crore for
extra/substituted items under three zones, against the accepted extra items of
₹ 11.89 crore. NDMC undertook the work of signages in seven separate
packages between February 2009 and October 2009 at a total contract cost of
₹ 19.52 crore.

6.2 Restrictive conditions in tendering

The department was aware that there were only two manufacturers of RR
sheet and that the component of RR sheet formed about 33 per cent of the
total project cost. Yet, the following restrictive eligibility conditions were
included in the NIT, finalised on the basis of discussion between Pr. Secretary
to C M, Pr. Secretary (PWD) and Pr. Chief Engineer

* The bidder shall cither be a RR sheet manufacturer or shall have an
exclusive Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the manufacturer
of RR sheet in the case of a firm or Joint Venture (JV).

* Out of the three packages of road signage works, not more than two
packages shall be awarded to any one RR sheet manufacturer.

* The sequence of bid opening was stated with the financial bid of Zone M1
to be opened after the other two zones (M2 and M3).

Thus, inclusion of above conditions resulted in the following:

* It enabled the RR sheet manufacturers either to collude to split the order
among themselves or to consistently bid high in all the bids, knowing that
no party would take all the bids.

92 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 6: Road Signages

* It presented a situation for both the sheet manufacturers to charge a
premium for their association/exclusive MoU as they were an
indispensable component of the bidding process.

* It was ensured that at least one zone each would be awarded to both the
sheet manufacturers irrespective of the competitiveness of their bids.

Audit observed that the bidders backed by Avery-Dennison won the contracts
in zones M2 and M3. However, in zone M1 the financial bid of the Avery-
Dennison backed vendor (Prakash Reflective Devices) was rejected on the
grounds that the turnover of the other partner (other than lead partner) of JV
did not fulfill the minimum proportionate turnover criteria individually. Such
extreme interpretation of the clause was not explicitly stated in the NIT or
Eol, and has not been so interpreted in similar evaluation of other works in
PWD such as in Streetlighting project. Consequently, in zone Ml, the
department was forced to accept the sole technically qualified bid of 3M-Bajaj
consortium, by negotiating down the quoted rate by 15.95 per cent of quoted
amount, but still at higher rates than M2 and M3. The estimated value of work
of M1 was similar to the sum of works for M2 and M3.

The impact of the restrictive clauses was that the works in the three zones of
PWD were awarded at rates higher than the three works of NDMC awarded in
the same period (October, 2009). The cost of major comparable items of RR
sheet and a Very High Strength Bond (VHB) tape, a proprietary product of
M/s 3M-Bajaj, was higher by 21 to 73 per cent respectively, in PWD when
compared with NDMC.

Department stated (February, 2011) that after the execution of pilot project, it
was learnt that there were at least two parties (M/s 3M & Avery Dennison,
both based in America) who were manufacturers of RR sheets conforming to
ASTM standards. As the department was not sure of any other manufacturers
of RR sheets in the world other than these two, so NIT conditions were
designed in such a way that only RR sheet manufacturers (conforming to type
IX ASTM standards) are permitted to participate in the bid in the form of
JV/consortium. The tender cannot be called a restrictive tender in the strict
sense because participation by minimum two numbers of parties competing
with each other with their known background since years would ensure
competitiveness in any tender.

The reply is not acceptable because competition could have been ensured by
continuing with calling for authorized converters to bid as was in the case of
pilot project after specifying the standards.

The lack of competition in PWD resulted in higher tender rates and
consequent loss to government. In case of M-1 Zone as not more than two
works would be awarded to one sheet manufacturer, only 3M-Bajaj-CBM
consortium was technically qualified. 3M-Bajaj-CBM consortium quoted 8
per cent above estimated cost. In fact, in all the three zones, the 3M

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 93


Chapter 6: Road Signages

consortium quoted varying rates, and each time higher than its competitor.
The department negotiated the bid of 3M-Bajaj-CBM consortium down by
₹ 4.75 crore. The work was finally awarded to the consortium at 9.2 per cent
below estimated cost, which was still 5.1 per cent higher than the rates for
other two zones. Thus the acceptance of single tender at higher rate due to
restricted competition resulted in a minimum loss of हैं 1.40 crore to
government.

GNCTD replied that NIT conditions were designed in this manner for faster
execution and to ensure that a single agency did not take up the entire signage
work for all the three zones, so that if one agency failed, the other agency
could be used to counter the failure.

Tt was further stated that a conscious decision was taken to use type IX RR
sheet in signages and make RR sheet manufacture (of type [X sheet) a party in
tender participation by way of a JV or consortium as RR Sheet is the key
element of signage, there were chances of short supply of RR sheet type IX
due to major work in progress in Delhi before CWG 2010.

Reply is not acceptable as recourse to awarding the work to another agency in
case of failure by the selected agency was always available and PWD ensuring
that both the agencies were awarded a share of the work led to reduced
competition.

6.3 More expensive design and execution in PWD vis-a-vis
NDMC

Audit compared the cost of three similar types of signages executed by
NDMC. The rates were compared with that of PWD and found that the cost
of execution in PWD was substantially higher than that in NDMC. The
difference in cost is both due to a higher cost of the input material and a more
expensive design, consuming more of the input material. NDMC used
structure of stainless steel while PWD used mild steel structures to fix the
signages. The cost comparison with and without structure was worked out as
tabulated below:

Table 6.1 Unit cost of signages Table 6.2 Unit cost of signages
(without structure) (with structure)

Signage Type NDMC PWD

Place Identification 31,178 | 56,809 Place Identification 51,129 | 61,544
Cautionary 10,029 | 21,510 Cautionary 25,400 | 24,513
Road name-Double | 18,739 | 42,437 Road name-Double | 35,827 | 45,336
artow arrow

The cost incurred by PWD for various signages excluding structure work, was

94 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 6: Road Signages

substantially higher by 82 to 127 per cent than NDMC. This indicated
inefficient and expensive design and procurement.

GNCTD stated that the signages requirement of PWD roads is entirely
different than that of NDMC roads. The PWD signages were bigger and more
visible both from near and far and to slow moving and fast moving vehicles
and NDMC sign boards were fixed at low height and were shoulder mounted.
Further PWD signages were larger and heavier than NDMC signages and
PWD signage pattern was different from NDMC. The reply is not convincing
as the audit observation is just indicative of unit cost with respect to the
purpose. It is apparent that the structures meant to serve the same purpose
costed more in PWD than NDMC.

6.4 Execution of extra and substituted items leading to cost
escalation

A large number of extra/substituted items after award of work, without
documented technical reasons, raises doubt on their actual utility, especially
when the designs finalised by Shri. D.S Sachdeva, Advisor (without specific
authority) was based on the methodology submitted by Fibrefill, one of the
executors of the signage work.

Inspite of design approved by the department well in advance, in all the three
zones, identical extra items were accepted valuing हैं 11.89 crore (22.38 per
cent of contract amount of % 53.13 crore).

As tenders for the work were invited on the basis of the pilot project carried
out by the PWD wherein both the sheet manufacturers had participated, it was
expected that the requirements for execution of project would be well known
leaving minimum possibility for substitution of items or execution of new
items. This was not the case. Further, there was no uniformity in the rates
proposed/approved by different zones for these identical items. The accepted
amount of € 11.89 crore across the three zones on extra/substituted items was
primarily on account of the following items:

Table 6.3 — Approved amount of major extra/ substituted items
crore)

Approved
Amount

Substitution of MS Angle with Square Hollow Section for 151

making signage frame

Covering rear face of signages with ACM? as extra item 3.79

Use of Aluminium channel/Trim as extra item 4.06

Use of Pre cast bend , bolts and anchor plates as extra item 1.71

2 Aluminium Composite Material

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 95


Chapter 6: Road Signages

In reply to audit observations on extra and substituted items, GNCTD stated
that after award of work, samples were prepared with due deliberations at
various levels and the designs were fine-tuned within the ambit of basic frame
work, PWD in consultation with Shri D.S. Sachdeva, Adviser (PWD) who
was a former DG of CPWD finalized the detailing of signages for best use and
utility befitting the city environment.

As explained in the following sections, the need for these extra and substituted
items, which has substantially inflated the cost of the project was not
convincing.
In an item wise scrutiny of impact of substituted items on overall cost of
various types of signages, Audit observed that the cost per unit increased from
21.5 per cent to 71.9 per cent.
The details of the extra/substituted items leading to the stark increase in cost
are given below. The avoidable expenditure includes estimates for zone M1
for which final payments are yet to be made (July 2011).
Table 6.4 — Increase in cost on account of substituted items

(Per unit cost in 2)

ecuted Cost

Agreement

Gantry mounted 5,52,399 8,87,201
Cantilever mounted 1,95,272 2,37,067
Directional shoulder mounted (DSM) 54,623 87,328
Cautionary signboard 15,482 26,597
Place identification signboard 40,092 48,690
Road name signboard: Double sided 23,479 28,985
Road name signboard: Single sided 23,479 37,851
Road name signboard: Double arrow, 27,259 45,082
single sided

GNCTD stated that the executions of extra/substituted items were considered
necessary in order to enhance the life of signages and to improve aesthetics by
preventing percolation of water inside of boards, warping of the boards etc.
and further stated that extra cost has only added longevity to the signages
system apart from adding aesthetics to the city. The report of the committee
to finalise extra/substituted items was getting finalised soon and accordingly
the rates of items would be decided.

96 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 6: Road Signages

6.4.1 Substitution of Mild Steel (MS) Angle with Square
Hollow Section (SHS)

% कि

Square Hollow Section | Mild Steel (MS) Angle
(SHS)

During the pilot project for signages in PWD, the frame for fixing of RR sheet
was constructed using MS Angle and the same was specified at the time of
tendering. No questions regarding the frame were raised by any of the bidders
during the pre bid conference.

Audit observed that during issue of detailed drawing by PWD, which was
done subsequent to the award of work, the item of MS frame using MS angle
was substituted by SHS and contractor was paid for the difference in the rates
between MS angle and SHS as extra item.

The use of costlier SHS has actually benefitted the contractor by way of
reducing his fabrication cost, while increasing the cost of the project. This
substitution of item would lead to avoidable expenditure of 1.51 crore, of
which & 1.07 crore’ has already been paid by three zones as of 5 August 2011.

This also led to increase in weight of larger signage structures like gantry and
cantilever, which runs counter to the reason given by the department in
support of use of SHS.

GNCTD stated that payment will be made as per terms and conditions of
agreement and uniformity will be kept in all zones afier proper analysis in
conformance of decision of the constituted committee and after approval of
sanctioning authority. Difference in fabrication cost, shall be considered while
finalizing the rates.

6.4.2 Sanction of work for covering rear face of signages with

ACM as extra item

A successful pilot project was already complete based on which the NIT did
not include in its scope of work a covering for the rear face of some of the
signboards. However, during execution, the rear surfaces of signages were

covered using 4mm thick ACM, which served no functional purpose and was
done for the stated purpose of improved aesthetics. The execution of this extra

7 M1-¥. 0.35 crore, M2 %. 0.21 crore and M3 ₹. 0.51 crore =%. 1.07 crore.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | क्रय


Chapter 6: Road Signages

item enhanced the cost of signage by हैं 4926 per sqm leading to avoidable
expenditure of € 3.27 crore as of 5 August 2011.

Audit observed that since only the front portion of the signboard had
information to be seen by the citizen/user, any expenditure on improving the
aesthetics of the rear surface was wasteful.

Analysis of the cost components of ¥ 4926 per sqm for assessed value of work
of covering the rear face with ACM, done on the basis of single quotation,
revealed that the cost of VHB tape used for fixing ACM was हैं 1666 per sqm
(34 per cent) while = 1259 per sqm (26 per cent) was for its routing, bending,
making tray, fixing of VHB tape etc. In fact, the VHB tape used for bonding
ACM with the MS frame is manufactured by 3M Limited, one of the sheet
manufacturers.

Aluminium Trim peeling off from

Riveting of ACM to frame
frame

During computation of cost for extra item of covering rear face of the signages
with ACM, excess area (than required) was considered, causing a further loss
of % 0.22 crore to the government at the rate of रैं, 348.43 per sqm for 6672.67
sqm of item paid till 5 August 2011.

GNCTD stated that provision for covering the rear face of ACM has been
made only for cautionary boards for concealing MS frame for aesthetic
improvement and increasing the life of the signages and to avoid rusting of
back cover etc. Regarding amount in escalation of cost, it was stated that final
figure would be cleared after finalization of rates.

6.4.3 Wasteful expenditure on inclusion of aluminium
channelf/trim as extra item
The guidelines issued for execution after awarding works included an item of

providing 2 mm thick Aluminium channel/ trim around the sides of RR boards
for aesthetic reasons.

Consequently this item of aluminium trim was executed as an extra item.
Audit observed that:

98 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 6: Road Signages

« The aluminium trim was to be fixed by using VHB tape (an expensive
proprietary product of 3M), thereby exposing the trim to inevitable theft
by peeling it off. It has been removed in some places, and in some other
places, they are in the process of being removed.

« As the ACM sheet used in the board already had an aluminium layer as an
integral part, the overlay by another aluminium layer as trim was wasteful.

* The aesthetic utility of aluminium trim on signboards mounted on gantries
and cantilevers fixed at a height of above 6m, meant for vehicles running
at substantial speed should have been foreseen before award of work.

Thus, the decision to use aluminium trims was unwarranted and has resulted in
wasteful expenditure of हैं 3.79 crore as of 5 August 2011. Further, an
expenditure of % 1.37 crore for this item was incurred by MI and M2 zones
without approval of rates by the competent authority.

Department stated (February 2011) that fixing of trim was decided after
lengthy deliberations at the level of the Advisor (PWD) who happens to be the
former Director General CPWD and was also approved by the GNCTD while
approving the sample. As regards non-acceptance of clarification by Audit on
the ground that trim pasted with VHB can easily be peeled off and was not
theft proof, the department added that theft has no limit. Few places were seen
in Delhi where the trim has peeled off however about 6000 boards have been
installed which reflects negligible damage. The chances of this type of
happening always remain on running roads in such Metro cities. Continuous
maintenance is the only solution for such incidents, which is being done
simultaneously. Further, the expenditure on this item was quite nominal in
comparison of utility and aesthetics etc. of the trim and the payment made
against this item was provisional subject to final rates to be approved by the
committee and the competent authority.

Reply is not convincing as the recommendations of the Advisor are not
binding on the department, further, department has accepted the changes.
While selecting ACM it was stated that it is less prone to theft hence the
department considered this aspect of theft prior to tendering and not while
deciding extra item.

Hence, to use costly Aluminium with VHB tape by exposing it to known risk,
is application of item negating the reality. This led to enhanced maintenance
cost.

GNCTD stated that the decision to provide aluminum channel was taken to
protect edges of the board so as to prevent tampering with RR Sheet etc.
Further, such items were not foreseen at the time of preparing estimate and
while calling tenders and so were not included in the tender schedule.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 99


Chapter 6: Road Signages

6.4.4 Inadmissible payment for precast bend, bolts and anchor
plates as extra item

The contract provided for welded bends for the tubular support structure. The
department replaced welded bends with precast bend as an extra item, despite
the clarification given in the pre-bid meeting that nothing extra would be
payable on this account. This replacement on the grounds of improved
aesthetics without any functional purpose would lead to an additional cost of
हैँ 0.83 crore (under M2 and M3 zones) against overall approved amount of
% 1.10 crore for the item, of which हैं 0.57 crore has already been paid by M3
zone (July 2011).

Further, as per the description of work, rate analysis of the item, drawings
appended with agreement and CPWD specifications for steel works, the
component of anchor bolts and anchor plates was to be paid under the relevant
item of steel work itself However, Audit observed that the same was
separately paid as extra item at the rate of हैं 116.73 per kg instead of the
agreement rate for steel work of हैं 65 per kg, leading to inadmissible
expenditure of % 0.31 crore*. On the basis of audit observation recovery has
been made by M2 zone in March 2011.

6.5 Undue financial benefit to contractor for barricading
work

During the pre bid meeting, the department clarified that the barricade can be
retained by the contractor after completion of work. Audit observed that the
executed quantity of this item increased by 172 per cent, resulting in undue
financial benefit of € 0.25crore® to contractors as of 5 August 2011.

Department stated that safety of the commuter on the road cannot be
compromised. However due to wear and tear as well as continuous accidents
etc. the batricading sheets can hardly be of any use except scrap after six
months of their placement.

GNCTD stated (December 2011) that the quantities of barticading work
actually required to ensure safety was much more than what was provided in
the agreement and further stated that the cost involved in barricades is
insignificant in view of the requirement of safety measures to avoid accident.

The reply is not tenable as the quantum of work of signage was not exceeded
(as per paid amount), the site was available, time was agreed and the
contractor had quoted rates accordingly. The time for installation and fixing
was limited in case of signage. Thus, any inefficiency on the part of contractor
was not to be compensated from public money.

*M2 ₹. 19.05 lakh and M3 %.11.49 lakh =%. 30.54 lakh ie रैं, 0.31 crore.
°M1&. 10.63 lakh, M2 ₹. 13.02 lakh and M3 %.1.70 lakh = हैं, 25.35 lakh ie हैं, 0.25 crore.

100 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 6: Road Signages

6.6 Non imposition of penalty

Audit noted that all the three works executed by PWD were delayed by 440
days as on 31 July 2011, but penalty of हैं 5.31 crore for the delay was not
levied on contractors.

GNCTD stated (December 2011) that Superintending Engineer concerned is
the final authority, under the agreement and competent to grant EOT/levy
compensation for delay and a judicious decision taken after hearing all the
representations will be final and binding on both the parties of the agreement.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 101


71 Introduction

As a part of upgradation of city infrastructure and in preparation for the
Games, GNCTD had taken up 75 projects linked to city infrastructure
improvement. Subsequently, 25 projects were stated to be directly linked to
CWG for close monitoring.

Three projects were delinked’ from CWG, and not taken up. In all, GNCTD
undertook construction of 25 roads and bridges projects to improve
infrastructure of the city during CWG 2010. Of these 25 projects. one project
each was started in 2004, 2005 and 2006. Nine projects were started in first
half of 2007 and four in the second half. Three projects began in first half of
2008 and four in the second half. Two projects were started as late as in 2009.
Of these 25 projects, 17 were fully completed, and the remaining 8 were
substantially completed and open to traffic, with physical completion status
varying between 90 per cent and 99.5 per cent.

Audit selected six of these projects executed by PWD for detailed review viz.
Raja Ram Kohli Marg Flyover, Ghazipur Flyover, Barapulla Elevated Road,
UP Link Road, Corridor improvement on Road no.56 (Inter State Bus
Terminal (ISBT)-Anand Vihar) and Ring Road Byepass. These six projects
involved a total sanctioned amount of € 2160 crore.

Table 7.1 — Road and flyover projects selected for detailed audit
¢

Name of Contractor Estimated | Tendered | Date Stipulated
project cost amount of date of | made as
award completion | of Oct
2011
RR Kohli Afcons Apr 09
Marg Flyover
Ghazipur Afcons 173.36 | 199.79 | Apr 08 Apr 10 | 175.79
Flyover
Barapulla DSC 352.40 | 433.71 | Aug 08 Mar 10 | 451.35
Elevated Road
UP Link Road | DSC 177.80 | 265.04 | Sep 08 Apr 10 | 209.00
Road No. 56- | Valecha 97.60 | 140.53 | Nov 08 May 10 193.76
Anand Vihar
ISBT
Ring Road Simplex 330.20 | 409.45 | Dec 08 June 10 |. 157.64
Bye pass Jan 09 July 10 | 127.49

' Elevated East West Corridor, BSZ Marg Flyover, and Shastri Park Tunnel Corridor


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

Project Timelines: Most of the projects were awarded in 2008, with the
CWG just two years away. The dates by which various important milestones
were to be met for the six projects examined by Audit are tabulated below:

Table 7.2: Important Milestones for selected Road/ Flyover Projects

Name of Date of Date Date of Date Date of} Stipulated Status as of
Project Feasibility | of approval of | award| date of Oct. 2011
AA/ES of DUAC NIT of completion
work
RR Kohli Sep 05 Jul 06 | Oct 06 Feb Mar 07 | Apr 09 Completed
Marg Flyover 07
Ghazipur ‘Aug 04 ‘Apr 08 | Jul 07 Dec | Apr08 | Apr 10 Flyover
Flyover 07 completed but
formal
completion is
yet to be
recorded
Elevated Tune 08 | Aug | Tul08 | Aug | Mar 10 Connectivities
Road over 08 2008 under
Barapulla progress
Nalla
UP Link Mar 07 May Dee 07 Jul 08 | Sep 08 | Apr 10 Completed
Road 08
Road No.56- | Sep 04 Jun 08 | Jan 08 Aug | Nov May 10 Flyover
Anand Vihar 08 2008 completed but
ISBT formal
completion is
yet to be
recorded
Ring Road | | May | इक 0... Jul08 | Deco8 | Jun 10 Completed
Bye pass 08 Sep | Jan09 | Jul10
08

7.2. Adoption of contractor’s profit and overhead charges of
37.5 per cent for bridge/ flyover projects

All the six PWD projects adopted contractor’s profit and overhead charges
(CPOH) of 37.5 per cent’ for the bridge/flyover components (which
represented the bulk of the work involved). This is in contrast to CPOH of 15
per cent (raised from 10 per cent in December 2007/April 20087) stipulated by
CPWD’.

225 per cent as overhead charges, and 10 per cent profit thereon; this works out to an overall
37.5 per cent

3 The increase was communicated by DG, CPWD in December 2007, but approved by MoUD
only in April 2008.

4 CPWD’s manuals, contract clauses and other terms and conditions/ circulars are generally

104 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

The justification adduced by PWD, GNCTD for adopting this percentage of
37.5 per cent (as opposed to 10/15 per cent adopted by CPWD) is that this
CPOH rate was based on the “Standard Data Book for Analysis of Rates”
issued by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH). The
foreword to this data book indicates that it is being adopted by various
agencies for projects other than National Highways (which is the primary
purpose of this data book). The estimates for these projects were prepared
using the data elements indicated in the data book.

Audit observed that the basic approach for the preparation of the MoRTH data
book? highlights common elements of overhead charges for both road and
bridge works, but specifies different rates for CPOH (varying from 18.8 per
cent to 43 per cent) for different categories of road and bridge works.
However, the MoRTH data book and the CPOH rates (indicated in the data
book) have not been formally adopted by GNCTD®. Despite this, PWD,
GNCTD have adopted the CPOH rate of 37.5 per cent (as per the MoRTH
data book), which is substantially higher than the CPOH rate of 15 per cent
stipulated by CPWD. This resulted in increasing the justified cost, worked out
by the department after opening of the financial bids, by € 352.47 crore.

PWD stated that CPOH at the rate of 37.5 per cent was adopted in conformity
of the provisions of MoRTH Data Book. The reasons behind 25 per cent OH
and 10 per cent CP as per MoRTH specification for bridges and flyovers
items was that many smaller items which are incidental to bigger items such
as laps and chairs in steel reinforcement, barricading, load testing of piles,
establishment of laboratory with technical persons at site etc. involved in
execution are not measured and paid separately. Reply is not acceptable as
these items are also incidental of main items in DSR also. DSR also allows 5
per cent in name of waste in steel reinforcement. Moreover, in all these 6
contracts PWD included separate items for barricading and load testing in
BOQ and paid separately also. While in ten states PWD Departments are
adopting the MoRTH data book for the purposes of estimation of road and
bridge work, in all these states the overhead and profit rates were state’
specific.

Further, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), which routinely constructs
elevated viaducts, similar to flyovers, does not use the MoRTH data book for

adopted by PWD, GNCTD
5 Indicated in the data book itself

It is not clear when PWD, GNCTD commenced using these higher CPOH rates.

7 (i) Orissa (10%), (ii) Haryana (10% CP ~ 21.5% OH), (iii) Tripura (15%), (iv) Chattisgarh
(15%),

(5) Madhya Pradesh (10%), (vi) Goa (10% CP + 5%-15 % OH), (vii) Himachal Pradesh (10%
CP + 10%-25 % OH), (viii) Rajasthan (10%), (ix) Assam (10% CP + 10%-20 % OH), (x)
Karmataka (10% CP + 10 % OH)

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 105


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

its cost estimation. For any non-scheduled item of work executed by DMRC,
whether following MoRTH specifications or otherwise, they apply a uniform
fixed CPOH of 20 per cent.

It is also not clear whether the overhead components for constructing national
highways (generally by NHAI) are applicable as such to the bridge and
flyover projects in Delhi.

The critical importance of the CPOH rate is that once adopted for estimation
purposes, the detailed estimates thus prepared constitute a baseline for
potential bidders. The CPOH rate also forms an indirect input into the process
of preparation of justified costs, where required, and the associated band of
5/10 per cent for assessing the reasonableness of rates for final award of the
contract.

Thus, the use of the CPOH rate of 37.5 per cent for preparation of the
estimates for the bridge/ flyover projects is inappropriate. GNCTD needs to
carry out an in depth study of the actual elements of overhead involved
(including the extent of equipment intensive construction methods actually in
use for similar projects) and practices followed in other states for similar
projects, before deciding on the appropriate CPOH rate for all such projects.

7.3 Irregularities in tendering procedure

7.3.1 Acceptance of bids quoted on papers other than tender
documents

Rules and guidelines on form of the General Conditions of Contract (GCC),
which are essentially part of NIT, stipulate that in case of item rate tenders,
tenderers are expected to quote on the tender form. Any tender containing
percentage below/above the rates quoted is liable to be rejected®. It was
observed in Audit in three instances where bids were accepted by PWD
despite being quoted on paper other than tender forms:

. PWD invited (July 2008) item rate tenders for work of construction of
elevated road on Barapulla Nalla (in two packages) from the
empanelled contractors/firms. Six bids were received for each
package. The works were awarded to DSC Limited at = 218.79 crore
and % 214.92 crore respectively for both the packages. It was however
noticed that DSC became the lowest bidder not on the basis of his bid
in the prescribed format of bid documents, but on the basis of separate
letters quoting a lump sum amount stated to be found in envelopes
containing financial bid,

® Audit noted many instances e.g. Ghazipur flyover, where percentage discount was offered
on tender form, but accepted in violation of this system.

106 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

* Similarly in case of UP Link Road project, where PWD invited (July
2008) item rate tenders, two bids were received, and work was
awarded in September 2008 to DSC Limited at a cost of हैं 265.04
crore. Again DSC became the lowest on the basis of separate letter
quoting a lump sum amount stated to be found in envelop containing
financial bid.

Award of work to DSC was irregular as:

* the letters were not part of the tender documents issued by the
department but were stated to be found in envelopes containing
financial bids,

. in the said letters, the firm had quoted the lump sum cost “after
discount on all items”. It was PWD which converted the difference
between the lump sum amount and amount worked out as per item
wise bid, to a percentage discount to the quoted rate.

Taking cognisance of the letter which did not form part of the prescribed
tender documents, and considering the lump sum cost quotation against the
item rate tender was not in order and awarding of work to DSC limited was
irregular. Further, Audit could not ascertain whether the said letters were
submitted along with the bid documents or placed at a later stage. PWD stated
that it was true that letters were not part of the tender document issued by the
department but were found in envelope containing financial bid. The financial
bid was evaluated in totality. Each and every word written any where in the
financial bid or any letter enclosed with it could not be ignored. The reply is
not acceptable as any document which was not part of prescribed tender
document issued by the department is not to be considered.

7.3.2 Acceptance of bid despite over-writings/use of correction
fluid

CPWD Manual prohibits the use of correction fluid anywhere in tender
documents and, if used, such tender is liable for rejection. Audit observed that
the bid documents of M/s Simplex Infrastructures Limited who was awarded
the work of Ring Road bypass (Package 1) had 12 cuttings’corrections,
besides three cases of use of correction fluid for changing the figures, having
an impact of increasing the bid amount by % 6.23 crore.

Use of correction fluid in the tender document made it liable for rejection. In
spite of these obvious shortcomings in the bid document, the department did
not reject the bid.

In reply the department stated that in the tender for Package II, the tenderer
M/s Simplex Infrastructures Limited have filled rates for approximately 113
items and used correcting fluid for correcting rate of three items only. The
same has been duly taken cognizance of by Executive Engineer and recorded

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 107


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

on the corresponding pages at the time of opening of tender. ‘Liable for
rejection’ does not mean mandatory’ summary rejection of the bid on this
account and particularly when there is a difference of approximately = 40
crore between the bid price of Ll & L2 on the estimated cost of हैं 173 crore
put to tender.

While there is no apparent monetary loss, but the sanctity of the bid process
should be maintained and not vitiated.

7.3.3 Irregular invitation of percentage rate tender

Audit observed that tenders for RR Kohli Marg flyover were incorrectly
invited (February 2007) as percentage rate tender, instead of item rate tender,
as is required by the CPWD Works Manual.

Audit also noticed that though the tenders for the work were initially invited
on item rate basis, yet it was subsequently changed to percentage rate tender
without assigning any reason despite the fact that scheduled items based on
DSR constituted only 2 per cent of the work.

Thus, invitation and acceptance of percentage rate tender was irregular.

GNCTD stated that there were no specific reasons recorded for initially
inviting the tender on item rate basis and subsequently changing the same to
percentage rate tender. Government further added that call of tenders on
percentage basis is always better as tenderer cannot quote unbalanced rates
during execution and try to avoid executing low rated items. The reply is not
acceptable as the approving authority 1.6. Chief Engineer approved for call of
tenders on percentage rate without recording any reasons at the time of issue
of corrigendum of item rate to percentage rate.

7.4 Unwarranted inclusion of items in Bill of Quantity
(BOQ) of agreement

Audit observed that in six projects of PWD, the agencies had included
separate items for providing temporary barricades and pile testing al the
tendered cost of 11 crore and = 11 crore respectively, against which, a
payment of 14.69 crore had already been made.

Payment for both the items is inconsistent with MoRTH specifications’ for
Road and Bridge Works, against which the project costs had been estimated
and executed, which clearly states that traffic safety arrangements including
erection and maintenance of barricades and pile testing would be considered
as incidental to the works and would be contractor’s responsibility.

2 Section 112

108 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

In reply the department stated that section 112.4 (Traffic Safety and Control)
of MoRTH Specification for Road and Bridge works, is a general provision
and does not mention height of barricade, sizes of members, its fixing
arrangement to the ground, gap between each barricade, frequency of painting
etc. The terms stipulated in the MoRTI specification are adequate in general
for normal traffic on Highways & Road works in outskirts.

The reply is not acceptable because though it is true that MoRTH specification
does not mention height of barricades, frequency of painting, etc. yet it is
mentioned that barricades are not payable separately. Lf the department
required specific type of barricades these could have been mentioned in
special terms and conditions in the NIT without providing a line item in the

BOQ.

On pile tests, the department stated that the initial load tests are carried out for
checking adequacy of design load adopted for piles and in case of major
deviation in actual pile load capacity, pile design is to be modified and initial
load test is required to be conducted again. Thus, its quantity remained
uncertain, and it is always advisable to keep separate item for initial load test
and routine load test. Similarly, frequency of routine load tests and integrity
test had to be defined, so that no dispute arises in case of any variation.
MoRTH specifications do not stipulate the frequency of carrying out initial
and routine load tests on piles.

The reply is not acceptable because clause 1118 of MoRTH specifications
clearly mentions that routine and initial pile load tests shall not be measured
for payment. Also, IS 2911 clearly prescribes both the minimum and
maximum tests to be carried out. In case more number of tests beyond the
maximum limit are required, the NIT can always provide for the same
separately.

7.5 Non compliance with quality standards.

7.5.1 Usage of steel not conforming to standards in Barapulla
elevated road

Audit noticed that out of 387 batches of steel consignment weighing 9048
MT, samples of 26 batches having the total batch weight of 642.01 MT and
costing हैं 5.79 crore were found, by the department, to be of weight lower than
tolerance limit prescribed in IS 1786. These were, however, not rejected by
the department leading to use of less than tolerance limit steel. Out of these 26
batches, samples of only four were sent to third party laboratories, which, on
testing, found them to be conforming to standards. GNCTD stated that the
tolerance limit for batches and individual samples were different. For payment
for steel reinforcement the weight of individual sample of each batch was
taken for the purpose of determining the unit mass of entire lot. This is not a
quality test for steel reinforcement bars as its quality is measured by its tensile

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 109


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

strength and not by its weight. The reply is not acceptable because Audit has
compared the batch tolerance limit mentioned in the steel mass register
provided to it and found the tolerance limit to be lower than the prescribed.
Further taking the weight of the steel reinforcement at the site is an integral
part of the prescribed quality assurance process. However, it was seen that
instead of the sub-standard steel being outrightly rejected, samples of these
batches of steel which had failed in the basic tests, were sent to external labs
for testing then again the same selected samples were subjected to third party
tests.

7.5.2 Usage of steel not conforming to the standards in Ring
Road Byepass

Another instance of non-conformity with standards was seen in the Ring Road
bye-pass project where five batches of steel having total batch weight of
370.78 MT and costing हैं 2.69 crore were found by the department to be of
weight higher than tolerance limit prescribed in IS 1786. These were,
however, not rejected by the department, leading to use of non-compliant
steel.

GNCTD in reply stated that there could be human error in checking at site.
Moreover, testing laboratory has better controlled conditions and therefore,
results of the test laboratory are given more authenticity and reliability and
accordingly are given precedence over results at site laboratory. As the
laboratory test reports of all the steel samples were found in order, the steel
reinforeement for the said lots were treated as acceptable. Reply is not
acceptable as from the reply it appears that the prescribed quality assurance
mechanism of on site weight checking was of no consequence, which is not a
fact as it is an integral part of the quality assurance mechanism prescribed by
the department itself. Moreover, the Section 26 of the CPWD Manual clearly
provides that sample shall be taken and got tested by the engineer-in-charge as
per the provision in this regard in the relevant BIS code. In case the test results
indicate the steel arranged by the contractor does not conform to the BIS code,
the same shall stand rejected.

7.5.3 Pile tests to confirm quality not carried out

Audit observed that routine tests of piles were not carried out during
construction of the elevated road over Barapulla Nallah, in violation of
MoRTH specifications and IS 2911-1985"°.

As per IS 2911-1985, routine tests for pile are necessary primarily to
determine the safe load on pile, and between one-half per cent to two per cent
of the piles are required to be tested. This translates to a minimum of seven

10 Indian Standard Code of Practice for Design and construction of Pile Foundations

110 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

routine tests to be conducted in case of Barapulla Nallah. As not even a single
routine test was carried out, Audit could not ascertain how the PWD
authorities satisfied themselves that piles were executed as per the IS
specifications.

PWD in November 2010 stated that these tests could not be undertaken due to
shortage of time. However, GNCTD in December 2011 stated that routine test
of piles were carried out. This reply could not be verified in audit as no test
report was found enclosed alongwith the reply.

7.5.4 Unauthorized substitution of Portland Slag Cement with
Ordinary Portland Cement

As per agreement slag cement was to be used in construction of elevated road
over Barapulla Nallah. However, Audit noticed that Ordinary Portland
Cement (OPC) was used in place of Portland Slag Sement without the
approval of the competent authority. A total quantity of 16264 MT of OPC
was used in place of slag cement. Slag cement and OPC have distinct
properties and have distinct applications and uses. The use of slag cement in
this project was a conscious decision by higher authorilies. Substitution of
slag cement with OPC without approval of competent authority has the
potential of compromising the quality.

GNCTD stated that the progress of this work was being monitored by the
Chief Engineer on a day-to-day basis and decisions were being taken then and
there in the weekly review meetings due to urgency of this work. It was
further stated that use of PPC in place of PSC was allowed by competent
authority under emergent conditions of shortage of PSC in the market and as
per codal provisions and therefore there is no question of compromising with
the quality of work. The reply is not acceptable as NIT was approved by the
Chief Engineer and as per the provisions of the CPWD Works Manual formal
approval of the Chief Engineer was mandatory to substitute PSC with PPC
before such substitution. Moreover, the approval of the Chief Engineer was
not obtained even after one year of the commissioning of the Elevated
Corridor.

7.6 Contract management

7.6.1 Adoption of revised price variation clause

Price variation in PWD is payable as per standard clauses'' in General
Conditions of Contract (GCC). Audit noticed that PWD incorporated a new
clause 10CCA for price variation in all the six selected PWD projects. The
standard price variation clauses of GCC stipulate that for each project, the
proportion of key components of steel, cement, labour and material is
computed based on the estimated usage of these items in the project, which

" 10C, 100५, 100९

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | ll


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

varies from project to project. In contrast, the new clause introduced by PWD
adopted constant percentages of use for all the components, viz, labour (22
per cent), steel (25 per cent), cement (15 per cent), fuel (5 per cent) and
machinery and machine tools (18 per cent). Further, the CPWD manual does
not prescribe any price variation payable on machinery and machine tools,
though it was prescribed in this new price variation clause.

As the proportion of steel used in these projects was far higher than 25 per
cent, and there was a downward trend in prices of steel during the construction
period of four of these projects, the amount of recovery was lesser by = 18.01
crore than that which would have become recoverable with the standard price
variation clause.

Audit also noted that no financial or legal advice was taken by the Chief
Engineer before incorporation of this new clause, as is required vide General
Financial Rules (GFR) and CPWD manual.

PWD stated that the NIT approving authority could introduce additional terms
and conditions in NIT to suit the exigencies of work and these would override
the corresponding standard clauses of various forms.

Reply is not acceptable as only a formal, well thought out policy decision at
the department level after taking financial and legal advice for amending
critical conditions of the GCC can ensure that the interests of the Government
are protected. This cannot be left to the discretion of individual NIT approving
authority on a contract to contract basis.

7.6.2 Incorrect measurement of underweight steel resulting in
excess payment of €0.35 crore

Audit observed that 5184.26 MT of reinforcement steel bars were found
underweight by 48.842 MT in terms of standard unit weight in Ring Road
Byepass project. However, while converting the length into weight for
payment purpose, in violation of section 5.3.4 of CPWD specification which
stipulates that if actual unit weight of reinforcement bars is less than the
standard unit weight but within variation, then weight of reinforcement shall
be calculated on the basis of actual unit weight. The actual unit weight has
been ignored and payment was made for standard unit weight of 5233.102
MT, resulting in excess payment of हैं 34.63 lakh. PWD stated that the
provision of the agreement provides that the records for actual sectional
weight of each dia of bar for every lot of steel brought to the site shall be
maintained as per specification. This provision mentions about maintenance of
record as per CPWD specification and not for payment. The reply is not
acceptable as the payment to the contractor for reinforcement steel bar should
have been made according to the CPWD specificiations.

112 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

7.6.3 Extra expenditure of €1.13 crore due to post tender
change

In the project of construction of grade separator at ISBT Anand Vihar crossing
of Road No. 56, PWD substituted the items of work, construction of three
pipe culverts, with the item for executing the same using a different
technology (trenchless digging). This entailed an additional expenditure of
र₹ 1.13 crore, GNCTD stated that substitution was done because it was a busy
road and it was difficult to cut open the road without disrupting the traffic and
this situation could not be foreseen at the time of preparation of Detailed
Estimates/NIT. The reply is not tenable as the traffic on this corridor was a
well known fact and it should have been taken into consideration at the time
of preparing detailed estimates. Had the department included the item of
laying of pipe by trenchless method in the detailed estimates/NIT/ tenders
competitive rates could have been quoted by the bidders and government
could have got the advantage of fair market competition.

7.7 Loss due to incorrect estimations

7.7.1 Avoidable expenditure of हैं 3.66 crore due to inaccurate
estimation

« Audit observed that in RR Kohli project, the requirement of mastic asphalt
had been grossly underestimated, with an estimated quantity of 6200
square meter of mastic asphalt in agreement, while the actual quantity
executed was 56724 sqm. an increase in quantity by 815 per cent.

The contractor was, therefore, paid for mastic asphalt as per market rate of
% 572 per Sqm. against the contract rate of हैं 296, in keeping with
Schedule F of the contract, which states that contractor was eligible for
payment at market rates for items which had been executed beyond 30 per
cent of the agreement quantity. This has resulted in avoidable expenditure
of & 1.34 crore for payment for the extra quantity of 48664 square meter
of mastic asphalt at market rates.

Similarly in the same project, the quantity of reinforcement steel increased
by 197 per cent and department had to pay हैं. 1.94 crore extra to the
agency on account of the difference in agreement rates and market rates.

GNCTD stated that initially the project was conceived to be constructed
partly on stilt and partly with a retaining wall and estimates were prepared
accordingly. But the Yamuna Standing Committee approved the proposal
for construction on stilts. In addition, the original scope of work had the
provision of steel column and steel pier cap but later on it was changed to
RCC. Due to these reasons, deviation in estimated quantities of mastic
asphalt and reinforcement steel took place. Further, as per agreement
escalation for steel is not payable for the quantity where market rate is

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 113


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

payable. Accordingly, no escalation was paid for such quantity. Had the
division added escalation to the agreement rate the total rate works out to
₹ 43.17 per kg which is more than the market rates paid. The reply is not
acceptable as all these factors affecting construction should have been
taken care of at the time of preparation of detailed estimate. Secondly,
payment under clause 10 CCA of the agreement depends upon the
quantity of the steel consumed in the particular month and the difference
in the cost index in that particular month. Further in working out the total
rate of हैं 43.17 per kg. the department has applied the escalated rate of
steel upto the actual date of completion without restricting it to the
stipulated date of completion. Also it did not consider the cost index of the
month in which the steel was actually consumed.

« Audit observed that in the work of the Gazipur Project the quantities of
mastic asphalt were grossly underestimated in the detailed estimates
prepared by the consultant. The actual executed quantity was upto 311 per
cent more than the estimated quantity for which department had to pay
र 0.38 crore extra to the agency on account of the difference in agreement
rates and market rates.

PWD stated that in pre-bid meeting, provision for RCC wearing course to
be laid in underpass had been deleted from the scope of work and it was
decided that type of wearing course in underpass would be decided at the
time of execution. Later on bituminous wearing course was laid which
resulted in excess quantity of mastic. Reply is not acceptable as in a
project of such magnitude there has to be prior planning for wearing
course of underpass.

7.7.2 Loss of €3.55 crore due to incorrect estimation

Audit observed that estimation for quantities prepared by the Tandon
Consultant Pvt. Ltd. in Package-II of work relating to Elevated Road over
Barapulla Nallah was not very accurate with large deviations. As a result,
based on the actual executed quantities of material used, the inter-se ranking
of LI and L2 bidders changed with the bid of L2 bidder now lower by हैं 3.55
crore than 1.1.

Greater accuracy in estimate preparation would have led to the work being
awarded to a different contractor, and a sum of % 3.55 crore could have been
saved. The department did not invoke the relevant penalty clause against the
consultant for his error in estimate preparation.

Department stated that at a later stage a circulation plan for movement of
traffic and pedestrians around the Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium was formulated
in consultation with the MCD and CPWD, who were the other two agenc
working in the same area. This circulation plan was approved by UTTIPEC

114 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

and it has increased the length of the elevated road by about 380 meters. In
addition, a retaining wall was also constructed to accommodate the parking
area developed by MCD. Further at the behest of Delhi Traffic Police two
connectivities to this road were also taken up for construction under the same
agreement. These extra items had resulted in deviation in quantities which was
not due to error in the estimates but cropped up during the course of execution
which could not have been anticipated at the time of framing the
estimates/award of tender. The reply is not acceptable as all these aspects
should have been considered at the time of planning of this elevated road with
proper co-ordination with the other agencies.

7.8 Execution of works without tendering

Audit noticed that two major works were executed as deviation to ongoing
works, i.e., without call of fresh tenders. The two cases are discussed in
succeeding paragraphs.

7.8.1 Work costing रैं 51 crore without tendering

During the construction of Barapulla elevated road, the Delhi Police requested
PWD to provide proper connectivity of this road with Lala Lajpat Rai Marg so
as to provide uninterrupted dedicated lane for athletes to move from CWG
Village to all sports venues during CWG-2010. The PWD proposed to
GNCTD to construct this connectivity through main contractor without calling
the tenders so that work could be completed before CWG-2010. GNCTD
accorded administrative approval and expenditure sanction for %51 crore for
this work in July 2009. This proposal was approved by GNCTD keeping in
view the fast approaching CWG 2010 but connectivities were not completed
in time for the Games and the work was ongoing as of November 2011.

Despite having got the approval of GNCTD the PWD had not taken required
initiatives to ensure completion of the work before CWG-2010. Even the
main contractor was not officially informed regarding completion of the said
connectivity before CWG. PWD did not obtain the consent of the contractor
to complete the work as deviation without asking for extra time and at the
time of submitting the proposal to get the work done through deviations.
There was no plan/mechanism with the PWD to get the work completed
before CWG-2010 which resulted in irregular award of work of € 51 crore.

In their reply the PWD stated that due to shortage of time and resources the
competent authority had decided to get the connectivities completed through
same contract as deviation in the quantity of work and asking the ongoing
contractor to take up the work as deviation in ongoing project contract was as
per delegated financial powers and codal requirements prescribed in CPWD
works manual. The reply is not acceptable as taking up the construction of
connectivities as deviation in ongoing contract these were lying incomplete as
on December 2011 due to lack of initiative by the department.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 115


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

7.8.2 Work costing €11.63 crore undertaken without tendering

GNCTD conveyed the approval for = 11.63 crore for widening of the existing
bridge on Trunk Drain No. 2 at the T Junction of Road No. 56-71 and bridge
on Road No. 56-58A, and widening of Road No. 56 from 6 lane to 8 lane in
front of ISBT Anand Vihar to provide smooth and signal free traffic on Road
No. 56. The Executive Engineer decided to get work executed (without call
of open tenders and without the approval of competent authority), by Valecha
Constructions, the contractor who was executing the ongoing work for
“Corridor Improvement of Road No 56-ISBT Anand Vihar and allied works”,
so that the work could be completed before the Games. The work was in
progress as of August 2011.

Audit maintains that widening of the bridges was not a part of work already
being executed in that area and thus cannot be termed as deviation in any way.
Hence, award of work to M/s Valecha Engineers Limited without call of open
tenders was unauthorised.

GNCTD stated that it was intimated to the Principal Secretary, PWD that
these works could be completed before CWG 2010 if done as deviation under
ongoing contract there was likelihood that if fresh tenders had been called
there would have been no response from eligible agencies for such work or
PWD would have received much higher rate than the quoted rates of ongoing
contract. It was further stated that these works were only extension of ongoing
main work and not completely new work at a different location. Reply is not
acceptable because these are mere presumptions and Administrative Approval
and Expenditure Sanction was issued with the condition that PWD should
complete all the codal formalities as per General Financial Rules and CPWD
works manual while awarding the work. Moreover, the work could not be
completed before CWG 2010 even as deviation in the ongoing contract.

7.9 Infructuous expenditure of रैं 8.65 crore on FOBs

The work for construction of two arch foot over bridges (FOBs) was awarded
to P&R Infra Projects Limited at a tendered cost of % 10.35 crore to facilitate
the public to reach JLN Stadium during CWG. The design of the FOB was of
a suspension type, and not the ordinary pillar supported structure, and was
being attempted for the first time by PWD, Delhi. Given the limited amount of
time available for the Games, it may have been better for PWD to stick to the
tried and tested method of FOB construction. However, PWD decided to use
an imported suspension system (Macalloy make) in spite of the fact that a
suspension bridge with a similar suspension system had collapsed in Glasgow
in 2008. Instead of awarding the design consultancy work to a specialized
agency having experience in the related field, the work was awarded as extra
item to the consultant for the main work (M/s Tandon Consultancy).

116 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

The deck of one of the FOBs collapsed during construction, while concrete
was being laid. After this incident no efforts were made to construct the deck
of second FOB or reconstruct the deck of ill fated FOB.

Collapsed FOB near JLN Stadiu

In the absence of FOBs to provide approach to Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium
(JLNS), PWD arranged for construction of temporary FOB by the Indian
Army.

The Dogra Committee, set up by GNCTD to enquire into the reasons for the
accident, has pointed out that the design of the joint in sufficient detail was
not provided by the design consultant. The contractor devised the procedure
on his own and did not obtain necessary approval for the same. Deviation
from the correct design led to failure of the joint and collapse of the deck slab.

As drawings and design prepared by the consultant were subject to the
approval of the department, failure of the PWD in ensuring correct
methodology and design for the FOB and to identify a consultant competent
to attend to this work resulted in infructuous expenditure of हैं 8.65 crore,
which has already been paid to the contractor and consultant.

In response, PWD stated that the completion of the work had only been
postponed and not altogether shelved, and as such, the expenditure could not
be termed as infructuous. The reply is not tenable as the main purpose of
these bridges to be ultimately used by pedestrians for approaching the JLN
Stadium during the Games was not fulfilled. The work has not been restarted
and in any case the FOBs have no legacy value.

7.10 Extra avoidable expenditure of % 0.73 crore

Specifications for road and bridge works, Ministry of Shipping, Road
Transport and Highways provide that for high traffic density wearing course

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 7


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

comprising of 40 mm bituminous concrete overlaid with 25 mm _ thick
bituminous mastic layer can be adopted.

However, in Ghazipur project the PWD had provided a layer of 50 mm
bituminous concrete in place of prescribed 40 mm layer of bituminous
concrete and 25 mm thick bituminous mastic as wearing coat on the road of
Gazipur Flyover Project. Thus, over designing of wearing coat of the road had
resulted in extra expenditure of हैं 73.24 lakh on excessive bituminous
concrete.

GNCTD stated that the richer specifications were adopted because this flyover
would be the part of proposed Delhi Meerut Expressway and therefore had to
be designed for 120 Ki/hr., instead of 60-80 Km/hr being adopted for urban
road. PWD further stated that 50 mm DBC was approved by MoRTH itself in
the technical specifications while according the sanction for two other works
for widening of NH-24 from 4 lanes to 8 lanes adjacent to this flyover. Thus,
providing 50 mm thick Dense Bituminous Concrete (DBC) was the technical
requirement. It was also added that said specification of MoRTH are for deck
of bridge and flyover only. Reply is not acceptable as neither during conduct
of feasibility study nor while granting approval to the proposal by GNCTD for
this project was there any mention of such a corridor. Secondly this being an
urban road traffic speed within the city of Delhi is restricted to 60 काका.
PWD itself, on eight flyovers constructed alongwith this flyover during the
same period, has provided wearing course of 40 mm DBC as wearing coat on
deck as well as on its approaches. Further in the said technical specifications
for widening of NH-24 in two other works the wearing coat was designed
with 50 mm DBC without the provision of mastic asphalt whereas the wearing
coat on this flyover and its approaches was provided with 50 mm DBC
overlaid with 25 mm mastic asphalt. Thus, it cannot be compared with
widening of NH-24.

7.11 Unauthorised execution of work

Section 23.3.2 of CPWD Works Manual provides that no extra/substituted
item should be executed or approved without the prior concurrence of the
authority who accorded the Technical Sanction. Audit noticed that 12 extra
items amounting to हैं 5.90 crore were executed in work of Barapulla Project
and Ring Road Bypass project without the approval of the competent
authority. Though these extra items were got executed on road and bridges
which have been opened for public use prior to October 2010 and completion
certificate of RR bypass had already been recorded but no approval of the
competent authority was obtained even after execution of these works and
they were lying unapproved as on August 2011

118 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

In the absence of the concurrence of the competent authority, the necessity of
these items is uncertain. GNCTD stated that a few extra/substituted items
were executed during the course of work but these were executed in the
interest of work and as per provisions of the agreement. Though no formal
approval of the competent authority is available on record prior to execution
of such items but the tacit approval was always there since the progress of
work was being monitored by the Chief Engineer on almost day-to-day basis
during the course of execution. Further, in principal approval of competent
authority for various extra items were deemed to have been taken during his
regular site visits and accordingly execution of these items was allowed at
site. Over and above, there was enough pressure on field engineers to get the
work commissioned and operationalised before CWG and they were having
no time to initiate in writing the proposal for obtaining in-principle approval
of such items. Prestige of the nation was at stake and commissioning of the
project was the only motive. The reply is not convincing as the approval of
competent authority to these items has not been obtained even after one year
of completion of the these works.

7.12 Other irregular payments

7.12.1 Excess payment of हैं 1.43 crore due to violation of
agreement terms

Schedule-F of the Agreement defines the percentage to be added on cost of
materials and labour to cover all overheads and profit in the cost for
determining the market rates of an item.

As per Schedule-F of agreements of Gazipur Project and RR Kohli Project,
the CPOH was to be added at the rate of only 10 per cent for fixing the market
rate for deviated and extra items. However, Audit noticed that the department
allowed CPOH at the rate of 37.5 per cent and 15 per cent in determining the
market rates of the deviated and substituted items.

Allowing the CPOH at a rate higher than that prescribed in the agreement has
resulted in excess payment of & 1.43 crore to the contractor for eleven items.

In their reply the GNCTD stated that after being pointed out by Audit the rates
for the items which are available in DSR have now been analysed on the basis
of DAR by allowing ten per cent CPOH and the market rates of certain items
viz., Mastic asphalt, RR stone pitching etc., works out to be more than what
has been sanctioned by the department based on the MoRTH Data book
allowing ten per cent CP and twenty five per cent OH. Hence rates of these
items have not been modified. Further, necessary recoveries are being made
from the payments due to the contractors as pointed out by Audit. Reply is not
acceptable as the contract permits only ten per cent OH on all items
irrespective of their being in DSR or MoRTH.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 119


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

7.12.2 Excess payment of € 0.36 crore due to higher CPOH

Audit noticed that in “ISBT Anand Vihar Project, the department had not
disclosed the percentage of overhead in Schedule-F of the agreement.
However, the contractor’s profit was decided to be added at the rate of 10 per
cent. It was further noticed that while determining the market rates for
payment of extra items/ deviated items OH at the rate of 25 per cent and
contractor’s profit at the rate of 10 per cent was added by the department.
Whereas as per extant orders of Director General of Works, CPWD, CPOH at
the rate of 15 per cent was to be added. Addition of OH at higher rate resulted
in over payment of ¥ 0.36 crore. In their reply PWD stated that as stipulated in
Clause 12 of the contract and provisions of CPWD Works Manual, the
Analysis of Rate for determining market rate of deviated items shall be same
as adopted in preparing justification. The extra items which are not covered by
CPWD specifications and Delhi Schedule of Rates are executed as per
MoRTH specification and their rates were determined in accordance with
MoRTH Standard Data Book.

The reply is not acceptable as the General Conditions of the contract clearly
stipulate that CPOH will be fixed @15 per cent for determining the market
rates for all items.

7.13 Engagement of consultants in PWD

For design and implementation of flyover projects, PWD appointed
consultants for feasibility study of the projects, preparation of structural
designs’ drawings/ estimates/ justified amount statements, proof consultants
for checking of the proposed designs and drawings. Audit noticed that:

. the works were awarded to the contractors for execution following the
norms prescribed in CPWD Manual and specifications of MORTH and
relevant BIS codes. Ensuring quality and specifications for the works
was the responsibility of the contractors executing the works and the
officers (Engineer-in-Charge, Project Manager, Chief Engineer and
Engineer-in-Chief) supervising it. In addition, the consultants
entrusted with the designs of the projects were also tasked with
ensuring execution of the works as per the designs/drawings and
specifications. However, the department had further engaged Third
Party Quality Assurance (TPQA) for independent assessment of the
quality and specification of the works at a total tendered cost of
हैं 14.74 crore. Although the TPQA is to be selected trom among the
short listed panel for such job, the department did not have any
specified policy and qualifying criteria for selection of the TPQA.
TPQA consultants were engaged in all the projects examined making
TPQA consultancy more a norm of CPWD rather than an exception,

120 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 7: City Infrastructure Development: Roads and Flyovers

adding 1 to 2 per cent to the cost of the project. It was also observed
that the quality assurance consultants are actually not independent
from execution since TPQA were engaged by the Executive Eng
directly in charge of the execution and the test/investigation reports
were also submitted to them. To ensure that the third party quality
assurance agency is truly independent of both the executing agency,
and the contractor, the TPQA should be engaged and monitored at a
level higher than the Executive Engineer. Further, PWD should
strengthen and streamline its systems for quality assurance and come
out with clear guidelines on engagement of TPQA providing agencies.
No specific reply was submitted by the GNCTD on this issue.

ineers

as per section 53.2 of CPWD Manual, the ‘quality assurance plan’ has
to be a part of the tender documents. However, it was noticed that in
all projects the work of TPQA was awarded after two to ten months
after the works commenced which not only defeated the purpose of
TPQA but also resulted in non-inclusion of Quality Assurance Plan in
the tender documents.

the consultancy agreements provided for performance guarantee and
performance security at five per cent of the tendered cost for the
performance of the contract. In audit it was noted that design
consultancy agreements provide a clause to deal with the post contract
variations in assessed quantities if any. The agreement did not
explicitly state the accountability for lack of accuracy on designs and
estimation. Audit noticed gross variations in quantities of two major
items viz. reinforcement work and steel liner for pile ranging between
28 and 100 per cent in six projects involving impact on the cost of the
projects and extra payment to the contractor. Since the projects are
consultant driven, in audit’s view, the defect liability for the consultant
should have been strengthened with specific provision for
accountability for timely completion of the project, as per specified
designs and also within the estimated cost.

GNCTD stated that there have been changes in structural system from
the conceptual stage to preliminary design stage and then to final stage
of design due to site constraints and therefore quantities in few cases
varied by more than 20 per cent but they had valid reasons. Reply is
not acceptable as detailed estimates were to be prepared by the
consultant after considering all these aspects.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 121


8.1 Introduction

Connaught Place (CP) and its surroundings have a historical legacy and it is
the Metropolitan City Center, as per the Master Plan for Delhi 2021. In April
2004, Chairman, NDMC directed that action be initiated for restoration of
Connaught Place before CWG-2010. The chronology of subsequent events is
summarised below:

Table8.1: Chronology of events relating to restoration of CP

2005 Cost estimate for project prepared for = 76 crore

Cost estimate and milestones for project
implementation by EIL approved by Council

February 2008 DPR sent to GNCTD and Ministry of Urban
Development (MoUD) for funding under Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Rehabilitation Mission
(JNNURM).


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place
Timel

April 2008 Administrative approval of हैं 615.20 crore by NDMC
for the project, and Engineers India Limited (ETL)
appointed turnkey consultants

DUAC eesracerestived
8.2 Undue Delays

As can be seen the project was plagued by undue delays. The decision to
initiate action was taken in April 2004 but the Detailed Project Report (DPR)
was submitted only in February 2008 and DUAC clearance received in
November 2008. ॥ was therefore, clear that the project would not have been
completed in time for the Games. Further, the constraints of traffic
management, considering the importance of CP to Delhi’s traffic, made this
task even more difficult.

In its reply (December 2011) NDMC stated that project of CP was not related
to CWG. However activity of project took time due to statutory clearances at
various stages and final clearance from DUAC was received on 27 November
2008.

Audit, however, observed that the Consultant appointed on nomination basis
was awarded the contract of executing the whole project, without floating the
tenders, just to meet CWG 2010 dead line. Single tenders at higher rates were
accepted in order to meet CWG 2010 deadline. Thus despite the NDMC's
averment that the CP Project was not related to CWG the CP project became
interlinked with CWG 2010. Besides, EIL took 4 years to submit the DPR is
indicative of poor planning.

8.3 Increase in scope of work

The original estimated cost of ¥ 76 crore in May 2005 went up nearly nine-
fold to हैं 671 crore by July 2007. This was mainly due to an increase in the
scope of work on account of the following components:

Table 8.2: Increase in scope of work/ costs @ in crore)

rough indication of
cost by NDMC prepared by EIL
lay 2005) (July 2007)

124 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

Amount in original
rough indication of
cost by NDMC
(May 2005)

nent area
ER including improvement of existing
subways and new subways, Outer
Circle development)

Grand total 670.99
671.00)

There was thus an enormous increase in the scope of work and costs. It is
likely that this increase in scope and cost was driven, at least partly by the
launch of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
by Gol in November 2005, and subsequent inclusion of this project under
JNNURM.

Under JNNURM, the scheme launched in December 2005 with the objective
of sustainable development of physical infrastructure in cities, 35 per cent of
the cost would be funded by Gol, and 65 per cent would be funded directly or
indirectly by GNCTD. Till August 2011, out of total expenditure of
196.5 crore on the project, हैं 22.21 crore was met from JNNURM funds,
% 50.36 crore from GNCTD funds, and the remaining amount of
123.97 crore out of NDMC funds (to be reimbursed subsequently by
GNCTD). The total contract value of 13 works awarded under the project was
% 443.80 crore as shown in Annexure 8.1.

In its reply (December 2011) NDMC stated the rough cost of हैं 76 crore was
mainly for the facade restoration work, improvement of civic amenities and

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 125


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

related work. The escalation of cost from हैं 76 crore to % 671 crore was
artived after suggestions from various statutory bodies and stake holders

8.4 Project planning

A pilot project for fagade restoration of C-Block was awarded in August 2007,
and completed in August 2008. The rest of the project was divided into nine
packages spanning the whole of CP, with all activities getting underway
around the same time. The status of implementation of various works is
summarized below:

Figure 8.1 Timeline of Implementation of Works

Works Jul,07 | May, | Jun, st | Nov, | Jan, | a" | Apr, | Jun, a Aug, | Aug,
09 09 09 [109 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 i
1(€ block)* Pilot
project
2 (Facade)
3 (Facade)

4 (Service corridor-
middle circle)

5 (Electrical works-
outer circle,
subways)

6 (Area dev- inner
and outer circle)

7 (Fagade lighting
C pilot block)

8 (Toilets, kiosks
everywhere)

9 (Escalators in
subways)

1 (Fagade =
lighting- others)

11 (Horticulture)

12 (Signage,
everywhere)

13 (Road works in
inner and outer
circle)

Note: Orange: award of work; Grey: Work in progress
* Date of Work Order 31.08.2007 and stipulated date of completion 28-02-2008. Work actually complete on 10-08-2008.

As a result, all works were underway more or less at the same time, with the
scheduled completion by November 2010. It is difficult to assess the timeline

126 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

by which this project is likely to be completed to provide necessary benefits to
the citizens of Delhi. A brief summary of two major works in progress is
given below:

Table 8.3: Summary of two major works in progress

il, Electrical and
ishing Works for

This work was awarded to Era Infra Engineering
Pvt. Ltd. in November 2009 for % 56.04 crore on
single tender basis on grounds of urgency and
completion by CWG 2010.

In its reply (December 2011) NDMC stated that the project was well planned
to achieve the targets set before CWG. The existing subways works were
completed, made functional and opened to general public before CWG. Initial
delays were on account of delay in several statutory clearances and the delay
was primarily on account of late and very limited stage wise clearances by
Delhi Traffic Police, unprecedented and prolonged rains last year and limited
time available for execution of work and stoppage of works from 31 July 2010
due to CWG.

In case of ‘Civil, Electrical and Finishing Works for Service Corridor in
Middle Circle’ NDMC stated that there was no conditional rebate offered by
tenderer while rebate of € 5 crore was offered as the condition of working
round the clock for all days given in rebate offer letter was already there in
SCC 4.5.1 of the tender.

In case of ‘Renovation of old subways and construction of new subways’
NDMC stated that the work has been awarded at 8.79 per cent above the
estimated/justified cost after deleting the cost of items of the dismantled
materials from the scope of work from the contract and thus the award of
work at हैं 56.04 crore against the estimated cost of हैं 51.51 crore is well

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 127


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

within the permissible tolerance of 10 per cent as per para 19.4.3.2 of CPWD.
manual and norms of EIL.

The reply is not acceptable in view of the following:

The undue delays in execution of the project is indicative of the poor planning
by NDMC. Further given the importance of CP to the traffic movement,
limited traffic clearance was to be expected.

In case of ‘Civil, Electrical and Finishing Works for Service Corridor in
Middle Circle’ the single tenderer initially quoted a rate € 270.71 crore
against a departmental estimate of हैं 207.41 crore i.e., 30.59 per cent above
the estimated costs. To bring the quoted rates to acceptable level so that a
single tender can be accepted post tender reductions of % 33.99 crore were
made. This includes reduction of हैं 23.34 crore on account of O&M Part,
% 5.62 crore on account of revised price for item No 8.1(d) and % 5.03 crore on
account of a conditional rebate. The rebate of हैं 5.03 crore was on the
condition that the site will be made available 24x7 without hindrance.

In case of ‘Renovation of new subways and construction of new subways’ the
single tender initially quoted a rate of हैं 56.80 crore against departmental
estimate of 47.51 crore i.e. 19.6 per cent above the estimate. However afler
the tendering process was over the department revised the estimate to हैं 51.51
crore by taking into consideration the salvage value of the dismantled
Bituminous material. Also the contractor offered a further rebate of हैं 75 lakh
on item no 5.7 of the tender. These changes in the estimate and rebate offered
by the contractor reduced the difference in quoted price and estimate from
19.5 per cent above to 8.79 per cent above. Thus in order to accept a single
tender post tender changes were made.

8.5 Traffic Management

In April 2008 administrative approval of % 615.20 crore for the CP project
was given by NDMC, and Engineers India Limited (EIL) was awarded the
contract of executing the whole project. E[L sought permission from the
Traffic Police in December 2008, who issued a No Objection Certificate
{NOC) for 240 days (effective from | January 2010) only in December 2009.
However, the NOC was withdrawn subsequently as described below:

Due to starting of work at nine locations simultaneously, there were protests
by the shopkeepers and the New Delhi Traders Association (NDTA) strongly
opposed the construction and redevelopment work!, The Traffic Police stated
that due to this construction work, a large number of buses had been diverted,
creating congestion in the surrounding areas of the entire New Delhi District
and Central District and asked NDMC to take a relook at the entire project of

1 NDMC informed the Trattic Police that the traders association had been taken into
confidence. However, the Traffic Police were informed by the NDTA that they had strongly
opposed the construction work in their interaction with NDMC

128 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

construction of subways and related redevelopment work in consultation with
all the stakeholders i.e. Traffic Police, DTC, NDTA, etc. Pending a decision
in the matter, construction work was asked to be immediately stopped, and the
barricades covering the road space were removed and the NOC issued for
traffic diversion during construction of the subways in the outer circle and
service corridor in the middle circle was withdrawn in January 2010 by the
Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Traffic.

Subsequently, the Lieutenant Governor (LG) issued instructions for slowing
down the pace of construction. In a meeting in January 2010 called by the LG
to discuss traffic problems and access issues during renovation works in CP,
the Commissioner of Police opined that the requirement of subways needed to
be revisited and advised that some of the relatively less important subways
could be taken up after the Commonwealth Games, and concreting of the
Outer Circle road should be done lane-wise.

The LG stated that the NDTA did not have any problem with restoration of
fagade renovation work in the inner circle, and the problems due to ducting
work in the middle circle seemed manageable by appropriate segregation of
works so as to keep two roads for entry and two for exit to and from the inner
circle open at all times. The major problem seemed to be with the works in the
outer circle, which needed to be looked into in greater detail and the right
solution found.

Till December 2010, the contractor could complete only one sub-way i.e. at
Super Bazar (old); the earthwork done for the four new sub-ways had to be
refilled, due to non-receipt of clearance from Delhi Police. The work of
installation and commissioning of escalators in the sub-ways (awarded to a
different contractor) was correspondingly delayed.

Covered subway entrance after re-filling

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 129


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

NDMC’s response that taking up construction of subways one by one would
have led to completion in eight years with associated cost over-runs and
inconvenience to the people appears to be untenable, as taking up so many
works simultaneously led to even greater difficulties in execution. Also a 24 X
7 schedule of construction work in CP was completely impracticable,
considering the importance of CP to traflic flow in Delhi.

NDMC in December 2011 stated that the execution of the work was delayed
due to non-receipt of clearance from the traffic authorities and due to
unprecedented and prolonged rains. The reply is not acceptable as the delay
was due to impractical and inadequate planning by NDMC.

8.6 Extra cost incurred on use of granite as flooring material
in restoration of facade of C Block (sample block)

Granite was used as flooring material in the pilot project for *C’ Block,
contrary to the initial DUAC approval of November 2006. Consequent to
inspection, DUAC ordered sandblasting of granite flooring in November 2008
to reduce the colour contrast resulting in an avoidable expenditure of
% 0.19 crore on granite which was a costlier material.

In its reply NDMC stated that it is not true that DUAC objected to use of
granite in flooring of corridor of *C’ Block, a pilot project and Heritage
Conservation Committee (HCC) only suggested that granite is not appropriate
for Architectural restoration. The reply is not tenable as is evident from the
minutes of the DUAC meeting with NDMC of July 2008, where a reference to
the DUAC approval of November 2006 was made wherein it was clearly
stated that the floor finish of corridor had been changed to granite stone from
the originally used sandstone by NDMC which was against the conservation
objectives. Since “C’ Block was restored as a test case it was recommended
that original sandstone flooring and original pattern be followed since granite
is not appropriate for the architectural restoration that is being sought, as
suggested by HCC. Later DUAC was left with no other choice but to order
sandblasting of granite flooring to reduce the colour contrast for *C’ Block
only.
Tn December 2011, NDMC stated that no sand blasting has been carried out in
the flooring and no expenditure has been incurred on this account hence it is
incorrect to say that हैं 0.19 crore has been incurred on this account. The fact
remains that = 0.19 crore was spent on granite which is costlier material.
8.7 Inflated estimate due to inclusion of service tax in rate
analysis
An amount of % 2.77 crore on account of service tax was loaded in the rates of
items in the detailed estimate for civil work including structural & finishing

works excluding works of electrical, fire fighting, fire alarm system, Close
Circuit Television (CCTV) and Public address (PA) system prepared by EIL.

130 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

As service tax was not leviable on such works, the estimate was inflated to
that extent.

In its reply (February 2011) NDMC stated that M/s EIL has assured that in
case the agency does not deposit service tax it would be recovered from its
running account bills. The reply is however silent about the inflated estimate.

In its reply (December 2011) NDMC stated the estimation was not inflated as
parts of components are only exempted from service tax. The department has
not given details of components exempted from service tax, in the absence of
which reply is not acceptable.

8.8 Justified cost inflated due to incorrect framing of rate
analysis

Para 19.4.3.1 of the CPWD Manual 2007 provides for preparing justified cost
statement based on market rate of labour, material, cartage etc. for checking
the reasonability of tender rates.

The work of Area Development for Inner and Outer circle of Connaught
place, was entrusted (March 2010) to M’s SCG Contracts (India) Pvt. Ltd. at a
tendered cost of % 35.93 crore against estimated cost of % 36.40 crore and
work order was issued (January 2010) with a time limit of nine months. Till
the fourth running account bill dated 16 February 2011, work worth
% 14.81 crore only was completed. Audit observed that quotation of rate of
building materials was not found on record in support of rate analysis of all
the items. These rates were compared with the DSR of 2007 duly updated by
price indices of cement and all commodities from official web site of
Economic Advisor, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India
http://eaindustry.nic.in/. Scrutiny revealed that the rates of cement and other
materials were inflated by 14 per cent to 59 per cent as shown in Annexure
8.2 resulting in inflation of justified cost by हैं 87.30 lakh as shown in
Annexure 8.3.

In the absence of availability of market rate for the required time, price indices
released by Government of India have been used by Audit to update the rates
so as to arrive at the prevalent market rates.

In its reply (December 2011) department stated that the justification of tender
was prepared as per CPWD Manual and the method adopted by Audit was
against the provisions of the manual.

In the absence of market quotation in the files the ouly method left to
determine the market rate was to consider the DSR 2007 rates and update it by
price indices of cement and all commodities from official website of
Economic Advisor, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Government of India
http://eaindustry.nic.in/. The provisions of the manual only states to compare
the market rates with quoted rates it does not specify that only quotations

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 131


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

obtained by the department can become the benchmark of the market rates.
Also in this case quotations obtained from agencies other than for the current
work cannot be considered as a benchmark for determination of the market
rate as it is an afterthought.

8.9 Incorrect rate analysis

In the work “Providing and laying 18mm thick granite slabs in floors, risers,
cladding, skirting, dado, in tread, landing with 20mm cement mortar (1:3)”,
the rate of granite was = 1800/sqm inclusive of Value Added Tax (VAT) and
cartage, but in the rate analysis rate of granite was taken as = 1816.43/sqm and
हैं 83.56 was added for cartage. Thus, हैं 100/sqm were added over and above
the laid down rate of ¥ 1800/sqm. Further a higher co-efficient of labour was
taken instead of the available coefficient in the DSR of 2007 item no.11.27
which resulted in inflating the estimate by हैं 36.25 lakh. Details are given in
Annexure 8.4.

In reply NDMC stated that difference of हैं 16.43 is due to rounding and
% 83.56 towards re-handling cost due to space constraint. Also the co-
efficient of labour was stated as based on item no 8.2.2.2 of DAR 2007
whereas Audit calculations were based on item no 11.27 of DAR meant for
Kota stone.

The reply of NDMC is not acceptable because as per item specification the
rate of granite to be used has been prescribed as हैं 1800/sqm including cartage
and VAT. Hence adding for VAT @ 12.5 per cent and for cartage @ 2 per
cent over हैं 1800/sqm is incorrect. Further, scrutiny of NDMC’s rate analysis
revealed that they also had adopted the coefficient of item no 11.27 adopted
by Audit.

Further no reply has been given on addition of VAT and cartage extra as
against fixed rate of = 1800/sqm in the item description.

8.10 Avoidable grant of extra item against contract conditions

In area development works for inner and outer circle of CP granite stone Kerb
instead of concrete Kerb was used, with a difference in expenditure of हैं 5.61
crore. This included avoidable expenditure of हैं 0.61 crore, due to an
unjustified change in colour of granite stone kerb from ‘Sindoori Red’ to
‘Rajashri Red’ colour without the approval of competent authority i.e the
Committee of Directors (as per EIL Rule). This has been done by inclusion of
item no 5 in place of item no 5.1 of the contract at differential rate of
%25981/cum. Further in fourth running bill in February 2011, % 12.39 lakh
was paid to the contractor out of extra cost of ¥ 61.08 lakh without obtaining
the sanction for the same. Moreover justification for change in colour of
granite was not found on record.

132 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 8: Renovation and Restoration of Connaught Place

Further, the granite kerbs have been fixed in the busy traffic area around
Central park of Connaught place where dust accumulates and as such the
lustre of red colour cannot be maintained.

Pictures below shows actual granite kerb fixed at the work site

Thus, the change in colour of granite has resulted into extra cost of
% 61.08 lakh of which हैं 12.39 lakh was paid in February 2011 without
approval of competent authority for extra item.

NDMC in reply stated that the granite kerb stone was used keeping in mind
the aesthetics and importance of the area, and the expenditure was approved
by the Competent Authority.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 133


9.1. Secured communication system (TETRA)
9.1.1 Introduction

TETRA or Terrestrial Trunk Radio is a professional mobile communication
service which permits communication either through a network of base
stations or point to point communication like a walkie-talkie. Compared to
commercial mobile networks Global System for Mobile Communication,
GSM or Code Division Multiple Access, CDMA TETRA's main advantages
are:

* longer range which permits very high level of geographic coverage
with fewer base stations;

* very fast call set-up;

« facilitation of mission critical network with a number of fall-back
modes, and availability of communication services even during
overload situations e.g. major public events or disasters; and

* suitability for working at high speeds e.g. high speed trains.

TETRA was specifically designed for use by government agencies,
emergency services, for public safety networks, rail transportation staff for
train radios, transport services and the military. As regards major sporting
events, it was used for the Athens Olympics in 2004, the Doha Asian Games
in 2006 and the Beijing Olympics in 2008.

The TETRA vendor was selected afier following a competitive bidding
process. HCL-Motorola was awarded the contract on wet lease basis for
& 99.81 crore for 87 month period from January 2010 to March 2017 (i.e., not
only covering the CWG period but also for legacy use.)

9.1.2 Selection of TETRA and award of TETRA Contract

The decision to adopt TETRA for secured communication during CWG-2010
was taken in September 2008:

* Ina meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) on 9 September
2008, Chief Secretary (CS), GNCTD, expressed the need for setting up
an efficient communications system among various agencies involved
in CWG-2010 arrangements. While suggesting a TETRA based
solution, he proposed the setting up of a task force.

* On 11 September 2008, LG, Delhi called a meeting of senior officials
of GNCTD for establishing a secure communication system for CWG-
2010 on the lines of the Beijing Olympics. A presentation by the



Chapier 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

suppliers of TETRA at Beijing was made at this meeting, and it was
decided to adopt the TETRA as a secure communication network in
Delhi for CWG-2010. An Inter-Agency Group (IAG) was constituted
to draw up the specifications. The Department of Information
Technology (DoIT) was named as the nodal agency for the project and
Telecommunications Consultants India Limited (TCIL), a PSU, was
hired as the Project Management Consultant.

* The decision that TETRA would be used not only for CWG 2010, but
also for legacy period, was taken in September 2008 at the very first
meeting of the IAG, and the requirements of different departments, as
well as information on existing communication systems, was sought
between October and December 2008.

An RFP was issued in April 2009. Three bids (from HCL-Motorola, TCS-
EADS, and Tech Mahendra-Selex SPA) were received, all of whom were
found to be technically qualified. On opening and evaluation of financial bids.
HCL-Motorola was found to be 1.-1 (at a cost of = 99.81 crore plu:
tax) and was awarded the work in December 2009. All the acti
opcrationalise! the system were to be completed within 24 weeks of award of
contract, but were completed in August 2010 after delay of seven weeks.

9.1.3 Legacy use of TETRA

From the beginning (in September 2008), TETRA was envisaged to cover not
only CWG-2010, but also for legacy use, on a wet-lease basis for an
additional period of seven years. The usage indicated by major departments
during CWG-2010 and legacy are summarised below:

Table 9.1 — Planned use of TETRA

3221

1 वा February 2010, the Department of Telecommunication granted captive license to the
GNCTD for establishing wireless telegraph stations and fixed spectrum charges of & 16.70
lakh p.a, for 50 base stations and 72 frequencies.

136 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

Audit observed that the Delhi Police (DP) already had an extensive integrated
wireless communication system with:

* 10894 sets covering police stations, police posts, pickets, border check
posts, Police Control Room (PCR) vans/ motorcycles/ ambulances and
tourist PCRs;

* 42 hotlines connecting with Central Control Room (CCRs), hospitals,
civic bodies, Government agencies; and

* Satellite audio phones for CCRs at selected Delhi Fire stations, mobile
control rooms and rescue and relief teams.

Even though DP was the largest user of the TETRA both during CWG-2010
and the legacy period, in September 2009, DP had expressed an intention to
limit their participation in the TETRA system only to CWG-2010 and
withdraw the previously projected requirement for the legacy period.
However, LG, Delhi prevailed upon the Commissioner of Police, Delhi not to
withdraw the requirement projected for DP as withdrawal at such a late stage
(of technical evaluation) would vitiate the tendering process and the entire
tender ran into the risk of being cancelled.

It is also pertinent to mention here, that although DP was represented in the
IAG, they chose to withdraw only at a very late stage.

The GNCTD in its reply acknowledged the change in stance by the Delhi
Police and stated that the communication by the Delhi Police was in view of
financial implications of hiring of sets for the legacy period and not because
they did not need the technology. It was stated that the said letter of the Delhi
Police was sent by them without the prior approval of the LG, Delhi who
statutorily superintendents the Delhi Police under the Delhi Police Act.
Accordingly the LG had properly guided the Police for usage of the TETRA
system during the legacy period.

The fact remains that as the existing radio communication system of DP
comprised of 10894 sets with a life of at least 15 years. It is incomprehensible
how just 3656 rented sets would meet the legacy requirements of Delhi Police,
especially when TETRA would not be connected or integrated with the
existing communication system (as per the Department’ of
Telecommunication’s stipulation). This effectively means that TETRA users
in the DP would also have to carry the existing analogue sets for
communication across the DP network.

The GNCTD has explained that the Delhi police had not purchased new
communication sets after 1999 and they had reached the end of their useful
life. The contention of Audit is not to belie the usefulness of the TETRA
technology to the Delhi Police but only to indicate that the requirements of the

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 137


Chapter 9; Other Intrastructure Development Activities

Delhi Police were not carefully thought out for a comprehensive solution to
use the new technology instead of going in for a piecemeal solution, given the
numbers. The Government has itself stated that 900 sets are being used in
Beat patrolling duties, though requirement to service all beats (2200) will be
substantially higher and that the best policing can be done if the complete
police force is equipped with the latest infrastructure facility. It has also been
mentioned in the reply that the availability of 10,000 sets of Delhi Police was
never communicated to the GNCTD by the Police.

On the necessity of carrying two communication sets by the Police, it was
stated that the new technology allows over 1000 talk groups to be configured
on the TETRA sets. The audit point is however about interconnection
between the TETRA and analogue sets.

9.1.4 Utilisation of TETRA during CWG-2010

The implementation of the TETRA could be completed only by mid-
September 2010, but its utilisation had not stabilized by the time of the Games
due to insufficient time for familarisation, a fact accepted by the Government.
As the setting up of Backup Control Centre was delayed by 4 to 5 months,
there were cascading effects in different directions which was subsequently
compounded by delay in providing fleet mapping up to mid September and in
some cases even later. Infact the largest TETRA users during the CWG-2010
period — the DP were unable to use it due to poor signal quality.

The Delhi Police, which held 38 per cent of the sets during CWG —2010 and
79 per cent lor legacy use, conveyed its dissatisfaction with the signal quality
inside the buildings and underground afier surveying the venues and other
areas during CWG-2010, as detailed in Annexure 9.1. The Special
Commissioner (Intelligence and Operations) called the TETRA system a
“failure” and noted that it was the existing police communication network that
was utilised successfully for security related communication during the
Games. In response, GNCTD stated that the average duration of talk time on
TETRA by Delhi Police was 72 hours/ day, while it was 178 hours/ day for all
Departments. This, however, does not translate to effective and complete
coverage, which was the grievance of the police.

The GNCTD in reply has not accepted the contention of the Delhi Police of
poor signal quality. The Delhi Police however in reply to the Audit
observation have informed that the problems faced by the field officers in the
TETRA communication during CWG 2010 were intimated to the Secretary,
IT, GNCTD and HCL- Motorola from time to time and as a client the Delhi
Police had clearly taken a stand that they would not be paying the rentals for
the TETRA system till it is fully functional.

138 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

The vendor raised a bill of € 9.46 crore for the CWG-2010 period (September
—October 2010), which was not justified, considering that the system was
finally optimised in mid-September 2010, and pro-rata reduction should have
been made. The Government stated that no rentals have been paid as of
December 2011 to the vendor.

9.1.5 Other legacy users

Even in respect of other user departments, the legacy use was not properly
thought through:

MCD had public mobile radio trunking sets and mobile phones in closed
user group (CUG) mode. MCD reduced its requirement of TETRA from
500 handheld sets to 415 and deployed it in departments like
horticulture, education, sanitation etc. and even the PA to the
Commissioner; which is not in keeping with the objective of using
TETRA for emergency services. In reply to the PAC (Lok Sabha) query
MCD said that it will be making use of the TETRA sets for its top
priority work ie., sanitation. It was stated that the deployment of
TETRA sets will also improve the public compliant redressal system for
maintenance of sanitation system in a coordinated manner.

DTC had 27 trunk radio sets and mobile phones provided to officers,
central control rooms, and regional control rooms. DTC abandoned its
functioning radio communication system in April 2010, replacing it with
the TETRA system, and deployed its 82 sets in all depots (47), recovery
vans (10), airport express services (9), control rooms (7) inspecting staff
(6) and others (3).

The Health and Family Welfare Department had a wireless UHF based
trunk radio system and a public mobile network on CUG mode for key
doctors and hospital staff. They issued 83 sets to the Employee State
Insurance Corporation, who sought clarification as to how the sets were
to be utilised. Of the remaining 50 sets, 17 were distributed to CMOs
and other officers; and 33 static terminals were kept in the emergency
rooms of various hospitals. In reply to the PAC (Lok Sabha) query the
ESIC informed that it has provided Internet protocol (IP) telephone to its
user units and suggested that TETRA sets may be used by CATS
ambulances.

170 sets were given to the officers of the Revenue Department in the
Divisional Commissionerates. These include 12 sets given to the Delhi
Disaster Management Agency (DDMA). In reply the Government
stated that that the DDMA have increased their requirement to 170 and
later to 426 sets on account of security requirement communicated by
the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) for the Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC).

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 139


Chapter 9; Other Intrastructure Development Activities

While the decision to employ TETRA for CWG-2010, is not being questioned
but the decision to extend it for legacy use for 7 years was without a proper
assessment of the requirements of either DP or other public agencies. The task
of replacing the existing networks with the TETRA (since no interconnection
‘was pennitted by the DOT between the TETRA network and other networks)
was not properly thought through.

Post-CWG-2010, most of these expensive TETRA sets (at monthly rentals
ranging from हैं 2168 to हैं 2365 / month) are, in effect, no more than mobile
phones as they are not being properly used for the underlying objective of
mission-critical communications services for public security/ safety,
emergency response and other allied public services.

The Government stated that the decision to implement TETRA for the legacy
period was visionary and futuristic and that Audit had erred in its judgement
of legacy use of TETRA. While Audit has no objection to the introduction of
new technology, it is merely emphasizing the fact that the new users of
TETRA are unable to exploit the full potential of the new technology.

9.2. Transportation services for CWG-2010

9.2.1 Introduction

GNCTD directed DTC to provide transportation services for ferrying the
athletes, technical officials and media persons during the Games. The
requirement of buses for ferrying in different categories was:

* 600 AC low floor buses for the athletes ‘Games family;

* 630 non- AC low floor buses for Delhi Police; and

« 1516 low floor (AC/Non-AC) buses to the OC for “mass Cast*”, work
force/volunteers and spectators.

? Cast for Ceremonies of CWG-2010

140 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

9.2.2. Purchase of low floor buses

During 2008-09, DTC procured 2500 low floor buses (1000 AC and 1500
non-AC) at an inordinately high price, which was reported in Para 5.2.6 of
Report of the CAG (Civil and Commercial), GNCTD, for the year ended
March 2009. Audit observed that between September and November 2009,
DTC procured additional 625 buses at the same high price, exercising an
option clause, which cost the exchequer an additional हैं. 61.10 crore over the
estimates.

The GNCTD stated (December 2011) that while these buses may appear
expensive than the conventional buses, it has been found that taking into
account the longer life of the bus (12 years or 7.5 lakh kms whichever is
later), the increased vehicle utilization, and availability, reduced cost of
repairs and maintenance, the buses are actually more economical than the
traditional buses which have a life of 8 years and 5 lakh kms and high
maintenance costs. Moreover, there are obvious qualitative benefits such as
increased safety, lower pollution, passenger comfort and being disabled,
ladies and children friendly.

9.2.3 Incomplete implementation of LED project

Audit found that poor planning and lack of clarity till the late stage of award
of the contract resulted in incomplete installation of Light Emitting Diode
(LED) destination boards not only prior to CWG but even till date.

In October 2009, DTC decided to install LED Destination Boards on 1500 of
its standard Buses on BOT basis in lieu of advertisement right. In November
2009, tender specifications were prepared and thereafter the issue was
discussed at various levels in DTC and Transport Department, GNCTD. In
February 2010, Secretary cum Commissioner Transport directed (after
discussion with Minister of Transport) that the contract would be awarded on

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 141


Chapter 9; Other Intrastructure Development Activities

BOT basis (in lieu of advertisement rights) and DIMTS was nominated as the
Bid Process Manager.

Subsequently in July 2010, the contract was awarded to Castmaster Mobitec
India Private Limited and letter of intent issued in July 2010, with the
stipulation of project completion within four months.

The LED Destination Boards could be installed only in 500 buses till
December 2010. As per terms of BOT contract, the concessionaire was to pay
र 430 per bus per month in the first year; and ¥ 473 per bus per month during
second year of the contract. No such payments have been received. After the
issue was raised by audit, the DTC (January 2011) raised the monthly
concession fee bill for 605 buses where completion certificates had been
issued, and also assured that liquidated damages would be imposed on the
firm.

The GNCTD accepted the facts and stated that liquidated damages as per the
contract terms shall be imposed on the firm. In December 2011 GNCTD
further stated that the cases where completion certificate for 605 buses has
been issued, monthly license fee of € 17.86 lakh was paid till July 2011 and
for non-performance of contract DTC has imposed a penalty of = 1.20 crore
and if required recovery suit shall be filed in court of law for recovering the
liquidated damages. The fact remains that this work related to CWG 2010 and
installation of LED board on all 1500 buses had to be completed by
November 2010 which has not been completed by the end of December 2011.

9.2.4 Ad hocism in methodology adopted for construction of Bus
Queue Shelters (BQSs)

In a meeting held by the Chief Minister, GNCTD on 22 June 2006, it was
decided to upgrade 1000-1500 BQSs in the city with modern designs on Built,
Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis for their upkeep and maintenance. The
concessionaire would generate revenue from display of advertisements on the
BQSs and pay an agreed amount as Concession Fee to GNCTD. Audit
observed that for getting 1500 BQSs constructed before the Games, the DTC
and the Transport Department resorted to various methods, which indicated,
adhocism in implementation of such a large project. From 2006 to 2010, four
models of construction of BQSs have been followed. Yet, only 472 BQSs
could be completed.

142 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Intrastructure Development Activities

The details of the various methods of construction and audit findings thereon
are given below:

Figure 9.1... Different models of construction of BOS

ae Ad

Se = ee ee के कक कि

*Construction of Construction of *Construction of *Construction by
80550 BOT BOSs from 5100 BQSs by DIMTS on GNCTD funding
model in four funding by OTC in BOT model an through DIMTS
segments 3 packages nomination basis *Contract awarded

sonly one segment *Only one package #250 805s on nomination,
of 248 BQSs of 157 8055 awarded fora basis to DIMTS for
successfully successfully concession fee of construction of
awarded to Green awarded to Rs.9259 per BOS 800 BQSs at a cost

Delhi Pyt, Ltd ata Ozone KLA JV for per month or 16 of Rs 97,70crore
concession fee of Rs. 18.98 crore per cent of *S0completed
Rs, 93,800. per °99 completed earning, before CWG-2010
805 per month before CWG-2010 whichever, is

#248 completed higher है
before CWG-2010 *75 completed

before CWG-2010

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 143


Table 9.2 — Main findings in respect of different models of BQS construction

« Escrow account not opened by Green Delhi 805 Pvt Ltd.,
though contractually required; and

« It had not paid the concession fee since March 2008
following which DTC encashed its bank guarantee on two
occasions and recovered % 13.31 crore. The total amount
outstanding from contractor as of October 2011 was =
47.84 crore.

* DTC gave advertising space on 79 BQSs covered under
the BOT contract to OC, instead of offering its own BQSs.
The OC specifically asked for these by enclosing a list and
DTC agreed to OC’s list without making any effort to offer
its own BQSs.

The GNCTD accepted that the concessionaire has not provided

further bank guarantee. The DTC by giving the Green Delhi

BQSs to the OC had foregone a revenue of = 1.18 crore. The

GNCTD further stated that the DTC had earned revenue by

displaying Delhi Government’s advertisements. The reply is

not acceptable because had the bus shelters been given to the

OC, a higher revenue would have been earned by the DTC

which was foregone in favour of the contractor.

* The work could not be completed within the scheduled
time of seven months and till 30 September 2010, only 99
BQSs were built; the project was finally completed in June
2011.

* DTC was losing out on the revenue that it could have
earned from advertisements on these BQSs; and

« As of November 2011, ₹ 16.51 crore had been paid to the
contractor by the DTC whereas no funds have been
received from the GNCTD.

The GNCTD stated that in the process of holding a Board

meeting for the said project, a two-month delay was

reasonable. They added that till 30 September 2010, 99 BQSs
were operationalised while the remaining were in progress.

Senior officers of DTC as well as engineers of Delhi

Integrated Multi Model Transit System (DIMTS) were doing

the monitoring of the said work. The funds were diverted on

the instruction of the Transport Department.

The reply is not acceptable as the construction of 157 BQSs

was to be completed before the CWG, therefore the DTC



should have taken the necessary technical and financial

approval for the said work well in advance. Further, the

contractor had to construct all the BQSs before 27 August

2010 but he was able to complete them only in June

2011despite the stated monitoring by the DTC and DIMTS.

+ The concession fee was based on a similar contract
entered by NDMC (with JC Decaux) in 2006, when
reference rates of 2007 were available;

* The concession fee fixed for DIMTS of the higher of
9259 or 16 per cent of earnings, is much lower than the
BOT rate of हैं 93,800 per BQS per month fixed with
Green Delhi 805 Pvt. Ltd, JC Decaux offer of 21,000
and DTC’s reserve price of € 20,000 for BOT I.

* DIMTS had not deposited the performance security as
required and the department appointed an independent
engineer to review the progress of work completed by
the concessionaire only in December 2010 and at the
instance of Audit, also directed DIMTS to pay the
concession fee in respect of the 75 completed BQSs.

The GNCTD stated that the DIMTS was set up with

specific purpose in mind and decision to allot the project to

DIMTS was the collective decision of the Council of

Ministers and the Government. Besides, as the Government

has a 50 per cent stake in DIMTS, the performance security

is assured from it. On low concession fee it was further
stated that location of 250 BQSs was less attractive as
compared to the NDMC area.

The reply of the GNCTD is not acceptable as award of

work of 250 BQSs on nomination model is in contravention

of Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines. Also
the concession fee as compared to the rates considered by

DTC in its various BOT projects was very low given that

the rates of DTC related to MCD areas also.

After being pointed out by Audit, the Department directed

DIMTS to pay the concession fee in accordance with the

agreement. The independent engineer was also appointed

only in December 2010 after a delay of more than 6

months. The performance security of हैं 1.16 crore was

finally paid only in August 2011.

« Contract awarded despite the Finance Department’s
protestations of lack of funds;



Chapter 9; Other Infrastructure Development Activities

[OUI Met) © Mandatory contractual provisions like depositing of
nomination bank guarantee and performance security not insisted
basis upon;

* Department of Transport released payments of हैं 42
crore (excluding Mobilization funds of = 10 crore) on
demand to DIMTS without having the detailed bills
duly scrutinised by the engineer as required in the
contract agreement;

« No statutory deductions on account of Tax deducted at
source (TDS) (₹ 117.42 lakh), Worker Welfare Cess
(₹ 57 lakh) were made at the time of release of funds
and collected only at the instance of Audit from the
subsequent payment of % 5 crore.

« In the absence of funds, ~ 52 crore was made available
by the department from other plan schemes Major Head
5055 DD-1 (3) (1) ‘Alternate mode of transport’ and
Major Head 5055 DD-1(1) (4) ‘Purchase of land for
New Bus Terminal’.

The GNCTD stated that as the DIMTS is a predominantly

Government controlled company, the performance security

was assured and efforts were made to complete the work by

seeking cooperation from the PWD, Power & National

Highway Authority of India (NHAI). They further stated

that concern of Finance Department regarding lack of funds

was conveyed for the year 2009-10.

The reply of the Government is not acceptable because

BQSs were to be constructed on BOT basis only. Therefore

possibility should have been explored by inviting tender by

lowering the concession fee. The reply of the Government
was however silent on non-preparation of detailed estimates

and market rate justification for the work. As on 31

December 2010, the physical progress of work was 24.47

per cent whereas the project was to be completed before the

CWG. It was further stated that the payments were made

against running claims submitted by DIMTS in the interest

of completing the work before CWG 2010 and accepted
that no independent Engineer could be appointed by the

Transport Department when the above stated payments

were made.

As can be concluded from above, not only did the Government lose sight of
its objective of creating 1000-1500 BQSs between 2007 and 2010, but, in its

146 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


very belated effort to build them before CWG-2010, failed to secure proper
utilisation of public money or exploit the revenue potential of the scheme

fully.

As is evident from the observations given in the preceding paragraphs,
DIMTS has been unduly favoured, by being awarded a number of consultancy
contracts on nomination basis, despite being a non government company. The
major contracts awarded to it by DTC during 2007- 2010 are summarised

below.

Table 9.3 — Award of contracts to DIMTS

Consultancy DIMTS could not prepare the justified price

(PMC)

= 1.3 crore

for the low floor buses, citing reasons of lack
of historical data and even delayed
preparation of bid documents.

The GNCTD in their reply (February 2011)
stated that DIMTS has the expertise to deal
with the project and it may not be appropriate
to conclude that DIMTS have no expertise on
the basis of its inability to assess the
reasonableness of prices only. They further
added that the company was engaged by the
GNCTD as ‘Bid process Manager (BPM) &
Consultant to DTC’ for augmentation of DTC
city fleet by purchasing 4500 new CNG Buses
in the light of commitments made before High
Court of Delhi and the same may not be seen
from a narrow angle

The reply of Government is not acceptable as
the intended objective of appointment of
DIMTS was defeated as it failed to assess the
reasonableness of the rates quoted by the
VMs which cost the DTC to buy buses at



Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

Particulars Type of Observations
of Work contract
and

contract
value

LED Consultancy DIMTS was appointed directly by Secretary
Destination (BPM) cum Commissioner (Transport). When DTC
Board % 0.32 crore refused to pay more than हैं 16 lakh for the
Standard work (that it considered to be the rate payable
Buses for work of bid processing) the claim of
DIMTS of र 32 lakh was released directly by
the Transport Department.

The GNCTD stated that since DIMTS has 50
per cent share with the government. and
considering the urgency of work it was
appointed as Project Management Consultant
(PMC).

The appointment of DIMTS on the basis of
urgency is not justified as the work was
allotted to it in March 2010 and subsequently
work was allotted to concessionaire in July
2010. The work was not scheduled to be
completed before the CWG and has not been
completed even upto November 2011.

Construction
of 500 BQSs
by DTC

148 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Construction
(PPP)

Construction
हैं 96.70
crore

performance guarantee clause included in the
agreement with DIMTS.

The GNCTD stated that DTC did not have
adequate capability to supervise and check the
quality of work regarding construction of 500
BQSs which was a very big project. So the
DIMTS was appointed Project Management
Consultant instead of Bid Process Manager
(BPM) at an agreed fee @ 3.75 per cent of
cost of project if the award had been issued for
500 or more BQSs and in case of less than 500
BQSs, it would be 5 per cent of the project
cost. They further stated that Hon’ble Minister
had eventually agreed to DTC proposal on 12
August 2009 for DIMTS as PMC in place of
BPM only.

The reply is not acceptable because as per the
Board’s and the Minister’s decision DIMTS
was to be a BPM only and if any additional
help was required, it was to be done through a
third party to maintain transparency. Further
no documentary evidence has been attached
with the reply in support of this contention.

Citing reason of urgency before the Games,
GNCTD awarded the work of construction of
800 BQSs (for % 96.70 crore) from
government funding and 250 BQSs on PPP
model to DIMTS, with several
favours/relaxations mentioned in paragraph
9.2.4. The work was, however, not
completed.

The GNCTD stated that the decision to award
the work to DIMTS was a collective decision
of the Council of Ministers and the
Government.



Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

Frequent nomination of DIMTS by GNCTD is to be viewed in the context of
its legal identity. It is a joint venture of GNCTD with Infrastructure
Development Finance Company, IDFC (a private sector company) with 50:50
share holding, and is not a Government Company as per the Companies Act,
1956 provisions. Effectively, while it is engaged on nomination basis on the
justification that it is a joint venture of GNCTD with Chief Secretary, Delhi as
its Chairman, it is not bound by any established Government financial
procedures. Unlike Government Companies which come under the audit
preview of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, all activities of
DIMTS are outside the audit purview.

Audit had earlier reviewed the execution of the Bus Rapid Transit Corridor
(BRTC) in paragraph 4.8 of the Audit Report on the GNCTD for the year
ended March 2008. In this report, Audit had commented adversely on the
need to hire DIMTS as supervision consultants in addition to RITES who was
the Project Management Consultant and also highlighted certain instances of
undue benefits to DIMTS. The functioning of the Transport Department was
also reviewed in paragraph 4.1.6 of the Audit Report on GNCTD for the year
ended March 2009 wherein the irrational rate of fees for works assigned to
DIMTS, despite its being a private company was commented upon. The
present audit focused on the Transport Department, since DIMTS was not
within the purview of audit.

9.2.6 Construction of bus parking at Ash Pond opposite
Millennium Park

In October 2009, the LG, Delhi on the recommendations of the Chief
Secretary and the CM, GNCTD, approved the proposal to develop Athlete
Bus Parking Facility at the Ash Pond opposite the Millennium Park.
Thereafter, in December 2009, Transport Department sanctioned the work at
an estimated cost of 61 crore.

Audit observed that DTC had not obtained the necessary approvals for the use
of the land from the DDA, which was the land owning agency. The
construction was in violation of the Master Plan for Delhi 2021 and the
proposed* Zonal plan earmarks the area as being meant for recreation (green)’.

In reply to the Yamuna Jiye Abhiyaan and in reply to the audit observation,
the Secretary-cum-Transport Commissioner stated that all the structures in the
facility were semi-permanent in nature and it would be necessary to continue
to use the facility so long as the Government was unable to make alternative
provisions for bus parking. In December 2009, LG, Delhi directed the DDA

3 Although the zonal plan has been approved, the notification is yet to be issued

+ Permitted recreational uses include green stretches, bio-diversity park, forest, botanical
park/ herbal park, science park, theme park etc. without pucca / permanent construction

150 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

to place the matter to change the land use of this site for Bus Depot in the
Zonal Development Plan for Zone ‘O’ before the Authority.’ DTC also sent a
letter to DDA requesting for change in land use.

The management while confirming the facts (December 2010) stated that the
DTC was presently using the depot for operation and maintenance of 800
buses and if the facility cannot be used by DTC, expenditure would in any
case be reimbursed by the DDA, therefore the question of expenditure going
waste did not arise. Further, the GNCTD in their reply (December 2011)
added that the structure built and the facility developed were either temporary
or semi-permanent type including carpeting of the parking area with
bituminous surface and the approval of DDA was neither required nor
obtained.

The above reply confirms Audit’s view that the expenditure incurred on
construction of the bus parking would be rendered wasteful even if not
reimbursed by DDA and the fact remains that the stated objective of Zone ‘O’
was not realised. Moreover, the structure is violative of the zonal plan and
includes permanent structures like workshop, baggage scanning work,
washing pit with underground tank, bituminous road, boundary wall, sub
station and high mast light costing about हैं 47.90 crore.

9.3. Power services
9.3.1 Power Generation

GNCTD planned to commission a new power plant at Bawana to make
available 1250 MW of power before the Games, on the grounds of increasing
dependence on own sources of generation from the current 17 per cent to 50
per cent. The target, was however, not met, as the 1500 MW Bawana gas
based power project was delayed (by eight months as of October 2010, despite
an expenditure of < 2330 crore) for the following reasons.

« After the Pragati Power Company Ltd (a GNCTD PSU) put up a proposal
for the project in 2003, the Cabinet of GNCTD finally approved the
setting up of the 1000 MW power plant at Bawana under government
execution only in November 2006. GNCTD took over three years to
decide whether the project should be Government funded, private funded
or a PPP, as also whether to set up two power plants at Bawana and
Pragati Maidan or a single plant at Bawana.

* The turnkey contractor, BHEL, who was awarded the work in April 2008,
could not reportedly mobilise adequate resources at the site.

Consequently, the Ministry of Power allocated additional power supply of 100
MW to GNCTD for the CWG petiod (after taking into account internal and
external sources of power) from the unallocated power of the central
generating stations of the Northern Region.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 151


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

9.3.2. Power transmission

The total capacity of 220 KVA electrical sub-stations was targeted to be
increased from 6920 MVA in 2009-10 to 12,340 MVA by 2011-12. As a first
priority, Delhi Transco Ltd. (DTL), a GNCTD PSU, took up projects of
setting up five 220 KVA electrical sub stations (AIIMS, Ridge Valley,
Electric Lane and Masjid Moth and Airport Complex) and 7 corresponding
cabling projects in south and central Delhi, to strengthen the power supply
position for completion in time for the Games.

Most of these projects were awarded very late (in the second half of 2009) and
could not be completed before the Games. Only two (Ridge Valley and
Airport Complex,) out of five sub-stations were completed and two (Ridge
Valley to Naraina and Bamnauli Mehrauli (LILO at Airport complex) out of
seven cabling projects had been completed. Reasons given by DTL for delay
included non-availability of land and permission for cutting trees from the
Forest Department; clearances from GAIL and other civic agencies,
unprecedented rains, traffic permissions etc. These hindrances, together with
delayed award, made delayed completion almost inevitable.

Audit observed that the contract award process was not transparent, as DTL
had applied conditions inconsistently to award contracts to bidders as
discussed below:

Irregular tender evaluation for construction, testing and
commissioning of 220 KV GIS at Ridge Valley leading to
selection of favoured bidder

In response to the global (ICR) tender for supply erection, testing and
commissioning of 220 KV GIS Ridge Valley floated on 14 November 2006
with date of submission of bid document as 29 January 2007, 8 bidders
submitted their bids.

DTL amended a clause asking for compliance with latest International
Electro-technical code (TEC) relating to type test. As a result, three parties
submitted the techno-commercial bid. M/s Hyosung, Korea was the lowest
and the contract was awarded to them at a price of 77.87 crore. Audit found
that after awarding the contract, type test was waived. It is observed that if the
management of DTL had waived the condition of type test before award of
contract L-1 would become L-2. The difference amounted to हैं 2.84 crore.

The work was awarded to M/s Hyosung Corporation Ltd on 12 March 2008
with the completion period of 18 months. The sub-station was energized on 17
September 2010. Some electrical and civil work is still not completed even
afier 15 months of scheduled date of completion. The Company has
provisionally released the Liquidated Damages (LD) of an amount of हैं 1.32

152 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

crore without any justification. This shows undue favour to the contractor and
resulted into loss of 1.32 crore to the DTL.

The GNCTD in their reply stated that the terms and conditions of the tender
clarify that for the purpose of tender evaluation, the charges of type test shall
be included, however, the type test may be conducted or waived at the
discretion of DTL based on the technical requirement.

Further on the issue, it was stated that the type test condition was kept in the
tender keeping in view the situation that if a firm which has not supplied the
equipments in India becomes L-1, then it would be prudent to get their
equipment, in GIS sub-stations type tested. If type test was not included in
the tender, then a situation could have arisen when the type test cost is added
to the offer of these firms and they may become L-2 and L-3 post bid. Since
before opening and finalization of the tender the 1-1 would not be known
hence it would not be possible to know whether the type test would be
required to be done or not. This will only be known after L-1 is selected.
This is why the condition of type test was incorporated keeping in view that if
not required, the same shall be waived off or not waived off depending upon
the selected bidder’s past record of execution of similar cases in India. In the
present case L-1 bidder Hyosung was selected through transparent bidding
process and they had already supplied at least two GIS sub-stations, which are
functioning satisfactorily in and around Delhi. In fact one of the GIS sub-
station was executed by PGCIL on behalf of DTL and paid by DTL.

The reply is not acceptable because if execution of similar cases in India was
the criterion for conduct or waiver of type test, it should have been stated so
upfront in the NIT, so that the bidders got a chance to quote with full
information. In any case the fact of supply of equipment to India would have
been known at the time of evaluation of technical bid itself and the L-2 bidder
Areva, France was technically qualified and had supplied atleast 34 GIS
systems of 220 KV in the country to NHPC, BNVNL and NTPC. So at the
time of comparison of financial bids, its type test should also have been
waived and compared.

On LD it was stated that the execution of project was delayed due to various
reasons beyond the control of DTL including non-availability of land from
BSES and permission to cut trees from Forest Department and accordingly
provisional time extension was given to the party without prejudice to DTL’s
rights to levy LD as per provisions of contract agreement as well as DTL’s
delegation of powers. The final decision of levy of LD shall be decided on
completion of contract on merit basis, however 15 per cent amount is already
available with DTL against the contract and as such there is no loss to DTL on
this account.

The reply is not tenable, as these facts have not been found recorded in
hindrance register at the time of audit. Also initial deduction of LD and

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 153


Chapter 9; Other Infrastructure Development Activities

thereafter releasing of LD without any justification and approval from
competent authority shows undue favor to the contractor. Further no decision
regarding levy of liquidated damages has been taken even after expiry of one
year of completion as confirmed in GNCTD’s reply of December 2011.

Irregular restriction of competition by reducing the time of
completion of work from 18 months (time period for similar
project at Ridge Valley) to 12-15 months

In the contract for the 220 KV sub-station at Airport complex, DTL included a
restrictive clause in the contract stating that the completion period for the
contract should be 12 months in view of CWG-2010, when the previously
awarded Ridge Valley stipulated a completion time of 18 months.
Accordingly, bid of M/s Areva was rejected as it had stipulated a completion
period of 18 months. In this work also M/s Hyosung was the L-1 bidder, but
actually took 21 months to complete the project.

The GNCTD replied in December 2011 that the completion period had
already been standardized as 12-15 months range for all 220 KV sub-station
projects. Accordingly, tender for Ridge Valley as well as Airport sub-stations
were floated with standard completion period of 12 months. However,
completion period of Ridge Valley project was changed to 18 months on the
request of prospective bidders in the pre-bid conference. No such request for
change of completion time period was received from prospective bidders in
case of airport sub-station and hence it was retained as 12 months.

The reply is not acceptable as the contractor could not complete the work
within the 12 months timeframe assured by him, taking 21 months, which
shows that the clause was restrictive to keep out competition and favour a
particular bidder.

9.4 Other infrastructural facilities
9.4.1 Construction of 1 MGD Water Treatment Plant by DJB

In August 2006, DDA indicated its requirements of water and sewage disposal
of | MGD and 0.80 MGD respectively for the Games Village, Akshardham
Temple and surrounding areas to the Delhi Jal Board (DJB), and asked them
to make necessary arrangements. Incidentally, DJB had already decided to set
up a separate | MGD Water Treatment Plant.

A contract for setting up a | MGD Water Treatment Plant (WTP), with
membrane filtration technology was awarded by DJB to VA Tech Wabag in
October 2008 at a cost of 28.20 crore, with an additional % 7 crore for 1 year
of Defect Liability Period (₹ 1.56 crore) and 3 years of operation and
maintenance (% 5.44 crore). The WTP was scheduled for completion by
January 2010. Figure 9.2 depicts the chronology of events.

154 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

Figure 9.2 : Chronology of events for award of work for construction of WTP

Figure 9.2

The WTP was over designed for the following reasons:

* The need for a separate 1 MGD WTP was not clear - DDA
indicated its water and sewage disposal requirements for the Games
Village, Akshardham Temple in August 2006 and asked DJB to make
necessary arrangements; it did not specifically indicate the need for a
separate 1 MGD WTP. There was no evidence of a formal request
from DDA for construction of a separate WTP. Incidentally, DIB had
already engaged STUP Consultants in July 2006 itself for a separate 1
MGD water treatment plant. DJB’s reply that the plant was
constructed to create an independent source of water free from
dependence on external sources “as the Sonia Vihar WTP is dependent
on Uttar Pradesh for its supplies” is unconvincing.

In its reply GNCTD stated that the Sonia Vihar water was not considered
absolutely safe against any possibility of disruption due to accident ‘sabotage
as it was carried through a long transmission and distribution network and it
would not have met the requirement without further treatment. Accordingly,
dedicated WTP was planned based on ground water sources and Sonia Vihar

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 155


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

water was used as a standby source. It was also claimed that the WTP had a
legacy value as it was to serve the DDA complex post Games.

The reply is not acceptable as DDA had only projected its water requirement
and did not ask for a dedicated WTP at Games Village. Government could
not provide any documentary evidence in support of its contention that the
Games Village would require water of higher standard quality than was being
supplied from Sonia Vihar WTP. The need for a separate WTP remains
questionable even after the Games as plant was shut down for three months
and currently running at 50 per cent of its capacity.

© Over-designed plant with expensive membrane filtration
technology -

The water quality requirement was specified as conforming to WHO
standards. However, the technology for the WTP was subsequently changed
in 2008-09 to membrane filtration technology, on the purported grounds of a
“green project with zero discharge”. Audit got the source water® tested in
January 2011 for 14 parameters indicated in the NIT of June 2008, and found
that all parameters (except for total hardness) were met. Such hardness could
have been easily treated with the lime and lime-soda softening process, in
accordance with the Ministry of Urban Development’s Manual on Water
Supply and Treatment (which is based on WHO standards). DJB’s argument
that higher treatments were necessary to bring the water to WHO standards,
particularly of turbidity below 0.5 NTU, is not tenable. WHO standards have
left the level of turbidity undefined, since it is material only for effective
disinfection of water; otherwise, water with turbidity of 5 NTU or less is
usually acceptable to consumers®. Further confirmation of the plant’s
overdesign is derived from the fact that the proof of experience accepted in
respect of VA Tech Wabag (the single and winning bidder) was that of a fully
automated “Treated Refinery Effluent Recycle Plant”, and not a mere Water
Treatment Plant.

In its reply GNCTD stated that it normally constructed WTPs for treatment of
surface water. In this case, the source of raw water was through a Ranney
Well and few tubewells which contained high chemical contents such as iron,
ammonia, dissolved solids, hardness etc. The parameters existing in the raw
water sources were analysed over a period from 2003 to 2008 and the
treatment process was finalized to bring the parameters within the prescribed
limit based on examinations of the variations / trends of these parameters.
Regarding water quality of the source tested by Audit in January 2011, DIB
contended that the samples from Ranney Well were drawn by audit while the
same was not in regular use for the last two months resulting in stagnant water

* Ranney Well P4
© water tests showed the turbidity less than 1 NTU.

156 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

which could not represent the true parameters of raw water. The testing as
carried out by Audit was not relevant according to the reply of the
Government. Regarding turbidity it was stated that the acceptable limit of
median turbidity as per WHO guidelines was below 0.1 NTU however DJB
decided to keep the turbidity value as 0.5 NTU. The WTP was designed as per
the requirement of an international sports meet as guided by the source water
quality parameters.

The reply is not tenable as any international sports meet should not require
any specific design for WTP and the parameters of raw water collected by
Audit were of raw water source available at the time of testing. The reply did
not explain how the sample collected by Audit did not represent the true
parameters of raw water, in casc the Ranney Well was not in regular use.
Moreover, WHO standards have left the level of turbidity undefined. Also, in
general the water quality reports of the drinking water reservoirs of Delhi
(UGR Majlis Park 2, Nangloi 35 and Bhagirathi 3) show that the turbidity of
water ranged between 2 and 4 NTU. That the plant was over-designed is also
borne out by the fact that the proof of experience accepted for M/s VA Tech
Wabag by DJB was that of “a fully automated Treated Refinery Effluent
Recycle Plant (TTP) on turnkey basis including civil works for generating
demineralised quality of water suitable for process/boiler feed for power
generation from the treated effluent”. The major process equipments involved
were “ solids contact clarifier with lime handling system, dual media filters,
ultra filtration plant, micron filtration, reverse osmosis blocks (primary, reject
and permeate blocks) followed by degasification and the final polishing mixed
bed exchangers with regeneration and tank ages system”.

Further, the award of the contract to VA Tech Wabag was also flawed and
irregular for the following reasons:

* Undue and inexplicable delays -

The entire process took an unduly long 26 months from July 2006
(appointment of consultants) to October 2008 (award of work), In particular,
between August 2006 and March 2008, there was practically no progress,
except the approval of a block estimate in December 2007. However, there
were two rounds of tendering, with only a single qualified bidder (VA Tech
Wabag).

* Injudicious evaluation of bidders -

In the second round of bidding, DJB took an unduly harsh stand in
disqualifying one bidder (Triveni Engineering and Industries) and an unduly
lenient stand in holding VA Tech Wabag eligible. Triveni submitted
experience of three project; all three projects were rejected - one was rejected
for not being commissioned in the last seven years, the second was rejected
for not submitting certificate in support of experience of successfully
commissioning a EPC/DB/DBO contract, and the third was rejected as the

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 157


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

capacity of the plant was 3.24 MLD (which fell short of the required 4.5
MLD). VA Tech Wabag submitted experience of only one project - an IOCL
project commissioned in October 2006. Going by the same strict standards,
this plant did not meet the NIT criterion of being in operation for at least one
year after the Defect Liability Period (DLP) as on 30 May 2008. DJB’s
records failed to contain any details of the DLP (which would normally be 1
year) ’; consequently, such experience would be invalid.

In its reply GNCTD stated that M/s VA Tech Wabag Ltd. had submitted
performance guarantee test run after it commissioned IOCL project in October
2006 as per the relevant contract. Thereafter the firm performed O&M of the
plant commissioned on 19" December 2006. The reply also refered to the
High Court Decision on the eligibility of M/s VA Tech Wabag Ltd. and
ineligibility of M/s Triveni Engineering in the case.

The fact is that Audit did not contradict High Court’s decision in any mannet.
It was pointed out that DJB did show leniency towards M/s VA Tech Wabag
Lid. as far as the firm having experience of | year O&M शीला DLP in strict
sense of NIT is concerned.

« Increase in estimate just before bid receipt-

The estimate for the WTP was increased from हैं 9.36 crore (as per the
December 2007 block estimate) to € 29.42 crore on 26 August 2008, just three
days before opening of the single financial bid of VA Tech Wabag on 29
August 2008. VA Tech Wabag’s bid was for हैं 45.42 crore. DJB arrived at a
suggestive (justified) cost of = 32.59 crore, and the price was negotiated down
to = 35.20 crore (which was within 10 per cent of the justificd cost).

GNCTD stated that a block estimate was first approved for हैं 9.36 crore
without a specific choice of technology. Later it was intended that state of art
technology should be chosen for treatment of water from Ranney Well and
tubewells in the bed of river Yamuna. At the time of tenders the precise cost
estimates were not prepared. It was however claimed that a rough cost of € 18
crore was assumed, though not specifically recorded, for the financial
eligibility criteria. The suggestive cost was worked out at हैं 29.42 crore
before opening of bids that was subsequently reworked out to हैं 32.59 crore at
the instance of Sub Technical Committee due to some omissions in the
suggestive cost as worked out by the consultant. The contention of the
GNCTD does not contradict the Audit observation pointing out that the
suggestive cost was amended after opening the bid which was for हैं 45.42
crore.

7 In the exit conference, DJB attempted to re-interpret the clause to mean operation and
maintenance for one year, after completion of a Peak Guarantee Test (and not DLP): this is
not bome out by the wording of the NIT

158 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

The WTP was “substantially completed” in June 2010, although no
completion certificate was on record. DJB failed to levy liquidated damages
(LD) of % 2.82 crore on the contractor.

GNCTD stated that there were hindrances like tree cutting, shifting of plot,
confirmation of plot layout by DDA, modifications in the raw water pipe line
routing, access to working front and coordination with different agencies
working simultaneously at the site. It was further informed that EOT upto 19
September 2010 to the firm had been allowed without levy of compensation.

The reply is not acceptable as the work should have been awarded after
ensuring free site. Moreover, the hindrance registers (civil and electrical) for
the project did not have any record of such hindrances at the time of audit.

The WTP was run only during the Games period, and is currently running at
50 per cent of its capacity for want of demand. DDA’s estimated requirement
of water for the Games Village was just 0.27 MGD (out of the total of 1
MGD). The balance requirement was for hotels and other facilities (which
have not come up) and the Akshardam Temple (which is still not connected to
the WTP). Further, there was an additional connection from the distribution
line of the Sonia Vihar WTP as a standby arrangement, which would have met
the needs of the Games Village.

In its reply GNCTD stated that during Games the plant normally treated 0.50
MGD of water with peak treatment of 0.70 MGD and that plant remained idle
from 11 November 2010 to 16 March 2011 as there was no demand of water
from DDA. DJB started running the plant by treating 0.50 MGD water w.e.f.
17 March 2011 and utilizing the water in DJB network.

The reply is in effect acceptance of audit observations made in the preceding
paragraphs that there was no specific need of a separate WTP for the Common
Wealth Games Village.

In short, the | MGD Water Treatment Plant awarded at a cost of = 35.20 crore
was over-designed and overpriced, with a flawed bid evaluation process. The
requirement for this plant on a legacy basis is questionable, and the plant is
currently underutilised. Further, DJB has a liability of fixed O&M costs,
totaling € 7 crore, till 2013. DDA has not raised any infrastructure charges on
Emaar MGF for its share of the cost of the WTP, although Emaar MGF
indicates in its advertising brochure that the residential complex has a
dedicated WTP.

In its reply GNCTD intimated that DJB had already raised the demand to
DDA for payment of cost of WTP. The facts remains that DDA has not paid
or made any commitment to pay the cost as of yet.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 159


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

9.4.2 Construction of a 1 MGD Sewage Treatment Plant by DJB

DJB awarded a contract for setting up a 1 MGD Sewage Treatment Plant
(STP), with Membrane Bio-Reactor (MBR) technology, to UEM India Ltd. in
October 2008 at a cost of हैं 24.75 crore, with an additional हैं 7.20 crore for
operation and maintenance of 10 ycars. The STP was scheduled for
completion by November 2009.

As in the case of the WTP, there was an undue delay in the case of STP also
till March 2008, when block estimates of हैं 23.42 crore were prepared. The
STP commenced its operation w.e.f. August 2010 without the issue of
completion certificate. DJB failed to levy liquidated damages (LD) of हैं 0.92
crore on the contractor.

In its reply GNCTD stated that the project was delayed mainly as DDA
provided land in June 2007 and could confirm the capacity of plant only in
February 2008. Approval of estimates, tendering etc. could be initiated in
March 2008. However, the case for EOT was under consideration and as a
precaution हैं 2.47 crore had been withheld from the bills of the contractor.

The reply is unconvincing as the delay in completion of project was after the
award of work in October 2008 i.e. after getting the land and proposed
capacity from DDA. The reply does not specifically explain the reasons for
non-completion of the project by scheduled date i.e. November 2009.

The STP was to receive sewage from the Games Village and hotels (0.53
MGD), the Akshardham Temple complex and others (0.25 MGD). After the
CWG, the STP was getting sewage only from the Akshardham Temple
complex. Audit observed that the STP was utilised upto 44 to 70 per cent of
its capacity between August and October 2010. After 31 October 2010, for a
short period of time, utilization was nil due to non evacuation of the effluent
from the plant by the DDA (a pre-condition for operating the STP).
Consequently, the sewage from Akshardham was diverted to Mandawali
pumping station (which was already operating at its full capacity of 45 MGD),
leading to discharge of untreated sewage into the Yamuna.

Thereafter, the STP remains grossly under-utilised (less than 17 per cent of its
capacity). Without adequate utilisation, the required quantity of Mixed Liquor
Suspended Solid (MLSS) bacteria (needed for proper treatment of sewage)
was not sufficiently maintained, defeating the purpose of installing a MBR
STP. During the exit conference, DJB indicated that they were bringing
sewage from elsewhere and injecting into the STP for this purpose.

In its reply GNCTD admitted that the plant was under utilized after the Games
as there had been no habitation in the Games Village. Only the sewage from
Akshardham temple was being received and treated.

160 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

DJB raised a demand of % 32.70 crore® on DDA which included & 10.58 crore
in respect of the residential complex of the Games Village. However, DDA
paid & 24.75 crore to DJB between February 2008 and March 2010, and raised
a demand for हैं 10.58 crore on Emaar MGF only in July 2010, which is yet to
be recovered.

GNCTD, in its reply confirmed the facts about non-receipt of the outstanding
amount from DDA and informed that the demand had been raised.

9.4.3 Award of security contract for WTP and STP to IL&FS

In April 2010, DJB awarded a contract for security arrangements at the WTP
and STP at the Games Village to IL&FS at a cost of € 0.42 crore, which was
increased to हैं 0.75 crore in August 2010 through an additional work order.

The work was awarded on nomination basis without inviting tenders and
without recorded justification of the exceptional circumstances for such
award.

In its reply, DJB stated that as the decision for security of WTP and STP was
taken by the government at a very late stage, there was no time for tendering.
It further added that it did not have IT experts for preparing estimates and
detailed specifications. While accepting that approval for awarding the work
on nomination basis was not sought on file, DJB stated that the work was
awarded to M's IL&FS afier due diligence and consideration of all relevant
issues as the matter was urgent. DJB’s contention of urgency is untenable,
since GNCTD had decided in February 2008 itself to provide security at these
sites.

9.5 Creation of Park and Ride facility at Safdarjung Airport
by NDMC

का August 2009, NDMC proposed the creation of a Park and Ride and holding
facility at Safdarjung Airport with a parking area of 170000 sqm, as per the
approved traffic plan for CWG-2010. The facility was to cater to the traffic
during CWG-2010 events at JLN stadium and thereafier be dismantled to
restore the Safdarjung Airport area to its original position. In October 2009,
while approving the proposal for हैं 31.25 crore, EFC observed and advised
that the dismantling of assets should be kept at minimum.

« Audit observed that out of the expenditure of € 38.37 crore incurred on
creating the temporary park & ride facility, € 20.48 crore was on assets
some of which have been dismantled and others to be eventually
dismantled; This is not in line with EFC approval as more than 53 per
cent of expenditure was without creation of any asset.

*& 4.75 crore in September 2007 and & 27.95 crore in November 2009

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 161


Chapter 9: Other Intrastructure Development Activities

NDMC replied that the airport area was to be restored to its original state after
the Games therefore concrete pavers were used so that the same could be
reused afier removal. The reply is not acceptabl Audit has already taken
into account the utilization of concrete paver blocks, jersey barriers, signages,
public utility structure ete valuing हैं 17.89 crore.

* In addition, out of 48 lakh paver blocks costing हैं 12.13 crore laid in
parking facility, 35 lakh paver blocks valuing हैं 8.45 crore were to be
dismantled and reused by DTC and remaining were stated to be
retained for use by AAI/NDMC. The dismantling was to be completed
within three months from completion of the Games, however, till
November 2011 only 4.10 lakh (12 per cent) paver blocks out of 35
lakh paver blocks have been lifted by DTC.

NDMC replied DTC has been repeatedly requested to take away the
interlocking paver blocks urgently. Now DTC has asked NDMC to shift
pavers at different locations in DTC depot for which the cost will be borne by
DTC. The fact remains that the area has not been brought to its original
condition as required and Airports Authority of India has also warned NDMC
that it would levy demurrage charges against NDMC as construction material
lying in airfield is a safety hazard for aircraft operations.

* The work of laying roads and interlocking paver blocks is normally
executed by NDMC, however, हैं 0.13 crore was paid to CRRI and
Design Action Group for consultancy services for park and ride
facility.

NDMC replied that there was need to have a specialist consultant to give
design and specifications for huge parking lot of 170000 sqm catering to 3000
cars, 6000 two wheelers and 450 buses. The reply is not acceptable as
GNCTD has also objected to the inclusion of payment of consultancy charges
in the revised proposal.

« No Liquidated Damages (LD) for delay on the part of contractor (M/s
K. R. Anand) was levied against contractor on the plea of delay due to
VVIP movements/security instruction from MHA. Audit observed
that, out of total delay of 70 days, delay of 24 days was attributable to
VVIP movements/ security instructions by MHA and remaining 46
days delay was on contractor’s part for which LD of हैं 0.71 crore
should have been levied. The major reasons recorded in hindrance
register were rains /bad weather, that do not hold good since the works
were initially to be completed in mid July before the onset of
monsoons.

NDMC replied that no compensation was levied against contractor since delay
was not on the part of the contractor. Majority of work was completed before
16 July 2010 but as per security instructions issued by MHA certain activities

162 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

like installation of fencing jersy barriers and signages were to commence three
weeks before commencement of the Games. The reply is not acceptable as
progress of work was slow and NDMC issucd a show cause notice to the
contractor on 16 July 2010 for wrongful delay/slow progress of work. Further
while calculating the LD of % 0.71 crore Audit has already considered the
hindrances due to VVIP movements/security instructions.

* An amount of % 30.33 crore against total contractual value of हैं 31.60
crore (including additional work of 0.98 crore) has been paid to M/s
K.R. Anand till September 2011 despite the fact that the second phase
of work i.e. restoring area to its original form by dismantling paver
blocks, GSB and WMM laid underneath the pavers is yet to be
completed.

NDMC replied that final payment to M/s K.R. Anand will be made after
completion of work. Sufficient amount has been withheld as part payment and
other heads. The payment will be made to contractor after completing all
codal formalities. The second phase of work is held up due to non lifting of
paver blocks by DTC. The reply is not acceptable as more than 95 per cent
payment has already been made to the contractor despite non completion of
the work.

* The contractor (M/s Fiber Fill) engaged for constructing public utility
services was technically ineligible at the time of opening of financial
bids. The required experience certificate was received post opening of
financial bids; and the other bidder (KR Anand) who was otherwise
eligible, was declared ineligible.

NDMC replied that as per CPWD Memorandum, the value of executed works
can be brought to the current level by enhancing the actual value of work at
the simple rate of 7 per cent per annum calculated from the date of completion
to last date of receipt of tenders for works executed. M/s K.R. Anand did not
submit mutual agreement with M/s Pooja Enterprises. The reply is not
acceptable as enhancing to current level is to be applied for completed works.
The completion certificate proving the eligibility of M/s Fiber fill was
received by NDMC on 16 February 2010 i.e. शीश opening of technical and
financial bids. MOU submitted by M/s K.R. Anand was on stamp paper duly
signed by M’s Pooja Enterprises confirming its association for execution of
electrical work.

* DCE was engaged TPIQA on offer basis for a fee of ¥ 0.38 crore, but
no agreement determining its scope of work and terms of payments
linked to milestones achieved by the contractors was signed. DCE was
contracted to be paid हैं 3.58 lakh in ex of | per cent of tendered
cost as sanctioned by EFC.

NDMC replied that Delhi Government sanctioned additional amount of हैं 8.75
crore and the payment to TPIQA was within | per cent of total sanction of

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 163


Chapter 9: Other Infrastructure Development Activities

%40 crore. The obligatory service tax over the fee was paid to TPIQA. The
reply is not acceptable as TPIQA was engaged for main civil work and Public
utility structure work and TPIQA fee @ | per cent on tendered cost of € 34.80
crore works out to हैं 34.80 lakh against which = 38.38 lakh was to be paid.
Further as evident in the TPIQA contract for Talkatora & Shivaji Stadium
consultancy fee is inclusive of taxes in NDMC contracts.

+ Integrated Security System was provided at temporary parking facility
at a cost of € 2.45 crore, out of this the non legacy equipments worth =
2.08 crore were to be removed for utilization by NDMC.

NDMC replied that non legacy equipment have been handed over to security
branch of NDMC for their proper use in due course and NDMC is in process
of utilising the same. The fact remains that equipment have not been utilized
so far.

164 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


10.1 Introduction
The health infrastructure for CWG-2010 is summarised below:
Figure 10.1

Medical
at

ether locations

care fo
patient



Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

10.1.1 Preparatory Activities
10.111 Planning

There was ambiguity in identification of the nodal agency responsible for
overseeing health services for the Games. This was clarified only in
November 2008, when it was indicated that the Directorate of Health Services
(DHS), GNCTD would be the nodal agency for health services.

Planning for health services was protracted for over four years, crystallising
only in October 2009 with the formulation of the Health Action Plan (HAP)
by the Department of Health and Family Welfare, GNCTD (DoHFW). There
were subsequent amendments on account of changes in the venues for
marathon, cycling, and archery finals as well as changes in manpower at
various venues in 2010.

The HAP prepared by DHS was quite comprehensive and in line with the
different levels of health care responsibility indicated by the OC (complete
health care responsibility for athletes, team officials, Games Family etc. and
appropriate level of health care for other categories of persons). It indicated
the organisational structure for the medical arrangements for the Games, the
detailed requirements of manpower, medical equipment, furniture,
consumables and medicines at different locations, and the corresponding
delivery timelines.

10.1.1.2 Budgeting

Although line items for CWG health services were provided in the budget of
the DHS, GNCTD from 2006-07 onwards, the expenditure incurred till 2008-
09 was insignificant, primarily due to delayed planning and preparatory
activities; most of the expenditure was incurred in 2010-11.

Against the revised budget of 41.53 crore from 2006-07 to 2010-11, a total
expenditure of = 15.45 crore has been incurred as of November 2010. This
does not include expenditure incurred directly by hospitals, which was met
out of their own budgets.

10.2 Procurement activities

Due to delay in finalization of the HAP, compounded by further delays during
tendering/ award, stipulated procurement procedures meant for ensuring
transparency and competition (open tendering, adequate time for bidding ००.)
were circumvented on grounds of urgency.

10.2.1 Procurement process

DHS did not go in for tendering for direct procurement of medical equipment,
as per the requirements assessed in the HAP. Instead, they floated tenders for
concluding one year Rate Contracts (RCs), which could be operated by DHS

166 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

and the hospitals. Also, the hospitals retained an option to make purchases
from their own existing RCs or from the RCs of other hospitals.

Normally, RCs are concluded for use over an extended period of time
(typically by multiple agencies) when requirements are likely to arise at
different points of time. When the procurement requirements for CWG-2010
were known well in advance, DHS chose to go in for one year RCs rather than
direct procurement through appropriate tendering procedures.

Further, against the HAP timeline of initiating procurement by November
2009 and completing procurement/ installation by June 2010, the procurement
continued even upto October 2010 during the Games.

For finalising RCs for 34 items of major medical equipment, DHS followed a
complicated process with several irregularities:

RC tenders (on item rate basis) were floated on 26 February 2010, but
cancelled in April- May 2010 on the orders of the Secretary, DoHFW on
account of a complaint regarding non-compliance with procedures in respect
of Small Scale Industry (SSI) vendors. However, despite the Secretary’s
instructions for not opening the financial bids, DHS went ahead and opened
the financial bids in April 2010, which was highly irregular. GNCTD
informed that the oversight was unintentional and had happened as the
Secretary’s orders did not get conveyed in the DHS. The tenders were
subsequently cancelled after instructions were conveyed on 22 April 2010.

RC tenders were refloated on 17 May 2010 (with less time of only 16 days for
responses). Out of responses from 16 vendors, 7 vendors were qualified.
DHS concluded 1-year RCs in June 2010 with all seven bidders (for items’
where they were L-1).

DHS placed supply orders in respect of all 34 items of equipment. However,
two contracted firms - Lord Krishna Company and Mangalam Medicaments —
failed to supply 15 items of equipment, and were consequently blacklisted by
the DHS

Out of the 15 items (for which Lord Krishna Company and Mangalam
Medicaments had been contracted), DHS ordered 8 items by operating RCs of
other hospitals and 2 items by collecting “spot quotations” from the open
market by a nominated committee. The remaining 5 items (with an estimated
cost of = 5.89 crore) were not ordered at all

Further, DHS chose to keep 14 items of medical equipment (listed in the
HAP) out of the RC process for 34 items of equipment (on the ground that
“only major common items” were included under the RCs). For these items,
instead of following a tendering procedure, DHS purchased % 2.32 crore of

1 Out of 34 items, RCs were concluded on single bids in respect of 3 items (foldable wheel
chair, AED, and military anti-shock trousers).

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 167



Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

equipment from 10 suppliers on 30 August 2010, by collecting “spot”
quotations from the “open market” through a committee.

In addition, DHS purchased five items of medical equipment costing हैं 1.10
crore, although these items were not included in the HAP. These were either
procured from the “open market” through “spot quotations, or on the basis of
RCs of other hospitals, and were received between 31 August 2010 and 8
October 2010, In fact, one ECG Machine (costing हैं 0.68 lakh) and 6 ICU
Beds (costing = 11.12 lakh) were received only on 8 October 2010.

DHS followed multiple procurement processes for three sets of purchases,
despite requirements having been identified well in advance in the HAP.

In addition to these equipment purchases by DHS, individual hospitals
procured equipment for the Games out of their own budget. The procurement
of furniture items was also irregular:

DHS purchased furniture items worth हैं 1.25 crore; these were procured
through open tender (e-tender) with just one day’s notice period after
publishing the NIT in the newspaper on 22.8.2010. GNCTD stated that as the
e-tender was uploaded on 19 August 2010, the notice period was 4 days. The
fact remains that extremely short time was given to respond to the tender.

The GNCTD stated that the rate contracts mode is routinely used by hospitals
and DHS for procurement of various equipment/ consumables to meet their
requirement. The requirements for CWG were calculated on normative basis
in the HAP (based upon type of centre). It was expected that there may be a
change in number'location of first aid posts’ field of play posts for various
venues. Any change in policy of OC/security/disaster management agencies
would have also required flexibility in managing’ procuring the supplies. Also
the procurement process was started in December 2009 and would have been
completed by June 2010 had the first tender not been cancelled.

On non-purchase of 5 items, it was clarified that IRR lamps,
ophthalmotoscope and golf cart stretchers were taken from the available
resources with hospitals after their tenders had failed. In case of trolley beds
also no valid bid was received hence item was procured on valid rate contract
of DDU hospital as ICU beds. The item of shifting trolleys was substituted
with Hydraulic Transfer trolley with X-ray compatible table top and procured
from the open market as no valid rate contract was available and the tender
had failed.

While the urgency of the situation is understood the fact remains that any well
thought out plan always accommodates for contingencies. As the total
numbers of items to be procured were available, the DHS could have gone in
for open tenders with sufficient time to attract adequate interest to ensure
economy without leaving any scope for sub-optimal solutions. Had timelines
been drawn giving due thought to the tendering process the bunching of

168 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

purchases and related short-circuiting of procedures like short tendering and
open-market purchases could have been avoided.

10.2.2 Exorbitant rates

Audit observed that the rates for many of the items purchased through
contracts by DHS/ individual GNCTD hospitals were exorbitant, causing
financial loss to the GNCTD.

A few instances of widely varying rates for the same item are given below; a
detailed listing alongwith financial implication is given in Annexures 10.1
and 10.2.

Table 10.1: Widely varying rates for the same item

Equipment Minimum Maximum

rate (per rate (per
unit in हैं) unit in %)

00 anes

21525 57749

68250 141750

11393 35700

21525 151200

Cardiac Arrest resuscitation drug and PF | ४ ४ /४|
equipment trolley crash cart

B-type Oxygen Cylinder with flowmeter 0 | su eesI0}
ae as

Bag Value Mask) Paediatric 5145

In response, GNCTD stated that audit’s comparison of rates of equipment
across hospitals was done based upon nomenclature, without going into the

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 169


Chapter 10: Health Services tor CWG-2010

technical details of the equipment. The reply is not tenable for the following
reasons:

The equipments were purchased by various hospitals (after due approval by
purchase committees of doctors) for the same purpose viz. CWG-2010;

Secretary, H&FW had issued directions stating that the hospitals were free to
use their own RCs or the RCs of DHS, clearly evidencing interchangeability.

10.2.3. Purchase of ice-making machines

DHS purchased 68 ice-making machines at a cost of €0.78 crore as part of the
“open market” purchases of 30 August 2010. All these ice-making machines
were purchased from Dolche India (who was only a dealer and not a
manufacturer). Audit observed that these rates were, in many cases, even
higher than the Maximum Retail Prices (where ascertainable).

In response, GNCTD stated that two e-tenders were floated on 27 July and 10
August 2010, but were unsuccessful on account of technical rejections and
lack of response respectively. Further, manufacturers/ distributors expressed
their inability to provide machines of the same capacity within the available
short span of time. Consequently, negotiations were conducted with vendors
for all available sizes and makes, which included the voltage stabiliser, site
inspection and installation pre and post Games, besides 6-year additional
warranty and service. The market retail price and the package price paid by
DHS cannot be compared due to provision of additional services in DHS
price. It was also stated that the requirement of machines was decided by the
OC and the DHS was not to question the need of the machines.

The fact remains that lack of planning had led to a situation where purchases
were made of machines of any size to cater to the requirement of OC to the
extent that some machines could not even be utilized due to space constraints
ete.

10.2.4 Items procured but not available during the Games

Audit observed numerous instances of procured items not being available for
the Games:

Medical equipment worth हैं 0.43 crore and furniture worth हैं 0.46 crore was
nol issued for the Games, reportedly because of curtailment of medical venues
by the OC.

% 1.49 crore of equipment procured for the Games directly by the hospitals
viz. 64 electrical nursing beds worth हैं 0.86 crore received by GB Pant in
August 2010 could not be installed before the completion of construction of
the Emergency Block, Further, items amounting to हैं 0.13 crore were received
Lok Nayak Hospital only after the Games during October- December 2010.

170 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

Government replied that as non-utilisation of equipment furniture was due to
curtailment of venues, it was not its fault. Even otherwise when the hospitals
procured certain equipment, the same also had a legacy value. Further, the
Lok Nayak hospital had categorically denied that any item procured by it had
been received afier the Games. This is however not based on documents
available with Audit wherein the Department of Burns and Plastic surgery of
the Lok Nayak hospital had ordered certain consumables and equipment in
September 2010 of which items worth हैं 13 lakh were received after the
Games in October, November and December.

In respect of the 64 electrical beds it was clarified that even though the new
EDP block was not complete and ready for installation of the beds, a revised
plan was adopted wherein the beds were installed in five private rooms and
utilised during the CWG. This position is however not evident in the stock
register entries available with Audit that indicate that the beds were installed
in various wards in November and December with 18 beds lying in store as of
December 2010.

10.3 Contract Management Issues

Several deficiencies in contract management, both by DHS and individual
hospitals were observed:

* AC bills* for = 2.21 crore in respect of GB Pant hospital and हैं 0.39
crore in respect of DHS were outstanding as of December 2011. In
case of GB Pant hospital the bills pertained to four equipments where
the installation and commissioning of the equipment was pending. In
case of the DHS the bills pending pertained to purchase of 64
computers of = 18.69 lakh and advances of = 20 lakh drawn for
mecting incidental expenditure.

* DHS is still to recover liquidated damages amounting to € 0.42 crore
and GB Pant hospital is still to recover 0.25 crore from vendors on
account of delayed supplies.

* The receipt by GB Pant Hospital of additional equipment worth = 0.30
crore to be supplied free by a vendor could not be assured. In reply it
was stated that all the equipment were received and utilised during
CWG and stock entries had now been updated. However, receipt of
free equipment cannot be accepted in audit without proof of despatch,
Custom Duty receipts or firm’s procurement documents.

2 AC Bills are Abstract Contingent bills utilized for drawing advances; accounts of advances
should be rendered within one month.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 171



Chapter 10: Health Services tor CWG-2010

10.4 Facilities development for hospitals

10.4.1 Turnkey project for establishment of emergency block
in EDP building of GB Pant hospital

GB Pant hospital (along with AIIMS and RML hospitals) was designated for
definitive care of accredited personnel during the Games. For this purpose,

* a separate casualty area (with 6 observational beds) was to be
designated for the Games on the ground floor of the newly constructed

EDP Block, with provision of all routine radiological and pathological
services; and
« 4 dedicated ICU with a minimum of 10 beds with all state of the art

facilities and nursing care was to be made functional during the period
of the Games.

In November 2008, GNCTD while designating GB Pant as hospital for
definitive care said that all necessary procurement and installation should be
done by May 2010 and functionality ensured by June 2010. However, GB
Pant Hospital awarded the turnkey contract (covering both construction and
supply of equipment) for establishing an emergency block in the EDP
building at ¥ 5 crore only in May 2010 to Adison Equipment Company for
completion within 90 days (by 25 August 2010). While completion certificate
dated 19 November 2010, showed the project as completed on 6 September
2010, Audit, however, observed that:

* Seven items of Indian-make equipment were recorded as issued only
on 11 November 2010, while the installation certificate of all
equipment was issued on 1 November 2010;

« Six items of imported equipment were not recorded in the stock
register; as per customs duty payment records, some of these items
were received only after 27 October 2010.

The GNCTD stated that for the equipment received after 27 October 2010 the
levying of liquidated damages was under process. All seven Indian items and
six imported items were duly issued on the original challan to the firm by the
store keeper before 31 August 2010 and final indent was made on 11
November 2010. The fact remains that the equipment of Indian make was
installed on | November 2010. This supports the audit contention that the
certificate recorded was premature.

10.5 Ambulance services
10.5.1 Background

DoHFW had been planning to upgrade its “102” ambulance services under the
Centralised Accidental and Trauma Services (CATS) since 2006. The HAP
took into consideration DoHFW’s plan for deployment of 150 ambulances in

172 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

PPP mode through the selected vendor (Fortis Healthcare) by July 2010 for
CWG-2010. These ambulances would be of two types:

« Nine Advance Life Support (ALS) ambulances for covering high risk
sports with potential for serious life-threatening injury; and

* 141 Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulances for other cases.

Since the overall requirement of ALS ambulances during the Games would be
around 20, these 9 ALS ambulances would be supplemented from ALS
ambulances from various government hospitals and, if required, private
hospitals.

10.5.2. Tendering and award of concession for 150 ambulances

A 15-month long process was undertaken for tendering and award of the
concession for 150 ambulances in PPP mode, as summarised below. The
contract was finally awarded to Fortis Healthcare Ltd. at a one-time capital

cost of = 25 crore and monthly annuity payments of € 1.23 crore (which made
Fortis the L-1 bidder on NPV basis).

Figure 10.2 — Tendering and award of concession for ambulances

Technical Evaluation

slanuary 2009

Agreement with
Fortis Healthcare

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 173


Chapter 10: Health Services tor CWG-2010

As can be seen about 3% months between the opening of the financial bids
and the issue of the LOI was spent in obtaining Cabinet approval. The scope
of work involved:

« Procurement of ambulance vehicles and fabrication, and procurement
and installation of equipment;

* Procurement of hardware/software and setting up of a control room
(Emergency Response Centre), and recruitment and training of
manpower;

« Operation of the ambulance flect over a six year period.

Audit observed that the Request for Proposal (RFP) did not specify a
requirement for “factory-built” ambulances, allowing the concessionaire to
fabricate ambulances from any vehicle chassis; however, details of the
medical equipment were fully specified. The successful concessionaire was
required to submit a registered prototype ambulance for inspection by
DoHFW. Further, each ambulance was to be inspected by DoHFW before
deployment.

The financial model for the Public Private Partnership (PPP) involved
payment of one-time capital cost and monthly annuity payments to cover cost
of categories of persons (accident victims, economically weaker sections,
obstetric emergencies etc.) exempted from payment of user fees. The
concessionaire could collect user charges from other users.

10.5.3 Failed execution of contract

DoHFW terminated the contract with Fortis Healthcare in February 2010, due
to its failure to procure and register 50 per cent of the ambulances by the
stipulated deadline of 8 January 2010°. Subsequently, DoHFW had to procure
३31 factory-built Force Traveller ambulances (10 BLS and 21 ALS
ambulances) in July- 2010 at a cost of = 2.24 crore for vehicles at Director
General of Supplies and Disposals (DGS&D) rates from Force Traveller Lid.,
and awarded the work of fabrication and equipment at € 6.88 crore in August
2010 to MGM Associates.

The chronology of events leading to the termination of the Fortis contract is
given in table 10.2:

3 The remaining 50 per cent were to be operationalised by July 2010.

174 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Table 10.2: Chronology of events leading to termination of Fortis contract

Fortis produced a bus chassis-based ambulance‘ as the
prototype ambulance. Despite multiple meetings/
inspections, the special committee constituted by
DoHFW did not find the vehicles satisfactory on several
parameters — workmanship, aerodynamics/ ergonomics,
fittings, and certification of actual performance on
suspension damping

However, DoHFW agreed on 22 October 2009 to Fortis’
request to go ahead with placing the order for
ambulances on the manufacturer, subject to vehicles
complying with the stipulated specifications. It was seen
that even before this approval, Fortis had already placed
orders on 21 September 2009 for 74 bus chassises.

Fortis submitted another prototype ambulance for
inspection and ambulance registration; this was approved
by the Committee for Registration of Ambulances
(CRA) for registration by the Transport Department

Transport Department agreed to DoHFW’s proposal for
registration of 150 ambulance vehicles, subject to
certification (in Form 22 (A) Part 1) by DoHFW that
each fabricated vehicle complied with the Motor Vehicle
Act and Rules.

One ambulance was registered on 16 January 2010, even
without DoHFW certification.

A new “core group” constituted by DoHFW found the
ambulances to be deficient and non-compliant, especially
on the quality of ride, noise pollution, poor quality
stretcher and general workmanship.

DoHFW terminated the contract with Fortis.
Mediation efforts between DoHFW and Fortis failed.

Thus, DoHFW’s failure to specify the exact nature of the ambulance vehicle
well in advance led to termination of the contract. DoHFW did not specily
“factory-built ambulances” and the range of acceptable makes/ models
thereof. The Committee of Doctors associated with the second round of
procurement had recommended factory-built over chassis-built vehicles.
Though chassis-built vehicles were found to be a cheaper option, DoHFW did
not specify the range of acceptable chassis makes/models.

4 Mahindra RTD BS III (bus-chassis without windshield)



Chapter 10: Health Services tor CWG-2010

The GNCTD replied that the IDFC prepared the bidding document and
concession agreement for the project which also included minimum
specifications of ambulances without specifying the requirement of chassis
built vehicle or factory built vehicle. Further, none of the short-listed
applicants, in the pre-bid meeting, had raised any question regarding the non-
availability of ambulance vehicle of required specifications. Also, even after
issue of LOI when Fortis had asked for relaxing the condition of patient
compartment width, the IDFC had advised that adequate number of vendors
for ambulance vehicles were available to provide ambulances as per the
specifications prescribed in the tender document.

The above only goes to underscore the audit point that by indicating the range
of acceptable makes available the department would have exercised better
control and guided the procurement process more efficiently specially when
the specifications were so important.

Further, there was a marked difference in rates between the quotes of Fortis
Healthcare (for chassis-built ambulances) and the factory built ambulances
purchased later which is indicated below:

Table 10.3 - Comparison of quotes of Fortis and ready-built ambulances
(in lakh)

Supplier Vehicle Fal Total Cost of | Total Cost
Cost BLS of ALS
BIS) ALS. Ambulance | Ambulance

Factory built 7.23 13.43 26.36 20.66 33.59
ambulances

(Force

Traveller/

MGM

Associates)

The factory built ambulances (with fabrication and equipment) were far
costlier than Fortis’ quoted cost, although the inner width of the patient
compartment of these factory-built ambulances was only 1650 mm, as against
the contracted specification of 2000 mm +/- 10 per cent.®

5 The invoice documents supporting the registered prototype BLS ambulance supplied by
Forlis revealed a cost of just हैं 9.50 lakh.

# Tn June 2009, Fortis Healthcare requested for a reduction in the inner width of the patient
compartment trom 2000 mm +/- 10 per cent to 1650 mm (which is a more common
specification): this was not avcepted by DoHFW and the contract retained the original
specifications.

176 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Chapter 10: Health Services for CWG-2010

The GNCTD replied that the Committee of experts in its report detailing
specifications of the ambulance had recommended for procurement of mono-
coque (factory built) vehicle from DGS&D. It did not specify/ consider the
width of the vehicle while recommending the vehicle to be purchased from
DGS&D.

The fact remains that the specifications of the original RFP were not
considered in the later RFP wherein the attempt was to exercise greater
control over the purchases by making the specifications exact.

It was seen in audit that the price difference was mainly on account of
differing specifications of equipment. The equipment specifications for the
factory-built ambulances (drawn up by a Committee of doctors appointed in
March 2010 by the Minister of Health and Family Welfare) were substantially
higher than that indicated in the RFP prepared by IDFC, the Transaction
Advisor. These specifications drew references to the Medical Device
Directives specified by the European Union and also stipulated manufacture
of the devices in an ISO-certified facility’.

The higher specifications (and higher cost) of the subsequent purchase of
factory-built ambulances were also acknowledged by DoHFW (in its response
to Audit), stating that the detailed specifications for fabrication and equipment
were suggested by experts; further, almost all the equipment were imported,
of reputed brands and met all international standards for safety and quality.

While there is no doubt that higher specifications were adopted for the
ambulances, yet the fact remains that these specifications were not adopted in
the first instance at the RFP stage.

The GNCTD in its reply also acknowledged the higher specifications of
international level being the main reason for the price difference. It was
however, stated that as the ambulance PPP project was meant for accident and
trauma services in Delhi (not specifically for CWG), so commonly used
specifications were prescribed in the RFP. These specifications though not
international were even higher than the specifications prescribed in the
guidelines prescribed by the Committee for Registration of ambulances
(CRA) for registration of any ambulance in Delhi. The subsequent purchase
of 31 ambulances was primarily for meeting the CWG requirement which was
a prestigious international event due to which higher international
specifications were prescribed.

specification); this was not accepted by DoHFW and the contract retained the original
specifications.

7 They did not specify equipment brands.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (G



Chapter 10: Health Services tor CWG-2010

10.5.4 Non-fulfilment of Requirement of BLS Ambulances

Originally, DoHFW envisaged purchase of 141 BLS ambulances and only 9
ALS ambulances. This was to be supplemented through extra ALS
ambulances from Government and private hospitals to meet the (short term)
requirement of around 20 ALS ambulances for the Games.

However, DoHFW actually ended up buying 21 ALS and only 10 BLS
ambulances. It is pertinent to note that the ALS ambulances require services
of trained doctors and are, therefore, not suitable for deployment through
CATS. Consequently, these ALS ambulances have been allotted to various
hospitals/ institutes.

The need for a general ambulance services under the aegis of CATS (102
ambulance service) for immediate pre-hospital emergency response, is met
primarily through BLS ambulances. Such ambulances are cheaper than ALS
ambulances (which are linked to individual hospitals) and, could be procured
in greater numbers than ALS ambulances to meet the requirements of the
Games.

The GNCTD while accepting the audit observation explained that while
making the bid documents for PPP project considering that a BLS ambulance
can be upgraded to the level of an ALS ambulance, provision for only 9 ALS
ambulances was made by IDFC. As per the HAP for the CWG, a total of 40
BLS and 24 ambulances were required. The ambulance requirements were to
be met by the PPP partner. However as the PPP arrangement failed, the
Government in its hospitals had only 3 ALS ambulances. After considering
the availability of ambulances from Government hospitals, CATS, AIMS and
private institutions, tender for procurement of 21 ALS and 10 BLS
ambulances was floated and purchased. These ambulances were used in
CWG and after completion of CWG, ALS ambulances have been deployed at
Delhi Government hospitals/ institutions where they are being used for patient
shifting. The CATS is using the 10 BLS ambulances for its city operation.

178 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Conclusion

Deficient planning put pressure on timelines and created a sense of urgency.
As works were not spread out evenly over the years preceding the Games,
there was unprecedented bunching of activities in the final years before the
Games. The expected result of the high demand for labour and material were
the high tendered costs paid. Government gave up decision making to the
vast number of consultants employed as it tried to grapple with its
technological and managerial limitations. With an immoveable deadline of
the Games there was considerable relaxation of rules and procedures in
making purchases and awarding contracts for works at higher costs.
Transparency in following procedure was also not ensured. GNCTD had not
settled its bills in respect of atleast 40 completed projects even after one year
of the Games.

tid if *
: bio, :
Dated: 3 January, 2012 (NAMITA SEKHON)
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Delhi

New Delhi
Countersigned
ye, -
yy
Dated: 3 January, 2012 (VINOD RAI)
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 179


Annexure to Chapter 2
Annexure 2.1 — Category-wise profile of approvals/ sanctions by GNCTD

nD
oo

|

*This includes funding from Gol — (a) components of JNNURM: ®761 crore and 6) Additional
Central Assistance far CWG-related projects: = 2800 Crore.

180 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Annexure 2.2 - Details of projects where final payments have not been made

Annexures

(in crore)

5. Project [Agency|Tendered] Paid up to Status of work
INo.| Cost | October 2011
(Chapter- 3 Venues constructed by “NDMC and PWD”
1. C/o Thayagaraj Sports Complex) PWD | 108.80] 112.29 Completed
४ Thayagraj Nagar, New Delhi,
(,I and other works) Package-II
C/o Thayagaraj Sports Complex! PWD 14.10 12.18] Completed
lat Thayagraj Nagar, New Delhi,
(IL and other works) Solar Plant
C/o Thayagaraj Sports Complex! PWD 19.58] 24.73 Completed
lat Thayagraj Nagar, New Delhi,
(1 and other works) Gas
turbine
2 |Addition/Alteration of Talkatera| NDMC 74.74 69.59} Completed
Indoor Stadium
3 [Improvement upgradation of | |NDMC| 162.47 75.05 Project yet to be
Shivaji Stadium and SITC of completed
lIntegrated Security System by
IECIL at Shivaji Stadium
4 |Architect Consultant for NDMC 5.25] 4.26 Shivaji Stadium Project
[Talkatora Stadium and Shivaji yet to be completed
Stadium
5 |TPIQA for Talkatora Stadium NDMC 1.06] 1.09) Shivaji Stadium yet to be
land Shivaji Stadium _ _ completed.
Total | 383.00
|Chapter- 4 Streetscaping and beatification of Roads around venue’
[* Streetscraping and beatification | PWD | 242.01 187.88 Completed
lof roads around CWG Venue
7 |Streetscraping and beatification | MCD 65.14) 55.28 Completed
of roads around CWG Venue
(| Streetscraping and beatification | NDMC 25.30} 20.89} Completed
jof roads around CWG Venue
|| Road Signages PWD 33.13 40.52] Completed
Total 381.58)
(Chapter- 5 Street lighting
[7] Street Lighting PWD 51.18) 42.42) Completed
MI
11 Street Lighting PWD 48.61 43.66 Completed
M2
12 Street Lighting PWD 55.15] 47.43] Completed
M3
13 Sweet Lighting NDMC 34.40) 34.32] Completed
14 Street Lighting MCD 34.53 Completed
Ph-I
15 Street Lighting MCD 61.98] Completed
Ph-Il

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (G

CT Delhi) | 181



Annexures

Total 280.85]
|Chapter- 7 City Infrastructure Development : Road and Flyovers
16 |R R Kohli Marg Flyover 214.57] 258.26) Completed
17 |Ghazipur Flyover 199.79] 175.79] Under Progress
| 18 [Barapulla Elevated Road 433.7] 451.35] Completed
19 |UP Link Road 265.04) 209.00) Completed
20 [Road No. 56-Anand Vihar ISBT 140.53) 193.76 Completed
21 [Ring Road Bybass 409.45] 157.64] Completed
127.49|
Total 1656.09]
Chapter- 8
22 Restoration of Connaught Place] NDMC 1.99] 1.63} Completed
IC Block
INo.33/43/EE/CP dated 31-08-
2007
23 [Restoration of facade of inner] NDMC 15.64| 10.44] Not Completed (66.75%)
circle block
24 [Restoration of Facade (M). NDMC 13.52 10.22|Not Completed (75.59%)
25 Restoration of facade G,H,K off NDMC 12.20] 7.99| Not Completed (65.49%)
ICP
26 (Civil, structural & finishing] NDMC 236.70} 112.05|Not Completed (47.33%)
vorks including electrical, fire
fighting, fire detection, CCTV,
jworks for service corridor in|
imiddle circle of Connaught)
Place,
27 (Civil structural, finishing &|NDMC 56.05] 12.38] Not Completed (22.08%)
electrical works for new ani
existing subways in outer circle|
ICP
28 [Area Development Works for NDMC 35.93 14.81] Not Completed (41.22%)
inner and outer circle of CP
29 |Facade lighting works in C Block|NDMC 031 00.00\Noi Completed (0.00%)
lof CP for redevelopment of
Connaught Place
30 (Civil structural & finishing] NDMC 30.40} 5.39] Not Completed (17.73%)
lworks of toilets, Kiosk including|
electrical works for
redevelopment of Connaught
Place
31 Supply, installation, testing &{NDMC] 34.08] 3.10] Not Completed (9.09%)
commissioning of escalators in|
lhew and existing subways in|
[Connaught Place.
32 |Facade lighting works of CP NDMC 4.28) 1.19 Not Completed (27.80%)
33 [Horticulture works &  Drip[NDMC] 00.87] 0.59] Not Completed (67.81%)
irrigation for redevelopment o
Connaught Place

182

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



Annexures

ना cp PNPM] FY 0.5f Not Competed (27.32%0)] Road signage works fi 1.83 0.50, Not Completed (27.
lredevelopment of CP.
35 [Payment of consultancy charges) NDMC 48,08) 16.2 | |
Ito M/s EL
Total | 483.88

(Chapter- 9 Other Infrastructure Development Activi

36 220 KVA sub station at Ridge] DTL 90.05 Completed
alley
37 220 KVA sub station at DIAL DTL 99.00] Completed
38 [Construction of | MGD WTP DIB 35.20] Completed
39 [Construction of | MGD STP DIB 24.75 Completed
40 Park and Ride Facility at NDMC| 38.82] Second phase of
Safdarjung Airport New Delhi dismantling of parking
facility yet to be
completed.
Towl | 278.82]
Grand| 3464.22]
Total

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (G



Annexures

Annexes to Chapter 3

Annexure -3.1

Irregular framing of rate analysis

oo _ (₹ in lakh)
Type Total no. of No. of Extra cost
items items test Zin lakh
cropped checked Excess Extra liability
paid

Sports Facility Block
Extra items 23 5|[ 0 10.33
Substituted items 05 2 28.17 | 0 |
Deviated items 20 7/00 | 5.41
Additions/alterations work
Extra items 20 5 87.88 69.49
Deviated items 17 2 0.99 1.23
TOTAL 85 | 21 | 117.04 86.46

184 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



५81

“Kyyeuad yo
Kad] 10} 310m Jo UoNa| duo 10} SUI
Ur पगाश्णागशा[ om st xq], “poraAosar
aq 0} anp Ayeuad ysurefe yueroyynsut
Sem JunowR एभ्पपा॥ se ajqeidesoe
jou st Ajday 210m Jo ayer ed ‘a1sodap
AsNd9s JO UNO} oyr UL जुवश[एकड
S} junowe jusloysns pue pajajduros
खाए SYFOM otf) 93प0 sIseq TLIO TO YL
yeep 2q pInom asim IO 10 AJeued
Jo Kady 1Oy २४४० ay) 10५ pereIs QWAN
Ajdax uy “aye 8९७ 20% Jo woo dus09
pekejap 10} Aeuad Jo oy
ए०प०४ OU pus ए०प्रपए४ sem syye] ६89
५ 1ए० yng ajqeiae] sea 1800 parpur}
stp Jo (ग्रण 61 3) 1ua9 4ad 01 Jo
wunurxews ४ ण॒ yoalqns yuo Jed 1४०2
tad ¢*| 0 Kyeuad 42exU09 Jo है asne[>
Jed sy ‘Uo|suayxe [euoIstAoud jnomLN
aiep payeindys oy; puokaq pamooxa
2५ 0} panurjuos yom oy} ‘ssouespULY
aiqreonou ou alam जप. ySnoyy,

P9AI9SqO 3४ UA
(0.10.19 ur 3)

umipeys
“pry swofoig Jo uoneunye
Sl 011६ skep 5५5६ 01506 cov = 66. Ads SW /पणाफ़ज

uopaydio>

payeindas 310M Jo गाए

PaluDis Waaq SPY [OF [MUCISIAOAd alayM SUIMOYS कगार ड़

7'§ aanxauuy

uimipeis
LOWE NIL

nua,

samxauuy


11076 LTJO 5४ pan: Aviad #

कुथ३७००० pu pataaj aq ० anp
Ayeuad suse se yuatoysnsur jsodep
PlayyN se ayquidedae jou sea Ayday
“OWUN yn गपणाए।५७
Som ogjuemm oauzuoyed / isodap
Aunaes jo junowe jusroyyns yeyr
pur ajajdiuoo sea oa ayy aauo got
uo passaaoid aq pynom Ayouad yo KA9}
Jo aseo ayn yey) pains sem व जीव uy
(eomasa oF PAIN) एक say
३० SIG Va WOH, platyptar ग०७ (1107
requidag) mou qndn अणा 562 2
{uo seaxyar uM] au 22४० (शक e 10y
Jo|3eUOD AY) UO एज dq ण posIbas
SUM 1800 3000० JO %() 7B) 24049 ६0-91 2
Jo Aymuad winuiixeut ए 01009 ayy 40 Z
asnejo sopun शाप. जुएए५ ३० worya{dwu0d
ur Aepp am जय DOGAD wo Areuad

Aue एड) 100 4०49५०१ pey OWN YL
‘aja|duroo jou

NS S| ANUAA ayy se asvaxoUL उनपर ण
जा st पृणपथ 1102 JaquUaydag ० 0102

saquiardag woy वएव 9७०1० (णग एडएक
fol '9०00प्र * pled pu pounoaxa कारक
“Kuo 1019 €6'S62 RUNsOa ([एजगगर
19) sHrom (110% taqwardas)

sou qdn yey paarosqo om 010:
Asnny 0} (ous 1200 Buspury ajajdiu0s)
6002८ YAW UO sy]UOUT है] 10
ponad uoy2[duroa Fuyunor Joye wary

soanxouuy

|
uonesodso3
dnoig nfisiys, wumprg — wnupers
"गर्भुवा09 esi at Jouoneperidn —_J00pinQ,
Sorel CLOT OE =— SULT TZ — OH IEKIOM —BOTTI'8T LTO9I Un S/N syuowasoiday ——earys हज


L8I

yasjeammba yeoysnose
vyensny | 6/6/88६1/2 6L'8S7S ug o9s | 78६%0 ८0६ tubs | s6b‘b. 30 ayntu jauedeuog yay ७४०७6 | ()L16 cd | का
Pued 95०7०
wanyuyunpy 4914)
juayeamba | ur p Jo sastiduroa
Bury | 8६966626६8 67 LOBE OS'SPLI__| 8969918 subs | 60% 40 ZV GNOBODATY | 3णाए२० popusdsng 66 t34d | 1
"mS yue[eatnbe 10
ryensny | ६[६६68098 besoee ov sit | 0८८ ८0६01 bbe'9 cunyuasd vst A/V spuguapoom | ५16 Rd | दा
अण्गषथपाए |. [गाएव गर[8०वा०3
एणप> | 110:9६62679 7086 LLsth 819%६%0/ cubs | 8#9टा 40 दर GNOSODN TV wunyurumnty 16 ct | ता
(पाप)
Buoy
BuoH | 9006ध ६ L9 1LOZL og! 12212 74 1 8 69६८9 HOS पा, OULATAL vonmed apo. | ट६५ zF4d | 01
spuvd oj1soduros
sduaqeamnba |. wnqurunpy जजपा
एणप> | ५78088६10: 4424८] ८८६८६ | ६८५८१०८ wbs | ५६9४ 40 7¥ 0१४080>11₹ एाए+ Surppel 184 cd 6
aD
juajeamba so (ys) घ yos
WSO | 270५960 धघ्ट 6556टट Ipstol | टट06घ८ट प्ए5 | 2961 आज्टणयह ग्पुण्थागत ब्गुपर7ण्णुप॒ se 8
juseainba Jo visy
VSN | 8८६1090/56 घ्ट६6६9 66961 [71610 ८8 "ए७ ६ | 795 +5एछ 10 UNA ६211 12010:9 re L
yeays oweuOquEOAjod
eury | steaseeror ६8४६ SLLEL8__| 9[ट1५५91 wbs | ese ouyyeuniad पा suyoou £6 9
quayeainba 40
Aueunay | 96//1६0519 8295 4082601 | 0096६018 wubs | 8८29५ Lesis9 AW वाटएअ Suyooy 16 L-BAd s
quaye\inba soya
ueipul | 0009# 11224 00८ 0009%% yova | (घ्टंट 3० NAH BIH pesuljoSuxtg | 1६8 Lyd v
yaapeamba saved yosur
uerpuy | 000092 008६ 00८ 00009 ८ प०४० | 008६ 2० AH पाप Jo ३पणा॥/ग्धव | ८६8 [जज ६
उप्र juajeamba 40 (syutor
eqIS Jo uoHnAsUO,) uorsuedxs)jeas
ensny | pr eroreoe ध्ध्डा 896011 | ८0065 91 way | ६६४1 XA A PAIS squror 9५ [जज 4
eyensny | [26५05६11 68६ 68/16ट | 09५190[ 1एस | 68६ 10/08/४४७० 10 एजा8 | धणण[ weTONNsuOD ६५ [जञत [
UO PaA[OAUT aq aed
Jo aanypuadxa ay paynaaxy paayoauy se jun paaosdde “ON oN
(ayunog TOL, yuamaaasy | Ayuend | oanypuadxg | yug | sod जष्च pues YW पा Jo जया; majyy_ | adeyseg | 8

(unipns fomsvdy yz) juapvainhy 40 aumy puvsg jauou puvsg Aq paifiaads sway :¢°¢ asnxauuy

somxauny


88I

जर्फत Taaists कफ
“ureds warping - oye | 9 DAd
-290%u | ४४८99८2८91 psrespe | Lp 8/9 ६5% yoed |#870६ ए)०च- | yyatuiseg एणत | ६01 cd | 61
(out ysty)
गण royenjoy-
vsa 1गश० ysny
चप्ा०१०छ awamduad / arempury- |. [णात एगृएश्णप०७-
“uyeds 17०१०७- "2.0 Buny
"४०० | 81८15/561 IZOSLEE 8५ 00६४८ 9 पण्ष्व | 50962 एउ०च- | ॥0७ va1vuld- | 01071 784d
AueWLIa) (eur ysIy)
-araeanq| arefd soremoy -
“ysa waist पा
नप्०्१०छ quagey- [eng एशुएशणप००-
‘uredg qwavang - OM Suny yen
-200y | 91'96SSPS7 #6#7//6६_| 9 IZe‘Zp'nz yoeg | 068%६ ery | OSNAS ४॥४४०- | (१)101 व्थ्जव | LI
(9णा yay)
गए[पें वणणशा70-
हर] प्ागश० ysny
चा#ण्यात एणात एगुएग००००- | ("०
“uredg waving - om Buny | -yog)
-४>०स | 8TLLILSS 86 25905 iat 25/8४% पम्प | दक्ष ए००च- | 1४ ००० [शत | 101 ca | 9
Buyjaued
TRA PAYS
उन्पृष्णा | pawsopied
[एण््रशञा००ए- jays
उ्पणा। pareioyiod
वश एएशाज्ञा००७
शाष्यज्ञाए | #६5.6/806५६ 80626 4 8/9 TL9‘TS‘Ob ubs _| Ler‘b 10 ayew jeued एच०६ अगफ़ wes | (IT'S wa | ST
5 छ छत उत्व्फक
उनपृष्ण | paruopsod
yeonsnosy -Jaaqg
saquury paresoysod
WSO Paayoauy ag जगत
jo aanyipuadxa aey paynaaxg paaqoauy se आरा poaosdde “oN oN
Agno [wo] quouaaasy | Auend | aanj;pusdxy yup | sadaey एण्ष्य१ xv Way] JO anyENy way | >हैष्भ्रग्ष्त Ss

somxauuy.



681

LUIZ का (४2401) .)1७०1.
0६001.8/911८ ८६+%8'#टट (,) TOL
vsn 25659/161 7६992 a 96S°E0'RZ yor | coe‘ez ureap ००ए syuod yar] sy cAnd | 92
weds जाकर - उठ:
-200% #0:56518 85600 [८ SLI'SL yowa | ८8५५६ ए००च- uiseq oun | ८01 Td | ६८
“vsn
चाए०१०७ उश्याहिएठ- gosta -
‘uredg 17०१०0- Suyjunop-
P00 L8'V996E7 छा6ट2992 [७ [14/464 yora | 8५1कट e204" uyseq पृ | (१७४०1 ve
yueuruog, | टटघ्घ्टभ्क ersproe [का aan) yoed | 0992 quajeainba 10 ज्णु-तु uig aysem iodeg | हा] घ्ट
Testedsip
जाएपप०6 | 76 LOLELb scgesee | bl 8e6'E9"s yoea | 08962 quoyeainb Jo ग्पा-त॒ 17७० ३००४१ | LTT tna | 77
ur
goded ajsey ‘rok (a
puryy *sasuadsrp | —yog)
आएफए०( | टा [258085 धध्धश्कफट | HZ THO'sT'SS goed | LIZZ outl-d. [2060 rodeg sv tnd | IZ
yoARIp
#[86607£ 10/5कछटट fal tata yoea | soe‘Iz jugjeamnbe 10 Wa pury 7०७ण६ | €1T Tard | 0८
Ruruiay
6 फग्प्ग्ण्णु aq जगत
yo aanypuadxa aey paynaaxg paaqoaty se yun poaosdde “oN
Aayunog Troy quauraaasy | Gyuend | aanyrpuadxg aad ayy pura oye wayjoamnjen | way | adeyoeg

sainxouury



061

'एण्डयव juayeamba se paynaax जु+

OFO'SLLTDT 1०, puery
painoaxe
WN [0 0 JON 000‘08' Ib wbs | 611 oueN | Suyvoadwep प्रणए | _ #01 ट्खव |_1६
इएक# ण UApSey
शा प्राएण॒ण्णा[ए
[शणण्टफ़ण्प
painsaxo quayramba yun [६७
WN [0 0 JON SSS'8S'9Z ‘wbs_| iso's Jo oyu yrauay | uo sayiy rosea, 1412 za | 0६
poinsoxo Ruyjeoo peRUNy
eypensny | 0 0 10N €2C'S6'bY wbs | joy juajeainba 10 eyig | nue qorpdarisea | ele zTBya | 62
Wa
paynoaxo yas
xa [0 0 JON SLUT wbs | ८८92 juajeamba 10 OWL TV Bupooy [4०७ | ३3०८६ Ta | 87
ए्णुग
एथा>०७ uosundxg)sdya
eyensny | 0 0 JON 6sv's9'6 wor | [प्‌ quayeagnb 10 एजा5 जज sl 14a | ८८
Wao poayoauy qa pd
yo aanyipuadxo गष्प्त एगाज्ग्ज poajoaur sv yrun poaosdde “ON # “ON
Aayunog 1४३०, yuauaaty | GQpuend | aanypuadxq | गण] | sed ay एप््यव /जण९५ wayyjoaamen | way | a8eyoea | 8

Paynsaxa jou sway]

somnxauuy


Tol

GET'S V'ET'S eed UI 9909५७७४०३ ७०७५
Sey Sa}e4 Jo UoADURS B10J9q 1032eIU09 0
53181 s9yfiy ३९ JuaUAed pue sishjeue ayes Jo
Buywey 9a1209U! ण anp wauihed 55३७3 «

६६5 ered ७ 9ग०१७७७४००
uaag sey 51९1० winipeys yo way paanynsans
४० 21019 789 ३ Jo yuauiAed ssaox3 #

sa}puage 1७३1)॥0 YsIn ७०॥९७.७७० pri swaforg
-o‘quawafeuew — awin‘uognaexa’dujuue|d yuowormbar xajdus, ‘ummpers 1oopuy ‘cummpeis
uy aysisa10y jo »pel* ousiadsy ६६0 161 08's orl SIN JOUONLINsUONIPPY —eIOWyLEL,

OWAIN

O10z-seueD

प्राएसकएणएरघा०)
foy(auey ॥ 5 १७ OOF
ype जागपाएे anus,

quoutouinbos हु Surmey NAT
ausndsy - हा

juawasinbas यार
sad st pur उउत्त ण ‘xajdutoa
[says wou UFIsap —(4ROG - + ) omy (aumanays, 59008
juDUOD ०४४. प्रा ०० पा जतेधरपु) 610६ 2 96६01 OWE SIN. aiseg) Paamyarg —— fereceyy,

(21019

paasasqo am 1७१५४ | 07 uaatd sui 2 MOA Jo WEN, anuaa,
YAOM AY] UI LUA} paynjysqns/payvisap/vajxa Sulmoys juawapyjys

PE aanxouuy sounxouuy


t61

वक्ष | 25 2

uontuodina

quawameue गए[ Fuyuueyd 42007 30a oysodiwoa,
Aoams ayenbepeut 0} गए pasinsso (Auuenb r bse WIPES
quawaarie Jo %97 Jo UN] WoHeLAap juowerinbar ay) Jo uonepead

puoXag Amuenb jeuonippe) suoneAaqy ausiodsy 79'6 cum EA -dnjuawaaordury

paasosqo 3४ 1४७ | 07 Wats suoseoy [५० ६ : | joourey: yom Jo uTENT anu,

somnxouny


Annexure 3.5

REBUTTAL ON CROPPING UP OF EXTRA ITEM DUE TO INCORRECT PREPARATIONOF
ESTIMATES BY ARCHITECT CONSULTANT

Annexures

(in crore)

Type ofitem | Item Quantity | Rate Cost Reason put forth by | Audit Rebuttal
description NDMC
Talkatora Indoor stadium addition/alteration work
Extra item No.6 ACP for 360.32 14500 1.25] Iteminthe estimate [How it was not safe not
HVAC was covering clarified. Further if it was
HVAC duct with | so the same why it was
gypsum board inserted in the estimate.
which was not
structurally safe
Extra item No.10 ACP for | 1180.48 10000 1.18 | The item was The suggestion should have
column suggested to been given in estimate so as
increase lobby space | to prevent payment at
market rate later.
Extra item NO.10 7 3785812 0.58 | Motorised frame of | Other stadia constructed
Alu.truss Alu.truss was given | under CWG 2010 do not
as per internation | have such structure.The
practice idea was very expensive
and inconvenient as Alu
truss is hanging on Space
frame which is suspended
with angle of old space
frame for which cat walk
was also closed.
‘Talkatora new sports facility block
Substituted Strglazed 2762.57 | 18135.54 5.01 | [twas adopted as | Earlier glass was also heat
curtainwall per green building | reflective, as no event were
system item norms,heat to be held in Facility block,
No.2 reflective.prevents | probability of — breaking
injury if broken glass was remote. It did not
fulfill green building
criteria ०.13 of CPWD
OM dated 16.3.09
Str.glazed 707.28 15000 1.06 | do Do
curtainwall
system item
10.95
Extra item No.8 lean 3975.9 2000 0.80 | It was proposed to | The lean concrete could
conerete provide solid base | also have been laid in situ
which was not instead of ready mix which
possible by was costlier items
Mech.means
Extra item No.10 for 3630 250 0.09 | It was required to be | Chequerrd tile is a routine
cement mortar proposed as per item of DAR item
manufactures of No.11.20.1 to 11.20.4
tiles specification | which prescribes. 20mm.
mortar for fixing it, hence
reason is not convincing
TOTAL 9.97

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010

'T Delhi) | 193


Annexures

Annexes to Chapter 4
Annexure 4,1: Irregular Justification of the Quoted rates
(@in crore)

Name of the package Estimat Value % of Justified | %over Justified

edcost ofthe — above/less cost the dept cost

putto tender quoted by computed | justified worked justified

tender Li by dept cost out by cost

Audit *
Roads around 35.38 | 40.64 14.87 40.90 (0.64 37.57 8.17
Yamuna Sports
‘Complex
Roads around 31.16 | 34.63 | | 1.11 36.44 C5 35.30 |” 9
commonwealth
Games Village
Roads around दा 16.38) 19.94 21.77 19.46 3 16.99 17.36
Stadium (Kishan
Ghat)
Roads around IGT 35.55 41.95 18 | 5 | | 37.71 11.24
Stadium (Ashram to
Bhairon Marg)
Roads around IG 28.45 31.01 9 34.92 (11 30.44 1.87
Stadium (Bhairon
Marg ITO)
Mall road from Delhi 20.44 24.15 18.18 | (-)9 21.78 10.88
University to
Chhatrasal Staddium
Dr Karni Singh 19.98] 24.42 22.25 28.92 (016 21.94 11.30
shooting range
Roads around 21.80 25.27 pe 25.80 (02 22.86 10.54
various games venues
(Africa Avenue)
[tora | 209.14 | | 242.01 | | 254.86 | 224.59

194 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Annexure 4.2: Different rates for Horticulture Items

Description of
item

Supplying &

Minimum

r
DSR rate

144.05

Unit

Rate
adopted
in the
estimates

Diff

Extra
cost

(Zin crore)
Name of
Packages whe
higher rates
adopted

GI stadium/

stacking (Ashram to ‘Yamuna Sports
good earth Bharon Complex
Marg)
P| Removal of | 61.19(DSR) | Cum 84.54 | 23.35 38 | 27396 | ९० | IGT stadium/¥SC
malba
F Maintenance. | 56.15 each/ |” 41.85 75 | 50610 | 0.21 | Delhi university
of shrub (Ashram to year to Chatrasal
Bharon Stadium
Marg)
| Maintenance of | 56.15 each’ 63) 6.85 12 | 145324] 0.10 | YSCCWG
shrub (Ashram to | year village
Bharon
FP Maintenance sqm 36 | 12.84 55 | 19600 | 0.03 | Delhi university
of ground year to Chhatrasal
cover/lawn Stadium/CWG
| Providing/ Each 2000 | 1400 233 | | | CWG village
planting
Washingtonia
palm
7 Providing/ 6 Each 30. 24 400 | 27230 | 0.07 | Delhi university
planting (Ashram to to Chhatrasal
Chloredendrum | Bharon Stadium/CWG
enermi Marg) का रे —| es
| Providing/ 60 Each 125) 65 108 |. 5439 | 0.04 | IG Stadium
planting (Ashram to
Ficus Pandas | Bharon
Marg
| Providing/plant | 60 Each 70 ‘10 17) 6824 a cCWG
ing (Ashram to villageYSC
Ficus Panda | Bharon
Marg
i Providing/ 22.05(DSR) | Fach | | 37.95 172| 7500 | 0.03 | CWG village
planting
Bougainvillea
Total | 1.08 |

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010



Annexures

Annexure 4.3: Examples of high cost electrical items

Unit cost Unit Cost ates ence ‘Total extra
as per including all r cost with
Invoice ‘y items (7) put to

Tender

Roads around | 18 watt CFL with । 9,22,797
IGUStadium metre steel body
(Kisan Ghat) bollard/140

MBL
| | Roads around | Trapez Pole of 9 2,81,343 3,25,270 | 4,53,910 | 1.28,640. 9,39,870
IGI Stadium | metre height with
(Kisan Ghat) four 140 watt

MBL casmopolis lamp/6

a Roads around | Nemo Torch 150 1,92,435 2,24,020 | 4,29,978 | 2,05,958 |. 50,15,901
IGI Stadium watt metal halide
(Kisan lamp/20
Ghat)/MBL_

4 | Roads around | TS Light fixture 5100 6321 8371 2050 | 13,78,830

IGI Stadium | ATL make with
(Bharion Marg) 2x28 watt with

to ITO and aluminium dia cast
Ashram to body/570

Bhairon
‘Marg)/Sharma/
SAM India

total 82,587,398

196 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (Gi



L6I

a0] oF URI
LLUO8E ६091191_ [८2 O8L1661 OL 0 se 0 ६01 Solel पाकर) tpuewuny | pl
[sajod [euonexop)
peoy qirajeley
८६६1६८ 11211 1/ 2 4 है. 89/9#5 061 0 96 0 60६ 99०८८ rena. ova pezy | हा
अछ्छ UEYIN,
9eT'esT $Z0°SS6 91 O9T8EIT or 0 4 ॥| 650 ८0८ था renq peoy ysuig fury | ZT
Lep‘ees Wsize'z__| OF ROE198T L6 0 Is 0 SI 9O1F1 rena prow wsesw | ता
It
91799 108४ ट६ट[6६ 9107667 801 0 zs 0 sl 76० ५/ 11 yen MEN wos JofeW | 01
bL88P‘T CpLissor | 8L 919P08S +0z7__—«| 0 wor [0 80६ 95०४1] ree 510 wns | 6
PEP'LL6 16957/ट | OF 8TLEZLE ral 0 99 0 4८1 TSO ESI reng Bue pueueyania | 8
pSS‘bb6 worl | 8s 91590 LSI 0 LL 0 svt CoOL 01 yend Fury wesurg pues | L
एफ
L8L'88 10:4६ 6 886579 w 0 u 0 £0 ELBE wnog ण १8 | 9
८८995 19/%26ट_ [७ RBEILbE taal 0 19 0 oT +6 rena, Rae wes nyc ely | ५
915६8 51 05#99ट5 | os 9/5५101/ sel 0 a 0 961 8°61 46°61 rend peow ype |p
Bre WdS
ण a8plg saa0}004
89887५८ 150 टाट9 | 6५ 61609L8 L6 99 कक Le 6tT $8 bz lend Bren yseygns | ६
0st)
14:14 120 | ess‘spe'r | Lb S9LE6T9 8b zs 8b 4 ZI ५6५ 8८ तु द-आणुर एए/णपए७ण | 2
SEL'PSS‘T ८1६0855 | ६५ 505६५ का 0 69 0 ५0ट ६8० ६11 vend, Sew 100 | 1
Wil 20५८ | Moor | wor | We
“uods
भव
aad se 29 uoHepunoy (wy)
pasinbas apt sajod an yySuay (प) पा ron ON
aousz9ss10 380 sated 30०० ५२७ | sadse stupa | ai sad se sajog ‘mi prox एप्प prox Jo ouren “Is

(2 ण॒ yunoury) -asvyd Ul spvos AoMasvlssvs Jonp uo ainjipuadxa ssaoxg : | 'C-aanxauuy

¢ 42}d¥yD ० soxouuy

sounxouny


861

(L9s‘0eo'szI - 8६0/06५6 + ६8६॥06'५6) %#07५61 = AanyIpuadxgy ssaaxq

8£0°06S'6 aya seqnauta ‘sllurssou ‘saqima so) quatuaumbar ६०100 enixa 10) 1107 wad 0] 10 2007# णा 1807 [eUONIPPY
raroelez | ६४६०06५96 | LrPL Los‘oco'szL [18८६ [9 (८68 | ort [2795 ToL
POS‘786 gie979% | bb. 028809६ ou |0 ५9 0 tama 6 eng Ieproy ewry | ie
TOAATA OF 1UIOg
€19°89 veo'uze'9 [901 Ly9S6E9 0 Elka ५9 bh wy 58 ० L9'VT rena Awoy peor 10 | 0६
81#86 #1615561 [9८ ८६६0591 8S 0 6ट 0 I s9 rend uopjoy ander | 62
PeOY eye OF
£0S°CZ0'L 58/6/8६ | ५9 88टट06७ ध्ा (0 98 0 घछ््ट #6० ८5] rena peow [er एप्स ane | 8८
999°C78'1 #/ 76६6६ | 99 ObIZ9LS rst 0 sor [0 lst 9०661 reng peow ner | Lz
20
wdny पद) moet
६6:65 6६1%#70६ | Is दाक9६ 8टा [0 +9 0 ८61 26 OL SS"EL rend Puruy 0} peoy zie | 92
Ss9'LZE'L 608%६8% | 18 y9PZ919 हाट [0 80 [0 we 9110 ८61 rena. prow AeMoU MeN | SZ
bbl ‘b19@ 258850# | 89 9667499 “el | 0 <ध 0 99८2 दा पडा rend prow एशात | pz
P8L19L geszerl [कट OzEb6IZ OL 0 oF 0 60 LL} €1 rena Bey ueurysiy iG | घट
68691 1112 11 ॥ | Lt 256805८ 88 0 vb 0 ६90 88 ०४01 rena peoy ewaur.) एप [44
HA
६6179८६ 8८0६1 |[घ्ट 0#706691 68 0 0६ 0 980 8 rend Jey raat sofew | 1८
peo
Bury or sey NOW
LEI‘SO€'L EOP 9 | Lz 029162 8 0 ss 0 ६01 ६01 थ IPL rend ४7६०४ PLOY | 02८
OLE‘6IZ ट8189८ट| 8६ 14920:1//4 98 0 br 0 sv PRNCEL rena Liven mural | 61
Re
OSL LIL 095%8६८ [0 07६501६ ८0 [0 ss 0 951 96 eng ssuprs[ny puearsor | 81
ZL0'699 oosusez__| ov ८६9950६ 901 [0 vs 0 551 8०6 rena peoy Aopueg jemuew | LL
GaNOK
0] peoy zie)
40168 ore'Lyy'z_| Ib 958&६६६ 0 दा us 0 9 LLOS EL tena peow edn ‘ga | 9
Be
nemesis pue Sie,
40608: ere'Leye | Ib 9SIRLIE 901 | 0 Ls 0 91 40.6 ५ 8701 rend Hyseyg Japueysuapuy | ५1
2२४०.

sounxouuy



661

00689८ 009°SLS‘L 9 oos‘rrs'| | 89 0 re | 0 1 ६8०0॥। reng Fay soodey [ej wey 81
sl
0016/८ 007999८ te oos‘st6't | 01 0 rs 0 Lt ण्ट0ा शत peoy eueyy repes LI
Cras 00820६८ 8६ 000%092 | 96 0 # [0 srl ५01 feng | Sey yFurg weypy peayeys 91
(amypeis
Osorele O08'8EL'L 8 05: ८502८ | oF 0 ez [0 590 SLL ren Jesayey.)) peoy प्णाफण5 sl
051 ६८६ 009°SLs"T 9 05/8681 | OL 0 5६ [0 I 76186 Ten 800५ ५१७०६ npucyr "५ vl
(qurgoy) peoy
oso lee 009°060'€ Is ose‘zer'e | LIL 0 so [0 z roars Feng | afajjo3 yfurg puraoy nung €l
osg‘Lee 009'828'T 1६ 05८9८ | 18 0 Ip | 0 fa 8०५४8 ren 5101५ YaUS spuyog "yD fal
00666६ 0098/81 1६ 005४8/८ट | #8 0 tw 10 दा 88०८6 renq 51014 WAEYS UKE ul
ey Acypeyy
05६६0? 00789६८ 6६ 05/99/८ | ८01 0 1६ |o sl 68०#8 Feng | 7 एपणाएप५ wey पर गपण्त्‌ ol
051%9%# 009°8L8° 1६ 056 ८६६८ | 98 0 क [0 a 48०98 feng | rey sem sewny ys1yseA 6
006616 009°L8L'7 ov oos‘zo¢*e | LIL 0 zw [0 81 1: ण18 ren peoy ‘d'd'd'a 8
ose‘ozs 00/8#8 tl osL'g9e | Zr 0 lz 10 ५0 ५6 शत ह1शध पण॥ !PUEN L
0596८01._| 009'8/8" 1६ osc'go6'z | 16 0 ८5 10 दा ६9० ६89 feng | Brey urep wey एए४५ tiny 9
peoy
oor'sos't | oor'e9ez 6६ 0051 ६८#% | 9४1 0 8८ [0 st #6० ८01 renq पाप) # पहुण5 गपाण्प “YO s
peoy
0010061_[| 00#89६८ 6६ 005६9८% | 091 0 8८. [0 sl 8०५8 (img एपजपञ्ञ) Tuy adie r
0589961_| 00#६9६८ 6६ 05८0६६# | PSI 0 18 0 sl 799189 Fun uasresay vfemeyey,
oso‘ese'z | 009&58&६ 95 05८६8/५5 | tr 06 IZ 06 Tt 9L ZL Ay peoy पाए fessuey i4
oos‘soe'z | 0000६8% os oos‘sexz | 0 ist [ss | o€ ५61 a reng एएण्त WEN UPseD equE i
Mosz | Moor | Wor] ZI
“sods
“ypay sad (ap
se sojod 1802 sajod waaay |. WP Kea
1300 11221 11 | कण 40 '०ए enjoy ssugug ३3० "० एष्ण्त्त एश्ण्त्त उहिएजय8 “ON IS

(Qu nowy)

[[-asnyg ui spvod Avmasoisavs jonp uo aanjipuadxa

OXY २ ['C-aanxouup

samxauuy



007

05६96 OOF TST'T Gi OSL'LETT | OF 0 ध् | 0 L0 560 86 Teng peoy riday enya) ig
(yiirgriqelung)
05६96 00715] or OSL'LPTT | OF 0 ez [0 Lo 8०५५ Ten fae pur ALYS Ov
(peoy souarney)
009°S01 00#95 6 000159.__[#ट 0 za 10 €0 ZLOVOL Bey wey Aasury १ 6६
009°601 00#090८ +e 0000/1८ | 08 0 or jo eT ६9० ५9 Teng Faey 1 गाए 8६
0517011 009°060'¢ Is osz‘o0z'e | 811 0 6s [0 z 98०98 शत peoy एणप्श३णछ Le
peoy ण्पजणणत
01 Bre YBuIg [eT) प्रात
05६91 007999८ bb 05८ ८8/८_ | POT 0 15 [0 Lt SLOTS ren, yeury peoy ज०णप्त-0%0 9६
oss‘LIL 00789६८ 6६ 05टाक##ट | ५6 0 Sb 0 st 6५6 rend ie puruelia manp ५६
00द्घा 007६9६८ 6६ 00556#ट८ | ८6 0 or fo st $6156 Feng | (peow 1-8) Hew weseyq re
OS8‘PsI oor'rsr'l कट 02685 | 09 0 oz | 0 60 LASL Teng Srey जएएए ५ wey ६६
1184 0097999 ul OSL‘EL8 0६ 0 ५ 0 v0 SLL rend Fae purudcy प5एपणु५ we
0068 0099८6+# Is oos‘po’s | SIL 0 9s | 0 z 8०५४8 rmq ए५७ AAALA “Pro 1 त 1६
00709] 009°SLs'T 9 0009६] | #9 0 व8घ 10 I SB SL Teng | Bae 16061 yedaaq sole 0६
901 Bo.) neadyes
007891 009509% 9८ 000%/4% | 9६1 0 88 [0 ६ णट0] Dur Srey पत४1६ पष[ए७ 6ट
058८6] 007999'ट tb osz‘ess'z | #01 0 es [0 Lt SOLs's peoy Funds 7 10261 प्जाएज 87
(proy
006'861 009°L8L'7 oF 005986८ | 96 0 85 | 0 8T 90५५५ जणग) Sey fA yen wey lL?
059%#1८ 0095/5 1 9 08206/1 | 99 0 ६६ [0 1 6०५6 Samy प्रण६ meyoury 5 9
059#12८ 0095/51 9% 05८06८/1 | 99 0 ६६ 0 I 96५ ६6 peoy wey 1१०५९ vey <4
059%८ 009°SLS‘L z 08206/1 | 99 0 cc 10 I 86५ ५01 Ran upuryy eaysapred 1४4
059 टटट 009 ५0५1 9 05286/1 | (9 0 ce [0 I 6०८8 uundsey!\ ज०णछन्म्त घ्ट
(एण्ण्त
006 घट८ 009696 or 005६6 | by 0 wz jo 90 878 df % 49918 D) prow IPN ww
009°8zz 00898 +1 000//01 | 6६ 0 oz fo ५0 BOLL ren peow zie Iz
00६%८ 008509'ट छत 001%8'८_| #8 ता cw 11 ५91 पर्दा Teng peoy seyueys 4
00165८ 00#1591"1 6[ 00५01 | zs 0 9८ jo L0 010५6 lenq Brey [PT weyOS "1. 61

somxouuy



107

00#86[- 00#६9६८ 6६ 0000/1८ | 08 0 Ov 0 st 606 Teng, | Sar ueweg 2 पष्पह स्प्पप्पप्त £9

0590८ OOF IST'L 6l osLioeo'l | 8६ 0 6 |0 L0 58०५6 eng ड10॥५ ॥+0पणश ए०४+एपप्त ce)
(aap fey rewny

058%6- 009°SLS‘L 9% OsLosrl | 9५ 0 Lo 0 I 8968 fend YS “a tele poayeys 19
(proy

05966 0क#कट 1४ 05८८9 9 0 £ 0 दा0 99० ५9 Tend lypesead) IeseN है०4५७1 09

009'9S- 009 ५/५ भ्र्ट 0006151 | 9५ 0 87 0 q 560५6 Tend | Brey णणव # Yas Tedary 35 6५

rol

OST 0078४8 tL 05/508 6ट 0 sl 0 90 ०५901 Tend Biv seq Ary 8s

0018& 009६9६ 9 0055८६ [दा 0 9 0 70 COGS eng Sie unuea Ls

059%& 008४8 tL 05८ ६18 0६ 0 st 0 90 990८८ Tend, Bue, MPS एव PULAod 9s
ह (papuadxg)

05७५८ 00r the v 000°L1Z 8 0 v 0 10 ६8० ५४8 fend Ban yAurg yoalury, ss

009'sI- 009°999 IL 0001५9 1४4 0 ral 0 70 OT OVLT. rend T-XD prod euraury euyory bs

009'SI- 009°999 UL oo0'1s9 | bz 0 दा |0 r0 ६9 ण ८9 eng Suv Hemseses €s
Bre

09#६ 008#8# 8 0४८४४ | 81 0 6 0 sz0 ६8५५५ णातु yedfer] eye] एपण्प5 उप es

0516८ 009696 9 0५/866 be 0 61 0 90 59198 eng Srey osog गपएए5 1५
(peoy 2०णणकएग)

0076८ ॥02224॥ 17 00001 | # 0 124 0 80 8०८6 eng काश pueuvdeg juwas os
Tey

059८६ 009°8L8'L 1६ 052८1161 | ८9 0 Le 0 aa 9८०५८ Tend 1७७७४ wey eRuey 1g oP
ary

ool OOFISI'L 61 005६6 | 0 wz io L0 68०८8 Teng | 1४//७३ [एए५ idea poayeys हक

0५78४? 008°060'T 81 05८65६171 | क 0 x4 0 990 96 fend 1806 yoaya oF >गए३० TSI] ly

05६15 007५/5६ 6५ 05/9८9६ | ६६ 0 L9 0 घ्ट vs end, Brey uewey AD oF
(proy

0099 OOP spl 4 0006151 | 95 0 87 0 60 6८01८ feng 08100) peoy Breuryee SP

059६8 009°L7'L ig 05295६&1 | 05 0 बट 10 80 16५ 96 eng, proy ०४४८५४ 1४४

00108 OOP LSLT 6ट 005&7#81 | 89 0 be 0 UT 590८6 Tend proy emdureyiy, fb

00148 OOF LSLT 67 0051#81] | 89 0 be 0 19 SLOSL Tend, Bye ysUlg BOW. cr

sounxauuy



Ot

[(00#099'टा + 000‘r0S'9Z1) - 009'880'sFT] 007%868 = aaNNpuadyg ssa9xq

00F0S9'ZI dia शणाएात ‘SBurssor9 ‘SAAMo sof jAUarMbar sajod एक वण 1497 lad 0[ JO aruTMOTTY 1809 [एप्णाएएए
00
o9'rss'sT | 000/#059टा_| O86T ofsgo'shl [18% | BSZ | OTbZ | Ted Teno
(arerp 0}
oso‘OLe- 00#7090'८ ve 05//6891 | £9 0 1६ 0 el 18०9५ dn) peoy 007७.) Acmsiury 89
05195& 007६9६८ 6६ 052५00८ | FL 0 Le | 0 st £69701 Samy puruewypaes puvag L9
0081 ६६& 0085/81६ ee ooo'sssz_| 9 0 ze 10 stl ६9 ie 1001४श्नर “CN 99
0S9°68- 007108८ 6ट 05/115८ | ss 0 oz | 0 UL 11५ ५6 एएण्च्च भाए०१ए yas ९ एप्ट ५9
एजाब SPX)
OOP 'SLZ- OOF IST'L 61 ooo'eL8 [६६ 0 a1 fo L0 TLS reng एएण्त AdUD Md Avysoy 9

somxouuy


Annexures

Annexure 5.3 - Suspected alteration of bids in MCD

Apparent post tender alterations of M/s Sweka Power Tech Engineers Pvt. Ltd. in Phase-I

Ttem No ) fter Increase in
correction correction _ quoted amount

1. SITC[1] of 12m PU poles | 60 | 32,149 42,149 6,00,000,

2. SITC of 12m galvanised 1813 28,358 38,358 o*

poles

3. SITC of 10m poles 910 23,974 28,974 45,50,000

21. Supplying & Laying 115000 215 315 1,15,00,000

(DWC) HDPE pipe (90mm

dia

22 (a),S &L XLPE, Alu 165000 185 285 1,65,00,000

armoured cable

1 % discount on ee 31,22,229

31,22,22,858

* The amended rate of 38358 was not accepted hy MCD, as there was difference in the figure in digits and in
words

Annexure 5.4 - Apparent post tender alterations of M/s Sweka Power Tech Engineers Pvt.
Ltd. In Phase-IT
Ttem No. | Quantity] Rate Rateafter Difference Remarks
particulars before _correctio in
correction n Amount

22, Supplying & | 212382 1,27,42,920 | All three corrections are on one

Laying HDPE page of SoQ. Certificate at the
pipe bottom of page  reads-“no

cutting and one overwriting
23(a), XLPE 246525 | 141 141 | | attested” whereas correction at
conductor 4cX item no 23(a) only is attested
25 Sq.mm but not encircled by the tender

opening officer. Other two

i aed & | 20680 os 1638 | 2,06,80,000 corrections at item no 22 and 24
by trenchless are neither encircled nor
technique attested.

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 203


07

soanxouuy

paload ayy fo 7807 77.10 [010] puv syuauodwos fo 1807 jav4IUOD Fuimoys JuawmaIy]y 7] 9 ainxauuy
8 JojdeyD 0} soxouuy

O87 000 O1ozRo/6z ‘| RTP O10Z/90/91 एप्प [ele SIA. १337 00०४ Bunyay opesey [TL
aac | व IYANLUUOD
71 ur sKeagns Surstxo pur AU UT ध्रणणशु४०४३
01६ 606 000 Lloz/roitz__| 80%६ OLoz/Po/ez कव SUPT एव्ऋपण SA | Jo Fuworssnuwoa ay एप ‘uoneyeysut ‘Ajddng | 01
Bae] IPAMNLUUOD JO juaadojadapar
कृत कर epuy JO} SYIO.M [एजज29भ9१ Fuipnyour ysory,
6६5 ध्ध्धा BY 01050/0_ [0०70६ OLOZ/EO/TT SroouyAUG] WOOUITH STA हरभाण jo SyLom FuyystUy क yeantonays 101: 6
pry wd Doe] q TATED Jo WoWdO|SAapar
00°00 000 000 OLOZ/SO/LI 1६0 OLOZ/Zo/SZ_| भुण्गप०० ०ग०्भूप 719¥ SAL 20} dD JO YO DU! 807०४ Huy apeseg |g
PIT ‘do Jo appa
18%] wip o1ozoliz | ESSE OLOZ/LO/ZZ | WA PPUTSHENTTT DIS | Jamo pur sauuy soy ७७०७ waudojanag easy | L
का त्क्ताहज्क्क्तत WI) भठ IanO UF छत काए TuNsIxa PuE Mau
श्घ्दा 80टट Lozeo/ro _| $095 6007/11/50 TTT VU STA | 20) Som jromnoaja के Furysyy Jeansonys wary | 9
2aujq WANTUUOD
JO गजा० गागाएए UF ZOpLLIOD AdTAIaS JOY SOM
TTORTOT TOS | “ALOO ण्णाग्थक aay Funysy any ‘Peoutoaya
soz Tozso/eo [0८9६८ _| 600Z/TI/Po | एफडणाएगड़ TOV STA Buypnjsuy 59100 Funystuy के Teyonuys PAD | ५
“pry seqquy
SEY SA) coaTSUO;D
66L 6759 0105/500<_[0टटा 6002//0/9८ | __ पड VN 7णएणगए०: d240 WH'D गाण्णण fo uoneroysry | _ #
wot 65 od asa SOOT/LO/EL | RUNAAUTTWG WOSUTH STA “CA pear jo uonerosay | ६
TaeNwO.
rr ol ५5699 olozro/so | 49'S 1 600Z/b0/90 3००१ गुजर 1०00० ApLaTY so UONEIOISAY | ८
8007-80-01
uo arajduroo
porojdutos Ajjengoe 410.4, ८002-80-1६ PoP d/AA/Eb ELON
छा OM. 3007-20-87_| 661 Loozso/ie |__ TonenASTOD NEG STW YOO} 0 २०णणुव॒ 1पृज्नाएण्प० Jo एणाष्ठण5ण्तु |_1
509
TL0z एग्ज्फ्ण्थयण
asniiny wy | aanypuadsa |. pyqzAsenuep | एग्रागवश०) soy | जाए।.. |. aapao ys0an “ON
aanypuadxg | jo aSvquaczeg | pm aamyypuadxy [ported payemdys] उ>ष्यए०७ joayeq हा] धाणाजू-ण्त 41s
(0.10.19 UT 2)



५0८

[ps96r wor 0्०्छा SEPP TOL
[Zrs1 rar गाए 800659077 एप SIN 0} SoBreya Xaueynsuoa yo qwauked [FI
Panury
os tele wo olozouse | es't O10z/L0/97 इजजजएण EO SW | “dd. 40 wawdojanapoa soy sysom २हएपहा& puoy | EL
उठण॒त WSNEUUO. 10 ए०छवंग॒र pau
650 18:69 810 0105/60/1_[ ८800 0105//0//८ | PI a Paid ON Joy प्रणाम dug 7 som anynWOH | ZL

गाव]

sainxauuy


saunxouuy

OLE 0घ्ट्ट ELI (0०८ Elz [0061 (0092 5010001| SMa 1४
Sse (POL (6६८1 ५052८ [Pele (009 (6५01 प्पा107४४ २०४४४००)|_ ६
06६६ 89069155ए
LET aa (6६८1 iS OST (Pele (00८ 6५01 प्पाण २४४०) (4
[70% (८६9 8धिटक्क ८8& 1400८ (६६४1८ 00५9 (0967 LA) wound I
20/01
01 LO/P
woly
OLOZ/T | seorpur
षणाणाण | 9909 3502. jasvarouy|1oy xopul| ०्यूयव yo | ध्यध्य 2907 | ध्यष्न
27०7 dag | -aayyiq, [एगष्फगा] #णग्० sag| ag [asesoay Usd dMdd| TIA गण] शार1०( [०९४ ‘TS|

STVINALVW NOILIAULSNOD AO LSOD (मात ONIMOHS LNAWNALVLS

78 aanxauup



02८

150 se 6961 Tubs] wad 01) उकफ़फ़छ ioquica कछज॒ op 7 8
pormnbos amp ० ०००४ ०११००
एपाण #ैण(एु pue Surpiaosg|

szoLe ezer ॥#६00.._ 190 pero ive ISZ81 uibs| 7 क्र ८
puv o8eueo जैपफाएण्य्‌ "10081

ares 5९६) sHuIppela ‘ss9std
"510०1 ul 8१०४ भष्ण्पह apeys|
parouddr जए/ए pur Fuprrosd
lopeize wbs| (LVA pur) कफ 9
Bees Surpnjout '0टटट _ थण|
aiseq) sBurppejo '81981 510००]||
प्राधपृशु8 थाप्रष्य8 15७१ pus aprys|
panroudde Burkey pur Furprrosg
SL8LP1 Paeeez ceo eo I evr ara wns) @oorox wbsziEL छक हर
जउताषप््चा #ट:1 शग1०१०० 1090797|
WL 00] #ण/ए| pur Furprrorg

L6vlorl ISSSE96 OSES 177६000 190 7710 is"

चले

589 (४८178 92900 ra Sc" Vee 9811 wna] FOAL जग्ाव हणुएणु एक FUpLAdsy| ve v

(८6999 rzsol cro evo I Tres sosz wand apemoe| et | €
W pamyoeynuewt a}ax9u09 paxtuu
Apvar Sudvy pue Suipivoug|

छल. कद ceo ceo I Evy lesel wan big 7% |
1 20d Furdey pur Furpraoig

5८1 176 6८9५8 (६10 (६10 i stb Leos camo
1. Q0d Furey pue Supraoig
PINCTNE TS)
LIN/ZE9 2 WAT
® (LIN) uoyduunsuoa| yua1914j0-09 -09 04 रत 0०४३० [oy
1502 BAX] एगष्णाष्ज़ aANIIA |ण्गगा०3 | aepOW | auasrajay | AUENd | UA yong ण्‌ wary ‘ou want | ‘Ig

4802 (ILVAILSA NI SALVE TWIMILVW CILVIANI OL AAG LSOD VALXA ONIMOHS LNANFALVLS
६8 aanxauup

somnxouny


807

LOL

(0901

बाग

(aus गववग्ठ
गापएणा्र yay wo .)] pur शए|

woo 01) odeys एप४ soqures opera]
pasmbas ayy ० ०7०५ २११००
एणाए Sunde] pur Surpraoag|

oD

Li

jO9SZOL

[688८

80PS1°0

LOL

[0

8६

“us|

(1vAl

pue ofeyzeo Surpnyout -/998 12
ayes >5एप) SHuIppeyd ‘s4asiy|
10०1 UI Squ[s शपथ opEys|
posoudde 2uiAy] pur Supraosg|

sy

JOILLSZ1

980967 1 S6F

80PS1°O

LOL

[0

9कधट६

“wbs|

(VA Pee]
afeyes Suipnyour पटटट , ove
a1seq) sfuippeyo “s1osia ‘S300])

uIsqe]s ayrueaz 18९९ pues apeys|
poaoadde Surkey pue Supraog|

vy

SI

11५५1[

PSE STE

Saal

Saau

THT LEL

wana]

(ए 001 0x wibsZ 1 €)XINAUL|
] ajerott09 yuauted|
एण 00] BuIAR] pur FurprAosg|

er

vl

ध्श्टाा

992८ LE

(५/920

(८01

४८0

11६1६99 811

Tun9|

som WoUG SuIAe] pur Furpraosg|

ve

el

\CroLle

STI POOL

Naat)

scr.

Tpe's|sosz

win9|

oped og -|
WW pammarynuew aasquo paxity
Apras Runkey pur Furpraoag|

eT

rai

JOPLELT

1980 209

Svall

Saal

CTHESEL

wana]

card
1. 90¢ 8u1Aey pur Surpraoag|

tT

af

६0४8

Jo LOET

(80

(0

81%/६0५

uma]

37H]
1 33व Furey pur Ruyprorg

7

OL

uINd/S Sez
(0) 1507 ४.1

(uansyaondumsto9|
pareunsay

TOOTS]
०३ oanaayjal

qwaIsIyOD

aNVS|

8S9OPTE

(४) TV.LOL

(6६862

६6६1८ Ly

(६८25000

[६0

(६100

PVE TE 6s68

“wbs|

1०००3 G2] wu 0६ ग्पगएं
pus paqqns yo aves Hues जगपा|
wut 9g Surxy pur Burpraoid

or

(eu0}s 919909]
थाप्रष्ठह YSty Wo 01 pue eip|

somnxouuy



607

क्र्प्व्य्प्ड (G+0+8+V) TV.LOL GNVUD|
|
|
6IPS VLp9b1 sec por San) rst cr (viol) re | +z
yiom yang Burdey pur Zurpraosd|
पृ०४ण (tins)uondumsuos| quatoyga] 1एशगगु०)| syonig| €7
16020 pareunsy}-o2 ०प भाप
1807 एल
(02900: (3) 19101
\cecbst 89059 680 680 T evr Tee uma (ar oor Ox wbsziEXINTUL] छा दिए

#:ट:1 ayarquoa juawad|
un 00] Rude] pur Aurpragig
Zeoros —stezIz 80 sso T res sosz um] apumoe-] छट | Iz
W paimjorynurus aazqu0 paxiy

[एज Sunde] pur Burpraoig

ssesez LT bOTT 680 680 T ६ ट्क leser पा rd व्व कि
20d 2ण6ण pur Surpraoiy

Irspzo01 छिटशक 680 680 rT Ty (६६0५ प्णाः 8:क Tt 6
:1. Ode #ैण5ण pur हपाए-णत
छः एह्द एाजुप्ग्तग्कब्प्ग्ग गर्ग ०ग्छ्ण्ठ SALVDAUDDV ASUVOD
5) poreumsg]|-oo aanoarya
309 BX]
TOOLLPE (a) पर 01|
|esszs 1zp9e'z9 1 68100. ० 100. [घ्टटा 1 ६6568 “utbs| 1०0०७ GL uM QZ aus! हक | ST

pues 0२११० 100 aves Huet जगपा।
wut 05 Burxy pur Burpraosg|

sounxouuy



ole

[ez9161z Sosree “uibs 01 Jed ys05}
1६99६ [029कछ PHaysaro pur वप्ुणव sIOIENUOD % ST PPV|

ry sieve es el loz
9788८ 5961ए1० 19०७ % 1 PPV|

LS'Sc8sz
evi 51961 ५६0८८. [ert घ1561 Surysyjod aspa pur Surpnoy|
eri SYsz 18 1816. EIT SIST IB soupung
ZAI eq SUIT [cat Avago शा००3]
ZiT Reale SUIT [ect ता) reprg|
loz Avae 080६ lolz Acar [rusty]
॥ जऊव्कण्न
losr Isp SONIOL lost sp ४०४०1 [Pais ४४०|०१३४|
| पप्रगहाप्णणठ इज Jo peasul
9्फ़ [0009 LAITO'0 sb 0009 जाी00 quourad aya BuIsh|
६01 ६11] गण 160 ६01 ert ०ण 60 गा]
|eore 09 जञाछ 0 61६09 जञछ 0 आणुण[ 10 615 uy pasy
1छण्ाठ5 Jo Fy OSM 7 ६ छा फण्कात|
Toe [err STI69Z Troe IT STL697 YURI $0 aRELLE
cid [0969 TA|s0°0 Sid 0967 ग्प५00 “wbs/ay pp को Kunjs yours)
76010. [150८६ undirez70 ४०४०८ [1506६ anlp7z'0 ७६ - SOKO
I f: | FELOU JUAWUAD अगप] WILE 0८|
0 0 SI 9५६8 SI % ८ - ग1971 एएए % ८ - ०७४४]
I “WS OS TT
WS OST = HSI हसन
tubs 00.01 — भराण्णछ'
| LVA % ५ टा > UPS/OST
loozoz —_foost wbs|s"11 68880: कि 9181 9 जा। अजप्र एएए 81 -आएणए]
कण
उक्तव्णए | Taney a Awuend | unouy [Taney in meal

woHENses JIpny tod sy

अछ्णपछ ताज aod sy

TTTTON Way] 407 गुब्पष्ण्ए अष्च|

sonxouny

P'8 aanxauup


Lz

JIPND Aq Pa4APISU0I ION ५

O8EST9E

091'6S9

wubs 00५5५ X 916५9 = 1809 RANG

IL67- EL OL9E= Bes Ur JoUdIAAICL

1८6८ yipne aad se ity ६६0६६ गण गएएप़न RUT AVION
(05681 किटाट४ट 0६78 poppe asequooiod [x0 ]|
| lor JuouaTeue जएब्ण PPV

[ot XP] JATIN SYIO AA : PPY|
॥ isa XEy DdTAIOg ppv
| vol 55 MOE]: PPV|
(916८2 [608४४६६ "प्र 197 5०5]

sounxouuy


SL. No. Place
1 DCP office complex at
Pushpanjali Enclave,

Residence in Central distt.

DCP office complex
Darya Ganj

2 Area of South District

3 Vikas Puri premises of
Police Station

4 P.S. Premises, Ring road,

ISBT Sarai Kale Khan,
H.N.din Bridge,
Millennium Park Bus
depot

5 Inside PHQ buildings in

and around D-1/119 Satya
Marg and in moving car ,

Niti Marg, Akbar road
6 MHA North block near
gate no. 7, Firoz Shah
road, W point ITO, A-
point ITO, PHQ ground
floor, PT street hotel
Shangrila ( Ashok road)

7 No. 11 Murti Marg,
Mother Teresa Crescent,
R. K. Ashram marg,

Sikandra road, Firoz Shah

road, Talkatora road and

onward PHQ office

8 Jai Singh road, Vasant
Kunj,

9 Bhopal Ground,

R.K Puram, Dwarka

10 Food court, MPC and.
various halls, IBC

11 Parliament street Andrews

Ganj, Rohtak road Sakur

Reporting Dates

Non-venues
3-10-2010 and
4-10-2010

4-10-2010,7-10-
2010, 8-10-2010

4-10-2010

4-10-2010, 7-10-
2010

27-09-2010 to
04-10-2010

4-10-2010, 6-10-
2010, 8-10-2010

30-09-2010

03-10-2010 to
11-10-2010
04-10-2010, 7-
10-2010 to 9-10-
2010
05-10-2010 t0
11-10-2010
06-10-2010 t0
07-10-2010

Comments about
performance

Round the clock signal
problems, inadequate signal
network

Unclear signal in buildings
premises and also call
dropping while travelling

No communication from the
premises of PS Vikas Puri

No communication,
intermittent

No network coverage,
transmission not completed.

No communication PC call
unable, dead zone

No signal, signal cut

Signal leaves regularly, no
signals in various times
No signal, intermittent

Service denied

No service



SL. No.

14
15

Venues
1.

wl

bal

10.

12
13

14.

Place

basti, Motilal Nehru
Marg, Ashok Vihar,
Akbar road.

Airport Delhi in Terminal
नया

Todar Mal road, JLN
Marg near Delhi Gate,
DCP’ Central office
complex, Outer Circle
Connaught Place, Police
station Pahar Ganj East
Inside Airport

‘Vasant Kunj, Mandir
Marg Kalibari Road

Ash Pond

K.S.S.R

Yamuna Sports Complex
Jawahar Lal Nehru Sports
Complex

Siri Fort Sports Complex
M_D.C National Stadium
Siri Fort Sports Complex

Logistic screening centre

M.D.C National Stadium

Jawahar Lal Nehru Sports
Complex
Yamuna Sports Complex

Bhopal Ground J.M.I
Talkatora Indoor Stadium

1.0. Sports Complex

Jawahar Lal Nehru Sports
Complex

Reporting Dates

03-10-2010

03-10-2010

03-10-2010
08-10-2010
10.10.2010
11.10.2010
11.10.2010
11.10.2010
11.10.2010

11.10.2010
13.10.2010

13.10.2010
14.10.2010
3.10.2010

7.10.2010

09.10.2010

09.10.2010
08.10.2010

08.10.2010

09.10.2010

Comments about
performance

No connectivity

Weak signals, no
communication, red light
blinking, no communication

message on the screen “PTT
denied”

Discharging of batteries
Poor signals

No service, no signal, network
busy

Signal poor

No communication

No transmission

No signal
Signal cutting, no clarity
Connectivity poor and

unreliable, not available after
some time, call dropping is
very frequently, voice does

not carry

Service not available, no
communication

No communication, no
service, PTT denied, signal
cutting

Tntermittent, no transmission,
high fluctuation in

transmission, signal breaking,
weak signal

No signal, intermittent, no
communication, no response
Receiving signal very weak
Signal remained very poor for
a very long time, signal nil.

Intermittent, no
communication
Persistent problem of

fluctuating transmission, No



Annexures

Signals not clear, voice in the
set is not clear, poor
connectivity, poor audio
quality, communication एल
delink, poor network

Voice is shaking, voice not
clear, transmission of signals
is not proper and creates echo
on communication, signals are
weak and voice clarity is not
upto the mark, poor network,
poor sound.

214 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)


Annexures

Annexes to Chapter 10
Annexure 10.1 Available rates for 34 major medical equipments

ja No. | Cancelled = NIT-2 Actual Rates on
Equipment NIT-1 R which items procured
(DHS) __(DHS)
| 1. | Patient Stools 1522 1260 DHS-RC
* | Examination 50 19897 | 12070 | 12070 | DHS-RC 18900-LNJP
couch with
mattress
3. | Three Fold 350 3096 2762 2762 | DHS-RC
Partition

screen
| 4. _| Trolley Bed 166688 | 288749 | ----[-—- |
[© | Foldable 55 12600 | 103320 | 103320 | DHS-RC | 18900-LNJP

wheel chair
|] Shifting | | 46725 | 75600 | =|
Trolley
7. | Scoop 135 62475 | 86100 | 13650 | RC-GTBH | 13650-LNJP
Stretcher
| 8._| Spine Board 130 15750 6300 6300 | DHS-RC 20475-LNJP
| Head 130 9975 6825 6825 | DHS-RC 6825-LNJP
Immobiliser
10. | Physiotherapy | | 146842 | 430500 | 430500 | DHS-RC 157500-LNJP
Table
11. | Superior 220 21525 | 57749 | 38535 | Open
Massage market by
Table with quotation
Mattress with approval
pillow
12. | Ultrasound || 146843 | 367499 | 94500 | Pt 50925-LNJP.
Therapy (1& MMMH-
3MHz) RC
13. | IRR Lamp | -| 141750 | 488250 | ---- |---| 68250-LNJP
14. | Shortwave i 502950 | 518700 | 446250 | Pt
Diathermy MMMH-
RC
15. | Physiotherapy | ४] 258930 | 409500 | 409500 | DHS-RC 194250-LNJP_
Laser
16. | TENS-IFT | | 262395 | 414749 | 273673 | Safdarjung
Combo Hosp.-RC
17. | X-ray View 17 20790 | 35700 | 11393 | GTBH-RC
Box
18. | Golf Cart | | 470924 | 518699 | | | |
Suretcher
19. | Automatic 93 509250 | 519751 | 203742 | DMSCH 140175-
External GGSH/Hedgewar
Defibrillator
‘AED)15

Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi) | 215


12> |

Name of

Equipment

Pulse
Oxymeter

64

119700

151200

Actual

] Rates on

which items procured

151200

DHS-RC

Annexures

Other rates
available

21525-LNJP

|

Cardiac Arrest
resuscitation
drug and
equipment
trolley crash
cart

03

19792

27100

27100

DHS-RC

81900-DMSCH

| |

Examination
Light

30907

47249

45255

As per
stock

23.

Ophthalmo-
otoscope

25725

50400

a

B-type
Oxygen
Cylinder with
flowmeter

110250

6405

6405

DHS-RC

25.

Suction
Machine
Electrical
Operated

05

5932

5932

5932

हु

Suction
Machine Foot
Operated
Manual

45

2887

6090

DHS-RC

27.

Ambu Bag
(Bag Value
Mask) Adult

|

2048

5145

5145

DHS-RC

रा

‘Ambu Bag
(Bag Value
Mask)
Paediatric

"|

5145

5145

DHS-RC

| 29. |

LV. Stand

110

1670

1523

1523

DHS-RC

30.

B.P.
Apparatus

200

3728

6825

2625

GTBH-RC

3860-LNJP

31.

Clinical
Thermometer

120

73

val

7

DHS-RC

32.

Military Anti-
shock
Trousers
(MAST)

04

37800

35070

35070

DHS-RC

33.

Transport
Ventilators

12

372750

516729

485100

ILBS-RC

34.

Nebulizer

62

8379

8206

8206

DHS-RC

RMLH: Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital; 11817: Lok Nanak JayaPrakash Narayan Hospital; DHS: Directorate of
Health Services; MMMH: Pt. Madan Mohan Malviya Hospital; GTBH: Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital; DMSCH:
Dadadev Maitri Sishu Chikitsalaya; GGSH: Guru Gobind Singh Govt. Hospital

216 | Performance Audit Report on XIX Commonwealth Games 2010 (GNCT Delhi)



LIT

Treysties
vhtiony 016 zp
SOSes6 495६9 3९000०एग | ५८101 6८८ 0६1950६ [6४६0८ SI aav हि
0ावाकाए
S766 50 का -op- | 009 “906 szeerl siroc [०0 preog aurds L
ADO,
ores छाए पृश्छ3
OOEIZL 05909 -op- | oole _| ४८५ 0055/1 05८८8 | 20 Anuaiisaury 9
ssoueU
0६89 oriry? ua yovo,) Tendsoy
099€1 SHA | 0LOZI “906 008/६ 00681 0 uopeuruexs| ६ | MeAtn 407
(SDOVe're
“S99
(घटो0'08
“SLL
(0) 01.01
0८८७9)
01016 (&1+६ट+/+ ५४9)
OEOTZLS ८95६9 SHDD | ६फा | 4६9 08/9६६81 | #८६0८ | 06 aay 1
Oreorw sel
05159 oszsiz -op- | oszbol | ‘seo 0058टटा [00560 [६ Advsoyyoskyd हे
analy आए] Adesoy,
SLITOE suser -op- | 5260६ | 658 005058 00986 [6 punosenin x4
011 टाए
“658
0160147 aD, WIX()
0076678 SLO6TL dIN1 | szsiz__| ५६9 0089296 | 00ट2151 | z1+zs asind 8 sHa

aangipuadxa SOXE||
atqeproaw (.) reydsoy गहन area 2aysnpouy —-saxvy, sway (एमी

waxy ayes UY OU aiquneae — pue on Pleq ——«Patsnpouy paseysand —uatdnba jo Suyseyoand
jojunouy >>, भू] Jo गाए 3४०७० गा! AA junowy ay Ayguend Jo amen ‘ON IS ३० गाए

Quy गए say s1y Aypousougn uo juaudinba fo sasvysand fo spmjaq TOL aanxauup soinxouwry


BIT

उप 69" | ABS

oosoer
2anyipusdxa

a[qupjoae
ड्यर्तु
jo junowy

samxouuy

OSTSIT

(जे

ayel पा
३2०ए्रज्वगूव

ष्णुकण्म
ou
Jo aWEN

ayer
aiqetear
S9MOT

aq
pur ‘on
md DAA

छत,

जक्षुक्राज्णु
pred

junoury

paseyaand
Aynuend,

juoudmba
Jo WEN

+६190६691 rio.
(dav)
urysurs, उणणाण्पाग्त
ए४8०7ए olive; jeworxy |
896८ 495६9 semafipay | ५1७01 ‘S797 89618 | 7८६0८ [10 जाष्णगाज | “OT reydson
OrirsP लक आएप्प्र्प्त
d(N7 | 052761__ | /092 000618 | 00560# #0ण०प्रण४४पत 891, nmp

sua}
jo
“ON 15

Aauase
Suiseyoand
jo amen


© Comptroller and Auditor General of India
2011-12

WWww.cag.gov.in
www.agaudelhi.cag.gov.in