 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag2/kerala 
 
  
 
REPORT OF THE 
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
on 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR 
 
 
for the year ended March 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 4 of the year 2021 
 

 
 
 

Table of contents 
 
(i) 
CONTENTS  
 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph  Page 
PREFACE  (iii) 
OVERVIEW  (v) 
CHAPTER – I   
INTRODUCTION 
Introduction  1.1  1 
Trend of Expenditure  1.2  1 
Authority for Audit  1.3  2 
About this Report  1.4  2 
Planning and conduct of Audit  1.5  3 
Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit  1.6  3 
CHAPTER – II   
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
Functioning of the Kerala Agricultural University  2 5 
CHAPTER – III   
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Fraudulent payment to contractors through submissio n of 
original and duplicate copies of invoices in suppor t of 
purchase of bitumen for different works   
3.1 41 
Inadmissible payment made for sinking reinforced ce ment 
concrete circular wells for foundations of three bridges  3.2 44 
Undue benefit to the contractors due to non-recover y of  
differe ntial cost  of depart mental bitu men fr om  them 3.3 46 
Unfruitful expenditure of ₹18.34 crore on payment o f 
salary to the staff attached to  Road Rollers  3.4 48 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
 
(ii) 
APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 
No. Description Page 
1.1 Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Report s (IRs) 
as on 30 June 2019  51 
2.1 Composition of the General Council 53 
2.2 Composition of the Executive Committee 55 
2.3 Composition of the Academic Council 56 
2.4 Posts of Teaching Staff not having Statutes 57 
2.5 Programmes/Colleges not granted Accreditation by NA EAB 
in September 2020  58 
2.6 
Details of laboratory equipment as per the Fifth De ans’ 
Committee and in actual possession of College of 
Agriculture, Ambalavayal  
60 
3.1 Instances of duplicate invoices submitted for different works 64 
3.2 Details of the additional payments made to the contractors on 
account of the inadmissible items  65 
3.3 Details of works involving short recovery of cost of bitumen 67 
3.4 The works in which cost of bitumen was neither reim bursed 
nor recovered  68 
3.5 The works in which cost of bitumen was recovered / 
reimbursed partially  70 
3.6 Salary paid to the crew of 86 idling road rollers 72 
 
 Glossary of Abbreviations  73 
 
 

(iii) 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2019 is prepared for submission to the 
Governor of Kerala under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and compliance  
audits of the Departments of Government of Kerala under the Economic Services 
including Departments of Agriculture and Public Works.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are those  which came to notice in the course 
of test audit of records during the year 2018- 19 as well as those which came to notice 
in earlier years but could not be reported in previous Audit Reports. Instances relating 
to the period subsequent to 2018-19 are also included wherever necessary. 
The Audit is conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Overview  
  

 

   Overview 
 
 
(v) 
OVERVIEW  
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR  
 
This report contains one Performance Audit Report a nd four Compliance Audit 
Paragraphs. The significant audit observations are discussed below: 
 
Performance Audit  
 
Functioning of Kerala Agricultural University 
 
A performance audit was conducted to assess the ext ent to which the Kerala 
Agricultural University (the University) had achiev ed its organisational goals and 
objectives in the areas of academic, research and e xtension education activities with 
reference to the existing Act and Regulations, and also the adequacy of its financial 
management and internal controls in ensuring econom y, efficiency and effectiveness 
in the functioning of the University. 
 
The governance framework of the University was weakened by non-framing/ updation 
of its Statutes, Ordinances & Regulations and non-p ublication of the same in the 
Gazette as mandated under the Kerala Agricultural U niversity (KAU) Act, 1971. 
Further, the University did not appoint ‘Officers o f the University’ in the prescribed 
manner.  Teaching staff were nominated to these pos ts with full additional charge. 
These arrangements contributed significantly to the University’s non-compliance with 
various University Grants Commission (UGC) regulations governing it and applicable 
guidelines of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). Also, it contributed 
to its under-performance in terms of quantity and quality of research papers published 
in the scientific journals. 
 
The information furnished by the University to the National Agricultural Education 
Accreditation Board (NAEAB), the accreditation agency for Agricultural Universities 
during the accreditation process had factual inaccu racies. The University did not 
comply with the relevant UGC regulations regarding the award of Ph.D. degrees and 
recruitment of both regular and contract teaching s taffs. As a result, the Government 
norms for granting advance increment were not satis fied and the granting of the same 
to the faculty members who were awarded such degrees was irregular. It established a 
new College of Agriculture in Ambalavayal, Wayanad without the minimum 
requirements prescribed by ICAR. The University’s i ntegrated Master’s Degree 
Programme in Climate Change Adaptation instituted i n 2010 was being run without 
any permanent faculty since the inception of the pr ogramme as it had not framed 
statutes for recruiting them. 
 
The research product of the University in terms of number and quality of research 
papers published in scientific journals by its facu lty, were below benchmark. Over a 
third of its faculty members had not authored or co-authored any research papers during 
the period 2014 to 2018. The popularisation of new varieties of crop developed by the 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2019 
 
(vi) 
University was adversely affected due to non-initiation of meas ures to get these 
varieties notified under the Seeds Act, 1966. The University had not taken measures to 
protect new varieties of crops  developed by it under the Protec tion of Plant Varieties 
and Farmers’ Rights Act, 2001. New technologies developed were transferred without 
applying for patent. The University did not have a system to de termine potential 
infringements to Geographical Indication owned by it. 
 
The accounting software used by the University was not certified by an external agency 
for its reliability and controls.  This can lead to malpractice s and frauds through 
manipulation of figures. More than fifty per cent of the stations under the University 
were not covered by its internal audit. The University had not initiated action on the 
recommendations of the Committee on Public Accounts (PAC). 
 
(Chapter 2) 
 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
 Non-exercise of caution and chec ks by departmental officials en abled 
contractors to defraud the Public Works Department of ₹30.65 lakh by 
submitting multiple copies of the same invoices in support of p urchase of 
bitumen for different works. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
 
 Revision of estimates by the Public Works Department in favour of the 
contractors resulted in inadmissible payment of ₹1.99 crore in three bridge 
works. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
  
 Failure of the Public Works Department to recover the different ial cost of 
departmental bitumen from contractors consequent on the decreas e in the 
market price of bitumen result ed in undue benefit of ₹4.36 cror e to the 
contractors.  
(Paragraph 3.3) 
 
 The Public Works Department incurred an unfruitful expenditure of ₹18.34 
crore during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 towards the salary of staff attached 
to 86 road rollers idling in eight PWD divisions 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
1 
CHAPTER  I  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Introduction 
 
Kerala is located at the southern end of India, wit h a population of 3.63 crore and a 
geographical areas of 38,863 sq. km. For the purpos es of administration, there are 42 
departments headed by Additional Chief Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, 
who are assisted by Directors/Commissioners/Chief E ngineers and subordinate officers 
under them. 
 
Government functioning is broadly classified as Gen eral Services, Social Services and 
Economic Services. This Report covers the functioni ng of eight Departments of 
Economic Sector listed in Table 1.1 .  
 
Of the eight Departments, with a total expenditure of ₹12,990.05 crore in 2018-19 
covered here, a major portion of the expenditure wa s incurred by  Public Works 
Department (39.66 per cent ), followed by Agriculture Development and Farmers’  
Welfare Department (31.51 per cent ) and Food, Civil Supplies & Consumer Affairs 
Department (11.49 per cent ) during 2018-19.  
 
1.2 Trend of Expenditure 
 
The expenditure incurred by the departments under Economic Sector during the last five 
years is given in Table 1.1. 
 
Table 1.1 Expenditure Incurred in Economic Sector Departments 
(₹ in crore) 
 
Sl 
No Name of the department 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
1 Agriculture Development & 
Farmers’ Welfare Department  
2,762.94 3,272.38 4,060.87 4,061.54 4,092.71 
2 Public Works Department  3,786.53  5,588.51  5,331.26  5,855.39  5,151.80  
3 Co -operation Department  451.73  349.87  509.31  504.07  813.84  
4 Environment & Climate 
Change  * 
NA NA NA NA NA 
5 Fisheries & Ports  Department  518.24  876.12  857.77  971.44  841.49  
6 Food, Civil Supplies & 
Consumer Affairs  
1,157.16 1,262.20 1,672.33 1,557.24 1,492.45 
7 Forest & Wildlife  489.76  502.25  637.56  614.06  597.76  
8 Science & Technology *  NA  NA  NA  NA  NA  
 Total 9,166.36 11,851.33 13,069.10 13,563.74 12,990.05 
Source: Appropriation Accounts for the years 2014-1 5 to 2018-19 
 
* These are Secretariat level Departments for which  there are no separate Grant heads in the Budget.  The 
funds for autonomous bodies/institutions under them  are allocated under various other Grant Heads and 
hence their expenditure also are subsumed in those heads of accounts. 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
2 
Reasons for increase in expenditure in respect of C o-operation Department was mainly 
due to assistance to Co-operatives (₹1,445.43 lakh) , expenses towards ‘Direction and 
Administration’ (₹114.89 lakh) and decrease in reco very of overpayments (₹8,121.43 
lakh) 
 
1.2.1 Some major schemes implemented by the Departm ents of the Economic 
Sector during 2018-19 
 
(i)  The Ports Department incurred an expenditure of ₹100.69 crore on development 
of Vizhinjam Deep Water International Transhipment Terminal and ₹26.79 
crore towards Port Infrastructure Development for S hipping Operation – 
Development of Beypore and Kozhikode Ports. 
 
(ii)  The Agriculture Development & Farmers’ Welfare Depa rtment incurred an 
expenditure of ₹81.97 crore towards group farming f or augmenting rice 
production. 
 
(iii)  Dairy Development Department incurred an expenditur e of ₹43.45 crore 
towards Commercial Dairy Milk and Milk Shed Development Programme. 
 
(iv)  Forest Department incurred an expenditure of ₹25.96  crore for Forest 
Protection. 
 
1.3 Authority for Audit 
 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India’s (C&A G) authority for audit is derived 
from Articles 149 and 151 of the Constitution of In dia and the Comptroller and Auditor 
General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service ) Act, 1971[C&AG’s (DPC) Act)]. 
C&AG conducts the audit of expenditure of the departments of the Government of Kerala 
under Section 13 
1 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. Besides, C&AG also conduc ts audit of 23 
Autonomous Bodies in the Economic Sector under Sect ion 14 2 & 15 of C&AG's (DPC) 
Act, which are substantially funded by the Governme nt. Principles and methodologies 
for various audits are prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on Audit 
and Accounts, 2007 (as amended up to 2013) issued by the C&AG. 
 
1.4 About this Report 
 
The primary purpose of this Report is to bring to t he notice of the State Legislature, the 
important results of audit. The findings of Audit a re expected to enable the Executive to 
 
1 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolidate d Fund of the State (ii) all transactions relating to the 
Contingency Fund and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss accounts, 
balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts. 
2 Audit of all (i) receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants or loans from 
the Consolidated Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any body or authority where the 
grants or loans to such body or authority from the Consolidated Fund of the State in a financial year is not 
less than rupees one crore. 

Chapter  I - Introduction 
 
3 
take corrective actions and to frame policies and d irectives that would lead to improved 
financial management of the organisations, thus contributing to better governance. 
 
This Report of the C&AG relates to matters arising from Performance Audit and 
Compliance Audit of selected activities of Departme nts coming under the Economic 
Sector. Compliance Audit covers examination of the transactions relating to expenditure 
of the audited entities to ascertain whether the pr ovisions of the Constitution of India, 
applicable laws, rules, regulations and various ord ers and instructions issued by the 
competent authorities are being complied with.  Per formance Audit examines whether 
the objectives of the programme/activity/Department /entity are achieved economically, 
efficiently and effectively. 
 
1.5 Planning and conduct of Audit 
 
The audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of the 
Government based on the expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level 
of delegated financial powers, assessment of overal l internal controls and concerns of 
stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also cons idered in this exercise. Based on this 
risk assessment, the frequency and extent of audit are decided. During the year 2018-19, 
the Economic Sector Audit Wing utilised 1,156 party days to carry out audit of 137 units. 
 
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports (IRs) containing audit findings 
are issued to the heads of the offices. The departments are requested to furnish replies to 
the audit findings within four weeks from the date of receipt of the IRs. Whenever replies 
are received, audit findings are either settled or further action for compliance is advised. 
The important audit observations arising out of the se IRs are processed for inclusion in 
the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India for being presented to the State Legislature.  
 
1.6 Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 
 
1.6.1 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
 
The Handbook of Instructions for Speedy Settlement of Audit Objections/Inspection 
Reports (IRs) issued by the State Government in 201 0 provides for prompt response by 
the Executive to the IRs issued by the Principal Ac countant General (PAG) to ensure 
action for rectification in compliance with the pre scribed rules and procedures and 
accountability for the deficiencies, lapses etc., n oticed during the inspection. The Heads 
of Offices and next higher authorities are required  to comply with the observations 
contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omiss ions and promptly report their 
compliance to the PAG within four weeks of receipt of the IRs. Half-yearly reports of 
pending IRs are being sent to the Secretaries of th e Departments concerned to facilitate 
monitoring of audit observations. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
4 
As on 30 June 2019, 922 IRs containing 4,195 paragr aphs were outstanding against the 
departments under Economic Sector. Year-wise details of IRs and paragraphs outstanding 
are detailed in Appendix 1.1. 
 
A review of the IRs pending due to non-receipt of replies in respect of these departments 
revealed that the Heads of offices did not furnish even the initial replies in respect of 214 
IRs containing 1,452 paragraphs. 
 
1.6.2 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
 
No Audit Committee Meetings were held during the year 2018-19. 
 
1.6.3 Response of departments to the draft paragrap hs 
 
Four Draft Paragraphs and a Performance Audit parag raph were forwarded demi-
officially to the Additional Chief Secretaries/Prin cipal Secretaries/ Secretaries of the 
departments concerned between March 2020 and August  2020 with a request to furnish 
their responses within the time limit. The Governme nt replies in respect of Performance 
Audit and other Compliance Audit paragraphs were re ceived by November 2020. The 
replies received are suitably incorporated in this Report.  
 
1.6.4 Follow-up action on Audit Reports 
 
The Finance Department issued (January 2001) instru ctions to all administrative 
departments of the Government that they should subm it Statements of Action Taken 
Notes on audit paragraphs included in the Audit Rep orts directly to the Legislature 
Secretariat with copies thereof to the Audit Office  within two months of their being laid 
on the table of the Legislature. 
 
Four out of the eight departments did not submit St atements of Action Taken Notes for 
18 paragraphs for the periods from 2015-16 to 2017- 18, even as of November 2020. 
Action Taken Notes on audit paragraphs were due from the Departments of Public Works 
(11), Fisheries and Forests & Wildlife (two each), Ports (one) and Co-operation (three). 
 
1.6.5 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Acco unts Committee 
 
There were 24 paragraphs relating to eight Departme nts pertaining to the period from 
2012-13 to 2017-18 pending discussion by the Public  Accounts Committee as of 
November 2020. Pending audit paragraphs include thr ee from Departments of 
Co-operation and Forests & Wildlife; four from Fish eries & Ports and 14 from Public 
Works. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
5 
CHAPTER  II 
 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT  
 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT AND FARMERS’ WELFARE 
DEPARTMENT 
 
2 FUNCTIONING OF THE KERALA AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY  
 
2.1 Introduction 
 
Agriculture in Kerala is distinctly different from the rest of India in many ways. 
Kerala has unique and diverse agro-climatic conditi ons in various regions, which 
enable it to cultivate many types of crops. Predominance of non-food plantation sector, 
multi-cropping systems, homestead farming and abund ance of biodiversity are a few 
among these specific features. Agriculture in Keral a is dominated by small and 
marginal farmers. The average size of land holding is around 0.27 ha. The population 
density is very high. More and more agricultural la nds are converted due to 
population pressure. As per the land use data of 20 18-19, out of a total geographical 
area of 38.86 lakh ha, total cultivated area is 25.68 lakh ha (66 per cent ).  
 
The Kerala Agricultural University (the University)  was established in February 1971 
under an Act 1 of the State with the objective of imparting educa tion and undertaking 
research and extension activities in the field of a griculture and allied sciences. A 
model Act proposed by the Indian Council of Agricul tural Research (ICAR) in 2009 
for replacing the existing Kerala Agricultural Univ ersity Act, 1971 is under 
consideration of the Government. The stated mission  of the University is Excellence 
in Agricultural Education, Research and Extension f or Sustainable Agricultural 
Development and Livelihood security of farming comm unity. The University fulfills 
its mission through a network of institutions sprea d over the State consisting of seven 
constituent colleges, six Regional Agricultural Res earch Stations (RARS), sixteen 
research stations, one Central Training Institute, one Communication Centre and 
seven Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK). There is a netwo rk of libraries, including a 
Central Library in the main campus, constituent colleges, RARS, research stations and 
KVKs. Besides, there is an Academy of Climate Chang e Education and Research 
(ACCER) offering M.Sc. (Integrated) in Climate Chan ge Adaptation. The Act 
mandates that all institutions under its jurisdicti on shall form constituent units and 
prohibits the University from granting affiliation to any institution. The University 
offers diploma, graduate, post-graduate and doctora l programmes in almost all 
disciplines related to Agriculture, Agricultural Engineering, Forestry, Horticulture and 
allied sciences.  
 
The University is the principal instrument in the S tate in providing the skills and 
technology required for the sustainable development  of its agriculture, agricultural 
engineering, horticulture and forestry by integrati ng education, research and 
 
1 The Kerala Agricultural University Act, 1971. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
6 
extension. The University focuses its strategy on s ynergising multi-disciplinary 
education and strengthening problem-specific resear ch relevant to the State and help 
building innovative extension systems for sustainab le management of natural 
resources, sustainable agricultural production and overall improvement of rural 
livelihood. 
 
2.1.1 Organisational setup  
 
The Vice-Chancellor (VC) is the principal executive  and academic officer of the 
University. General Council, Executive Committee, A cademic Council, Faculties and 
Board of Studies are the ‘Authorities of the University’ . The VC is assisted by 
Registrar, Comptroller, Deans of the Faculties, Dir ectors of (i) Research, (ii) 
Extension, (iii) Physical Plant 2 , (iv) Students' Welfare and Librarian who are 
designated as ‘Officers of the University’  and they hold their posts for specific 
tenure. 
 
The General Council is the supreme authority of the  University and its constitution is 
as per Appendix 2.1 . Ordinarily, the Council meets once in four months . It has the 
powers to review the actions of the Executive Commi ttee and Academic Council. It is 
the authority vested with powers to make, amend or repeal Statutes.   
 
The Executive Committee is the chief executive auth ority of the University and its 
constitution is as per Appendix 2.2 . The Executive Committee shall meet, as and 
when required. It has the powers including general superintendence and control over 
the institutions of the University. It is vested wi th the powers to make ordinances and 
to amend or repeal the same. 
 
The Academic Council is the body responsible for th e maintenance of standards in 
educational programmes and examinations and its con stitution is as per Appendix 
2.3 . The Academic Council shall meet ordinarily once in a trimester. It has the powers 
to make regulations and to amend or repeal the same. 
 
  
 
2 ‘Director of Physical Plant’ who is the general cu stodian of all University properties and responsibl e for 
construction and maintenance. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
7 
The administrative structure of the University is given below: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CHANCELLOR (GOVERNOR OF KERALA)  
STUDENTS WELFARE 
COMMITTEE 
RESEARCH REVIEW 
COMMITTEE 
PLNG & DEVPT COMMITTEE 
WORKS COMMITTEE 
ESTABLISHMENT 
COMMITTEE  
FINANCE COMMITTEE  
ASSURANCE COMMITTEE 
STATUTE COMMITTEE 
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
BOARD OF STUDIES 
PRO -CHANCELLOR (Minister for Agriculture, Govt. of Kerala)  
VICE -CHANCELLOR  
ACADEMIC COUNCIL 
RESEARCH COUNCIL 
EXTENSION ADVISORY COUNCIL 
GENERAL COUNCIL 
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
DIRECTOR STUDENT  WELFARE  
DIRECTOR PHYSICAL PLANT  
DIRECTOR RESEARCH  
DIRECTOR EXTENSION  
COMPTROLLER  
DIRECTOR PLANNING  
DIRECTOR ACADEMICS & PGs  
FACULTY DEANS  
REGISTRAR  
Six RARS and 16 
Research Stations 
CENTRAL TRAINING INSTITUTE MANNUTHY  
COMMUNICATION CENTRE MANNUTHY  
KAU PRESS MANNUTHY  
AGRICULTURAL TECHNOLOGY 
INFORMATION CENTRE MANNUTHY  
SEVEN KRISHI VIGYAN KENDRAs  
AGRICULTURE 
College of Cooperation, Banking and Management, 
Vellanikkara  
College of Agriculture, Padannakkad, Kasaragod 
College of Horticulture, Vellanikkara, Thrissur 
College of Agriculture, Vellayani, Thiruvananthapuram 
College of Agriculture, Ambalavayal, Wayanad (started 
in 2018)  
FORESTRY  
College of Forestry, Vellanikkara, Thrissur 
 
AGRICULTURAL ENGINEERING 
AND TECHNOLOGY  
Kelappaji College of Agricultural Engineering & 
Technology, Tavanur, Malappuram 
 
Academy of Climate Change Education & Research, 
Vellanikkara 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
8 
2.2  Audit objectives  
 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess: 
 
 the extent to which the Kerala Agricultural Univers ity had achieved its 
organisational goals and objectives in the areas of  academic, research and 
extension education activities with reference to the existing Act and Regulations;  
 the adequacy of its financial management and intern al controls in ensuring 
economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the functioning of the University. 
 
2.3  Audit criteria 
 
Audit criteria were derived from: 
 
 The Kerala Agricultural University Act, 1971, Statu tes, Ordinances and 
Regulations framed thereunder; 
 Kerala State Agricultural Development Policy, 2015; 
 University Grants Commission (UGC) Regulations and ICAR Guidelines; 
 Kerala Financial Code and Kerala Account Code; 
 Project/scheme guidelines of various funding agencies. 
 
2.4  Audit scope and methodology 
 
The Performance Audit was conducted from July to De cember 2019 covering the 
period from 2014-15 to 2018-19. Audit examined the records at the Government 
Secretariat, the University headquarters and at selected units of the University.  
 
Audit selected all eight academic institutions, thr ee 
3 RARSs out of six and three 4 
KVKs out of seven through random sampling for detai led scrutiny. Similarly, 54 out 
of 265 research projects and 29 out of 127 extensio n projects were selected based on 
stratified random sampling method. An entry confere nce was held in July 2019 
attended by officials from the Government and the U niversity, in which the audit 
objectives, audit criteria, audit scope and methodo logy were discussed. Similarly, an 
exit conference was conducted in October 2020 to discuss the audit findings. 
 
2.5  Audit findings 
 
The audit findings as against the audit objectives are grouped under six categories 
namely; Governance, Academic activities, Research, Extension education, Financial 
Management and Internal Controls as given below. 
 
 
3 RARS at Vellayani, Kumarakom and Ambalavayal. 
4 KVK Kollam, Kottayam and Kannur. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
9 
2.5.1  Governance 
 
‘Governance’ in the University denotes the framewor k within and by which the 
University exercises powers and discharges its func tions. Governance plays an 
important role in the overall performance of the Un iversity as deficiencies in 
Governance have a cascading effect on the other fun ctions of the University. The 
Kerala Agricultural University Act, 1971 (the Act),  the Statutes and the Ordinances 
and Regulations framed under the Act provide a self -contained framework for the 
internal governance of the University. Further, the  Act has designated various 
‘authorities’ and ‘officers’ of the University to exercise powers.  
  
The meetings of the General Council and the Executi ve Committee were held as 
stipulated. The Registrar being the ex-officio secr etary to the General Council, the 
Executive Committee and the Academic Council is bou nd to place before each such 
authority all such information (UGC Regulations, IC AR Guidelines, applicable 
Government Orders etc.) as may be necessary for the  transaction of its business and 
decision making. The officers of the University, in cluding the Registrar are not 
appointed as per the statutory provisions as detail ed in para 2.5.1.2. Due to such 
temporary arrangements, the Authorities of the Univ ersity could not properly exercise 
the powers vested in them to make/amend Statutes, O rdinances and Regulations as 
prescribed in the Act. This resulted in taking deci sions which were not in compliance 
with the regulatory frameworks including the UGC Re gulations and ICAR guidelines 
etc. as discussed in this report. 
 
Audit examined the governance framework of the Univ ersity consisting of the Act, 
Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations and the compli ance thereof by the authorities 
and officers of the University. The audit findings in respect of Governance are 
discussed below.  
 
2.5.1.1  Deficiencies in Governance Framework 
 
Lapses in the following areas indicated that the sy stem of governance in the 
University was not effective. 
 
 Non-framing of Statutes - S ection 7(11) of the Act empowers the University to 
create posts for teaching, research and extension e ducation and to appoint persons 
to such posts. Section 42(3) of the Act stipulates that the procedure for selection 
of officers, teachers and other employees of the Un iversity shall unless otherwise 
provided for in this Act, be such as may be prescri bed in the Statutes. Audit 
observed that the General Council of the University  created several posts 
including senior level posts such as Dean of Forest ry (head of the College of 
Forestry), Controller of Examinations, Associate Deans (head of various colleges), 
Associate Directors (heads of various research stations) but did not frame and pass 
Statutes specifying the procedure of selection to t hese posts (Appendix 2.4). This 
was the case even in respect of the post of the Dir ector of Students Welfare, a post 
specified in the Act since the inception of the Uni versity. Consequently, the 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
10 
University could not carry out regular recruitment to these posts and these posts 
were operated by giving additional charge to senior  faculty members, which 
affected their academic and administrative performa nce. The University attributed 
the under-performance in respect of its research pa pers published in scientific 
journals to multiple responsibilities and excess wo rk pressure, as discussed in 
paragraph 2.5.3.1. The Government in its reply (Oct ober 2020) stated that Statutes 
for these posts were being framed and the process would be expedited.  
 
 Non-amendment of Ordinances - Section 7(14) of the Act empowers the 
University to fix, demand and receive such fees and  other charges as may be 
prescribed. Section 50(a) of the Act stipulates tha t the Executive Committee shall 
have power to make Ordinances regarding levy of fee s in colleges and other 
institutions by the University. Audit observed that  the University last amended the 
relevant Ordinance in September 2002, but revised t he fees periodically without 
amending the Ordinance. As a result, the fees levie d now is much higher than 
what is prescribed in the Ordinance, as shown in the following table:  
 
Table-2.1: Fee Details 
Name of programme 
Fees fixed as per amended 
ordinance, 2002 (in ₹) Fees collected in 2019 (in ₹) 
First semester 
Second 
semester 
onwards 
First semester  
Second 
semester 
onwards 
B.Sc. (C&B)  1,800  1,285  11,980  9,580  
All other UG programmes  2,200  1,685  11,980  9,580  
B.Tech (Food Engg.)*  - - 36,250  30,000  
Master’s Degree programme  4,250  3,025  16,710  13,510  
MBA (Agribusiness 
Management)*  - - 36,500 29,000 
B.Sc -M.Sc. (Integrated)*  - - 44,000  40,000  
Doctorate Degree 
Programme  5,525 3,925 17,500 13,510 
* Programme instituted after 2002 
 
Levy of fees at rates higher than those notified th rough Ordinances was irregular and 
its legality is questionable. The Government in its  reply (October 2020) stated that, 
henceforth the University shall ensure that the Ord inances are amended promptly by 
the Executive Committee for levy of fees in colleges/other institutions. 
 
 Non-publishing of Regulations in the Gazette - Academic Council is the Body 
which frames, amends and repeals Regulations regard ing academic matters 
subject to the provisions of the Act, Statutes and Ordinances. Section 55 of the 
Act stipulates that all Statutes, Ordinances and Re gulations made under the Act 
shall be published in the Gazette. The Statute No.8 39/74 require that a copy of the 
Ordinances and Regulations be forwarded to the Chan cellor besides placing them 
before the General Council as soon as they are made . Audit observed that the 
University has framed five Academic Regulations and published it in its handbook 
(which is an internal document of the University, u nlike the Gazette), but none of 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
11  
these were published in the Gazette as mandated in the Act. No copies of these 
Regulations were submitted to the Chancellor. Non-s ubmission of the Regulations 
to the Chancellor who is the Head of the University  and the non-publication of 
Regulations in the Gazette as mandated by the Act m ade the validity of the 
Regulations questionable. The Government in its rep ly (October 2020) stated that 
the University will henceforth ensure that all Ordi nances and Academic 
Regulations are placed before the General Council f or its approval and it will be 
published in the Gazette and it will be submitted to the Chancellor.  
 
2.5.1.2  Officers of the University  
 
The Vice-Chancellor is appointed by the Chancellor and the Comptroller by the 
Government. Appointment to the posts of other offic ers of the University is done by 
Executive Committee. Audit examined the procedure f ollowed by the University in 
appointing the ‘Officers of the University’. The St atutes governing appointments of 
‘Officers of the University’ (except VC and Comptro ller) stipulate that their 
appointment shall be done by inviting applications through advertisement except for 
the Registrar and Director of Physical Plant who ca n also be appointed on deputation. 
Appointments to these posts are for a fixed tenure 5. Audit noticed that the University 
did not appoint these Officers in the prescribed ma nner during the past several years 
as shown in the table below. Instead, it nominated teaching staff to these posts (except 
librarian) with full additional charge.  
 
Table-2.2: Procedure prescribed for appointment of Officers of the University 
Sl. 
No. 
Designation Date of last regular 
appointment 
Procedure prescribed 
for appointment 
1 Registrar 22/05/2003 Direct recruitment or 
deputation  
2 Director of Physical Plant 22/06/2004 Direct recruitment or 
deputation  
3 Librarian  16 /05 /1995  Direct recruitment  
4 Dean (Faculty of Agriculture)  03 /07 /2010  Direct recruitment  
5 Dean (Faculty of Agriculture 
Engineering)  04/07/2010 Direct recruitment 
6 Dean (Faculty of Forestry)  Statute not made  Not prescribed  
7 Director of Research  03 /07 /2010  Direct recruitment  
8 Director of Extension  03 /07 /2010  Direct recruitment  
9 Director of Students’ Welfare  Statute not made  Not prescribed  
 
No appointment as stipulated under the Statutes has  been made by direct 
recruitment/deputation as required for the posts, a fter the last regular appointment as 
shown in the table. Audit noticed that these in-cha rge postings of short duration 
compromising the efficiency of internal governance had become a regular practice in 
 
5 The period of appointment of these officials shall  be five years in the first instance, except Regist rar who shall be 
appointed in the first instance on probation for a period of one year within a period of two years and  on 
satisfactory completion of probation shall be confi rmed. In the case of persons above 50 years of age,  the period 
of appointment shall be so fixed as to terminate on  the date of superannuation which is currently 56 y ears for 
Registrar and 60 for others. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
12 
the University. Statute No. 266/72 empowers the Vice-Chancellor to make provisional 
appointments only under emergent situations. 
 
The Act and the relevant Statute stipulate that the  Registrar shall be a whole-time 
officer of the University and also the ex-officio S ecretary to the General Council, 
Executive Committee and Academic Council. Audit not iced that the University did 
not comply with the statutory provisions while appo inting Registrars. During the 
period from 25 January 2007 to 30 March 2019 (12 ye ars and two months) 12 
officials (excluding the present incumbent) held ch arge of the post of Registrar with 
periods of incumbency ranging from one month to thr ee years. These stopgap 
arrangements did not provide many of the incumbents  the time required to familiarise 
themselves with the rules and regulations governing  the administrative system of the 
University before they retired; thus affecting thei r capacity to discharge duties 
efficiently.  
 
The Government stated (October 2020) that the University will take necessary steps to 
appoint a Registrar as per the statutory provisions  by direct recruitment or by 
deputation. It was also stated that Statutes were b eing framed wherever required and 
that action would be taken for regular appointment against posts of all Officers.  
 
The failure of the University to carry out regular appointment to these posts, 
especially that of the Registrar contributed to the  non-compliances to the regulatory 
norms as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
2.5.2   Academic Activities 
 
2.5.2.1 Enrolment of Students 
 
The University offers five Under Graduate programme s 6 of four years’ duration in as 
many disciplines. The syllabus followed by the Univ ersity is based on the curriculum 
proposed by ICAR. As against the intake capacity, t he actual enrolment to these 
programmes during the five year period from 2014 to 2018 were as follows: 
 
Table-2.3: Intake Capacity and the number of students admitted to programmes 
 B.Sc (Hons.) 
Agriculture 
B.Sc (Hons.) 
Forestry B.Sc (Hons.) C&B  B.Tech Ag. 
Engineering 
B.Tech Food 
Engineering 
Year Intake 
Capacity  Admitted  Intake 
Capacity  Admitted  Intake 
Capacity  Admitted  Intake 
Capacity  Admitted  Intake 
Capacity  Admitted  
2014 209 210 30 30 40 35 49 41 30 17 
2015 209 232 30 30 40 38 49 43 30 20 
2016 209 216 30 30 40 37 49 49 30 29 
2017 208 209 31 31 40 40 50 42 30 22 
2018 420 418 31 30 40 39 50 47 30 29 
 
 
6  B.Sc (Hons.) Agriculture, B.Sc. (Hons.) Co-operati on & Banking, B.Sc. (Hons.) Forestry, B.Tech (Agri.  
Engineering) and B.Tech (Food Engineering). 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
13  
The number of students admitted was above the intak e capacity in some programmes 
as additional seats were allotted to various catego ries such as diploma holders in 
Agricultural Sciences, Children of personnel retire d from paramilitary services in the 
State and holders of Vocational Higher Secondary Education (Agriculture). 
 
The University increased the intake capacity of its  B.Sc. (Hons.) Agriculture 
programme due to its increased demand, from 208 to 420 in the year 2018 by 
increasing the capacity of the existing Colleges an d opening a new College. Besides, 
it offers seven 7 Masters programme in 32 disciplines with a total i ntake capacity of 
320 and two 8 B.Sc. – M.Sc. Integrated programmes with intake ca pacity of 20 each. 
The University also offers six doctoral programmes in 26 disciplines with total intake 
capacity of 113 as of 2019. The total student strength as of March 2019 is 2,412 9. 
 
University Grants Commission (UGC) was established under the UGC Act, 1956 for 
determining the standard of Universities, promotion  and co-ordination of University 
education. The Act empowers UGC to frame regulation s for the purpose of 
performing its functions like defining the qualific ations and standard that should 
ordinarily be required of any person to be appointe d in the Universities. Universities 
are governed by these regulations which are subordi nate legislation and have binding 
effect. 
 
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR),  an autonomous organisation 
under the Department of Agricultural Research and E ducation (DARE), Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of Indi a is the apex body for 
co-ordinating, guiding and managing research and ed ucation in agriculture including 
horticulture, fisheries and animal sciences in the entire country. ICAR has 
recommended the minimum standards in respect of inf rastructure, equipment, staff 
strength, curricula etc. to be maintained by the Ag ricultural Universities. The audit 
findings on the University’s academic activities are discussed below:  
 
2.5.2.2 Accreditation 
 
Accreditation is a process of quality control in hi gher education, carried out by an 
authorised agency through scientific evaluation or assessment, whereby an institution 
of higher education or a programme conducted by tha t institution is recognised as 
conforming to the parameters of academic quality. Q uality assurance, including 
accreditation processes, is one of the universal te chniques to enhance global 
competitiveness. 
 
According to the UGC (Mandatory Assessment and Accr editation of Higher 
Educational Institutions), Regulations, 2012 (The U GC Accreditation Regulation, 
2012) accreditation is compulsory for all universit ies. Each accredited higher 
 
7 M.Sc. Agriculture/Horticulture, M.Sc. Community Sc ience, M.Sc. Agricultural Statistics, M.Sc. Forestr y, M.Sc 
Cooperation and Banking, MBA Agri. Business Management and M.Tech (Ag. Engg.). 
8 B.Sc. - M.Sc. (Integrated) Biotechnology and B.Sc - M.Sc. (Integrated) Climate Change Adaptation. 
9 UG – 1,633, PG - 594 and Ph.D. - 185. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
14 
educational institution is to apply for re-accredit ation six months before the expiry of 
the existing accreditation in accordance with the n orms and procedures prescribed by 
the relevant Accreditation Agency. The validity of accreditation is for five years.  
 
Audit observed the following lapses/irregularities relating to the accreditation of the 
University: 
 
 Delay in applying for renewal of Accreditation: The National Agricultural 
Education Accreditation Board (NAEAB) of ICAR gave accreditation (2014) to 
the University and its constituent colleges which w ere valid up to 10 March 2019. 
ICAR in its letter dated 09 October 2018 reminded t he University to apply for 
renewal of accreditation without delay and also int imated that accreditation was 
mandatory for the release of development grant from  it. Despite this, the 
University did not apply for renewal of accreditati on within the timelines 
prescribed in the UGC accreditation Regulation, 201 2, but applied (19 February 
2019) for renewal of accreditation just 19 days pri or to the expiry of existing 
accreditation. The NAEAB renewed the accreditation only in September 2020. As 
a result, ICAR did not release development grant to  the University for the year 
2019-20 even though the University had requested ₹91.47 crore.  
 
In its reply (October 2020), the Government contend ed that the NAEAB had not 
stipulated any timeline for renewal of accreditatio n and that the delay in getting 
accreditation was due to non-compliance of timeline s by the NAEAB. Regarding 
non-release of development grants, it was stated th at normally the ICAR 
development grants were limited to ₹ 4 crore to 5 c rore only and that the 
University had requested for additional grant in the ensuing allocation.  
 
The reply of the Government is not tenable as the U GC Accreditation Regulations 
2012 is applicable to all Universities including Ke rala Agricultural University and 
it should have followed the timeline prescribed.  
 
 Inaccuracies in the application for renewal of accr editation: The process of 
accreditation starts with the submission of a Lette r of Intent (LOI) by the 
University along with the proforma for the Institut ional Eligibility for 
Accreditation (IEA) to the NAEAB Secretariat. The p roforma for IEA includes an 
action taken report on the last recommendation/obse rvation of NAEAB, the status 
of implementation of ICAR guidelines including the Fifth Deans’ Committee 
recommendations, conduct of academic audit, publish ing of Annual Academic 
Calendar, etc. In addition to these, a statement on the compliance of the University 
Grants Commission (Minimum Qualifications for Appoi ntment of Teachers and 
other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges a nd other Measures for the 
Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) Regul ations, 2010 (UGC 
Regulations, 2010) and the University Grants Commis sion (Minimum Standards 
and Procedure for the award of M.Phil./Ph.D. degree ) Regulations, 2009 (UGC 
Ph.D. Regulations, 2009) should also be submitted. If the IEA is found 
satisfactory, the NAEAB Secretariat shall send a le tter in this regard to the 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
15  
University/ institution following which the Univers ity is required to submit the 
accreditation fees along with Self Study Reports (S SR). A Peer Review Team 
(PRT) is formed by NAEAB after scrutiny of the SSR.  The peer review team 
visits the University and submits its report to the  NAEAB. The NAEAB takes a 
decision on accreditation based on the report. If t he IEA is not satisfactory, it shall 
be rejected along with the action taken report and the university/ institution shall 
re-submit the document after due modification/justification.  
 
As NAEAB ascertains eligibility of an institution f or accreditation solely based on 
the information provided by the institution in its LOI and IEA, it is important that 
the information so provided by the institution should be accurate and factual.  
 
The University submitted the LOI and IEA under the signature and seal of the 
Registrar who specifically certified to the accurac y of the information provided 
therein and subject to the condition that if the in formation furnished was false or 
misleading, the accreditation granted was liable to  be cancelled. Audit Scrutiny of 
the IEA/report submitted by the University to NAEAB  revealed factual 
inaccuracies as detailed below: 
 
 Statement of Compliance (Central and State Universi ties): The University 
certified that it was governed by the UGC Regulatio ns, 2010 and the UGC Ph.D. 
Regulations, 2009 and that it had complied with all  its provisions. Audit scrutiny 
revealed that the University did not comply with the following UGC regulations: 
 
 Regulation No. 1.1.1 of UGC Regulations, 2010 prescribing the 
qualification for appointment of teachers in the fa culty of Agriculture and 
Veterinary Sciences as per ICAR norms, as discussed in paragraph 2.5.2.3. 
 
 Regulation No. 6.0.11 of UGC Regulations, 2010  prescribing establishment 
of an Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) in all  Universities/Colleges as 
per the UGC/National Assessment Accreditation Counc il (NAAC) 
guidelines. The functions of IQAC inter-alia  include development and 
application of quality benchmarks, dissemination of  information of various 
quality parameters, documentation of various progra mmes / activities of the 
university leading to quality improvement, developm ent of quality culture in 
university etc. But the University did not establis h IQAC as per UGC/NAAC 
guidelines. As a result, a proper system to document research data in terms of 
research papers published, did not exist in the Uni versity, as discussed in 
paragraph 2.5.3.1. The role of IQAC in the Universi ty was limited to the 
documentation and record keeping of career advancem ent scheme of the 
teaching staff.  
 
 Regulation No. 13.1 of UGC Regulations, 2010 prescribing the procedure 
for appointing teachers on contract, as discussed in paragraph 2.5.2.3
. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
16 
 UGC Ph.D. Regulations 2009 superseded by UGC Ph.D. Regulations 
2016  prescribing the procedure for award of Ph.D. degre e, as discussed in 
paragraph 2.5.2.9. 
 
 Action taken report on the last recommendation/obse rvation of NAEAB: 
NAEAB had recommended that recruitment to the Offic ers’ positions should be 
taken up periodically. In the proforma for IEA the University stated that it 
conducted recruitments to the Officers’ positions r egularly, as and when the 
positions fell vacant. Audit observed that the Univ ersity did not conduct regular 
recruitment of Officers, as discussed in paragraph 2.5.1.2. 
 
 Fifth Deans’ Committee recommendations : The University stated that it 
implemented in full, the recommendations of the Fif th Deans’ Committee 
including the recommendations on minimum requiremen ts for establishment of 
new college in agriculture and allied disciplines. Audit noticed that the University 
did not comply with the recommendations on establis hment of new colleges in 
respect of the College of Agriculture, Ambalavayal,  as discussed in paragraph 
2.5.2.5. 
 
 Conduct of Academic audit: Audit noticed that the IQAC of the University did 
not conduct academic audit as prescribed in NAAC Gu idelines. However, in the 
proforma for IEA the University stated that it had conducted academic audit in 
the last two years.  
 
Thus, the University undermined the accreditation process by not disclosing the actual 
position in the IEA and the Compliance Statement su bmitted for renewal of 
accreditation.  It is also pertinent to note that w hile granting accreditation (September 
2020), the NAEAB also awarded the University with ‘ B’ grade (out of possible four 
grades of A+, A, B and C) corresponding to a score of 2.90, which placed it among 
the Category III Universities. According to the Uni versity Grants Commission 
(Categorisation of Universities (only) for Grant of  Graded Autonomy) Regulations, 
2018, Category III Universities are eligible for th e least autonomy. Further, 
accreditation was not granted to 14 of its programm e and two colleges (Appendix 
2.5). 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) claimed that, the Peer Review Team of 
ICAR had visited all the campuses and had physicall y verified the facts stated in the 
IEA and LOI.  
 
The reply of the Government is not tenable, as Univ ersity has underplayed its lapses 
by merely referring to the Peer Review Team exercis e. Further, the documents 
furnished by the University did not show any indica tion that the Peer Review Team 
had verified the process followed for regular and c ontract recruitment of teachers as 
pointed out by audit, compliance to UGC Ph.D. Regul ation 2009 and adherence to the 
Fifth Deans’ Committee recommendation in respect of  new College of Agriculture at 
Ambalavayal.  
 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
17  
2.5.2.3 Manpower Management 
 
The sanctioned employee strength of the University consisting of faculty and other 
staff is 2,457. The manning levels as of March 2019  against the sanctioned strength is 
as shown in the following table:  
 
Table-2.4: Staff strength position 
 Sanctioned 
Strength 
In-position  Vacancy Vacancy 
Percentage  
Faculty 766  342  424  55  
Other staff 1,691  1,219  472  28  
Total 2,457  1,561  
 
The recruitment of other staff is carried out by th e Kerala Public Service Commission 
(KPSC). The recruitment of faculty members is condu cted by the University directly.  
The University Manual 2001 (Chapter VII para 4) rec ommends the recruitment be a 
continuous process to fill up vacant positions with  fixed schedules in order to avoid 
stress on regular employees. A total of 166 teacher s 10  retired during the audit period 
2014-15 to 2018-19. Audit observed that the Univers ity initiated recruitment process 
in 2016 after eight years of the previous recruitme nt in 2008. The recruitment process 
initiated in 2016 was finalised only in 2019. As a result, the strength of the regular 
faculty was reduced to below 50 per cent  in its colleges, research stations and KVKs 
as shown in the following table.  The main reason f or arising of these vacancies was 
the failure of University to carry out regular recr uitment against vacancies arising due 
to normal retirement. 
 
Table-2.5: Faculty staff strength position 
 Sanctioned 
Strength 
In-position 
(regular faculty) 
Vacancy Vacancy 
Percentage  
Colleges 415  176  239  58  
Research Stations 
including AICRP 302 144 158 52 
KVKs 49  22  27  55  
Total 766  342  424  55  
 
The University filled, on an average, 47 per cent  of the sanctioned posts of teachers in 
its colleges through postings made on contract/dail y wage basis during the years 
2014-19. Audit observed the following lapses in the  recruitment process initiated in 
the year 2016 and in the appointment of contract teachers: 
 
 The UGC Regulations, 2010 
11  issued on 30 June 2010 and notified on 18 
September 2010 prescribing the minimum standards fo r appointment of teachers 
and other measures for maintenance of standards in higher education stipulates 
 
10  In 2014-15 : 22, 2015-16 : 46,  2016-17 :  47, 2017-18 : 28  and 2018-19 : 23. 
11  University Grants Commission (Minimum Qualificatio ns for Appointment of Teachers and other Academic 
Staff in Universities and Colleges and other Measur es for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Educa tion) 
Regulations, 2010. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
18 
that in respect of faculty of agriculture and veter inary science, the 
norms/regulations of ICAR shall apply. Accordingly,  in December 2011, ICAR 
modified the norms for recruitment of Assistant Pro fessor in respect of faculty of 
agriculture and veterinary science, according to wh ich, NET 12  along with one 
publication in National Academy of Agricultural Sci ences (NAAS)13 , New Delhi 
rated refereed journal was made compulsory for cand idates having Master's 
degree for being recruited to the post of Assistant  Professor and equivalent in the 
disciplines in which NET is conducted. The main obj ective of NAAS is to 
recognise and promote excellence of individual scie ntists in fields of agricultural 
sciences including crop husbandry, animal husbandry , fisheries, agro-forestry and 
interface between agriculture and agro-industry.  NET could be waived off for 
candidates holding Ph.D. degree, provided it was do ne with course work as 
prescribed by the UGC Regulations 2009 and the cand idate had at least two full 
length publications having a NAAS rating of not les s than  four on the last date of 
submission of application. Those candidates with Ph .D. degree without course 
work would not qualify for NET exemption. The modif ied norms had prospective 
effect from 01 January 2012. Universities which fai led to implement NET 
essentiality as per the above provision were not to be given development grants by 
ICAR. 
 
Audit observed that the University diluted the abov e provision in the recruitment 
notification issued in March 2016 in which the esse ntial qualification prescribed 
were Master’s degree with NET. Ph.D. was only a des irable qualification not 
eligible for NET exemption. This was contrary to th e ICAR norm. The University 
thus failed to give due weightage to the research c redentials of the candidates 
stipulated by ICAR. As the research product of the University in terms of the 
research papers published in scientific journals wa s below the benchmark, as 
discussed in paragraph 2.5.3.1, the University shou ld have given emphasis to the 
research credentials of candidates as required by ICAR. 
 
 According to UGC Regulations 2010, (Regulation No. 13) the qualification and 
selection procedure for contract appointment of tea chers was to be the same as 
those applicable to a regularly appointed teacher. The selection committee for 
contract appointment to the post of Assistant Profe ssor was to consist of eight 
members 14  from the field of education. The presence of at le ast four members, 
including two outside subject experts was required to complete the quorum.  
 
 
12  National Eligibility Test. 
13  NAAS allots score in the following manner - Catego ry I: Those journals where Thompson Reuters Impact 
Factor is available, the scores are assigned as 6.0 0 + Impact Factor with capping on 20.00. Category I I: Those 
journals where Thompson Reuters Impact Factor is no t available, the marks are assigned on the basis of  
information provided by the Publishers in a prescri bed proforma and also evaluation of scientific cont ents of the 
journals.  
14  Vice-Chancellor who will be the Chairperson of the  Committee, three experts in the concerned subject 
nominated by the VC, Dean of the concerned Faculty,  Head/Chairperson of the Department/School, an 
academician nominated by Chancellor and an academic ian representing SC/ ST/ OBC/ Minority/ Women/ 
Differently abled categories nominated by VC. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
19  
Audit observed that, the selection committees for t he recruitment of teachers on 
contract basis were not formed as per the UGC regul ations. Thus the composition 
and quorum of the selection committees were not as prescribed. It consisted of 
only three members against a quorum of at least fou r and included members from 
non-academic background also, thus rendering the de cision of the selection 
committee challengeable.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) contende d that the notification for 
recruitment to the post of Assistant Professors iss ued in March 2016 was issued in 
accordance with the Statutes of the University and the relevant UGC norms. It was 
further stated that the notification also contained  a clause at the end stating that 
‘The mode of selection, applicable reservation, rel axation of age and all other 
matters relating to the appointment to the post sha ll be governed by the provisions 
contained in the University Statutes, UGC Regulatio ns, 2010 and orders issued by 
the Government from time to time’ making the notifi cation compliant to the UGC 
regulations.  
 
The reply is not tenable as the University notifica tion for recruitment of regular 
faculty was a dilution of the essential qualificati on prescribed in the UGC 
regulations and binding on the University. Further,  the subsequent recruitment 
notification issued (February 2020) by the Universi ty, is in line with relevant 
UGC regulation.  
 
Regarding the recruitment of teachers on contract b asis, it was stated that the 
University will ensure that the selection procedure  will be the same as those 
applicable to a regularly appointed teacher as per UGC regulations. 
 
In the application for accreditation (February 2019 ) submitted by the University it 
was, however, claimed that the University had compl ied with all the provisions of 
the UGC regulations as discussed in paragraph 2.5.2 .2. This indicates that the 
University as an institution and the Registrar of t he University who submitted the 
application for accreditation in particular, was un informed on the regulatory 
norms governing the University. This reflects poorl y on the governance of the 
University.  
 
2.5.2.4 Functioning of Libraries 
 
The University has a network of libraries, includin g a Central Library in the main 
campus, constituent colleges, RARS, research statio ns and KVKs. The Kerala 
Agricultural University Library and Information Sys tem (KAULIS) was established 
in 1995. The KAULIS consists of the Central Library , college libraries in constituent 
colleges and research stations. It has digitised re pository of information on agriculture 
which includes Crop and Animal Production, Fisherie s, Forestry, Nutrition and Rural 
Development. It facilitates digital access to most of the advanced sources of 
information like CABI e-Books (https://www.cabi.org ), CAB Abstracts, KrishiPrabha, 
Indiastat.com etc. which facilitates knowledge upda tion for students and faculty. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
20 
Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture (CeRA) pr ovides access to full text of 
3,951 journals from reputed publishers like Elsevie r, Springer, Annual Review Inc., 
Wiley etc. Apart from that, users can request for a rticles to any of the libraries in the 
consortium through Document Delivery Service. India  Agristat, 1,174 e-books and 17 
e-book series published by Elsevier were also provided through CeRA. 
 
Krishikosh is a digital repository of accumulated k nowledge in agriculture and allied 
sciences which is maintained by ICAR. Full text of thesis submitted to the University 
can be accessed through the Krishikosh. The Univers ity is an Institutional Member of 
DELNET (Developing Library Network) which provides access to more than 20 
million bibliographic records of books, journals, a rticles, CDs etc. The Inter Library 
Loan (ILL) and Document Delivery Services (DDS) are  one of the most popular 
services of DELNET. Indian Digital Ensemble of Agri cultural Libraries (IDEAL) is a 
platform for sharing library holdings through Union  Catalogue (AgriCat) of 
Agricultural University Libraries of Indian Nationa l Agricultural Research and 
Education System (NARES). Bibliographic details of more than one lakh books 
available in College Libraries and Central Library is available through the IDEAL.  
 
The average daily footfall of students and faculty visiting the library was 51 per cent   
and 48 per cent  in the years 2017 and 2018. 
 
2.5.2.5 Establishment of a new college 
 
The report of the Fifth Deans’ Committee released ( July 2016) by ICAR 
recommended measures for improvement of the nationa l agricultural education 
system and prescribed minimum standards for establi shing new colleges of 
agriculture. These recommendations which were made mandatory by ICAR were 
linked to the accreditation of institutions and to the release of ICAR grants.  
 
The University proposed (April 2018) to start the n ew college by upgrading the 
existing RARS at Ambalavayal subsuming its faculty and infrastructure facilities 
which was stated to be sufficient for the first two  years. Government approved the 
proposal subject to the condition that no additiona l fund would be given and no new 
posts would be created. The College of Agriculture,  Ambalavayal started to function 
(2018) by admitting one batch of 60 students from t he academic year 2018-19 
onwards. 
 
Audit observed that the faculty strength and the in frastructure facilities available at 
RARS were far below the requirements recommended by  the Fifth Deans’ Committee 
as evident from the following table: 
  

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
21  
Table 2.6: Facilities required/ available at College of Agriculture, Ambalavayal 
Sl. 
No. 
Minimum facilities required as 
per Fifth Deans’ Committee 
recommendation 
Facilities available 
1 Five smart lecture halls  Two ordinary class rooms (This was provided with th e infrastructure 
diverted from the project ‘Technology intervention and peoples 
participation for poverty alleviation in Wayanad district at Ambalavayal’ as 
discussed in paragraph  2. 5.3.4)  
2 31 teaching staff  15 teaching staff  
3 Two hostels (separate for boys 
and girls each with 150 capacity)  
No hostel. (Students accommodated in congested trai nees’ hostel, 
conference hall and staff quarters)  
4 12 full -fledged laboratories  Five under -equipped laboratories  (Appendix 2.6 ) 
 
In the application for accreditation submitted (Feb ruary 2019) by the University to 
NAEAB, the University gave an undertaking that it h ad implemented the 
recommendation of the Fifth Deans’ Committee in ful l which was contrary to the 
facts as shown in Table 2.6. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated that the University would earnestly 
take all necessary steps to ensure the minimum standards as recommended in the Fifth 
Deans’ Committee Report, by the fifth year of the establishment of the College i.e., by 
2023, when it becomes due for accreditation with the support of the Government.  
 
The reply is untenable because according to the NAE AB’s guiding principle, 
accreditation is granted based on the performance a nd facilities existing in the 
colleges for last five years. The Hon’ble Supreme C ourt has also ruled in Appeal No. 
31813 of 2018 against a special petition that it sh ould also be ensured that the courses 
in the past met the minimum standards prescribed by  ICAR. So, the University is 
bound to adhere to the minimum requirements prescribed by ICAR since the inception 
of the College.  
 
2.5.2.6 Institution of academic programme 
 
The University instituted a five year academic prog ramme of B.Sc-M.Sc. (Integrated) 
Degree 
15  in ‘Climate Change Adaptation’ in its Academy for Climate Change 
Education and Research (ACCER) during the academic year 2010-11 with a 
sanctioned strength of 10 teaching staff and a year ly intake of 20 students. The 
programme, claimed to be the only one of its kind i n Asia, and was commenced with 
expected career prospects including research in State/Central government departments 
related to agriculture, conservation and natural re source management, animal science, 
fisheries, forestry, water resources and environmen tal protection. As of March 2019, 
72 students of four batches had passed out from the  Academy. Audit examination of 
the functioning of the Academy revealed the following;  
 
 The University could not make regular appointment o f teachers since the 
inception of the programme as it had not framed statutes for recruitment of regular 
teaching staff. As a result, classes were handled b y teaching staff on contract and 
 
15  It was an integrated degree programme of five year duration leading to award of Master’s Degree 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
22 
visiting staff from other institutions. This result ed in lack of continuity in the 
academic programme and was creating difficulties in  the routine activities 
(Academic Officer/Hostel Warden/Accompanying studen ts on study tour etc.). 
Further, the academy is not in a position to explor e research funding opportunities 
due to lack of permanent teaching staff. 
 
 This being a unique degree, the University could not convince potential employers 
of equivalence of this degree to other similar Mast er’s degree 16 . As a result, the 
career prospects of the students were adversely aff ected. The Master’s degree 
holders of this course were eligible to appear for recruitment exams for common 
posts only, for which the qualification was general  undergraduate  degree and the 
position remained the same even after the passing o ut of the fourth batch (March 
2019). 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat necessary steps were being 
taken to frame Statutes and to appoint teachers. 
 
2.5.2.7 Non-compliance with the UGC guidelines on S tudents’ Entitlements  
 
The UGC issued (April 2013) ‘Guidelines on Students ’ Entitlements’ to all 
universities with a view to make the students aware  of their entitlements along with 
other student related services and also to simplify  the procedure for redressing 
grievances. It was mandatory for every college/univ ersity to publish these guidelines 
in full in their prospectus and also to post it on the homepage of its website. The 
Guidelines, among other things, provided for the following students’ entitlements: 
 
 Publishing a document, known as ‘Prospectus’, speci fying the curricula including 
syllabi, names, academic profile and status of the faculty, mode and frequency of 
evaluation, duration of the course, academic calend ar, comprehensive information 
about fees or charges of any kind and refund rules. 
 
 Disclosure of full and correct information about an y institution of higher 
education in which the students study or propose to  study. Every 
college/university must disclose in the prospectus and on its website information 
regarding its status, its affiliation, accreditatio n rating, physical assets and 
amenities, membership of governing bodies and minutes of the meetings of bodies 
like Academic Council/Executive Committee, sources of income and the financial 
situation and any other information about its functioning necessary for a student to 
make a fully informed choice. 
 
  
 
16  Like M.Sc (Environmental Science), /M.Sc. (Agricultural meteorology), M.Sc (Meteorology), etc. 
 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
23  
Audit noticed the following: 
 
 The University did not publish the guidelines in th e prospectus. Instead it 
published an illegible copy of the guidelines on th e website. Publishing of the 
prospectus in this University is done on the authority of the Academic Council. 
 
 The name, academic profile and the status of the fa culty were not given in the 
prospectus. 
 
 The status of available physical assets and ameniti es was not disclosed in the 
prospectus.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat all the information required as 
per the guidelines were made available in the website and continuously updated. 
 
The reply of the Government is not tenable as the g uidelines require that the 
information should be published in the prospectus which is an authoritative document. 
Further, the webpage of the College of Agriculture at Ambalavayal does not provide 
the actual status of infrastructure and the webpage  of ACCER does not provide full 
profile of the faculty members. 
 
2.5.2.8 Conduct of examinations 
 
Integrity of the process of conducting examinations  which culminates in the award of 
marks/grades/certificates is of highest concern as it has a bearing on the status of both 
the institution/ university that conducts the exami nation and the students. Hence, a 
system should be in place to prevent any possible i rregularities in the conduct of 
examinations.  
 
According to the Act (Section 16(m)), the Executive  Committee is responsible for the 
conduct of examination and declaration of results b ased on the Regulations framed by 
the Academic Council for conduct of examinations. F urther, Section 52 of the Act 
require the Academic Council to frame regulations o n the duties of examiners. The 
University did not notify any Regulation in this regard.  
 
Audit noticed the following: 
 
 Access to the premises of the University press wher e question papers are printed 
was not regulated by maintaining a record of visitors to the press.  
 
 No restriction was placed on the use of mobile phon es or other recording devices 
within the Press which can compromise the secrecy of question papers. 
 
 The blank answer sheets printed at the Press were n either machine numbered nor 
barcoded, as a result they could not be distinguished.  
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
24 
 The University did not issue any guidelines regardi ng the accounting of blank 
answer sheets.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat Regulations prescribing the 
procedure for the conduct of examinations and dutie s of examiners would be 
formulated and that corrective action was initiated on the audit observations regarding 
printing of question papers and accounting of blank  answer sheets. Further, in the exit 
conference (October 2020), the University stated that CCTV cameras were installed in 
the press. 
 
2.5.2.9 Non-compliance to UGC Regulations in the aw ard of Ph.D. degree 
 
Government of India, Department of Higher Education , had instructed (November 
2008) the UGC under Section 22 of the UGC Act, to f rame and notify regulations for 
the award of Ph.D. degree. Accordingly, UGC notifie d and published in the Gazette 
of India (11 July 2009) the UGC (Minimum Standards and Procedure for Award of 
M.Phil./Ph.D. Degrees) Regulations, 2009. This was superseded by the UGC 
(Minimum Standards and Procedure for Award of M.Phi l./Ph.D. Degrees) 
Regulations, 2016. These Regulations, inter alia,  prescribed that: 
 
 All Universities shall admit M.Phil./Doctoral stude nts through an entrance test 
conducted at the level of individual University. 
 
 The University shall issue a Provisional Certificat e to the effect that the Degree 
was awarded in accordance with the provisions of the aforesaid UGC Regulations. 
 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
 
 The University did not conduct an entrance test, in stead admitted students to the 
Ph.D. course on the basis of an interview and the a cademic merit of the applicant. 
143 Ph.D. degrees were awarded by the University to  such students during the 
period 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
 
 The University did not issue provisional certificat e as prescribed in the UGC 
Regulations. 
 
In the order issued (March 2010) by Government of K erala for implementing pay 
scales to university teachers and in subsequent cla rifications, Government authorised 
grant of incentives to holders of Ph.D./M.Phil. deg ree and other higher qualifications. 
The grant of incentive was, among other things, subject to the condition that the Ph.D. 
degree should have been awarded by a University in accordance with the provisions 
of UGC Regulations, 2009.  
 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the University had gra nted advance increments to its 
faculty members who were directly admitted to its P h.D. programme and awarded 
Ph.D by the University. The award of Ph.D. by the U niversity was not according to 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
25  
‘Keramithra’, a coconut de-husking tool 
invented and patented by the University is one 
of the most popular engineering inventions of 
the State. 
The University has released more than 300 
varieties of different crops. This includes 121 
varieties of rice, the staple food crop of the 
State. Its rice varieties ‘Jyothi (PTB39)’ and 
‘Uma(MO16)’ occupy more than 80 per cent 
of the cropped area of the State. 
the provisions of the UGC Regulations, 2009 in that , the University had neither 
conducted an entrance exam nor issued provisional c ertificate as mandated under the 
Regulations. The University also granted advance in crements to those teaching staff 
who possessed Ph.D. degree from other universities.  The provisional certificate 
submitted by them did not conform to the UGC regula tions, as the same did not 
indicate that the Degree was awarded in accordance with the provisions of the UGC 
regulations. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat, it would conduct an entrance 
test for admission to Ph.D. as mandated in UGC regu lations, from the 2020 Academic 
year onwards. It was also stated that action would be taken to review the advance 
increments granted, if any, in contravention of Gov ernment order and recoveries 
would be effected. In the exit conference (October 2020), the Vice-Chancellor stated 
that the admissions to the Ph.D. programme were bas ed on the ICAR guidelines 
which permitted admission of students on the basis of entrance examination or on the 
merit of the applicant at the Master’s degree level or a combination of both.  
 
The contention of the University that the admission s were based on the ICAR 
guidelines is not tenable, as ICAR guidelines cannot supersede the UGC regulations. 
 
 
2.5.3 Research 
 
The research initiatives undertaken by the Universi ty are focused on increasing the 
productivity of crops currently grown in the State.  The research agenda is set through 
consultations with the farming community and the ex tension personnel and is based 
on need assessment by the faculty, the State and Na tional level agencies and 
institutions engaged in development and research. 
 
The University has officially released 320 varietie s of different crops including 121 
varieties of rice, the staple food crop of 
the State. The rice varieties ‘Jyothi’ and 
‘Uma’ released by the University in 
1974 and in 1998 respectively, occupy 
more than 80 per cent  of the cropped 
area of the State. During 1980s the 
University identified a bio-control agent 
called Cyrtobagus salviniae  for successful control of the aquatic weed ( Salvinia 
molesta ) which infested the water bodies of the State. ‘ Keramithra ’, a coconut de-
husking tool invented during the 1990s and patented  by the University is one of the 
most popular inventions of the State. 
 
The research projects in Kerala 
Agricultural University are mainly 
funded by the State Government, ICAR, 
Indian Council for Forestry Research 
and Education, Directorate of 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
26 
Biotechnology, Department of Science and Technology  and the Kerala State Council 
for Science Technology and Environment. The projects are implemented by the 
scientists working in the colleges and research sta tions of the University. These 
scientists are also discharging extension and teach ing duties. Post graduate and 
doctoral research projects also contribute to the research outcome.  
 
The Director of Research is in charge of the resear ch management in the University 
and is supported by nine Associate Directors of Res earch (one each located in five 
zones and four at the Headquarters). There are thre e faculties, namely Agriculture, 
Forestry and Agricultural Engineering. There are 24  subject specific Project Co-
ordination Groups, 19 in agriculture, two in Forest ry and three in Agricultural 
Engineering. 
All the projects, including PG and Ph.D. projects, are coordinated by the 
Professor (Research Co-ordination). 
 
Audit analysed the performance of the University in  areas of research product, impact 
and excellence, implementation of selected projects  and in emerging areas of 
Intellectual Property Management. 
The audit observations are discussed below: 
 
2.5.3.1 Research Product 
 
In order to maximise the benefits from research, th e results of the research activities 
must be disseminated through publications at the ea rliest and in the most effective 
manner. Publication of research article in journals  is a criterion considered for 
appointment of faculty and evaluating their perform ance for career advancement. It is 
also a mandatory requirement for the award of Maste rs/Doctoral degrees and an 
important factor of consideration for ranking of Un iversities by various agencies. The 
quality of a research article is relative to the qu ality of the journal in which it is 
published.  
 
In agriculture and allied subjects, the quality of a research article is determined by the 
score allotted by the NAAS to the journal in which it is published. According to the 
data on research papers submitted by the University  to NAEAB for accreditation, a 
total of 689 papers were published during the perio d 2014 – 2018. The Audit findings 
on the analysis of the data are shown in the following table:  
 
Table-2.7: Details of research papers published 
Year  
 
No. of papers 
published as 
per the data 
submitted by 
University 
Repetition 
of papers 
noticed 
 
Actual 
No. of 
papers 
published 
(2)-(3) 
Published in Journals 
Predatory 17  
Conference 
papers/ 
News letters  
with NAAS 
score below 5  
with NAAS 
score of 5 
and above 
not rated 
by NAAS  
(1) (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  
2014 17 0 17 8 7 1 1 0 
2015 62  4 58  29  24  4 0 1 
2016 187  6 181  96  45  15  22  3 
 
17 Verified from the following URL https://web.archive.org/web/20170111172309/https:/scholarlyoa.com/ 
individual-journals/ as mentioned in the UGC public notice dated 31 st  July 2019. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
27  
2017 219  40  179  85  64  18  10  2 
2018 204 27 177 66 78 18 15 0 
Total  689 77 612 284 218 56 48 6 
Details at column Nos. 3 to 9 were obtained on analysis of the item at column No.2 
 
 The fact that 77 out of the total 689 (11 per cent ) research papers included in the 
list submitted to NAEAB were duplications indicates  lack of proper system of 
research data management in the University. As per UGC Establishment and 
Monitoring of the Internal Quality Assurance Cell i n Universities (2012-2017), 
the IQAC is responsible for the documentation of va rious programmes/activities 
of the University leading to quality improvement. A s research papers are a key 
quality indicator, the IQAC of the University shoul d have developed an organised 
methodology of its documentation. The deficiency in  the functioning of IQAC is 
discussed in paragraph 2.5.2.2. 
 
 The University does not have a procedure to verify the quality of journals in 
which the works are published by its faculty and st udents. This is evidenced from 
the fact that 104 (17 per cent ) out of the 612 publications showcased by the 
University as its achievement were in non-NAAS rate d/ predatory journals 
18 . This 
is also an indication that the University has not a dopted the ICAR Guidelines for 
Internal Evaluation and Forwarding Research Papers to Scientific Journals and 
Data Management in ICAR Institutes which recommends  stringent evaluation 
before submission of manuscripts to research journals. 
 
 Of the 502 research papers published in NAAS rated journals, 284 (57 per cent ) 
were published in journals having a score of  five or below. They do not qualify 
for either ICAR accreditation or ranking. 
 
The minimum benchmark adopted by ICAR for ranking o f agricultural universities in 
2017 and 2018 was 0.6 papers 
19  per faculty per year, published in journals having  
NAAS score of above six. Audit mapped the research papers to individual faculty 
member authors and found that 139 (38 per cent ) out of the 367 faculty members as 
on 30 October 2017, including 37 faculty members posted at various research stations, 
did not author/co-author even a single research pap er during the period 2014 to 2018. 
This contributed to low productivity per faculty in terms of research papers published.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat repetitions were compilation 
errors made during the effort to make the list as e xhaustive as possible, and that 
individual faculty members were asked to furnish a list of publications for the given 
period. It was further stated that there was a decline in the number of papers published 
 
18  A predatory journal is a publication that actively  asks researchers for manuscripts. They have no pee r review 
system and no true editorial board and are often fo und to publish mediocre or even worthless papers. T hey also 
ask for huge publication charges . 
19  As per the criteria fixed by NAAS, the number of r esearch papers per faculty is to be calculated by d ividing the 
total number of research papers published by the fa culty members of the University by the total number  of 
faculty members. If the number of research papers p er faculty is less than 0.6, no marks are awarded a nd for 
those above 0.6, marks are awarded based on a slab fixed by NAAS. Hence, the minimum bench mark fixed for 
the obtaining mark is 0.6. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
28 
in Non-NAAS rated/predatory journals in proportion to the total numbers, indicating 
heightened awareness and that a single criterion li ke number of papers published 
would neither be comprehensive nor adequate enough to capture performance/ 
contribution of the faculty members. In the exit co nference (October 2020), the Vice-
Chancellor contended that the faculties were engage d in teaching, research and 
extension activities, therefore papers per faculty should be considered as a criteria 
only for those faculties engaged in research activi ties instead of considering the total 
strength of the faculty. 
 
The reply of the University confirms the audit obse rvation regarding lack of effective 
system for research data management and lack of pro cedure to verify the quality of 
journals in which the papers are published. The vie w expressed in the exit conference 
cannot be acceded to, as the criteria adopted by au dit was the same as that adopted by 
ICAR for ranking purposes, in which, research paper  per faculty is determined taking 
into consideration the total strength of the facult y irrespective of their engagement in 
teaching, research or extension. 
 
2.5.3.2 Research Excellence 
 
For ranking of agricultural universities, ICAR eval uates their research excellence by 
considering, among other things, their achievement in release of crop varieties, 
granting of patents (discussed in para 2.5.3.3), et c. Audit examined the achievement 
of the University in the above mentioned areas and observed the following; 
 
 Varieties released and notified: The State Seed Sub-Committee under the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare, Gov ernment of Kerala released 
47 varieties of crops developed by the University d uring the period 2014-2018. 
However, the State Seed Sub-Committee could not ini tiate action for notification 
of these varieties under the Seeds Act, 1966 as the  University failed to submit the 
notification proposal.  
The notification is made by the Central Government on the recommendation of 
the Central Seed Committee. The varieties accepted for release by the State Seed 
Sub-Committee has to be submitted to the Central Su b-Committee on Crop 
Standards, Notification and Release of Varieties fo r notification. For this, the 
breeder (the University) concerned should submit su fficient copies of the 
notification proposals in the prescribed proforma to the State Seed Sub-Committee 
for onward transmission to Central Sub-Committee. T his inter-alia  includes 
deposition of seed material to Gene Bank, NBPGR 
20 , New Delhi  
Audit observed that the University failed to submit  the notification proposal despite 
repeated requests from the Department of Agricultur e. The Department of Agriculture 
can popularise only the notified varieties. In the absence of notification, such newly 
released varieties could not be included in the see d plan of the Department for 
procurement of seeds and supply to farmers free of cost.  
 
20  National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
29  
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat notification of varieties 
involves additional data generation by DNA fingerpr inting of varieties. The 
University has initiated activities in this directi on. A proposal for DNA fingerprinting 
of all varieties as a prerequisite for notification  has been developed and work is in 
progress. 
2.5.3.3 Intellectual Property Management 
 
India as a member of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO) is obliged to comply with 
the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellect ual Property Rights (TRIPS 
Agreement) which requires the member countries to p rovide for protection of 
intellectual property rights (IPRs) in one form or the other, in all fields of technology 
including agriculture. The IPR, among other things includes patents, protection of 
plant varieties and Geographical Indication (GI) of  Goods. The study of Intellectual 
Property Rights is a course included in the syllabus of B.Sc.(Hons.) Agriculture and is 
a compulsory course for various disciplines of M.Sc . (Agriculture) programme of the 
University. 
 
The University formed an Intellectual Property Righ ts (IPR) Management Cell in 
2003 with the aim of (i) Protection and management of the IPR in Agriculture, (ii) 
Protection of Farmers’ rights, Breeders’ rights, pa tents and crop varieties, (iii) 
Protection of Geographical Indications, (iv) Development of policy guidelines for IPR 
and Transfer of Technology in the University, (v) E mpowering of farmers, students 
and faculties to address IPR issues and (vi) organi sing awareness programmes. The 
ICAR released (2006) Guidelines for Intellectual Pr operty Management and 
Technology Transfer/Commercialisation and recommend ed their adoption by the 
State Agricultural Universities suitably for intern al use. Audit observed the following 
shortcomings in the Intellectual Property Management of the University:  
 
 Patents 
21  
 
ICAR Guidelines prescribe that all research results which are patentable under law 
and have scope for technology transfer or for advan cement of basic and strategic 
research, should be taken up for patent protection.  The technologies developed by 
the University as a result of its research activiti es need to be protected against 
unauthorised use/exploitation by other agencies wit hin and outside the country for 
commercial gains. Patents obtained under the Patent s Act, 1970 offer such 
protection.  
 
  
 
21  It is an authority or license that confers a right  or title for a set period, especially the sole rig ht to exclude others 
from making, using, or selling an invention. In India, patents are governed by the Patents Act, 1970.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
30 
Audit noticed that during the period from 2014-15 t o 2018-19 the University 
developed 16 products 22  and transferred their technology, but did not appl y for 
patents except for five of them. Thus, 11 technolog ies transferred by the 
University were not protected by applying for patents. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) contende d that obtaining of patent 
required five years to six years and that the long wait for completion of the 
patenting formalities before the technology could b e transferred would render 
many technologies irrelevant.  
 
The reply is not tenable as a patent application af fords protection to the invention 
from the date of its filing.  The University had ap plied for patents in respect of 
five products before transfer of technology thus pr otecting their patent. However, 
the technology in respect of remaining 11 products were transferred without 
applying for patent thus exposing the technology to  unauthorised use/exploitation 
by other agencies as mentioned above. 
 
 Protection of plant varieties  
 
Plant varieties cannot be patented in India under t he Patents Act, 1970 but they 
can be protected by registering them under ‘The Pro tection of Plant Varieties and 
Farmers’ Rights (PPV&FR) Act, 2001’. The PPV&FR Act , 2001 allows 
registration of four types of plant varieties, such  as new variety 23 , extant variety 24 , 
farmers’ variety 25  and essentially derived variety 26 . The varieties requiring 
registration should fulfill the criteria of distinc tiveness, uniformity and stability 
(DUS) and should have a single and distinct denomination. 
 
Audit noticed that the University has not initiated  action for registration of any of 
the plant varieties under the PPV&FR Act, 2001 so f ar (March 2019 ) despite 
releasing over 300 varieties of different crops . As a result, the University cannot 
opt for any remedial measure against unacknowledged /unauthorised use of the 
varieties developed by it. 
 
22  Technologies developed by the University - i) Vegg ie wash, ii) Ayar, iii) Osmovac dried Intermediate Vaccum 
dried Nendran Banana, iv) Sampoorna Rice micronutri ent formulation, v) Sampoorna Vegetable micronutrie nt 
formulation, vi) Sampoorna Banana micronutrient for mulation, vii) Tuber fortified cold extruded pasta/ noodles 
products, viii) Liquid fertiliser from waste hair, ix) Kerasuraksha coconut climber, x) Coconut collec tor, xi) 
Palm basin digger, xii) Trichoderma & Pseudomonas, xiii) Banana Bunch covering device, xiv) KAU weed 
piper, xv) Jackfruit products, xvi) Bioreactor using high rate bio-methenation. 
23  A variety which is not in public domain in India e arlier than one year before the date of filing; or outside India, 
in the case of trees or vines earlier than six years, or in any other case, earlier than four years. 
24  A variety which is notified under Seed Act, 1966 o r a variety about which there is common knowledge o r a 
farmers’ variety or any other variety which is in public domain is considered as an Extant variety. 
25  A variety which has been traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their fields or a var iety which is 
a wild relative or land race of a variety about which farmers possess common knowledge. 
26  An “essentially derived variety” shall be said to be essentially derived from such initial variety wh en it is 
predominantly derived from such initial variety, or  from a variety that itself is predominantly derive d from such 
initial variety, while retaining the expression of the essential characteristics that result from the genotype or 
combination of genotype of such initial variety and  it is clearly distinguishable from such initial va riety. An 
essentially derived variety conforms to such initia l variety that results from the genotype or combina tion of 
genotype of such initial variety. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
31  
The Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Cell of 
the University has been at the forefront of 
conserving unique products of Kerala 
agriculture and getting them granted 
Geographical Indication (GI) registration. 
The University is the ‘registered proprietor’ of 
five GIs and has facilitated obtaining GIs of 
another five. In recognition of these efforts, 
the IPR Cell of the University was adjudged as 
the ‘Top organisation for best facilitation of 
registration of GI and promotion of GI in 
India’ in 2018 by the Department of Industrial 
policy, Promotion and Intellectual property, 
Government of India. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat registration of plant 
varieties under the PPV&FR Act will be taken up on priority basis. 
 
 Geographical Indication of Goods  
 
The protection of agricultural goods 
indicated to specific geographical 
territories/regions is governed by the 
Geographical Indication (GI) of 
Goods  Act 1999. GI is an 
indication that the goods being 
commercialised under that indication 
have originated from a definite 
geographical territory either as an 
agricultural produce (e.g. Nagpur 
orange) or as a natural produce like 
from mining (e.g. Mussourie Rock 
Phosphate) or by manufacturing 
(production or processing or preparation e.g. Banarasi saree) or some specific 
local brews of tribal areas (e.g. Agrekapetha ) and it has a special quality or 
reputation or other characteristics attributable to  that origin. GI is the collective 
intellectual property of the entire community or so ciety or organisation of the 
geographical region to which the goods belong. 
 
The IPR Cell of the University has facilitated vari ous farmers’ collectives/ 
organisations in the State to obtain GIs for their agricultural produce. The 
University is the ‘registered proprietor 
27 ’ of five 28  GIs and has facilitated 
obtaining GIs of another five 29 . The efforts of the University on this front have 
won many accolades, the most recent being the Natio nal Intellectual Property 
Award 2019 instituted by the Indian Intellectual Pr operty Office under the 
Ministry of Industries and Commerce.  
 
Audit, however, noticed that the IPR Cell was not e ffective in preventing 
infringements on its GI. The University is a regist ered 30  proprietor of the GI 
‘Wayanad Jeerakasala Rice’ a traditional aromatic r ice variety cultivated in the 
Wayanad district of Kerala. Any company or person who wishes to use this GI tag 
has to get themselves registered as ‘authorised use rs’ under intimation to the 
University. There are no ‘authorised users’ for the  GI ‘Wayanad Jeerakasala Rice’ 
as of July 2020. Audit observed that at least two c ompanies which are not 
‘authorised users’ of the GI ‘Wayanad Jeerakasala R ice’ were marketing the rice 
 
27  "registered proprietor", in relation to a geographical indication, means any association of persons or of producers 
or any organisation for the time being entered in the register as proprietor of the geographical indication. 
28  Pokkali rice, Vazhakkulam Pineapple, Central Trava ncore Jaggery, Wayanad Jeerakasala Rice and Wayanad  
Gandhakasala Rice. 
29  Kaipad Rice, Chengalikodan Nendran Banana, Marayoor jaggery, Tirur Vettila and Nilambur Teak. 
30  Registered in the year 2009. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
32 
branding it as ‘Jeerakasala ’ and also referring to it as ‘Wayanadan Kaima’ on the 
packing. Under the product description, the website  of one company described it 
as ‘ Jeerakasala rice, also known as Wayanadan Kaima, is  popular traditional 
small aromatic non-basmati rice, cultivated by the farmers in Wayanad District in 
Kerala’. This is an indication of a potential infringement o f the GI granted to the 
University.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat the University’s 
contribution in terms of GI registration has been t he best in the country and has 
been nationally acclaimed. However, it may be noted  that it is only a facilitator in 
most GI registrations and cannot address legally. I t is the responsibility of the 
owners of the GI registration, the community of pra ctice in our case to proceed 
against such infringements. The instance referred t o involving ‘Jeerakasala’ rice 
in Wayanad calls for in-depth investigations of sci entific and legal nature before 
establishment of infringement.  
 
The contribution of the University in obtaining Geo graphical indication is 
noteworthy and also it cannot address legally infri ngement cases in which, it is 
only a facilitator. However, the reply is not tenab le in the instance of ‘ Wayanad 
Jeerakasala Rice’ as it is the ‘Registered Proprietor’ and not a faci litator. The 
University’s inability to either confirm or deny po tential infringement of GI 
owned by it, when brought to its notice indicates absence of an IP watch system as 
recommended in the ICAR guidelines.  
 
2.5.3.4 Specific Research Projects  
 
The University formulates new research projects on the basis of the thrust areas 
identified by various project groups. Each research  project is scrutinised by the 
respective Project Coordination Groups duly approve d by the Faculty Research 
Council before it is formally commenced. Audit, how ever, noticed that there was no 
general guideline governing the implementation of projects.  
 
The University undertook 265 specific research proj ects with a total outlay of ₹73.06 
crore during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 as detailed below: 
 
Table 2.8: Details of projects undertaken by the University 
Funding agency No. of projects approved 
during the audit period 
Outlay (₹ in 
crore) 
No. of projects completed 
during the audit period 
Government of Kerala  123  22.89  19  
ICAR  19  7.31  6 
External agencies  123  42.86  25  
Total 265 73.06 50 
 
Audit selected 54 out of the 265 research projects for detailed review and noticed that 
four of them failed to achieve the objectives envisaged.  
 
 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
33  
 The following projects did not achieve the objectives due to defective planning: 
 
 The project “Development of entrepreneurship and su stainable livelihood for 
SC / Tribe women through projection of tissue cultu re plants” which involved 
developing 15 lakh banana plants at an outlay of ₹9 .35 lakh funded by State 
Horticulture Mission (SHM) failed as the physical t arget fixed was far above 
the infrastructural capacity provided to achieve it. 
 
 The project “Import of planting material by RARS Am balavayal” which 
involved import of high yielding varieties of sub-t ropical fruits, cut flowers 
and other perennials from foreign countries to repl ace the indigenous varieties 
could not be implemented, in spite of creation of r equired infrastructure at a 
cost of ₹24.28 lakh, due to the failure of the Univ ersity to get import license 
from the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in time. 
 
 In the following projects the University deviated from the project guidelines.  
 
 The University decentralised the implementation of the project “Creation of 
Seed Hub for increasing indigenous production of pu lses at RARS, Pattambi” 
to other 13 research stations without the prior con currence of ICAR, the 
funding agency, which resulted in unproductive expenditure of ₹37.47 lakh 
 
 The University diverted the infrastructure worth ₹3 .13 crore created for the 
project “Technology intervention and peoples partic ipation for poverty 
alleviation in Wayanad district at Ambalavayal” to an entirely different 
purpose, resulting in non-release of the balance fu nd amounting to ₹4.55 crore 
(59 per cent ) by the Government. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) accepted  the audit observation on the 
first project. Regarding importing Planting materia ls it was stated that import 
license having validity of only six months was not applied for as the requisite 
infrastructure had to be readied first and that the  import license had been obtained 
with effect from 28 February 2020. The reply is not  acceptable as the University 
deviated from the approved DPR of the project which  set a time frame of one year 
for implementation.  
 
In respect of the project on Creation of Seed Hub, the University replied that the 
reason for decentralisation of production was commu nicated to ICAR and 
approval sought in December 2017 but denial of sanc tion was intimated only in 
December 2018. The reply is not acceptable, as it w as not correct on the part of 
the University to implement the project in decentra lised manner without obtaining 
prior approval of ICAR, the funding agency. 
 
Regarding the project on “Technology intervention a nd people’s participation”, 
the University contented that the transfer of infra structure did not have any impact 
on other activities but conceded that the resultant  delay in implementation had led 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
34 
KVK Kannur developed a Production 
Protocol for rice farming which resulted in 
enhanced yield of more than three times the 
state average. 
to non-release of funds. The reply cannot be accept ed, as the building constructed 
for the implementation of the project was being use d as class rooms for the 
College of Agriculture, at Ambalavayal compromising the objective of the project.  
 
2.5.4 Extension Education 
 
The Extension Education Programmes of the Kerala Ag ricultural University are 
planned, organised, and coordinated by 
the Director of Extension (DoE) at the 
University level as mandated under the 
Act. The basic objective of the extension 
education programme is to make 
available to the farmers and others through the Gov ernment Departments concerned, 
useful information based on research findings. The extension education activities of 
the University are implemented primarily through th e KVKs and other centres 
functioning under the DoE. The educational institut ions and research stations of the 
University also implement extension education programmes. 
 
The planned activities of the KVKs include on-farm trials, frontline demonstrations, 
trainings and extension programmes. Audit selected three 31  out of the seven KVKs 
operated by the University in the State for detaile d scrutiny and observed that all of 
them had achieved their targets in the above activi ties. A noteworthy activity of the 
University was the practice of deputing Multi-disci plinary Diagnostic Teams to visit 
farmers’ fields and recommend solutions to various problems reported by them. It has 
also designed a programme for the public to interac t with the faculty about the latest 
developments in agricultural sector. Another notabl e achievement was that of KVK 
Kannur, which developed a production protocol for r ice farming from sowing to 
harvesting and for value addition by processing and branding of organic rice under the 
Mayyil Grama Panchayath, in Kannur district. As a r esult, the productivity has 
enhanced to nine to ten tonnes/hectare as against t he State average of 2.9 
tonnes/hectare . 
 
ICAR ranks agricultural Universities annually based  on various parameters under 
teaching outcome, research and extension. In teachi ng, parameters with high score 
include performance of students in national level examinations. In research, parameter 
with high score include research papers with high N AAS rating. In extension, 
parameters with high score includes revenue generat ion. The University was ranked 
14 in the year 2016, but its ranking slid to 34 in 2018. In the year 2019, it improved its 
ranking to 19 mainly aided by the performance of it s students in national level 
examinations. 
 
  
 
31  Kollam, Kottayam and Kannur. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
35  
2.5.5 Financial Management 
 
The University follows a decentralised financial sy stem. The funds of the University 
are operated and managed in accordance with the pro visions of Articles 45 to 47 of 
the Act. The Government of Kerala, in exercise of t he powers conferred by section 63 
of the Act, notified 
32  the first statute (Statute SR. No.815/79) regardin g "Finance 
Accounts and maintenance and management of all Univ ersity Funds in General". The 
University amended the above Statute and issued Not ification No.GA/8762/A3/83, 
dated 29 September 1983. The Statute permits the Un iversity to follow the Financial 
and Accounting Rules of Government of Kerala until such time the University 
prescribes and adopts its own Financial and Account ing Rules. The Kerala Financial 
Code mandates that every Government servant should see that proper accounts are 
maintained for all Government financial transaction s with which he is concerned 
exercising specially strict and close control in re gard to the maintenance of proper 
accounts. 
 
The receipts and expenditure of the University for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 
were as follows:  
 
Table-2.9: Receipts and Expenditure during the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 
          
(₹ in crore ) 
 
Source of 
Fund 
Description 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 Total 
Plan 
Receipt 31.37  29.17  42.25  38.90  15.00  156.69 
Expenditure 21.55  23.94  20.77  14.24  15.61  96.11 
Excess/ Savings 9.83  5.23  21.47  24.66  -0.61  60.58 
Non-Plan 
Receipt 208.82  250.53  281.91  324.20  338.09  1,403.55 
Expenditure 216.72  260.06  306.19  335.13  343.00  1,461.10 
Excess/ Savings -7.90  -9.53  -24.28  -10.93  -4.91  -57.55 
ICAR 
(100%) 
Receipt 13.92  5.44  10.73  14.92  21.26  66.27 
Expenditure 21.95  16.18  22.45  19.39  19.82  99.79 
Excess/ Savings -8.03  -10.74  -11.72  -4.47  1.44  -33.52 
ICAR 
(75%) 
Receipt 9.47  11.14  9.36  13.40  16.53  59.90 
Expenditure 16.26  17.73  18.23  19.48  16.72  88.42 
Excess/ Savings -6.79  -6.59  -8.88  -6.08  -0.19  -28.53 
External 
Agencies 
Receipt 36.72  17.20  15.82  18.54  12.30  100.58 
Expenditure 27.18  20.94  13.32  11.11  12.44  84.99 
Excess/ Savings 9.54  -3.74  2.50  7.43  -0.14  15.59 
 
Audit noticed the following weaknesses in the finan cial management of the 
University. 
 
  
 
32  Notification No. GO(MS) No.257/79/AD dated 23 June 1979. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
36 
2.5.5.1 Deficiencies in the UFAST 33  accounting software 
 
The University prepares its annual accounts and sub mits the same to the Government 
as per Section 47 of the Act and Statute No.815/79.  The annual accounts are prepared 
through the UFAST software developed internally. Th e UFAST generates parallel 
bank statements and reconciles the office cash bala nce with it instead of the statement 
generated by bank. The UFAST generated bank balance s were found to be different 
from the actual bank balances. Generation of parall el bank statements through 
UFAST software and the reconciliation of the book balance with the same is irregular. 
Audit observed that the UFAST generated bank balanc es shown in the annual 
accounts were often modified after their submission  as the software allowed 
adjustments even after the closing of accounts.  
 
Audit test checked the bank balances exhibited in t he accounts with those generated 
by UFAST on 19 December 2019 and found that the sam e did not match with the 
statements generated for the finalisation of accoun ts. For instance, the closing balance 
of ₹131.75 crore for the 2016-17 was corrected as ₹ 144.10 crore after the submission 
of the annual accounts. Consequently, the opening b alance of 2017-18 showed an 
excess balance of ₹12.35 crore. Option to enable mo difications/adjustments in the 
items contained in the accounts after their closure  and submission to Government is 
indicative of major deficiency in the Software. Aud it also noticed that the accounting 
software was adopted without certification of its reliability and controls by an external 
agency. The adoption and use of software without en suring their security and 
reliability can lead to malpractices and frauds through manipulation of figures. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) accepted  the audit observation and stated 
that corrective action was taken to ensure that the re was no mismatch between 
UFAST and bank statements. It was, however, silent about the security and reliability 
of the software. 
 
2.5.5.2 Non-preparation of Balance sheet 
 
The original Kerala Agricultural University Act, 19 71 required the University to 
submit its balance sheet along with the Annual Acco unts to the Government. Statute 
No. 815/79 framed under this Act prescribed respons ibility of the preparation of 
balance sheet by the Comptroller.  The non-preparat ion of the balance sheet was 
commented in the Report of the C&AG for the year en ded 31 March 1998. 
Meanwhile, the Act was amended in 2001 removing the  clause requiring the 
submission of balance sheet along with annual accounts to the Government. 
 
The Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) in its 57 
th  report, based on the 
aforementioned C&AG Report presented to the legisla ture on the 17 th  of March 2008 
recommended double entry system in accounting and t he valuation of assets. Further, 
Statute prescribing the duties of the Comptroller t o prepare balance sheet is still in 
 
33  University Functional Accountability System. 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
37 
force. Moreover, prudent accoun ting practice warrants the prepa ration of balance 
sheet in double entry accounting system. 
 
In the reply furnished (October 2020) the Government stated tha t comprehensive 
balance sheet was not being made but effort was on to make the balance sheet 
inclusive of all assets and liabilities of the University. The reply is not tenable as it 
does not justify the delay in pre paration of balance sheet, whi ch is stipulated in the 
Statutes notified in 1979 and also recommended by the PAC in 2008. 
 
2.5.5.3 Inadequacy of non-plan funds released by Government lea ding to 
diversion of money from the PF contributions of employees 
 
According to the Act, every year the Government shall make non- lapsable lump-sum 
grants to University not less than the estimated net expenditur e of pay and allowances 
of the staff, contingencies, suppl ies and services of the Unive rsity and also to meet 
such additional items of expenditure recurring and non-recurrin g as the Government 
may deem necessary for the proper functioning of the University.  
 
Audit noticed that, the non-plan g rants released by the Governm ent to the University 
were less than the demand and actual expenditure of the Univers ity from the year 
2000-01. Audit analysed the grant released and non-plan expendi ture during the 
period 2014-15 to 2019-20, and the details are as follows: 
 
Table-2.10: Details of grants 
                                                  (₹ in crore) 
Financial 
year 
Grant 
requested 
Grant 
received 
Non-plan 
expenditure 
Shortage 
2014-15 269.48 208.82 246.72 37.90 
2015-16 328.53 250.53 260.02 9.49 
2016-17 413.59 281.91 306.20 24.29
2017-18 405.24 324.20 419.38 95.18
2018-19 463.50 338.10 343.40 5.30
Total 1,880.34 1,403.56 1,575.72 172.16 
 
Audit noticed that the University met the deficiency in the non-plan grant by diverting 
amounts from the General Providen t Fund (GPF) contributions of the employees, 
which also depleted the balance in their GPF accounts to the ex tent of ₹96.61 crores. 
As a result, the University has not been able (February 2020) t o transfer the provident 
fund of the employees who opted for Kerala Veterinary and Anima l Sciences 
University (KVASU) and Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies (KUFOS) 
on trifurcation (2011) of the erst while Kerala Agricultural Uni versity. The amount 
due to KVASU was ₹33.31 crore while the dues to KUFOS has not been ascertained.  
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) accepted that the inadequacy of non-plan 
fund released by the Government had caused a deficit of nearly 100 crore in the GPF 
accounts and that 60 per cent  of the deficit in GPF subscription amount of the 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
38 
employees had been made good by now. It was also sa id that GPF closure amounts 
were being disbursed to employees at the time of their retirement.  
 
2.5.6 Internal Controls  
 
The internal controls of an entity to safeguard its  assets, promote accountability and 
efficiency are generally elaborated in its Accounts  manual, Stores and Purchase 
manual, policy documents etc. Audit noticed that th e University did not frame any 
such manual; and that the duties and powers of vari ous authorities from which the 
internal controls of the University are derived wer e not separately documented or 
declared by Statutes. 
 
Audit noticed the following weaknesses in the internal control of the University. 
 
2.5.6.1 Inadequacies in the functioning of internal  audit system 
 
In order to strengthen the existing internal audit system and to bring uniformity in 
audit, Government of Kerala issued (19 December 200 3 and 10 June 2005) guidelines 
on internal audit to all heads of departments. Acco rdingly, the University formed 
three internal audit circles (South, Central and North) for conducting internal audit.  
 
Audit observed that the University has not framed i ts own internal audit manual so 
far. Further, even though the funds received at the  University headquarters are 
distributed to the various stations coming under th e three audit circles, the internal 
audits were not evenly covered. For example, during  the period from 2013-14 to 
2017-18, funds were transferred to 65 stations comi ng under the three circles; but the 
audit programmes of the period were restricted to S outh and North Regions only 
covering 31 centres. More than 52 per cent  of the stations were outside audit purview 
for several years. The University headquarters did not have a record of the internal 
audit programmes conducted.  
 
The above lapses indicate the inadequacy of the exi sting Internal Audit system of the 
University and points to the need to improve governance.  
 
In its reply (October 2020), the Government has acc epted the audit observations and 
stated that earnest effort was being taken to frame  an Internal Audit Manual of the 
University and to strengthen the Internal Audit System so as to improve governance. 
 
2.5.6.2 Non-maintenance of Asset Register 
 
Statute No.815/79 mandates the Director of Physical  Plant to maintain an Assets 
Register containing the details of its plants and b uildings. Audit noticed that such a 
register was not being maintained in the University. As a result, the University did not 
have proper control over its immovable assets. 
 

Chapter II - Performance Audit 
39  
The Government replied (October 2020) that necessar y steps were being taken to 
maintain the Asset Register. 
 
2.5.6.3 Irregular Operation of revolving funds 
 
Revolving funds are maintained to meet the day to d ay expenditure on revenue 
generating activities like production and sale of s eeds/seedlings, vegetables, other 
agricultural produces etc. The Act permits the Univ ersity to have such other funds as 
may be prescribed by Statutes. 
 
Audit noticed that the University operated 77 revol ving funds and had a balance of 
₹20.94 crore as of March 2019. But none of them had  any legal back up as they were 
not prescribed by Statutes as required under the Act. 
 
The Government in its reply (October 2020) stated t hat the audit observation 
regarding lack of legal backing was taken note of a nd that necessary steps would be 
taken to achieve the objective.  
 
2.5.6.4 Lack of responsiveness to PAC recommendatio ns. 
 
The Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) in its 57 th  report presented to the 
Legislature on the 17 March 2008 made the following  recommendations on the basis 
of the report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 
March 1998.  
 
 To adopt Double Entry System in accounting and Valu ation of Assets as 
mentioned in paragraph 2.5.5.2 (Recommendation No.1.9). 
 
 To undertake a work study on the faculty and redepl oyment of idling/ 
underutilised faculty (Recommendation No.1.13). 
 
Audit noticed that the University has not implement ed the recommendations so far. 
Further, the University had assured the PAC that a register containing the details of 
the extent of land was being maintained and was upd ated. Audit noticed that this was 
contrary to the facts. 
 
The Government replied (October 2020) that necessar y steps were being taken to 
adopt the double entry system in the accounting sof tware of UFAST and to undertake 
a work study on the faculty and redeployment of idling and underutilised faculty.  
 
2.6  Conclusion 
 
The governance framework of the University was weak ened by non-updation of 
Statutes, Ordinance and Regulations. It was further  impacted by non-appointment of 
Officers of the University. In Academic activities,  most of the programme offered by 
it are in demand and are fully subscribed. However,  the University failed to comply 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
40 
with the provisions of UGC regulations governing it  in recruitment of faculty 
members and award of Ph.D. degree. As a result, fac ulty members awarded with its 
Ph.D. degrees were not eligible for advance increme nts as per Government norms. It 
also failed to comply with ICAR recommendations on establishment of new college at 
Ambalavayal. In research activities, the number and  quality of research papers 
published in scientific journals per faculty were b elow benchmark as more than a 
third of the faculty did not publish research paper s. The rice varieties released by the 
University occupy more than 80 per cent  of the cropped area of the State in the case 
of rice, which is the staple food crop of the State . However, the popularisation of new 
varieties released by the University was hindered d ue to non-notification under the 
Seeds Act. The technologies developed and varieties  released by the University are 
not protected by patents and by registration under the PPV&FR Act respectively. The 
University has obtained and facilitated Geographica l Indication for various 
agricultural products of the State, however it lack s expertise to determine 
infringements to Geographical Indications owned by it. The internal controls and 
financial management of the University needs strengthening. 
 
2.7 Recommendations 
 
The Audit recommends that : 
 
 Immediate steps may be taken to frame/update its St atutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations to ensure that the appointments of Offi cers of the University are 
done regularly and in compliance with the provision s of the Act, UGC 
Regulations and ICAR guidelines. 
 
 Revamp its existing recruitment policy so as to att ract high calibre faculties 
capable of strengthening its research output. 
 
 Evolve a mechanism to monitor and update its compli ance to various UGC 
regulations and ICAR Guidelines on a regular basis. 
 
 Evolve a system for notification of newly developed  and released varieties to 
be notified under the Seeds Act, 1966. 
 
 Adopt appropriately the ICAR guidelines relating to  Intellectual Property 
Management and Internal Evaluation of research papers. 
 
 Develop own resources to improve its financial posi tion and strengthen 
internal audit. 
 
 University may put in place a suitable mechanism to  inventorise and monitor 
the assets available in all its constituent colleges and research units. 
     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit Paragraphs  
41  
CHAPTER  III 
 
COMPLIANCE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS 
 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
 
3.1 Fraudulent payment to contractors through submi ssion of original and 
duplicate copies of invoices in support of purchase  of bitumen for 
different works 
 
Non-exercise of caution and checks by departmental officials enabled 
contractors to defraud the Department of ₹30.65 lak h by submitting multiple 
copies of the same invoices in support of purchase of bitumen for different works. 
 
The quantity of bitumen required for a road work is  worked out on the basis of the 
estimated quantity of bituminous items required to be executed. According to the 
instructions issued by Chief Engineer (Admin & NH) in circular dated 22 October 2003, 
which also form part of the agreement conditions 
1 , the requisition for purchase of 
bitumen should be placed to the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (BPCL) through 
the Executive Engineer (EE) of the Division concerned. The EE should issue a letter to 
the BPCL comprising details like name of the work, the contractor and agreement 
number of the work, for supply of the required quan tity of bitumen. The contractor 
would then procure the bitumen by paying its cost a nd BPCL would issue invoices in 
the name of the EE. 
 
The Public Works Department (PWD) adopted the Central PWD Schedule of Rates and 
the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) Specifications in the State with 
effect from 01 October 2013 
2 . The MoRTH, in January 2015 instructed 3  the Chief 
Engineer, National Highways to ensure that copies o f the invoices for purchase of 
materials are enclosed with the running/final bill of works in proof of procurement of 
the required quantity/grade of materials, and that a clause to this effect should be 
included in the contract agreement. The instruction  was not adopted by PWD Roads 
Wing and a clause to this effect was not added in the contract agreement. 
 
Audit test checked the accounts and registers relating to 2018-19 and 2019-20 in respect 
of seven out of 16 Roads Divisions of PWD. Out of t he 6,922 works, audit scrutinised 
442 works with total Agreed Probable Amount of Cont ract (PAC) of ₹1,762.11 crore 
and found the following irregularities in respect of five works under three Divisions as 
detailed below:-
 
 
 
1 Para 12 of Agreement conditions. 
2 GO(P) 36/2013/PWD dated 17/04/2013. 
3 Letter No.RW/TRI/ Tech/Misc/3/2008 dated 15/01/201 5 of MoRTH. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
42  
The Superintending Engineer, PWD (Roads & Bridges),  North circle, Kozhikode 
awarded (11 May 2017) a work 4 to a contractor 5 under PWD Roads Division, Kannur 
at an agreed PAC of ₹5.92 crore. The items of the w ork included in the contract were 
of MoRTH Specifications. The bitumen required for t he work was to be procured by 
the contractor. The contractor submitted 31 origina l invoices to the EE, PWD Roads 
Division, Kannur, in support of procurement of 463. 19 Metric Ton (MT) of bitumen 
VG 6 -30/NRMB 7  for the work. Audit scrutiny revealed that four o f the invoices 
produced (in the original) in support of purchase of 59.79 MT of bitumen, belonged to 
another road work 8 executed by the same contractor under another divi sion viz. Roads 
Division, Wayanad as shown in the table below: 
 
Table 
3.1 Details of bitumen purchased and work for which invoice submitted 
Sl. 
No. 
Invoice No. 
and date 
Grade of 
bitumen 
Quantity 
purchased 
(in MT) 
Cost 
(₹) 
Work for which 
bitumen was 
purchased 
Work to which the 
original invoice was 
submitted 
1 6300007585 
dated 
22/04/2017  
NRMB 
(bulk) 
15.04 4,68,543 Thavinjal-Valad- 
Kunjome road, 
km 0/000 to 
8/300, under 
Roads Division, 
Wayand 
(Copy of the 
invoices 
submitted) 
Airport road -
Providing Dense 
Bituminous 
Macadam to 
Thalassery-Irikkur 
road from km 3/300 
to 15/000 under 
Roads Division, 
Kannur 
2 6300007589 
dated 
22/04/2017  
NRMB 
(bulk) 
14.89 4,63,870 
3 6300019349 
dated 
22/05/2017  
VG-30 
(bulk) 
14.93 4,55,287 
4 6300019486 
dated 
23/05/2017  
VG-30 
(bulk) 
14.93 4,55,287 
   59.79 18,42,987   
 
Audit noticed that the agreement executed for the work under Roads Division, Kannur 
did not contain provision for departmental supply of material. Further, no material was 
transferred to the work from any other work/Division.   
 
Verification of records of the PWD Roads Division, Wayanad, revealed that the 
contractor had submitted duplicate copies of the same four invoices as mentioned above 
in support of purchase of bitumen made for a road w ork executed by him under the 
Division. This indicated that there was underutilisation of 59.79 MT of bitumen in either 
of the two works (under Roads Divisions Kannur and Wayanad) leading to fraudulent 
gain of ₹18.43 lakh by the contractor. 
 
Audit also came across duplicate/quintuplicate copi es of five invoices worth ₹12.22 
lakh submitted by three contractors in support of p urchase of bitumen for three road 
 
4 Airport road-Providing Dense Bituminous Macadam to  Thalassery-Irikkur road from 3/300 to 15/000 
(Airport work). 
5 Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha. 
6 Viscosity Grade. 
7 Natural Rubber Modified Bitumen. 
8 Thavinjal - Valad - Kunjome road km 0/000 to 8/300  under Roads Division in Wayanad district. 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit Paragraphs  
43 
works. It was observed that these invoices pertained to purchas e of bitumen for five 
separate road works. As noticed in the above instances, illegal  gain by contractors 
through submission of the originals of these invoices elsewhere  could not be ruled out 
(Appendix 3.1). 
 
The PWD did not adopt the MoRTH instructions (January 2015) regarding submission 
of copy of invoices along with work bills. It also failed to introduce a fool-proof system 
for payment of work bills by insisting on the submission of original invoices of bitumen 
along with the work bills. This system failure along with the lackadaisical approach of 
the departmental officials who ve rify the contractors’ claims e nabled contractors to 
defraud the Department of ₹30.65 lakh
9. 
 
The Government replied (February 2020) that an amount of ₹33.62  l a k h
10  was 
recovered from the Contractor’s Certificate (CC) 3 rd and Part bill of another work 11 of 
the same Contractor 12 under Roads Division, Wayanad. However, on an enquiry with 
Executive Engineer of Wayanad Road Division, it was stated (December 2020) that the 
amount deducted from the contractor’s bill was kept under Depos it Head and not 
transferred to Revenue Head. 
 
It was further stated by the Government that to stop the malpra ctice of submitting 
duplicate bills for more than one work, the Government was cons idering a suggestion 
s u b m i t t e d  b y  t h e  C h i e f  E n g i n e e r  ( R o a d s )  t o  i n s i s t  f o r  ( i )  o r i g inal invoice from oil 
companies for admitting the us age of bitumen; and (ii) producti on of non-payment 
certificate and transfer order of Executive Engineer of origina ting division in cases 
where material is transferred from one division to another. 
 
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in selected road divisions, Department 
may examine the position in rest of the works to ensure that pa yments were made on 
the basis of original invoices to prevent such malpractices. 
 
Recommendation: The Department may streamline the system by including enabling  
clauses in the tender/agreements insisting to invariably furnis h original invoices of 
bitumen along with work bills in all road works involving bituminous items. 
  
 
9  ₹18.43 lakh + ₹12.22lakh = ₹30.65 lakh. 
10 ₹18.43 lakh pointed out by Audit plus further shortage of bitu men worth ₹15.19 lakh detected by the 
department. 
11 Improvements and providing BM&BC to Nedumpoyil – Mananthavady road chainage km 38/000 to 
81/000 (portion from km.50/400 to 81/000 of Thalasseri Bavali road) Balance work. 
12 Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
44  
3.2 Inadmissible payment made for sinking reinforce d cement concrete 
circular wells for foundations of three bridges 
 
Revision of estimates by the Department in favour of the contractors resulted in 
inadmissible payment of ₹1.99 crore in three bridge works 
 
Conditions No.1 and 2 under the special conditions of contracts in Public Works 
Department (PWD) stipulate that the rate quoted by the contractor shall be an inclusive 
one, covering all the operations contemplated in the specification of the work and tender 
schedule and all incidental works necessary for suc h operations. The rates quoted for 
the various items shall be inclusive of tools and plants required for the proper execution 
of work and all other incidental charges. Separate claims for these will not be 
entertained under any circumstances. 
 
Section 1216(e) of the Ministry of Road Transport a nd Highways (MoRTH) 
specifications for Road and Bridge works stipulates  that the contract unit rates for 
sinking of wells shall cover the cost of labour, to ols, equipment and plant and for all 
operations and other incidentals for sinking of wells including seating. 
 
During the period 2018-19 and 2019-20, the Roads Divisions under Roads and Bridges, 
North Circle, Kozhikode made final payments amounti ng to ₹607.33 crore to 
contractors in respect of 188 bridge works. Audit examined the payments pertaining to 
59 works involving ₹397.78 crore and noticed irregularities in three 
13  works. 
 
The agreement schedule of the three bridge works in cluded an item of work namely, 
sinking of Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) circular wells of different dimensions 
14  
in all classes of soil other than rock  to lines and levels and plumb by scooping out 
earth from inside and below steining with dredgers or any other appliances for 
pier/abutment wells including hire charges , labour charges , dewatering, casting, 
vibrating, removal of obstacles , dumping the spoil at suitable places with all leads and 
lifts, incidental expenses etc. complete as per standard specifications and as directed by 
the departmental officers.  
 
While the execution of the three works was in progr ess, the Department revised their 
estimates for an amount of ₹1.99 crore. The contrac tors completed the works and the 
Department paid them as per the Revised Estimates. 
 
Audit examined the files relating to the three brid ge works and noticed that the 
additional/extra items included in the revised esti mates such as hire charges of 
labourer/ equipment, cutting/breaking down of boulders of more than 40 dm 
3 and 
logs of more than 100 dm 3 in size, removal of obstacles and seating of wells  were 
 
13  Construction of (1) Pathikkalkadavu bridge connect ing Venniyode and Kurumani across Venniyode-
Valiyapuzha at Kottathara Panchayat, (2) Chekkikada vu Bridgein Kannur District, and 
(3) Kariyattukadavu Bridge across Kadalundi River ( Balance work). 
14  RCC circular wells of 9.00m external diameter and 6.60m internal diameter for abutment wells and 
RCC circular wells of 6.50m outer diameter and 4.30 m inner diameter for pier well. 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit Paragraphs  
45  
already part of the specifications of the work incl uded in the original 
estimate/agreement schedule, and the seating of wells  was an incidental item to the 
sinking of RCC circular well. As such, there was no  need to include the same in the 
revised estimate as additional/extra items of work.  Besides the rates quoted by the 
contractors in the tenders were inclusive of all these operations as well as the incidental  
items. So, the contractors were bound to carry out the work at their quoted rates. Details 
of the additional payments made to the contractors on account of the inadmissible items 
are given in the Appendix 3.2 . 
 
In the reply, Government stated that the specificat ion for ‘Well sinking’ excludes 
boulders of size more than 40 dm 
3 and extra payment was payable for cutting and 
breaking obstacles into small pieces. An explanatory note from the standard data book 
was quoted in support of this argument. The reply is untenable. The Standard Data Book 
along with the Schedule of Rates only forms the bas is of preparation of Detailed 
Estimate. The Standard Data Book is neither part of  the agreement nor there is a 
reference to it in the agreement. The original item of work mentioned only “removal of 
obstacles” in the Detailed Estimate and did not dis tinguish between boulders below or 
above 40 dm 3.  
 
It was also stated in the reply that the payment fo r actual labour and machineries were 
to be made on the basis of Daily Labour Reports (DL Rs). The reply is not acceptable 
for the reason that the payment of daily labour through a contractor, instead of by muster 
roll in the usual way, is objectionable in principle as per Kerala Public Works Account 
Code. The Code also states that in a case of great emergency 
15  it may sometimes be 
found impossible to employ labour otherwise than th rough a contractor and when this 
course is adopted, a report of the number of labour ers of each class employed daily 
(DLR) should be prepared. Further, the department i tself had admitted that there were 
no hard and fast rules available in the department for claiming actuals in well sinking, 
the procedure being followed is based on DLRs. Ther e were no recorded underlying 
emergency conditions which warranted payment based on DLRs.  
 
Government also stated that there was no intention at all to insert the words “obstacles 
below 40 dm 
3 in the revised estimate, as the obstacles were act ually above 45 dm 3 or 
100 dm 3 size 16 . But this claim is not true, as the item of work i n the original estimate 
did not contain these words. In the revised estimat e, these words were included under 
original item of work in order to facilitate an ext ra for removal of obstacles above 40 
dm 3 or 100 dm 3. Further, there was no pre-measurement or post mea surement of the 
obstacles to prove the size of the boulders and to justify the revision of the estimate. 
The Government have admitted that no such measureme nt was feasible since the 
obstacles were invisible. 
 
Further, the Government claimed that, during the we ll sinking process, obstacles were 
met with in both the abutments and six piers.  As per the boreholes chart enclosed with 
 
15  Great emergent condition like breach of canal, natural calamities like flood, earthquakes, tsunami 
etc. 
16  Government reply erroneously quoted 45dm 3 instead of 40dm 3. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
46  
the investigation report, eight boreholes were take n and huge boulders were not met 
with except pebbles. The department argued that the  bore hole chart prepared at the 
time of investigation may not be a true replica of actual happening at site and the result 
of eight bore holes cannot be considered as the sam e for entire structure. This is also 
not tenable since the department itself admitted in the reply relating to Karyattukadavu 
Bridge, that the presence of obstacles can be noticed on boring, though the size, quantity 
and nature of work required cannot be assessed.  
 
It was also claimed that the boulders/logs were actually above 45 dm 
3/ 100 dm 3 in size 
and was got verified by the top officials of depart ment including Chief Technical 
Examiner (CTE), during their inspection at site. If so, it should have been documented 
giving complete history of each well and the problem met with during sinking operation 
as envisaged under MoRTH specification 1208.1. The department admitted that this 
mandatory document was not maintained. In the absen ce of this mandatory document, 
the claim that the boulders/logs were actually abov e 40 dm 3/100 dm 3 in size is not 
acceptable.  
 
Thus, revision of estimates of the three bridge wor ks by the Department in favour of 
the contractors gave undue benefit to the contracto rs and resulted in inadmissible 
payment of ₹1.99 crore. 
 
Recommendation :  The Department may issue directions making it co mpulsory that 
in unforeseen circumstances where boulders above 40 dm 
3 or logs above the size of 100 
dm 3 have be found, it should be documented giving comp lete history of each well and 
the problems met with during the sinking operation as envisaged under MoRTH 
specification 1208.1. Further, as use of DLRs are o bjectionable in principle, 
Government may issue directions that it is used onl y in emergency conditions and not 
in routine circumstances as in the above works. 
 
3.3 Undue benefit to the contractors due to non-rec overy of differential cost 
of departmental bitumen from them 
 
Failure of the Department to recover the differenti al cost of departmental 
bitumen from contractors consequent on the decrease  in the market price of 
bitumen resulted in undue benefit of ₹4.36 crore to the contractors  
 
In Kerala Public Works Department, road works were being tendered and arranged with 
provisions for supply of bitumen by the department. As per the provisions in the PWD 
Manual and Code, in the case of works with provisio n for departmental supply of 
materials
17  , contractor’s profit and tender variation are not  allowed on the cost of 
departmental supplies and the bidders were allowed to quote exclusive of the cost of 
departmental materials. Further, in all such works,  the cost of departmental materials 
has to be compulsorily recovered from the contracto r at the time of payment of his 
running account bills. The cost of departmental mat erials to be recovered is calculated 
 
17  Departmental supplies included bitumen, steel, cement etc. But from 2012, the system of departmental 
supplies of materials except bitumen was stopped. 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit Paragraphs  
47  
on the basis of Schedule of Rates prevalent at the time of preparation of the Detailed 
Estimate and shown separately in the Detailed Estim ate, Tender Schedules and 
Agreement Schedules. 
 
In the case of departmental supply of bitumen, Gove rnment introduced an alternate 
system (2003) for large works costing above a limit  which was fixed by the 
Government. In this system, instead of the Department directly purchasing the bitumen 
from the manufacturer, transporting it to PWD Store  and later issuing it to a work, the 
Department authorised the Contractor to purchase th e bitumen from the manufacturer 
based on the indent issued by the Executive Enginee r of the Division, making the 
payment and then transporting it to the work site. The contractor will be reimbursed the 
actual cost of the bitumen on furnishing the original invoice. A clause to this effect is 
included in the Agreement and therefore, the contra ctor is legally bound to submit 
the invoice to the Department. As the cost of bitum en purchased and used in the work 
is totally borne by the Department, it is treated a s departmental supply of bitumen. 
Hence, as per the provision of the PWD Manual and 
 Code, the cost of bitumen is to 
be recovered from the contractors running account b ills. This system was introduced 
to insulate the contractor’s from suffering loss du e to increase in the price of bitumen 
in the market and also to benefit the Department wh en the price of bitumen decreases 
in the market. 
 
During the years 2018-19 and 2019-20, the roads div isions
18  under the Roads and 
Bridges (R&B) North Circle, Kozhikode made payment of ₹2,838.28 crore in respect 
of 5,191 road works. Of these, Audit examined payme nt of ₹1,607.08 crore relating to 
352 works. It was noticed that the aforementioned p rocess regarding recovery of the 
cost of bitumen was not correctly followed in 34 works, as detailed below: 
 
 As ascertained by Audit from the purchase invoices produced by the contractors and 
from the price list of M/s Bharath Petroleum Corpor ation Ltd., the supplier of 
bitumen, the market price of bitumen was lesser tha n the cost of bitumen included 
in the estimate in all the 34 cases. 
 
 In three works, the office of the Superintending En gineer (R&B), North Circle, 
Kozhikode committed an error of noting a recovery rate of bitumen (per MT) in the 
agreement which was lesser than rate included in the respective estimates. The cost 
of bitumen was recovered from contractors at the ra tes noted in the agreements. 
This led to short-recovery of ₹1.91 crore from work bills of contractors (Appendix 
3.3 ). 
 
 In 21 works, the Department should have recovered t he cost of bitumen from the 
contractors at estimate rates and reimbursed them t he cost of bitumen at purchase 
rates. Instead, the Department abstained from recovering  the  cost  of  departmental  
supply  of  bitumen  from  the contractors and reimbursing the actual cost as per the 
invoice to them. As the estimate rate of bitumen re coverable from the contractors 
 
18  Roads divisions Kasargod, Kannur, Kozhikode, Wayanad, Manjery and Palakkad. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
48  
was higher than the purchase rates, the non-recover y of cost of bitumen resulted 
in loss of ₹2.70 crore to the Government (Appendix 3.4 ). 
 
 In the remaining 10 works, only part of the estimat ed cost of bitumen was 
recovered from the contractors by the Department an d the reimbursement to the 
contractors was also limited to that extent. Lapses  in the recovery  procedure 
resulted in loss of ₹ 46.78 lakh to the Government (Appendix 3.5 ) 
 
Thus, lack of diligence on the part of the departmental authorities in the above 34 cases 
led to undue benefit to the contractors to the tune of ₹4.36 crore. 
 
Government have accepted the objections and agreed to initiate recovery of excess 
payments made to the 
contractors. 
 
As this was a test audit in the sampled works in se lected divisions and the audit 
observation is of a nature that may reflect in othe r works not covered in test audit, 
the Department may like to internally examine the p osition in rest of the works with a 
view to ensure that the provisions prescribed in th is regard are followed scrupulously 
to avoid losses to the Government.  
 
Recommendation:  Government may issue directions that the cost of b itumen which 
is a departmental supply shall 
invariably be deducted from the payment of contractor's 
bills. 
 
3.4 Unfruitful expenditure of ₹18.34 crore on payme nt of salary to the staff 
attached to Road Rollers 
 
The Department incurred an unfruitful expenditure o f ₹18.34 crore during the 
period 2014-15 to 2018-19 towards the salary of staff attached to 86 road rollers 
idling in eight PWD divisions.  
 
The Roads and the National Highway (NH) wings of th e Kerala Public Works 
Department (PWD) attend to the planning, constructi on and maintenance of all roads 
including highways coming under the control of the PWD. The Roads wing and the NH 
wing have 16 and eight Divisions respectively for executing road works. 
 
According to Para 7.3.16 of the Kerala Public Works  Account Code, if any plant or 
machinery which is serviceable is not required for immediate use on any work in any 
Division, it shall be sold and if any plant is cons idered unserviceable, it shall be 
condemned with the sanction of the competent author ity. According to Section 309 of 
the Kerala PWD Manual 2012, the quantum of work handled by the staff may vary from 
time to time necessitating suitable norms to be fix ed so that the staff strength be 
augmented, reduced or arranged according to require ments. The HR Cell of the PWD 
is responsible for assessing the staff requirement and for submitting proposals to the 
Chief Engineer (Administration) for creation/deploy ment/abolishing of posts. The 

Chapter III - Compliance Audit Paragraphs  
49  
Government has to, from time to time, fix the norms based on the suggestions from the 
Chief Engineer. 
 
Departmental equipment and machinery including Road  Rollers were frequently used 
in road works. However, with the introduction of mo dern machinery by contractors in 
road works, there has been a drastic decline in the  use of departmental Road rollers. 
Moreover, the huge expense involved in their repair s made the maintenance of 
departmental Road Rollers uneconomical, leading to their idling. 
 
The Government identified 19   140 posts of Roller drivers and 110 posts of Roll er 
cleaners as surplus and abolished (November 2003) 80 posts of drivers and 60 posts of 
cleaners, but they were allowed to be retained as supernumerary. 
 
As of October 2019 the Department had 26 Roller drivers and 57 Roller cleaners, who 
were idling in their posts. According to the detail s furnished, (May 2018) the 
Department had 187 road rollers, of which 140 were non-functional. The status as of 
31 March 2019 is awaited from the Department (March 2020). 
 
Audit examined the records relating to the Road rollers and the salary paid to the roller 
drivers and cleaners in eight randomly selected Roa ds/NH Divisions covering the 
period from 2014-15 to 2018-19 and observed the following: 
 
 Out of 86 road rollers available in the eight selec ted divisions, 73 were idling for 
periods ranging from 8 months to 27 years (March 2019). Further, 15 roller drivers 
and 26 cleaners were retained for maintaining the b alance 13 operational road 
rollers. 
 
 Out of the 73 rollers idling, 47 were beyond repair , but only nine of them were 
disposed of at a total value of ₹13.21 lakh. 
 
 The average use of the 13 rollers in operation was around six days in a year. 
 
 The Government did not explore the possibility of r e-deploying the idling crew, 
whose basic qualification was ITI (Diesel Mechanic), to other departments such as 
Technical Education, Industrial Training, Motor Veh icles, Ground Water, etc. in 
posts requiring similar qualification. 
 
 The Chief Engineer (Admn), PWD submitted several 20  proposals to the Government 
for re-deployment of the idling Roller drivers and cleaners, including proposals to 
deploy them as ‘Ferry Man’ in Local Self Government Department. The Transport 
Commissioner, Motor Vehicles Department (MVD) also submitted a proposal to 
deploy these staff as ‘Guards’ in MVD.  But the Gov ernment did not take (June 
2019) any action in the matter. As a result majorit y of the drivers and cleaners, 
 
19  GO (Rt) No.1078/2003/PWD dated 04/11/2003. 
20  FOn 23/11/2010, 08/11/2016, 20/07/2017 and 31/10/2 018. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
  

 

Appendices 
51 
Appendix 1.1 
Year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) as on 30 June 2019 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6.1 - Page: 4) 
Year Up to  
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
2019-20 
(Upto 30 
June 2019) 
Total 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 224 36 31 07 04 302 
Number of paragraphs 1,070 262 277 79 19 1,707 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
11(82) 06(56) 16(122) 02(22) 06(38) 41(320) 
AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT & FARMERS’  WELARE DEPARTMENT 
 (CROP HUSBANDRY) 
Number of IRs 133 NIL 03 10 10 156 
Number of paragraphs 271 NIL 27 66 67 431 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
03(16) 02(17) 04(30) NIL NIL 09(63) 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DEPARTMENT  
Number of IRs 21 NIL 46 NIL NIL 67 
Number of paragraphs 37 NIL 150 NIL NIL 187 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
05(08) NIL 20(56) NIL NIL 25(64) 
SOIL SURVEY AND SOIL CONSERVATION DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 06  NIL NIL 18 01 25 
Number of paragraphs 15 NIL NIL 82 06 103 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
01(09) NIL NIL 18(82) NIL 19(91) 
DAIRY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Number of IRs 04 NIL 08 NIL NIL 12 
Number of paragraphs 07 NIL 67 NIL NIL 74 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
02(03) NIL 03(37) NIL NIL 05(40) 
FOREST AND WILD LIFE DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs 100 19 03 NIL NIL 122 
Number of paragraphs 294 126 14 NIL NIL 434 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
02(04) 06(61) NIL NIL NIL 08(65) 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
52 
Year Up to  
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
2019-20 
(Upto 30 
June 2019) 
Total 
CO-OPERATION DEPARTMENT  
Number of IRs  24  06  02  20  NIL  52 
Number of paragraphs  80  47  21  166  NIL  314 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs)  
05(28) 05(34) 01(17) 20(155)  NIL  31(234) 
FOOD, CIVIL SUPPLIES AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS DEPARTMEN T 
Number of IRs  59  NIL  11  21  09  100 
Number of paragraphs 138 NIL 73 194  105  510 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs)  
05(12) NIL 11(71) 21(194)  09(105)  46(382) 
HARBOUR ENGINEERING 
Number of IRs 13 NIL 04 04  NIL  21 
Number of paragraphs  28  NIL  32  17  NIL  77 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs) 
NIL NIL NIL NIL  NIL  NIL  
FISHERIES DEPARTMENT  
Number of IRs  16  NIL  20  08  NIL  44 
Number of paragraphs  38  NIL  160  75  NIL  273 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs)  
01(01) NIL 18(128) NIL  NIL  19(129)  
PORT & HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEY WING 
Number of IRs  11  1 NIL  8 NIL  20 
Number of paragraphs  22  10  NIL  33  NIL  65 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs)  
02(04) 01(10) NIL 07(30)  NIL  10(44) 
ENVIRONMENT  AND CLIMATE CHANGE DEPARTMENT 
Number of IRs  NIL  NIL  NIL  NIL  01  01 
Number of paragraphs  NIL  NIL  NIL  NIL  20  20 
Number of IRs for which 
initial reply has not been 
received (number of 
paragraphs)  
NIL NIL NIL NIL  01(20)  01(20) 
     Total IR  922 
Total Paras  4,195 
Initial replies not received (IR(Para))  214(1,452)  
 
 
  

Appendices  
53  
Appendix 2.1 
Composition of the General Council  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.1- Page: 6) 
Sl. 
No. Designation 
 Ex-Officio members 
1 The Chancellor; 
2 The Pro-Chancellor; 
3 The Vice-Chancellor; 
4 The Agricultural Production Commissioner; 
5 
The Principal Secretary, the Secretary or the Special Secretary to 
Government, as the case may be, in the Departments of Agriculture, 
Finance, Fisheries and Animal Husbandry.  
6 The Director of Agriculture; 
7 The Director of Animal Husbandry; 
8 The Director of Dairy Development; 
9 The Director of Fisheries; 
10 The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests; 
11 The Chairman, Rubber board. 
12 The Chairman, Spices Board. 
13 The Chairman, Marine Products Export Development Authority.  
14 The Director, Central Plantation Crops Research Institute.  
15 The Director, Kerala Forest Research Institute. 
16 One representative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. 
17 The Member of the Legislative Assembly representing the constituency in 
which the Headquarters of the University is situated . 
 Elected members  
1 
Four members elected according to the principles of proportional 
representation by means of single transferable vote by the members of the 
Legislative Assembly from among themselves of whom one shall be a 
member belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;  
2 One member elected by the Deans of Faculties of the University from 
among themselves.  
3 
Four members elected by the teachers of the University from among 
themselves according to the principles of proportional representation by 
means of single transferable vote.  
4 
Two members elected by the students of the University from among 
themselves according to the principles of proportional representation by 
means of single transferable vote.  
5 
Two members elected by the non-teaching staff of the University from 
among themselves according to the principles of proportional 
representation by means of single transferable vote.  
6 Two members elected by the permanent labourers of the University from 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
54 
among themselves according to the principles of proportional 
representation by means of single transferable vote.  
 Members nominated by the Chancellor 
1 Four eminent Scientists in the field of agriculture and allied subjects from 
the concerned university or from outside  
2 Four farmers of whom one shall be a member belonging to a Scheduled 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and one shall be women.  
3 One Member from the association of planters Kerala. 
4 Two Presidents of Grama Panchayath.  
 Other Members 
1 Three members to represent respectively the University of Calicut, Cochin 
and Kerala, elected by the Senates of the respective Universities.  
2 One representative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.  
3 The member of the Legislative Assembly representing the constituency in 
which the Headquarters of the University is situated.  
Source: University Records 
 
 
Note: 
1.  General Council : The Act prescribes that the Gener al Council shall meet at least 
once in four months. During the period 2014-15 to 2 018-19, 15 meetings were 
held against the prescribed 15. 
 
2.  In the composition shown above,  one representative  of the Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research and one member of the Legisla tive Assembly representing 
the constituency in which the Headquarters of the U niversity is included under 
both ‘Ex-officio’ members and ‘Other members’. 
  

Appendices  
55  
Appendix 2.2 
Composition of the Executive Committee 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.1 - Page: 6) 
Sl. 
No. Designation 
Ex-Officio members 
1 The Vice-Chancellor; 
2 
The Agricultural Production Commissioner and the Pr incipal Secretary, 
the Secretary or the Special Secretary to Governmen t as the case may be 
in the Finance department.  
 Other Members 
1 The member representing the Indian Council of Agricultural Research in 
the General Council;  
2 One Dean of Faculty elected by the General Council; 
3 One member elected from among the teachers in the G eneral Council, 
by the Council;  
4 
Five non-official members of the General Council el ected by the 
Council of whom one shall be a member belonging to a Scheduled Caste 
and Scheduled Tribe and one shall be a women.  
5 The member of the Legislative Assembly representing  the constituency 
in wh ich the Headquarters of the University is situated. 
Source: University Records 
 
Note: 
The Executive Committee shall meet as and when requ ired. During the period 
2014-15 to 2018-19 and a total of 40 meetings were held.   

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
56 
Appendix 2.3 
Composition of the Academic Council 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.1 - Page: 6) 
Sl. 
No. Designation 
1 The Vice-Chancellor; 
2 The Deans of Faculties; 
3 The Director of Research; 
4 The Director of Extension; 
5 The Director of Students Welfare; 
6 The Librarian; 
7 Six members from among the Heads of Departments of the Faculties, 
nominated by the Chancellor on rotational basis.  
8 Three members from among the staff of the research stations of the 
University, nominated by the Chancellor;  
9 
Two members from among the Post-Graduate students a nd one member 
from among the Research Students of the University,  elected in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
10 One member elected by the teachers (other than the Dean) of each 
Faculty, from among themselves;  
11 The Registrar, 
12 Such other members as may be prescribed. 
13 
The Academic Council may co-opt as members, not mor e than ten 
persons for such periods and in such manner as may be prescribed, so as 
to secure adequate representation to different aspects of agri culture.  
Source: University Records 
 
 
Note: 
As per the Statute, the Academic Council shall meet  every trimester. But the 
University switched over to semester system. The Co uncil had met 12 times 
during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
  

Appendices  
57  
 
Appendix 2.4 
Posts of Teaching Staff not having Statutes 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.1.1- Page: 9) 
Sl. 
No. Post 
1 Director of Education 
2 Director of Students Welfare 
3 Director (Planning) 
4 Dean, Forestry 
5 Controller of Examination 
6 Associate Dean College of Agriculture, Padannakad 
7 Associate Dean, College of Horticulture, Vellanikkara 
8 Associate Dean, College of Agriculture, Ambalavayal 
9 Associate Dean (CCBM) 
10 Special Officer, ACCER 
11 Associate Director of Research (Planning) 
12 Associate Director of Research (GA) 
13 Associate Director of Research (M&E) 
14 Associate Director of Research (Coconut Mission) 
15 Associate Director of Research (Vegetable Mission) 
16 Associate Director of Research (NZ), Pilicode 
17 Associate Director of Research (Seeds) 
18 Associate Director of Research RARS, Kumarakom 
19 Associate Director of Research, College of Agriculture, Vellayani 
20 Associate Director of Research, RARS, Pattambi 
21 Associate Director of Extension (South Zone) 
22  Teaching Staff, ACCER  
Source: University Records 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
58 
Appendix- 2.5 
Programmes/Colleges not granted Accreditation by NAEAB in September 2020 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.2.2  - Page: 16) 
Sl. 
 
Name of the 
Programme/College 
Reason Action taken by the University 
1 
M. Sc.(Ag) in Agricultural 
Entomology & Nematology in 
CoA, Vellayani  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Appeal for granting accreditation furnished as 
Department of Agricultural Entomology and 
Department of Nematology are two separate 
Departments of College of Agriculture, 
Vellayani, of which accreditation was 
requested only for the Department of 
Agricultural Entomology.    
2 M. Sc. (Hort) in Pomology & 
Floriculture in CoA, Vellayani  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Appeal for granting accreditation given as 
134 th  Meeting of the Academic Council held 
on 13/12/2019 had bifurcated Department of 
Pomology and Floriculture into two separate 
Departments, viz., Department of fruit science 
and Department of Floriculture & Landscaping 
as per ICAR nomenclature.  
3 
Ph. D in Agricultural Entomology 
& Nematology in College of 
Agriculture, Vellayani  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Appeal for granting accreditation furnished as 
Department of Agricultural Entomology and 
Department of Nematology are two separate 
Departments of College of Agriculture, 
Vellayani, of which accreditation was 
requested only for the Department of 
Agricultural Entomology.    
4 
Ph. D in Pomology & Floriculture 
in College of Agriculture, 
Vellayani  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Appeal for granting accreditation given as 
134 th  Meeting of the Academic Council held 
on 13/12/2019 had bifurcated Department of 
Pomology and Floriculture into two separate 
Departments, viz., Department of fruit science 
and Department of Floriculture & Landscaping 
as per ICAR nomenclature.  
5 B. Tech in Food Engineering in 
KCAE & T, Tavanur 
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.   
Appeal given. The nomenclature and syllabus 
was changed as per the recommendation of the 
ICAR’s 5 th  Deans’ committee in  2019 as 
B.Tech (Food Technology). From 2020 
admission onwards, KAU is admitting students 
to B.Tech (Food Technolo gy) programmes.   
6 
Ph. D in Processing & Food 
Engineering in KCAE & T, 
Tavanur 
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.   
Appeal furnished to ICAR. The nomenclature 
of this programme has been changed from Ph. 
D in Agricultural Processing & Food 
Engineering to Ph. D in Processing & Food 
Engineering from 2019 admission onwards as 
per the recommendation of ICAR.  

Appendices  
59  
Sl. 
 
Name of the 
Programme/College 
Reason Action taken by the University 
7 
College of Co-Operation, 
Banking & Management, 
Vellanikkara, KAU, Thrissur and 
its following programmes  
•B.Sc. (Hons.) Co-Operation & 
Banking  
• M.Sc. (C&B) in Rural 
Marketing Management  
• M.Sc. (C&B) in Rural Banking 
& Finance Management  
• M.Sc. (C&B) in Co-operative 
Management  
• Ph.D (C&B) in Rural Marketing 
Management  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Academic Council has decided to have further 
discussions with stakeholders regarding 
changing the nomenclature of programmes as 
it may affect employment of the graduates. 
8 
Academy of Climate Change 
Adaption Education Sit Research 
Vellanikkara, KAU, Thrissur and 
its following programmes  
• B.Sc. (Integrated) Climate 
Change Adaptation  
• M.Sc. (Integrated) Climate 
Change Adaptation  
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.  
Changed to 4+2 system as per ICAR 
guidelines. 
9 Integrated B.Sc. and M. Sc. 
programmes in Biotechnology 
Not approved for 
accreditation on the 
ground Degree 
nomenclature not 
adhering to ICAR 
guidelines.   
Changed to 4+2 system as per ICAR 
guidelines. 
Source: University Records 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
60 
Appendix 2.6  
Details of laboratory equipment as per the Fifth Deans’ Committee and in actual 
possession of College of Agriculture, Ambalavayal 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.2.5 - Page: 21) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of equipment Requirement 
(MSHAE) 
In the 
possession of 
College 
Shortfall  
1 Different types of ovens 14 4 10 
2 Different types of microscopes 67 2 65 
3 Different types of balances 39 18 21 
4 Different types of cameras 8 1 7 
5 Computers 37 3 34 
6 Moisture box 30 0 30 
7 Tube Auger 10 1 9 
8 Bucket auger 10 0 10 
9 Seed germinator 6 0 6 
10 Conductivity meter 2 1 1 
11 pH Meter 9 1 8 
12 Moisture meter 7 0 7 
13 Chlorophyl meter 1 0 1 
14 Brix meter 2 3 -1 
15 Water bath 6 0 6 
16 Shaker 4 2 2 
17 Drip and Sprinkler System 3 5 -2 
18 Meter Scale 10 0 10 
19 Tape 5 5 0 
20 LCD projector 1 1 0 
21 Digital voice recorders 5 0 5 
22 Audio recording-mixing consoles 1 0 1 
23 Insect box 60 17 43 
24 Insect collection nets 60 5 55 
25 Collection bottles 60 5 55 
26 Insect collection big boxes for 
museum (1 for each order) 
29 2 27 
27 Soxhlet Extraction Apparatus 1 0 1 
28 Patters Tower 1 0 1 
29 Fumigation Chamber 01 1 0 1 
30 Automatic seed/grain counter 1 0 1 
31 BOD Incubator 3 2 1 
32 Centrifuge 4 0 4 
33 Growth chamber 1 0 1 
34 Distillation assembly 2 1 1 

Appendices  
61  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of equipment Requirement 
(MSHAE) 
In the 
possession of 
College 
Shortfall  
35 Hand refractometer 5 2 3 
36 Digital refractometer 2 2 0 
37 Refrigerator 3 1 2 
38 Deep Freezer 2 1 1 
39 Fruit crusher 1 1 0 
40 Grinding and mixing machine 1 1 0 
41 Grafting and budding knife 60 70 -10 
42 Secateur 60 60 0 
43 Saw 5 10 -5 
44 Loppers 5 5 0 
45 Mist Chamber 1 10 -9 
46 Poly house with drip irrigation 
system  
2 10 -8 
47 Muffle furnace 1 0 1 
48 Fruit penetrometer 2 0 2 
49 Pulper 1 1 0 
50 Juice extractor 1 1 0 
51 Crown corking machine 1 1 0 
52 Spectrophotometer 2 1 1 
53 Poly pouch sealer 1 1 0 
54 Crusher 1 1 0 
55 Masala grinder 1 1 0 
56 Dehydrator 1 1 0 
57 Cold room 1 0 1 
58 Vacuum pump 2 0 2 
59 EC Meter 5 1 4 
60 Flame Photometer 1 1 0 
61 Hot Plate 3 1 2 
62 Distilled water unit 3 1 2 
63 Autoclave 4 4 0 
64 Laminar Air Flow 1 3 -2 
65 Digestion block 2 1 1 
66 Hydrometer 5 0 5 
67 Infiltrometer 2 0 2 
68 Atterberg's limits meter 5 0 5 
69 Nitrogen Analyser 2 1 1 
70 Thermometer Max 5 3 2 
71 Thermometer Min 5 3 2 
72 Digital Anemometer 2 0 2 
73 Cup Anemometer 2 1 1 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
62 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of equipment Requirement 
(MSHAE) 
In the 
possession of 
College 
Shortfall  
74 Pan Evaporimeter 1 1 0 
75 Soil thermometers 15 9 6 
76 Rain gauges 2 2 0 
77 Sunshine Recorder 1 1 0 
78 Stevenson's Screen 1 1 0 
79 Thermograph 1 1 0 
80 Hygrograph 1 1 0 
81 Soil Heat Flux Plate 1 0 1 
82 GPS 10 1 9 
83 AWS (optional) 1 2 -1 
84 Lysimeter (optional) 1 0 1 
85 Luxmeter 2 0 2 
86 Solar Pyranometer 1 2 -1 
87 Sterobinocular 5 0 5 
88 Sample processing board (Dry 
preservation of samples) 
4 0 4 
89 Wet preservation jars 50 0 50 
90 Incubator 2 0 2 
91 Occular meter 5 0 5 
92 Stage Micrometer 5 0 5 
93 5000/6500 Feed and Forage 
Analyzer  
1 0 1 
94 Micro kjeldahl N digestion & 
distillation apparatus 
1 0 1 
95 Soxhlet unit for fat estimation 1 0 1 
96 Willy mill grinder 1 0 1 
97 Milk analyzer (automatic) 1 0 1 
98 Crude fiber estimation unit 1 0 1 
99 Incubator cum hatcher 1 1 0 
100 Brooder machine 1 0 1 
101 Feeder 1 0 1 
102 Waterer 1 0 1 
103 Egg candling machine 1 0 1 
104 Debeaker 1 0 1 
105 Vaccinator 1 0 1 
106 Chaff cutter 1 0 1 
107 Lactometer 1 0 1 
108 Castrator 1 0 1 
109 Shearer 1 1 0 
110 Electric dehorner 1 0 1 

Appendices  
63  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of equipment Requirement 
(MSHAE) 
In the 
possession of 
College 
Shortfall  
111 Artificial vagina 1 0 1 
112 Common medication device 1 1 0 
113 Cattle crate 1 0 1 
114 Seed drill 1 0 1 
115 Working models of reaper and 
mowers  
2 0 2 
116 Cut model of CI & SI engine 1 0 1 
117 Cut model of tractor 1 0 1 
118 Internet Server 1 0 1 
119 Intranet Server 1 0 1 
120 Heavy duty photocopiers 2 1 1 
121 Computerized Issue and 
Catalogue Systems  
2 0 2 
122 CCTV monitoring system for 
library  
1 0 1 
123 RFID and Access Control System 
(Optional) 
1 0 1 
124 Broadband Internet Connectivity 
with minimum speed of 1Gbps 
1 0 1 
Total 853 305 548 
Source: University Records 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2019 
64 
Appendix 3.1 
Instances of duplicate invoices submitted for different works 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1 - Page: 43) 
Sl. 
No. 
Invoice No. 
and Date 
Amount 
(₹) 
Quantity 
(MT) 
Work for which bitumen was purchased (as noted 
in the invoice) 
Work to which copy of the invoice   was submitted 
in support of purchase of bitumen 
1 
63000592718 
dated 
27/03/2017 
3,11,884 9.720 
VG 30 
Thavinjal-Valad-Kunjome road, km 0/000 to 8/300  
under Roads Division, Wayanad, Contractor: 
Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha 
Thavinjal-Valad-Kunjome road, km 0/000 to 8/300  
under Roads Division, Wayanad 
Contractor : Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha 
(Quintuplicate copy submitted) 
2 
6300016644 
dated 
16/05/2017 
2,30,012 6.370 
Emulsion 
Airport road-Providing DBM to Thalassery -Irikkur 
road from km 3/300 to 15/000 under Roads Division, 
Kannur. 
Contractor: Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha 
Thavinjal-Valad-Kunjome road, km 0/000 to 8/300  
under Roads Division, Wayanad 
Contractor : Farooque Constructions, Alappuzha 
(Quintuplicate copy submitted) 
3 
4550075564 
dated 
18/01/2018 
2,96,987 7.826 
Emulsion 
Improvements and providing BM&BC to 
Methurumba - Chapparappadavu - Kuttoor road km 
16/450 to 23/285 under Roads Division, Kannur. 
Contractor: M/s Abcon Engineering, Kasaragod 
Improvements and providing BM&BC to 
Methurumba - Chapparappadavu - Kuttoor road km 
16/450 to 23/285 under Roads Division, Kannur. 
Contractor M/s Abcon Engineering, Kasaragod 
(Duplicate copy submitted) 
4 
4550067335 
dated 
30/12/2017 
1,19,312 3.094 
Emulsion 
Manvila-pullukadavu road km 0/000 to 3/000 under 
Roads Division, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Contractor: Sri. A. Thajudeen 
Improvement to Karattee-Nagaroor-Puthusserymukku 
road, from chainage 0/000 to 4/000 under Roads 
Division, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Contractor Sri. A. Thajudeen 
(Duplicate copy submitted) 
5 
4550017329 
dated 
25/08/2017 
2,64,139 9.469 
VG30 
Mechira-Sastampara-Vilappilsala road under Roads 
Division, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Contractor: Sri. A. Thajudeen 
Improvement to Karattee-Nagaroor-Puthusserymukku 
road, from chainage 0/000 to 4/000 under Roads 
Division, Thiruvananthapuram. 
Contractor Sri. A. Thajudeen 
(Duplicate copy submitted) 
  ₹12,22,334  36.48 MT   
Source: Department Records 
 
 
  

Appendices  
65  
Appendix 3.2 
Details of the additional payments made to the contractors on account of the inadmissible items 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2 - Page: 45) 
Sl. No. & Name 
of bridge work 
Items included in the Original Estimate Additional/extra items 
included in the Revised 
Estimate corresponding to 
the items under Col. 2 
Expenditure 
on the 
additional/ 
extra items  
(₹) 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4  
1. Construction 
of Chekki-
kkadavu Bridge  
Item-7:  Sinking of RCC (M 200) circular well of 9m externa l 
dia and 6.60m internal dia in all classes of soil o ther than rock 
to lines and levels and plumb by scooping out earth  from 
inside and below steining with dredgers or any othe r 
applications for abutment wells including hire charges, 
labour charges,  dewatering, casting, vibrating, removal of 
obstacles, dumping the spoil at suitable places wit h all leads 
and lifts, incidental expenses  etc. complete as per standard 
specifications and as directed by the depart mental officers.  
Item No.30 of Appendix 
A: Actual labours & 
machineries  for removal of 
abstract and seating of 
wells. 
 
1,35,41,526 
According to Sn.1216 (e) of 
MoRTH specifications for Roads 
and Bridge works, the contract 
unit rates for sinking of wells 
shall cover the cost of labour, 
tools, equipment and plant and 
for all operations and other 
incidentals for sinking of wells 
including seating. The contract 
unit rates of items 7 & 8 are 
inclusive of the items ‘hire 
charges, labour charges’ and 
‘seating of wells’ which is 
incidental to the work ‘sinking of 
well. So, the contractor is not 
eligible for separate payments for 
any of these items. 
Item-8:  Sinking of RCC circular well of 6.50 m outer dia  and 
4.30m inner dia in all classes of soil other than r ock to lines 
and levels and plumb by scooping out earth from ins ide and 
below steining with dredgers or any other applicati ons for 
abutment wells including hire charges, labour charges,  
dewatering, casting, vibrating, removal of obstacles , 
dumping the spoil at suitable places with all leads  and lifts, 
incidental expenses  etc. complete as per standard 
specifications and as directed by the departmental officers.  
2. Construction 
of 
Kariyattukadavu 
Bridge 
Item-5:  Sinking of RCC circular well of  6.5 m outer dia a nd 
4.5 m inner dia for foundation of piers in all classes of soil 
other than rock  to lines and levels and plumb by scooping 
out earth from inside and below steining with dredg ers or any 
other appliances including hire charges, labour cha rges, 
dewatering, casting, vibrating, removal of obstacle s, dumping 
the spoil at suitable places with all leads and lif ts, incidental 
expenses etc. complete as per standard specificatio ns and as 
directed by the departmental officers.  
Additional item No.28: 
Cutting and breaking down 
in to small pieces boulders 
more than 40 dm3 and  
logs of wood more than 100 
dm3 in size from below the 
cutting edge portion of the 
well kerb etc. complete. 
 
 
43,17,254 
The contract unit rate of item 5 of 
the original estimate was for 
sinking of well in all classes of 
soil, except rock and removal of 
obstacles irrespective of their 
size. The contractor quoted rates 
considering these aspects. So, the 
contractor was not eligible for 
separate payments f or the 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2019 
66 
Sl. No. & Name 
of bridge work 
Items included in the Original Estimate Additional/extra items 
included in the Revised 
Estimate corresponding to 
the items under Col. 2 
Expenditure 
on the 
additional/ 
extra items  
(₹) 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4  
removal of boulders of more than 
40 dm3 and logs of wood more 
than 100 dm3 in size.  
Item No.29 : Seating of well  
in hard rock up to average 
depth of 50 cm by cutting 
and breaking down the rock 
by using Jack hammer, 
chisel etc. to maintain the 
well in correct level and 
embedment in rock etc. 
complete.  
As stated against work No.1, 
seating of wells’ is incidental to 
the work ‘sinking of well. So, the 
contractor was not eligible for 
separate payments for that work. 
3. Construction 
of 
Pathikkalkadavu 
bridge 
Item No.8: :  Sinking of RCC circular well of  8.5m outer dia 
and 6.5m inner dia for foundation of abutments in all classes 
of soil other than rock  to lines and levels and plumb by 
scooping out earth from inside and below steining with 
dredgers or any other appliances including hire cha rges, 
labour charges, dewatering, casting, vibrating, rem oval of 
obstacles , dumping the spoil at suitable places with all lea ds 
and lifts, incidental expenses  etc. complete as per standard 
specifications and as directed by the departmenta l officers.  
Extra Item 2: Removal of 
obstacles and Seating of 
Well engaging Labour and 
equipment 
20,19,088 
The contractor was not eligible 
for separate payment for 
removing obstacles and seating of 
well, for reasons stated in the 
remarks column against work 
No.1  
 Total  1,98,77,868  
Source: Department Records 
 
Note  : 
The labour charges and hire charges of machineries for removal of obstacles and seating of wells, claimed as extra items in the revised 
estimates, were already included in the original es timate by the words, “ including hire charges, labour charges, dewatering, c asting, 
vibrating, removal of obstacles, dumping the spoil at suitable places with all leads and lifts, incidental expenses ” 

Appendices  
67  
Appendix 3.3 
Details of works involving short recovery of cost of bitumen 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3 - Page: 47) 
Agreement No 
Rate of 
bitumen  as 
per 
Agreement / 
estimate (₹) 
Quantity of 
bitumen 
used in the 
work (in 
MT) 
Amount 
required to be 
recovered as 
per agreement/ 
estimate (₹) 
(2x3) 
Amount 
actually 
recovered 
(₹) 
Short recovery 
(₹) 
1 2 3 4  5 6 
SE (K) 60/2015-16 
dated 22/08/2015 
51,250 531.42 0 2,72,35,275 1,63,90,874 1,08,44,401 
37,500 25.940 9,72,750 8,00,081 1,72,669 
   2,82,08,025 1,71,90,955 1,10,17,070 
SE (K)331/2015-16 
dated 27/02/2016  
50,600 26.403   13,35,992 10,83,958   
39,283 4.105 1,61,257 1,78,738   
   14,97,249 12,62,696 2,34,553 
SE(K)122/2014-15 
dated 27/03/2015 54,400 46.173  25,11,811 18,47,040 6,64,771 
Total     1,19,16,394 
Source: Department Records 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
68 
 
 
Appendix 3.4 
The  works in which cost of bitumen was neither reimbursed nor recovered 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3 - Page: 48) 
Sl 
No Agreement No 
Rate of 
bitumen  as 
per 
Agreement  / 
estimate (₹) 
Quantity  of 
bitumen 
used in the 
work 
executed 
Amount 
required to 
be recovered 
as per 
agreement 
/estimate (₹) 
(3 x 4) 
Amount 
required to 
be 
reimbursed 
to 
contractors 
(₹) 
Undue 
benefit to 
contractors 
due to non- 
recovery of 
cost of 
bitumen (₹) 
(5-6) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 SE (K) 138/16-17 
dated 10/08/2016 
41 ,000  326.879  1,34 ,02 ,039  1,00 ,24 ,455  
35,20,462 
39 ,283  23.908  9,39 ,178  7,96 ,300  
    1,43,41,217 1,08,20,755 
2 SE(K) 16/17-18 
dated 02/06/2017 
38 ,167  557.821  2,12 ,90 ,354  1,86 ,07 ,729  
26,58,458 
39 ,961  321.971  1,28 ,66 ,283  1,27 ,73 ,900  
33 ,294  55.942  18 ,62 ,532  19 ,79 ,082  
    3,60,19,169 3,33,60,711 
3 SE(K) 375/15-16 
dated 04/03/2016 
41 ,000  400.198  1,64 ,08 ,118  1,44,21,476 
33,83,388 
39 ,283  35.556  13 ,96 ,746  
    1,78,04,864 1,44,21,476 
4 SE(K) 126/15-16 
dated 17/09/2015 
41 ,000  312.598  1,28 ,16 ,518  
1,05,10,209 
30,92,077 
39 ,283  8.048  3,16 ,150  
29 ,800  15.759  4,69 ,618  
    1,36,02,286 1,05,10,209 
5 SE(K) 202/15-16 
dated 06/10/2015 50,600 67.694 34,25,316 20,16,682 14,08,634 
6 SE(K) 306/15-16 
dated 08/02/2016 
41 ,000  10.977  4,50 ,057  3,95 ,578  
58,082 
39 ,283  1.59 0 62 ,460  58 ,857  
    5,12,517 4,54,435 
7 SE(K) 9/16-17 dated 
20/05/2016 
50 ,600  10.511  5,31 ,857  64,89,618 
17,75,129 
41 ,000  187.936  77 ,05 ,376  
39 ,283  5.499  2,16 ,017  1,73 ,416  
29 ,800  9.616  2,86 ,557  3,01 ,644  
    87,39,807 69,64,678 
8 SE (K) 37/2015-16 
dated 09/07/2015 
41 ,000  300.205  1,23 ,08 ,405  88 ,59 ,118  
35,10,157 
39 ,283  20.951  8,23 ,018  7,62 ,148  
    1,31,31,423 96,21,266 
9 SE(K) 95/2014-15 
dated 24/12/2014 
41 ,320  187.124  77 ,31 ,964  48 ,68 ,599  
30,54,450 
34 ,975  27.52 0 9,62 ,512  7,71 ,427  
    86,94,476 56,40,026 
10 SE (K) 64/2015-16 
dated 26/08/2015 
41 ,320  62.727  25 ,91 ,880  21 ,37 ,873  
5,02,111 
34 ,975  11.834  4,13 ,894  3,65 ,790  
    30,05,774 25,03,663 

Appendices  
69  
Sl 
No Agreement No 
Rate of 
bitumen  as 
per 
Agreement  / 
estimate (₹) 
Quantity  of 
bitumen 
used in the 
work 
executed 
Amount 
required to 
be recovered 
as per 
agreement 
/estimate (₹) 
(3 x 4) 
Amount 
required to 
be 
reimbursed 
to 
contractors 
(₹) 
Undue 
benefit to 
contractors 
due to non- 
recovery of 
cost of 
bitumen (₹) 
(5-6) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
11 SE (K) 99/2016-17 
dated 15 /07 /2016  
41 ,000  125.563  51 ,48 ,083  40 ,75 ,932  
11,10,566 
39 ,283  18.386  7,22 ,257  6,83 ,842  
    58,70,340 47,59,774 
12 SE(K) 300/15-16 
dated 06/02/2016 
41 ,000  45.029  18 ,46 ,189  12 ,83 ,639  
6,35,045 
39 ,283  6.954  2,73 ,174  2,00 ,679  
    21,19,363 14,84,318 
13 SE(K) 96/2014-15 
dated 24/12/2014 
41 ,320  29.534  12 ,20 ,345  7,88 ,690  
5,00,327 
34 ,975  8.868  3,10 ,158  2,41 ,486  
    15,30,503 10,30,176 
14 SE(K) 332/2015-16  
dated 27/02/2016 
41 ,000  28.59 0 11 ,72 ,190  8,06 ,937  
3,95,149 
39 ,283  2.698  1,05 ,986  79 ,885  
29 ,800  2.497  74 ,411  70 ,616  
    13,52,587 9,57,438 
15 SE(K) 4/2015-16 
dated 10/04/2015 
50 ,600  9.653  4,88 ,442  2,83 ,239  
2,22,284 
39 ,040  1.924  75 ,113  58 ,032  
    5,63,555 3,41,271 
16 SE (K) 287/2015-16 
dated 27/01/2016 
41 ,000  7.52 0 3,08 ,320  2,27 ,520  
96,157 
39 ,283  1.703  66 ,899  51 ,484  
29 ,800  0.684  20 ,383  20 ,441  
    3,95,602 2,99,445 
17 EE/85/2015-16 
dated 16/11/2015 
49 ,610  12.22 0 6,06 ,234  3,27 ,677  
3,18,288 
47 ,238  2.014  95 ,137  55 ,406  
    7,01,371 3,83,083 
18 EE/155/2014-15 
dated 13/10/2014 
55 ,200  20.216  11 ,15 ,923  7,56 ,761  
3,71,526 
41 ,400  1.786  73 ,940  61 ,576  
    11,89,863 8,18,337 
19 EE/128/14-15 dated 
29/09/2014 
50 ,800  14.405  7,31 ,774  5,36 ,389  
2,02,783 
38 ,100  2.042  77 ,800  70 ,402  
    8,09,574 6,06,791 
20 EE/127/14-15 dated 
29/09/2014 
50 ,800  17.51 0 8,89 ,508  7,54 ,018  
1,31,719 
38 ,100  1.55 0 59 ,055  62 ,826  
    9,48,563 8,16,844 
21 EE/122/14-15 dated 
24/09/2014 
50,800 12.353 6,27,532 5,59,254 
65,940 38 ,100  0.961  36,614 38 ,952  
    6,64,146 5,98,206 
Total 2,70,12,732 
Source: Department Records 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2019 
70 
Appendix 3.5 
 
The works in which cost of bitumen was recovered / reimbursed partially 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3 - Page: 48) 
Sl. 
No. Agreement No. 
Rate of 
bitumen  as 
per Agt. 
/estimate 
(₹) 
Qnty. of 
bitumen 
used in 
work 
Amount 
required to 
be recovered 
as per Agt. 
/estimate (₹) 
(3 x 4) 
Amount 
actually 
recovered (₹) 
 
Balance to be 
recovered (₹) 
(5) – (6) 
Amount 
reimbursed 
to contractor 
(₹) 
Balance 
amount due to 
the contractor 
(₹) 
Net amount due 
to be recovered 
from contractors 
(₹) 
(7) - (9) 
1 2 3 4 5  6 7 8 9 10 
1 SE(K) 46/15-16 dated 
01/08/2015 
41,000 320.600 1,31,44,600 1,28,24,554 3,20,046 1,08,10,989 2,37,080 
1,09,926 
39 ,283  21.238  8,34 ,292  7,07 ,801  1,26 ,491  6,58 ,522  99 ,531  
    1,39,78,892 1,35,32,355 4,46,537 1,14,69,511 3,36,611 
2 SE(K) 42/2015-16 
dated 24/07/2015 
56,580 228.194 1,29,11,217 96,00,042 33,11,175 51,38,527 17,16,666 
16,32,322 
41,400 19.165 7,93,431 6,66,954 1,26,477 4,92,836 88,664 
    1,37,04,648 1,02,66,996 34,37,652 56,31,363 18,05,330 
3 SE (K) 76/2012-13 
dated 13/07/2012 
38,167 818.476 3,12,38,773 2,15,58,163 93,08,015   75,88,304 
17,28,957 
33,294 64.710 21,54,455 19,02,686 2,51,769   2,42,523 
    3,33,93,228 2,34,60,849 95,59,784 2,46,24,613 78,30,827 
4 SE(K) 14/2014-15 
dated 14/05/2015 
50,800 167.211 84,94,319 76,86,243 8,08,076 49,14,684 4,83,944 
3,45,376 
38,100 24.095 9,18,020 8,18,236 99,784 8,09,841 78,540 
    94,12,339 85,04,479 9,07,860 57,24,525 5,62,484 
5 SE(K)346/2015-16 
dated 02/03/2016 
41,000 217.249 89,07,209 77,57,200 11,50,009 60,74,015 8,17,744 
3,50,089 
39,283 1.867 73,341 
3,14,569 52,030  
  
  
  
34,206 29,800 9.841 2,93,262 
    92,73,812 80,71,769 12,02,039 60,74,015 8,51,950 
6 SE (K) 42/2013-14 
dated 01 /06 /2013  37,073 65.132 24,14,639 18,85,384 5,29,254 19,82,726 4,25,666 1,03,588 
7 SE(K)71/ 2014-15 
dated 18/10/2014 
41,320 410.502 1,69,61,943 1,67,81,291 1,80,651 1,75,48,757 1,48,222 
32,971 
34,975 35.108 12,27,902 11,97,404 30,498   29,956 
    1,81,89,845 1,79,78,695 2,11,149 1,75,48,757 1,78,178 

Appendices  
71  
Sl. 
No. Agreement No. 
Rate of 
bitumen  as 
per Agt. 
/estimate 
(₹) 
Qnty. of 
bitumen 
used in 
work 
Amount 
required to 
be recovered 
as per Agt. 
/estimate (₹) 
(3 x 4) 
Amount 
actually 
recovered (₹) 
 
Balance to be 
recovered (₹) 
(5) – (6) 
Amount 
reimbursed 
to contractor 
(₹) 
Balance 
amount due to 
the contractor 
(₹) 
Net amount due 
to be recovered 
from contractors 
(₹) 
(7) - (9) 
1 2 3 4 5  6 7 8 9 10 
8 SE(K)38/2015-16 
dated 10/07/2015 
41 ,000  237.0 36  97 ,18 ,476  87 ,71 ,786  9,46 ,690  67,61,432 6,68 ,502  
2,81,095 
39 ,283  0.365  14 ,338  3,52,534 5,547  4,46,099  2,640  29 ,800  11.535  3,43 ,743  
    1,00,76,557 91,24,320 9,52,237 72,07,531 6,71,142 
9 SE(K)70/2014-15 
dated 16/10/2014  
41,320 124.755 51,54,877 38,53,090 13,01,787 41,60,007 12,46,478 
51,989 
34,975 14.699 5,14,098 3,81,927 1,32,171   1,35,491 
    56,68,975 42,35,017 14,33,958 41,60,007 13,81,969 
10 SE(K)254/2015-16 
dated 07/12/2015 
41,000 50.016 20,50,656 19,98,914 51,742 14,86,667 32,588 
42,042 
39,283 3.646 1,43,226 1,20,338  22,888     
   21,93,882 21,19,252 74,630 14,86,667 32,588 
        Total 46,78,355 
Source: Department Records 
 
 
  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
72 
Appendix 3.6 
Salary paid to the crew of 86 idling road rollers  
(Reference: Paragraph 3.4 - Page: 50) 
Period for which 
the rollers idled 
Number of road 
rollers idling 
Salary paid to the crew 
(in ₹) during the period 
2014-15 to 2018-19 
Up to five years  18  5,60,05,448  
Five to 10 years  33  6,46,01,196  
10 to 15 years  27  5,69,43,712  
15 to 20 years  5 23,88,594  
Above 20 years  3 34,52,572  
Total 86 18,33,91,522  
Rounded to ₹18.34 crore  
Source: Department Records 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
 
  

 

Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
73  
Glossary of Abbreviation used in the report 
 
Abbreviation  Full Form  
AB Autonomous Body 
ACCER Academy of Climate Change Education and Research 
BC Bitumen Concrete 
BM Bitumen Maccadam 
BPCL Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd 
CC Contractor’s Certificate 
CCBM College of Co-operation, Banking & Management 
CE Chief Engineer 
CeRA Consortium for e-Resources in Agriculture 
CoA College of Agriculture 
CoH College of Horticulture 
CTE Chief Technical Examiner 
DARE Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
DLR Daily Labour Reports 
dm 3 Cubic Decimeter 
DNA Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid 
DoE Director of Extension 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DUS Distinctiveness, Uniformity and Stability 
EE Executive Engineer 
GA General Administration 
GI Geographical Indication 
GoI Government of India 
GoK Government of Kerala 
GPF General Provident Fund  
ICAI Institute of Chartered Accountants of India 
ICAR The Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IEA Institutional Eligibility for Accreditation 
IPRs Intellectual Property Rights 
IQAC Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
IR Inspection Report 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
KAU Kerala Agricultural University 
KUFOS Kerala University of Fisheries and Ocean Studies  
KVASU Kerala Veterinary and Animal Sciences University 
KVK Krishi Vigyan Kendras 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 3 1 March 2019 
 
74 
Abbreviation  Full Form  
LOI Letter of Intent 
M&E Monitoring & Evaluation 
MoA Ministry of Agriculture 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MSHAE Minimum Standard for Higher Agriculture Education 
MT Metric Ton 
NAAC National Assessment Accreditation Council 
NAEAB National Agricultural Education Accreditation Board 
NBPGR National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources 
NET National Eligibility Test 
NH National Highway 
NRMB Natural Rubber Modified Bitumen 
NZ Northern Zone 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PF Provident Fund 
PG Performance Guarantee 
PPV&FR The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights 
PRT Peer Review Team 
PSC Public Service Commission 
PWD Public Works Department 
R&B Roads & Bridges 
RARS Regional Agricultural Research Stations 
RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete 
SE Superintending Engineer 
SoR Schedule of Rates 
SSR Self Study Reports 
UFAST University Functional Accountability System 
UGC University Grants Commission 
VC Vice Chancellor 
VG Viscosity Grade 
 