  
    
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
On 
Performance Audit of 
Outcomes of Higher Education in Rajasthan 
  mpfeaet Aarts 
Dedicated to Truth in Public Interest 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 1 of the year 2021 
   

Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
On 
Performance Audit of 
Outcomes of Higher Education in Rajasthan 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 1 of the year 2021

Table of Contents 
Reference to 
Paragraph | Page 
  
Preface ili 
Executive Summary Vv 
State Profile: Higher Education 1.1 3 
Organizational set-up for Higher Education 1.2 4 
Identifying outcomes parameters for Higher Education 1.3 5 
Audit Objectives 1.4 6 
Audit Criteria 1.5 6 
Scope of Audit and Audit Methodology 1.6 8 
Employability 2.1 11 
Existence and effective functioning of job facilitating 2.1.1 12 
mechanism 
Enhancement of employability 2.1.2 15 
Indicators based evaluation of students’ outcomes of HEIs 2.1.3 20 
Performance of students in examinations 2.2 22 
Effective curriculum 3.1.1 26 
Effective teaching processes 3.1.2 34 
Contribution to society by creating new knowledge through . 3.2 50 effective Research 
Issues related to Research Activities 3.2.1 50 
Extension activities in collaboration with industry, 
    community etc., and student participation a 3 
Chapter-IV: Access and Equity in Higher Education 
Easy access to Higher Education 4.1 60 
Gross Enrolment Ratio 4.2 64 
Affordability 4.3 68 
Proper Infrastructure 4.4 71 
Governance 5.1 80 
Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions 5.2 87 
De-burdening of Universities 5.3 88 
Accreditation of Higher Education Institutions 5.4 88 
Non-teaching staff 5.5 90 
Financial Management 5.6 90 
Chapter-VI : Conclusion 95 
  
i Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

IHC) 
1.1 List of Key and Input-Output Indicators for Outcomes 99 
of Higher Education in Rajasthan 
  
1.2 Details of inputs available in test checked affiliated 102 
government and private colleges 
1.3 Detail of quantitative proxy criteria developed by Audit 106 
based on the scores obtained by 22 Universities under 
the NAAC grading system during 2017-18 
2.1 Discrepancies noticed in information of placement 109 
reported by Commissionerate (College Education) to 
Assembly and furnished by concerned college to audit 
3.1 Details showing results of scrutiny of syllabus of 19 110 
courses of UoR, Jaipur 
3.2 Details of delay in declaration of revaluation result in 111 
UoR, Jaipur 
3.3 Position of 22 research projects lying incomplete in 112 
UoR Jaipur 
5.1 Functioning of Governing Bodies in test checked 114 
universities 
5.2 Delay in release of RUSA funds by the State 116 
Government 
5.3 Responses of student satisfaction survey 117 
5.4 Glossary of Abbreviations 120 
      
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of ii 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Rajasthan 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
Twelfth Five Year Plan document and Output Outcomes Budget 2018-19 of 
Government of India identified Access, Equity, Quality and Governance as four 
main areas of focus in higher education that need attention. Rajasthan State 
Higher Education Plan also identified inadequate resources for infrastructure 
development, lack of access to higher education for vast section of socially 
deprived population, low overall as well as sectional Gross Enrolment Ratio, 
weak curriculum, inadequate teaching aids, lack of adequate quality faculty, 
higher Student-Teacher Ratio, lack of linkage with the industry, and absence of 
proper MIS and monitoring and evaluation system, etc., as areas of concern. 
Significantly, many of the aspects examined and assessed during this audit have 
also been prioritised by the recently released National Education Policy-2020, 
including areas such as, access, quality of teaching and research and institutional 
governance. 
Audit hopes that this report will provide guidance to the administrators entrusted 
with the crucial task of implementing the National Education Policy-2020. 
The Performance Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  
iti Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary 
Purpose to undertake this audit 
According to the Twelfth Five Year Plan (FYP) document, higher education in 
India suffers from two basic concerns: the low Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) 
i.e. 25.8 per cent in 2017-18 and the quality of higher education marked by lack 
of world class higher educational institutions (HEIs) in the country. National 
Education Policy (NEP)-2020 reiterates the issues plaguing Indian higher 
education system, such as limited access, less emphasis on research, restricted 
institutional autonomy etc. Further, the India Skills Report 2020 has observed 
that more than fifty per cent of the students graduating from Indian HEIs are 
unemployable. 
According to All India Survey on Higher Education Reports published by 
Ministry of Human Resources Development (MHRD), the ranking of Rajasthan 
for GER among all States/Union Territories (UTs) in higher education declined 
from 20 (2010-11) to 23 (2018-19). 
Since Rajasthan fared poorly in terms of both gross enrolment and quality of 
education being provided by the HEIs, it was decided to conduct a Performance 
Audit of the ‘Outcomes of Higher Education in Rajasthan’. 
Identification of outcomes and their measurement in higher education was a 
challenging task. Based on extensive interactions with domain experts and on 
various policy documents, it was concluded that students desire ‘employability 
and higher studies’ as the primary outcome of higher education and society 
wants higher education to contribute towards ‘creation of new knowledge 
through research’ and ‘diffusion of knowledge through effective 
teaching/learning processes’ while the Government aims to ‘create a high- 
quality higher education system which is easily accessible to all sections of 
society’. It also emerged that a robust and strong governance structure was 
paramount in achieving these outcomes. 
This performance audit was conducted to assess and evaluate the State’s 
performance in achieving outcomes of higher education in student progression, 
access, equity, quality and governance in selected three! state universities, three 
constituent colleges and 66 affiliated government and private colleges providing 
education in general streams (Science/Arts/Commerce). Records of 
Commissioner of College Education were also scrutinised. The audit was 
conducted for the period 2014-19. 
  
1 University of Rajasthan (UoR), Jaipur; Jai Narain Vyas University (INVU), Jodhpur; 
Govind Guru Tribal University (GGTU), Banswara. 
  
vy __ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary   
Results in brief 
Audit observed that system of maintenance of data related to student 
progression to employmenit/higher studies/performance in competitive 
examinations was either poor or non-existent at all levels of higher education 
system. Job facilitating mechanisms were either dysfunctional or non-existent. 
Feedback from stakeholders were not obtained before designing/revision of 
curriculum of programmes. The availability of Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) facilities was poor and very few teachers were using ICT 
teaching tools in test checked HEIs. 
Student Teacher Ratio was high and substantial number of teachers in test 
checked private colleges did not possess the prescribed National Eligibility Test 
(NET) qualification. Sufficient steps were not taken for professional 
development of teachers. The evaluation systems in JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, 
Banswara suffered from operational and monitoring inadequacies. The 
performance of the test checked HEIs was abysmal in conducting research 
activities. 
Though GER of Rajasthan increased marginally over last nine years, it 
consistently remained lower than the national figure. GER of both SCs and STs 
in Rajasthan increased during 2014-19 but Government of Rajasthan (GoR) did 
not maintain data regarding GER of OBCs, minorities and disabled categories. 
Gender parity index of all the categories of Rajasthan matched the All India 
average in 2018-19. Community Education Development Cells were not 
functional in all the test checked HEIs. Basic infrastructural facilities were 
inadequate in most of the test checked HEIs and disabled friendly infrastructure 
except ramps was absent in all the test checked HEIs. 
The position of National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) 
accredited HEIs in the state was dismal and prescribed meetings of Governing 
bodies were not held in the test checked universities. 
Principal findings and recommendations of the performance audit 
The chapter wise audit findings that led to audit conclusions and 
recommendations are as follows. 
Chapter I: Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies 
e Career counselling cell/placement cells and alumni associations were either 
dysfunctional or non-existent. Employability enhancement programmes 
were not organized in 99 per cent of the test checked HEIs. None of the 
students undertook field projects/internships during 2018-19 in the test- 
checked HEIs. 
(Paragraphs 2.1.1.1 and 2.1.2.2) 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of vi 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary   
Very few new courses focusing on employability/entrepreneurship/skill 
development were introduced in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur during 
2014-19. 
(Paragraphs 2.1.2.3 and 2.1.2.4) 
Data related to student employment and progression to higher studies was 
not maintained either by Commissionerate, College Education for State 
level or by test checked universities as well as their affiliated colleges. 
(Paragraphs 2.1.3.1 to 2.1.3.2) 
Recommendation: 
Every higher educational institution should constitute well-functioning 
placement cell, career counselling cell and encourage a vibrant alumni 
association to facilitate graduating students in getting employment or to 
progress to higher studies, 
Chapter LT; Quality of Higher Education 
Effective Learning Processes 
Feedback from stakeholders such as industrialists, entrepreneurs, students 
were not obtained in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur during designing/ 
revision of curriculum of general degree programmes. 
(Paragraph 3.1.1.2) 
Curriculum/syllabus of 96 per cent programmes in UoR, Jaipur and 64 per 
cent programmes in JNVU, Jodhpur were revised during 2014-19 (in 11 
selected departments), while GGTU, Banswara did not revise curriculum 
of any programme since its establishment in 2012 up to 2019. 
(Paragraph 3.1.1.3) 
Effective Teaching Process 
During 2018-19 in the three test checked universities, only 10.75 per cent 
classrooms were ICT enabled and 30.59 per cent teachers were using ICT 
tools in teaching. 
(Paragraph 3.1.2.2) 
Availability of faculty was insufficient in government colleges which 
resulted in Student Teacher Ratio (STR) being as high as 88:1 (average), 
more than four times the prescribed limit of 20:1. 
(Paragraph 3.1.2.3 (A)) 
In the 30 test checked affiliated private colleges, 45.71 per cent teachers 
did not possess prescribed NET qualification. Efforts towards professional 
development of teachers were also insufficient. 
(Paragraph 3.1.2.3 (B) and 3.1.2.4) 
  
vii Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary   
Effective Research 
e UoR, Jaipur could utilize only 45.82 per cent of approved grants on 
research projects and complete only 39 per cent research projects. Further, 
no patent could be awarded as an outcome of the completed research 
projects. In JNVU, Jodhpur, none of the 14 research projects could be 
completed even after utilising 62.60 per cent of research grants. No 
research project was undertaken in GGTU, Banswara. Alarmingly, in UoR, 
Jaipur, 72 thesis submitted by PhD students were pending for evaluation/ 
examination with the examiners since 2007 upto 2019. 
(Paragraph 3.2.1) 
Recommendations: 
e The Universities should: 
© Revise/design curriculum timely considering the need of industry, 
local/national market. 
o Endeavor to improve the learning process by implementing Choice 
Based Credit system and semester system in all the programmes and 
encourage continuous evaluation of students through term papers, 
internship, projects and weekly assignments so that employability of 
students is enhanced. This would also be in line with the New Education 
Policy which promotes multi-disciplinary education. 
o Ensure that all the research projects are conducted with due quality and 
are completed in timely manner to extend significant gains to the society. 
e To keep pace with technological advancement and innovations in delivery 
of education, the HEIs should encourage teachers to use ICT teaching 
tools. 
Chapter IV: Access and Equity in Higher Education 
e GoR did not have a specific policy for establishment of new colleges in 
unserved areas and did not undertake geographical mapping to identify 
habitations that lacked higher education facilities. 
(Paragraph 4.1.1.1 and 4.1.1.2) 
e There were urban/rural and region wise imbalances in availability of HEIs. 
Availability of seats in Science and Commerce streams decreased while 
availability of Arts stream increased during 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
(Paragraph 4.1.2.1 to 4.1.2.3) 
e Though GER of Rajasthan increased from 18.2 per cent in 2010-11 to 23 
per cent in 2018-19 but it has consistently been lower than national figure. 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomes of viii 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary   
Institutional mechanisms to assist disadvantaged groups such as 
Community Education Development Cells (CEDCs) were not functional in 
all the test checked universities and colleges 
(Paragraph 4.2.2) 
Adequate basic infrastructure like academic and administrative building, 
laboratory, library and furniture was not available in GGTU, Banswara and 
majority of the test checked government and private colleges. Moreover, 
disabled friendly facilities, except ramps, were not available in all the 66 
test checked colleges. 
(Paragraph 4.4.1) 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may: 
© Provide access to higher education in rural areas and undertake 
planned efforts to enhance GER across all categories; 
© Recognising the direct relationship between availability of quality 
infrastructure and higher education outcomes, the State Government 
should take urgent measures to provide prescribed high-quality basic 
infrastructure in government colleges for facilitating effective teaching, 
improving access and increasing retention rates of students. 
The Universities should prepare proper plans for infrastructure 
augmentation including development of e-library and procurement and 
utilization of advanced scientific equipment. 
Chapter V: Governance and Management 
Even after completion of the Twelfth FYP, only four out of 1,761 general 
stream colleges had attained autonomous status in Rajasthan as of March 
2019. 
(Paragraph 5.2) 
The position of NAAC accredited HEIs in the state was dismal as only 6.04 
per cent of eligible HEIs were NAAC accredited as of January 2020. 
Further the fact that only 0.66 per cent of accredited HEIs obtained A‘/A 
grade indicated poor quality of higher education being imparted in HEIs in 
the state. 
(Paragraph 5.4) 
Recommendation: 
In order to increase the number of NAAC accredited institutions, State 
Level Quality Assurance Cell should effectively monitor functioning of 
Internal Quality Assurance Cell of colleges and HEIs should also 
strengthen their Internal Quality Assurance Cell. 
  
ix Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Executive Summary   
e The universities should strengthen the affiliation process for the colleges 
and ensure that renewal of affiliation is completed before start of academic 
year so that the future prospects of students are not adversely impacted. 
Indicators based evaluation of performance of test checked universities 
e Assessment of the performance of the three test checked universities was 
based on nine outcomes indicators and 17 input-output indicators (26 in 
total) developed using NAAC accreditation criteria and measured using 
grades given by NAAC to universities accredited by them. Overall grade 
awarded by NAAC to a university is the cumulative result of marks (from 
zero to four, four being best) awarded individually against each indicator 
decided by NAAC. 
e UoR, Jaipur did not provide/maintain data needed to evaluate 18 of these 
indicators. It scored zero marks against four indicators, one mark against 
three indicators and four marks against one indicator. JNVU, Jodhpur did 
not provide/maintain data needed to evaluate 18 of these indicators. It 
scored zero marks against five indicators, three marks against one indicator 
and four marks against two indicators. GGTU, Banswara did not 
provide/maintain data needed to evaluate four of these indicators. It scored 
zero marks against 16 indicators, one mark against two indicators and four 
marks against four indicators. 
The indicators for which marks were awarded indicated the performance of 
Universities but significantly, even though NAAC had earlier accredited 
UoR, Jaipur (in 2016) and JNVU, Jodhpur (in 2011), both universities did 
not maintain basic data required for accreditation process. Due to this, most 
of the indicators could not be evaluated. It was the responsibility of Internal 
Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) of the universities to ensure that 
information relevant to accreditation be regularly updated and maintained. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of x 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter - I 
Introduction 
 

          
        
HIGHER EDUCATION SEC. EDU 
  
ELEMENTARY 
EDUCATION 
Chapter — I 
Introduction 
  
Higher Education in India is currently defined as the education which is 
obtained after completing 12 years of schooling and is of the duration of at least 
3 years. This education may be of the nature of General, Vocational, 
Professional or Technical education. 
As per University Grants Commission (UGC), education, including higher 
education, in India is currently structured as depicted in Chart 1.7. National 
Education Policy (NEP)-2020 envisages overhauling the existing structure. It 
states that the extant 10+2 structure in school education will be modified with a 
new pedagogical and curricular restructuring of 5+3+3+4 covering ages 3-18 
{Foundation - 5 years (ages 3-8 years in Anganwadi/preschool/ Balvatika and 
class 1 and 2), Preparatory - 3 years (ages 8-11 in class 3 to 5), Middle —3 years 
(ages 11-14 years in class 6 to 8), and Secondary - 4 years (ages 14-18 in class 
9 to 12)}. 
Chart 1.1: Structure of Education in India 
PRIMARY SCHOOL 
According to the Twelfth Five Year Plan (FYP) document, higher education in 
India suffers from two basic concerns. The first being the low Gross Enrolment 
Ratio? (GER) which was 25.8 per cent in 2017-18. The second basic concern is 
  
2 Gross Enrolment Ratio is total enrolment in higher education, regardless of age, expressed 
as a percentage to the eligible official population (18-23 years) in a given year. 
  
1 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
COMPULSORY EDUCATION

Chapter-I Introduction   
the quality of higher education; i.e. lack of world class higher educational 
institutions? in the country. On both these aspects, Rajasthan’s higher education 
system has fared poorly. 
The Twelfth FYP further lists certain aspects on which Indian higher education 
performs inadequately. These include: 
e Access to higher education is still less than the minimum international 
thresholds levels, 
e Distribution of institutions is skewed in terms of regional/urban/rural 
balance, 
e Enrolment in public universities is largely concentrated in the conventional 
disciplines, 
e The quality of higher education as well as research conducted in most 
universities is unsatisfactory, 
e A large number of faculty positions are lying vacant. 
NEP-2020 also discusses the major problems currently plaguing the Indian 
higher education. These include: 
e Presence of severely fragmented higher educational ecosystem; 
e Limited access particularly in socio-economically disadvantaged areas, 
e Inadequate mechanisms for merit-based career management and 
progression of faculty and institutional leaders, 
e Lesser emphasis on research at most universities and colleges, 
e Less emphasis on the development of cognitive skills and learning 
outcomes; 
e Rigid separation of disciplines, with early specialization and streaming of 
students into narrow areas of study; 
e Limited teacher and institutional autonomy; 
e Large affiliating universities resulting in low standards of undergraduate 
education. 
One of the most significant fallouts of these issues has been lack of perceived 
employability. The India Skills Report 20204 has observed that more than 50 
per cent of the students graduating from Indian HEIs are unemployable. Further, 
more than 60 per cent of the general stream graduates were not employable. 
With the aim of ridding the higher education of problems it currently has, policy 
documents such as Strategic Framework of Twelfth FYP (2012-17) and the 
  
3 As per QS World Universities ranking 2019, only six Indian higher education institutions 
(five Indian Institutes of Technology (Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai, Kanpur and Kharagpur) and 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru) were ranked in first 300 universities. Only University 
of Delhi, ranked 487, amongst the first 500 general degree universities. 
4 India Skills Report is a joint initiative of Wheebox, People Strong and Confederation of 
Indian Industry in collaboration with United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and Association of Indian Universities. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 2 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
Output Outcomes Budget 2018-19 of Government of India have identified 
Access, Equity, Quality and Governance as four main areas (Chart 1.2) of focus 
that need attention in higher education. 
Chart 1.2: Four main area in higher education 
* Availability of *Equal Improving Essential in 
sufficient opportunity to teaching and order to achieve 
number of all sections of research across Access, Equity 
institutions the society to all institutions & Quality 
participate in 
higher 
education. 
1.1 State Profile: Higher Education 
e Number of HEIs and GER: According to All India Survey on Higher 
Education (AISHE) Reports published by Ministry of Human Resources 
Development, a comparison between Rajasthan and All India in terms of 
number of HEIs, college density’, and GER in the years 2010-11 and 
2018-19 is given in Table 1.1 below. 
Table 1.1: Number of HEIs and GER 
Cia YEO Total number of OTM LANA GER of Ranking of 
universities colleges Rajasthan 
Rajasthan |All India |Rajasthan |All India |Rajasthan | All |Rajasthan | an |eongst all 
India ji Reni 
HFG 43 621 2,435 32,974 29 23 18.2 19.4 20 
HE] 83 993 3,156 39,931 35 28 23.0 26.3 23 
93% 60% 30% 21% 6 5 26% 36% ()3 
Source: All India Survey on Higher Education Reports 
    
    
It can be seen that though the percentage increase in number of universities, 
colleges and college density in Rajasthan was more than All India averages 
during 2010-11 and 2018-19, the increase in GER was much lower 
(Rajasthan 26 per cent and All India 36 per cen?). Further, the ranking of 
Rajasthan among all states/Union Territories (UTs) in respect of GER in 
higher education also worsened gradually from 20 (2010-11) to 23 
(2018-19). This points to the fact that in Rajasthan the increase in number of 
universities and colleges did not have an adequate impact on increasing the 
GER in the state. 
e Ranking of HEIs: With regard to the quality of higher education in 
Rajasthan, only two® private HEIs were placed in the top 100 rank in the 
  
5 College Density = Number of colleges per lakh population. 
6 Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani (39% rank) and Banasthali Vidyapeeth, 
Bansathali (87" rank). 
  
3 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
country as per the ranking framework of the National Institutional Ranking 
Framework’ (NIRF) in 2019. 
e Weaknesses of Higher Education System: Rajasthan’s State Higher 
Education Plan-2015-22 (SHEP) prepared under Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha 
Abhiyan (RUSA) identified several weaknesses in higher education in the State, 
including inadequate resources for infrastructure development, lack of access to 
higher education for vast section of socially deprived population, low overall as 
well as sectional GER, weak curriculum, inadequate teaching aids, lack of 
personality development programmes and soft skills for students, lack of 
adequate quality faculty, higher Student-Teacher ratio, lack of linkage with the 
industry, absence of proper MIS and monitoring and evaluation system, 
minimal number of NAAC accredited institutions, miniscule number of PhDs, 
research publications and patents, weak control of institutional heads, etc. 
The above facts demonstrate that Rajasthan fared poorly in terms of access, 
equity, quality and governance of higher education systems, The State also 
acknowledged these deficiencies. To examine the above concerns, it was 
decided to conduct a Performance Audit of the ‘Outcomes of Higher Education 
in Rajasthan’. 
POE ENCE M am mae eles iCo mm LCRA 
Higher Education is included in Concurrent List (Seventh Schedule) of the 
Constitution of India. Accordingly, its planning, implementation and regulation 
responsibilities are shared by both the Central as well as the State Governments. 
The roles and responsibilities of various central, state and universities 
authorities involved in management of higher education in India are briefly 
discussed below: 
1,2.1 At Central level 
e MHRD (renamed Ministry of Education in July 2020) is responsible for the 
overall development of the basic infrastructure of higher education sector, 
both in terms of policy and planning. Under a planned development process, 
it looks after expansion of access and qualitative improvement in the higher 
education, through world class universities, colleges and other Institutions. 
It provides funds under RUSA for overall quality improvement of existing 
government and government aided state HEIs. 
e UGC, a statutory body of the Government of India, controls and monitors 
higher education in India by providing funds and by coordinating, 
determining and maintaining standards in HEIs. 
e The National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC), an 
autonomous institution of the UGC conducts assessment and accreditation of 
HEIs. It evaluates standards of quality of the HEIs in terms of educational 
  
7 NIRF was approved by MHRD and established in September 2015. It outlines a 
methodology to rank institutions across the country. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 4 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
processes and outcomes, curriculum coverage, teaching-learning processes, 
faculty, research, infrastructure, learning resources, etc. 
1,2,2 At state level 
In Rajasthan, Department of Higher Education headed by Secretary, is tasked 
with management of higher education in the state. Commissioner, College 
Education is responsible for overall work relating to development and 
expansion of higher education. It controls administrative, educational and 
financial functions of government colleges and issues no objection certificate 
to private colleges. 
Under RUSA, at the State level, State Higher Education Council headed by 
Minister of Higher Education is responsible for preparation of perspective plan 
for planned and coordinated development of higher education in the state. State 
Project Director, RUSA is responsible for implementation of RUSA. 
1.2.3 At the University level 
University affiliates government and private colleges for ensuring availability 
of basic infrastructure, qualified teaching and non-teaching staff and for 
awarding degree to students of the affiliated colleges. Importantly, University 
has the mandate to visualize appropriate curricula for particular programmes, 
revise/update them periodically and ensure that the outcomes of its programmes 
are defined by its governing bodies. 
The Vice Chancellor (VC) who is the ex-officio Chairman of Senate, Syndicate 
and Academic Council, is the Principal Executive and Academic Officer of the 
University. The Syndicate is the Chief Executive Body responsible to make, 
amend and cancel ordinances and it appoints teaching as well as non-teaching 
staff and defines their duties, emoluments and conditions of services. 
1.3. Identifying outcome parameters for Higher Education 
Identification of outcomes of higher education and their measurement is a 
challenging task. In order to understand the outcomes expected by main 
stakeholders - students, society and Government - Audit interacted extensively 
with policy makers (MHRD), accreditation agencies (NAAC), regulatory 
bodies (UGC), experts® and educationists. Based on their inputs, Audit arrived 
at the broad outcomes of higher education and related parameters to assess them. 
It emerged that students desire ‘employability and higher studies’ as the 
primary outcome of higher education and society wants higher education to 
  
8 Prof. Ved Prakash (Ex-Chairman, UGC), Prof. Dinesh Singh (Ex-Vice Chancellor, Delhi 
University), Shri Ajay Shah and Ms Ila Patnaik (Professors of National Institute of Public 
Finance and Policy), Mr. Ramesh K. Arora (Ex-Prof, University of Rajasthan), Shri C.S 
Rajan (Ex-Chief Secretary, GoR), Shri Ashutosh AT Pednekar (then Special Secretary, 
Higher Education Department, GoR) and Shri Rajeeva Karandikar (Director, Chennai 
Mathematical Institute). 
  
5 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
contribute towards ‘creation of new knowledge through research’ and 
‘diffusion of knowledge through effective teaching/learning processes’. The 
Government aims to ‘create a high-quality higher education system which is 
easily accessible to all sections of society’. It also emerged that a robust and 
strong governance structure was paramount in achieving these outcomes. 
Hence, Audit identified and evaluated the various ‘parameters required for 
good governance’. 
Audit also realized that achievement of higher education outcomes crucially 
depended on a number of inputs and outputs required in setting up and managing 
an effective higher education system. The outcomes, their related inputs and 
outputs and the relationship between them is depicted in Chart 1.3. In order to 
assess the performance of higher education system in relation to the identified 
outcomes, 26 key outcomes indicators as well as input-output indicators 
(Appendix-I.1) were also formulated. 
1.4 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of Performance Audit of Outcomes of Higher Education in 
Rajasthan were to assess whether: 
(@) ~The Higher Education system led to increased employability and progress 
to higher studies for students of higher education institutions. 
(ij) The Higher Education system contributed to society through effective 
teaching learning processes and high quality research. 
(iii) Equitable Access to Quality Higher Education was ensured for all, and 
(iv) Governance and Management of Higher Education system was adequate 
and effective. 
1.5 Audit Criteria 
The Performance Audit was conducted against the criteria derived from the 
following documents: 
e Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
e Inclusive & Qualitative Expansion of Higher Education-Twelfth FYP 
e Guidelines and Manual issued by NAAC. 
e Internal Quality Assurance Cell Manual issued by NAAC. 
e State Higher Education Plan (2015-22) prepared under RUSA. 
e  Circulars/orders issued by University Grants Commission, Department of 
Higher Education/Commissioner, College Education etc. 
e Hand books, circulars and guidelines issued by selected Universities. 
e Minutes of the meetings of Governing Bodies of selected Universities. 
e Annual Accounts of selected Universities. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 6 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
Chart 1.3: Diagrammatic representation of the relation between outcomes of Higher Education and their 
related inputs, and outputs 
OUTCOMES   
OUTPUTS   
  
  
        
Employability 
and Higher 
Education 
  
        
    
    
      
  
Societal 
         
Value Access, 
Addition Equity, and 
Quality for All Teaching Research 
- Learning 
  
  
    
       
e Per cent employed 
« Per cent in higher 
education 
e Examination results 
\ 
     
            
  
e Well Designed Programmes ("svocrense in number of » 
& Courses HEIs Increase in GER 
e Advanced teaching methods 
e Robust Examination & 
Evaluation System 
© Number of research papers 
and publications 
e Number of patents filed and 
awarded 
¢ Number of consultancies 
e Availability of 
Academic Choices 
e Good Infrastructure 
  
e Career Counselling 
e Placement Cell 
e Job fairs 
e Alumni activity 
  KY 
  
  
and awards won by faculty ) e SD 
(vesien new/ revision of >) (". speciti Policies/ \ 
programme/ course Schemes targeting 
material/reading list Access, Equity and 
¢ Academic flexibility Affordability 
(CBCS, Semester) © Funding 
« Feedback from stakeholders 
© Teaching style 
(Use of ICT etc.) 
¢ Teacher qualification 
© Scholarships/freeships 
¢ Non-teaching staff 
* Disabled friendly 
. facilities 
e Teachers Professional eICT 
development wa ae . 
¢ Teachers pursuing Higher e Building, library, labs 
Education 
« Defining Exam schedule 
© Fool proof process of 
conducting exams 
« Centralised & standardised 
evaluation 
« Number of researchers 
\e velnme of Research Grants S       Ne   
  GOOD GOVERNANCE 
(Senate, Syndicate, Academic Council, Board of Study, 
Board of Inspection) 
© Quality Assurance mechanism 
© Deburdening of Universities 
e Autonomy 
© Affiliation 
. © Financial Management   
eee eee eee en 
  
7 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
bom -6 Scope of Audit and Audit Methodology 
1.6.1 Scope of Audit 
According to the All India Survey on Higher Education (AISHE) Report 2018- 
19, there were total 83 universities? and 3,156 colleges in Rajasthan. There were 
23 state public universities, of which 10 universities were providing education 
in general streams (Science/Arts/Commerce). 
This performance audit was conducted during September 2019 to February 
2020 for the audit period 2014-15 to 2018-19. The audit included examination 
of aspects such as student progression, access, equity, quality and governance 
of higher education in state universities and constituent and affiliated colleges. 
Three!® (30 per cent) out of 10 state universities providing education in general 
streams (Science/Arts/Commerce) were selected by simple random sampling 
method. Three out of five constituent colleges (two from University of 
Rajasthan (UoR), Jaipur and one from Jai Narain Vyas University (JINVU), 
Jodhpur) and 60 (10 per cent) out of 602 government/private colleges affiliated 
to these three selected universities were selected by simple random sampling 
method. In order to ensure appropriate audit coverage of affiliated colleges, 30 
colleges each from government affiliated colleges and private affiliated colleges 
were selected as detailed in Table 1.2 below. 
Table 1.2: Number of selected affiliated colleges 
Total affiliated Number of selected affiliated colleges 
colleges colleges rs 
UoR, Jaipur 31 15 16 
JINVU, 19 10 9 
Jodhpur 
Ler eaNOn 97 10 5 5 
Banswara 
Total 602 60 30 30     Further, on the request of Secretary, Higher Education and Commissioner, 
College Education, additional six government colleges (two each from three 
selected universities) were also test checked. Thus, total 66 colleges 
(36 government colleges and 30 private colleges) were test checked (Names of 
  
9 Out of 83 universities, 23 were state public universities, 45 state private universities, eight 
deemed private universities, five institutes of national importance, one state open university 
and one central university. 
10 Two Universities {University of Rajasthan (UoR), Jaipur and Jai Narain Vyas University 
(INVU), Jodhpur} were selected from six old universities which were either NAAC 
accredited or had applied for accreditation and one university {Govind Guru Tribal 
University (GGTU), Banswara} was selected from other 4 new universities. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 8 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
selected colleges are available as part of (Appendix 1.2). Besides this, records 
of Commissioner, College Education were also scrutinized. 
1.6.2 Audit Methodology 
Audit was conducted to assess and evaluate the State’s performance in 
achieving outcomes of higher education. Neither Government of India nor 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) has clearly defined such outcomes. In the 
absence of defined criteria for evaluation and measurement of outcomes in 
higher education, Audit had to develop its own criteria based on policy 
documents, provisions of Twelfth FYP, NAAC assessment indicators, higher 
education experts’ inputs and National Institute of Public Finance & Policy’s 
suggestions. 
Audit developed quantitative proxy criteria on the basis of scoring system used 
by NAAC for awarding grades to universities in their accreditation process. 
Under NAAC’s scoring system, the HEI is awarded marks (from 0 to 4) for each 
of the assessment criteria. Cumulative average based on weightages is 
calculated to give the final grade (which could be one amongst A++, A+, A, 
B++, B+, B, C, D). Due to confidentiality reasons, NAAC did not disclose the 
correlation between performance of an HEI on a particular criteria and the 
corresponding score it was awarded by NAAC. However, based on the analysis 
of scores obtained by 22 universities that were graded A++, A+, A, BH, B+, 
B, C under the NAAC grading system during 2017-18, Audit developed a 
correlation between scores and performance of each criteria (Appendix-I.3). 
This correlation was then used as proxy criteria to assess the performance of 
each of the selected universities vis a vis chosen indicators. The proxy criteria 
were discussed at length and explained in detail to the Heads of audited units 
during the entry conference held in September 2019. 
Audit was conducted through physical inspections of sites and evidences were 
collected through copies of relevant documents, discussion papers and 
photographs of sites. For evaluation of quality of education, feedback from 
2,280 students!! through a student’s satisfaction survey was also obtained. 
Important survey responses have been discussed with relevant audit finding in 
concerned para of the report. However complete response of student survey 
have been given in Appendix 5.3. An Entry Conference was held (September 
2019) with Secretary, Higher Education Department, Government of Rajasthan 
and Vice-Chancellors of all three selected universities in which audit objectives, 
scope of audit, audit methodology and andit criteria including proxy criteria for 
  
11 Student survey of 30 students from each of the selected colleges (equal number of students 
of Ind/ Ilrd year of UG course and Final year of PG course) and 15 students of Final year 
of PG course from each selected departments of the universities was done. Students were 
selected randomly from the students available on the date of inspection of concerned 
colleges/department. 
  
9 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Introduction   
this performance audit were discussed. Exit Conferences were conducted in 
June and July 2020 with representatives'? of selected universities to discuss 
audit findings, responses and address concerns. The Exit Conference with 
Secretary, Higher Education Department and Commissioner, College Education 
could not be held despite being scheduled thrice. However, the GoR submitted 
its reply to the draft report. (August 2020) 
JINVU, Jodhpur stated (October 2020) that since NEP-2020 has been introduced 
by the Central as well as State Governments in July 2020, audit objections raised 
in this report would be implemented by the university at the earliest. UoR, Jaipur 
in its reply (January 2021) accepted the facts and assured to take corrective 
actions. 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation extended by the Higher Education 
Department; Commissioner of College Education; Vice-Chancellors and 
concerned officers of UoR, Jaipur; INVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara and 
Principals of selected government colleges and private colleges in conduct of 
this Performance Audit. 
1.8 Structure of the Report 
This report is structured in a manner that focusses on the performance of GoR 
in terms of desired outcomes of higher education and its efforts towards 
providing the inputs and outputs required for achieving these outcomes. The 
achievement of these outcomes is dependent on how adequately and effectively 
interventions of the Government are planned and implemented. Hence, many 
inputs such as funding and human resources and outputs such as research and 
capital expenditure, that directly influenced these outcomes were also assessed 
and commented upon. 
Audit findings regarding each of the identified outcomes and related 
government interventions have been discussed chapter-wise in detail in the 
succeeding four chapters. Audit findings in respect of ‘Employability’ and 
‘Higher Studies’ are included in Chapter II, ‘Effective Teaching/Learning 
Processes and High-Quality Research’ in Chapter III, ‘Equitable Access to 
Quality Higher Education’ in Chapter IV and ‘Governance and Management’ 
are included in Chapter V. 
  
12 Vice Chancellor of GGTU, Banswara; representatives of JNVU, Jodhpur and 
Commissionerate (College Education) GoR and Financial Advisor of UoR, Jaipur. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 10 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter - I 
Student Progression towards 
HNN ee mei uitaE 
STATICS 
 

Chapter - II 
Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies 
This chapter discusses higher education outcome related to students that is, 
increasing student progression to employment and higher studies. Audit 
assessed contributing factors and institutional initiatives in increasing student 
progression to employment and higher studies with reference to the following 
audit objective. 
Audit Objective 1: Whether the Higher Education system led to increased 
employability and progress to higher studies for students 
of higher education institutions 
  
The relationship between student progression and the various factors 
contributing towards it can be understood through the following representation: 
WM Availability of: QM 1. Percentage of ® 1. Increase in 
Ft Career Counselling f= students employed 5 employability 
iS Cells - 2. Percentage of 3 
7, 2. Placement Cells fm Students progressing () 2. Increase in po ; > to higher studies =n 
3. Job fairs . > progr . . _. © 3. Performance in higher studies 
4. Alumni Associations examination ° 
5. Employment oriented 
curricula 
6. Data of graduating > 
students 
Student progression, besides quality of education imparted, is directly 
dependent on existence and effective functioning of a number of facilitating 
mechanisms including career counselling cells, placement cells, alumni 
associations, job fairs and proper maintenance of data of graduating students. 
Placement and career counselling cell and alumni association help the students 
with appropriate guidance to establish linkages with industries and locate career 
opportunities vis-a-vis the realities and job profiles in the context of highly 
competitive emerging occupational patterns. Additionally, employability is also 
enhanced through curricular aspects such as employment focused courses, 
internships and field projects etc. 
In respect of paragraphs 2.1.1.1(di), 2.1.2.2 (i) and 2.1.2.3 UoR, Jaipur and 
JNVU, Jodhpur did not provide consolidated and complete information for all 
their departments. In the absence of complete information, Audit collected such 
information from selected 11 departments!> of universities concerned. 
2.1 Hi eloling 
The International Labour Organisation defines employability as the presence of 
  
13 Chemistry, Zoology, Physics, Accountancy & Business Statistics, Business Administration, 
Hindi, English, Sociology, Political Science, Geography and Economics 
  
11 ~~ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
skills, knowledge and competencies that enhance a worker’s ability to secure 
and retain a job, progress at work and cope with change. Individuals are most 
employable when they have broad-based education and training, basic and 
portable high-level skills including teamwork, problem solving, Information 
and Communications Technology (ICT) and communication and language skills. 
Generic employability skills are important because the labour market is 
intensely competitive and employers are looking for people who are flexible 
and have the ability to undertake a variety of tasks in different environments. 
As per India Skills Report!* 2020, at all India level, BSc, BA and BCom 
undergraduate programmes have provided on an average 37.47 per cent, 32.34 
per cent and 31.86 per cent of employable graduates respectively during the 
period 2014-20. Conversely, more than 60 per cent of the general stream 
graduates were not employable. This makes a strong case for setting up of a 
well-functioning job facilitation system in all HEIs providing higher education 
in general streams. 
2.1.1 Existence and effective functioning of job facilitating mechanism 
Presence of job oriented facilitators such as placement cell, career counselling 
cell and alumni association in HEIs is essential in two ways. Firstly, they play 
an integral role in enhancing the potential ofjob aspirants in identifying the right 
areas of employment, honing their skills and getting accepted by recruiters. On 
the other hand, they also provide a platform to potential employers to access 
vast pool of trained human resource. 
Chart 2.1: Job facilitating mechanism 
Placement & Career Counselling Alumni Association Job Fair Cell 
Gather information about job Contribute in academic Recruiting events 
avenues, analyze information in matters, student support organized by HEls 
local, regional and national contexts as well as mobilization which provide 
to explore its relevance and utility COMB eRe Tce Terra aN csUVCOUME-N UCM eeyHTveNLey TN 
OMICS UMN TMmOELaSTItTUmeTTGE financial and non- meeting ground to job 
on job training, organize seminars PPPOE Etec seekers as well as 
and workshops on emerging potential employers. 
professional trends, job profiles, and 
market needs for students and 
impart training in soft skills. 
  
  
14 India Skills Report is a joint initiative by Wheebox and People Strong in collaboration with 
the Confederation of Indian Industry (CID along with partners like UNDP, AICTE and AIU. 
This report is a combination of an assessment of 300,000 candidates from 3500 educational 
institutes across 28 States and 9 Union Territories of India and more than 150 corporates 
spread across 9 Industry sectors. This is the seventh edition of the Report with annual 
editions being released since 2014. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 12 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
The gaps in perception about the market demands and individual expectations 
could be bridged through effective working of such mechanisms. 
Audit of test checked HEIs in respect of job facilitating mechanisms brought 
forth the following observations: 
21.1.1 In test checked universities 
) Placement Cell: UoR, Jaipur, GGTU, Banswara, JNVU, Jodhpur and their 
selected constituent colleges did not constitute placement cell for general 
streams (Science, Arts and Commerce) during 2014-19. This was despite 
the fact that UGC had requested (December 2014) JNVU, Jodhpur to set 
up counselling and placement cells in the university campus and to 
associate the representative of National Skill Development Corporation. 
(ii) Career Counselling Cell and Alumni Association 
e In UOoR, Jaipur and two selected constituent colleges, a Student Advisory 
Bureau was established (October 2016) in place of career counselling 
cell to provide guidance to students on various issues relating to 
academics and future career options!>. Director, Student Advisory 
Bureau, intimated to Audit that 4,930 students were provided guidance 
relating to future career options during 2016-19. 
Thus, Student Advisory Bureau confined itself to providing only career 
courses related information. It did not provide information related to job 
avenues, potential placement opportunities in different institutes. 
Further it did not examine information in the local, regional and national 
contexts to explore its relevance and utility for students in their 
placement and on job trainings as envisaged in UGC guidelines. 
Alumni associations were constituted only in two departments (Zoology 
and Physics) and one (Maharani College) out of the two constituent 
colleges of the university. Though nine meetings of alumni association 
were stated to have been conducted during 2014-19, placement and 
career guidance were not part of agenda of these Alumni Association 
meetings. 
JNVU, Jodhpur and one constituent college established a career 
counselling cell January 2010) pursuant to Eleventh FYP but it has been 
dysfunctional since March 2017 due to non- availability of funds. 
Alumni association was neither constituted in JNVU, Jodhpur nor in any 
of its constituent college during 2014-19. 
  
15 Career courses available, institutions providing career courses, scholarships available etc., 
within India and abroad. 
  
13.“ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
e GGTU, Banswara did not constitute career counselling cell and alumni 
association during 2014-19. 
(iii) Job fair: UoR, Jaipur and its two constituent colleges organized only one 
job fair (2016) during 2014-19, in which 57 companies/employers took part. 
449 out of 4,000 students who participated were stated to have got the job. 
JNVU, Jodhpur including its constituent college and GGTU, Banswara did not 
organize any job fair during 2014-19. 
JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara accepted (June 2020) the facts regarding 
job facilitating mechanism. GGTU, Banswara further stated that, being a newly 
established (2012) university, it suffered from many infrastructural and resource 
constraints such as absence of own building, lack of teaching and non-teaching 
staff, etc. Hence, it could not prioritise setting up of career counselling cell, and 
alumni association. UoR, Jaipur accepted (January 2021) the facts and stated 
that instructions would be issued to constitute placement cells and to establish 
career counselling cells and alumni associations in all departments of the 
university and constituent colleges. 
2.1.1.2 In test checked colleges: 
In line with the UGC Guidelines for State universities, Commissioner, College 
Education directed (September 2014) Principals of all government colleges to 
constitute placement cell in their colleges. The position regarding existence of 
placement cells and other job facilitating mechanisms in the test checked 
colleges is depicted in Chart 2.2. 
Chart 2.2: Existence of job facilitating mechanism in test checked colleges 
  
Percentage of colleges 
    
8.33 
ote 
oh By 
  
@ Not existed m@ Existed 
  
  Placement Career Alumni Jobfair Placement Career Alumni —_ Job fair 
cell counselling assocition cell counselling assocition 
cell | | cell 
Govemmenl colleges Private colleges 
  
Source: Information provided by test checked colleges concerned 
The chart 2.2 clearly shows that most of the test checked private colleges did 
not constitute basic job facilitation mechanisms in their campuses. Further, 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 14 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
Audit observed that 38.89 per cent test checked government colleges organized 
55 job fairs'® during 2014-19 in which 114 students were given placement. 
  
  
Good practice: Govind Guru Government College, Banswara; Government 
College, Jaipur and Government Girls College, Lalsot organized job fairs every 
year during 2014-19.   
2.1.1.3 Student survey result: In response to student satisfaction survey’s 
question, “Are you satisfied with the initiatives taken by Placement Cell of your 
institution for enhancing the employability?” approximately 48 per cent of the 
501 students of 17 test checked government colleges where placement cells 
were constituted expressed dissatisfaction/partial satisfaction with the 
functioning of the placement cell. 
Similarly, in response to student satisfaction survey’s question, “Are you 
satisfied with the initiatives taken by Career Counselling Cell of your institution 
for enhancing the employability?” approximately 50 per cent of the 358 
students of UoR, Jaipur and three test checked government colleges where 
Student Advisor Bureau/Career Counselling Cells were constituted expressed 
dissatisfaction/only partial satisfaction with the initiative. 
Thus, failure of HEIs to establish institutional mechanisms for increasing 
employment opportunities and undertaking initiatives to improve job prospects 
meant that students were deprived of these basic facilities to widen their 
professional horizon and enhance their chances of securing meaningful careers. 
2.1.2 Enhancement of employability 
The India Skills Report states that employers preferred positive attitude, 
adaptability, learning ability and interpersonal skills in a job seeker. Also, 
employability of HEI students is enhanced if they are given the opportunity to 
take part in job oriented activities such as employability enhancement 
programmes and field projects/internships. Employment prospects are further 
improved if curricular aspects such as employment focused courses are offered 
to students. Another important aspect is Industry-academia engagement!”. It 
carries the idea of mutuality and sharing of knowledge and expertise. Chart 2.3 
depicts the various aspects involved in employment enhancement. 
Further, State Higher Education Plan (2015-22) also envisages creation of 
institutional linkages with industry to enhance employability of graduates. In 
line with this, State Project Director, Rastyiya Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
directed (October 2017 and January 2018) all Principals of Government College 
  
16 UoR, Jaipur: 91 students got job in 49 job fairs in nine colleges, GGTU, Banswara: 23 
students got jobs in six job fairs in two colleges in which 13 potential employers participated. 
17 As per UGC guidelines for establishment of University-Industry inter linkage centres. 
  
15 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
to invite industries situated in nearby industrial areas in the Entrepreneurship 
and Employment Fest/Fair 2017 and 2018 that were to be organised in their 
respective colleges. 
Chart 2.3: Employment enhancement oriented aspects 
Employment enhancement programmes 
* To bridge the gap between skills possessed by the prospective employees 
and the abilities expected by potential employers such as develop soft skills/ 
communication skill, spoken and written English etc. 
  
— BR SS eB seelteryeriicovatsiiy ens 
* Field project involves conducting surveys and collecting data from 
designated communities or areas related to course content. Internships are 
designated activities that carry some credits and involve working in an 
organization under the guidance of an identified mentor. 
  
ma ndustry-academia Linkage 
* Faculty offering consultancy to industries and assisting their Research & 
Development activities. Industries assisting universities in placements/ 
internships of students and their skill development and employability. 
  
mae Employment oriented courses 
* Courses whose Syllabi is relevant and in tune with job market dynamics. 
      
2.1.2.1 Indicators based evaluation of employment oriented curricular aspect 
Audit assessed performance of three test checked universities on number of 
courses/new courses focused on employability, students undertaking field 
projects and number of functional MoU through four outcomes indicators on 
the basis of NAAC benchmarks. The information is provided in Table 2.1 below 
(Details of indicators are given at S]. Nos. 1 to 3 and 10 in Appendix-I.1), Audit 
findings in respect of these indicators are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 16 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

    
    
Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
Table 2.1: Performance of test checked universities with respect to indicators 
Outcomes indicators MCMC MC e COM hres UCR e LH 
reference to NAAC benchmarks (marks" obtained) 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, 
University Selected Universi Selected PRZROAzte 
   level 11 tylevel 11 
deptts. deptts. 
Average percentage of 50% and Could not 2 Could 0 0 
courses having focus on above comment not 
Employability etc., during comment 
PUES 
ogee em met] 10% and Could not - 0 - 4 
introduced during 2014-19 Rum 7 comment 
UO moe lias 
Percentage of students 10% and Could not 0 Could 0 0 
Dro eLeeiRud) ae above comment not 
internships during 2018-19 comment 
Number of MoUs executed [RUUEUG| 0 - 0 - 0 
with industry and above 
national/international 
institutions 
2.1.2.2 Employment enhancement programme, field projects/internships and 
Industry-academia connect 
Scrutiny of information provided by test checked three universities and 66 
colleges revealed: 
(@) In test checked universities: 
© Employability enhancement programmes and field projects/ 
internships: 
None of the three test checked universities as well as constituent 
colleges organized any employability enhancement programme and had 
undertaken any field projects/internship during 2014-19. However, 
JNVU Jodhpur organized two types of coaching classes!® for 
competitive examinations for the SC/ST/OBC (non-creamy layer) and 
minority students under the UGC funded coaching scheme. Though 227 
students attended these classes, number of students who appeared and 
qualified in competitive examinations/NET were not maintained by the 
university. UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that action would be taken 
  
18 Marks have been allotted by Audit as per university’s performance on selected indicators 
and comparing it with benchmarks derived by analysing scoring pattern of universities 
accredited by NAAC (Appendix 1.3). 
19 For appearing in competitive examination such as for second grade teacher, pre teacher 
eligibility test, RAS pre, etc. and for appearing in National Eligibility Test (NET)/State 
Eligibility Test. 
  
17 ~~ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
in the interest of students in respect of employability enhancement 
programmes. In respect of field projects, it was stated that they were 
undertaken in those courses wherever required. However, the university 
did not provide details of courses of general streams in which field 
projects were undertaken during 2014-19. 
(ii) Industry-academia connect: Though UoR, Jaipur executed one MoU 
(2011) and JNVU, Jodhpur executed two MoUs with national/ 
international importance institutions”° for facilitating research activities 
and scholarly studies about Indian Civilization, Culture, Languages and 
Social Science and forest research. However, all three test checked 
universities did not execute any MoU with the industry. 
(iii) In test checked colleges: 
e Out of 36 test checked government colleges, none of the government 
colleges had undertaken field projects/internships and executed any 
MoU with industry or institutions of national/international importance. 
Further, only Haridev Joshi Government Girls College, Banswara 
affiliated with GGTU, Banswara organised one employability 
enhancement programme (2017-18) on computer learning and spoken 
English during 2014-19. 
e None of the 30 test checked private colleges organised any 
employability enhancement programme, undertaken field projects/ 
internships and executed MoU with industry or with institutions of 
national/international importance during 2014-19. 
Hence, Audit observed that in 99 per cent of the test checked HEIs, employment 
enhancement programmes were not conducted and wherever they were 
conducted, no information which could help in understanding their 
effectiveness was maintained. This meant that job aspirants, despite getting 
academically trained, were not provided the means to hone their practical skills 
and were deprived of exposure to real world work environment. 
2.1.2.3 Courses having focus on Employability/Entrepreneurship/Skill 
development 
As per paragraph 4.3 of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in 
Higher Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP, syllabi should be made relevant 
in tune with job market dynamics. 
  
20 UoR Jaipur executed MoU with American Institute of Indian Studies, New Delhi, an 
international institution and JNVU executed MoU with Arid Forest Research Institution and 
Indian Council of Social Science Research 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 18 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
Since the specific parameters that underscore employability focus in a course 
are not clear and HEIs also did not inform about the parameters they chose in 
this regard, Audit observations in this section were based on the information 
furnished by the test checked universities and colleges concerned. Hence, while 
one university included a particular course as part of employability focused 
courses?!, another university excluded the same course. The position of courses 
having focus on employability/entrepreneurship/skill development in three test 
checked universities during 2014-19 is given in Chart 2.4 below. 
Chart 2.4: Courses having focus on employability/entrepreneurship/skill 
development 
  
  Percentage of courses 
focused on employability 
etc. 
Ms 2014-15 mmm 2015-16 2016-17 Mmm 2017-18 MMM 2018-19 ——— Average percentage 
a. UoR, Jaipur JINVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
    
Source: Information provided by university concerned 
Chart 2.4 clearly shows that over the years, the number of courses focusing on 
employability have reduced in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur. Alarmingly, 
during 2014-19, none of the courses being run in GGTU, Banswara focused on 
employability/ entrepreneurship/ skill development. 
JNVU, Jodhpur accepted (une 2020) the facts. GGTU, Banswara stated (June 
2020) that MBA, PGD (Yoga), Diploma in Hotel Management and MA in 
Education programs are being offered in the university campus which make 
students more employable. Further, UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that more 
emphasis would be given in future in this regard. 
The facts remain that none of the courses in general stream education focused 
on employability. 
e Further, none of the courses offered in 66 test checked colleges focused on 
employability/ entrepreneurship/ skill development during 2014-19. 
  
21 For example, UoR, Jaipur informed that M Com (ABST), M Com (CMA), M Sc (Physics) 
have focus on employability whereas JNVU, Jodhpur intimated that these courses are not 
employability focused. 
  
19 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
212.4 Introduction of new courses 
Scrutiny of information provided by three test checked universities revealed that 
JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara introduced two new courses and one new 
course respectively during 2014-19 and all of these courses were focused on 
employability. Though UoR, Jaipur introduced five new courses during same 
period, but they did not intimate how many of these courses were focused on 
employability. 
GGTU, Banswara, introduced one new course in Science stream {MSc. 
(Mathematics)} and discontinued the three courses of Arts stream since 
2018-19 without approval of Board of Management”*. When enquired, the 
university replied (January 2020) that courses were introduced/closed due to 
administrative reason. UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that the university was 
facing difficulty in introducing new courses due to constraints of resources. 
However, more emphasis would be given in future in this regard. 
2.1.3 Indicators based evaluation of students’ outcomes of HEIs 
The performance of test checked HEIs in increasing employability and progress 
to higher studies has been assessed by analyzing job placements, progress to 
higher studies and qualification in competitive examinations. These parameters 
have been evaluated through the following three indicators - Percentage of 
students progressing to higher studies during 2018-19, Average percentage of 
students qualifying in State/ National/ International level examinations during 
2014-19 and Average percentage of placement of outgoing students during 
2014-19 on the basis of NAAC benchmarks (SI. Nos. 4, 5 and 11 of 
Appendix 1.1). 
213.1 In test checked universities: 
e Status of Job placement of students: Job placement of students refers 
to a student getting employment through various efforts made by the 
institution before the student completes his/her programme. Audit 
observed that all three test checked universities did not maintain data of 
students who got jobs through campus placement during 2014-19 in their 
campus as well as selected constituent colleges. 
e Progress to higher studies: Progress to higher studies for post- 
graduation, doctorate and post-doctorate studies, etc., is a career option 
that students aspire to take up. Audit observed that all three test checked 
Universities did not maintain data of outgoing students progressing to 
higher studies during 2018-19 from their campus as well as constituent 
colleges. 
  
22 It is the apex Executive Body of the University. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 20 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
© Qualifying in Competitive Examinations: Competitive examinations 
held at the national and state levels provide immense opportunities for 
student progression. A number of competitive examinations are held for 
graduating students to qualify for employment or for progressing to 
higher studies. Audit observed that all three test checked universities did 
not maintain data of students who qualified in 
state/national/international level examination during 2014-19 in their 
campus as well as selected constituent colleges. 
e Even though UoR, Jaipur (in 2016) and JNVU, Jodhpur (in 2011) were 
accredited earlier by NAAC, both universities did not maintain data 
regarding student progression to employment and higher studies. It was 
the responsibility of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (QAC) to ensure 
that information relevant to accreditation be regularly updated and 
maintained. Thus, it points towards the failure in functioning of IQAC 
in these universities as discussed in Chapter V. 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that job fairs would be conducted 
from time to time and instructions regarding maintenance of data in 
respect of job placement and competitive examinations would be issued 
to departments concerned and affiliated colleges. 
Thus, due to non-maintenance of required data, Audit could not measure and 
comment on the performance of all the test checked universities with respect 
to students progressing to higher studies, qualifying in state/national/ 
international examination and getting job through campus placement 
indicators. Hence, increase in employability and progress to higher studies 
could not be assessed in these universities. 
2.1.3.2 Test checked colleges: 
e Though 11 (30.56 per cent) out of 36 test checked government colleges 
were found to have a system for maintaining information of placements, 
only four”? of these were able to provide jobs to average 0.13 per cent 
(114 out of 85,044 students) of the students during 2014-19. 
Further, scrutiny of information furnished by Commissioner, College 
Education (reply to an Assembly Question Number 2840 of Eighth 
Session) revealed that 2,652 students got jobs through campus 
placement organized in 52 government colleges during the period 
2014-18. 11 out of these 52 government colleges were test checked in 
this performance audit and significant discrepancies were noticed in 
  
23 UoR, Jaipur: Two government colleges (91 out of 58,750 students were placed) and GGTU, 
Banswara: Two government colleges (23 out of 26,294 students were placed) 
  
21 ~=Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
respect of nine colleges**. The Commissionerate reported that 582 
students got placement in these nine colleges whereas government 
colleges concerned informed to audit that only 45 students got jobs 
(details given in Appendix 2.1 ). 
In four? out of 36 test checked government colleges 156 students 
qualified in state/national/ international level examination during 
2014-19. Further in these four government colleges, number of students 
appearing in such examinations was not available. In the absence of such 
information, the percentage of students qualifying could not be 
calculated 
None of 30 test checked private colleges maintained data regarding 
placement of students, progression to higher studies and qualification in 
state/national/international level examination during 2014-19. 
  
Performance of students in examinations 
Extent of effectiveness of teaching learning in a HEI is reflected in the students’ 
performance in examinations. Such performance is seen as the realization of 
learning outcomes which are specifications of what a student should be capable 
of doing on successful completion of a course and/or a programme. 
In this context, test checked HEIs were evaluated according to pass percentage 
of students during 2018-19 (S\. No. 12 of Appendix 1.1). Audit also analysed 
division-wise results of students of test checked universities. This helped to 
understand not only the overall performance of students in examinations but 
also how well they had done relative to each other. 
The performance of all students who appeared in final year examinations in 
under graduate and post-graduate programmes of Science, Arts and Commerce 
streams during 2018-19 in test checked universities is given Chart 2.5 below. 
  
24 UoR, Jaipur: Three government colleges (number of placement reported by 
Commissionerate: 223 and no. of placement informed by colleges concerned to audit: 30; 
INVU, Jodhpur: Four colleges (14 and 0) and GGTU, Banswara: Two colleges (345 and 
15). 
25 UoR, Jaipur: 141 students qualified in three government colleges and GGTU, Banswara: 15 
students qualified in one government college. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 22 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-I Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
Chart 2.5: Performance of students in examinations during 2018-19 
  
  
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
eee ™ Percentage students passed ™ Percentage students failed 
  
    
It can be seen from Chart 2.5 that during 2018-19 UoR, Jaipur (with 65.47 per 
cent pass percentage) and all their constituent/affiliated colleges fared lower 
than other two universities although it is the largest and the oldest state public 
university. 
Further, in all three universities, the number of students who passed with first 
division/above B* grade was highly unsatisfactory (ranging between 16.21 per 
cent and 22.44 per cent), which is further depicted in Chart 2.6. 
Chart 2.6: Division wise performance of students in examinations 
  
  
GGTU, Banswara CHAI EK 42.19 
JNVU, Jodhpur 21.14 61.81 17.05 
UoR, Jaipur 77) BK rE) 
Percentage of students 
m Passed with first division/above B+ grade m@ Passes with second division/B and C grade 
@ Passed without division 
    
JNVU, Jodhpur informed that they organised remedial coaching for UG 
and PG level students for improving their academic skills and linguistic 
proficiency in various subjects, for raising their level of comprehension of 
basic subjects to provide a stronger foundation for further academic work 
and to strengthen knowledge, skills and attitudes of SC/ST/ OBC students 
in various subjects. GGTU, Banswara did not organise any remedial classes 
for poorly scoring students, while UoR, Jaipur did not provide such 
information. 
e Further, for students of only the test checked universities campus/ 
constituent colleges who appeared in the examination, pass percentage was 
  
23 ~=Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IT Student Progression towards Employment and Higher Studies   
90.12 per cent in UoR, Jaipur, 93.26 per cent in JNVU, Jodhpur and 70.27 
per cent in GGTU, Banswara. During accreditation of universities, NAAC 
for the indicator pass percentage of students during 2018-19, awarded 
maximum marks to an institution on having pass percentage of 90 per cent 
and above. Accordingly, UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur were eligible to 
score four (maximum) marks and GGTU, Banswara one mark. 
Chart 2.7: Performance of selected universities based on chosen indicator 
2 HE oR, Jaipur 
GH INVU, Jodhpur 
mz GGTU, Banswara 
  
  
Good practice: 100 per cent students passed every year in science stream in 
Haridev Joshi Government Girls College, Banswara during 2014-19.   
  
  
Summing up and Recommendations 
Employability and Student progression to higher studies 
The system of maintenance of data related to students’ employment, students’ 
progression to higher studies and students’ performance in competitive 
examinations was almost non-existent at all levels of the higher education 
system in the state. Even in test checked colleges, such data was not being 
consistently maintained. Thus the main student outcome of ‘employability and 
progression to higher studies’ could not be adequately evaluated. Further, 
dysfunctional or non-existent job facilitating mechanism and lack of 
employment enhancement programmes meant that the students were deprived 
of the necessary assistance and facilitation needed for getting good jobs and 
exercising career choices. Though the overall proportion of students 
successfully clearing college/university examinations was high, but percentage 
of students clearing with first Division/above grade B* was much lower. 
Recommendation: 
1. Every higher educational institution should: 
a. Constitute well-functioning placement cell, career counselling cell, and 
encourage a vibrant alumni association to facilitate graduating students in 
getting employment or to progress to higher studies, and 
b. Put in place a robust system of collecting and maintaining related data for 
depicting a real and fair position of the quality of education being imparted 
in the institution.   
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 24 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

OE aw 0 
Quality of Higher Education 
 

INPUTS 
Chapter - II 
Quality of Higher Education 
This chapter discusses societal perspective of higher education outcomes in 
terms of teaching-learning processes and research capabilities of Higher 
Education System. Audit assessed the performance of HEIs and GoR in 
providing high quality higher education with reference to the following audit 
objective. 
Audit objective 2: Whether the Higher Education system contributed to 
society through effective teaching learning processes and 
high quality research 
  
Twelfth FYP emphasizes on the quality in imparting higher education in general 
stream (Arts, Science and Commerce streams). It states that, if properly 
imparted, general education could be an excellent foundation for knowledge 
based careers. Also, as per India Skills Report?® 2020, at an all India level, BSc, 
BA and BCom programmes have provided low number of employable 
graduates during the period 2014-20. Therefore, the focus should be towards 
improving the quality of general education. 
The quality related outcomes and their relationship with the contributing factors 
can be understood from the following representation. 
1. Design, new/ revision a ; ey 
of programme/ course > 1. Well Designed Ss Higher education 
2 Feedback a Programmes & leading to 
Pogo a i Courses © contribution to stakeholders Oo . 
. — i 2. Advanced teaching Society by 3. Academic flexibility © methods 5 
eae roof process of 3. Robust Examination © @ Diffusing 
conducting exams & Evaluation System knowledge to 
5. Centralised & 4. No of Papers, society through 
standardised evaluation Publications, Patents, High Quality 
6. Availability and Consultancies & Teaching/ 
qualification of teachers awards Learning 
7. Teaching style 
8. Volume of Research @ am oducing ney 
Grants owledge throug, 
u research 9. Number of researchers 
UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur did not provide consolidated and complete 
information in respect of issues discussed in paragraphs 3.1.1.2 to 3.1.1.4, 
3.1.2.2, 3.1.2.3 (D), 3.1.2.5 (B), 3.2.1.3 (A) & (B) and 3.2.2 (i). 
  
26 BSc, BA and B Com programmes have provided on an average 37.47 per cent, 32.34 per 
cent and 31.86 per cent employable graduates respectively during the period 2014-20. 
  
25 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
In the absence of complete information, Audit collected such information from 
selected 11 departments?’ of universities concerned. 
COU CECA ME MTT met Marko 
curriculum and teaching-learning processes 
3.1 Effective curriculum and teaching-learning processes 
  
3.1.1 Effective curriculum 
In this section, audit findings and assessment of performance of outcomes 
through selected four indicators related to curriculum design and development, 
and teaching-learning processes are discussed. These indicators are also used by 
NAAC during assessment and accreditation process of HEIs. 
3.L11 Performance of universities based on outcome indicators 
Audit assessed performance of three test checked universities in effective 
curriculum and learning processes through following four outcomes indicators 
on the basis of NAAC benchmarks. The information is provided in Table 3.1 
below (Details of indicators are given at Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 13 and 14 in Appendix- 
1.1). Audit findings in respect of these indicators are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Table 3.1: Performance of test checked universities with respect to indicators 
    
          
     
        
Outcomes indicators NAAC Os Ug UEMMNRCR CRC MUN RI UR Bag 
Lyotainneyg 4 NAAC benchmarks (marks”* obtained) 
ls UoR, Jaipur INVU, Jodhpur GGTU, 
WERTH) PCE Nee) 
SEH Tniversity Selected University | Selected 
level 11 depts. _ level 11 depts. 
Neos 50% and Could not 4 Could not 4 0 
of syllabus in above comment comment 
programmes during 
2014-19 
Number of value- 50% and Could not 0 Could not 0 0 
added courses offered above comment comment 
Ue aA Sy 
IVE eae 10% and Could not 0 Could not 0 0 
students enrolled in above comment comment 
Pour cUla mania) 
Uetz ES 
ogee 50% and 0 - 3 - 0 
URE MENA Td above 
CBCS during 2018-19 
  
27 Chemistry, Zoology, Physics, Accountancy & Business Statistics, Business Administration, 
Hindi, English, Sociology, Political Science, Geography and Economics 
28 Marks have been allotted by Audit as per university’s performance on selected indicators 
and comparing it with benchmarks derived by analysing scoring pattern of universities 
accredited by NAAC (Appendix 1.3). 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 26 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
3.1.1.2 Curriculum design and development 
One of the significant responsibilities of universities and autonomous colleges 
is curriculum design and development and they are expected to have processes, 
systems and structures in place to shoulder this responsibility. 
Chart 3.1: Procedures and Functionaries involved in curriculum design and development 
; ; Referring to 
Somcutum Design and Stakeholders’ feedback curricula of leading P universities 
It is a complex process of 
developing appropriate need-based 
HMMM MRO IetH OMA, Z EES. ¢e 0 
groups, based on the feedback from 
stakeholders. 
This results in the development of 
relevant higher education 
programmes with flexibility to suit 
the professional and personal needs 
Stakeholders are key informers 
and drivers of the contents, 
method of delivery, evaluation 
requirements and scope of 
orraai ean emi ame] eit Keg 
certain professions. 
Stakeholders suggest about 
local needs and national and 
global trends of requirement of 
Te ae 
This helps in 
including cutting 
edge topics as 
well as making 
improvement to 
existing 
curriculum 
   of the students. 
  
Curriculum design and development is a complex process of developing 
appropriate need-based inputs in consultation with expert groups, based on the 
feedback from stakeholders. This results in the development of relevant higher 
education programmes”? with flexibility to suit the professional and personal 
needs of the students and realization of core values. 
Scrutiny of information provided by test checked universities revealed that: 
() Curriculum Design and Development Procedure 
Each institution has the authority to design and develop curricula and formulate 
their own procedure for this purpose. The procedures followed by test checked 
universities and related findings are given below. 
e UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur: \t was observed that the selected 11 
departments of the universities followed the prescribed procedures*” while 
  
29 As per NAAC manual, programme is a range of learning experiences offered to students in 
a formal manner over a period of one-to-four years leading to certificates/ diplomas/ degrees 
i.e., BA (Economics), BSc (Physics). 
30 UoR, Jaipur: The Board of Studies (BoS) of each subject, recommends 
curriculum/syllabus to the Academic Council. The Academic Council makes, amends and 
cancels regulations laying down courses of study and curricula, subject to the approval of 
the Syndicate of the university. 
JNVU, Jodhpur: Branch Committee proposes content of syllabus of a programme to 
Departmental Council for open discussion on the basis of feedback of the students and 
according to current national and international scenario. The Departmental Council in turn 
compiles the syllabus and submits to Committee of Course and Study (CoC &S), which is 
subsequently placed before Syndicate through Academic Council. The Syndicate finally 
approves the syllabus. 
  
27 ~~‘ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
designing/ revising the syllabus of courses. 
However, in JNVU, Jodhpur supporting documents indicating attempts towards 
inclusion of topics relevant to local/national/global development needs were not 
made available and hence veracity of the claim could not be established in audit. 
e GGTU, Banswara: The university did not, on its own, design/revise any 
programme/course since its establishment in 2012 to 2018-19. It had adopted 
curriculum of the programmes/courses of Mohan Lal Sukhadia University 
(MLSU), Udaipur. 
(ii) Stakeholders’ feedback for revising curricular content: 
Feedback from students, teachers, prospective employers, industries should be 
obtained and considered during designing/revising the curriculum so that 
curriculum is finalized keeping in mind the needs and expectations of important 
stakeholders. Related findings with respect to test checked universities are given 
below: 
e UoR, Jaipur: Scrutiny of minutes of the Board of Studies (BoS) meetings 
revealed that stakeholders such as industrialists, entrepreneurs, students were 
not represented in the BoS of any of the 11 departments, indicating that their 
feedback for designing/ revising the curriculum was not taken. Further, in spite 
of NAAC recommendation (2016) that the BoS of the university should 
restructure its curriculum by including job oriented/facilitating contents with the 
help of industry and stakeholders, UoR did not take feedback from the 
industry/stakeholders. 
However, departments stated (November 2019 to January 2020) that feedback 
from students and teachers were taken before designing/revising the curriculum. 
As details/records were not provided in support of their comments, audit could 
not verify this claim. Further, the process followed by the department goes 
against the intention of the process of developing appropriate need-based inputs 
in consultation with the expert groups. The practice of taking feedback from 
teachers and students alone are not sufficient to develop/design curriculum that 
are relevant to local needs and in tunes with the emerging national and global 
trends. Thus, the HEIs should revisit their existing practice and put in place a 
robust mechanism as envisaged in the university manuals and directions from 
various authorities and duly documenting the process. 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that there was no provision in the University 
Act to include representatives of industrialists, entrepreneurs, students in the 
BoS meetings. The fact remains that UoR, Jaipur did not consider NAAC’s 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 28 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
recommendations given in 2016 regarding taking feedback from students, 
industries etc. while designing/revising course curriculum. 
e JNVU, Jodhpur: Selected 11 departments intimated that external members 
of other universities, local faculty members and post bearer of students union 
also participated in the process of introducing new syllabus/modified syllabus 
in the curriculum. However, Audit observed that inputs from prospective 
employers were not obtained. 
(iii) Referring to curricula of leading universities: 
Successful universities are known for following a rigorous and regular process 
to update and revise their course curricula. This helps them in constantly 
improving upon the existing material and adding new topics that have emerged 
in respective programs. Other universities can take advantage by referring to 
these curricula while designing and revising their own course curricula. Audit 
enquiry related to this aspect revealed the following: 
e UoR, Jaipur: Six out of 11 selected departments stated that mapping of 
curriculum was done with other universities but scrutiny of the minutes of BoS 
of these departments revealed that no attempts were made in this regard. 
e JINVU, Jodhpur: The university intimated that syllabi were mapped with 
that of Delhi University and UoR, Jaipur. However, details of such mapping 
exercise were not available in the minutes of meetings of Academic Council as 
well as of Committee of Course and Study (CoC&S), due to which veracity of 
the claim could not be verified in audit. JNVU Jodhpur in its reply (June 2020) 
accepted the facts. 
GGTU, Banswara accepted (June 2020) the facts and stated that, being a newly 
established (2012) university, it could not initiate activities such as curriculum 
design and development. Thus even eight years after establishing the university, 
it had not designed/revised any programme/course. 
Hence, though UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur claimed to have followed the 
laid down procedures in the process of curriculum design and development, 
audit could not assure itself that crucial feedback from stakeholders, inputs from 
expert groups and reference to curricula of leading universities were used for 
curriculum improvement. 
3.1.1.3 Revision of syllabus 
Paragraph 4.3 of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in Higher 
Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP mandated that the curricula be revised at 
least once every three years and the syllabi be made relevant in tune with job 
market dynamics and advances in research and development. 
Scrutiny of information provided by test checked universities revealed that: 
  
29 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
(i) UoR, Jaipur 
As per Ordinance 61-A, Handbook of Rajasthan University, the BoS and the 
Committees of Courses while recommending changes in the scheme of 
examinations and syllabi shall provide full implication of and justification for 
the proposed changes. It was observed that: 
e In selected 11 departments, syllabus of 96 per cent (27 out of 28) 
programmes was revised during 2014-19, However, scrutiny of minutes of 
meetings of BoS of these 11 departments revealed that details regarding 
modifications and deliberations behind such changes were not documented. 
Hence, audit could not get assurance whether any changes were made at 
all. Further, no justification or any implications of changes made were 
mentioned while revising the syllabus. 
e Audit compared content of syllabi of 20 courses for the period 2014 to 2019 
in which, as per BoS minutes, syllabi were stated to be changed. Audit 
found that no changes in syllabus were carried out in 15 courses and minor 
changes/some word replacements were done in four (Appendix 3.1). 
Syllabus of the remaining courses*! was stated to have been changed twice 
(in 2016 and 2019) in last five years; but audit observed that these changes 
were in nature of minor language modifications in 2016 and the syllabus of 
2014 had again been repeated in the year 2019. Thus, the syllabus had not 
been substantially changed since 2014. 
While UoR, Jaipur did not furnish specific reply to the audit observation, it 
stated (January 2021) that action would be taken to revise syllabus of 
programmes as per NAAC guidelines in future. 
(ii) + JNVU, Jodhpur 
JNVU, Jodhpur revised syllabus of 64 per cent programmes (18 out of 28 
programs) during 2014-19. 
  
  
Good practice: Audit compared the current syllabi of 139 courses of these 18 
programmes with that of the previous year and it was observed that substantial 
revision was carried out which was an indication of existence and 
implementation of sound mechanism for syllabi revision.   
(iii) GGTU, Banswara 
GGTU, Banswara adopted the syllabus for UG and PG programmes of Arts, 
Commerce and Science streams of MLSU, Udaipur and it did not revise the 
syllabus of any programme since its establishment in 2012 to 2018-19. Further, 
many landmark changes had taken place during this period such as the 
  
31 BA Part-I Sociology (pass course) 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 30 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
introduction of ‘Goods & Service Tax’, but the university did not take steps to 
include such contemporary topics in the syllabus of UG and PG programmes of 
commerce stream. GGTU serves the districts of Banswara, Dungarpur and 
Pratapgarh which are predominately tribal population dominated. However, 
despite the National Policy of Education 1992 {Para 4.6 (vii)} which 
emphasized that the curriculum at all stages of education would be designed to 
create an awareness of the rich cultural identity of the tribals and their enormous 
creative talent, GGTU failed to take steps for fulfilling this requirement. 
GGTU, Banswara accepted (June and August 2020) the facts and stated that 
syllabus of BA, BCom and compulsory subjects of Hindi and English have been 
updated by the university since academic year 2019-20. Further, marks obtained 
in compulsory subjects would be taken into consideration along with optional 
subjects while deciding the grades of students. A new paper, General 
Knowledge was also introduced as a compulsory subject in second year of UG. 
In the PG programmes syllabus of Hindi, English, Sanskrit, History, Geography, 
Economics, Sociology, Political Science and three subjects of Commerce 
stream have been updated since academic year 2019-20. 
Though the university claimed that syllabus of a number of subjects had been 
updated since 2019-20, it did not intimate whether these syllabi have been 
revised after obtaining feedback from stakeholders; keeping in mind the local 
needs and circumstances as well as changing national scenario and duly 
approved by the governing bodies. Further, on comparison of updated syllabus 
with syllabus of previous year we observed that syllabi of all UG programmes 
were updated while syllabi of 40 out of 48 papers of five PG programmes” were 
not updated. 
  
  
Good practice: GGTU, Banswara included the marks obtained in compulsory 
papers of Hindi and English for merit list determination as part of emphasising 
on the importance of languages and literature. Further, paper on General 
Knowledge was introduced as a compulsory subject in second year of 
undergraduate programme since academic year 2019-20.   
3.1.1.4 Number of value-added courses and students enrolled 
Value added courses imparting ‘transferable and life skill’ and activities are 
those which may not be directly linked with one’s discipline of study but 
contribute to sensitizing students to cross cutting issues such as gender, 
environment and sustainability, human values and professional ethics. Scrutiny 
of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
  
32 MA- Economics, Sociology and Geography; M Com- Business Administration and ABST 
  
31 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
() In test checked universities and constituent colleges: Value added 
course imparting ‘transferable and life skill’ were not offered in all test checked 
three universities during 2014-19. UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that more 
emphasis would be given in future in this regard. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: Only two® (5.56 per 
cent) out of 36 test checked government colleges offered ‘transferable and life 
skill? value added courses (skill development, personality development courses 
etc.) during 2014-19 in which 231 students were enrolled. Further, none of test 
checked 30 private colleges offered value added course. 
3.1.1.5 Academic flexibility 
Academic flexibility and its components are briefly described in Chart 3.2 
below: 
Chart 3.2: Academic flexibility and their components 
  
Academic flexibility: 
Choices offered to the students in the curriculum. It can be incorporated by 
introducing choice-based credit system (CBCS) and semester systems etc. 
  
   
     Semester system: An opportunity to the 
students for continuous learning, 
assessment and feedback. It accelerates 
the teaching-learning process and 
enables vertical and horizontal mobility 
in learning 
CBCS: Provide opportunities and additional 
avenues of learning beyond the core subjects. 
CBCS allows students to choose inter- 
disciplinary, intra-disciplinary courses and 
skill oriented papers from the prescribed 
core, elective/minor or skill based courses. 
                  
       
  
             
  
(A) Programs having Choice Based Credit System 
UGC has prescribed minimum course curriculum for undergraduate courses 
under CBCS and guidelines for implementing Semester System in higher 
education institutions. UGC reiterated (April 2018) the need to implement 
CBCS in universities and also to revise curriculum. In Rajasthan, in a meeting 
held (5 May 2015) by Hon’ble Chancellor with all Vice Chancellors of state 
universities it was decided that proper arrangement would be made to introduce 
CBCS in state universities from academic year 2015-16. 
In this regard, scrutiny of information provided by the test checked HEIs 
revealed that: 
@ Universities and constituent colleges: CBCS was not introduced in any 
programmes being offered in UoR, Jaipur and GGTU, Banswara. In JNVU, 
  
33 Govind Guru Government College, Banswara affiliated with GGTU, Banswara and SPDM 
Government Girls College, Kotputali affiliated with UoR, Jaipur 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 32 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education 
Jodhpur and its one constituent college, CBCS was introduced only in 29 (46.03 
per cent) out of 63 programmes during 2018-19. 
On being pointed out, UoR, Jaipur intimated (December 2019) that CBCS was 
not introduced in the university due to lack of faculty members. GGTU, 
Banswara stated (June and August 2020) that CBCS has been introduced in MSc 
since 2019-20. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: CBCS was introduced 
in 21.62 per cent programmes only in 5** (13.89 per cent) out of 36 test checked 
government colleges during 2018-19. It was not introduced in any of the 30 test 
checked private colleges during 2018-19. 
(iii) Student Survey Result: In response to student survey question "Are you 
aware of choice-based Credit System (CBCS) in your institution?" 66 per cent 
students out of 294 students of JNVU, Jodhpur and five test checked 
government colleges where CBCS was introduced were not aware of CBCS 
system. 
(B) Programmes having Semester System 
Paragraph 2.2.3 (c) of Report of ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion of Higher 
Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP considered introduction of semester 
system for academic flexibility as a quality enhancing measure for excellence 
in higher education. 
It was observed that semester system was introduced only for post graduate 
(PG) programmes and annual examination system continued for UG 
programmes in all three test checked universities. The position of semester 
system introduced in test checked HEIs during 2018-19 is given in Chart 3.3 
below. 
Chart 3.3: Position of semester system introduced in test checked HEIs 
  
   Cm 
og Re TH 
a0 
ae 3 bh 52 26 eT AIR) 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Government Private colleges 
Banswara collleges 
@ Semester offered @ Semester not offered 
      
  
34 Affiliated with JNVU, Jodhpur 
  
33 ~Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Further, in the test checked institutions where semester system was not 
introduced, annual examination system was continuing for all UG and PG 
programmes during 2018-19. Thus, all the students of UG programmes and 
students of PG programmes to the extent where semester was not introduced in 
the test checked HEIs were deprived of the advantages of semester system. 
3.1.2 Effective Teaching Processes 
In this section, use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in 
teaching, faculty related aspects and robust examination and evaluation systems 
of the HEIs have been discussed. Further, results of selected eight indicators 
related to effective teaching process have also been discussed. 
3.1.2.1 Performance of universities based on outcome indicators 
Audit assessed performance of three test checked universities in effective 
teaching process through following eight outcomes indicators on the basis of 
NAAC benchmarks. The information is provided in Table 3.2 (Details of 
indicators are given at Sl. Nos. 8 and 15 to 21 in Appendix-I./). Audit findings 
in respect of these indicators are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Table 3.2: Performance of test checked universities with respect to indicators 
    
   
  
   
NAAC Performance of the test checked universities with reference to 
ToT be 9 NAAC benchmarks (marks*> obtained 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, 
University Selected11 University Selected 11 [ghugts) 
level departments level departments 
  
    
    acme es Memiog 80% and Could not 0 Could not 0 1 
teaching during 2018-19 above comment comment 
owl eum Osteoricm 80% and Could not 0 Could not 0 1 
OER UNNmEoTitamccMm above comment comment 
during 2018-19 
Sis eoniniomm=ciem 10:1 and Could not 2 Could not 0 0 
CivbiutntapAUne So by below comment comment 
Average percentage of full Bibi 1 - Could not - 0 
time teachers with Ph.D. FEtO73 comment 
during 2014-19 
om ete 15% and Could not 3 Could not 4 0 
teachers who received BRE comment comment 
awards, recognition, etc., 
during 2014-19 
PA oie iusuoneie 50% and 0 - 0 - 0 
teachers provided finacial FRlyo73 
Rivy ey oreya to attend 
conferences/ A Ceri el tC) or 
etc., during 2014-19 
  
35 Marks have been allotted by Audit as per university’s performance on selected indicators 
and comparing it with benchmarks derived by analysing scoring pattern of universities 
accredited by NAAC (Appendix 1.3) 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 34 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Outcomes indicators NAAC IMT Meme re CMR COR Aedes Moen 
Toe bas VGH Lr OR Cee Smeal Ne LL ieren 
ie Te LAUT Tins GGTU, 
Banswara 
   
   
    
   
ineitte<e University Selected 11 University Selected 11 
level departments level departments 
Average percentage of BRU/Aritl 1 - Could not - 0 
teachers Pinaninta above comment 
professional development 
programs during 2014-19 
Average percentage of BRyAETtl Could not - Could not - Could not 
FeO Om Ornenom below comment comment comment 
leading to change in marks 
during 2014-19 
   
3.1.2.2 Use of ICT in teaching and availability of ICT related infrastructure 
Gol’s National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT) prescribes the 
three-cardinal principles as providing connectivity to all colleges and 
universities, providing low cost and affordable access-cum-computing devices 
to students and teachers and providing high quality e-content free of cost to all 
learners in the country. 
Paragraph 21.265 of Twelfth FYP puts focus on use of ICT in higher education 
by providing smart classrooms and setting up classrooms with interactive 
video-conferencing facilities linking Meta universities** and affiliating 
universities. State Government also provides grants to government colleges for 
setting up of smart classrooms. Further, NAAC Manual also states that technological 
advancement and innovations in educational transactions have to be undertaken 
by all HEIs, to make a visible impact on academic development as well as 
administration. Effective use of ICT in HEIs will be able to provide ICT literacy 
to the campus community, using ICT for resource sharing and networking, as 
well as adopting ICT-enabled administrative processes. 
The position of number of teachers using ICT, number of ICT enabled 
classrooms and Student Computer Ratio in test checked HEI during 2018-19 is 
given in Table 3.3 below. : 
  
36 Meta University allows a student to benefit from access to faculty, library and laboratory of 
multiple institutes while pursuing a degree. 
  
35 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Table 3.3: Teachers using ICT for teaching during 2018-19 
Name of | Teachers using ICT ICT enabled Student Computer Ratio 
HEIs classrooms 
OU 
teachers 
544 149 19 10,654 
(27.39%) (12.41%) 
140 62 51 3 999 0 - 
Ay (44.29%) (6.88%) 
GGTU, 09* 1 10 1 51 0 - 
Banswara (11.11%) (10%) 
Government 766 166 684 58 78,919 564 140:1 
Peale ae (21.67%) (8.48%) 
woken) 457 136 461 89 11,482 502 23:1 
Pe esstar hai (29.76%) (19.31%) 
Source: Information provided by concerned university. *All were part time teachers 
             
It can be seen from above table that: 
e Only 5.88 per cent to 19.31 per cent classrooms/seminar halls were ICT 
enabled in test checked HEIs in which 11.11 per cent to 44.29 per cent 
teachers used ICT teaching methods during 2018-19. 
e Student Computer Ratio ranged from 23:1 to 140:1 in these test checked 
HEIs except JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara where no computers 
were available for students during 2018-19. 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that corrective action would be taken in this 
regard. 
(i) Student Survey Result. In response to survey question "Express your 
satisfaction on teaching methods/techniques used in your institution on 
ICT based teaching (PPT/videos etc.)?" approximately 55 per cent of the 
students out of 1,445 students of UoR, Jaipur; JNVU, Jodhpur and 34 test 
checked college where faculty utilized ICT tools were either dissatisfied 
or were only partially satisfied. 
3.1.2.3 Availability and quality of Faculty 
Paragraph 7.1.2 of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion of Higher 
Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP stated that shortage of quality faculty 
  
37 Though ICT enabled classrooms were available in 24 government colleges but teachers of 
20 colleges only used ICT teaching methods. 
38 Though ICT enabled classrooms were available in 17 private colleges but teachers of 14 
colleges only used ICT teaching methods. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 36 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
coupled with lack of faculty mobility across regions is a major constraint in the 
development of Indian higher education system. 
As per NAAC manual, aspects that determine quality of teacher/faculty includes 
availability of teachers, qualification of teachers, teachers’ characteristics, 
professional development and recognition of teaching ability. 
(A) Availability of teachers 
Objective 4 of Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) scheme aims to 
ensure adequate availability of quality faculty in all HEIs. Under RUSA, States 
can claim funds for additional posts of faculty to enable them to achieve the 
Student Teacher Ratio*? (STR) 20:1, if all the vacant sanctioned posts are filled 
by the State. Moreover, as per Rajasthan Higher Education Plan (2015-22), 
State Government had also fixed the goal of STR at 20:1 by filing up of all 
sanctioned posts in government general, Sanskrit and technical education 
colleges and universities. 
(a) Availability of teaching staff at state level in government colleges 
The position of sanctioned strength, working strength and vacancy of teachers 
and enrolment of students in government colleges at the state level during 
2014-19 is given in Table 3.4 below. 
Table 3.4: Availability of teaching staff in government colleges at state level 
Mido nits Availability of teachers Student Teachers 
i Ratio with respect to 
    government [Sanctioned | Working | Vacant 
one Strength | strength ue 
working | sanctioned 
strength | strength 
(Oi of 
teachers | teachers 
BOTS 3,483,438 5,723 4,362 1,361 (23.78) 80:01 61:01               3,64,818 5,875 4,201 ‘1,674 (28.49) 87:01 62:01 
3,72,870 5,957 3,880 2,077 (34.87) 96:01 62:01 
3,74,949 6,295 3,907 —_-2,388 (37.93) 96:01 60:01 
3,95,346 6,637 4,640 1,997 (30.09) 85:01 60:01 
3,71,284 6,097 4,198 1,899 (31.15) 88:01 61:01 
Source: As per information provided by Commissioner, College Education and Administrative Report of 
Higher Education department 
It can be seen that: 
  
39 Student-teacher ratio is the number of students who enrolled in an institution divided by 
the number of teachers in the institution. 
  
37 = Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education 
At state level, the STR in government colleges with respect to sanctioned 
strength of teachers ranged between 60:1 and 62:1 during 2014-19 as 
against the prescribed STR of 20:1. 
Further, the State Government did not even recruit teachers in government 
colleges up to their sanctioned strength resulting in average 31.15 per cent 
posts of teachers lying vacant (ranged between 23.78 per cent and 37.93 
per cent) during 2014-19. This resulted in an adverse STR of 88:01 (ranged 
between 80:1 and 96:1) on average at the state level. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that procedure for recruitment of 
Assistant Professor is under process and advertisement for recruitment of 920 
Assistant Professor had been published in November 2020 by Rajasthan Public 
Service Commission. 
(b) Student Teacher Ratio in the test checked HEIs in 2018-19 
The position of STR in UG and PG programs in Arts, Science and Commerce 
stream in 2018-19 in test checked universities, government colleges and private 
colleges are depicted in Chart 3.4, 3.5 and 3.6 respectively. 
It can be seen that: 
@ 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) 
that action would be taken for 
Government for recruitment of 
teachers on vacant posts. 
169 
@ Science 
7 72 
44 38 
; our 18 Prescribed limit is 20 
seeking permission from State | 605 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
In test checked universities: Chart 3.4: STR of Universities 
  
STR in all streams in JNVU, 
Jodhpur and in Arts and 
Commerce stream in UoR 
Jaipur in 2018-19 was higher 
than the prescribed limit of 
20:1. 
@ Arts 
Student Teacher Ratio 
@ Commerec 
  
      
In GGTU, Banswara though STR was within the prescribed limit, but full 
time teachers were not posted in the university during 2018-19. Shortage of 
regular qualified teaching staff seems to have adversely impacted the 
quality of higher education being provided to the students as out of 37 
students who appeared in final year examination in 2018-19, none of the 
students passed with first division and only 12 (32 per cent) students passed 
with second division. 
The State Government sanctioned 30 posts of teaching staff during 2012 
but due to non-framing of recruitment rules by the university, it could not 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 38 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education 
recruit regular teaching staff as of October 2020. GGTU, Banswara 
accepted the facts. 
(ii) In test checked colleges: 
Chart 3.5: STR of Government colleges Chart 3.6: STR of Private colleges 
  
328 
269 
    
mArts BCommerce @Science 
   
    
140 
Prescribed limit is 20 
86       
  Student teacher ratio 
Student 
Teacher 
Ratio 
mArts BCommerce Science 
54 
Prescribed limit is 20 
32 
28 27 
21 
i4 
0 = 
  
UoR, Jaipur 
  INVU. UoR, Jaipur INVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
Jodhpur 
GGTU, 
Banswara 
      
e Chart 3.5 shows that the STR was higher than the prescribed limit in all 
three streams of test checked government colleges during 2018-19 particularly 
in government colleges affiliated with GGTU, Banswara. Further, it was also 
observed that in three government colleges”? affiliated with GGTU, Banswara 
though 528 students were enrolled in different classes during 2015-19, no 
faculty was available during 2018-19. Similarly, Chart 3.6 shows that STR was 
higher than prescribed limit in all streams in test checked private colleges 
affiliated with UoR, Jaipur and in Arts stream in test checked private colleges 
affiliated with both JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara. 
As already discussed in Paragraph 2.2 of chapter II, the fact that less than a 
quarter of the students passed with first division/above B* grade during 2018- 
19 is indicative of the adverse effect on quality of teaching on account of 
insufficient faculty. Since faculty are the primary medium of imparting 
instructions in HEIs, their shortage would have hampered the development of 
students and arrested their employability potential, putting a question mark on 
their success in future. 
(B) Availability of teachers with minimum prescribed qualifications 
Paragraph 3.4.4 of UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by University) Regulations, 
2009 prescribes that the number of teaching posts, qualification of teaching staff 
and their recruitment/promotion procedure shall be as prescribed by UGC and 
condition of the services shall be in accordance with the Statutes/Ordinance/ 
Regulation of the University/state Government/UGC. 
  
40 Haridev Joshi Government Girls College, Banswara: no faculty was available for Commerce 
students since 2015-16; Bhogi Lal Pandya Govt. College, Dungarpur: no faculty was 
available for Commerce Students in 2018-19 and MBD Govt. College, Kushalgarh: no 
faculty was available for Science stream in 2018-19. 
  
39 = Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
In this context, Handbook of UoR, Jaipur and Ordinance issued (September 
2011) by JNVU, Jodhpur prescribes the minimum qualification for teachers as 
Master’s degree with minimum 55 per cent marks and clearing National 
Eligibility Test (NET). 
The position of full-time teachers having minimum qualification in test checked 
HEIs during 2018-19 is depicted in Chart 3.7 below: 
Chart 3.7: Full time teachers having minimum qualification 
  
It can be seen that no = Qualified teachers m™Non qualified teachers 
full time teacher was 
posted in GGTU, |. ™ m ™ 
Banswara and 45.71 
per cent teachers*! in 
test checked private 
colleges did not 
possess prescribed 
UoR, JINVU NET qualification. , GGTU, Govt Private 
Commissionerate Jaipur Jodhpur Banswara colleges colleges 
College Education stated (August 2020) that qualification of teachers posted in 
nine selected private colleges affiliated with JNVU, Jodhpur are being checked. 
UoR, Jaipur stated January 2021) that affiliated colleges would be instructed to 
ensure availability of teachers possessing prescribed qualification. 
  
Percentge of full time 
teachers 
      
Thus, private colleges did not comply with UGC norms regarding basic 
qualification requirement in private colleges. This not only adversely impacted 
the quality of teaching being imparted in these colleges but also raises questions 
about the diligence of universities regarding procedure of inspection of 
affiliated colleges. 
(C) Full time teachers with PhD 
Scrutiny of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
() Universities and constituent colleges: On an average 47 per cent (ranging 
from 43 per cent to 51 per cent) full time teachers had completed PhD in 
UoR, Jaipur and two selected constituent colleges during 2014-19. Though, 
JINVU, Jodhpur did not maintain such data during 2014-17, on an average 
91 per cent of full-time teachers had completed PhD in the university and 
one constituent college during 2017-19. No full-time teacher was posted in 
GGTU, Banswara during 2014-19. 
  
41 41 per cent teachers in 12 out of 16 test checked private colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur, 
44 per cent teachers in two out of nine private colleges affiliated with JNVU, Jodhpur and 
73 per cent teachers in all five private colleges affiliated with GGTU, Banswara. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 40 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
(i) Test checked government and private colleges: 
Only 12 test checked government colleges affiliated with JNVU, Jodhpur 
provided details for the entire period of 2014-19, according to which on an 
average 67.48 per cent full time teachers had completed PhD. Remaining 
24 test checked government colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur and 
GGTU, Banswara provided such information for the year 2018-19 only 
which showed that 65.39 per cent full time teachers had completed PhD. 
Similarly, only nine test checked private colleges affiliated with JNVU, 
Jodhpur provided details for the entire period of 2014-19 according to 
which on an average 40.68 per cent full time teachers had completed PhD. 
Remaining 21 test checked private colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur and 
GGTU, Banswara provided such information for the year 2018-19 only 
which showed that 30.45 per cent full time teachers had completed PhD. 
(D) Full time teachers who received awards, recognition, fellowships 
Faculty motivation is crucial to improve academic quality. Scrutiny of 
information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following. 
() 
(ii) 
Universities and constituent colleges: Only 14 per cent (32 out of average 
234 teachers) full time teachers in selected 11 departments of UoR, Jaipur 
and two constituent colleges, 16 per cent (25 out of average 154 teachers) 
full time teachers in selected 11 departments of JNVU, Jodhpur and one 
constituent college have received awards, recognition, fellowships at state, 
national, international level from government and recognized bodies during 
2014-19. 
Test checked government and private colleges: Only one full time 
teacher in one* out of 36 test checked government colleges received one 
award from State Government during 2014-19. None of the full- time 
teachers in 30 test checked private colleges received awards, recognition, 
fellowships at state, national, international level from Government, 
recognized bodies during 2014-19. 
Thus, the fact that the work of very few teachers was acknowledged through 
awards, recognition etc., in test checked colleges indicates that the environment 
in which the faculty worked was not motivating enough to deliver high 
standards of teaching. 
(E) Teachers provided with financial support to attend conferences/ 
workshops 
Scrutiny of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
  
42 Affiliated with GGTU, Banswara 
  
41 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
() Universities and constituent colleges: None of the teachers were provided 
financial support to attend conferences/workshops and membership fee of 
professional bodies in any of the three test checked universities and 
three constituent colleges during 2014-19. 
(ii) ‘Test checked government and private colleges: Audit found that 29 
out of 36 test checked government colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur and 
JNVU, Jodhpur did not maintain such information while none of the teachers 
was provided financial support to attend conferences/workshops in remaining 
seven test checked government colleges affiliated with GGTU, Banswara 
during 2014-19. None of the teachers was provided such financial support in 
30 test checked private colleges during 2014-19. 
Thus, it can be concluded that none of the test checked HEIs made efforts 
towards continuous professional development of teachers by encouraging 
faculty to attend conference/workshops. 
3.1.2.4 Professional Development Training of faculty 
Paragraph 7.1.3 of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion of Higher 
Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP states that faculty development initiatives 
could include areas like entry level orientation, curriculum development, 
teaching and learning, research and innovation, engagement with social 
concerns and leadership development. Customized faculty development 
programmes may also be introduced on a large scale. 
Further, as per NAAC Manual, teachers need to take initiative to learn and keep 
themselves abreast with the latest development, to improve, continuous 
improvement in their work and strive for individual and institutional excellence. 
(A) State level status 
Chart 3.8: Percentage of teachers who took 
part in training programmes 
38.23 25.74 
61.77 74.26 
Orientation Refresher Short term 
programme programme programme 
  
Commissioner, College 
Education conducts 
professional development 
programmes viz. orientation 
program, refresher course 
and short term course for 
teachers posted in 
government colleges in the 
State. It was observed that 
1,789 (67.77 per cent) 
against target of 2,640 
teachers of government 
colleges attended professional development programmes during 2014-19. The 
Percentage of teachers 
  
@ Imparted training | Not imparted training 
      
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 42 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
programmes wise position of teachers’ imparted training in such programmes 
during 2014-19 is given in Chart 3.8. 
(B) Attest checked HEIs level 
Scrutiny of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
() Universities and constituent colleges: 
e On an average 14 per cent teachers (75 out of 524 teachers) attended 
professional development programmes in UoR, Jaipur and two constituent 
colleges every year during 2014-19. No regular teacher was appointed in 
GGTU, Banswara, hence, no teacher attended professional development 
programmes. 
e JNVU, Jodhpur did not maintain consolidated data of teachers who 
attended professional development programmes. As a result, Audit had to 
collect such information from selected 11 departments and one constituent 
college. The information revealed that on average only three per cent 
teachers attended such programmes during 2014-19. 
For UoR, Jaipur, the State Government in its reply (August 2020) stated 
that less teachers attended trainings due to restrictions set by university on 
number of participants while absence of teachers in these programmes 
was due to other reasons. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: 
e On an average 6.17 per cent teachers (41 out of 664) from 29 out of the 
36 test checked government colleges attended professional development 
programmes every year during 2014-19. 
e Onan average 13.27 per cent teachers (41 out of 309) from two out of the 
30 test checked private college attended professional development 
programmes every year during 2014-19. 
3.1.2.5 Robust examination and evaluation system 
The effectiveness of examination system of a HEI depends on regularity in 
conducting examinations, quality of questions and how well it actually tests the 
programme specific outcomes and course outcomes. A high quality evaluation 
system contributes towards enhancing the competence of students. 
(A) Mechanism of setting of question papers: 
The details of selection of question papers setter and examiners were not 
provided by any of the test checked universities though called for. In the absence 
  
43 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
of which audit could not verify whether the norms/procedures™ prescribed by 
the universities for setting up of question papers were followed. 
GGTU, Banswara accepted the facts. INVU, Jodhpur stated (June 2020) that 
every year class wise, subject wise and paper wise paper setter and examiners 
are appointed by an Examination Committee from a panel of examiners duly 
approved by Department Council and keeping in view the norms approved by 
the Academic Council in August 1983. However, the university did not provide 
details of paper setter and examiners appointed during previous years due to 
which audit could not verify statement of the university. As discussed in sub 
para 3.1.2.5 (F) (b) below, marks of average 96 per cent of the students who 
applied for revaluation were changed during 2017-19 which indicated 
operational and monitoring inadequacy in appointment of examiners and 
evaluation of answer books. 
(B) Quality of questions in the examinations 
Major policy documents dealing with higher education have highlighted that 
examination reforms are considered as one of the key aspects of overall 
academic reforms for improving the quality of higher education. Questions and 
assignments which form a part of the examination and evaluation system 
currently being followed in higher education systems largely promote rote 
learning rather than assessing overall competence of the student. 
Through extensive consultations with higher education experts, audit identified 
certain important characteristics of good quality examination papers including 
less repetition of previous years’ questions. Audit findings related to these 
aspects are discussed below: 
e Questions of previous years examinations repeated in the current year 
With the aim of assessing the extent to which examination papers were 
encouraging rote learning, Audit compared question papers of final year 
examination of UG and PG programmes“ of 2019 and identified those 
questions which were also asked in question papers of last 10 years (in case of 
GGTU, Banswara, only last two years). 
  
43 In UoR, Jaipur and GGTU, Banswara, question paper setters were to be selected from a panel 
of teachers constituted under each BoS and from a committee consisting of one Convener 
of BoS, one member nominated by the Vice Chancellor and Dean/Faculty of relevant 
programme respectively. In JNVU, Jodhpur, as per decision of Academic Council (August 
1983) not more than 50 per cent of paper setters and examiners should be located in Jodhpur 
and 100 per cent paper setters and examiners for UG examinations should not be located 
beyond 1000 km from Jodhpur with in Rajasthan. Teaching experience of paper setters for 
PG/UG programmes should be not less than 7/5 years. 
44 Selected 11 departments in UoR, Jaipur and INVU, Jodhpur. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 44 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Audit compared previous years’ question papers* of available 10 question 
papers of seven subjects of seven selected departments in UoR, Jaipur, 14 
question papers of 10 subjects of 10 selected departments in JNVU, Jodhpur 
with questions papers of 2019, The results of comparison are summarised in 
Table 3.5 below. 
Table 3.5: Questions repeated in question papers of 2019 which have been included 
in previous years question papers 
Name of university No. of questions | No. of questions 
repeated in repeated in 2019 
AUER ica ACER mo 
eNom rea) 
number of 
which Cote questions 
Cte ey aa) Pita tes mb 
ER 
Loi these 
compared CCG) I 
pirate ty 
previous years peEy Toa} 
(in per cent) 
     
    10 224 98 (43.75%) 53 (23.66%) 
Nhe yas 10 14 350 111 (31.71%) 64 (18.29%) 
GGTU, Banswara 9 67 1,804 231 (12.80%) - 
Further, percentage of questions repeated was upto four times in UoR, Jaipur 
(out of 98 questions) and upto six times in JNVU, Jodhpur (out of 111 questions) 
as depicted in Chart 3.9 below: 
Chart 3.9: Relative share of repeated questions on basis of frequency of repetition 
  
cdhpur Zoo ae Jodhpur ae 
UoR, Jaipur 32 ee 
Percentage of repetition of questions 
Frequency of repetition: Hsix times Mfivetimes Mfourtimes three times Mtwo times 
      
It can be seen that substantial percentage of questions were repeated three to six 
times in UoR, Jaipur (42 per cent) and JNVU, Jodhpur (44 per cent). Further, 
46 per cent questions were repeated only in Sociology, Chemistry and Zoology 
in UoR, Jaipur and 43 per cent questions were repeated only in Sociology, 
Political Science and Economics in JNVU, Jodhpur. Interestingly, in GGTU, 
Banswara, seven questions in six question papers were asked twice in the same 
papers of 2019. GGTU, Banswara accepted the facts. 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that syllabus and copies of previous years’ 
question papers are sent to teachers for preparation of current year’s question 
  
45 Audit collected commonly available previous years’ question paper bank (UoR, Jaipur for 
six years and JNVU, Jodhpur for 10 years) of selected 11 departments from local markets 
as they were not provided by the concerned university. 
  
45 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
paper. Teachers prepared question papers accordingly and efforts were made to 
avoid repetition of questions. The university has only explained the procedure 
of preparation of question papers. It did not elaborate upon the corrective action 
that it would take to avoid frequent repetition of questions. 
Thus, repetition of questions and not using innovative methods indicate that the 
focus is still predominantly on rote learning. 
(CQ) Status of automation of Examination wing/section 
Scrutiny of information provided by three test checked universities regarding 
status of automation of examination wing revealed that in JNVU, Jodhpur and 
GGTU, Banswara all work related to examination such as receipt of 
examination forms, correction in examination forms, issue of admission cards, 
declaration of examination results, issue of mark-sheets, receipt of application 
forms for revaluation and declaration of result thereof are fully computerized. 
However, UoR, Jaipur intimated that examination wing is partially automated. 
Activities such as sending of question papers, issue of mark-sheets/degree, 
payments to examiners and verification of examination documents are being 
carried out through non-automated mode. 
(D) Delays in declaration of examination results 
Timely declaration of results is extremely important, especially for graduating 
students as many of their post-study opportunities such as employment, further 
studies, enrolment in competitive exams etc., are dependent upon their 
performance in the examinations. Any delay in declaration has the potential to 
adversely impact the future of such students. 
In the meeting (05 May 2015) of all Vice Chancellors of state Universities 
chaired by the Hon’ble Chancellor it was decided that results of all regular 
examinations should be declared by 07 July of each year and results of 
revaluation should be declared within one month from date of application for 
revaluation. Further, amended Ordinance 157-A of Hand Book of the UoR 
Jaipur also reiterated that result of revaluation should be declared within 30 days 
from date of application for revaluation. 
Scrutiny of information provided by three test checked universities revealed 
that: 
(i) UoR, Jaipur: Though the university did not prepare any annual schedule 
of dates of declaration of results of examination it claimed that results of 
examination were declared without any delay during 2014-19. However, it 
was observed from website of university that results of PG exam were 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 46 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
declared*® with delays of two to four months from July of each year during 
2016-19. 
Further, the results of revaluation were declared by the university with a 
delay*’ ranging from 27 days to 116 days beyond one month from receipt 
of application during 2017-19 (details given Appendix 3.2). 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that due to unavoidable reasons results 
were declared with delay in some cases and efforts would be taken to avoid 
such delays. 
(ij) JNVU, Jodhpur: The university prepared an academic calendar 
mentioning dates of examinations and declaration of results every year, it 
declared results of UG examination during 2014-19 with a delay*® ranging 
from six days to 34 days beyond due dates. 
(iii) GGTU, Banswara: The university declared results of examination within 
the dates prescribed’? in examination schedule during 2017-19. 
(E) Student Attendance norms for appearance in examinations 
In the meeting (5 May 2015) ofall Vice Chancellors of State Universities it was 
decided that adherence of 75 per cent attendance norms should be ensured. 
Scrutiny of information provided by the three test checked universities revealed 
the following: 
(i) UoR, Jaipur: Hand Book Part-II (Vol-II) of UoR, Jaipur also reiterated 
that minimum 75 per cent attendance is required in each subject (theory and 
practical) for appearing in the examination. 
Scrutiny of attendance registers of 1,477 students enrolled in Chemistry, Physics 
and Economics departments of UoR (selected classes) and its two constituent 
colleges for the period 2017-20 revealed that only 26 students (1.76 per cent) 
out of 1,477 students attended prescribed minimum 75 per cent classes as per 
details given in Table 3.6 below. 
  
46 Results of examination of PG programmes 2016 were declared upto November 2016, results 
of 2017 upto October 2017, results of 2018 upto September 2018 and results of 2019 upto 
September 2019. 
47 Delay in declaration of results of revaluation have been calculated from date of declaration 
of examination results by allowing 15 days for filling of application form and 30 days for 
revaluation of answer sheets. 
48 Results were declared with delay of six days beyond prescribed date of 30.06.2015 in 2014- 
15, delay of 15 days beyond 30.06.2016 in 2015-16, delay of 24 days beyond 10.06.2017 in 
2016-17, delay of 34 days beyond 25.05.2018 in 2017-18 and delay of 29 days beyond 
25.05.2019 in 2018-19. 
49 Results of 2017-18 were declared during 01 May to 20 July 2018 against expected dates of 
declaration during 10 May to 31 July 2018 and results of 2018-19 were declared during 01 
May to 27 June 2019 against expected dates of declaration during 1 May to 30 June 2019. 
  
47 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Table 3.6: Number of students in UoR who did not attend minimum prescribed classes 
  
  
ro ETT The RO eR guts No. of students who 
CrtehiCM nar Com tg attendance was did not attend 
Co elie Oe Cy iter cri minimum classes 
attendance) 
Aeee 921 683 609 588 (96.55%) 
AEE 861 642 693 690 (99.57%) 
2019-20 227 170 175 173 (98.86%) 
OE 2,009 1,495 1,477 1,451 (98.24%)   
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that as per ordinance of the University, 
minimum 75 per cent attendance was compulsory to appear in the examination 
and these norms were being followed. In case any department provided 
information in this regard, appropriate action will be taken. However, the 
university did not intimate whether these 1,477 students were allowed to appear 
in the examination or not. 
(ii) © JNVU, Jodhpur: As per Ordinance 78-A of Hand Book of INVU 
Jodhpur, all regular candidates in the faculties of Arts, Education & Social 
Sciences and Commerce should have attended at least 70 per cent of the lectures 
delivered and the tutorials held taken together as well as practical and sessional 
from the date of her/his admission. 
To assess the compliance to attendance norms, Audit requested the university 
to provide attendance registers. Scrutiny of attendance register of MA (Hindi) 
Semester-III for the year 2017-18 (made available by the university) revealed 
that attendance of all 48 students was more than 75 per cent. 
(iii) . GGTU, Banswara: The University informed that all students were 
meeting the minimum 75 per cent of the norms of attendance required for 
appearing in examinations. 
(F) Evaluation and Revaluation process: 
Revaluation in an examination system refers to the rechecking of the answer 
sheets on the request of the students who believe that the result they obtained is 
not commensurate with their own expectations. 
(a) Centralised Evaluation Norms: 
In the meeting (5 May 2015) of all Vice Chancellors of State universities it was 
decided that centralised evaluation method should be followed in all state 
universities excluding technical & agriculture universities. Further, maximum 
50 answer books should be given to each teacher (maximum 5 hours duty) for 
evaluation. 
In this regard it was observed that: 
Centralised evaluation is being done only for UG final year examination in UoR, 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 48 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

  
    
Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Jaipur due to non-availability of adequate examiners. JNVU, Jodhpur and 
GGTU, Banswara did not adopt centralised evaluation method and answer 
books of the examination were being delivered to examiners in a non-centralised 
manner for evaluation. 
(b) Revaluation of Answer Books 
In UoR, Jaipur, as per hand book of the university, revaluation of answer books 
shall be permissible in not more than 25 per cent of the theory papers in which 
a candidate actually appeared at an examination. Further, on the request of 
affiliated private colleges, number of papers to be revaluated were relaxed from 
25 per cent to 50 per cent for 2017 only. 
In JNVU, Jodhpur, as per rules, revaluation of answer books shall be 
permissible in not more than 50 per cent of the theory papers subject to a 
maximum of three papers where total number of papers is six and a maximum 
of four papers where total number of papers is more than six. 
As per information provided by test checked universities, the details regarding 
revaluation of answer books in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur during 
2016-19 and in GGTU, Banswara during 2017-19, are given in Table 3.7 below. 
Table 3.7: Position of revaluation of answer books 
Number of students appeared | Number of students applied Students whose marks ROC RCo Ly 
for examination Ome VEL changed after revaluation [changed post revaluation 
2016-17 | 2017-18 | 2018-19 | 2016-17 | 2017-18 | 2018-19 | 2016-17 § 2017-18 [2018-19 | 2016-17 | 2017-18 J2018-19 
(fail to pass) 
4,48,789 5,36,319 4,39,133 46,475 94,058 63,855 12,885 22,973 15,294 7,174 12,705 
NA 1,36,017 —1,08,510 NA 13,615 8,525 NA 4,007 2,508 NA 669 
4,48,789 6,72,336 5,47,643 46475 1,07,673 72,380 12,885 26,980 17,802 7174 13,374 
(10%) (16%) (13%) (28%) (25%) (25%) (15%) (12%) 
128129 | 128943 125957 16926 17088 20145 16091 16406 19258 NA | NA 
17601 12768 |~—«12429'| «2329: «1409'S's«d1794.=S«2184. «1345. «1766. =2SSNA.SONA 
  
Total 1,45,730 
cL CaUGR UG - 
Eres PG 
Total - 
Source: As per information provided by concerned university) | NA- Not available 
1,41,711 1,38,386 19,255 18,497 21,939 18,275 17,751 21,024 NA NA 
(13%) (13%) (16%) (95%) (96%) (96%) 
33,205 61935 - 998 3142 - 641 2064 - 161 
- 4,110 6654 - 404 487 - 333 370 - 41 
37,315 68,589 - 1,402 3,629 - 974 2,434 202 
(4%) (5%) (69%) (67%) (21%) 
It can be seen that marks of average 26 per cent students (ranging from 25 per 
cent to 28 per cent) in UoR, Jaipur, average 96 per cent students (ranging from 
95 per cent to 96 per cent) in JNVU, Jodhpur and average 68 per cent students 
(ranging from 67 per cent to 69 per cent) in GGTU, Banswara who applied for 
revaluation, were changed after revaluation. 
Thus, high percentage of changes in the answer books during revaluation, 
especially when it leads to change of result from fail to pass, suggests that the 
  
49 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
267 
(11%)

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
evaluation systems followed by three test checked universities particularly in 
JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara are not adequate and effective and there 
is need to revamp the entire evaluation system. 
Student Survey Results: In response to student satisfaction survey question 
"Are you satisfied with the examinations and evaluation process with reference 
to reassessment/re-evaluation practices in your institution?" approximately 27 
per cent students stated that they were dissatisfied/Partially satisfied and 73 per 
cent students stated that they were highly satisfied/satisfied. 
3.2 Contribution to Society by creating new knowledge through effective 
Research 
Research capacities* need to be consciously developed in the colleges. Colleges 
and their teachers should be encouraged and supported in taking up research 
including generation of innovative teaching-learning material. Multi- 
disciplinary mission mode research and innovation programmes should be 
evolved in association with arts, humanities and social sciences which should 
directly benefit the society at all levels and contribute to economic development. 
In this section, audit findings and results of aspects related to research projects 
and extension activities in the test checked HEIs are discussed. Further, results 
of selected four indicators (three related research activities and one related to 
extension activities) are also being discussed. These indicators have been taken 
from the key indicators used by NAAC during assessment and accreditation 
process of HEIs. 
3.2.1 Issues related to Research Activities 
3.21.1 Performance of universities based on outcome indicators 
Audit assessed performance of three test checked universities in effective 
research activities through following three outcomes indicators on the basis of 
NAAC benchmarks. The information is provided in Table 3.8 below (Details of 
indicators are given at Sl. Nos. 22 to 24 in Appendix-1.1), Audit findings in 
respect of these indicators are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
50 As per paragraph 7.1 of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion of Higher 
Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 50 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

5 
: 
: 
al 
    
   
  
    
Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Table 3.8: Performance of test checked universities with respect to indicators 
Outcomes indicators NAAC Performance of the test checked universities with reference to 
Yotaititya¢ NAAC benchmarks (marks*! obtained) 
ig 
maximum UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, SCL tv ty Banswara 
University Selected11 University Selected 11 
level departments level departments 
          
   Number of patents Not Not 
awarded to the institution [Elva72 applicable applicable 
during 2014-19 
irom ease) 10 and Could not 1 Could not 1 0 
papers per teacherin the JRuwc comment comment 
journals notified on UGC 
website during 2014-19 
Number of teachers 40% and Could not 0 Could not 0 0 
awarded international above comment comment 
fellowship for advanced 
studies/research during 
2014-19 
3.2.1.2 Volume of research grant, research projects undertaken and patents 
awarded to test checked HEIs 
Paragraphs 7.1 and 7.1.19 (a) of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion 
of Higher Education’ issued under the Twelfth FYP states that adequate funding 
and initiatives/schemes need to be developed for research activities in HEIs. 
As per UGC guidelines the major base of researchers in science and technology 
remains with the universities and colleges and NAAC manual also envisages 
that the institutions have responsibility to enable faculty to undertake research 
projects useful to society. 
Information provided by test checked HEIs revealed that they receive research 
grants only from government sources such as UGC, Department of Science & 
Technology (DST), Department of Bio-Technology (DBT) and GoR etc., under 
various projects. The position of receipt of research grants from government 
sources, research activities under taken and research outcomes during 2014-19 
in test checked HEIs is given in Table 3.9 below: 
  
51 Marks have been allotted by Audit as per university’s performance on selected indicators 
and comparing it with benchmarks derived by analysing scoring pattern of universities 
accredited by NAAC (Appendix 1.3) 
  
51 ~~ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Table 3.9: Position of receipt of research grants from government sources and 
   UoR, Jaipur 96.98 
(86.97%) 
research outcomes 
(& in crore) 
Name of CO eth) Number of | Number | Number | Number of 
HEIs received | of grants | research i of consultancies 
big) projects research | patents | given by the 
Cerna undertaken | projects | awarded | university 
    Res ers 
84.34 
INVU, 1.23 0.77 14 0 0 0 
Jodhpur (62.60%) 
GGTU, 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Banswara 
Government 0.60 0.34 14 13 0 0 
oy tree (56.67%) 
(10 out of 36) 
Private 0.65 0.37 25 25 0 0 
colleges (56.92%) 
(1 out of 30) 
Teel] 99.46 85.82 140 2 0 0 
(86.29%) 
Source: Information provided by concerned universities 
  
It can be seen that: 
3.2.1.3 
The research activities in JNVU, Jodhpur and UoR, Jaipur were not 
carried out satisfactorily as none of the 14 research projects in JNVU, 
Jodhpur and 39 per cent research projects were completed in UoR, 
Jaipur. It was further observed that in UoR, Jaipur total grants worth 
~184.05 crore was approved to the university for undertaking these 87 
research projects but due to non-utilization of grants/non-submission of 
utilization certificates of grants by the university it could receive %96.98 
crore. Thus, the university not only failed to fully utilize the grants 
received but was also deprived of remaining grants of = 87.07 crore. 
Details of some instances in which grants were not utilized fully have 
been discussed in Paragraph 3.2.1.5 (C). 
Further, though 51 per cent projects were completed in test checked 
HEIs during 2014-19, no patent was awarded to these HEIs and no 
consultancy was given by these HEIs. UoR, Jaipur accepted (January 
2021) the facts. 
Teachers’ contributions to research in HEIs 
(A) Number of research papers published per teacher 
The strategic framework of Twelfth FYP seeks to bring excellence in higher 
education by building synergies between teaching and research to promote 
excellence in both. Research acumen in an institution is an evolving feature 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 52 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
reflecting various research output with clear rewards such as doctoral, post- 
doctoral, project inventions and discoveries, number of patents obtained and 
number of research publications. 
Further, the NAAC during accreditation of an institution allots scores for 
number of research papers per teacher published in UGC notified Journals and 
number of books and chapters in edited volumes/books published per teacher. 
The details of number of research papers published in UGC notified Journals 
and number of books and chapters published in edited volumes/books in test 
checked HEIs during 2014-19 is given in Table 3.10 below: 
Table 3.10: Number of research papers published and number of books and 
chapters in edited volumes/books published 
ETC PN Te 143 No. of em LC ee Lew Overmars Biotic 
HEIs number of Peedi ds POCO MODE RU ett SOU evel epi 
Sait SOR cas v2) national/international conference 
teachers given seed proceedings 
during money for Wye Number of | Totalnumberof | Number of Books 
2014-19 research Pino a Eo Books & chapters | & chapters in edited 
C4 papers published | in edited volumes/ | volumes/ published 
2014-19 published | per teacher eu ror per teacher 
Ie 806 3.44 298 1.27 
    UoR, Jaipur 
JNVU, Jodhpur 0 417 2.71 30 0.19 
EASED 
sy 
ny 
Source. Information provided by concerned university 
It can be seen that: 
e On an average 0.38 to 3.44 papers per teacher were published in UGC 
notified Journals and 0.71 to 1.27 books & chapters in edited 
volumes/books and papers in national/ international conference 
proceedings per teacher were published in UoR, Jaipur; JNVU, Jodhpur and 
36 test checked government colleges. No research papers were published 
in UGC notified Journals, no books and chapters were published in edited 
volumes/books and no papers were published in national/international 
conference proceedings in all 30 test checked private colleges during 
2014-19. 
e No seed money was provided to any teachers of all test checked universities 
while it was provided to 30 teachers only of test checked government 
colleges. 
  
53 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
(B) Number of teachers awarded international fellowship 
(@) Universities and constituent colleges: None of the 388 full time teachers 
posted in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur were awarded international 
fellowship for advanced studies/research during 2014-19. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: None of the 29 test 
checked government colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, 
Jodhpur maintained such information, while no teacher posted in seven test 
checked government colleges affiliated with GGTU, Banswara was 
awarded international fellowship for advanced studies/research during 
2014-19. Further, none of the teachers posted in 30 test checked private 
colleges was awarded international fellowship for advanced studies/ 
research during 2014-19. 
3.2.1.4 Delay in evaluation/examination of thesis of PhD Students in UoR, 
Jaipur 
As per modified Ordinance 124 (10.15) of Hand book of UoR, the entire process 
of PhD thesis should be completed within a period of six months from the date 
of submission of thesis. 
Audit observed that 72 thesis submitted by PhD students were pending for 
evaluation/examination with the examiners since 2007 to 2019, of these 11 
thesis were pending for evaluation/examination for more than five years, 18 
were pending for three to five years and 43 were pending for one to three years 
as of March 2019. The reasons for pendency mainly included not deciding the 
dates for viva-voce (40 cases), not sending the panels (nine cases), not sending 
the report (four cases) by the supervisors, etc. UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) 
that efforts would be taken in accordance with University Ordinance. 
Such delays point toward a serious systemic problem plaguing UoR, Jaipur 
which not only undermines the research efforts of all those involved but more 
crucially, stalls the progress of students involved in these academic endeavors. 
3.2.1.5 Other findings relating to research projects 
(A) Non-adherence of minimum standards for appointing Research 
Supervisors in GGTU, Banswara 
As per UGC norms (May 2016) a Research Supervisor should be a regular 
Professor of the university/college concerned with at least five research 
publications in referred journals or a regular Associate/Assistant Professor of 
the university/college concerned with a PhD degree and at least two research 
publications in referred journals. External faculty should not be appointed as 
Research Supervisors. Further, there shall be a Research Advisory Committee 
or an equivalent body in the university to review the research proposal and 
finalize research topics, to guide the research scholar in developing study design 
and methodology of research and to review periodically and assist in the 
progress of the research work of the research scholar. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 54 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Scrutiny of records of GGTU, Banswara revealed that the university registered 
230 Research Scholars under 72 Research Supervisors in 2018-19. 30 (41.67 
per cent) out of 72 Research Supervisors were appointed from retired teachers 
and private institutions. They were not regular teachers of the university/ its 
affiliated government colleges. Though remaining 42 Research Supervisors 
were appointed from teachers of government colleges, details of their research 
publications in referred journals were not provided to Audit, due to which their 
eligibility for being appointed as Research Supervisors as per UGC norms could 
not be ascertained. 
Further, the university did not establish a Research Advisory Committee or any 
other equivalent body for review of the research work and to suggest corrective 
measures. The university also failed to maintain the records of research scholars 
under each supervisor. GGTU, Banswara accepted the facts. 
(B) Non completion of “Start Up Research Projects” 
UGC sanctioned “Start Up” grant of 2 36 lakh for research projects*? to six 
newly recruited Assistant Professors in Science department of JNVU, Jodhpur 
in 2014-15, The research projects were to be completed within three years. 
Audit observed that all six projects were not completed as of January 2020 even 
after lapse of 22 months from the stipulated period of their completion. 
Moreover, due to non-submission of UCs for utilization of grants to UGC for 
all six projects, Audit could not ensure how much grants were utilized for the 
intended purposes. Further, due to non-completion of projects, intended 
objectives of the research could not achieved. Reasons for non-completion of 
“start up research projects’ though called for (February 2020) were not provided 
by the university. 
(C) Failure to avail research grants by the UoR, Jaipur 
Audit scrutinized 22 research projects in UoR, Jaipur in which research grants 
of = 61.76 crore was sanctioned by different government sources*’ during 2014- 
19. Of these the sanctioning authorities released initial grant of = 15.58 crore to 
the university and as per sanction letters subsequent instalment of grants were 
to be released on submission of UCs of the initial grants. 
  
52 Studies on Development and Validation of Novel Electrochemical Sensors for Monitoring 
and Determination of Heavy Metals in Industrial Effluents; Molecular Characterization and 
in vitro studies of Cordia myxa of Arid and Semi-Arid Region of Rajasthan; Synthesis of 
lead based Silicate material and study of their structural, electric, thermal and magnetic 
properties; Detection and elimination of Fluoride and Nitrate from drinking water of Barmer 
district; Molecular characterization and micro morphological studies on selected edible 
Cucurbits of Rajasthan and Structure —Reactivity Correlation in some Electron Transfer 
Reactions. 
53 UGC under (UGC- Special Assistance Program), Department of Science & Technology 
(DST) under (Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence and Sophisticated 
Analytical Instrument Facilities) and Department of Bio-Technology (DBT) under 
(nterdisciplinary Program of Life Sciences) 
  
55 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
Audit observed that out of €15.58 crore, the university could utilize only 
11.23 crore on research projects (Appendix 3.3) and it also did not submit 
related UCs to the sanctioning authorities due to which further grants were not 
released. Thus, the university not only missed the opportunity of availing further 
grants of = 46.18 crore but the research projects were also not completed. When 
enquired (October 2020), UoR, Jaipur did not provide information regarding 
number of research scholars who were deprived of research activities due to 
non-availing of these grants. 
Further, in one case, Department of Science & Technology (DST) released 
< two crore to the university for purchase of instruments under the Sophisticated 
Analytical Instrument Facilities programme. The university could not purchase 
the required equipment within the prescribed period of 2013-18 and had to 
return the entire grant of = two crore to DST. Director, UGC Infonet Center 
(UoR) replied that the equipment could not be purchased due to non-creation of 
web-portal and non-constitution of Facility Management Committee till 2016, 
however, the centre did not inform the specific reasons for not purchasing the 
equipment even after the Facility Management Committee was constituted in 
September 2017. 
UoR, Jaipur while accepting the facts stated (January 2021) that effort would be 
made to utilize sanctioned grants with in time in future. 
3.2.2 Extension activities in collaboration with industry, community etc., and 
student participation 
Learning activities have a visible element for developing sensitivities towards 
community issues, gender disparities and social inequity and in inculcating 
values and commitment to society. Affiliation and interaction with groups or 
individuals who have an interest in the activities of the institution and the ability 
to influence the actions, decisions, policies, practices or goals of the 
organization leads to mutual benefit to both. 
In order to assess the extent to which industry has been consulted or has 
provided sponsorship and funding, in a collaborative environment, the efforts 
made by test checked universities in conducting extension and outreach 
programmes conducted in collaboration with industry, community and NGOs 
(NCC/NSS/Red Cross etc.) and number of students participating in these 
activities have been scrutinized. 
Scrutiny of information provided in this regard by the test checked three 
universities and 36 government colleges revealed the following: 
() Universities and constituent colleges: 
e Two extension and outreach programmes (National Service Scheme™ and 
National Cadet Corps*°) were conducted in two departments (Chemistry 
  
54 National Service Scheme (NSS) is an Indian Government-Sponsored Public Service 
program conducted by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports of the Government of India. 
Popularly known as NSS. 
55 National Cadet Corps is the Military cadet corps of India that provides basic military 
training to the students of schools and colleges. It comprises Army, Navy and Air Force. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 56 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
and Geography) and one selected constituent college of UoR, Jaipur in 
2018-19 in which only 1.04 per cent students (111 out of 10,654 students) 
participated. 
e JNVU, Jodhpur and one constituent college conducted two extension and 
outreach programmes (NSS and NCC) during 2014-19 in which on average 
eight per cent students participated. INVU, Jodhpur accepted the facts. 
e GGTU, Banswara did not conduct any such programme during 2014-19, 
(ii) Test checked government colleges: 
12 test checked government colleges affiliated with JNVU, Jodhpur did not 
provide information regarding number of extension activities conducted by 
them. Whereas nine out of 17 government colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur 
informed that on an average 29 extension activities were conducted during 
2014-19 in which average 2,188 out of 44,488 students participated every year. 
While no extension activity was conducted in seven test checked colleges 
affiliated with GGTU, Banswara during 2014-19. 
(iii) Evaluation through indicators (SI. No 9 of Appendix 1.1): 
NAAC in its accreditation and assessment process gives weightage to 
participation of students in extension activities. Hence, as per NAAC 
benchmarks, JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara were not eligible for award 
of marks. Due to non-availability of complete information of UoR, Jaipur audit 
could not comment on their performance with respect to this indicator. 
  
  
Summing up and recommendations 
Feedback from stakeholders such as industrialists, entrepreneurs, students were 
not obtained in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur during designing/revision of 
curriculum of general degree programmes. GGTU, Banswara did not revise 
curriculum/syllabus of any programmes since its establishment in 2012 upto 
2019 despite clear mandate of Twelfth FYP. ICT teaching tools were sparingly 
used by the teachers. Availability of proper faculty was insufficient as GoR did 
not recruit the required number of teachers in government colleges which 
resulted in Student Teacher Ratio being as high as average 88:1, more than four 
times than its prescribed limit of 20:1. 45.71 per cent of the teachers did not 
possess the prescribed NET qualification in 19 out of 30 test checked private 
affiliated colleges. Efforts towards professional development of teachers was 
also insufficient. Centralised evaluation system was completely lacking in 
JNVU and GGTU and partially developed in UoR, Jaipur. Alarmingly, marks 
of 96 per cent of students in JNVU, Jodhpur, 68 per cent of students in GGTU, 
Banswara and 26 per cent of students in UoR, Jaipur who applied for 
revaluation were changed during 2017-19. UoR, Jaipur could complete only 39 
per cent research projects during 2014-19. In JNVU, Jodhpur, none of the 14 
research projects could be completed even after utilising 62.60 per cent of 
research grants. Further, no patent could be awarded despite completion of 72 
research projects in test checked HEIs. Also, 72 thesis submitted by PhD   
  
57 ‘Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter-IlI Quality of Higher Education   
  
  
students during 2007 to 2019 were found pending with Supervisors for 
evaluation/examination in UoR, Jaipur. 
Recommendations: 
1. The universities should: 
a. Revise/design curriculum timely considering the need of industry, 
local/national market. 
b. Universities should endeavor to improve the learning process by 
implementing Choice Based Credit system and semester system in all the 
programmes and encourage continuous evaluation of students through term 
papers, internship, projects and weekly assignments so that employability of 
students is enhanced. This would also be in line with the New Education 
Policy which promotes multi-disciplinary education. 
c. Introduce centralized evaluation system of answer books so as to avoid 
operational and monitoring inadequacies. 
d. Ensure that all the research projects are conducted with due quality and are 
completed in timely manner to extend significant gains to the society. 
2. To keep pace with technological advancement and innovations in delivery of 
education, the HEIs should encourage teachers to use ICT teaching tools. 
3. Universities should ensure that all the teachers employed in private colleges 
possess the minimum qualification prescribed by regulatory bodies. The State 
Government may also consider to develop online monitoring mechanism on 
availability of qualified teachers in private colleges. 
4, The State Government and universities should conduct relevant professional 
development programmes for the teachers regularly and should ensure that all 
the eligible teachers are provided training in these programmes.   
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 58 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter - IV 
NCC Cm OL eA 
Higher Education 
 

INPUTS 
Chapter - IV 
Access and Equity in Higher Education 
Access to and equity in higher education have been widely regarded as the basic 
and key responsibilities of any government. Creating a high-quality higher 
education system which is easily accessible to all sections of society is thus one 
of the main higher education outcomes that a government seeks to achieve. 
Access to higher education has been defined as availability of sufficient number 
of institutions across the serviced region to adequately fulfil the demand from 
that region. Equity means equal opportunity to all sections of the society to 
participate in higher education. 
In order to assess the performance of HEIs and GoR towards achieving the goal 
of creating a high-quality higher education system which is easily accessible to 
all sections of society, the following audit objective was framed. 
Audit Objective 3: Whether Equitable Access to Quality Higher Education 
  
was ensured for all. 
The equity and access related outcomes and their relationship with the 
contributing factors can be understood from the representation below. 
Formation of: W 1. Increase in a 
I. Specific Policies/ 5 number of HEIs E 2. Increase in easy schemes targeting ow ; = access 
ces caved Ei iment 8 affordability — ; ; ; 
2. Buildings, Labs, © across categories 5 2. Ensuring equity 
Library 3. Availability of © 3. Funding for good Infrastructure 
infrastructure 
. 4, Availability of 
Fe ene Academic Choices 
5. Disabled friendly 
facilities 
A number of crucial steps such as specific policies and schemes targeted 
towards easy access, broad based equity and affordability have to be taken by 
the government as well as the HEIs concerned to ensure achievement of these 
outcomes. Moreover, scholarships/freeships and disabled friendly facilities 
must be ensured especially for the benefit of socio-economically backward and 
the disadvantaged sections of the society. This would lead towards a planned 
and equitable increase in the number of HEIs across the concerned region and 
  
59 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
encourage higher enrolments thus increasing GER across different regions and 
societal categories. 
In paragraphs 4.2.3 (i) and 4.3.2.2 (@) UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur did not 
provide consolidated and complete information for all their departments. In the 
absence of complete information, Audit collected such information from 
selected 11 departments® of universities concerned. 
cl Easy Access to Higher Education 
Twelfth FYP stated that focus should be given towards achieving higher access 
through expansion by consolidation and better utilization of the existing 
infrastructure, upgradation of the infrastructure and creation of new institutions 
primarily to meet the objective of regional equity. Moreover, Gol’s output 
outcomes frameworks*’ and GoR’s Outcome Budgets>® over the last few years 
have also laid emphasis on increasing access to higher education through 
establishment of new HEIs and increasing the capacities of existing HEIs. In 
this section easy access to higher education in Rajasthan with regards to number 
of HEIs, regional accessibility, availability of academic choices and Gross 
Enrolment Ratio as a whole as well as across categories is being discussed. 
4.1.1 Number of HEIs in Rajasthan 
According to All India Survey on Higher Education (AISHE) Reports prepared 
by MHRD, the number of all types of HEIs*?, college density (colleges per lakh 
population) and average enrolment per college in Rajasthan during 2010-19 is 
shown in Chart 4.1 below: 
Chart 4.1: Availability of HEIs in Rajasthan 
  
  
2956 3,120 3,281 3036 __3,239 
2,715 716, 2.832 - 2,4 Z Benes 
725 6338 661 665 562 551 443 526 521 29 32 32 33 34 35 36 33 35   
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
==—— Total HEIs ===College density Enrolment per college 
      
  
56 Chemistry, Zoology, Physics, Accountancy & Business Statistics, Business Administration, 
Hindi, English, Sociology, Political Science, Geography and Economics 
57 Under Grant No 58 of Gol’s output outcomes framework 2017-18 onwards. 
58 Grants are being provided under budget head 4202 for construction of college buildings. 
59 State public universities, state private universities, deemed universities, institutes of 
national importance, Government colleges, private colleges etc. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 60 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
It can be seen that number of HEIs™ increased by 30.71 per cent from 2,478 to 
3,239 and college density increased by 20.69 per cent from 29 to 35 colleges 
per lakh population during 2010-11 to 2018-19. 
4.1.1.1 Policies for establishment of new HEIs 
Twelfth FYP envisaged the use of geographical mapping of HEIs to identify 
habitations and settlements lacking HEIs. 
It was observed that GoR did not have a specific policy for opening of 
government colleges in rural, urban, tribal and unserved areas. It did not have a 
policy for geographical mapping of HEIs in the State nor did it conduct any 
geographical mapping to identify number of habitations that lack higher 
education facilities and accordingly assess total requirement of HEIs in the state. 
4.1.1.2 Distribution of HEIs in Rajasthan’s Education Blocks 
Scrutiny of records of Commissionerate (College Education) revealed that there 
were 289 education blocks in Rajasthan of which 12 blocks (4.15 per cent) had 
neither government nor private colleges, 89 blocks (30.80 per cent) did not have 
any government college and 238 blocks (82.35 per cent) did not have any girls’ 
government college upto 2018-19. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that policy for opening of new 
government college in college-less blocks was framed in December 2019 and 
accordingly, new government colleges at college-less blocks would be opened 
in phased manner by considering its population, demand for opening of college 
and for increasing the gross enrolment average of the state. 
CA siemens Leyiit 
The Twelfth FYP (2012-17) states that the regional imbalances in the 
distribution of institutions should be corrected. 
Audit assessed the status of accessibility to higher education in Rajasthan by 
comparing availability of HEIs in urban versus rural areas, and across different 
geographical regions (northern, eastern, western i.e. desert area, and southern 
i.e. tribal area) 
4.1.2.1 Accessibility in urban and rural areas 
Audit observed that urban and rural area wise distribution of private colleges 
were neither available in AISHE reports nor with Commissioner, College 
Education. Further, it was also informed that the latter did not have complete 
information about urban/rural area wise distribution of general degree private 
  
60 Universities increased by 93.02 per cent and colleges increased by 29.61 per cent 
  
61 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
colleges. Hence, due to limited availability of information, audit analysis was 
limited to urban/rural area wise distribution of general degree government 
colleges during 2014-19. 
Urban/rural area wise distribution of general degree government colleges vis a 
vis projected population® of persons of age group 18-23 years in Rajasthan on 
the basis of census 2011 during 2014-19 is given in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Urban/rural area wise distribution of government colleges 
bert Number of general degree Projected Population (age 
government colleges group 18-23 years, as per census 
2011) 
Total Colleges in Colleges in} Urban area | Rural area (%) 
colleges | urban area rural area (%) 
  
A % 
175 74.86 25.14 24.89 75.11 
180 71.67 28,33 24.57 75.43 
192 69.79 30.21 23.92 76.08 
209 66.99 33.01 23.34 76.66 
237 62.87 37.13 22.80 77.20 
Sources: Information provided by Commissioner, College Education and download from site of 
Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India 
It can be observed that though number of government colleges increased from 
175 in 2014-15 to 237 in 2018-19, the urban/rural area wise distribution of these 
colleges was not in accordance with proportion of population residing in these 
areas. During 2014-19, only 25.14 per cent to 37.13 per cent government 
colleges were available in rural areas for providing higher education to 75.11 
per cent to 77.20 per cent population of age group 18-23 years. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that for better access to higher 
education in rural and urban areas, new government colleges at college-less 
blocks would be opened in phased manner. 
4.1.2.2 Accessibility in different geographical areas of the State 
Physical/geographical aspects of a region also impact the ease of access to 
higher education, region wise availability of government and private colleges 
providing higher education in general streams by distributing these colleges in 
eastern region (nine districts), western region (six districts), northern region 
  
61 As per Single Year Age Data (C-13 Table) table downloaded from website of Ministry of 
Home affairs, Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India 
62 Name of districts clubbed in Eastern area- Ajmer, Alwar, Bharatpur, Dausa, Dholpur, 
Karauli, Jaipur, Swaimadhopur and Tonk; Western area- Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jalore, 
Jodhpur, Pali and Sirohi; Northern area- Bikaner, Churu, Hanumangarh, Jhunjhunu, 
Nagaur, Sikar and Sri Ganganagar; Southern area- Banswara, Baran, Bhilwara, Bundi, 
Chittorgarh, Dungarpur, Jhalawar, Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajsamand and Udaipur. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 62 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education 
(seven districts) and southern region (11 districts). Region wise availability of 
government and private colleges during 2014-19 is given in Table 4.2 below: 
Table 4.2: Region wise availability of colleges 
Geographical iLiad Pilla mug eh ed Number of total Diets Ci] 
EVs) Government colleges colleges ron) | aera) ESD 
   
  
ert 2014-15] 2018-19 | 2014-15 [2018-19 | 2014-15 PG et) rs 
(%) (% (5) i) ) i) 
61 (34.86) 74 (31.22) 555 (41.05) 612 (40.16) 616 (40.34) 686 (38.96) 30.47 (33.25) 
27 (15.43) 44 (18.57) 94 (6.95) 162 (10.63) 121 (7.92) 206 (11.70) 16.36 (17.86) 
38 (21.71) 48 (20.25) 515 (38.09) 544 (35.69) 553 (36.22) 592 (33.61) 22.13 (24.15) 
Piya (Oy) 
49 (28.00) 71 (29.96) 188 (13.91) 206 (13.52) 237(15.52) 277 (15.73) 22.67 (24.74) 
175 237 1352 1524 1527 1761 91.63 
Source: Information provided by Commissioner, College Education. 
It can be seen that percentage of general degree colleges decreased from 40.34 
to 38.96 per cent in eastern region and 36.22 to 33.61 per cent in northern region, 
while it increased from 7.92 to 11.70 per cent in western region and 15.52 to 
15.73 per cent in southern region during 2014-19. 
      
Further, during 2018-19, population of age group 18-23 years were almost equal 
in 7 districts of northern region (22.13 lakh) and in 11 districts of southern 
region (22.67 lakh), but number of colleges in northern region (592 colleges) 
was more than twice that of southern region (277 colleges). This indicates that 
Tegion wise distribution of general degree colleges in the State was not 
proportionate. The State Government did not furnish reply in this regard. 
4.1.2.3 Accessibility to different Academic Choices 
Twelfth FYP advocates for correcting the disciplinary imbalances in the 
distribution of institutions. Scrutiny of information revealed that the 
Commissioner, College Education did not have details of stream wise number 
of private colleges in the state. In the absence of such data, Audit analysed only 
number of colleges, availability of seats in first year and enrolment of students 
in Arts, Science and Commerce streams in general degree government colleges 
during 2014-19 as given in Table 4.3 below 
Table 4.3: Availability of different academic choices in government colleges 
  
ae 
No. of Sry iy No. of MK A) No. of aM) a 
eee) ery available enrolment Cr rere available Poni colleges Phe MEL eit 
3 vA % 
2014-15 175 161 (92.00) 64.67 67.05 100 (57.14) 17.69 16.25 108 (61.71) 17.64 16.70 
2015-16 180 170 (94.44) 65.02 6757 100 (55.55) ‘17.52 17.14 111 (61.66) 17.46 15.29 
192 182 (94.79) 65.75 67.83 103 (53.64) 16.91 17.80 112 (58.33) 17.34 14.37 
209 190 (90.90) 64.86 6842 112 (63.58) 17.95 18.18 114 64.54) 17.19 13.40 
2018-19 237 223 (94.09) 66.22 69.96 115 (48.52) 17.53 17.97 114 (48.10) 16.25 12.07 
Source: As per data provided by Commissionerate College Education 
  
63 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
The following observations can be made on this data: 
e Proportionate availability of colleges having Science and Commerce 
streams were decreasing continuously while number of colleges having 
Arts stream was increasing continuously. 
e §=©Availability of seats in both, Science and Commerce streams decreased 
while it increased in Arts stream. 
e Enrolment of students in Arts stream was more than double the enrolment 
of students in the Science and Commerce streams during 2014-19. 
Thus, the failure of the State to provide academic choices proportionately across 
all the streams seems to have impacted the stream specific enrolment trends 
during 2014-19, highlighting the lack of academic choices available to 
prospective students. 
4.2 Gross Enrolment Ratio 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), Gol aims to expand the 
Gross Enrolment Ratio® (GER) in higher education from 15 per cent in 2011- 
12 to 21 per cent by 2016-17 and further to 30 per cent by the year 2020. In 
State Higher Education Plan (2015-22) targets were fixed to increase GER in 
higher education to 26 by year 2019 and to 32 per cent by year 2022. 
In this regard audit observed that GoR did not maintain an independent database 
regarding GER and enrolment of students in all HEIs and it was dependent on 
data published in AISHE reports. The GER of Rajasthan as well as all India and 
ranking of Rajasthan in higher education for the period 2010-19 are given in 
Chart 4.2 below: 
Chart 4.2: GER of National and Rajasthan State   
54.6 55.8 56.1 57.6 56.1 56.4 
  
2010-11 2011-12, = 2012-13. 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 =. 2016-17. 2017-18 2018-19 
ma GER of top ranked state/UT ms GER of India 
mae GER of Rajasthan Ranking of Rajasthan       
It can be observed that: 
  
63 Gross Enrolment Ratio is total enrolment in higher education, regardless of age, expressed 
as a percentage to the eligible official population (18-23 years) in a given year. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 64 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
e Though GER of Rajasthan exhibits an increasing trend but it has 
consistently been lower than national GER during 2010-19. Significantly, 
ranking of Rajasthan in terms of GER amongst 36 states/Union Territories 
went down from 20® place in 2010-11 to 23" place in 2018-19. 
e Further, as per AISHE reports 2018-19, Rajasthan is at fourth position in 
terms of number of colleges (3,156 colleges) and at eighth position in terms of 
college density (35 colleges per lakh population) amongst 36 states/UTs in 
2018-19. Data of district-wise distribution of colleges® shows that four districts 
(12.12 per cent) had more than 200 colleges each while 14 districts (42.42 per 
cent) had less than 50 colleges each. Thus, comparatively low GER of Rajasthan 
even though having higher number of colleges and college density could be 
explained by the skewed availability of colleges across different 
regions/districts and low enrolment. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that GER is not calculated by 
Commissionerate, College Education because it is responsible only for general 
education while GER is calculated for all higher education enrolments i.e. 
engineering, medical, polytechnic, general education, etc. Further, GoR is 
dependent on AISHE Reports published annually by MHRD for the GER data. 
The reply should be viewed in light of the fact that for better planning, the State 
Government should obtain disaggregated regional/district-wise GER data. 
4.2.1 GER of disadvantaged groups 
Twelfth FYP envisages that a targeted approach focusing on Scheduled Caste 
(SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) dominated regions and convergence of various 
equity schemes in a composite manner to address the educational needs of the 
disadvantaged sections including the Other Backward Classes (OBCs) would 
be critical to enhance their inclusion in the mainstream of higher education. 
Further, as per paragraph 2.2.2 (a) of Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative 
Expansion in Higher Education’, issued under Twelfth FYP, the aim is complete 
elimination of gap between men and women in access to higher education. 
Category wise GER is the most common metric used to assess the improvement 
in enrolments of vulnerable sections and the effectiveness of measures targeted 
towards such improvement. Audit observed that data with respect to GER of 
OBCs, minorities and disabled categories is neither available in AISHE Reports 
nor maintained by GoR. In the absence of complete data, Audit could only 
analyse data of GER of SC/ST categories and gender parity index for All India 
and Rajasthan for the period 2014-19 as detailed in Table 4.4 below: 
  
64 Number of colleges per lakh population. 
65 10-19 colleges in 2 districts, 20-49 in 12 districts, 50-99 in eight districts, 100-199 in seven 
districts, 200-299 in three districts and 500-999 in one district. 
66 It is calculated as the quotient of GER of females by GER of males enrolled in higher 
education institutions. 
  
65 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
Table 4.4: GER of SC and ST category and Gender Parity Index 
aC GER of SC catego: GER of ST catego Gender Parity Index 
benny AllIndia | Rajasthan | All India 
19.1 14.7 13.7 15.8 0.92 0.82 
19.9 15.2 14.2 15.2 0.92 0.85 
211 16.1 15.4 17.9 0.94 0.89 
21.8 17.2 15.9 18.5 0.97 0.91 
23.0 20.0 17.2 213 1.00 1.00 
Source: As per AISHE reports 
e It can be seen that during 2014-19, though GER of SC category of 
Rajasthan increased but it was still less than All India average in all the 
years. GER of ST category of Rajasthan increased and it was more than All 
India average in all the years indicating a positive trend. 
e Gender parity index of all categories of Rajasthan increased and matched 
the All India average. Scrutiny of AISHE reports further revealed that 
gender parity index of SC and ST categories increased from 0.77 to 0.93 
and 0.76 to 0.92 respectively during 2014-19. 
  
  
Good practice: Increasing trend in overall gender parity index and of SC and 
ST category may be due to State Government’s interventions for easy access, 
such as waiving off of tuition fee for girls’ students, and distributing 
two-wheeler (scooty) to girl students under ‘Meritorious Girls Students Scooty 
Distribution Scheme’, and ‘Devnarain Girls Students Scooty Distribution 
Scheme’.   
4.2.2 Institutional mechanisms to assist disadvantaged groups 
Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in Higher Education’ issued 
under Twelfth FYP, emphasis on monitoring of performance with respect to 
improving equity at the institutional level. Eleventh FYP had initiated 
establishment of SC/ST Cell for students belonging to SC and ST categories and 
Twelfth FYP envisaged constitution of Community Education Development 
Cell®’ (CEDC) for monitoring the intake of students, performance, capacity 
building efforts etc., of students of all deprived social groups including 
minorities mandatorily in all recognized institutions. Scrutiny of information 
revealed the following: 
@) Test checked universities: 
e UoR, Jaipur constituted SC/ST Cell but selected constituent colleges did 
not constitute the SC/ST Cell separately. CEDC Cell was not constituted 
  
67 As per Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in Higher Education’ issued under 
Twelfth FYP, CEDC should monitor the intake of students, performance, capacity building 
efforts, along with intake in faculty and administrative staff from deprived social groups, 
including minorities 
  
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 66 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
both in the University and constituent colleges during 2014-19. Details 
regarding activities conducted by SC/ST Cell were not provided by the 
University. The university stated (January 2021) that action would be taken 
in this regard. 
e JNVU, Jodhpur and constituent college constituted the SC/ST Cell. It 
organized a seminar and two short terms courses each year during 2014-18 
to generate awareness among students of SC/ST/OBC/ Minority 
communities about equal opportunities available and about their 
fundamental rights. However, CEDC was not constituted. 
e GGTU, Banswara did not constitute SC/ST Cell or CEDC in the university. 
(ii) Test checked government colleges: 
SC/ST Cell was constituted in 23 (63.88 per cent) out of 36 test checked 
government colleges but CEDC was not constituted in none of the test checked 
government colleges. 
4.2.3 Gender equity promotional programmes and gender sensitive facilities 
Often considered as the largest disadvantaged section of our society, upliftment 
of women in general and enhancing gender equity in higher education in 
particular has been the foremost concern. An HEI’s initiative in terms of the 
number of gender equity promotional programmes (on sexual harassment and 
violence against women, women’s rights and access to criminal justice, legal 
awareness about women related laws etc.) organized and gender sensitivity 
facilities (safety and security, counselling and common room etc.) provided are 
assessed. In this regard Audit observed that: 
(@) In test checked universities: 
e UoR, Jaipur including selected two constituent colleges did not organize 
gender equity promotional programmes during 2014-19. The constituent 
colleges intimated that being exclusively girls/boys’ colleges they were not 
required to conduct such programmes. The replies of constituent colleges 
are not acceptable as awareness and knowledge raised through gender 
equity and sensitivity programmes like women’s right and access to 
criminal justice are not limited in their scope only to the time spent by 
students in HEIs. These programmes are expected to play an important role 
in sensitizing students, both boys and girls, about gender issues prevalent 
in society and how they could respond to them through their interactions 
with society in general. UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that corrective 
action would be taken in this regard in future and effort would be taken to 
organize gender promotional programmes giving equal importance to both 
boys and girls students. 
  
67 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
e JNVU, Jodhpur and constituent college organized 30 such programmes in 
which 363 teachers and students participated during 2014-19. However, 
GGTU, Banswara did not organize such programmes during 2014-19. 
(ii) Test checked government colleges: In 20 (55.56 per cent) out of 36 test 
checked government colleges on an average 27 gender equity promotional 
programmes®* were organized in which on an average 3,312 students 
participated during 2014-19. 
  
Good practice: Govind Guru Government College, Banswara organized gender 
equity promotional programmes for four consecutive years during 2015-19.       
rR} Affordabili 
Affordability is an important enabler for equitable and easy access to higher 
education. Regulated fee structure, comparable fees in government and private 
colleges, attractive student loan schemes and ample opportunities for availing 
scholarships/free-ships are some of the factors that contribute towards making 
higher education affordable. Scrutiny of information and replies received from 
GoR as well as test checked HEIs revealed the following: 
4.3.1 Uniformity in fee structure 
As per UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by University) Regulation, 2009 fees to be 
charged from each student should be approved by the affiliating university. 
Further, UoR in para 33 of University statute reiterated that in every college the 
fees charged shall be approved by the University. 
@ Audit observed that in spite of specific provision given in UGC 
Regulation 2009, the three test checked universities did not approve fees 
structure for its affiliated private colleges. Fees structure was decided by all the 
30 test checked private affiliated colleges on their own. 
Also, GoR did not regulate fee structure for private colleges as well as 
government colleges. On being asked about regulation of fees, Commissioner, 
College Education informed (November 2020) that finalisation of norms for 
deciding uniform fee structure for government colleges was under process as of 
October 2020. 
(i) Scrutiny of course-wise annual fee charged by 66 test checked affiliated 
government colleges and private colleges during 2018-19 revealed that 36 
  
68 Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, Self-defence skill programme, Anaemia and malnutrition 
programme, Workshop on sexual Assaults, Precious daughter Programme and Workshop of 
fashion designing. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 68 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
government colleges and 30 private colleges charged annual fees ranging from 
& 649 to = 5,000 and < 5,000 to = 45,000 respectively during 2018-19. Thus, in 
the absence of mechanism for monitoring the fee structure, private colleges 
charged significantly higher fees as compared to government colleges. 
As already discussed in Paragraph 4.1.1.2, since 89 blocks did not have 
government colleges, students would have been compelled to take admission in 
expensive private colleges or travelled long distances. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that determination of uniform fee 
structure for private colleges is a policy decision and the State Government has 
not constituted a regulatory body for this purpose. UoR, Jaipur stated 
(January 2021) that as per Hand Book of university, private colleges should not 
charge more than 50 per cent of fee being charged by government colleges from 
students and prior permission of the university was required if more fees was to 
be charged. The fact remains that in spite of explicit provision mentioned in the 
hand book, UoR, Jaipur did not take action against colleges that did not follow 
the prescribed rules. 
4.3.2 Scholarship/freeship 
Scholarship/freeship”’ schemes, as a facilitative mechanism, have been widely 
used by governments not only to encourage meritorious students but also to 
enhance equity in access to higher education. Report on ‘Inclusive and 
Qualitative Expansion in Higher Education’ issued under Twelfth FYP advised 
that for enhancing participation of SC/ST/Minorities, scholarships and 
fellowships for students of SC/ST/OBC/Minorities may be enhanced at all 
levels. 
4.3.2.1 At state level 
Tuition fees were not charged for girl students studying in government 
universities and colleges in Rajasthan during 2014-19. Further, Director, 
College Education had instructed (June 2011) the government colleges that 
admission fee would not be charged from disabled students for admission in 
government colleges from Academic Year 2011-12. 
  
69 Government colleges fee charged for BA: %649 to 22,524, B Com: %649 to 22,524, BSc: 
2649 to%2,524, MA: 2748 to 75,000, M Com: %748 to 22,245 and MSc: 2779 to 71,156: 
Private colleges charged fees for BA: 5,000 to %40,000, B Com: 26,000 to 40,000, BSc: 
10,000 to 745,000, MA: 27,500 to $20,500, M Com: 26,000 to $20,500 and MSc: 220,000 
to 743,000. Fees charged by government and private from all type of students have been 
considered. 
70 Scholarship means a sum of money or other aid granted to a student, because of merit, need, 
etc., to pursue his or her studies. Free ship means total education fee is paid by the sponsoring 
or aiding authority for the period they have approved. 
  
69 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
Audit observed that GoR gave scholarship amounting to %3,392.79 crore’! to 
33.78 lakh students through Higher Education department, Social Justice & 
Empowerment department (SJED), Tribal Area Development (TAD) and 
Department of Minority Affairs during 2014-19. Audit further noticed that for 
availing scholarship, students applied online to concerned sanctioning 
department and the latter transferred the scholarship amount directly in bank 
account of the applicant. 
When enquired, number of students eligible for each type of scholarship was 
not provided by any of the departments. Thus, audit was not able to ascertain 
the extent to which eligible students were getting benefitted by scholarship at 
state level and the positive effect such schemes had, if any, in increasing access 
and equity in higher education. 
4.3.2.2 At institution level 
Scrutiny of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
(@) Universities and constituent colleges: 
e Onan average of 27.39 per cent students benefited from scholarships and 
on average of 0.25 per cent students benefited from freeships provided by 
the government in UoR, Jaipur and two constituent colleges during 2014- 
19, 
e JNVU, Jodhpur and constituent college did not maintain data regarding 
number of students benefited through scholarships and freeships given by 
government. 
e An average of 78.92 per cent students benefited through scholarships in 
GGTU, Banswara during 2014-19. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: 
e An average of 40.05 per cent (1,35,101 out of 3,37,330) students benefited 
through scholarships and on an average 32.99 per cent (1,11,297 out of 
3,37,330) students benefited through freeships by government in 36 test 
checked government colleges during 2014-19. 
e On an average 15.56 per cent (8,960 out of 57,598) students benefited 
through scholarships while no freeships were given in 30 test checked 
private colleges during 2014-19. 
  
71 Higher Education department: ¥254.68 crore to 4.41 lakh students, SJED: $3,034.83 crore 
to 27.19 lakh, TAD: ~90.68 crore to 1.98 lakh and Minorities department: ¢12.60 crore to 
0.23 lakh students. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 70 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
(iii) Performance evaluation based on indicators: 
To assess performance of test checked universities vis-a-vis number of 
students benefited through scholarships and freeships, an indicator, 
Average percentage of students benefited by scholarships and freeship by 
the Government during 2014-19 (Sl. No. 25 of Appendix 1.1), was 
evaluated. NAAC awarded maximum marks to an institution where on 
average 40 per cent and above students benefited through scholarships and 
freeships in the institution. Hence, as par NAAC benchmarks: 
e GGTU, Banswara was eligible for award of maximum marks (four). 
e Due to non-availability of complete information for UoR, Jaipur, audit 
could not comment on their performance, however, based on 
information received from selected 11 departments, UoR, Jaipur was 
eligible for award of two marks for this indicator. 
e Due to non-maintenance of such data in JNVU, Jodhpur audit could not 
comment on their performance for this indicator at any level. 
Chart 4.3: Performance of selected universities in respect of chosen outcome 
indicators 
7 UoR, Jaipur 
EE (GGTU, Banswara 
  
UR I Troe rae Infrastructure 
Buildings, classrooms, laboratories, and equipment are crucial elements of 
learning environment in universities and colleges. High-quality infrastructure 
facilitates better instruction, improves access and retention rates of students 
which in turn improve student outcomes, among other benefits. 
4.4.1 Availability of buildings, laboratory, library etc. 
Norms that specify the minimum requirement of buildings, laboratory, library 
etc., for a university were neither made available by the test checked universities 
nor found in the records, so audit evaluated availability of such infrastructure 
on the basis of norms fixed for affiliated colleges under the UGC (Affiliation of 
Colleges by University) Regulation, 2009. The Regulation specifies 
requirements of buildings (lecture/seminar rooms with a minimum 15 square 
feet (sqft) per student, library, and laboratories with 20 sqft per student), library 
with 1000 number of books, fully equipped laboratory etc. 
  
71 ~~ Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
4.4.1.1 Test checked universities 
@) UoR, Jaipur. Sufficient administrative and academic buildings, 
laboratories and number of books in central library were available and were 
being maintained in good condition in the university during 2014-19. 
(ii) JNVU, Jodhpur: Sufficient administrative and academic buildings, 
laboratories, central library were available in the university during 2014-19. 
However, 207 out 33 posts sanctioned for library were vacant. In spite of 
availability of €26.43 lakh meant exclusively for purchase of books, the 
university did not purchase 5069 books as required by departments. Library 
was not fully automated and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) of 
books was incomplete and non-functional due to lack of budget. Physical 
verification of the books was not done during 2014-19. Roofs/ceiling and 
walls of library room/hall were badly damaged due to seepage of water in 
rainy season due to which thousands of books were destroyed. JNVU, 
Jodhpur accepted the facts. 
(iii) GGTU, Banswara: The University is operated from rented buildings. 
Construction of its own building which was scheduled to be completed in 
February 2019 is still in progress. Due to this, the university was not 
able to start new courses, centralized evaluation system and other academic 
works. Library of the university was running in a room of Govind Guru 
Government College one kilometer away from the university. 
4.4.1.2 Affiliated colleges 
The position of availability of college building, library, laboratory, furniture 
etc., in 66 test checked colleges of the three selected universities are given in 
Charts 4.4 and 4.5. 
Chart 4.4; Availability of physical infrastructure in test checked 30 Private colleges 
  
mAvailable m Not Available 
  
6 ao 
2 
2 Oo 
Gy 
o 
zZ, 
A B Cc D E A B IS D E A B Cc D E 
TJ __ a So o>? 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
Facilities: A - Suficient buildings, B - Sufficient labs, C - Library, D - Furniture, 
E- Ramps     
  
72 One post of Librarian, three post of Assistant Librarian, three posts of Senior Technician 
Assistant, Two posts of Junior Technician Assistant etc. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 72 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
Chart 4.5: Availability of physical infrastructure in test checked 36 Government 
colleges   
  No. of Colleges 
Available Not Available 
AB CC D_&£ Cc D £,A BC 1LA B I JL D Ey 
T T 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, Banswara 
Facilities: A - Suficient buildings, B - Sufficient labs, C - Library, 
D - Furniture, E- Ramps 
    
It can be seen that: 
Out of 30 test checked private colleges, only 18 (60 per cent) had sufficient 
administrative and academic building, 21 (70 per cent) had sufficient 
laboratory facilities, 17 (57 per cent) had sufficient libraries, 29 (97 per cent) 
had sufficient furniture. Though ramps were available in 20 test checked 
private colleges, other disabled friendly facilities” as prescribed in the 
Regulations 2009 and Persons with Disability Act 1995 were not available 
in the 30 test checked private colleges. Further, four” colleges affiliated with 
JNVU, Jodhpur were being run with schools/ITI college. 
Similarly, out of 36 test checked government colleges, only 18 (50 per cent) 
had sufficient administrative/academic buildings, 19 (53 per cent) had 
sufficient laboratory facilities, 29 (81 per cent) had sufficient library 
facilities, 27 (75 per cent) had sufficient furniture. Though ramps were 
available in 31 test checked government colleges, other disabled friendly 
facilities’> as prescribed in the Regulations 2009 and Persons with Disability 
Act 1995 were not available in all 36 test checked government colleges. 
Further, three colleges’”° were being run in school buildings. 
  
73 
74 
75 
76 
Section 46 of Person with Disability Act 1995 read with NAAC manual disabled friendly 
facilities include lifts, braille software, restrooms, scribes for examinations, special skill 
development for disabled students. 
MR Memorial College, Dhorimnna; Bhaskar College, Balotra; Hill Grove Col’s College 
Sumerpur and Rooparam Sevda College, Keru. 
Section 46 of Person with Disability Act 1995 read with NAAC manual disabled friendly 
facilities include lifts, braille software, restrooms, scribes for examinations, special skill 
development for disabled students. 
Government College, Marwar Junction, Government College, Sumerpur and Government 
College, Simalwara. 
  
73 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
Further, during physical inspection of test checked government colleges 
followings deficiencies were also noticed: 
e Government College, Jaipur 
Only 345 chairs in 8 classrooms were available to accommodate1500 students. 
Neither separate laboratory rooms nor equipment were installed in the 
makeshift laboratories of Chemistry, Zoology, Botany and Geography in the 
college. Five classrooms had been converted to laboratory-cum-classroom. 
  
Photo 1: Physics Laboratory being operated in a Photo 2: Small size of classroom 
classroom 
e Govind Guru Government College, Banswara 
Classes were being conducted in open gallery due to non-availability of 
sufficient number of classrooms. Regular librarian was not posted in the 
library since 2009. Roof and ceiling of library building were badly damaged 
due to seepage of water and storage equipment, books were protected from 
rain water by plastic sheets. Many valuable old books & literature were found 
damaged/torn due to storage in bad condition. 
    Photo 3: Sitting arrangement in gallery. Photo 4: Condition of library. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 74 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
e Government College, Simalwara 
GoR opened the college for 
BSc programme in 2017-18 
in which 84 to 174 students 
were enrolled during 2017- 
19. The government college 
was operated in only two 
rooms of a Government 
Girls school, out of which 
one room was being used 
for office purpose and other 
for storage of furniture. 
Classes were conducted in 
the gallery having a width of 
seven feet but during physical verification on 19 and 20 November 2019 
audit found that classes were not being conducted in the college. 
   Phato 5: classroom used in Photo 6: conducting of classes in 
Storage purpose. open gallery 
Separate laboratories and library 
rooms were not available and all lab 
equipment and books were locked up. 
Teachers were not posted for Botany, 
Zoology, Hindi and English subjects 
since establishment of college (2017- 
18) till November 2019. 12 out of 13 
non-teaching staff posts were vacant 
since 2017-18. 
Thus, even after completion of two 
academic years GoR could not 
provide minimum basic infrastructure facilities like academic and 
administrative buildings, laboratory, library, etc., and teaching and non- 
teaching staff in the college. 
  
Photo 7: laboratory Equipment stored in almirah. 
¢ Government College, Banswara 
Sufficient classrooms were not available as there were only 32 classrooms 
each having an area of 750 sqft to accommodate 7000 students. Some parts 
of academic building and classrooms were in bad condition (broken 
windows, damaged roof) with insufficient furniture. 
e Government College, Sumerpur 
GoR started the college in 2015-16 for UG programmes. The college was 
being run in a school building. Construction of its own building which was 
scheduled to be completed in July 2019 was under progress. There was no 
library available in the college and books were stored in four almirahs in the 
staff room and post of librarian was vacant since inception of the college. 
  
75 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
In spite of two batches of BSc and BA with Geography having already 
graduated, laboratories were not available in the college. On being pointed 
out, the Principal of the college intimated that temporary arrangements were 
being made in the nearby schools/Colleges. Post of teachers for Sanskrit, 
History and English subjects and 13 out of 16 non-teaching posts were lying 
vacant since inception of the college. 
e Student survey result: In response to student satisfaction survey’s question, 
“Are you satisfied with library, laboratory, toilet and cleanliness available 
in your campus?” approximately 25 per cent of the students expressed 
dissatisfaction/partial satisfaction with library, laboratory, toilets facilities 
and cleanliness available in the HEIs. 
4.4.2 Funding for infrastructure 
Universities receive funds from Central Government, State Government and 
other agencies for creation of infrastructure. The position of budget allocation 
for infrastructure and expenditure excluding salary in three test checked 
universities during 2014-19 is given in Table 4.5 below. 
Table 4.5: Budget allocation on infrastructure and total expenditure excluding salary 
(% in crore) 
Name of Expenditure Budget Dersies 
DTA Ag excluding salary allocation for incurred on 
infrastructure infrastructure 
@ (as % of (1)) (3) 
(2) 
      
         
UoR, Jaipur PES 155.00 7.15 (4.61%) 7.22 
2015-16 162.94 6.85 (4.20%) 6.21 
2016-17 174.89 11.80 (6.75%) 12.74 
2017-18 179.80 17.26 (9.60%) 17.58 
2018-19 257.30 5.28 (2.05%) 4.01 
Average 7          
  
        
   
     
       
   
  
iain 2014-15 12.70 0.78 (6.14%) 1.63 
SE 2015-16 10.49 4.02 (38.32%) 3.91 
2016-17 28.08 3.60 (12.82%) 4.03 
2017-18 18.62 7.08 (38.02%) 4.87 
2018-19 22.90 6.78 (29.61%) 6.12 
Nooo 24.98% | | 
ere 2014-15 0.00 0.00 (0.00%) 0.00 
Banswara = (PES 0.00 0.00 (0.00%) 0.00 
2016-17 0.00 0.00 (0.00%) 0.00 
2017-18 1.58 1.58 (100%) 1.58 
2018-19 3.55 3.55 (100%) 3.55 
    
Average es Source: Information provided by concerned universities. 
It can be seen that average budget allocation on infrastructure with respect to 
expenditure excluding salary was on average 5.44 per cent, 24.98 per cent and 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 76 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
40 per cent during 2014-19 in UoR Jaipur, JNVU Jodhpur and GGTU, 
Banswara respectively. 
() Performance evaluation based on indicators: NAAC for the indicator, 
Average percentage of budget allocation, excluding salary for 
infrastructure augmentation during 2014-19, awarded maximum score to 
institutions where on average 20 per cent and above budget allocation 
excluding salary was for infrastructure augmentation during last five years. 
Thus, as per NAAC benchmark, JNVU Jodhpur and GGTU Banswara were 
eligible for award of maximum marks (four) while UoR Jaipur was eligible 
for only one mark. 
Chart 4.6: Performance of selected universities in respect of chosen outcome 
indicator 
| UoR, Jaipur 
LY INVU, Jodhpur 
(EE GGTU, Banswara 
  
4.4.3 Equipment purchased for research purposes lying idle in UoR, 
Jaipur 
Scrutiny of records of UoR, Jaipur revealed that seven equipment purchased by 
the university for research purposes under RUSA/UGC/DST schemes at a cost 
of = 9.40 crore during 2013 to November 2018 were not utilized since their 
installation or for a long time as of December 2019. 
Further, five out of seven equipment were not utilized in the Chemistry 
department since installation. Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) was 
not utilized since May 2015 and Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) equipment 
was not utilized since purchase in July 2016. 
On being pointed out, the concerned department gave contradictory replies to 
Audit. In September 2019, they intimated that equipment for Chemistry 
department were purchased by General Administration Section of the university 
without its requirement. However, in December 2020, the department intimated 
Audit that proposals for purchase of the equipment were sent as they were basic 
requirement for PhD students. Audit found that TEM was not working during 
last several years as funds for annual maintenance charges were not provided. 
Director, Center for Conversing Technologies (CCT) intimated that MBE could 
not be operated as its running cost was = one crore per annum and CCT was not 
in the position to incur such huge expenditure. 
Audit observed that very important equipment and machinery were not utilised 
for the intended purposes. When enquired, information regarding number of 
  
71 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-IV Access and Equity in Higher Education   
researchers and research projects which suffered due to this was not provided to 
Audit. Thus, due to failure of Chemistry Department in assessing proper 
requirement and running cost of research equipment, the procured equipment 
could not be utilised for the intended purpose. 
UoR, Jaipur stated (January 2021) that due to various reasons equipment could 
not be utilised at full capacity and now after rectification of related problems 
these equipment would be utilised as per need. 
  
  
Summing Up and recommendation 
GoR did not undertake geographical mapping to identify habitations that lacked higher 
education facilities. The distribution of general degree colleges both regionally as well 
as among rural and urban areas of the state was not symmetrical. 
Though GER of Rajasthan increased during 2010-19 but it has consistently been lower 
than national GER. Further, during 2018-19 Rajasthan had a better rank in terms of 
number of colleges (fourth) and college density (eighth), but was placed much lower in 
terms of GER (23 rank) which could be explained by the skewed availability of 
colleges across different districts of Rajasthan. The GERs of SC and ST categories 
improved during 2014-19 but GER of SC category was still less than the national 
average. Further, GoR did not maintain data of GER of OBCs, minorities and disabled 
categories. 
In spite of provision in UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by University) Regulation 2009, 
the universities did not regulate fee structure for private affiliated colleges. Adequate 
basic infrastructure like building, laboratory and furniture was not available in 
majority of the test checked government and private colleges and disabled friendly 
facilities except ramp were not available in all the 66 test checked colleges. 
Recommendation: 
The State Government may: 
1. provide access to higher education in rural areas and undertake the planned 
efforts to enhance GER across all categories; 
2. regulate fee structure of private colleges to make higher education affordable. 
Recognising the direct relationship between availability of quality infrastructure 
and higher education outcomes, the State Government should take urgent 
measures to provide prescribed high-quality basic infrastructure in government 
colleges for facilitating effective teaching, improving access and increasing 
retention rates of students. 
4. The Universities should ensure availability of basic infrastructure in affiliated 
private colleges and may regulate the fee structure of these colleges. 
5. The Universities should prepare proper plans for infrastructure augmentation 
including development of e-library and procurement and utilization of advanced 
scientific equipment.   
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 78 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter - V 
OOo mie NiCr Titi 
Management 
 

INPUTS 
Chapter — V 
  
Governance and Management 
Twelfth FYP governance reforms were critical to achieve the outcomes of 
expansion, equity and excellence in higher education and to enable institutions 
to have the autonomy to develop distinctive strengths, while being held 
accountable for ensuring quality. It also states that autonomy in the areas of 
finance, organisational structure, operations and staffing is important, but 
should be consistent with internal systems of evaluation and accountability. 
In order to assess the status of governance and management in the selected HEIs 
through various elements and mechanisms of governance and the extent to 
which they have been effectively implemented, the following audit objective 
was framed. 
Audit objective 4: Whether Governance and Management of Higher Education 
system was adequate and effective. 
Various factors contribute to ensure that governance and management of an HEI 
is envisioned and carried out in a manner that effectively oversees the efforts 
towards achievement of higher education outcomes. The relationship between 
the aims of effective governance and management in HEIs and the factors, 
mechanisms and systems contributing towards achieving these aims can be 
understood through the following representation: 
1. Strong Governing HM 1.Affiliation as per ® 1. Good 
Bodies 5 norms Gl Governance 
2. Existence of Quality A, 2. University z 
Assurance Mechanism 5 deburdening ©) 2. Accreditation 
3. Following the Oo 3. Granting of f= and Ranking of 
affiliation norms autonomy to well = HEIs 
4. Policies for P erforming colleges ° 
University deburdening 4. Quality assurance 3. Effective 
J. Assessment for Financial 
granting autonomy to Management 
colleges 
6. Adequate Funding 
Effectiveness of governance and management structures of an HEI is reflected 
in the results of its evaluation through accreditation, ranking methodologies and 
in the prudence of financial management. 
  
79 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
nye | Governance 
Effective governance structures and process are essential to ensure 
accountability and transparency in an HEI. Leadership and Governance deeply 
influence all aspects of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). Though good 
governance and management in themselves are not the outcomes that are to be 
achieved in higher education, but they are crucial in determining the 
effectiveness of all the efforts aimed at achieving such outcomes. The existence 
and functioning of governance structures at state level and at selected 
institutional level have been discussed in this section. 
5.1.1 State level Governance 
Institutional mechanisms for governance at the state level include setting up of 
State Higher Education Council and State Level Quality Assurance Cell. 
5.1.1.1 State Higher Education Council 
Twelfth FYP document states that it would be desirable for each State to set up 
a State Higher Education Council (SHEC) to lead the planned and coordinated 
development of higher education in State. Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha 
Abhiyan (RUSA) also requires formation of SHEC for planned and coordinated 
development of higher education in State, sharing of resources between 
universities, undertaking governance reforms at institutional level etc. 
It was observed that GoR constituted (8 July 2015) SHEC under the 
chairmanship of Minister of Higher & Technical Education comprising of 25 
members. For development of higher education in state, SHEC prepared a State 
Higher Education Plan (2017-22) in July 2016 and updated it in May 2018. 
SHEC was required to meet at least once in every quarter, however, only three”’ 
meetings were held during July 2015 to March 2019. 
5.1.1.2 State Level Quality Assurance Cell 
As per UGC guidelines issued for Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC), 
State Level Quality Assurance Cell (SLQAC) shall monitor the functioning of 
IQACs in the colleges coming under their jurisdiction. 
NAAC Manual on ‘Quality Assurance Activities of State Quality Assurance 
Cells’ also suggests constitution of a SLQAC in a state with the objective to 
work towards quality improvement of colleges in the state, to draw up 
state-level action plan in consultation with NAAC and to act as nodal agency 
between the respective state HEIs and NAAC. 
State Project Director, RUSA constituted SLQAC in February 2016 which was 
reconstituted in May 2018. In this regard audit noticed that: 
  
77 11 July 2016, 20 February 2017 and 15 May 2018. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 80 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
e SLQAC’s scope of work was only to facilitate accreditation process for 
undertaking accreditation of HEIs in the State. However, as per NAAC 
manual, apart from facilitating accreditation process, SLQAC was also 
supposed to work towards quality improvement of colleges in the state. Thus, 
the objectives set for SLQAC by GoR were limited as compared to the role 
envisaged by NAAC. 
e For facilitating accreditation process, SLQAC sent 44 in-house teams to 
colleges for mock drill before the actual visit of NAAC peer team. Only 68 
(41.46 per cent) out of 164 eligible”® government colleges (established 
before academic year 2013-14) got accreditation as of January 2020. 
e Further, the SLQAC neither maintained data regarding number of colleges 
which had constituted Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) nor 
developed a mechanism to monitor constitution of IQAC in colleges. 
The State Government accepted the facts and stated (August 2020) that only 14 
government colleges were accredited at the time of formation of SLQAC and at 
present 70 (42.68 per cent) government colleges have valid accreditation. 
Continuous efforts are being made to improve the status of NAAC accreditation 
in the state by organizing division-wise video conferences of all government 
colleges to make them aware of the necessity and benefits of accreditation by 
NAAC. For smooth functioning of SLQAC and for expediting the process of 
accreditation, Divisional Level Quality Assurance Cells” have been established 
(June 2020) in all seven divisions. 
However, the fact remains that the scope of work for the SLQAC was limited 
and it could not contribute significantly towards the overall improvement in 
quality of higher education. 
5.1.2 Institutional level Governance 
Governance at the universities level is carried out through an elaborate 
mechanism consisting Governing Bodies (Senate, Syndicate, etc.,), quality 
assurance mechanism, affiliation process, etc. 
5.1.2.1 Governing Bodies 
Structure of Governing Bodies in test checked universities is depicted in Chart 
5.1 below: 
  
78 HEIs having record of at least two batches of students graduated or been in existence for 
six years, whichever is earlier, are eligible for apply to NAAC for accreditation. 
79 It comprises eight to nine Principals of Government Colleges nominated as Coordinators 
of IQAC and one representative each from affiliating universities. It will meet once in a 
month. Its main functions include preparation of information database related to NAAC 
for all colleges of respective division, conducting awareness programmes and training 
workshops regarding revised accreditation framework of NAAC, etc. 
  
81 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
Chart 5.1: Structure of Governing Bodies 
Natit Apex Body of the university for making/amending/ repealing Statue, 
considering and cancelling ordinances, etc. 
Syndicate/Board of Management : 
Executive Body of the university responsible for make, amend and cance 
ordinances, to hold control and administer property and funds of the University, etc 
FCO O el Meet UCM iC at Mm Lily aa ey MeO) lace Deo () yiitaits 
CoCS Council 
Responsible Recommends Makes rules for [| Intermediary between 
for the courses of approval, UGC and Colleges 
maintenance of study and recognition and for improving 
standards of curriculum in affiliation of infrastructure 
teaching and their Institutions etc. 
examination 
etc. 
facilities, benefit of 
respective the faculty members 
subjects etc. and students etc. 
  
Scrutiny of records related to functioning of governing bodies in each of the 
selected universities revealed that (details given in Appendix 5.1): 
() UoR, Jaipur 
e Annual meetings of Senate were not held since 2010. Only five special 
meetings of Senate for ‘passing grace’ to the students were held during 
2011 to 2018. In spite of University of Rajasthan Act empowering Senate 
to consider and to cancel ordinances passed by the university, it was 
observed during test check that there were 10 instances of amendments 
made in ordinances by Syndicate which were not placed before the Senate. 
Hence, ordinances were implemented without consideration of Senate. 
Audited accounts of the university were not placed before Senate. The 
University while accepting the facts stated (December 2019) that since 
annual meetings of senate were not organized regularly, the ordinances 
could not be placed before Senate. 
e Representation of students was not ensured in Senate and Syndicate. 
Director of Education did not participate in any meeting of Board of 
Inspection (Bol). 
e Further, the proposals of colleges for grants were not being sent to UGC 
through College Development Council (CDC) which indicated that CDC 
was not functioning fully as per its scope of work. This needs to be seen in 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 82 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
light of the fact that UGC grants to colleges decreased drastically from 
<2.64 crore in 2014-15 to nil in 2018-19. 
UoR, Jaipur while accepting the facts stated (January 2021) that efforts would 
be made to hold annual meetings of senate in future. 
(ii) JNVU, Jodhpur 
e There was shortfall of 73.33 per cent in holding of Senate meetings and 
78.33 per cent in holding of Academic Council meetings during 2014-19. 
Representation of students was not ensured in the Syndicate. 
e Post of full time Director of CDC was abolished in October 2017 due to 
paucity of funds and work of Director was being looked after by an 
Assistant Registrar. Advisory committee for CDC was not constituted. 
JNVU Jodhpur accepted (June 2020) the facts. 
(iii) GGTU, Banswara 
e The Senate, BoI and CDC were not constituted in the university since its 
establishment in 2012 till December 2019. Due to non- constitution of Bol, 
the Vice-Chancellor of the university made adhoc arrangement for 
inspection of affiliated colleges by nominating different members from 
time to time. 
e Board of Management (BoM) is the highest Executive Body in the 
university. There was shortfall of 70 per cent in holding BoM meetings 
during 2014-19. As already discussed earlier in Paragraph 2.1.2.4, GGTU, 
Banswara introduced one new course in Science stream {MSc. 
(Mathematics)} and discontinued all three courses of Arts stream since 
2018-19 without approval of the BoM. 
e Board of Study was not functioning as desired as none of the syllabus was 
revised in the university since its constitution in 2017-18. 
GGTU, Banswara accepted the facts. 
(iv) Student survey result: In response to student satisfaction survey’s question, 
“Are you satisfied with the institutional governance?” approximately 26 
per cent of the students expressed dissatisfaction/partial dissatisfaction with 
the system. 
5.1.2.2 Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
In order to internalize quality inputs all universities, government colleges and 
government-aided colleges are to be strengthened with full-fledged Internal 
Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) as part of UGC-supported scheme®. As per 
  
80 As per Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in Higher Education’ issued 
under Twelfth FYP 
  
83 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
NAAC Manual, IQAC of every accredited HEI shall submit an Annual Quality 
Assurance Report (AQAR) in the prescribed format to NAAC. 
Scrutiny of information provided by the selected HEIs revealed the following: 
(i) Test checked universities: 
e IQAC in UoR, Jaipur did not review university’s teaching learning process, 
methodology of operations and learning outcomes, didn’t take feedback 
from parents and other stakeholders on quality related institutional 
processes and did not compile information essential for NAAC 
accreditation. It did not submit AQAR to NAAC since 2016. UoR, Jaipur 
stated (January 2021) that action would be taken to make IQAC functional 
in future. 
e Though IQAC was constituted in JNVU, Jodhpur, its functionality could 
not be ascertained as information regarding its meetings/activities were not 
found in records since 2014-15. 
e GGTU, Banswara did not constitute IQAC in the university. 
(ii) Test checked government and private colleges: 
Though IQAC was constituted in 24 (66.67 per cent) out of 36 test checked 
government colleges and 5 (16.67 per cent) out of 30 test checked private 
colleges, details of meetings held and work done by IQAC were not made 
available. 
5.1.2.3 College Affiliation 
UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by University) Regulation, 2009 defines 
affiliation of a college as its recognition by, association with and admission to, 
the privileges of the affiliating university. At the time of inspection by affiliating 
university, the college concerned (seeking affiliation) either run by State 
Government or private body, shall satisfy pre-defined requirements*! of college 
buildings as specified in the Regulation. 
In this regard Audit observed the following: 
(i) Non-adherence to affiliation procedure by universities 
e In UoR, Jaipur, Audit scrutinized case files of nine test checked private 
colleges and found that in four colleges inspections were carried out with a 
delay ranging from two to seven months beyond the stipulated three months 
from date of application for affiliation; affiliation to two colleges was 
  
81  Lecture/seminar rooms and library with a minimum 15 sqft per student and laboratories 
with 20 sqft per student), library with 1000 number of books, fully equipped laboratories 
etc., 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 84 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
granted even after the shortcomings noticed in earlier inspections were 
persisting. Two colleges were granted conditional affiliation before as well 
as after academic session though there was no provision of conditional 
affiliation in the rules; inspection reports of seven colleges were neither 
filled properly nor supported by relevant evidences and information of 
teaching staff of three colleges was incorrect. 
UoR, Jaipur while accepting the facts stated (January 2021) that inspection 
of some colleges was delayed due to certain administrative and procedural 
reasons and affiliations were granted subject to rectification of deficiencies 
noticed. Action would be taken to grant affiliation as per the regulation 
2009 in future. 
In JNVU, Jodhpur, inspection teams were not submitting the required 
information in the prescribed format because of which actual position could 
not be made available to Syndicate. This was also confirmed during 
physical inspection, which revealed the differences in availability of 
infrastructure as compared to what was reported by the inspection teams. 
The university granted affiliation to certain colleges by imposing penalty 
where shortcoming/deficiencies were noticed in the college during 
inspection. However, justification for imposing penalty and its extent was 
not available on the records. JNVU, Jodhpur accepted the facts. 
In GGTU, Banswara, the university started granting affiliation to new 
government and private colleges since 2017-18. The university did not 
constitute the committee for inspection of affiliating colleges but the Vice- 
Chancellor made adhoc arrangement for inspection of affiliated colleges. 
A Managing Body and CDC were required to be constituted in the 
University for Grant of affiliation but these were not constituted. GGTU, 
Banswara accepted the facts. 
Delay in issue of Affiliation order by affiliating Universities 
As per paragraph 3.4.10 of UGC (Affiliation of Colleges by University) 
Regulation, 2009, neither any student should be admitted to any college nor 
should any programme be started in any college in anticipation of grant of 
affiliation or in excess of the number of seats sanctioned per programme of 
study by the university. 
Information related to colleges getting new/additional/extension of affiliation 
and delays in issuance of affiliation orders in UoR, Jaipur and GGTU, Banswara 
are given in Table 5.1 below. 
  
85 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
Table 5.1: Details of delay in grant of affiliation of colleges 
Acade No. of No. of OE aT Period of issuance of affiliation 
mic colleges colleges grant of order 
Year getting new/ granted affiliation 
    (July to | additional | extension of | (in months) 
June) Eva ERs affiliation 
UoR, Jaipur 
  
| 2014-15 | 49 120 1to11 July 2014 to May 2015 
neg 87 324 2to30 August 2015 to December 2017 
61 402 1to17 July 2016 to November 2017 
71 365 3to16 September 2017 to October 2018 
95 277 6to18 December 2018 to December 
2019 
369 1,488 
GGTU, Banswara 
12 - 4to5 October 2017 to November 
2017 
03 - 5to8 November 2018 to March 2019 
It can be seen that: 
UoR, Jaipur granted fresh affiliation and extension of affiliation with a 
delay of one to 30 months after the start of academic year (July every year) 
during 2014-19. Moreover, for the Academic Year 2015-16, affiliation was 
granted as late as December 2017. UoR, Jaipur while accepting the facts 
stated (January 2021) that affiliation orders were issued with delay due to 
certain administrative and procedural reasons. Action would be taken to 
complete work in this regard as per the regulation 2009 in future. 
e GGTU, Banswara granted fresh affiliation during academic years 2017- 
19 with a delay of four to eight months after start of academic year. 
Moreover, for the academic year 2018-19, affiliation was granted as late 
as of March 2019. GGTU, Banswara accepted the facts. 
e Further, INVU, Jodhpur did not maintain year wise consolidated position 
of colleges to whom affiliation/re-affiliation was granted. However, 
during test check of 21 colleges, it was seen that annual temporary 
affiliation was granted to four to eight government colleges and five to 
seven private colleges during 2014-19 with a delay ranging from four to 
273 days beyond prescribed date of 31 July of every year. INVU, Jodhpur 
accepted the facts. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 86 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
Case study regarding violation of affiliation norms in Impulse College, Lalsot 
(Dausa) 
The college has been operating since 2014-15 and UoR, Jaipur extended its 
intake capacity from 60 to 120 seats of BSc programme since academic year 
2017-18. During physical inspection of the college (January 2020) by Audit, it 
was observed that though 119 students were enrolled, its building was being 
used as a coaching center in the morning session while college classes were 
being held in the afternoon session and even name of the college was not 
displayed on the building. Separate rooms for Physics, Zoology and Botany 
laboratories were not available and these were being operated from classrooms. 
No apparatus was installed in Zoology and Botany lab-cum classrooms. No 
library was available. Sufficient furniture was not available in the college and 
the students sat on the floor during classes. 
UoR, Jaipur stated January 2021) that temporary affiliation was granted to the 
college on the report of inspection party. Action was being taken to seek 
clarification from the college and affiliation would be granted in future only on 
fulfilment of the prescribed standards. This indicates that the college was not 
adhering to the affiliation norms and UoR, Jaipur also did not ensure availability 
of basic infrastructure in the college while granting annual affiliation after 2017- 
18, 
Photographs of the College 
    
    View of class of classroom without furniture View of laboratory cum classroom 
5.2 Autonomy of Higher Education Institutions 
Providing State universities and affiliated colleges greater autonomy and 
operational flexibility through enhanced resource support, based on the 
commitment of the state governments has been given priority during Twelfth 
FYP. Further, RUSA envisages greater autonomy of institutions in terms of 
  
87 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
decision making with full liberty to plan specific interventions depending on 
special needs and requirements. 
As per UGC guidelines, a college intending to become autonomous shall apply 
to Parent/Affiliating University which may forward the same to UGC. If the 
College is found eligible as per the guidelines, the UGC shall examine the 
proposal for conferment/extension of autonomous status with the help of an 
Expert Committee constituted by the Chairman of the UGC consisting of three 
expert members out of which one shall be the Chairperson, nominees from the 
Parent/Affiliating University and the State Government. 
It was observed that though the concept of autonomous colleges was introduced 
by the Eighth FYP whose target at that time was to grant autonomous college 
status to 10 per cent of the total colleges, however, even after completion of the 
Twelfth FYP, in Rajasthan, only four (0.23 per cent) out of 1,761 colleges®? 
have been granted autonomous status as of March 2019. 
5.3. De-burdening of Universities 
Effective structural’? modernization of the Central and the State Universities 
Acts need to be carried out to de-burden universities**. De-burdening essentially 
involves establishment of more affiliating universities so that work load related 
to affiliating university such as conduct of examination, repeated affiliation 
work etc., could be rationalized. Further, as per Governance and Administrative 
Reforms under RUSA guidelines number of affiliated colleges in a university 
should be limited to 100. 
Scrutiny of records of Commissionerate (College Education) revealed that 10 
state universities in general streams were being run in the State as of March 
2020. Nine of these 10 state universities had more than 100 affiliated colleges. 
Further, five®> out of these nine state universities had more than 200 colleges 
affiliated to each of them. 
  
5.4 Accreditation of Higher Education Institutions 
The rapid expansion in the number of institutions of higher education and their 
intake capacity has not been able to ensure simultaneous sustenance of quality. 
  
82 One out of 237 government colleges and three out of 1,524 private colleges 
83 As per Report on ‘Inclusive and Qualitative Expansion in Higher Education’ issued under 
Twelfth FYP 
84 Establishment of more universities in addition to the existing ones to reduce load of affiliated 
colleges 
85 UoR, Jaipur: 385 colleges; INVU, Jodhpur: 216 colleges; Maharaja Ganga Singh University, 
Bikaner: 285 colleges; Maharishi Daya Nand Saraswati University, Ajmer: 228 colleges and 
Shekhawati University, Sikar: 281 colleges. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 8&8 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
Quality parameters cut across teaching and research and associated systems 
need sustained attention and policy focus. 
As per UGC (Mandatory Assessment and Accreditation of higher education 
institutions) Regulation 2013, it shall be mandatory for each HEI except 
technical institution to get accredited by the Accrediting agency after passing 
out of two batches or six years, whichever is earlier. No HEI shall be eligible 
for applying or receiving financial assistance from UGC under any scheme 
without having undergone assessment and accreditation within stipulated period 
mentioned above. 
Further, as per condition of permanent No-Objection Certificate (NOC) issued 
by Commissioner, College Education, it is mandatory for new private college 
to obtain NAAC Accreditation within two years from issue of permanent NOC. 
In this regard we observed that: 
e Though Commissioner, College Education issued permanent NOC to 807 
private colleges, it did not maintain data regarding number of private colleges 
which had been given accreditation by NAAC. 
As per data collected from NAAC website, number of NAAC accredited 
HEIs in the state as of January 2020 are given in Table 5.2 below 
Table 5.2: Number of NAAC accredited HEIs in the state 
Se MOE C OTT Total number of Number of ee ees E Og 
No.| (for general streams | the HEIs during HEIs NAAC grade 
only) 2018-19 | 2013-14 | accreditedby | 4+] a | BYy ce NAAC (%) 1: te 
10 10 - 1 1 1 - 
   
      
    
    
    
State university 3 (30%) 
EES) Private university 51 40 7 (17.50%) 1 $13 2 - 
ESM Government colleges | 237 164 68 (41.46%) - ‘ ° ‘s ‘3 
EMH Private colleges 1,524 1,293 13 (1%) 
Ee ee eee 
Source: As per annual progress report of Higher Education Department and NAAC web site 
“percentage to the number of institutions during 2013-14 
The table shows that since 1,507 HEIs were functional in 2013-14, they were 
eligible for NAAC accreditation during the year 2019-20 (completion of six 
years of existence). Out of which, only 91 (6.04 per cent) HEIs got accreditation 
from NAAC as of January 2020. Though SLQAC was responsible to work 
towards quality improvement of colleges in the state, to draw up state-level 
action plan in consultation with NAAC and to act as nodal agency between the 
respective state HEIs and NAAC, the fact that only 6.04 per cent HEIs in the 
State were NAAC accredited points toward ineffective working of SLQAC. 
Further, the fact that only 0.66 per cent of HEIs were accredited with A*/A grade 
indicates poor quality of higher education being imparted in HEIs in the state. 
This was reflected in many of the audit findings seen in the HEIs as discussed 
in earlier paragraphs/chapters of this report. Audit noticed that in most of the 
test checked HEIs various essential facilities such as job facilitating 
  
89 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
mechanisms were either dysfunctional or non-existent, availability of ICT 
facilities was poor, Student Teacher Ratio was much higher than the prescribed 
limit, a substantial number of teachers in the private colleges were lacking 
prescribed NET qualification, more than 77 per cent of the graduated students 
with below first division/grade B* marks and outcome of research activities was 
not satisfactory. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that maintenance of data of NAAC 
accredited private colleges has been started since 2020-21. 
CEM E 
5.5.1 State level position 
As per information provided by Commissionerate (College Education) on 
average 52.36 per cent (2,056 against 3,926 sanctioned posts) posts of non- 
teaching staff were vacant in government colleges during 2014-19. Further, 
vacant posts of non-teachings staff increased continuously from 46.56 per cent 
in 2014-15 to 59.08 per cent in 2018-19. The State Government stated (August 
2020) that appointment letters to 266 Junior Assistants had been issued. 
5.5.2 Test checked universities level 
44.79 per cent, 28.34 per cent and 87.50 per cent non-teaching posts** were 
vacant in UoR, Jaipur; JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara respectively 
during 2018-19. In GGTU, Banswara six retired employees were deployed on 
contract basis. 
The possibility of adverse impact on core teaching function of HEIs due to huge 
vacancy of non-teaching staff cannot be ruled out as instances of non-teaching 
works (ministerial works e.g. administrative work, establishment work etc.) 
being done by teaching staff were noticed during joint inspection of the test 
checked colleges. UoR, Jaipur stated January 2021) that State Government was 
being requested to give permission for recruitment on vacant posts. 
5.6 Financial Management 
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) provides funds from State budget to state 
universities as grant-in-aid for salary of teaching and non-teaching staffs and to 
government colleges for meeting their recurring expenditure. Apart from State 
budget, State universities and government colleges receive assistance from 
  
86 UoR, Jaipur: 796 out of 1777 non- teaching posts lying vacant; JNVU, Jodhpur: 227 out of 
801 posts lying vacant and GGTU, Banswara: 35 out of 40 non-teaching posts lying vacant. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 90 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
MHRD under RUSA and UGC under several schemes for infrastructure, 
research purposes etc. 
5.6.1 Funds under state budget 
Position of year-wise funds provided by GoR to state universities and 
government colleges during 2014-19 from the State budget is shown in 
Table 5.3 below. 
Table 5.3: Funds from State budget 
(¥ in crore) 
aCe Budget Funds released to Lesser release of 
allocation | State Government | Total | funds than allocation 
universities | _ colleges (Per cent) 
[> | 3s | « |sao| «ep | 
  
1,038.62 210.44 763.29 973.73 64.89 (6.25) 
1,283.86 203.97 975.14 1179.11 104.75 (8.16) 
1,288.79 205.03 959.90 1164.93 123.86 (9.61) 
1324.77 ——-251.90 925.63 1177.53 147.24 (11.11) 
1491.72 297.31 1,125.46 1422.77 68.95 (4.62) 
Sources: Budget documents/information provided by State Government 
It can be seen that the GoR did not release entire amount of budget allocation to 
the state universities and government colleges. When enquired, information 
regarding non release of entire allocated funds and year wise utilization of funds 
was not provided to Audit. 
5.6.2 Funds under RUSA 
RUSA scheme, started in 2013, aims to improve the quality of state universities 
and colleges and enhance their existing capacities so that they become dynamic, 
demand-driven, quality conscious, efficient and forward looking and responsive 
to rapid economic and technological developments occurring at the local, state, 
national and international levels. The scheme covers only the government and 
government aided state higher education institutions excluding open 
universities and institutions offering Medical, Agriculture, Veterinary, etc. 
Centre-State funding for this scheme in case of Rajasthan is in the ratio of 60:40. 
5.6.2.1 Release of funds against approved outlay 
MHRD approved total outlay of ¢ 606 crore for the period 2014-20 under RUSA 
for Rajasthan (%357 crore for the period 2014-18 as infrastructure grants under 
RUSA-1 and & 249 crore for the period 2018-20 as infrastructure grants, equity 
initiatives and faculty improvement under RUSA-2). The position of funds 
received by State Project Director (SPD), RUSA and thereafter released to the 
State universities and government colleges under the scheme during 2014-19 is 
shown in Table 5.4 below. 
  
91 ~=Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
Table 5.4: Funds released under RUSA 
(@ in crore) 
Funds received by SPD, RUSA from Funds released by SPD to 
EK universities 
0 0 0 0 0 65.4 43.6 114.07 30 79 
62.4 41.6 104.0 20 84 
53.7 35.8 89.5 25 64.5 
56.1 37.4 93.5 62.5 
a Source: Information of provided by state Government 
  
       
         
It can be seen that the Central Government and GoR released only 307.50 crore 
out of approved outlay of €357 crore under RUSA-1 during 2014-18. 
SPD, RUSA intimated that RUSA-I Scheme was not discontinued in March 
2018. GoR received % 344 crore till March 2019 and only state share of = 2.60 
crore was pending as of July 2020 for which proposal has been submitted to 
Finance Department. 
Further, utilization certificates of = 367.01 crore out of disbursed amount of 
< 396 crore were received from state universities and government colleges as 
on 11 November 2020. 
5.6.2.2. Delay in release of funds by State Government 
As per RUSA guidelines, States contribute their share along with central share 
to dedicated RUSA saving bank account of the State Higher Education Council 
(here SPD, RUSA) within 15 days of the receipts of central share. Scrutiny of 
record of SPD, RUSA revealed that the GoR released their state share 
amounting to = 150.95 crore to RUSA with a delay ranging from 18 to 428 days 
beyond the prescribed 15 days of the receipts of the central share as per details 
given Appendix 5.2. 
The State Government attributed (August 2020) delay in release in state share 
to the time consumed in complying with the procedures prescribed for the 
release. The reply is not tenable as RUSA guidelines have clearly stated that 
maximum of 15 days would be allowed to comply with the procedures for 
release of state grants. 
  
87 Including <= 5.00 crore received as preparatory grants which was retained at SPD. 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 92 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-V Governance and Management   
  
  
Summing Up and Recommendation 
State Level Quality Assurance Cell (SLOAC) neither maintained the data 
regarding number of colleges which had constituted IQAC nor developed a 
mechanism to monitor it. Prescribed meetings of Governing Bodies such as 
Senate, Syndicate/Board of Management and Academic Council were not held 
during 2014-19 in all the three test checked Universities. 
IQACs were not functioning in UoR, Jaipur; JNVU, Jodhpur and 56 per cent 
test checked colleges. Instances of grant of affiliation to private colleges with a 
delay were noticed in all the test checked universities. The position of NAAC 
accredited HEIs in the state was dismal as only 6.04 per cent of eligible HEIs 
were NAAC accredited as of January 2020. Further only 0.66 per cent HEIs 
were accredited with A*/A grade indicates poor quality of higher education 
being imparted in the state. 
Substantial number of non-teaching posts were vacant in test checked HEIs 
during 2018-19. 
Recommendations: 
1. In order to increase the number of NAAC accredited institutions, State Level 
Quality Assurance Cell should effectively monitor functioning of Internal 
Quality Assurance Cell of colleges and HEIs should also strengthen their 
Internal Quality Assurance Cell. 
2. The universities should: 
a. Ensure constitution of all the governing bodies and convene their prescribed 
meetings so that the governance structure works in a concerted manner 
towards enhancing quality, equity and access in HEI; 
b. The universities should strengthen the affiliation process for the colleges and 
ensure that renewal of affiliation is completed before start of academic year 
so that the future prospects of students are not adversely impacted; 
3. For effective control and monitoring of functions of the university, GGTU 
Banswara should operationalize the governing bodies.   
  
93 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
 

Chapter - VI 
Conclusion 
 

Chapter — VI 
Conclusion 
  
Rajasthan’s Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in higher education has been lower 
than national average since 2010 and its ranking amongst all states/Union 
Territories (UTs) has worsened from 20 (2010-11) to 23 (2018-19). Further, 
none of the state run HEIs were placed in the top 100 in the country as per 
National Institutional Ranking Framework ranking 2019. In this background, it 
was decided to undertake a performance audit on outcomes in Higher 
Education system in the State. Audit defined higher education outcomes as 
‘increased employability and progress to higher studies’, ‘contribution to 
society through effective teaching learning processes and high-quality 
research’, and ‘Equitable Access to Quality Higher Education for all’ after 
consultations with various stakeholders. 
Audit found that system of maintenance of data related to student progression 
to employment/ higher studies and performance in competitive examinations 
was either poor or non-existent at all levels of higher education system due to 
which indicators for first outcome could not be evaluated. Job facilitating 
mechanism was either dysfunctional or non-existent thereby depriving students 
of the necessary assistance needed in getting jobs and in exercising informed 
career choices. Very few employability/ entrepreneurship focused courses were 
introduced and none of the test checked universities emphasized on courses 
involving field projects/internships during 2018-19 and did not make efforts to 
establish industry-academia linkage, thus, depriving the students of opportunity 
to develop analytical thinking and be job-ready. More than 77 per cent students 
graduated with below first division/grade B* marks. 
Feedback from stakeholders was not obtained before designing/revision of 
curriculum of programmes in UoR, Jaipur and JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, 
Banswara had not revised the curriculum/syllabus since its establishment in 
2012. Since Choice Based Credit System (CBCS) was introduced only in few 
programmes in JNVU, Jodhpur and few affiliated government colleges and 
semester system was introduced only for post graduate programmes in test 
checked universities and few test-checked government colleges during 2018-19, 
students could neither enrol in courses of related programmes nor have 
continuous assessments, thus impacting the academic flexibility adversely. 
The availability of ICT facilities was poor and very low use of ICT teaching 
tools by teachers in test checked universities and government colleges meant 
that teaching system needed a lot of improvement. 
High Student Teacher Ratio, substantial number of teachers (45.71 per cent) in 
19 out of 30 test checked private colleges lacking prescribed NET qualification, 
insufficient and irregular professional development of teachers showed that the 
  
95 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-VI Conclusion   
availability and quality of faculty in test checked HEIs was deficient and could 
have contributed towards poor quality of teaching-learning. 
The evaluation systems in JNVU, Jodhpur and GGTU, Banswara suffered from 
operational and monitoring inadequacies as marks of 96 per cent students in 
JNVU, Jodhpur; 68 per cent in GGTU, Banswara and 26 per cent in UoR, 
Jaipur were changed after revaluation of answer sheets during 2017-19. 
The performance of test checked HEIs was abysmal in conducting research 
activities. None of them were able to produce tangible outcomes from research 
projects undertaken during 2014-19. UoR, Jaipur could complete only 39 per 
cent research projects during 2014-19 and none of the completed research 
projects were awarded patents. In. JNVU, Jodhpur, all the 14 research projects 
were incomplete. Also, 72 thesis of PhD students in UoR, Jaipur were pending 
with supervisors for evaluation/examination with delays extending upto 12 
years. 
Though GER of Rajasthan has increased marginally over the last nine years, it 
has consistently been lower than national GER. However, during 2018-19, 
Rajasthan did relatively well in terms of number of colleges and college density. 
These two facts highlight skewed availability of HEIs across regions and lack 
of planning regarding establishment of new HEIs. GER of both SCs and STs in 
Rajasthan increased during 2014-19 but GoR did not maintain GER of OBCs, 
minorities and disabled categories. Gender parity index of all categories of 
Rajasthan matched the All India average in 2018-19. Community Education 
Development Cells were not functional in all the test checked HEIs. Basic 
infrastructural facilities were inadequate in most of the HEIs and disabled 
friendly infrastructure, except ramps, was absent in all the test checked HEIs. 
Number of government colleges offering Arts stream courses compared to 
Science & Commerce was disproportionately high. 
State Level Quality Assurance Cell (SLQAC) neither maintained data of 
colleges which constituted Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) nor 
developed a mechanism to monitor them. The position of NAAC accredited HEIs 
in the state was dismal as only 6.04 per cent of eligible HEIs were NAAC 
accredited as of January 2020. Prescribed meetings of Senate, Syndicate/Board 
of Management and Academic Council were not held during 2014-19 in all the 
test checked Universities. IQAC though constituted in 45 per cent test checked 
HETs, were not functional. 
Audit evaluated the performance of the three selected universities in achieving 
the indicators for the outcome in higher education. Despite the fact that these 
indicators were part of NAAC accreditation process, the test checked 
universities either did not maintain required information to measure these 
  
Performance Audit of “Outcomesof 96 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Chapter-VI Conclusion 
indicators or wherever it was maintained their performance was poor under 
many indicators. 
Considering the current situation of higher education in Rajasthan as observed 
during this audit, it appears that the system is still far from ready to adopt the 
NEP-2020 and will require concerted and focussed efforts by government and 
HEIs to achieve the objectives of NEP 2020 in a timely manner. 
A ine 
JAIPUR, (ANADI MISRA) 
The 07 April, 2021 Accountant General 
(Audit-I), Rajasthan 
Countersigned 
lee NEW DELHI, (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 08 April, 2021 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
  
97 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices 
 

<Uetseley 
UL 
UoNeonpy 
JoystH 
JO 
SOWIODING 
,, 
JO 
YIpNy 
soURULIOJIOg 66 
  
S/ 
(saead 
g Jo 
adeyuaoarad 
Jo 
wing) 
= 
osejus010d 
ose10Ay g/ 
(saead 
¢ JO 
9d¢j}U9910d 
Jo 
wing) 
= 
aseyusoied 
a3e10Ay 
G/ (saeah 
¢ Jo advyusoa1ad Jo ung) 
= 0S87]U00.10d O38.10AV 
  
61-8107 Surnp 
S1IYO"S} JO 1IQUIN [BO], 
qeak rvjnopaed 
91) UL SyuapNys Jo aqui 
6T-V107 
SULINp AjISABATUN 3Y} UL Pd.10jjo 
saTMVId01d Jo 19quNU [¥jO] 
avoX yey) Uy payjorus 
S}Uapnys Jo Jaquinu [e}0], 
woneUexy AjIS12ATay) 
3q} UT passed oy syuopnys 
aeaXk [BU JO 1aquINU [eo], 
61-7107 Suynp 
Ps1d{J0 SosaNod Jo Joquny 
ies JVI} UT SWIMS O1g 
[[@ WI s3sano0d Jo 19quIMyy 
POA D EMB CUO RAUU CLE § | 
61-8107 
SULMp LO] Sus sisqo¥93 Jo 1squanNy 
avok & SU]ANp sasinod poppe 
AD[BA 94} Ul PoyfO1Us syuepNys JO 1aquIn\y 
61-PL0Z 
SuLmMp 
pestaer 
sem 
snqey[As 
Yay 
Ur 
socmcuessord 
Jo 
1aquuny 
avod B Ul UOpEUWEX] 
dqn Of payyenb syuapnjs Jo zaqumnyy 
SIIPNyS AIYSIFY 07 SuIsso.1d0.1d 
syUapNys SulOSNo Jo 1squanu [8j}0 
61-P107 Sapp *3O SOLI[SNPUL “AIA 10430 ‘9908}.10d UI 
[euenELAN)UI /(eUCH EU JO SUCH SUI 
TIA SOTA] [BLOHIUNY Jo .9quiny\y 
61-F107 
SULMP p2dNpo.jUI $98.10 Mou JO JaquMN 
qeak IepNaysIed & uy yWIUIdOaARq [PIS 
do dyysaneus.ide.n0y Jo A4yyiqeAo|dury 
WO SNd0J SUIAVT SASIMOd Jo 1OQUIMN\, 
Plt) te CU A LN 
(¢'[ qdeaseaed 19j3y) 
I'l - xipusddy 
(aeak 3U9.11N9) 61-8107 SULIMp “9)9 s9d.1Nesa.1 
SUTLIva]-q “(SIAT]) StuessXg JUSTIASEUB, SUTLIBAT WEA 
SUI} IAPIIJJO 10J LOT SUISN s1ayI"aq Jo asupUSII9g 
61-7107 SUEMp sesanes 
Poppe aN[eA UT PI[][0.109 syuopnys Jo oseyUII10d OsBIDAY 
61-PL07 Sulmp yno parses 
SUM UOISIAGL snquyjAs a104M SUE IsO1d Jo a6vjUaI19g 
(sexo 
SODTA.I9S 998] G/S99IAIIG [ALD /ALVD / LOIS LAN) 61 
-710Z SULINp suopeUlWeEXxs [9Ag] [BUOYVUAIJUT /[EUOHeN 
IIS UL SupApenb syuapnys Jo aseyuas10d ase1aay 
61-8107 
Surmp 
SOIPNyS 
AIYSIY 
0} 
UoIssa.1501d 
yUSpPNyS 
JO 
asejUII19g 
Z)99U009 ETULapLIEe-ALYSNPUL JO }U9}X9 JY} ST IBAA 
Aymqudojdara Jo snd03 aq} WITH 6T-PL0Z SuLmp 
pe19jjo sommmeAsO.Ad [Je ss0.198 S3S.M0d Jo 1AquINU 
1830} 94} JO }HO paonpo.VUI sasinod Mou Jo asvzNI0I0g 
61-PL0z 
Suump 
juauidopsaop 
TPIS 
/digsansusidayuy 
/Aqedojdwy 
WO 
sNd0} 
SUIAVT 
So8.1n0d 
Jo 
9duj}M90I0d 
OSBIIAY 
S10JEIIPU] SOUI0DING Ady 
ROHR UCN MNCL) f 
PC MUOLLAL IC Meri sBUORCHUNIL@ POEM OLS TBO MG DLC OTM Cae. BBLS wf 
  
  
saaipuaddy

001 
.Ueyjseley Ul uoneonpy Jeysty 
Jo somoang ,, JO LIpny souRULIOjIOg 
  
/ 
(saead 
¢ Jo 
as¥jUa9I00 
Jo 
wns) 
= 
aseyusdJad 
ase.0Ay S/ 
(sivad 
§ JO 
93ujUa0I0d 
Jo 
wing) 
= 
95¢)009.10d 
9Se.10AY 
           
G/ (savad 
§ JO asvyue010d Jo wing) 
= aseyusoied adu.Ay 
aeak yeu) 
UY S19qa¥a} SUT) [NF Jo Jaquinyy 
SUOTIPUOD SUTZIOM 
UT siajnduros Jo 1aquiny 
vonnyysuy 
oy} WI S[[ey AvUTMeg pus SUIOOISSBTD JO JOquINU [¥}0], 
61-8107 Sump pa.zayyo 
sammmeise1d Jo 1squinu [BO] 
pozeodde oy syuopnys 
aeok [Buy Jo 19quINU [Bj0], 
avak yeqp 
UI syUapnys SUIODNO Jo 1IqQUINN, 
61-8107 Surnp 
UOHNIYSUT 9Y9 UT poyjorus 
S}USpNys JO A9quINU [e}0], 
qeak ye) UY payjo.1us 
S}Uapnys jo 1aquINnu [e}0], 
10}Bd[pUl 9Y} JO Lo}vUTWMEUEG 
aesk & 
UF (“Yd WHA S1ayoway aun] [NJ Jo Jaquiny] 
syUspnys JO Jaquinu [ej07, 
Somme LOT Gta 
S[[BY vues puv sMIO0.ASSETD JO LoquInyy 
61-8107 Su1.mp payuomayduny 
$Od)D Won Ul sonrmrer0.1d Jo 19quny 
61-¥107 
SULMp pasayjo STDS afl] pue apquaisysue1y 
SUT.1RdUII S9s.1m0d pappe-anyea Jo 1aquany] 
DoRneUIMEXy AJISIOATU/) 31} UT passed 
OYA Sjuapnys 1W9A [BUI JO A9quInu [BIO], aeok 
8 
Uf] 
paseld 
syuapnys 
SUIOTINGE 
Jo 
1aquuny] 
61-8107 
Supp 
sdyyswzszur 
10 
sy90fo1d 
PRY 
supyez.zspun 
syuspnys 
jo 
19quiny] 
qeak relapsed & UT saTyTAVIe 
Tons Uf Sued IyAed syuapnjs Jo 13quInN 
POA PRO CLR CIOL   
   
pajnsued useq sey A.1YSNPUl OTA 07 3U97X9 I) SI JET AA 
61-P107 
Suynp 
"(Ud 
WT 
S.19Q9e9) 
BUNT] 
[[Ny 
Jo 
adeyUaaIed 
ase.IAy 
8107 Sump opey 19yndur0;D - yuepnyg 
61-8107 
SULINP 399 “SIAT ‘SSBIO .1BUIS SB TINS SONTLIey poqeuo 
- LOI WIT s[[eY AeUrIUas pue sMOOASsE]D JO a8BI009.10g 
61-8107 Su1.mp payomaydurt 
wa0q Sey SOD WN UT sule.d0.1d Jo 33ej099.19g 
61-F107 Sul.mp pasayjo sy[Pys ayy] pur 
dIQRAIsUeI) SUTIedU Sosan0d pappe-anyea Jo Jaquiny] 
61-8107 SuLinp synopnyjs Jo osejz099.10d ssug 
61-107 
SuEmp 
syUapnhyjs 
Sulosjno 
Jo 
yusTUIDET|A 
Jo 
ao"yNaII10d 
BBVIZAY 
61-8107 Suymp sdyysusejuy 
/ spofoad psy supjey.1epun sjuepnys jo 93e3099.19g 
“ST 
"ST 
as 
as 
               
PRCA GML LILI Lag 
«61-107 SUlAp SODN 
‘AYMUINIOD ‘A.1jsnpuUl QI WoHe..1oge]joo Uy poyonpues 
SOWUIBISOAd YD¥I17NO PUB SATJIATIE WOIsUa}xXd 
UL Supedioy.ied syuepnjs Jo osvjzUeI10d asu.0AV,, 
261-107 SULINp JUSTIUOATAUA sATIe.1OgGe|[OD 
@ Oy ‘SuIpuny pue dryssosuods papraoid sey 10 
ROCA BOLIC   ‘ON 10}89IpUy 
  
saaipuaddpy

<Uetseley 
UL 
UoNeonpy 
JoystH 
JO 
SOWIODING 
,, 
JO 
YIpNy 
soURULIOJIOg 101 
  
s/ (saeak 
g Jo aseyuod10d Jo uns) 
= aseyuaosed a38.13Ay 
c/ (saeah 
¢ Jo advyuasrad Jo ung) 
= d8ujUedIOd as¥IDAYy S/ 
(sivad 
g Jo 
adeyuasa10d 
Jo 
wing) 
= 
38e7U010d 
9SE10AY 
s/ (s1vak 
g Jo asdeyuaorad Jo wing) 
= 380.00910d oSEIDAY ¢/ 
(siwad 
¢ JO 
aSujUa9I0d 
Jo 
wung) 
= 
o88jUI010d 
O3¥.10AY 
aeod yey} Uy Areles 
SUPPN]IX9 aany[pusdxsa [ej], 
Ivak ye) UT payors 
S}Uapnys Jo Jaquinu [ej0], 
61-F107 
SuLinp 
szsqo"e} 
au) 
[NJ 
Jo 
Jaquinu 
ose.12ay 
aeak 
Jey) 
Ul 
paaqeoa 
suoyeordde 
HLOHEN][BAIy 
Jo 
139quuNy 
aeak yeu) 
UI S199} SUH [NJ JO Jaquimny 
Ivak yey) 
UL S19q9B9} SW [NF JO J9quiny 
sivad ¢ }SE| SULINP Ss9qo"s3 
SUIT) [Ny Jo zsquinu ase1aay 
10}Bd[pUl 9Y} JO Lo}vUTWMEUEG 
azeok & uy Alv[¥s SUTPNdxe WoYeyUsWIsHE 
9ANJIN.ASVAJUT OJ WOIKIOT[e JosSpng 
aeak IeMIpAed & Ul JUUIUAZAOs) 
ayy Aq J9Ayem WOLINy/SdTys 39.4 
Paplsoid pue jus IaA04 Aq sdIyss¥poqos 
Aq po}jeueq syuapnys Jo 1oquiny 
65-P107 
Surnp 
YP.AVIset 
/SOIPNys 
poouvape 
10; 
ArysMorpay 
[BuO 
BU.19j01 
PapACMe 
S.19YdB9} 
JO 
LIQUIMY 
61-PL0Z 
SuLinp 
sjeumol 
payed 
DDN 
W 
uoyeoygnd 
Jo 
19qumy 
61-P10Z SuLMp uopNyysUy 
Ue 0} popivae syusjed Jo AIqQUInN 
4vak BU] pedueys 
SYED 9.134 SISed WOENTBADY JO JOqUInN 
avo & U] SOUIWIEISOIg 
Yans SuIpteye jyeys SuUNPI"E JO JoquIn\ 
aeah ¥ SULINp SoTpog [BUOTssajoi1d 
Jo a0j diqsioquioul sp1eMo} puv sdoysyiom 
/sodUa1ayN09 pus}j7e 07 Ja0ddns [eNUEUy 
UPI paplaoid s1aq9Bo} JO 19qUINY 
suvadk aay jS¥] 
SULANP S[PAd] [VUOLeU.L9JUT/[eUOTIeNy/o}eIS 
WO.1y SpPAvME SUTATEIIL 
UIOI; $1SYIVO} SUNT) [NJ JO LIqUIMNy 
POA PRO CLR CIOL 
61-107 SUpAMp LOPE AMISH aMjon.AyseAyOy 10 AreypEs 
SUIPH[IX9 ‘UOT RIO] |e Jaspngq Jo sdeyUaII0d aseIAY 
6I-P10Z SULINp JuUeUIUABA0) 3q) Aq JaATeEM TORINy/sdiys 
aa] paplaold pur jUaW1aA04 oq] Aq sdiqsivpoqos 
Aq peyjeatieq syuepnys Jo aduyueoJod oseisAy 
61-P10Z SULINp Wd.1vaSeA /SoIpNys paduvApeE 10J 
drqsMoyay [BUOREUAIVUT PopsVAE S19ydv9} JO 1AqUIN\Y 
6I-P10Z 
SULMp 
ayIsqod 
Df 
UO 
porou 
s[elInog 
91} 
Ul 
Joysve} 
tod 
sioded 
qo1vasol 
Jo 
Ioquiny 
61-V10Z 
SULANp UopNjIYsuU] UL Oo} papaeme syus}ed Jo I9quUINN 
61-P10Z SUlaAMp sy1EUN UT aduEYD 07 SUPE] 
TopeEnyeass 10} suoyestdde jo adeyuaos1ed ade13Ay 
61-F10Z SULMp 9s.mo0_D ULIIT, j104S ‘3s.n0_D AsqseIJOyY 
WIeADOAY WOH “ZA swueaS0Ad yuoUIdo;sAep 
[eUolssajoid Surpusye s.1949¥9) Jo o9ujues10d ase10Ay 
61-107 SULMp sarpog [eUOIssezo.id Jo 993 drysiraquisu 
Sp1BMo} pue sdoysy.10a / 89900197009 pus7je8 0} j10ddns 
[eIUvUly WILMA poplAoad s.19y9¥9} Jo 99¥}UI0I0d BBR.IDAY 
61 
-PLOZ SULINP SoIpod pesTas0se.1 JUITIULIDA0*) WO] [9A9] 
[euopeniezuy enone ‘37275 32 sdiysmoyay ‘WoTTUs0901 
‘spIEME P9ATII01 OY AA $.19T 989} SUIT} [NY JO asuyUSI.19g 
  ROCA BOLIC 
ial Oy < a t=) x) = 
  
‘ON 10}89IpUy 
  
saaipuaddy

.Ueyjseley Ul uoneonpy Jeysty 
ZOL Jo somoang ,, JO LIpny souRULIOjIOg 
  
             
  
A 
- 
A 
- 
x 
x 
* 
WN 
4 
ff 
X 
- 
A 
x 
s 
used 
‘939]10) 
“40D 
YINd| 
‘FI 
x 
x 
A 
x 
x 
, 
” 
WN 
X 
X 
xX 
x 
x 
x 
X 
Re 
eee 
Us ela 
eC 
a 
A 
A 
A 
- 
A 
» 
A 
WN 
A 
XA 
A 
> 
X 
+A 
Lian 
Reale 
iaere 
ke 
at 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
xX 
WN 
WN 
x 
x 
xXx 
x 
x 
x 
X 
Do 
ok 
i! 
- 
4 
- 
Xx 
x 
x 
»” 
WN 
7 
4 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
pose] 
“S9]10D 
*JA0D 
ay Py 
- 
x 
A, 
x 
x 
x 
-” 
WN 
4 
4 
x 
A 
x 
x 
A 
Dae 
ia 
ee 
meer, 
Ml 
> 
xX 
- 
- 
- 
- 
” 
WN 
f 
s“ 
- 
- 
- 
x 
- 
Dibaba 
Macnee’ 
Manees, 
Bcd 
A 
x 
A 
x 
, 
- 
~* 
WN 
fF 
-Z 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
HELO 
RTOS 
Micro] 
(UO 
Bend 
By: 
| 
fa 
- 
x 
x 
x 
x 
A 
* 
WN 
fF 
A 
x 
xX 
x 
x 
x 
BIOPE[BY 
O89]]0D 
40D 
STAS 
EB 
- 
- 
- 
- 
x 
x 
WN 
WN 
¢ 
~« 
xX 
x 
- 
x 
xX 
UC: 
Bee 
Ala 
RECON 
ACRES 
i 
x 
A 
> 
A’ 
xk 
x 
A 
WN 
4 
4A 
X 
FF 
FA7 
X 
F 
ry 
meal 
ieee, 
Badd 
, 
x 
, 
x 
x 
x 
2? 
WN 
A 
A 
x 
- 
x 
x 
, 
vindgeys 
asayfoD 
1495 
Gd 
a 
- 
, 
, 
, 
x 
x 
” 
WN 
x 
x 
xX 
x 
x 
x 
x 
PACU 
MAUR 
CUO 
Ree 
mend 
KUNE 
Z| 
A 
x 
A> 
- 
x 
X 
WN 
WN 
s 
—s 
x 
- 
x 
x 
A 
Gudea 
Gap 
oe 
are 
iee) 
BL 
       
          
RUS ge CLUS CR CYUL EG | 
Lie F/O 2) 
BEE AL 
WOIsua}xq 
POLL Lee | 
Yo.1¥vasayy] 
PIU Cae 
S19qoua |, 
sassep> LOI 
juomiaae[g 
Oy Rh 
joumyy 
IP9 
Suljesunoy 
11 A) 
qUsTIIIe[ 
=) 
5 
ee 9 es 
B28 i 
PCL Rod 
SadaT[0_ Poel Fe payxsoyo 4So} Jo SauBN 
S9F9]][0Od JUIUTUAZAOS payday 489} spivjag (Vv) 
rey (Me NOM CRC URCKUTe iit Ot o> ROAM) bg LCP SLC CORY LHe 6 | 
  
(1'9'T 
qdesSesed 
193931) 
Z| 
-xipusddy 
  
  
saaipuaddpy

<Uetseley 
UL 
UoNeonpy 
JoystH 
JO 
SOWIODING 
,, 
JO 
YIpNy 
soURULIOJIOg £Ol 
  
SS *®> > RMS > x > KK YY > KY > > > > 
SK > KK KS S‘ 4% * > + + > KS > HY 
S *® YS + RS x > KK KM > KK YS > KK 
mK mK mM KK XK a Oe a 
~*~ S pd pt be KS KK Ky DK KK Om 
SS «eK KR KS x KK MD KK KK MK OK 
7S ee .‘ + + + + + M+ IS > S 
WN 
4 
A 
x 
x 
- 
- 
WN 
/ 
- 
xX 
».¢ 
xX 
xX 
WN 
X 
xX 
xX 
xX 
xX 
xX 
WN 
X 
X 
x 
X 
xX 
x 
WN 
4 
4 
X 
XK 
AY 
WN 
* 
X 
A 
- 
-r> 
xX 
WN 
4 
4 
LS5L 
A 
AY 
CACC 
S 
WOO 
CONUS 
LAG 
MURLOCS 
LILANE 
SD) 
»” 
xX 
xX 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
»” 
xX 
xX 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
+ 
+ 
>» 
WN 
- 
x 
xX 
- 
* 
A 
WN 
A 
x 
x 
- 
*. 
A 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
~A 
xX 
X 
WN 
xX 
x 
x 
»” 
xX 
xX 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
-’ 
A 
”»* 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
>’ 
*£7. 
A 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
»” 
xX 
xX 
WN 
xX 
x 
x 
- 
* 
”*A 
WN 
A 
x 
x 
”A 
X 
xX 
WN 
X 
x 
x 
PUL Ty me CH CUO ELV, MULAN b 
WN X xX xX xX x xX 
WN A x x - x x 
WN * x x . x x 
4 6S S KR KS x > eK MK KK SY SY KY 
PoUTeJUIEO 
JON-IN 
qavsdeywaig 
982110) 
Dd 
40 
EE 
TELIA 
Gab, 
Rial 
wO 
MnO 
KCC0A) 
srs 
PRC 
Ants 
Bey: 
PUCRCELUTG Mere) (UO he) Pleo BRU: bs | 
  
Peet MMC ue EU 87 
Sa ee heer ec bee 
        warjoTeg 
‘3d9][0.) 
1405) 
YAIAT 
97] 
Det 
iT 
DO aS 
Cem 
LUre 
whi 
is 
a10jep 
‘9d9][0D 
Dd 
‘Ao 
UBISC 
‘da][0D 
*JA0 
ARR 
and.suing “ada][07) *}A0 
uvleyer ‘aSa][07> *}A0 
AAA Lol Micon! 
TONIUNG AWAIETA “adaJOD *}A0 
My[pueg 999][02) *}A0 
PIC ¢ ess) | NO Bey eae Uy 
Jose] ‘a8a][0Z) Spas) “}A0 
A om! Lom om! 
  
saaipuaddy

.Ueyjseley Ul uoneonpy Jeysty 
  
               
rOL Jo souloomg ,, Jo [pny souruLojIeg 
X | VN WN xX xX xX xX WN x x x x x x ([RIUEERRED (reco aauus aa RUC tee mene) Aye Olt 
s WN WN xX X X ” WN A 4 X X ~A XX (BBR codec cacy ta 0) pe! 
A VN WN X xX X X WN Y* 4» X X ~ x xX Pi ake kes ene eal 
x WN WN X X X X WN 4 A X X A x x ‘9991109 STAID Od 2410381) led 
IBAOIESUETA] 
A WN WN X X X X WN ZA ”4 X X x x x ‘o8aJ09 [euOHBUADUY IeAYSLIe| “01 AVAOIBSUB]A] 
A WN WN X X A ~A WN A F/ XX X A x x cig Oe OC | ee 
andre ‘as9][9D 
, K xk X xX WNysy x x x »~ x x See acco a ukaea (2k Me: 
x xX xX X xX WN FA fr X X x x x naseg ‘289]10,) s[AID aeysuvys y 
Xx K xX X xX WNs » x x x x < (RES es ee 
x x xk xX xX WNX x x x x x x eo Weed ee ec, ean) 
x x xk X xX WNX x x x x x x PCE tual! Wa oO kanes Mis 
x x x xX xX WNY - x xX x x x Ratan? Wan One Att Mae 
x x xX X xX WNS* ¢» x xX x x x Re ikea oe ee cases co a! 
x x x x x »~ x xX x x x Pca hee eke Me! 
       
      
   
  
AL ees OCR CULE | 
a & 
1 C/O RA i0 1) 
Boe 
PICT eC § 
Le | 
Yaaessoyy 
CCU REN 
PRC) BLL & 
Sossep> LOI 
PUCLCALIP 
wOREIDOSSY 
PU EUey 
PUCLUCALIE Perey (U@) 
poate LAB rm ORCL L Yl 
PU LSI RO) E =] 7 
=] Li] lay 
: eo 
7) 
Sado][09 PoyS9Y9 97BALId 489} JO spIejaq(q) 
  
saaipuaddpy

<Uetseley 
UL 
UoNeonpy 
JoystH 
JO 
SOWIODING 
,, 
JO 
YIpNy 
soURULIOJIOg 
Sol 
  
aiquondds 
oN 
-VN 
=» 
POUTVJUTVULION-TAIN 
= 
PIQUA 
ION 
-X 
—- 
AIqUITBAY 
- p 
                          
x WN WN x xX xX X WN X X x xX x ».¢ D.« CLUE Meer) (OR La | Pr 
viBloyyey] 
s VN WN 2s a = X wh 7” - x x x x x ‘eAvleAQpracqey pueyynqmesl °67 
x WN WN x xX x X WN A - x xX x >. x AG Caer) (Ne eee orld mL Leis Py 
PPro cae x VN WN x x x xX WN X x x x x x x SCAU TNACULYNATIU LIE Cai Gaz 
x VN VN x x x X WN A - x x x 4 x PRUr AUR Mey) | (ORS sia By: 
x VN WN WN X x xX A X xX WN xX xX x x SEIN C ECL OL TUT Ert Ts kos. 
x VN VN WN X xX xX A A xX WN XxX x ».¢ x NIay Vsa][0D EpEass weredo0o0y] Ey 
x VN WN WN X xX X Ar xX xX WN X x x x RRC Lise co) | (OM (UO LURES BILIS| eq 
x VN WN WN X xX xX xX xX xX WN X x x x Vojeg Vsa]]oD «vyseyg| Fe 
x VN VN WN X xX ».¢ -, xX xX WN X x ».¢ >. V.10[Vg ‘ada[[OD JsdALyEy UeMseag 17 
x VN WN WN X x xX A X xX WN X x ».¢ x Laer) | (D@ Wl hers me) Ua: -07| 
x VN VN WN X D4 X A A >»? WN X ».¢ ».¢ >». ODYS ‘2duaIIs pue Spry JO 999][0D TA -61 
xX VN VN WAN X ».« xX - xX xX WN ».¢ xX x x PACAP CLIC G meric) | (OO ML OIG) mci Fu 
x VN YN WN X xX x - xX X WN xX xX xX ».¢ POCO ii mere) UO RU UrS Bate hg hy Pa 
esneq 
‘999]10) 
WABYS 
ATUS] 
“9T| 
x VN WN X X X X WN X X X xX x x x yos[e’y ‘a3aT109 eee eo! 
  
saaipuaddy

Appendices 
Appendix-1.3 
(Refer paragraph 1.6.2) 
  
Detail of quantitative proxy criteria developed by Audit based on the scores obtained 
by 22 Universities under the NAAC grading system during 2017-18. 
Name of Indicator RENE Meee aCe Cee G 
eee 
  
Average percentage of 50% and 40% to 30% to 20% to Below 20% 
courses having focus on above 49,99% 39.99% 29.99% 
Employability/ 
Entrepreneurship/ Skill 
development during 2014-19 
Percentage of new courses 10% and 7% to 4% to 2% to Below 2% 
introduced out of the total above 9.99% 6.99% 3.99% 
number of courses across all 
programmes offered during 
2014-19 with the focus of 
employability 
Number of functional MoUs 30 and 20 to 29 10 to 19 6to9 up to 5 
with institutions of national/ above 
international importance, 
other Univ., industries etc. 
during 2014-19 
Percentage of student 20% and 15 to 10% to 5% to Below 5% 
progression to higher studies above 19.99% 14.99% 9.99% 
during 2018-19 
Average percentage of 30% and 15% to 10% to 5% to Below 5% 
students qualifying in State/_ above 29.99% 14.99% 9.99% 
National/ International level 
examinations during 2014-19 
Percentage of programs 50% and 40% to 30% to 15 to Below 
where syllabus revision was above 49.99% 39.99% 29.99% 15% 
carried out during 2014-19 
Average percentage of 10% and =6% to 3% to 1 to Below 1% 
students enrolled in value above 9.99% 5.99% 2.99% 
added courses during 2014- 
19 
Percentage of teachers using 80% and 60% to 40% to 20% to Below 
ICT for effective teaching above 79.99% 59.99% 39.99% 20% 
with Learning Management 
Systems (LMS), E-learning 
resources etc., during 2018- 
19 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 106 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Name of Indicator Range of performance for scoring marks 
Eee Average percentage of 30% and 25% to 20% to 15% to Below 15% 
students participating in above 29.99% 24.99% 19.99% 
extension activities and 
outreach programmes 
conducted in collaboration 
with industry, community, 
NGOs during 2014-19 
Percentage of students 10% and 50 9.99% 3104.99%  2to Below 2% 
undertaking field projects / above 2.99% 
internships during 2018-19 
Average percentage of 20% and 15% to 10% to 5% to Below 5% 
placement of outgoing above 19.99% 14.99% 9.99% 
students during 2014-19. 
Pass percentage of students 90% and 80% to 70% to 60% to Below 60% 
during 2018-19 above 89.99% 79.99 69.99% 
Number of value-added 50 and 40 to 49 30 to 39 20to29 Below 20 
courses imparting above 
transferable and life skills 
offered during 2014-19 
Percentage of programs in 10% and 6to 9.99% 305.99% 2 to Below 2% 
which CBCS has been above 2.99% 
implemented during 2018-19 
Percentage of classrooms 80% and 70% to 60% to 50% to Below 50% 
and seminar halls with ICT- above 79.99% 69.99% 59.99% 
enabled facilities such as 
smart class, LMS, etc during 
2018-19 
Student - Computer Ratio upto 10:1. = 11:1 to 20:1 21:1t030:1 31:1te |More than 
during 2018-19 40:1 40:1 
Average percentage of full 70% and 60% to 50% to 40% to Below 40% 
time teachers with Ph.D. above 69.99% 59.99% 49.99% 
during 2014-19 
Percentage of full time 10% and 9% to 8% to 7% to Below 7% 
teachers who received above 9.99% 8.99% 7.99% 
awards, recognition, 
fellowships at State, 
National, International level 
from Government, 
recognised bodies during 
2014-19 
Average percentage of 50% and 40% to 30% to 20% to Below 20% 
teachers provided with above 49.99% 39.99% 29.99% 
financial support to attend 
conferences / workshops and 
towards membership fee of 
professional bodies during 
2014-19     
107 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
  
Name of Indicator 
Average percentage of 
teachers attending 
professional development 
programs viz., Orientation 
Program, Refresher Course, 
Short Term Course, during 
2014-19 
Average percentage of 
applications for revaluation 
leading to change in marks 
during 2014-19 
Number of patents awarded 
to an institution during 
2014-19 
Number of research papers 
per teacher in the Journals 
notified on UGC website 
during 2014-19 
Number of teachers awarded 
international fellowship for 
advanced studies/ research 
during 2014-19 
Average percentage of 
students benefited by 
scholarships by the 
Government and provided 
free ships/tuition waiver by 
the Government during 
2014-19 
Average percentage of 
budget allocation, excluding 
salary for infrastructure 
augmentation during 2014- 
19 
40% and 
above 
5% & 
below 
20 and 
above 
10 and 
above 
40 and 
above 
40% and 
above 
20% and 
above 
30% to 
39.99% 
5% to 
8.99% 
10 to 19 
7 to 9.99 
20 to 39 
25% to 
39.99% 
15% to 
19.99% 
20 to 
29.99% 
9% to 
12.99% 
5to9 
4 to 6.99 
10 to 19 
16% to 
24.99% 
10% to 
14.99% 
10% to 
19.99% 
13% to 
15.99% 
1to4 
1to 
3.99 
2to9 
5% to 
15.99% 
5% to 
9.99% 
Range of performance for scoring marks 
eee Below 10% 
16% and 
above 
Below 1 
Below 1 
Up to1 
Below 5% 
Below 5% 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan” 
108

Appendices   
Appendix - 2.1 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.3.2) 
Cee CPUC EMU BUEN CM eS eR MOOG Coe 
(College Education) to Assembly and furnished by concerned college to audit 
Sl. | Name of college No. of student placed | No. of students 
No. reported by placed as per 
Commissionerate to | information 
PLY SUMMON LL 
by colleges 
  
Colleges affiliated with UoR, Jaipur 
Baba Bhagwan Das 200 30 
Government College, 
Chimanpura 
R. L. Sahriya Government 14 0 
College, Kala Dera 
P ] Pandit Naval Kishore sharma 9 0 
Government College, Dausa 
[* | R.D.J. Government college, 3 0 
Balotra 
Ba Government College, Balotra 3 0 
Ga Government College, Jodhpur 2 0 
Government College, Osian 6 0 
College affiliated with GGTU, Banswara 
MBD Government College, 20 
Khshalgarh, Banswara 
Govind Guru Government 325 
College, Banswara 
a 
—= 
wm oS 
  
109 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

pe 
: = 
= 3 
g   
Appendix- 3.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.1.3 (i)) 
Details showing results of scrutiny of syllabus of 19 courses of UoR, Jaipur 
(A) Syllabus of 15 courses in which no changed were noticed 
tN 
24.05.2017 M Sc (Zoology)(Semester-I & Il) 2018, Semester-II & IV 2019 
03.01.2018 B Sc (Zoology) Part-II (Honours) 2019 
15.07.2015 BA (Sociology) Part — II (Pass Courses) 2016 
15.07.2015 BA (Sociology) Part-II (Honours) 2016 
23.05.2016 BA (Sociology) Part-II (Honours) 2017 
Ga 27.02.2019 BA (Sociology)Part —I, II & III (Pass course) 2020 
27.02.2019 BA (Sociology)Part-III (Honours) for 2020 
ESM 15.11.2014 &10.05. 2016 B Sc (Chemistry) (Honours) 2016 & 2017 
ERM 21.01.2017 M Sc (Chemistry) (Semester-III & IV) 2018 
02.03.2019 M Sc (Chemistry) (Previous & Final) 2020 
ue 20.03.2018 M Sc (Chemistry) (Semester-I, II, II1& IV) 2019 
18.01.2018 B Com (Business Adm) (Honours) Part-II 2019 
15.04.2014 & 12.05.2016 BA (Political Science)Part-III (Pass course) 2015 and 2017 
15.04.2014 BA (Political Science)Part-III (Honours) 2015 
25.05.2017 BA (Political Sc.) Part-I & II and BA (Honours) Part-II 2018 
(B) Details of four courses in which minor changes/some word replacements were noticed 
SL | Content in syllabus before changes Content in syllabus after changes POEL 
No Cz 
1. Social Control 
Paper-I (Unit-IIJ) Dynamics in Paper-I (Unit-IIJ) Dynamics in deleted in 
sociology: sociology: Syllabus 2020. 
Social mobility: Concepts and forms Social Change and mobility: 
Social Control: Concepts and forms Theories and forms 
The word “issue” 
  
Paper-LI (Unit-ID) Topic Basic Paper-II (Unit-L) Topic Basic and ‘Continuity 
Institutions of Indian society: Institutions of Indian society: and Change’ 
Family Marriage & Kinship: Family Marriage & Kinship: replaced by 
Meaning and Forms Issues: Continuity | Meaning, Forms and Challenge. “challenges” 
and Change. and ‘Changing 
Caste & Class: Meaning and Forms Caste and Class: Meaning, Forms and Patterns’ 
Issues: Continuity and Change. Changing Patterns. 
SMEs replaced by 
Paper- II (Section-B) Industry:- Paper- II (Section-B) Industry:- MSMEs in 2018 
Role Strategy and Challenges, SMEs, Role Strategy and Challenges, syllabus. 
Public and Private Sector Industries. MSMEs, Public and Private Sector 
Industries. 
Fiscal Policy topic 
Paper —I (Section-C) Fiscal Policy: Paper-I (Section-C) deleted in 2018. 
Objectives and Instruments. Fiscal Policy topic deleted. 
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 110 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
  Appendix- 3.2 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.2.5 (D)(@) 
  Details of delay in declaration of revaluation result in UoR, Jaipur 
Name of 
Course 
BA Hons-I 
BA Hons-II 
BA Hons-Ill 
BA-I (D&D) 
BA-III (D&D) 
BA Hons-I 
BA Hons-II 
ywsliitseel 
BA Part-I 
ryeonell 
BA Part-II 
BA-I (D&D) 
BA-II (D&D) 
BA-III (D&D) 
BA-I (D&D) 
BA-II (D&D) 
2019 
2019 
2019 
2019 
2019 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2018 
2017 
2017 
DPT id 
PPT EVetacy imi 
aT 
28.06.2019 
28.06.2019 
02.07.2019 
18.06.2019 
18.06.2019 
22.07.2018 
17.07.2018 
02.07.2018 
09.07.2018 
04.07.2018 
05.07.2018 
11.07.2018 
11.07.2018 
06.07.2018 
09.08.2017 
14.09.2017 
  
Cut-off date™ ere 
of declaration | declaration of 
COB tating revaluation 
revaluation 
13.08.2019 
13.08.2019 
17.08.2019 
03.08.2019 
03.08.2019 
07.09.2018 
03.09.2018 
17.08.2018 
24.08.2018 
19.08.2018 
20.08.2018 
26.08.2018 
26.08.2018 
21.08.2018 
24.09.2017 
29.10.2017 
ate 
   12.11.2019 
12.11.2019 
31.10.2019 
16.09.2019 
16.09.2019 
30.11.2018 
02.12.2018 
02.12.2018 
14.12.2018 
14.12.2018 
14.12.2018 
16.11.2018 
14.12.2018 
18.09.2018 
06.12.2017 
06.12.2017 
IPE Nae 
days 
90 
90 
74 
44 
44 
83 
90 
105 
111 
116 
115 
81 
109 
27 
73 
37 
88 Cut-off date for declaration of results of revaluation have been calculated from date of declaration of 
examination results by allowing 15 days for filling of application form and 30 days for revaluation of answer 
sheets. 
  
111 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Appendix- 3.3 
(Refer Paragraph 3.2.1.5 (C)) 
Position of 22 research projects lying incomplete in UoR, Jaipur 
  
  
  
  
L Name of Purpose of research [Period | Amount PUTS Expenditure | Reason for 
Oca ORO a sanctioned | released by ] incurred tua ale hy 
(< in crore) sanctioning | (in crore) | of remaining 
authorities grant/refund 
to UoR Cy aed ei 
( in crore) 
5 
DST- PURSE To provide support to 2014- 32.40 6.00 4.46 Failure to 
(Phase-II) performing universities 19 submit UCs 
program essentially for research, of first 
man-power cost, installment 
augmentation of till elapsing 
equipment and of entire 
computational facilities, period of 
research consumables, 2014-19. 
organization of 
scientific 
conferences/workshops, 
travel and maintenance 
of the facilities. 
DST-SAIF To provide facilities of 2013- 5.80 2.00 Nil Due to non- 
sophisticated analytical 18 purchase of 
instruments to equipment 
researchers through its timely, the 
Sophisticated entire amount 
Analytical Instrument of % 2 crore 
Facilities (SAIF). was 
refunded. 
3. 
Start-up To assist researchers 3 2.38 1.40 0.83 Non- 
Research Grant working in frontier years utilization of 
(SRG)- areas of science and disbursed 
engineering 10 initiate grant. 
08 Projects their research career ina 
new institution. 
UGC- SAP To encourage the 2012- 11.28 1.85 1.50 Delayed 
(Special pursuit of excellence 19 submission 
Assistance and teamwork in of UC and 
Program) — advanced teaching and non- 
research to accelerate compliance 
11 projects the realization of of UGC 
international standards guidelines. 
in specific fields. 
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 112 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Name of 
project 
  
Purpose of research [P PU yis Amount Expenditure | Reason for 
sO RUC ra sanctioned | released by } incurred non-release 
(< in crore)] sanctioning | (in crore) | of remaining 
PU w Uy EVO 
evi 
  
DBT- 
Interdisciplinary 
Progra of Life 
Sciences 
(PLS). 
Isolation and 2010- 9.90 4,33 4.44 Non- 
Identification of desired 15 utilization of 
metabolites from the initial grant 
medicinally important timely and 
plants and non-purchase 
commercialization/ of major 
large scale production, equipment 
synthesis & 
characterization of 
Nanoparticles by using 
chemical and biological 
route, integration of 
metabolites and Nano 
materials for 
application in textiles, 
nutritional enhancement 
and medicines and to 
develop water 
purification system 
using CNT route, etc. 
  
  
113 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Appendix- 5.1 
(Refer paragraph 5.1.2.1) 
Functioning of Governing Bodies in test checked universities 
Name of | Functions/ Lapses noticed in functioning of the Governing Body 
CeO a Li COS OLR OMe ted 
  
otha periodicity of mectings) UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, 
PE Ee) 
Senate It is Apex Body of the Constituted Constituted Not 
university for: constituted 
(i) Making/amending/ (i) No annual (i) Only four out 
tepealing Statue. meeting of Senate was of 15 meetings were 
Gi) Considering and held since 2010 other held during 2014-19. 
cancelling ordinances and _ than for ‘passing grace’ (ii) No meeting of 
ii) Considering and to the students who Senate was held during 
passing of the resolutions appeared in university 2014-15 and only one 
on the annual report, annual examination in the year meeting each in 2016-18 
accounts and the other 2011 to 2018. were held. 
financial estimates etc. (ii) Amendments 
made in ordinances by 
Periodicity of meetings- syndicate were not 
UoR- Once in a year. placed before the Senate. 
JNVU- Three meetingsina (iii) Representation 
year of students were not 
found in Senate. 
Syndicate/ It is Executive Body of the Constituted Constituted In the 
Board of university to act: University, 
Management (i) To make (i) 10 amendments (i) Representation Board of 
(BoM) ordinance/ amend and (test checked) made by of students were not Management 
cancel ordinances. Syndicate were not found in Syndicate. is the highest 
(ii) To hold control placed before Senate. (ii) Only one = Executive 
and administer property (id Representation meeting out of six Body. Only 
and funds of the University of students were not meetings was held 
etc. found in Senate. during 2018-19. 
(iii) Audited 
six meetings 
were held 
inst 
Periodicity of meetings- accounts of the a _— ot oe prescribed Ordinarily one meeting in university were not 20 ti two months in UoR and Placed before Senate di _ OL. luring - 
Us 19. 
R} Board of @ It deals with Constituted Constituted Not 
Inspection applications for affiliation, constituted 
approval, arrange their (i) Delay in Work relating to 
inspection, conducting of inspection affiliation is being dealt 
(ii) Itmakes rules for of private affiliated ~with Academic Section. 
approval, recognition and —_—_colleges. It was found that affiliation of Institutions (ii) Not prescribing inspection teams were not 
and colleges. of list of minimum submitting the required 
information in the 
prescribed format 
laboratory equipment in 
Periodicity of meetings- affiliated colleges for 
As and when required. granting affiliation. 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 114 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Name Oi 
Governing 
Body 
Academic 
Council 
Board of 
Study in UoR 
and GGTU/ 
Committee 
of Courses 
and Studies 
in INVU 
College 
Development 
Council 
(CDC) 
Functions/ 
Responsibilities (including 
PSUS A MMT LAD] 
  
(i) It shall be 
responsible for the 
maintenance of the 
standards of teaching and 
examination. 
(ii) Subject to 
approval, to make, amend 
and cancel regulations 
laying down courses of 
study and curricula. 
Periodicity of meetings- 
UoR- Once in a year 
JNVU & GGTU- 
meeting in every month. 
one 
To recommend courses of 
study and curriculum in 
their respective subject to 
Syndicate and Academic 
Council. 
Periodicity of meetings- As 
and when required 
The CDC recommends the 
proposal of the colleges and 
teachers to the UGC as per 
the guidelines of UGC. The 
CDC plays an important 
tole between UGC and 
Colleges for improving 
infrastructure facilities in 
the college and for the 
benefit of the faculty 
members and students in 
multiple ways. 
(iii) Director of 
Education did not 
participate in any Bol 
meeting. 
Constituted 
Constituted 
Only the modified 
syllabus was attached by 
BoS before Academic 
Council without detailing 
of the changes that were 
actually made in the 
syllabus. 
Constituted 
(i) CDC did not 
invite any proposals 
from colleges for UGC 
grants during 2014-19. 
However, colleges sent 
their proposals to UGC 
by their own. 
(ii) Due to not 
recommendation of 
proposal of colleges by 
CDC, grants sanctioned 
by UGC to colleges 
decreased drastically 
from 22.64 crore in 
2014-15 to nil in 2018- 
19. 
Constituted 
Only 13 out 60 meetings 
were held during 2014-19 
Constituted 
Only the modified 
syllabus was submitted 
by Committee of Courses 
and Studies to Academic 
Council without detailing 
the changes that were 
actually made in the 
syllabus 
Constituted 
(i) CDC was 
established in 2016. 
Director of CDC which 
was appointed in June 
subsequently abolished 
in October 2017 due to 
paucity of funds. 
(ii) Also advisory 
committee for CDC was 
not found constituted. 
PV COBO ER me og Tm SAE 
UoR, Jaipur JNVU, Jodhpur GGTU, 
PenO ele: 
Constituted 
Seven 
meetings 
were held 
during 2014- 
19 
Constituted 
Thought it 
was 
constituted 
in 2017, no 
syllabus of 
courses was 
revised in 
the 
university. 
Not 
constituted 
  
115 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
  PWC |b cae 
(Refer paragraph 5.6.2.2) 
  EV SUB Cee WON UMC CE MCE e Com TIC 
rrr Central Share Delay in 
             ahs Date of grants Amount | Date of grants et 
(Xin crore) | released to State | (€incrore)| released to SPD | ‘éleased to 
Government SPD 
(in days) 
2014-15 3.25 12.01.2015 1.75 31.03.2016 428 
2015-16 38.40 30.09.2015 43.60 31.03.2016 167 
27.00 29.12.2015 77 
2016-17 44.40 27.12.2016 29.60 17.03.2017 64 
2017-18 53.70 19.12.2017 35.80 14.03.2018 69 
2018-19 12.00 11.07.2018 8.00 14.08.2018 18 
25.80 30.08.2018 17.20 29.11.2018 75 
10.80 11.10.2018 7.20 27.03.2019 151 
7.50 31.12.2018 5.00 29.03.2019 72 
4.20 07.03.2019 2.80 05.07.2019 104 
  
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 116 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
  Appendix- 5.3 
(Refer paragraph 1.6.2) 
  
SI. No. 
10. 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
Gv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
EO RU OUR CMO A ef 
Survey Questions 
How much of the syllabus was covered 
in the class? 
Teachers inform you about your 
expected competencies, course 
outcomes and programme outcomes. 
The teachers illustrate the concepts 
through examples and applications. 
The teachers identify your strengths and 
encourage you with providing right 
level of challenges. 
Teachers are able to identify your 
weaknesses and help you to overcome 
them. 
The institution makes effort to engage 
students in the monitoring, review and 
continuous quality improvement of the 
teaching learning process. 
The institute/ teachers use student 
centric methods, such as experiential 
learning, participative learning and 
problem solving methodologies for 
enhancing learning experiences. 
Efforts are made by the institute/ 
teachers to inculcate soft skills, life 
skills and employability skills to make 
you ready for the world of work. 
The overall quality of teaching-learning 
process in your institute is very good. 
Satisfaction with teachers. 
Subject Knowledge 
Teaching Ability 
Regularity/ Punctuality 
Fair as evaluator/examiner 
Mentor / Role Model and Guide 
Communication Skills 
Percentage of 
PLAT Cait) 
Pe RORST CHP TT TAY 
satisfied 
62.98 
81.10 
80.49 
84.70 
77.72 
90.17 
88.95 
88.00 
90.04 
88.95 
84.43 
74.61 
79.91 
76.54 
73.42 
ORE RE 
students partially 
PP RIRSE COCKER TCE | 
  
37.02 
18.90 
19.51 
15.30 
22.28 
9.83 
11.05 
12.00 
09.96 
11.05 
15.57 
25.39 
20.09 
23.46 
26.58 
  
117 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
SL No. Survey Questions COREE TR Percentage of 
STATI Ky RIUM IPE Ns 
satisfied/highly | satisfied/dissatisfied 
satisfied 
  
11. Satisfaction on Teaching Methods. 
(i) Practical Classes 75.09 24.91 
(ii) Assignments/Project work 71.18 28.82 
(iii) Seminars/Group Discussion 68.07 31.93 
(iv) Extra Coaching/Classes 56.23 43.77 
(v) ICT based teaching (PPT/Videos etc) 44.98 55.02 
(vi) Lectures 82.15 17.85 
12. Satisfaction with Admission Process. 
(i) Availability of Information in 82.85 17.15 
prospectus or institution website 
(ii) Guidance in the choice of subjects in 79.39 20.61 
institution 
(ii) Fees payment procedure 81.71 18.29 
(iv) Fair selection criteria in admission 81.80 18.20 
13. Satisfaction with Examination and 
Evaluation Process. 
(i) The pattern of Question Papers 87.11 12.89 
(ii) Practical / External Viva Examinations 74.69 25.31 
(iii) Timely Declaration of Results 79.43 20.57 
(iv) Grading / Marking System 75.88 24.12 
(v) Reassessment / Re-evaluation practices 72.76 27.24 
14. Institute’s Initiatives 
(i) Career Counseling 49,43 50.57 
(ii) Placement Cell 52.40 47.60 
(iii) Training and Internship 56.49 43.51 
15. Satisfaction with the opportunities in 
your institution to enhance the overall 
capabilities of the students? 
  
(i) Discussion in the classroom 77,46 22.54 
(ii) Activities like theatre, art, painting, 72.98 27.02 
music 
(iii) Sports and Games 69.61 30.09 
(iv) Open discussion on public issues 64.78 35.22 
(v) Interaction with scholars and eminent 69.17 30.83 
personalities 
(vi) Campus Environment 72.54 27.46 
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 118 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
  
SL No. Survey Questions COREE TR Percentage of 
STATI Ky RIUM IPE Ns 
satisfied/highly | satisfied/dissatisfied 
satisfied 
(vii) Social Outreach Activities National 74.52 25.48 
Service Scheme (NSS) National Cadet 
Corps (NCC) etc.) 
16. are you satisfied with the campus 
facilities available on your campus 
(i) Library, laboratory, toilet and 75.11 24.89 
cleanliness of the campus 
(ii) Sports and games 67.72 32.28 
(iii) Drinking Water 74.12 25.88 
(iv) Hostel 48.46 51.54 
(vy) Medical facility 52.19 47.81 
(vi) Supportive Campus for Differently 53.11 46.89 
Abled 
(vii) | Common room 68.38 31.62 
(viii)  Student’s grievance redressal cell 63.95 36.05 
17. Are you satisfied with institutional 74.30 25.70 
governance? 
Governance ee students were students were not 
aware PME 
Whether student council election is 72.98 27.02 
held? 
(ii) Are you aware of Anti-Ragging cell in 42.46 57.54 
your institution? 
(iii) Are you aware of Sexual Harassment 38.46 61.54 
cell in your institution? 
(iv) Are you aware of IQAC (Internal 33.99 66.01 
Quality Assurance Cell) in your 
institution? 
(v) Are you aware of Equal Opportunity 47.46 52.54 
Cell in your institution? 
(vi) Whether option for SWAY AM / 42.28 57.72 
MOOC / Online Courses exists in your 
institution? 
(vii) Are you aware of choice based Credit 34.01 65.99 
System (CBCS) in your institution? 
(viii) Are you aware of Student Counselling 57.63 42.37 
Centre in your institution? 
  
119 Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

Appendices   
Appendix-5.4 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
  
AISHE All India Survey on Higher Education 
AQAR _ Annual Quality Assurance Report 
Bol Board of Inspection 
BoM Board of Management 
CCT Center for Conversing Technologies 
CEDC Community Education Development Cell 
DBT Department of Bio-Technology 
DST Department of Science & Technology 
FYP Twelfth Five Year Plan 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GGTU Govind Guru Tribal University 
GoR Government of Rajasthan 
HEIs higher educational institutions 
ICT Information and Communications Technology 
IQAC Internal Quality Assurance Cell 
JNVU Jai Narain Vyas University 
MBE Molecular Beam Epitaxy 
MHRD Ministry of Human Resources Development 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NEP National Education Policy 
NET National Eligibility Test 
NMEICT National Mission on Education through ICT 
OBCs Other Backward Classes 
RUSA Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SHEC State Higher Education Council 
SHEP State Higher Education Plan 
SLQAC State Level Quality Assurance Cell 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
STR Student Teacher Ratio 
TEM Transmission Electron Microscope 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UoR University of Rajasthan 
UT Union Territory 
VC Vice Chancellor 
Performance Audit of “ Outcomes of 120 
Higher Education in Rajasthan”

© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
http://www. agraj.cag.gov.in