 
  
 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance audit  
of 
Management of storm water in 
Bengaluru Urban area 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report no. 2 of the year 2021 
 

 
  
 
 

i 
 
Table of contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface  iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Geography of Bengaluru 1 
1.3 Storm water drainage network in Bengaluru 1 
1.4 River and lake network in Bengaluru 4 
1.5 Rainfall and runoff yield in Bengaluru 5 
1.6 Need for storm water management 7 
1.7 Organisational structure for management of storm 
water drains in Bengaluru 
8 
Chapter II Audit framework  
2.1 Audit objectives 9 
2.2 Audit criteria 9 
2.3 Audit scope and methodology 9 
2.4 Joint study on geospatial data along with Regional 
Remote Sensing Centre, ISRO 
10 
2.5 Acknowledgement 11 
2.6 Audit constraints 11 
2.7 Previous audits 12 
2.8 Organisation of audit findings 12 
Chapter III Collection and conservation of storm water  
3.1 Policies and regulatory framework 13 
3.2 Coordination between different institutions 14 
3.3 Storm water collection systems 15 
3.4 Storm water conservation systems 26 
3.5 Other factors affecting the conservation of storm 
water 
29 
Chapter IV Planning, designing and construction of storm 
water drains 
 
4.1 Planning 33 
4.2 Designing of roads and drains 49 
4.3 Deficiencies in execution of projects involving 
remodelling of storm water drains 
59 
 
 
 
 

ii 
 
Chapter V Protection and maintenance of storm 
water management systems 
 
5.1 Protection of storm water drains 73 
5.2 Factors affecting/impeding connectivity/smooth flow 
of storm water in drains: Issues concerning 
maintenance of the SWD infrastructure 
84 
5.3 Monitoring and awareness 88 
Chapter VI Financial Management  
6.1 Allocation and expenditure towards management of 
SWDs 
93 
6.2 Deficiencies in preparation of annual budget 
proposals 
94 
6.3 Short provision of funds under 14th Finance 
Commission 
94 
6.4 Continued maintenance of bank accounts for 
JnNURM 
95 
6.5 Non-reconciliation of statutory recoveries remitted to 
departments concerned 
95 
6.6 Weak financial control mechanism 96 
 Appendices 99 
 Glossary 120 
 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
1.1 Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of 
BBMP – Zone wise 
99 
2.1 Statement showing the gist of audit observations and 
recommendations of Committee on Local Bodies and 
PRIs pertaining to storm water drainage works 
executed under JnNURM (Para 4.1 of Report no. 6 of 
2013, Government of Karnataka) 
105 
3.1 Status of compliance to NDMA Guidelines by the 
State Government/BBMP 
106 
3.2 List of disused lakes under BBMP 109 
3.3 Typical changes (change in size and shape) noticed in 
lakes 
110 
3.4 Table showing a few lakes converted for other 
purposes 
111 
3.5 Results of verification of few drains in 
Vrishabhavathi valley 
112 
4.1 Statement showing the details of SWD works 
executed under Package 2 of Nagarothana Yojane 
115 
4.2 Statement showing the details of SWD works 
executed under Nagarothana Yojane 
118 
5.1 Instances of encroachments noticed during joint 
physical verification 
119 
 

iii 
 
  
 
 
 
  
1. This Report of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India 
has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of 
Karnataka under CAG’s DPC 
Act, 1971. 
 
2. The Report covering the period 
2013-18 contains the results of 
performance audit of 
‘Management of storm water in 
Bengaluru Urban area’. 
 
3. Audit has been conducted in 
conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
 
 
Preface 

v 
  
 
 
The city of Bengaluru is a victim of a paradoxical situation - urban flooding on 
one hand and depletion of ground water table levels, on the other.  There is an 
urgent need for urban managers to address this issue from the water 
security/environment and urban planning perspectives. 
Rapid increase in frequency of flooding in the city over t he last few years, 
leading to destruction of roads, traffic congestion lasting several hours and 
extensive damage to public property and health has highlighted the need for a 
thorough examination into the design, agility/adaptability of the infrastructure 
for the management of storm water and other relevant issues; hence this 
performance audit (PA). 
The scope of this PA is not limited to the SWD infrastructure. We have 
attempted to address the larger conceptual question of redefining storm water 
as a critical natural resource worthy of conservation.  The PA which covers the 
period 2013-14 to 2017-18 involved test-check of records in the Office of the 
Commissioner, Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) and Chief 
Engineer, SWD along with joint physical ins pections of drains.  Audit 
conducted an independent study of long term changes in land use patterns 
utilising geospatial inputs with technical support from Regional Remote 
Sensing Centre –South, Indian Space Research Organization, Bengaluru to 
obtain details of changes across specific time periods which affect ground water 
recharge, simultaneous variations in SWD infrastructure in order to identify 
weaknesses in their management/monitoring. 
The PA revealed that Bengaluru witnessed large scale encroachment of 
lakes/drains and depletion of natural drainage systems.   The changes in land 
use such as decrease in vegetation cover and open spaces and increase in built 
up area resulted in loss of inter -connectivity between water bodies impacting 
effective recharge of ground water and increase in runoff of storm water. A 
study by the Indian Institute of Science states that the city (covering an area of 
741 sq km) had 1 ,452 water bodies with a total storage capacity of 35 TMC 
during early 1800s.  By 2016 , the number of water bodies in the same area 
reduced to 194 with a storage capacity of 5 TMC.  The current storage capacity 
which has further declined due to  siltation is merely 1.2 TMC (2016).  Out of 
210 lakes under the jurisdiction of BBMP as at the en d of December 2020, 18 
lakes with a total area of 254 Acres and 17 guntas were identified as disused 
lakes; making them vulnerable to encroachments and future conversions. 
A robust policy governing storm water management does not exist.   The State 
Government and BBMP failed to consider urban surface runoff (average annual 
rainfall being 969 mm during 2013-19) as a water resource despite the growing 
scarcity of water in the State/city.  More than 40 per cent of properties under 
the purview of Bengaluru Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB) failed 
to adopt mandatory rain water harvesting structures. 
Executive Summary 

vi 
The storm water drains of Bengaluru are documented in two different 
documents prepared by two different agencies – Revised Master Plan 2015 by 
Bengaluru Development Authority (BDA) and Master plan of drains by BBMP.  
There were significant discrepancies between these two plans with regard to 
identification and classification of drains.  This deprived the planners of a single 
source of truth for planning/developme nt of the city.  BBMP did not possess 
fool-proof data on the total number/length and nature of different types of drains 
under its jurisdiction.  The absence of a comprehensive inventory of drains and 
their proper classification contributed to lack of clarity on critical issues such as 
the extent of buffer zone to be maintained, etc.  This in turn hampered 
maintenance of drains as many utility lines like electrical, telephone, optical 
cable, etc., were laid across the drains in many locations obstructing flow in the 
drains.  
Comprehensive Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepared for improvement of 
SWDs were reportedly not available with BBMP and the only available revised 
DPR was deficient.  Works executed were either incomplete or were abandoned 
due to non-availability of required land and poor performance of the contractors.  
This resulted in BBMP not submitting the Utilisation Certificates and 
consequent loss of financial assistance of `83.59 crore under the Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission.   
Though a large number of works were abandoned and rescinded due to poor 
performance of contractors, risk and cost clause were not invoked. This led to 
extension of undue financial benefit of `35.31 crore to the contractors.  BBMP 
also resorted to payment of `94.93 lakh to an agency without the original 
records and proper reconciliation under questionable circumstances. 
BBMP failed to prepare a SWD manual specifying the design, construction and 
maintenance of the SWD infrastructure of the city.  It failed to factor in reasons 
for high intensity rainfall due to rapid urbanisation and did not adhere to the 
provisions of Indian Road Congress and the guidelines of National Disaster 
Management Authority while designing and constructing roads/drains. Ground 
water recharge structures were not taken up due to flow of sewage in SWDs. 
Water bodies and drains were not inter-connected and linkage between different 
drains was absent.  This affected free flow of storm water  leading to frequent 
flooding in various parts of the city.  
BBMP executed construction/remodeling of 332 km and maintenance of 308 
km of SWDs (primary and secondary) respectively till 2017 -18 from out of its 
own funds and funds received from Central/State  Government.  The 
performance audit showed instances of improper and delayed execution of 
works and execution of SWD works by multiple authorities within BBMP 
which was fraught with the risk of duplication of claims.  It incurred an 
expenditure of `8.51 crore on items of works, which were objected to by audit 
earlier and though the Committee on Local Bodies and Panchayat Raj 
Institutions had endorsed Audit’s observations.  Records such as ‘completion 
plans’ and ‘as built drawings’ and works history register s, which are vital for 
subsequent planning were absent and basic financial records such as grants 
register, deposit register, register of securities, schedule of work expenditure, 

vii 
register of advance etc., were not maintained.  This was indicative of a wea k 
financial control mechanism within BBMP. 
Rampant mixing of sewage (780 MLD) with storm water is a serious problem.  
Sewerage lines were drawn inside the SWDs and large quantity of sewage was 
illegally let into SWDs.  Joint inspection of drains confirmed the existence of 
sewerage lines within SWDs and sewage being discharged into the SWDs 
directly or through fractured manholes at many places.  Since the water in 
SWDs is not treated in the same manner as sewage, the untreated sewage is 
flowing into water bodies and affecting the quality of ground water adversely.  
This carries substantial risk of spurt in vector/water borne diseases such as 
dengue, typhoid, cholera, hepatitis, etc., and adverse environmental outcomes 
including disappearance of biodiversity a nd aquatic ecosystems.  The Chief 
Health Officer (Public Health), BBMP confirmed an outburst of cholera in the 
city during March 2020 and stated that seven out of the 25 suspected cases had 
been confirmed as cholera.  He, inter alia, attributed sewage flow ing in open 
SWDs to the spreading of the epidemic. 
The Revised Master Plan 2015 and NGT directions stipulated a buffer zone on 
either side of primary, secondary and tertiary drains and the statutory provisions 
stipulated putting in place boundary marks for  such descriptions. None of the 
test-checked drains, though had such boundary markings.  This led to 
encroachment of drains as well as construction in buffer zone.  BBMP was yet 
to take action on 714 out of the 2,626 identified encroachments.  The 
completeness and reliability of the data on encroachments available with BBMP 
was low as audit noticed significant instances of encroachments, in addition to 
those recognised by BBMP.  Removal of encroachments was incomplete. 
Severe blockages of surface drains/SWD s indicated absence of periodical 
inspections as well as its regular maintenance of drains.  BBMP failed to adopt 
quality monitoring measures and install Sewage Treatment Plants, despite Court 
directives leading to continuous contamination of water bodies.  BBMP did not 
take up any information, education and communication activities/awareness 
camps for educating people regarding importance of SWDs and their proper 
upkeep and did not enforce penal provisions for violation/dumping of debris in 
SWDs.  Conseque ntly, BBMP failed to protect and maintain the drain 
infrastructure resulting in continuous misuse of the drains. 
  

viii 
 
 
 
 
 
1. The State Government/BBMP should formulate a comprehensive policy 
which clearly recognises urban runoff as a potential source of water 
requiring clear plan of action for conservation in consonance with the NDM 
guidelines. 
2. BBMP should prevent further reduct ion in water bodies and length of the 
natural drains and ensure inter -connectivity of water bodies for proper 
conservation of the ecosystem as well as ground water. 
3. BBMP and BWSSB should jointly prepare a plan of action to prevent 
sewage flow into  SWDs within a definite time schedule and the 
implementation thereof should be monitored by the State Government.  
4. The State Government/BBMP should explore the possibility of  letting the 
treated water to the water bodies in the city to prevent drying up of water 
bodies and to aid in enhancing ground water recharge. 
5. The State Government/BDA should take immediate action to finalise and 
notify the revised master plan to prevent e ncroachments of Government 
assets such as land, water bodies etc., and rectify the omissions with regard 
to SWDs. 
6. BBMP should prepare a comprehensive database of SWDs in coordination 
with parastatal agencies like BDA, BWSSB etc., to serve as a single source 
for effective planning and management of SWDs. 
7. The State Government/BBMP should ensure that DPRs prepared are 
comprehensive and  realistic and  include details such as extent and 
availability of land, the requirement and sources of fund, coordination with 
other institutions etc. 
8. BBMP should initiate immediate action to comply with the instructions of 
the Government for recovery of risk and cost amounts from all the 
contractors who have violated norms and blacklist persistent violators. It 
should initiate action against the concerned officers/officials responsible for 
non-compliance. It should also put in place adequate and resilient financial 
controls through proper documentation. 
9. BBMP should maintain all  the basic records to ensure proper accounting 
and com ply with the statutory provisions for transparency in 
implementation and execution of works. 
List of recommendations 

ix 
10. The State Government should conduct a detailed investigation into the 
issues regarding preparation of incomplete and deficient DPRs, loss of files 
by SWD division,  payments made under questionable circumstances and 
take appropriate action based on the findings of the investigation. 
11. BBMP should factor in all parameters such as rainfall pattern, increase in 
impervious layers, decrease in vegetation etc., while designi ng and 
executing the roads and drains to increase ground water recharge and 
prevent flooding.   It should ensure strict adherence to the guidelines and 
norms prescribed for construction of roads/drains. 
12. BBMP should prepare action plans, comprehensive proje ct reports, 
completion plans etc., maintain a works history register and repository of all 
such records for future use in planning and implementation 
13. Since SWD works are identified as emergency works, BBMP should ensure 
that the works are completed within the prescribed time schedule.    It should 
also consider establishing a separate technical wing for meticulous scrutiny 
of the estimates to ensure execution of works economically and efficiently. 
14. The State Government should ensure strict action against the  
officers/officials responsible for non -compliance with Government 
instructions and Committee recommendations. Care should be taken to 
avoid excess/avoidable payments to contractors. 
15. The State Government should conduct an independent verification of the 
status and quality of all SWD works to ensure their quality and completion. 
16. BBMP should accord high priority to  prevent discharge of sewage into 
SWDs.   There is a need to prepare and execute (i) medium term strategy 
for complete cessation of sewage contamin ation of storm water and lakes 
eventually and (ii) a short term strategy for installation of sewage treatment 
plants in coordination with BWSSB to prevent contamination of water 
bodies. 
17. BBMP needs to escalate its efforts to conduct robust surveys to identify and 
evict all encroachments on SWDs and maintain the stipulated buffer zone. 
18. BBMP should put in place an adequate mechanism to conduct and document 
periodical inspection and maintenance of all categories of drains.  
19.  BBMP should educate the urban popula tion on the effects of improper 
management of SWDs and explore the possibility of involving Residential 
Welfare Associations/Non -Government Organisations for effective 
management of waste/drains and providing them with incentives. 
20. BBMP should prepare the b udget clearly indicating the scheme -wise 
receipts of funds and expenditure incurred thereon and for both capital and 
revenue activities under each function. 

  
 1 
 
Storm water is that portion of precipitation that does not naturally percolate into 
the ground or evaporate, but flows via overland flow, interflow, pipes and other 
features of a storm water drainage system into a defined surface water body, or 
a constructed infiltration facility1.   Storm water management is the control and 
use of storm water runoff.  It includes planning for runoff, maintaining storm 
water systems, and regulating the collection, storage, and movem ent of storm 
water.  Storm water management should also factor in drainage in the design of 
cities and housing developments.  The drainage system should best preserve or 
mimic the natural hydrologic cycle and fit within the capacity of the existing 
infrastructure.  
Bengaluru is located at 12.59º north latitude and 77.57º east longitude, almost 
equidistant from the eastern and western coast of the South Indian peninsula, 
and is situated at an altitude of 920 metres above mean sea l evel. The mean 
annual total rainfall  as per an Indian Institute of Science (IISc) study 2 
(henceforth referred to as 2017 study) is about 880 mm with about 60 rainy days 
a year over the last ten years. Bengaluru is located over ridges delineating four 
watersheds, viz. Hebbal, Koramangala, Challaghatta and Vrishabhavathi. The 
catchment area of major valleys of Bengaluru is shown in Chart 1.1. 
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) spread over an area of 741 
square kilometre (sq km) is demarcated into eight3 zones.  As per the records of 
the Chief Engineer, Storm Water Drains (SWD), BBMP has a total drain 
network (primary and secondary drains only) of 842 kilometre (km).  However, 
as per the master plan of dra ins also prepared by BBMP, the total length of 
drains was 856.74 km which includes the length of drains that are outside the 
jurisdiction of BBMP but are considered for hydraulic analysis purposes only.   
BBMP did not have on records the length of the tertiary drains under its 
                                                 
1  National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management of Urban Flooding. A publication 
of the National Disaster Management Authority, Government of India. ISBN: 978 -93-
80440-09-5, September 2010, New Delhi. 
2  Ramachandra T V, Vinay S, Bharath H. Aithal, 2017. Frequent Floods in Bangalore: Causes 
and Remedial Measures, ENVIS Technical Report 123, Environmental Information System, 
CES, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012 
3 Bengaluru East, Bengaluru Sout h, Bengaluru West, Bommanahalli, Byatarayanapura, 
Dasarahalli, Mahadevapura and Rajarajeshwari Nagar. 
1
Chapter
 Introduction
1.1  Introduction 
1.2 Geography of Bengaluru 
1.3 Storm water drainage network in Bengaluru 

Chapter I 
 
 2 
jurisdiction.  Even the drainage network map of BBMP has no mention/sketch 
of the tertiary drains.  The storm water drainage network under BBMP is 
depicted in Chart 1.2 .  Zone-wise maps showing the drains is exhibited in 
Appendix 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Map showing the catchment of major valleys of Bengaluru 
 
Source: CE, SWD, BBMP 
 
 


  Introduction 
 
 3 
 
Source: CE, SWD, BBMP 
Chart 1.2: Map depicting Storm Drainage Network under BBMP  

Chapter I 
 
 4 
The undulating terrain of Bengaluru city (varying from about 700 m to about 
962 m above mean sea level) has led to the formation of interconnected lakes.  
By design, these lakes were all interconnected with canals/drains to enable the 
transfer of excess wa ter to the next lake.  These lakes catered to basic needs 
such as maintaining and recharging ground water, drinking water, habitat for 
fish and other aquatic life and agricultural activities.   
Bengaluru being located on the ridge, forms three watersheds a s precipitation 
flows as runoff in three directions along the valleys (Chart 1.3) – Koramangala-
Challaghatta valley (K&C valley), Hebbal valley and Vrishabhavathi valley.  
Both K&C valley and Hebbal valley join at Nagondanahalli village ( BBMP 
Ward 94  – Hagadur) which further flows to Dakshina Pinakini river  while 
Vrishabhavathi valley joins Arkavathi river which is a tributary of river 
Cauvery. 
 
 
Chart 1.3: River and lake network along major valleys 
 
                                                 
4   Study on Water situation in Bengaluru - Ramachandra T V, Vinay S, Durga Madhab 
Mahapatra, Sincy Varghese, Bharath H. Aithal, 2016. Water situation in Bengaluru, ENVIS 
Technical Report 114, Environmental Information System, CES, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bengaluru 560012 
1.4 River and lake network in Bengaluru4 

  Introduction 
 
 5 
As per the study on Water situation in Bengaluru (henceforth referred to as 2016 
study), the city had 1,452 water bodies with a total storage capacity of 35 TMC 
(thousand million cubic feet) (in the current spatial extent of 741 sq km) during 
early 1800s.  By 2016, the number of water bodies in the same area reduced to 
194 with a storage capacity of 5 TMC.  Due to siltation, the current storage 
capacity further decreased to 1.2 TMC (2016).  The status of lakes in Bengaluru 
is given in Chart 1.4. 
Chart 1.4: Status of lakes in Bengaluru 
 
(Red colour indicates lost lakes between 1970’s and 2016) 
 
The average annual rainfall in Bengaluru is about 787 mm with 75 per cent 
dependability and return period of five years.  The runoff yield is in the range 
of 600-700 mm in most of Bengaluru as indicated in Chart 1.5.  Catchment 
wise water yield analysis indicates about 49.5 per cent of water yield in the 
Vrishabhavathi valley, followed by 35.2 per cent in K&C valley and 15.3 per 
cent in Hebbal valley.  The total annual water yield in Bengaluru is about 14.80 
TMC. 
  
1.5 Rainfall and runoff yield in Bengaluru 

Chapter I 
 
 6 
Chart 1.5: Runoff yield in Bengaluru (mm/year) 
 
 
Considering the rai nfall data for 115 years between 1901 to 2015, the 2016 
study reports that the rainfall in Bengaluru was spread across seven months (i.e., 
87 per cent  of rainfall occurs between the months of May and November, 
September being the highest with average rainf all of 156 mm ).  The spatial 
monthly rainfall distribution pattern is depicted in Chart 1.6.  
Chart 1.6: Spatial rainfall distribution pattern in Bengaluru (all units in mm) 
 


  Introduction 
 
 7 
The 2016 study also estimates the requirement of water for domestic 
consumption at 20.08 TMC.  Ideally, about 73 per cent of Bengaluru’s water 
demand can be met out of rain water.  Steps towards achieving this would 
include rejuvenating of lakes and re -establishing inter connectivity, treatment 
of sewage generated in households, rainwater harvesting, etc. 
 
Bengaluru is experiencing rapid urbanisation. Accelerated growth has resulted 
in population increase and consequent pressure on infrastructure and natural 
resources leading to encroachment of water bodies/drains and depletion of 
natural drainage systems.  Increase in concretisation and impervious layer 
results in increase of storm wate r runoff.  The higher the runoff, the more the 
flooding.  A 2017 IISc study estimated an increase of more than 1,000 per cent 
urbanisation since 1970s and an alarming decrease in vegetation cover (88 per 
cent) and water bodies (79 per cent) during the same period.  The change in land 
use in Bengaluru as per the above study is depicted in Chart 1.7. 
Chart 1.7: Land use dynamics in Bengaluru 
 
The frequency of floods has increased over the years and has become a regular 
phenomenon resulting in submergence of low areas causing water stagnation at 
several locations, restricting pedestrian movements, traffic holdups for several 
hours, and extensive damage to public property.  The need for effective storm 
water management is thus paramount. 
Effective storm water management provides environmental, social and 
economic benefits to local communities.  When storm water is managed well, 
streams, rivers and lakes are cleaner; flood risks are reduced; costs due to flood 
damage decrease and quality of community life increases.  
1.6 Need for storm water management 

Chapter I 
 
 8 
The Urban Development Department (UDD) headed by Additional Chief 
Secretary (ACS) to Government of Karnataka is the controlling department for 
all Urban Local Bodies in the  State, including BBMP.  The Commissioner, 
BBMP is responsible for enforcing and overseeing the implementation of storm 
water management under the BBMP area. The Commissioner is assisted by 
Special Commissioner (Projects), Engineer -in-Chief and Chief Engin eer 
(SWD).   For the management of SWDs, the BBMP is divided into nine zones5 
each headed by an Executive Engineer (EE). 
 
                                                 
5  Bengaluru East, Bengaluru South, Bengaluru West, Bommanahalli, Byatarayanapura, 
Dasarahalli, Koramangala, Mahadevapura and Rajarajeshwari Nagar. 
1.7 Organisational structure for management of storm water drains 
in Bengaluru 

 
  
 9 
 
 
 
The main objectives of the PA were to ascertain: 
➢ Whether there exists an adequate mechanism for collection and 
conservation of storm water;  
➢ Whether storm water management was efficient and effective in terms of 
planning, designing and construction of required infrastructure;  
➢ Whether the protection and monitoring of storm water management 
systems were effective; and  
➢ Whether funds provided for management of storm water were utilised 
efficiently, economically and as per relevant rules. 
The main sources of audit criteria for the PA were: 
➢ Indian Road Congress (IRC) SP:50 of 1999 and 2013 – Guidelines on 
Urban Drainage; 
➢ National Disaster Management Guidelines: Management of Urban 
Flooding (September 2010) (NDM Guidelines); 
➢ Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 
➢ Revised Master Plans (RMP) of Bengaluru Development Authority; 
➢ Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976; 
➢ Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement (KTPP) Act/Rules,  
Karnataka Financial Code, Karnataka Public Works Departmental and 
Accounts Code; and 
➢ Government orders, court judgments, executive instructions and circulars 
issued from time to time. 
➢ Research and study reports of Indian Institute of Science and other reports 
The PA covering the period 2013 -14 to 2017 -18 was conducted through test -
check of records (April -August 2018) in the Office of the Commissioner, 
BBMP and Chief Engineer, SWD.  Relevant information was also gathered 
2
Chapter
 Audit Framework
2.1 Audit objectives 
2.2 Audit criteria 
2.3 Audit scope and methodology 

Chapter II 
 
 10 
from Bengaluru Development Authority (BDA), Bengaluru Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (BWS SB), Karnataka State Natural Disaster Monitoring 
Centre (KSNDMC), Department of Revenue, Karnataka Lake Conservation and 
Development Authority (KLCDA). 
Two valleys - Vrishabhavathi and Koramangala which included drain length of 
467.10 km were selected for detailed scrutiny.  Audit adopted random sampling 
for selection/analysis of works and conducted joint physical inspections with 
BBMP officers/officials along approximately 70 drains6 (under the six zones of 
the selected two valleys) to examine the status of drains (drains were physically 
inspected traversing along the stretch, wherever accessible).  A few illustrative 
videos taken during joint inspection have been included in the report at relevant 
places by providing the link and also the QR code for scanning. 
An entry conference was held (4 April 2018) w ith ACS, UDD to discuss the 
audit objectives, scope and methodology.  The results of the PA were discussed 
with the ACS, UDD in an exit conference held on 6 December 2018.  The State 
Government furnished its replies on 8 January 2019.  Audit verified the actions 
and corrective measures stated to have been initiated as per the reply during 
November-December 2019 and the updated position has been incorporated 
wherever applicable.  The State Government furnished revised replies on 6 
August 2020, which have also been incorporated at appropriate places. 
Audit conducted an independent study of long term changes in land use patterns 
utilising geospatial inputs with technical support f rom Regional Remote 
Sensing Centre –South, Indian Space Research Organization, Bengaluru 
(RRSC).  Geospatial technology can provide valuable inputs and tools for 
mapping and monitoring of natural resources. The monitoring abilities of 
Remote Sensing (RS), G eographical Information System (GIS) and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) technologies are valuable for the tracking of 
dynamics of land use over a period of time.  
The aim of the study was to understand the potential application of geospatial 
and collateral data for generation of inputs for audit.  Time series maps were 
generated using geospatial and ancillary data to analyse significant land use 
changes covering Koramangala and Vrishabhavathi valleys (out of four 
valleys).  
Methodology adopted for the study 
Spatial databases containing building foot prints, road network, lakes, drainage 
network and sewer lines in vector format obtained from BBMP, BDA and other 
departments were used for the analysis. The spatial information about natural 
and artificial f eatures was created/ updated to create time series data of lakes, 
drains, roads, buildings, vegetation and open land layers.  These were analysed 
to understand the changes in land use patterns. 
                                                 
6 In addition, few unmapped drains were also inspected. 
2.4 Joint study on geospatial data along with Regional Remote Sensing 
Centre, ISRO 
https://youtu.be/SjoZp
h3NeYg 
 
Audit trail to trace 
drains 


Audit Framework 
 
 11 
The work was done by way of superimposition of Satellite Images  of 1960 
(Corona imagery), 2008 satellite imagery and 2016/2017 satellite imagery and 
identifying and quantifying the changes in land use and land cover.  Shape files 
(.shp files) of natural and artificial feature layers - built up layer, roads layer, 
lakes and tanks layer, drainage network layer and open lands layer were 
created/updated.   Details of counts, lengths and areas of these features were 
generated by way of summaries and statistics of the geospatial features using 
tools available in the ArcGIS.  During this study, several points for joint 
inspection were identified from the imagery such as drains existing but not 
shown in departmental maps, possibility of mixing of sewage lines and storm 
water drains etc.  The time series data of land use changes  were prepared from 
the layers so created for decrease in water bodies and drains, increase in 
impervious layer, decrease in wetlands/open lands etc., which have impacts on 
flooding.   
Databases: Departmental spatial databases, High Resolution Imagery, e -
Procurement database 
Tools: ArcGIS  
Technical Help, hardware & software provisioning, mentorship : Regional 
Remote Sensing Centre, ISRO, Bengaluru. 
Field visits and joint inspections substantiated the outcomes of this study.  The 
findings of the study are incorporated at relevant places in this Report. 
 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State 
Government, BBMP, BDA, BWSSB, KSNDMC and Regional Remote Sensing 
Centre–South, Indian Space Research Organization, Be ngaluru in conducting 
the performance audit. 
Absence of complete set of records in the office of the CE, SWD of BBMP 
(commented at various places in the report) hampered audit analysis.  Hence, 
the findings of the joint physical inspections documented in the form of 
photographs formed the basis for h ighlighting the impact of insufficient storm 
water management.  The findings have been substantiated with references to 
various studies conducted by the Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Media 
Reports and official tweets of the traffic department.  
The State Government, in its reply, cited the continuous flow of sewage in the 
SWDs as the main reason for not taking up many of the activities envisaged 
such as ground water recharge structures, restoring interconnectivity among 
water bodies and drains etc., which are vital for effective storm water 
management.  It further stated that BWSSB was in the process of segregation 
of sewage from SWDs but did not provide the details of works taken up, the 
action plan drawn and proposed to be drawn to prevent mixing  of sewage with 
storm water and the time frame within which these works would be completed.  
In the absence of the details of works taken up for segregation of sewage from 
2.5 Acknowledgement 
2.6 Audit constraints  

Chapter II 
 
 12 
SWDs and a definite commitment from the Government in this regard, audit 
could not verify the claim of the Government.  
Some of the issues covered in this PA were covered in two earlier performance 
audits; 
a. SWD works under BBMP were reviewed earlier, as part of the Performance 
Audit on Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban R enewal Mission (JnNURM) 
covering the period 2005 -06 to 2011 -12 and the findings were included in 
the Report of the CAG of India on Local Bodies (Paragraph 4.1 of Report 
no.6 of the year 2013-Government of Karnataka).  The Committee on Local 
Bodies and Panc hayat Raj Institutions, after discussion, placed its report 
containing recommendations before the State Legislature (March 2016). The 
UDD is yet to submit the Action Taken Report on the Committee’s 
recommendations. The gist of the audit observations, recom mendations 
thereon and compliance, if any, is given in Appendix 2.1. 
The State Government endorsed (January 2019) the reply of Commissioner 
that the officials who worked between 2006 -2010, the projects proposed 
during that period and the duties/responsibilities of each official at that time 
were being identified.  It further replied that based on the findings by 
verification of records detailed report on dereliction of duty would be 
submitted and disciplinary action will be initiated accordingly.  However, we 
noticed that neither the identification of the defaulting officials nor 
disciplinary action were initiated even as of December 2020.  The reply 
shows BBMP’s neglect of the recommendations of the Committee on Local 
Bodies and Panchayat Raj Institutions.  Moreover, the inordinate delay in 
initiating action against officials responsible for financial loss to BBMP 
would result in officials going unpunished for reasons such as retirement etc. 
b. A Performance audit on “Conservation and Ecological restoration of Lakes 
under the jurisdiction of Lake Development Authority and Urban Local 
Bodies” (hereinafter referred to as Report on Lakes) was conducted for the 
period 2009-14 (Report no. 1 of the year 2015 – Government of Karnataka).  
The report has been partly discussed by the Committee. The findings of both 
the reports have been referred to at appropriate places in this report. 
The findings of the PA have been arranged in line with the audit objectives and 
are discussed in the following chapters. 
Chapter 3: Collection and conservation of storm water  
Chapter 4: Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
Chapter 5: Protection and maintenance of storm water management 
systems 
Chapter 6: Financial management 
2.7 Previous audits  
2.8  Organisation of audit findings 

  
 13 
 
3.1.1 Absence of regulatory framework governing storm water management 
in Bengaluru 
The State formulated (2002) a Water Policy in tune with the National Water 
Policy, which provides policy guidance for the management of water resources 
in the State.  The Policy stated that the State had experienced a ‘serious 
destabilisation of the water sector with hydrological, economic and ecological  
impacts’.  The State also has the Karnataka Urban Drinking Water and 
Sanitation Policy, 2002, with the objective of ensuring universal coverage of 
water and sanitation services. The State enacted the Karnat aka Ground water 
(Regulation and Control of Development and Management) Act, 2011 to 
regulate and control the development and management of ground water and 
matters incidental thereto.   There was, however, no regulatory framework 
specifically governing storm water management.  The above policies and acts 
also do not consider the need for management of storm water.   
Further, the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), Government 
of India recognised urban flooding as a ‘disaster different from riverine floods’ 
and brought out (September 2010) detailed guidelines for Management of 
Urban Flooding stipulating the institutional framework, designing of urban 
drainage, mode of disaster risk management etc.  However , t he State 
Government/BBMP failed to fully comply with the NDM Guidelines, 2010 with 
regard to urban  storm water management as detailed in Appendix 3.1  and 
discussed subsequently at appropriate places7. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that the Water Resources 
department had brought out the Water Policy which is in force.  The reply was, 
however, silent on the absence of regulatory framework governing management 
of storm water and the action proposed to be taken to create such a framework. 
3.1.2 State Water Policy - Urban surf ace runoff not recognised as a 
resource 
Government of India brought out the National Water Policy 2012, which laid 
emphasis on conservation of rivers, river corridors, water bodies and/or 
associated wetlands, the flood plains, ecological buffer areas to be  managed in 
an integrated manner to balance the environmental and social issues.  The State 
Policy was, however, not updated.  The State Policy needs to be revisited, since 
it does not factor in water sector reforms specially recogni sing urban water 
                                                 
7 Paragraphs 4.1.2, 4.1.3, 4.2.1, 4.2.1.1, 4.2.1.5, 5.1.3, and 5.2.3 
3
Chapter
 Collection and conservation of 
storm water
3.1 Policies and regulatory framework 

Chapter III 
 
 
14 
runoff as a water resource in the wake of growing scarcity and competing 
demands on the pattern of the National Water Policy.   
The State Government stated (August 2020) that surface runoff was not 
considered as alternate source of water due to the presence of s ewage in the 
drains.  It further stated that once the drain and lakes are free of sewage, urban 
storm water runoff can be an alternate source of water and this issue has since 
been touched upon in the Master Plan. 
The State Government, however, did not fur nish the details of action 
taken/proposed to be taken to free the drains and lakes from sewage despite the 
fact that huge quantity of sewage continues to flow into the drains.   
 
Recommendation 1 : The State Government/BBMP should formulate a 
comprehensive policy which clearly recognises urban runoff as a potential 
resource of water requiring clear plan of action for conservation in consonance 
with the NDM guidelines. 
The amendments to KM / KMC Acts enacted by the State Government in 1994 
transferred the function s of “roads and bridges”, “water supply” and “public 
health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management” to ULBs.     
However, the situation on the ground was different and responsibilities were 
highly fragmented: 
(i) BBMP was responsible for construction, ma intenance and cleaning of 
drains and Solid waste management etc.,  
(ii) BDA was responsible for preparation of Comprehensive Development 
Plan for Bengaluru metropolitan region and development of 
infrastructure, and 
(iii) BWSSB was responsible for water supply and sew age disposal within 
the jurisdiction of BBMP area.  
The existence of multiple institutions to carry out various inter-related functions 
had a negative impact on coordination as indicated in subsequent paragraphs. 
3.2.1 Coordination Committee 
The State Government had put in place (June 2015) a Coordination Committee 
which included the Additional Chief Secretary, UDD and all the other stake 
holders like BBMP, BDA, BWSSB etc., for providing basic infrastructure 
facilities to the citizens of the city under the Chairmanship of the Chief 
Secretary.  Audit observed that meetings were held regularly only from August 
2018 onwards i.e., three years after the constitution of the Committee.  
Review of the proceedings of the meetings showed that encroachments of 
SWDs and  mixing of sewage were regular items in the agenda and the 
Committee had time and again issued instructions to clear encroachments and 
prevent mixing of sewage in SWDs.  The situation, however, remained the same 
3.2 Coordination between different institutions 

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  15 
as large number of SWDs continue to carry se wage.   Audit also observed that 
there was absence of coordination between various institutions. 
 
Illustration 
The AEE, SWD division of RR Nagar Zone, BBMP registered (22 October 2020) 
an FIR against the AEE, BWSSB, Banagiri  sub-division alleging that BWSSB 
had dug up the concrete road (Ward no. 160, 1st cross, 2nd main, Gurudatta 
Layout, Girinagar, Bengaluru -560062 under RR Nagar Zone) laid by BBMP 
without obtaining the necessary permission from the respective zonal office o f 
BBMP or SWD division to lay underground drainage pipes and construct 
manholes. The road had a SWD retaining wall on one side and 
apartments/houses on the other side.  He, further alleged that BWSSB had 
carried out the work unscientifically and without taking necessary precautions; 
because of which the road was filled with rain water after the rainfall that 
occurred on 21 October 2020 which resulted in collapse of the retaining wall 
and damage to the road thereby putting the public to risk (Exhibit 3.1).      
Exhibit 3.1: Damage to SWD retention wall and concrete road
       Source: Photographs shared by SWD wing of BBMP 
Lakes inter -connected with canals/drains constitute the basic storm water 
collection systems for Bengaluru city.  Various reports/studies have highlighted 
the fact that rapid urbanisation has given rise to increasing demand on land 
which led to pressure on water bodies and uncontrolled developmental activities 
in the neighbourhood of lakes, which led to 
➢ encroachment of lakes and SWDs resulting in decline in ground water 
table, while increasing the instances of flooding; 
➢ dumping of solid waste, construction debris etc., in SWDs, lake 
catchment and in lakes; 
3.3 Storm water collection systems 


Chapter III 
 
 
16 
➢ sustained inflow of partially or untreated sew age, polluting existing 
surface and subsurface water resources;  
➢ reduced water holding capacity due to accumulation of silt, debris etc.; 
and 
➢ loss of interconnectivity between water bodies. 
3.3.1 Management of lakes 
Bengaluru city was once aptly known as ‘ city of lakes’ due to the presence of 
large number of lakes.  As per the 2016 IISc report, it had around 1,452 water 
bodies during the early 1800s.  These were gradually reduced due to 
conversions/encroachments as discussed in the subsequent paragraph.  Th e 
lakes/water bodies in Bengaluru city were under the custody of different 
authorities such as BBMP, Forest Department, BDA, KLDCA, etc.   The 
Government ordered (September 2016 and December 2019) the transfer of all 
lakes (except Bellandur and Varthur lak es which remained with BDA) to 
BBMP.  The BBMP did not possess comprehensive data on the actual number 
of lakes, their status and custodians.  As per data furnished (December 2020) by 
the CE, Lakes Division, BBMP, there were 210 lakes under its jurisdictio n.  
Details are furnished in the Table 3.1 below. 
Table 3.1: Status of maintenance of lakes/water bodies in Bengaluru 
Status of lakes  Number of 
lakes 
Developed lakes 89 
Work in progress 37 
To be Developed 66 
Disused lakes 18 
Total  210 
                Source: CE, Lakes Division, BBMP 
It could be observed that while 66 lakes were yet to be developed, 18 lakes with 
a total area of 254 acres and 17 guntas were reported as disused lakes.  The 
current status of the disused lakes as per the Go ogle Earth images is shown in 
Exhibit 3.2 and the list of disused lakes is given in Appendix 3.2.  There is a 
significant risk of these lakes being vulnerable to encroachments and future 
conversions. 
Audit observed from media reports that many citizen foru ms concerned about 
the degraded condition of lakes and SWDs approached the courts and National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) seeking directions for proper maintenance.  However, 
CE, SWD did not furnish the details of court cases pending or judgments 
thereon.  The Karnataka High Court expressed dissatisfaction (July 2019) with 
the attitude of the city’s authorities towards its lakes and reprimanded BBMP 
and other civic agencies for not knowing the number of lakes that existed in the 
city.   
The State Government repli ed (August 2020) that works were being taken for 
restoration of lakes in a phased manner.  However, the number of active lakes 
are decreasing over a period of time by way of encroachments and conversion 
for other purposes as detailed in the subsequent paragraphs. Any delay in taking 
up the restoration works would lead to further reduction in the number of lakes. 

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  17 
Exhibit 3.2: Current status of disused lakes 
(Source: Google Earth images as on 19 January 2021) 
 
Chennammana kere 
 
 
Chikka Kallasandra kere 


Chapter III 
 
 
18 
Exhibit 3.2: Current status of disused lakes contd…. 
 
Doresanipalya kere 
 
  
Lingarajapuram kere 2000 Lingarajapuram kere 2020 
 
3.3.2 Decrease in water bodies and length of drains 
Audit conducted an independent study of long-term changes in land use patterns 
of Bengaluru city utilising geospatial inputs with technical support from 
Regional Remote Sensing Centre–South, Indian Space Research Organization, 
Bengaluru (RRSC).  The method ology adopted for the study is already 
explained in Paragraph 2.4.  The study corroborates the fact that urbanisation 
resulted in decrease in water bodies and length of drains as discussed below. 


Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  19 
 Decrease in water bodies 
The study revealed that about 41 an d 51 water bodies, which existed in 
Koramangala and Vrishabhavathi valleys respectively as per the cadastral  map 
(prepared through field survey during early 1900s) were reduced to 8 and 13 by 
the year 2008 indicating the severity of lake conversion.   Furt her, the wetland 
system (lakes, tanks, kere and katte), which contributed about 479.48 ha (0.75 
per cent) and 215.46 ha (2.24 per cent) to the geographical area of the valleys 
as per the cadastral map decreased to 262.37 ha and 62.05 ha during 2016/2017 
indicating erosion due to land use changes.  The time series map showing the 
changes in lakes/tanks is indicated in Chart 3.1.  
 
Chart 3.1: Time series maps showing changes in lakes / tanks 
Koramangala valley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


Chapter III 
 
 
20 
Vrishabhavathi valleyris 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The change in size and shape  of a few lakes in both the valleys which is 
indicative of significant reduction of lake foot print is indicated in  Appendix 
3.3.  The reduction in the number of lakes can be linked to conversion of lakes 
for other purpose s (Exhibit 3.3) such as bus stands, stadiums/sports grounds, 
National Games village housing complex, residential layouts etc., as indicated 
in Appendix 3.4.   
 
 
 


Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  21 
Exhibit 3.3: Conversion of lakes for other purposes 
(Source: Photographs taken during field visits) 
 
Kamakshipalya lake converted as sports ground 
 
Dasarahalli tank converted as Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Stadium 


Chapter III 
 
 
22 
Evidently, these conversions were authorised by the State Government, BBMP, 
BDA etc., over a period of time.  Reference is invited to Paragraph 4.4 of the 
Report on Lakes which refers to instances of irregular grant of lake land to 
various Government bodies, private parties and others in violation of the codal 
provisions which resulted in reduction of lake area. These conversions also 
resulted in the change in land use from being pervious to impervious thereby 
leading to higher runoff of rain water and consequent flooding. 
Further, a Legislative Committee 8 constituted to study the status of  
encroachments on lakes/water bodies in Bengaluru and its surroundings 
covering the period 2014 -2017, in its report revealed unabated encroachments 
of most of the water bodies, both by government departments/agencies and 
private parties, leading to diminishing boundaries of wetlands besides pollution 
of the ecosystem.  The major encroachers among government agencies were 
Education department, Forest department, BDA, BWSSB, BBMP, Bengaluru 
Electric Supply Company, Bengaluru Metropolitan Transport Corporation , 
Karnataka Housing Board, Railways, Defence authorities, National Highways, 
etc.   
The Committee expressed dissatisfaction particularly with the BDA, forming 
residential layouts over as many as 23 water bodies without obtaining the 
permission from the Rev enue Department. The Committee attributed 
degeneration of water bodies to the negligence and irresponsibility of officials 
and recommended action against the offenders through a judicial investigation. 
 Reduction in length of drains 
Natural drainage/stream systems were concretised into storm water drains with 
increase in urbanisation. As per the study, total length of drains (primary and 
secondary) as per cadastral maps (early 1900s) was 113.24 km and 226.29 km 
in Koramangala and Vrishabhavathi valleys respectively, which was reduced to 
62.84 km and 111.72 km by 2016/2017.  The time series drainage maps showing 
the changes is indicated in Chart 3.2.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 Headed by Sri..K.B Koliwad, the then Hon’ble Speaker of Karnataka Legislative Assembly.  

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  23 
Chart 3.2: Time series drainage maps 
Koramangala valley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Chapter III 
 
 
24 
Vrishabhavathi valley 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
The spatial analysis also showed significant changes in the alignment of drains 
mainly due to remodelling.  For example, in Koramangala valley, the length of 
two drains which merge before entering into Bellandur Lake was reduced from      
338 m to 136 m (Exhibit 3.4) between the years 2008 and 2016 which allowed 
constructions thereby affecting the free flow of storm water.  In Vrishabhavathi 
valley, the drain passing along the border of Hosakerehalli lake was remodeled and 
diverted to flow through the lake thereby reducing the area of the lake (Exhibit 
3.5). 


Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  25 
Exhibit 3.4: Realignment and remodelling of drainage network near 
Bellandur Lake 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit 3.5: Realignment of drainage network near Hosakerehalli Lake 
 
 
 
 
Physical verification of few storm water drains revealed that the drains were 
covered and encroached upon as indicated in Appendix 3.5.     
The State Government stated (August 2020) that some of the drains were 
remodeled based on the geographical conditions of the site and for allowing 
smoother flow.   
The reply cannot be accepted as in the instant case of Bellandur lake, the 
realignment was d one in such a manner that it  facilitated unauthorised 
developments in and around the lake area as can be seen from the Google Earth 
images taken over a period of time as exhibited (Exhibit 3.6).  
 
 


Chapter III 
 
 
26 
Exhibit 3.6: Google earth images showing the realignment of drains 
 
As at April 2012 
 
 
As at October 2012 
 
 
 
As at March 2014 
 
 
As at February 2020 
 
 
Further, large number of SWD work files relating to JNNURM were not on the 
records of CE, SWD, BBMP and were not furnished to audit; in the absence of 
which the exact reasons for modifications could not be ascertained.   
The State Government further stated (August 2020) that a number of measures 
were yet to be taken to counter increased runoff. 
Storm water is best managed through ground water recharge and rainwater 
harvesting techniques.   
3.4.1 Ground water recharge 
Groundwater recharge is both natural and artificial.  Groundwater is recharged 
naturally by rain and snow melt and to a smaller extent by surface water (rivers 
and lakes). This helps in aquifer recharge as well.  Natural replenishment of 
ground water reservoir is a slow process and is often unable to keep pace with 
3.4 Storm water conservation systems 

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  27 
the excessive and continued exploitation of ground water resources resulting in 
declining ground water levels and depletion of ground water resources.  
Artificial recharge efforts are bas ically aimed at augmentation of the natural 
movement of surface water into ground water reservoir through suitable civil 
construction techniques. Rainfall and runoff available constitute major sources 
of water for artificial recharge of ground water.  The common recharge 
structures comprise of percolation ponds/tanks, check dams, recharge pits, 
injection wells etc.   
While the above recharge structures help in replenishing the ground water to a 
certain extent, a large quantity of storm water runs off the im permeable, non-
porous and concrete surfaces in urban areas.  This surface runoff is to be 
conveyed/channeled either to the lakes/rivers or to inlets and recharge structures 
through SWDs to prevent flooding and aid in ground water recharge.  An 
efficient, well designed/maintained SWD system would minimise the level of 
water logging and damage, and therefore play an important role in storm water 
management.   In the backdrop of depleted ground water in urban 
conglomerates, the IRC guidelines stipulated that a ll SWDs should be 
efficiently utilised for the benefit of raising the existing ground water table.   
 
BBMP neither had a policy in this regard nor had taken up works relating to 
recharge structures for replenishment of groundwater. 
The State Government sta ted (August 2020) that implementation of recharge 
structures was deferred due to sewage flow in the drains. 
3.4.2 Rainwater harvesting 
The State Government made rainwater harvesting (RWH) mandatory in 
Bengaluru Urban Area by inserting Section 72A through a n amendment to the 
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1964 (August 2009).  After 
a delay of nearly two years, the State Government notified (May 2011) that the 
owners and occupiers of residential and non -residential buildings as specified 
shall comply with providing rain water harvesting structures by 31 December 
2011. 
As per the information furnished (February 2020) by BWSSB, about 2.12 lakh 
properties were required to adopt RWH structures out of the total 9.85 lakh 
properties under the purview of BWSSB.  However, only 1.27 lakh properties 
had adopted RWH structures. The compliance thereof was 60 per cent.   Non-
adoption of RWH structures resulted in failure to tap a potential source of water 
for storage and adequate ground water recharge. This,  in turn, contributed to 
excess runoff in SWD systems.  Further, adoption of RWH structures was not 
made mandatory for areas/properties not covered by BWSSB. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that measures required for ground 
water recharging has been indicated in the master plan of drains and the same 
is being implemented by BWSSB.  The reply cannot be accepted as BWSSB is 
catering to less properties w hen compared to the properties under the overall 
jurisdiction of BBMP. 
 

Chapter III 
 
 
28 
3.4.3 Loss of interconnectivity between water bodies/drains 
The reduction in water bodies and drains led to loss of connectivity between 
water bodies and between water bodies and drai ns.  Joint inspection of drains 
showed that the SWDs were not directly connected to water body/lake in few 
cases and the runoff was flowing in constructed deviation canals adjacent to the 
water body due to the fact that SWDs were carrying large quantity of sewerage.  
This facilitated overflows in SWDs channels and flash floods thereon.   
Failure of BBMP to ensure linkage of drains with water bodies facilitated drying 
up of a number of lakes in Bengaluru city which in turn facilitated conversion 
of lakes for other purposes as discussed in Paragraph 3.3.2.  
The State Government stated (August 2020) that many of the lakes were 
disconnected from the drains due to presence of sewage in the SWDs.  It also 
stated that as BWSSB was in the process of segregation of s ewage from SWD 
and implementing sewerage system in the new BBMP zones, the sewage flow 
in the drain may get minimised. 
Though BWSSB was undertaking the segregation of sewage from SWDs as 
stated in the reply, the flow of sewage into the SWDs continues to be substantial.   
 Recommendation 2: BBMP should prevent further reduction in water bodies 
and length of the natural drains and ensure inter -connectivity of water bodies 
for proper conservation of the ecosystem as well as ground water. 
 
Recommendation 3: BBMP and BWSSB should jointly prepare a plan of action 
to prevent sewage flow into SWDs within a definite time schedule and the 
implementation thereof should be monitored by the State Government. 
3.4.4 Recharge of water bodies 
Recharging the existing water bodies not only helps in ground water recharge 
but also caters to needs such as drinking water, agricultural activities and habitat 
for fish and other aquatic life.  Hence it is imperative that the existing water 
bodies be protected for which a definitive plan of action is to be drawn.  Out of 
the 210 lakes under the jurisdiction of BBMP, only 89 lakes were developed, 
and works were in progress for 37 lakes.   
Analysis of the works in progress showed that rejuvenation activities such as 
desilting, formation/improvements of main and ring bunds, inlet improvements, 
creation of sewage diversion drains, walkway formations, security rooms etc., 
were taken up.  While these activities help in restoration of the lakes, activities 
relating to actual rech arging of the water bodies were not taken up.  The 
Government of Karnataka had adopted a method of recharging dry water bodies 
by letting the treated water into the water bodies 9.  This would ensure that all 
                                                 
9  In 2010, in respect of Jakkur lake, rejuvenation work was done by the Government where 
treated water was let into the lake for the purpose of groundwater recharge, agricultural 
activities etc. Since it was successful in respect of Jakkur lake, the filling up of water bodies 
in Kolar and Chikkaballapura districts were also taken up with treated water. 

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  29 
the inter-connected water bodies would be filled up which in turn would prevent 
disuse of lakes and their possible encroachments and conversions.   This treated 
water combined with rain water would percolate into the ground and increase 
the ground water level. It was observed that an average of 170 and 73 MLD of 
treated sewage water were being pumped to water bodies in Kolar and 
Chikkaballapura districts respectively.  
Recommendation 4:  The State Government/BBMP should explore the 
possibility of letting the treated water to the water bodies in the city to prevent 
drying up of water bodies and to aid in enhancing ground water recharge.  
3.4.5 Impact of concretisation of storm water drains on ground water 
recharge 
Natural soil bed inside SWDs would help reducing velocity of flow as well as 
infiltration leading to ground water recharge.   
Joint physical verification and verification of records relating to execution of 
works for improvements to SWDs revealed that the flow path/bed of drains were 
invariably concretised which not only affected hydrological functional ability 
of SWDs but also impacted ground water recharge.  Besides, concretisation of 
SWDs also aggravated vulnerability to frequent floods. 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that SWDs were carrying high 
volume of sewage increasing the pressure on SWDs meant for carrying 
rainwater and large quantity of debris/wastes were also being dumped into 
SWDs which was affecting the flow in the drains.  Hence, the drain beds were 
concretised to allow smooth flow and avoid flooding/overflowing due to 
obstructions from wastes/debris. 
The reply is not acceptable as concretising of drain beds allowed drain water to 
flow with higher velocity a nd increased runoff.  Further, since the floor of the 
drain was concretised, water could not be absorbed naturally. 
Besides the reduction in number of water bodies and decrease in length of the 
drains, the joint study with RRSC also showed significant findings, as indicated 
in Table 3.2.  
Table 3.2: Other significant findings of the joint study 
Parameter Koramangala valley Vrishabhavathi valley 
Changes observed from 2008 to 2016/2017 
Pervious layer Decreased by 11 per cent Decreased by 14 per 
cent 
Impervious layer Increased by 15 per cent Increased by 13 per 
cent 
Built up area Increased from 19.98 sq km to 
23.88 sq km (20 per cent) 
Increased from 39.14 
sq km to 44.69 sq km 
(14 per cent) 
3.5 Other factors affecting the conservation of storm water  

Chapter III 
 
 
30 
Parameter Koramangala valley Vrishabhavathi valley 
Vegetation cover Decreased from 20.33 sq km to 
19.34 sq km (5 per cent) 
Increased from 26.82 
sq km to 28.38 sq km 
(6 per cent) 
Open land10 Decreased from 13.88 sq km to 
10.94 sq km (21 per cent) 
Decreased from 17.67 
sq km to 9.74 sq km 
(45 per cent) 
The above factors have a direct bearing on the collection and conservation of 
storm water.  The decrease in vegetation cover and open land affec ts natural 
recharge of ground water. The increase in impervious layer and built up area 
results in increased runoff of storm water leading to frequent flooding. 
The decrease in natural storm water collection systems and increase in runoff 
necessitate the need for formulation of a robust policy for storm water 
management.   The depletion in length of natural drains coupled with the failure 
to construct and adopt storm water conservation structures affected efficient and 
effective recharge of ground water besides impacting the ecosystem adversely 
with the increase in runoff.  Absence of coordination between various 
institutions responsible for preventing mixing of sewage with storm water, also 
highlights the inadequacy of the existing mechanism for efficient management 
of water. 
 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
3.1.1 There was no regulatory framework governing storm water management.   
3.1.2 Urban surface runoff was not recognised as water resource despite the growing 
scarcity and competing demands on the existing water situation. 
3.2.1 There was absence of coordination between various institutions responsible 
for providing basic urban infrastructure facilities. 
3.3.1 Out of existing 210 lakes under the jurisdiction of BBMP, 66 were yet to be 
developed and 18 lakes were reported as disused lakes.  These disused lakes 
were vulnerable to encroachments and future conversions. 
3.3.2 An independent study conducted with technical support from RRSC, ISRO 
showed reduction in water bodies and length of drains in the test -checked 
Koramangala and Vrishabhavathi valleys.  The study revealed that 
(i) about 41 and 51 water bodies, which existed in Koramangala and 
Vrishabhavathi valleys respectively as per the cadastral  map were 
reduced to 8 and 13 by the year 2008 indicating the severity of lake 
conversion.    
                                                 
10 The open land means areas not occupied  by any structures like buildings or vegetation 
typically includes ground, fallow/wasteland. 
Conclusion 
Summary of important audit findings 

Collection and conservation of storm water 
 
  31 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
(ii) total length of drains (primary and seconda ry) as per cadastral maps 
which was 113.24 km and 226.29 km in Koramangala and Vrishabhavathi 
valleys respectively was reduced to 62.84 km and 111.72 km by 
2016/2017.   
3.4.1 BBMP had not taken up any works relating to recharge structures for 
replenishment of groundwater.  
3.4.2 Of the 2.12 lakh properties under the purview of BWSSB that were required 
to adopt RWH structures, only 1.27 lakh properties (60 per cent) had adopted 
RWH structures.  Adoption of RWH structures was not made mandatory for 
areas/properties not covered by BWSSB. 
3.4.3 BBMP failed to ensure linkage of drains with water bodies which 
resulted in drying up of a number of lakes in Bengaluru city and in turn 
facilitated conversion of lakes for other purposes. 
3.4.4 Activities relating to recharging of the water bodies were not taken up. 
3.4.5 The flow path/bed of drains were concretised which not only affected 
hydrological functional ability of SWDs but also impacted ground water 
recharge.  Besides, concretisation of SWDs also  aggravated 
vulnerability to frequent floods. 
 

 
 33 
 
 
Section 9 of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961, stipulates 
that every planning authority should carry out a survey of the area within its 
jurisdiction and, prepare and publish a comprehensive development plan 
(CDP)/revised master plan (RMP) consisting of a series of maps and documents 
indicating the manner in which the development and improvement of the entire 
planning area within the jurisdiction of the Planning Authority is to be carried 
out and regulated.  Further, Section 13 -D of the Act also provides for revision 
of the master plan at least once in 10 years from the date on which the master 
plan had come into force.  The plans sh ould indicate areas reserved for parks, 
play grounds and other recreational uses, public open spaces, public b uildings 
and institutions etc. The Act does not explicitly describe the area preserved as 
tanks or lakes in the CDP/RMP. 
4.1.1 Deficiencies in the Master Plans prepared by BDA  
The Bengalu ru Development Authority (BDA)  prepares master plans.  The 
details of plans brought out by BDA are as shown in the Table 4.1.  
Table 4.1: Details of plans prepared by BDA 
Plan Identified as Date of approval Valid till 
First Outline Development Plan 22-05-1972 11-10-1984 
Second Comprehensive Development Plan 12-10-1984 04-01-1995 
Third Revised Comprehensive Development Plan 05-01-1995 24-06-2007 
Fourth Revised Master Plan 25-06-2007 Till the approval 
of RMP-2031 
Source: Information furnished by BDA 
BDA did not have on record the first two development plans prepared for the 
periods May 1972 to October 1984 and October 1984 to January 1995.  In the 
revised CDP approved in January 1995 and valid till June 2007, there was no 
consistency in the representa tion of water bodies which were shown as tanks 
and also as parks and valleys; and drains (water ways) were not exhibited 
explicitly.  The CDP was, therefore, incomplete and deficient.  In the absence 
of clear data on the width/type of the drains at any sta ge, encroachment  / 
disruption of flow could not be analysed.   
The Revised Master Plan - 2015 for Bengaluru approved in June 2007 and valid 
till the approval of RMP 2031 was also deficient for the following reasons. 
4
Chapter
 Planning, designing and 
construction of storm water drains
4.1 Planning 

Chapter IV 
 
 
34 
• Though RMP–2015 recognised the importance of having buffer zones 11 
for different types of SWDs, it did not classify the drains as required and 
hence, did not notify ‘no development area’ along the drains. As a result, 
the required buffer zone around/along the water bodies/water ways were  
neither marked nor maintained. 
 
• Though drains were mapped in the RMP -2015, many existing drains and 
water bodies (as per the Master Plan of SWDs prepared by BBMP) were 
not shown in the maps published (Exhibit 4.1). 
Exhibit 4.1: Illustrative photographs showing drains/water bodies not 
mapped in RMP-2015 (shown in red rectangles) 
 
Master Plan of SWDs RMP-2015 
 
 
Shown as a water body 
 
 
Shown as a park 
 
 
SWD shown between Bellandur and Ibbalur tanks 
 
 
No connectivity between two tanks 
  
                                                 
11 Buffer zones are areas of land adjacent to a drain or waterbody which are meant for providing 
utilities such as power, pipelines for water/oil/gas etc., and also to facilitate easy 
maintenance of drains. The RMP stipulated buffer of 50, 25 and 15 mtrs (measured from the 
centre of the drain) on either side of primary, secondary and tertiary drains respectively. 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
35 
 
Water bodies shown around Thoguru village  
No water bodies around Thoguru village 
 
 
 
 
The existing outlet drain (shown in red arrow) from Sankey tank not 
mapped either in Master Plan of SWDs or RMP-2015 
The lapses indicated above facilitated unabated construction along the drains 
without allowing the required buffer area. Photograph captured during joint 
inspection showing construction without allowing buffer area along SWDs are 
shown in Exhibit 4.2. 
  


Chapter IV 
 
 
36 
 
Exhibit 4.2: Illustrative photographs showing construction of buildings 
allowed without buffer area along storm water drains 
 
 
Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
 
 
South Zone (Covered Drain) 
 
 
West Zone 
 
 
West Zone 
     Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
The State Government accepted the omissions in RMP-2015 and stated (January 
2019) that corrective measures were being taken in RMP-2031.  In this context, 
reference is invited to Paragraph 4.6 of the Report on Lakes wherein the change 
https://youtu.be/sUCfk
Onb52k 
 
Absence of buffer 
zone 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
37 
in status of lake area (residential, roads, agricultural land etc.) in the RMP 2015 
when compared to the CDP of 2005 which described the status of lake area as 
tanks, parks and valleys citing few instances was commented upon.  The State 
Government had accepted (March 2015) the  findings and had stated that the 
error would be rectified in the RMP 2031 which was under preparation.  The 
replies of the Government in both the instances could not be verified as the 
preparation of RMP 2031 was still under progress.   
It is thus apparen t that the Government and the authorities concerned have 
overlooked the importance of water bodies and drains at the time of preparation 
of the master plans.  
4.1.2 Delays in preparation of Comprehensive Development Plans /Master 
Plans 
The Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act, 1961, provided for revision of 
the CDP/Master plan once every ten years .  The timely and periodic revision 
would assist the Planning authorities to factor in rapid growth and urbanisation 
of the cities for future expansion and devel opments in complia nce with the 
zoning regulations besides enabling them to take corrective measures to rectify 
any errors in the earlier plans. 
As can be seen from Table 4.1, the revision of the second and fourth plans were 
delayed by two years.  The fifth plan which was due for revision in 2017 has so 
far not been done.  Though the draft RMP 2031 was published (November 2017) 
for inviting public comments, the final plan was yet to be notified.  Delay in 
revision of the master plans would result in uncontrolled expansion leading to 
encroachments of Government lands and zoning violations besides the delay in 
rectification of the omissions pointed out in the above paragraph.  
 
Recommendation 5: The State Government/BDA should take immediate action 
to finalise and notify the revised master plan to prevent encroachments of 
Government assets such as land, water bodies etc., and rectify the omissions 
with regard to SWDs. 
4.1.3 Preparation of master plan of drains by BBMP 
The master plan prepared by BDA was to be followed by all the authorities for 
taking up any development work.  However, we observed that BBMP got a 
separate master plan of drains (including the expanded area  comprising of 
City/Town Municipal Councils and 110 villages  that was integrated during 
2007), water bodies, bridges/culverts, low lying areas, etc., prepared by M/s. 
STUP Consultants at a cost of `3.62 crore  during 2010-1112.   
The master plan of drains of BBMP was incomplete as  
• it was restricted to i dentifying only the primary and secondary drains in 
contradiction of the NDM guidelines which stipulated preparation of 
comprehensive database of all drains.   
                                                 
12 Tendered and entrusted during 2007-08. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
38 
• many of the drains shown in RMP -2015 were not mapped in the master 
plan of drains (Exhibit 4.3).  Besides, a large number of drains which were 
in existence but not found in RMP-2015 were also not mapped. This raises 
questions on the validity and reliability of the database.  
Exhibit 4.3: Photographs showing drains identified in RMP-2015 but not 
exhibted in master plan of drains of BBMP  (Arrows show stretches of 
missing drains)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• the master plan did not provide for buffer zones along the different kind of 
drains, despite being clearly spelt out in RMP-2015, which was in force. 
Further, the records relating to preparation of the master plan of drains 
containing tender conditions, tendering process, award o f contract and 
payments made to the agency were recorded ‘to have been lost’ and thus, not 
furnished to audit.  The CE, SWD also did not possess on record the detailed 
volumes of master plan pertaining to individual zones, except for Yelahanka 
and Rajaraje shwari Nagar (RR Nagar).  Hence, the correctness of the 
preparation of the master plan by the agency as well as compliance to tender 
conditions could not be verified. 
https://youtu.be/nNXe
ci28D-E 
 
Audit trail to trace 
unmapped drains 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
39 
BBMP did not initiate action to reconcile its master plan with that prepared by 
BDA.  It also did not conduct any physical inspection of the drains to update its 
master plan and to ensure inclusion of all the drains under its jurisdiction in the 
RMPs.  Significant discrepancies between the two sources of data deprived 
planners of a single source of truth for planning/development of the city. 
The State Government replied (January 2019) that RMP -2015 which was in 
place at the time of preparing  SWD master plan had not captured the drainage 
networks.  The SWD master plan has been shared with BDA an d now finds its 
place in the draft RMP-2031 and the anomalies are getting ironed out.  
However, verification of draft RMP-2031 showed that drains shown as primary 
and secondary in BBMP’s map were exhibited as secondary and tertiary in the 
draft RMP-2031.  These discrepancies assume higher significance in light of the 
judgments of the National Green Tribunal (NGT) enhancing the buffer area 13 
along the drains.  Moreover, the basis on which BDA identified, classified and 
exhibited the tertiary drains in the RMP  when BBMP, the authority for 
construction and maintenance of SWD, does not have the data on tertiary drains 
was not explained.   
The State Government accepted (August 2020) that the nomenclature of 
primary, secondary and tertiary drains in draft RMP-2031 are different from that 
mentioned in SWD master plan and action would be taken to discuss the issues 
with BDA for proper reconciliation and corrective measures. 
4.1.4  Storm water drain inventory 
Paragraph 4.5 of NDM guidelines stipulate that all ULBs/States/UTs shall 
prepare an inventory of the existing storm water drainage system on a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) platform.  The inventory was to be both 
watershed based and ward based with clear mapping of the major as well as 
minor systems.  Further each road was supposed to  have drains on both sides 
for collecting storm water which would ultimately lead into primary/secondary 
SWDs to allow runoff.  Hence, the tertiary/road side drains form the major 
contributor to urban drain runoff.   For quantification of runoff in different kinds 
of drains and their upkeep without allowing for clogging/flooding, the SWD 
authorities should have on record comprehensive data of different types of roads 
(length, width, type of surface, perviousness, gradient, etc.) collected at regular 
intervals. 
However, the CE, SWD, the authority for construction and designing SWDs 
thereon, did not possess comprehensive data of different roads and 
tertiary/surface road side drains within the jurisdiction of BBMP.  The lack of 
comprehensive data on runoff is bound to have an adverse impact on the design, 
construction and management of drains.   
The absence of comprehensive inventory of drains with BBMP and its failure 
to classify them properly contributed to lack of clarity on  critical issues 
including the extent of buffer zone to be maintained.   
                                                 
13 Buffer of 50, 35 and 25 mtrs (measured from the edge of the drain) on either side primary, 
secondary and tertiary drains respectively. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
40 
This, in turn, would  
• hamper regular maintenance of the drains.   
• impact one of the purposes of creating a buffer zone i.e., to provide space 
for laying of utilities.  Audit observed that many utility lines like water 
pipes, sanitation pipes, electrical, telephone, optical cable, etc., were laid 
across the drains in many locations obstructing the flow in drains and 
overflows ( Exhibit 4.4 ).  The absence of buffer zone also results in 
encroachments as indicated in Paragraph 5.1.3. 
Exhibit 4.4: Photos showing the presence of utility lines in SWDs 
 
Koramangala Zone 
 
Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
NGV campus, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
South Zone 
 
https://youtu.be/joRJQ
i5ElRk 
 
Utility lines blocking 
flow 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
41 
 
 
West Zone 
 
 
Bommanahalli Zone 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that action would be taken to 
compile and document the details of all types of roads and corresponding drains 
(surface and tertiary drains) under BBMP jurisdiction.  However, the data on 
roads was not made available even as at the end of December 2020. 
Audit also observed that the State Government/BBMP had not carried out any 
evaluation study to ascertain the adequacy/capacity of the existing storm water 
drainage network in the city.   
 
Recommendation 6: BBMP should prepare a comprehensive database of SWDs 
in coordination with parastatal agencies like BDA, BWSSB etc., to serve as  a 
single source for effective planning and management of SWDs. 
4.1.5 Detailed Project Reports for SWDs 
A Detailed Project Report (DPR) is a complete document for investment 
decision-making, approval, planning and implementing the project.  It provides 
details of the basic programme, roles and responsibilities, activities to be carried 
out, resources required, possible risks and risk mitigation measures.  Timeliness 
of DPRs duly considering the present status and other pre -requisites for each 
work proposed to be taken up is critical. 
4.1.5.1  Preparation of deficient DPRs and consequent non -execution of 
works (Bengaluru core area) 
Audit observed that the BBMP got DPRs prepared (2006 -07) for the SWDs 
under core Bengaluru area 14 through M/s STUP Consultants, Bengaluru, 
without particular reference to individual works.  The DPRs were found to be 
deficient as indicated in paragraph 4.1.10.1 of the Report of the CAG on Local 
Bodies for the year ended March 2012 (Report no. 6 of the year 2013 – 
Government of Karnataka).   
                                                 
14 As a requirement for obtaining funds under JnNURM scheme. 


Chapter IV 
 
 
42 
 
 
Subsequently, BBMP got revised DPRs covering the same jurisdictional area 
prepared (2010 -11) through M/s Aarvee Consultants, Hyderabad and the 
revised DPRs were approved by the State Level Empowered Committee for  
JnNURM.  The CE, SWD did not have on record the copies of revised DPRs, 
except that of Vrishabhavathi valley.   A review of the available DPR revealed 
the following: 
➢ The major works proposed and taken up (2006 -07) were stopped in 
2008-09 due to non -availability of sites and poor performance of 
contractors.  
➢ Works such as construction of detention ponds, wells with pumping 
arrangements etc., though provided for in the original DPRs were not 
carried out.  
➢ The revised DPR indicated only the physical and financial progress of 
works carried out as per the original DPR and the revised cost for 
carrying out the balance works.  
➢ Bed protection and water recharge arrangement works could not be 
taken up due to large quantity of sewage flow in SWDs. 
Further, as could be seen from the Independent Review and Monitoring Agency 
(IRMA)15 inspection reports, the works taken up and executed based on revised 
DPRs also remained incomplete/abandoned and details of a large number of 
works were not furnished to IRMA.   The reasons cited for abandoning these 
works were non-availability of work front and poor performance by contractors. 
Since many of these work files were not available with CE, SWD, the exact 
location of works could not be ascertained.   
The State Government stated (August 2020) that the required width to meet the 
hydraulic requirements as envisaged could not be procured for want of timely 
                                                 
15 Appointed by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee for review of SWD works 
executed under JnNURM scheme. 
Summary of deficiencies indicated in Report No. 6 of the year 2013 – 
Government of Karnataka 
• DPRs did not include the total quantum of land required for the project.  Details 
of land owned by BBMP alongside the SWDs for widening were not available. 
• The challenges involved in obtaining clearances for shifting of utilities along 
SWDs from concerned agencies like BWSSB/Bangalore Ele ctricity Supply 
Company (BESCOM)/Defence/Airport authorities etc., was not brought on 
record. 
• The project co st did not have a separate statement on the cost involved in land 
acquisition, environment compliance cost, cost of surveys and investigations, etc. 
• The sources for mobilisation of funds of BBMP during the project implementation 
were not distinctly brought out in the DPRs. 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
43 
revenue records. Hence, due to non-availability of work front, the project could 
not be implemented as desired.  Therefore, BBMP got the revised DPRs 
prepared based on the availability of land. 
The reply substantiates the fact that the original DPRs were prepared without 
taking into consideration the extent of land required and available with BBMP.  
Since the revised DPRs were got prepared based on the availability of land, the 
works of detention ponds, pumping wells etc., were dropped.  Further, the non-
completion and abandonment of works taken up both under the original DPR 
and the revised DPR resulted in loss of financial assistance to BB MP and non-
recovery of amounts from the contractors as explained below: 
 Loss of financial assistance 
Funds were to be released by the Central and State Government under JnNURM 
in instalments based on the physical and financial progress of the works and 
submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by BBMP. 
As a large number of SWD works taken up under JnNURM were abandoned 
due to non -availability of sites and poor performance of contractors, Audit 
observed that BBMP did not submit the required UCs.  Conseque ntly, BBMP 
had to forego financial assistance of `83.59 crore as detailed in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Statement showing the loss of assistance by BBMP 
                                                                                                                                 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
 Total amount to 
be received 
Amount actually 
received 
Loss of 
assistance 
1 Government of 
India 
216.94 158.42 58.52 
2 State Government 92.98 67.91 25.07 
 Total 309.92 226.33 83.59 
Source: Report on the performance of JnNURM  
Consequent to the above non -receipt of assistance, BBMP was forced to incur 
expenditure from its own funds for completion of the works taken up under 
JnNURM.   
The State Government agreed (August 2020) that the loss of assistance under 
JnNURM scheme was du e to non -completion of works and consequent non -
utilisation of allocated funds by BBMP within the timeframe. 
 Non-recovery of ‘risk and cost’ amounts from contractors 
SWD works relating to all the four valleys taken up under JnNURM were 
entrusted under 15 packages to different contractors during 2005-06 at an agreed 
cost of `496.90 crore.  The agreements with the contractors provided for 
termination of contract in case of default by contractor. The works under all 
these 15 packages were abandoned without completion as discussed above.   
The Conciliation Committee headed by Special Commissioner (Projects) 
decided (March 2010) to rescind the contracts without risk and cost  and 
submitted a proposal to the Government.  The Government, however, ordered 
(September 2013) to rescind the contract with ‘Risk and Cost’ to the contractors.   

Chapter IV 
 
 
44 
Audit observed from the records made available that BBMP had calculated 
`35.31 crore as the a mount of ‘Risk and Cost’ to be recovered from the 
contractors under eight packages16, but had not recovered any amount even after 
five years.  Similar details in respect of seven other packages17 were not 
furnished to audit.  This resulted in a loss to BBMP and extension of undue 
financial benefits to the contractors.  The CE, SWD did not furnish any reasons 
for the failure to enforce recovery proceedings. 
The State Government endorsed (January 2019/August 2020) the reply of the 
Commissioner that letters had already been addressed to contractors intimating 
rescinding of contracts and immediate action would be taken to trace all the 
records relating to these packages to calculate the risk and cost amount and to 
recover the same.  Further progress in this r egard was not furnished to audit 
(November 2019/December 2020).  The revised reply furnished to audit after a 
lapse of more than 18 months was similar to the initial reply indicating that 
serious action was not taken to calculate the risk and cost amount and recover it 
from the contractors.   
 Irregular payments to contractors 
In accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract, in case of failure of 
the contractor to execute the work, it would be binding on the employer to retain 
the whole of the co ntractor’s security deposit (including further security 
deposit) and encash the performance security furnished in the form of bank 
guarantee and get the work executed at the contractor’s risk and cost.   
Further, in view of the Government’s order (Septembe r 2013) to rescind the 
contract with risk and cost, BBMP had to retain the security deposit and encash 
the performance security and ensure that no further payments were made to the 
contractors.  Audit sought the details of security deposits collected and 
recovered from the bills and also the bank guarantees obtained in lieu of 
performance security in respect of the above packages.  The CE, SWD did not 
furnish these documents for scrutiny and verification. 
Audit analysed the pass sheets of the bank accounts pertaining to SWD works 
in respect of one package as a test-check and observed that `1.63 crore was paid 
to the agency during the period October 2013 to April 2017 for Hebbal -2 
package subsequent to the Government’s order which was highly irregular and 
amounted to extension of undue benefits to the contractors. 
The State Government endorsed (January 2019/August 2020) the reply of the 
Commissioner that explanation was called for from the executive engineers and 
accounts branch for the reasons for releasing p ayments after the instructions 
from government and action would be taken on the officers/officials found 
                                                 
16 Hebbal-2 (`0.56 crore), Hebbal-3 (`3.81 crore), Koramangala-1(`1.20 crore), Koramangala-
2 ( `20.30 crore), Koramangala -3 ( `1.06 crore), Vrishabhavathi -2 (`2.32 crore), 
Vrishabhavathi-3 (`0.28 crore) and Vrishabhavthi-5 (`5.78 crore). 
17 Challaghatta – all three packages, Hebbal – Packages 1 and 4 and Vrishabhavathi – Packages 
1 and 4.  

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
45 
guilty.  Further progress in this regard was not furnished to audit (December 
2020). 
Recommendation 7: The State Government/BBMP should ensure that DPRs 
prepared are comprehensive and realistic and should include details such as 
extent and availability of land, the requirement and sources of fund, 
coordination with other institutions etc.   
Recommendation 8: BBMP should initiate immediate action to comply with the 
instructions of the Government for recovery of risk and cost amounts from all 
the contractors who have violated norms and blacklist persistent violators. It 
should initiate action against the conce rned officers/officials responsible for 
non-compliance. It should also put in place adequate and resilient financial 
controls through proper documentation. 
4.1.5.2 Preparation of DPRs through different agencies and deficiencies 
thereon (Bengaluru agglomeration area) 
BBMP invited a single expression of interest for preparation of master plan of 
drains referred to in Paragraph 4.1. 3 and for preparation of DPRs.  From the 
records/information made available, audit observed the following deficiencies/ 
irregularities in preparation of DPRs and execution of works thereon. 
❖ The scope of the master plan among other things included identifying the 
drain networks using satellite imagery, terrain modelling and ground 
verification; preparation of catchment for each drain and preparing 
uniform guidelines for preparation of DPRs for different zones.  Hence, it 
is imperative to have master plan first on record followed by DPRs for 
development of drains identified in the master plan.   However, single 
tender was issued including both items with a time period of 28 weeks.  
Thus, master plan and DPRs were prepared simultaneously.   
Audit observed that guidelines were not prepared and apparently the DPRs 
were prepared18 without the guidelines. Moreover, in the absence of basic 
data of drains, entrusting the work of maste r plan and DPRs 
simultaneously renders the DPRs unreliable.  The audit observations on 
non-identification of many existing drains in the master plan (paragraph 
4.1.3), raises questions on the completeness of the master plan and the 
veracity of the DPRs prepared. 
❖ The draft DPRs prepared were reportedly approved (April 2012) by the 
Technical Advisory Committee put in place for JnNURM scheme.  
However, Audit could not verify submission of the final DPRs to BBMP 
by any of the agencies as they were not provided by the CE, SWD.  Only 
longitudinal cross section diagram of drains and cost estimates (submitted 
during 2013-14 after a delay of more than five years) were available.  There 
is thus, no conclusive proof for the submission of DPRs to BBMP .  This 
                                                 
18    RR Nagar and Byatarayanapura zones – M/s STUP Consultants, Bengaluru; Bommanahalli 
and Dasarahalli zones – M/s Preethi CAD Consultants; and Mahadevapura zone – M/s TTI 
Consultants. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
46 
conclusion is substantiated by the fact that none of the agencies were paid 
the full amount as shown in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Details of payment made to agencies for preparation of DPRs 
                                                                                                         (` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Zone Agreed amount Payment made as per 
available record 
1 Rajarajeshwari Nagar 252.92 177.05 
2 Byatarayanapura 225.29 214.02 
3 Bommanahalli 86.21 60.35 
4 Mahadevapura 191.10 152.88 
5 Dasarahalli 70.26 Not available 
Source: Information furnished by BBMP 
❖ The non-submission of DPRs by agencies was also confirmed by the fact 
that CE, SWD/BBMP had not submitted/obtained the approval of State 
Government for the DPRs.   
❖ Further, though DPRs were to be prepared fo r each individual work duly 
explaining the scope and requirements, the BBMP entrusted for 
preparation of DPRs for the entire zone without reference to individual 
stretch/drain.  The cost estimates prepared thereon contained the total 
length/numbers of vari ous components to be executed and the total cost.  
However, these were not supported with details for individual works.  In 
the absence of comprehensive DPRs for any of the zones, audit could not 
cross-verify the financial projections between the master plan and DPRs. 
❖ Besides, documents/records forming part of the DPRs such as Geo -
Technical survey, Cost benefit analysis, plans for shifting of utilities 
interfering with drains, details of encroachment on drains etc., that the 
agencies ought to have submitted , as per tender conditions, were not 
available with the CE, SWD. 
❖ The BBMP had obtained (2014 -15) another set of DPRs for the work of 
“Remodelling of SWDs, flood mitigation and sewage diversion to improve 
environmental condition near water bodies in Hulima vu Kere and 
Madivala Kere Watershed Clusters” under Bommanahalli zone through 
M/s STUP Consultants at a cost of `1.34 crore though the DPR for entire 
Bommanahalli zone was got prepared through M/s Preethi CAD 
Consultants during 2013 -14.  The CE, SWD did no t explain the reasons 
for getting the DPRs prepared through a different agency within the short 
time period.   
Audit observed that execution of a total of 14 SWD works with an 
estimated cost of `61.21 crore was entrusted (2014 -16) to contractors.  
Though these works were taken up specifically for sewage diversion and 
to improve environmental condition near water bo dies, joint inspection 
showed that sewage was flowing invariably in all the stretches of drains 
and was also directly being discharged into Hulimavu and Madivala lakes.   
Thus, failure of the BBMP to prevent the mixing of sewage into water 
bodies, despite taking up works specifically for the purpose rendered the 
expenditure of `62.86 crore19 largely unfruitful. 
                                                 
19 `1.65 crore on DPRs plus `61.21 crore on works. 
https://youtu.be/mzM_
eKXkwbs 
 
Sewage flowing into 
the lake 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
47 
❖ None of the work files furnished to audit contained a reference to DPRs 
except for a longitudinal cross -section/strip plan (location map) showing 
existing and required width for the stretch of the drain.   
With the master plan being incomplete and in the absence of guidelines for 
DPRs, the effectiveness of the DPRs prepared and the impact thereof on the 
drainage network could not be ascertained. 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that the scope of DPRs included 
carrying out detailed investigations, detailed engineering for  structural 
measures like drains, culverts, preparation of detailed estimates for the works 
and preparation of tender document and schedules and does not include 
detention ponds, meeting with different stakeholders like BWSSB, BDA etc., 
to meet the master plan objectives, non-structural measures.  Hence the master 
plan and DPRs were two distinctive activities and there was no duplication of 
expenditure.  It further stated that few volumes of DPRs pertaining to five zones 
were not readily traceable and that action would be taken to obtain another 
complete set of records (both soft and hard copies) from the agencies and 
preserved in the division. 
It is clear from the reply that the scope of DPRs was not comprehensive and 
hence the DPRs prepared were deficient.   The reply was silent on audit 
observations regarding non-approval of DPRs by the State Government and the 
unfruitful expenditure of `62.86 crore. 
 Injudicious payment to an agency under questionable circumstances 
As explained above, copies of DPRs and documentary evidence for completion 
of assigned tasks were not available with the CE, SWD and the BBMP had 
foreclosed the contracts for DPRs.  Audit observed that the CE, SWD had 
recorded that the complete set of records relating to tendering, selection of 
agency, RA bills, payments made etc., pertaining to preparation of master plan 
and DPR for RR Nagar were ‘lost’ but processed (March 2018) the balance 
payment of `94.93 lakh 20 to M/s STUP consultants based on duplicate 
documents furnished by the agency.  Scru tiny of the file built up based on the 
duplicate documents revealed the following:  
• The agency while preferring the claim (October 2017) for the balance 
amount had stated that payments due to it could not be processed by BBMP 
as BBMP had misplaced the files relating to the above works “twice”. This 
is indicative of the serious system deficiencies existing within the SWD 
division of BBMP.  The action taken by the SWD division/BBMP to trace 
the records or initiate disciplinary action against the official s responsible 
for such repeated dereliction of duty was not forthcoming.  Instead, the files 
were rebuilt again based on the documents furnished by the agency. 
• The Measurement books for these two works were recorded (indicating the 
details of payments made earlier to the agency) during February and March 
2018 and completion certificate issued accordingly. Neither the 
                                                 
20  `19.05 lakh in relation to master plan of drains and `75.88 lakh towards DPR of RR Nagar 
zone 

Chapter IV 
 
 
48 
measurement books recording the earlier measurements nor the reasons for 
delay of more than six years in issuing completion certificate were 
explained.  
• Analysis of the payments showed that the agency was earlier paid during 
the period from January 2009 to May 2013 and the 5th and pre-final bill was 
recorded on 29 December 2012.  This shows that the work was not 
completed by January 2012 as recorded during March 2018. 
• Further, the earlier payments were made to agency through different zones 
for different bills (eg.1st and 2nd bills – Byatarayanapura zone; 3rd bill -  RR 
Nagar zone; 5th bill – Bommanahalli zone).  In the absence of basic records, 
the CE, SWD was to reconcile the payments made earlier with the records 
of the different zones as well as bank records before processing the final 
claims for payment.  However, this was not done. 
• The agency had sought extension of time (October 2016) in respect of the 
DPR for RR Nagar zone.  This further indicates that the work was not 
completed as recorded in the MBs. 
• As per the noting seeking approval for payment of the bala nce amount, it 
was recorded that the same agency was entrusted with the work of 
preparation of DPRs under Nagarothana Yojana; no further details 
regarding tendering, approval thereon was forthcoming. 
• The CE, SWD sought approval of the Commissioner, BBMP fo r payment 
of final claims recording that the DPRs for six packages under Nagarothana 
Yojana was prepared from the same agency.  This was highly irregular and 
resulted in misleading the Commissioner as no DPRs were prepared for the 
package works under Nagarothana Yojana as detailed in Paragraph 4.3.9. 
• Balance payments were due to all the three agencies engaged for the 
preparation of DPRs.  However, the CE, SWD accorded approval only for 
M/s STUP Consultants without bringing on record the complete set of 
master plan/DPRs.  Thus, the payments made were not for the work actually 
entrusted but for assignments under Nagarothana Yojana. 
Since the approval for the master plan and the DPRs was not obtained, 
completion of the work and submission of final set of documents by the agency 
was doubtful and the payments made to the agency was injudicious and 
irregular.  Linking two different works which are mutually exclusive raises 
questions on the circumstances involved in processing the payments and 
amounts to fraudulent practice. 
Neither the BBMP nor the State Government furnished any reply in this regard. 
Recommendation 9: BBMP should maintain all the basic records to ensure 
proper accounting and comply with the statutory provisions for transparency in 
implementation and execution of works. 
Recommendation 10: The State Government should conduct a detailed 
investigation into the issues regarding preparation of incomplete and deficient 
DPRs, loss of files by SWD division, payments made under questionable 
circumstances and take appropriate action based on the find ings of the 
investigation.   

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
49 
Analysis of the rainfall data furnished by KSNDMC for the period 2013 -2019 
showed that the average annual rainfall was about 969 mm during the above 
period as indicated in Chart 4.1. 
Chart 4.1: Data on annual rainfall in Bengaluru area between 2013-2019 
(in millimeters)          
 
Source: Data furnished by KSNDMC 
The increase in built up area and impervious layers due to urbanisation and 
consequent decrease in vegetation cover compounded the impact of increase in 
rainfall.  Bengaluru faced repeated instances of flooding during the years  
2015-18.   
Hence, the patte rns in rainfall data available with KSNDMC needs to be 
factored in while designing the roads and drains in order to mitigate the 
instances of flooding as discussed in subsequent paragraphs.  No evidence was 
forthcoming from the CE, SWD on whether data on actual rainfall in Bengaluru 
from reliable sources was incorporated in the existing DPRs. 
4.2.1  Deficiencies in designing of storm water drains  
Paragraph 4.6 of the NDM guidelines stipulates the need for development of an 
adequate and functioning drainage  system based on sound hydrological and 
hydraulic design principles. Further, as per paragraph 1.1 of IRC guidelines, 
urban drainage systems need to be designed such that they capture the storm 
water runoff from the road surface/right-of-way and infiltrate it into the ground.  
In case there is lack of space for constructing the drainage system, the rainwater 
runoff should be conveyed along the right -of-way and discharged at the 
receiving water body, in addition to infiltrating it in the ground at designated  
locations only.  
Hence, a conducive storm water management needs to ensure detention and 
retention ponds, permeable surfaces and infiltration trenches, surface and sub -
surface groundwater recharge, and other source control measures.   Developing 
a SWD des ign plan is essential to ensure that storm water runoff could be 
discharged from the catchment area in an efficient and timely manner with 
ultimate linkage to natural waterways/water bodies. 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
984.25
874.39
1173.99
739.39
1328.13
811.01 871.24
4.2 Designing of roads and drains 

Chapter IV 
 
 
50 
4.2.1.1 Absence of data on designing of storm water drains 
The primary parameters for designing an optimal storm water drainage system 
are intensity, duration and frequency of rain in the catchment area.  The other 
parameters to be factored in while designing include vegetation, surface/soil 
permeability and terrain slo pe.  The runoff coefficient of a particular stretch 
should be calculated based on such data taking into consideration the existing 
surface drainage infrastructure.  The results obtained from the analysis of design 
parameters are required to be correlated with the site data and used to check the 
adequacy of the system to cater to the required return period flood discharge. 
The master plan of drains considered Central Public Health and Environmental 
Engineering Organisation ( CPHEEO) norms for urban drainage s ystem and 
rainfall data from Indian Meteorological Department for the period 1976 to 
2008 analysed for 15 minutes’ peak rainfall duration.  Intensity-duration-
frequency curves were prepared for one, two and five  years return period.   
Consequently, the DPRs were to indicate  the calculations adopted while 
projecting the specifications for construction/improvements to storm water 
drainages.   
Audit, however, could not ensure whether the methodology and data were 
adopted uniformly for preparation of these DPRs as CE, SWD did not maintain 
DPRs for any of the zones.   Moreover, the detailed calculation on designing of 
drains was not forthcoming from any of the work files furnished to audit and 
hence the veracity of the specifications adopted for remodeling of drains could 
not be vouched. 
Further, the hydraulic analysis showed in the master plan considered only the 
rainfall over a period in arriving at the runoff coefficient for drains.  Th is 
analysis and conclusion thereof for designing of drains would be inappropriate 
as huge quantum of unassessed sewage flowed in the drains. 
4.2.1.2  Non-provision for ground water recharge structures 
With a view to conserve the SWD runoff as a ground water recharging method, 
IRC guidelines suggested infiltration methods like retrofitting the surface roads 
through different filter layers, providing bore wells in the tertiary and secondary 
drains, construction of drains with porous layers and filter materials, providing 
detention ponds and retention system in co urse of the drains, and rain water 
harvesting in buildings.  Further all possible recharging methods should be 
adopted before the ultimate disposal of rainwater. 
As per paragraph 4.19.1 of NDM Guidelines, urban storm water management 
systems will include d etention and retention facilities to mitigate the negative 
impact of urbanisation on storm water drainage. 
Detention ponds are temporary holding areas for storm water that store peak 
flows and slowly release them, reducing the demand on treatment facilitie s 
during storm events and prevent flooding (Paragraph 10.1 (v) of IRC 
guidelines).  
 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
51 
Typical cross-section of a  
Detention Pond 
Typical cross-section of a  
Retention System 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retention facilities  are basically extended detention facilities, infiltration 
basins and swales 21 that could be used for water supply, recreation, pollutant 
removal, aesthetics and importantly recharging of ground water.  In the context 
of serious depletion of ground water table, these infiltration facilities  provide 
significant water quality benefits and need to be used for the primary benefit of 
urban areas by providing at one or more locations (Paragraph 10.1 (v) of IRC 
guidelines). 
Scrutiny of estimates for SWDs executed by BBMP showed that none of the 
estimates for construction/improvements to SWDs included the items of 
providing detention ponds/retention facilities.  Besides, works were executed 
with complete concreting of both the walls and bed of drains, which precluded 
the infiltration of the storm water and the corresponding recharging of ground 
water, as evidenced by the data provided by the Central Ground Water Board, 
which showed decrease in ground water level during the period 2013 to 2018. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that retentio n/detention ponds, 
percolation tanks and infiltration structures were not attempted in the pathway 
of SWDs as large amount of sewage, industrial effluents and other chemical 
wastes were being let into the SWDs.  It further stated that action would be taken 
in this regard once the discharge of sewage into SWDs is stopped by BWSSB. 
The reply cannot be accepted as it was the responsibility of the Government to 
ensure strict compliance to Section 230 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1976 (KMC Act, 1976) and Section 72 of the Bengaluru Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board Act, 1964 which specifically prohibit laying sewerage lines 
inside SWDs by authorities for ecological and hygienic environment.  
4.2.1.3  Absence of infiltration drains 
As per the IRC guid elines, the infiltration of rain water, which is discharged 
from the pavement surface, should be trapped by construction of infiltration -
filter median drains, all along the pavement and the regular drains should be 
located adjacent to the infiltration drai ns to facilitate surface water from the 
pavement entering into the infiltration drains and allow excess water to flow 
                                                 
21 A swale is a shady spot, or a sunken or marshy place. A swale may be either natural or man-
made. Artificial swales are often infiltration basins, designed to manage water runoff, filter 
pollutants, and increase rainwater infiltration. 


Chapter IV 
 
 
52 
into the regular drains.  This process was not adopted/ensured by BBMP and 
drains were constructed without any provision for infiltration drains (Paragraph 
10.1(i) of IRC guidelines). 
 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that elaborate detention systems 
such as rain water harvesting, detention ponds for infiltration and also to 
minimise flood were proposed in the master plan.  However,  infiltration inside 
SWDs are deferred due to presence of sewage in the drain. 
4.2.1.4  Construction of roads without proper storm water drainage facility 
According to IRC guidelines, while building new roads , storm water facility 
along the roadside should be mandatory. The type of storm water facility to be 
used will depend on the street profile or topology.  For new constructions, there 
is far more flexibility for storm water management because the street profile can 
be designed in a variety of ways.  
Audit observed that flooding was a common feature even on newly constructed 
roads including those constructed under ‘Tender Sure 22’ contracts, where the 
cost of construction of one km of road was `10-12 crore as against  `2 to 3 crore 
per km of two lane flexib le pavement road.  This was because such newly 
constructed roads were dug for repair works by other authorities indicating 
deficient dewatering/utility lines system. The execution and effectiveness of 
drainage system on these roads could not be ascertained/established as the drain 
stretches were completely covered. Audit also observed non-shifting of sanitary 
and utility lines at few locations.  Evidently, storm water drainage system was 
deficient in these roads. (Exhibit 4.5). 
Exhibit 4.5: Pictures showing the flooding of newly constructed roads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
22  Tender Sure (Specifications for Urban Roads Execution) is a flagship project of BBMP  to 
upgrade the  selected main roads in Bengaluru to international standards with uniform 
standard carriage way width, proper camber and profile as per Indian Road Congress (IRC) 
guidelines, proper storm water drainage system on both sides of the road to eliminate flowing 
or ponding of rain water on road, properly designed footpaths,  dedicated corridors below 
footpaths to lay conduits of essential amenities such as electricity, water, sewage, OFC etc. 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
 
      Source: Media reports 
The State Government admitted (August 2020) that these requirements and 
specifications were required to be taken care of during construction of roads and 
surface drains and stated that action would be taken to discuss the matter with 
the authorities concerned and to execute works as per IRC provisions and in 
proper coordination among all to avoid flooding in Bengaluru. 
4.2.1.5  Drainage through pumping 
Sump tanks with storm water pumping stations were necessary for removal of 
storm water from road sections, in respect of structures like under -passes, road 
under bridges, flyovers etc., where road is required to be depressed to get 
minimum vertical clearance. The storm water accumulated on the pavement was 
to be channelised to a sump tank and then pumped to the nearest drain; from 
where it flows by gravity.  The sump tanks were also to be used as infiltration 
tanks by providing open bottom with necessary filtra tion system (Paragraph 
11.1 of IRC guidelines). 
The BBMP did not attempt to put in place sump tank systems leading to roads 
under bridges and flyovers getting inundated during rains (Exhibit 4.6). 
 
Exhibit 4.6: Photograph showing flooding under flyovers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
     Source: Media reports 


Chapter IV 
 
 
54 
Further as per Paragraph 4.13.2.1 of NDM guidelines, road and rail bridges in 
cities crossing drains should be designed such that they do not block the flows 
resulting in backwater effect due to the fact that the piers of roads and railway 
bridges located in major storm water drains are known to cause backwater 
effects as much as 1 m high and as far away as 5 km upstream thereby resulting 
in flooding of the upstream catchments. 
Audit noticed construction of pillars for walk over bridge inside SWD s which 
impacted the proper flow of water leading to flooding as shown in Exhibit 4.7. 
Exhibit 4.7: Construction of pillars inside SWD and consequent flooding 
at Outer Ring Road, Bellandur 
   Sources: Media Photos 
 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that these were the requirements 
and specifications required to be taken care of during construction of 
flyovers/ROBs/RUBs and many of the flyovers and underpasses were 
constructed by BDA also. It further stated action would be taken to discuss the 
issues with the concerned and to execute works as per IRC provisions and in 
proper coordination among all to avoid flooding in Bengaluru. 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
55 
The reply cannot be accepted as construction of wells with pumping facility was 
provided for in the original DPRs prepared during 2006 -07 for core Bengaluru 
area, which ultimately was not executed and subsequently this was not 
considered in the revised DPRs for SWDs.  Evidently, BBMP failed to consider 
these requirements while undertaking the works. 
Thus, improper design of roads and drains and failure to provide for retention/ 
detention structures and infiltration drains etc., impaired the ability of the SWD 
system to handle runoff efficiently. 
4.2.1.6 Multiple authorities within BBMP for construction/management of 
drains leading to lack of coordination 
For an efficient SWD system with due discharge of all the runoff into definitive 
locations, the interconnectivity of all types of drains is essential.   
The IRC guidelines specify that urbanisation of any locality and population 
needs a well-engineered surface and subsurface drainage system. In the present 
day context of depletion of water table, the storm water drainage should be 
effectively utilised for ground water recharging.  It should be ensured that water 
from the road flows to the roadside drains through inlets and gratings. As per 
paragraph 4.13.4.1 of NDM guidelines, inlets should be provided on the roads 
to drain water to the roadside drains. For effective drainage, this should join the 
peripheral drains, which in turn should join the main or trunk drain for ultimate 
discharge to the natural drain or detention facility or retention facility. 
BBMP has in place different authorities23 for construction and maintenance of 
different types of drains/roads under its jurisdiction.  Audit observed from the 
joint physical inspection of a few drains that BBMP had constructed 
roads/drains without ensuring that the inlets to drain water from the roads were 
properly aligned with the roadside drains/underground drains leading to water 
logging on roads.   Evidently, there was lack of coordination among these 
authorities to ensure proper cambering/ gradient during formation of roads, 
regular cleaning of bell mouths/kerb vents provided to surface roads as well as 
proper linkage with SWDs resulting in choking and clogging of water on roads 
(Exhibit 4.8 and 4.9).   The tweets of the various stations of traffic department 
(Exhibit 4.10) attribute water logging to choking and blockage of drains. 
  
                                                 
23 Storm Water Drains division headed by Chief Engineer; Road Infrastructure division headed 
by Chief Engineer for a rterial and sub -arterial roads, and Zonal Executive Engineers for 
other types of interior roads/drains. 
https://youtu.be/dewon
CFfc1s 
 
Drains without 
connectivity 


Chapter IV 
 
 
56 
Exhibit 4.8: Photographs showing unscientific construction of roads/drains – 
absence of proper gradient/alignment 
 
Koramangala zone 
 
Bommanahalli zone 
    Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
 
    Source: Media reports 
  


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
57 
Exhibit 4.9: Photographs showing unscientific construction of roads/drains 
– absence of proper linkage 
 
Bommanahalli zone 
 
Koramangala zone 
 
South zone 
 
RR Nagar zone 
 
     Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
 
  
https://youtu.be/LWP0
FfwW3V4 
 
Drains without 
connectivity 


Chapter IV 
 
 
58 
Exhibit 4.10: Tweets of various stations of traffic department on water 
logging due to blockage of drains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
59 
Lack of coordination in ensuring proper construction of roads and 
interconnectivity of drains and their maintenance could result in frequent 
flooding of low lying residential localities and water logging on roads affecting 
vehicular movement in the city.  Besides, stagnant water on roads for long hours 
could result in deteriorating quality of roads and appearance of potholes.   
The State Government admitted (August 2020) that major and arterial roads 
were constructed by Road Infrastructure wing of BBMP and internal roads in 
residential localities were laid by concerned BBMP wards.  In addition, many 
of the major roads and other i nfrastructure were also constructed by BDA.  It 
further stated that maintenance of all types of roads and drainages fall under the 
jurisdiction of concerned BBMP wards and maintenance of SWD lies with 
SWD division.  It also stated that action would be take n to coordinate with all 
authorities concerned for ensuring proper construction/maintenance of drains 
and to avoid choking of drains and also to ensure adequate interconnectivity of 
surface drains with SWDs. The reply justifies the audit contention that there was 
absence of coordination between the different authorities within BBMP.   
Recommendation 11: BBMP should factor in all parameters such as rainfall 
pattern, increase in impervious layers, decrease in vegetation etc., while 
designing and executing roa ds and drains to increase ground water recharge 
and prevent flooding.   It should ensure strict adherence to the guidelines and 
norms prescribed for construction of roads/drains. 
There are a total of 633 storm water drains (primary and secondary) measuring 
842 km under the jurisdiction of BBMP.  BBMP had taken up remodelling of 
332.02 km of drains up to 2017-18 and maintenance of 308.02 km of drains as 
indicated in Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Details of various works taken up to 2017-18 
Year Remodelling Maintenance 
Total length (in km) Total length (in km) 
Till 2012-13 53.00  96.00 
2013-14 18.12 10.02 
2014-15 20.50 15.00 
2015-16 22.08 16.00 
2016-17 28.30 69.00 
2017-18 35.02 102.00 
Total 177.02 308.02 
Nagarothana Yojane 
2016-17 to 2017-18 155.00 NF 
Grand Total 332.02 308.02 
Source: Information furnished by CE, SWD  NF: Not furnished 
While the major component of expenditure for these works were incurred out 
of JnNURM grants and funds provided by the State Government, the BBMP 
also funded the works from its own resources. 
 
4.3 Deficiencies in execution of projects involving remodelling of storm 
water drains 

Chapter IV 
 
 
60 
4.3.1 Absence of action plans and progress reports  
BBMP was responsible for remodelling and maintenance of SWDs.  However, 
the CE, SWD did not possess either the action plans for the works approved or 
the physical and financial progress report of works executed.   This was because 
the CE had not maintained records such as tender register, works register, 
contractor’s ledger etc.  Hence, the CE did not furnish the work -wise details in 
justification of the claims for executing works for the length of 177.02 km.  In 
the absence of details and any kind of identification structures like information 
boards/pillars, markings etc., audit could not ascertain/identify the actual 
site/stretch at which these works were reportedly executed, particularly where 
the drains were fully covered for long stretches and also the correctness of the 
claims.   
The absence of basic records, action plans and progress reports of works could 
facilitate incorrect reporting of physical and financial achievement besides 
abandoning of works with substantial expenditure going unnoticed.  
While endorsing (August 2020) the reply of the Commissioner that action plans 
and progress reports were prepared only in respect of works sanctioned under 
Nagarothana Yojane during 2016-17, the State Government did not clarify the 
reasons for non-maintenance of essential records for other programmes. 
4.3.2 Non-maintenance of Works History Register 
The Karnataka Public Works Code provisions stipulate maintenance of Works 
History Register for undertaking various works.  This register was to contain a 
distinct folio for each drain duly recording the chainage, length of drain covered, 
improvements executed, period of execution, total expenditure, etc.  It was to 
serve as a record for preparation of action plans, undertaking future works and 
avoiding duplication. 
Audit observed that three 24 out of the nine zones had not maintained the 
prescribed register.  The registers maintained in the other six zones were not 
updated with the progress of work undertaken and were incomplete. 
Non-maintenance of Works History Register is fraught with the risk of  
duplication of works and fraudulent claims going unnoticed, as large number of 
works were being executed as ‘emergency works’ without the approval of the 
action plan.  Since works were sanctioned with different nomenclature and 
without specific reference to exact location, audit could not ascertain whether 
there were any duplications/fraudulent claims. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that instructions were issued to the 
concerned EEs to maintain the Works History Register and to update the m 
regularly.  However, the updated Works History Registers were not made 
available to audit for scrutiny (December 2020). 
 
                                                 
24 Bengaluru East, Bommanahalli and Koramangala. 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
61 
4.3.3 Non-availability of ‘Completion Plans’ and ‘As built drawings’ 
BBMP implements large number of works for repair and remodelling of SWDs.  
On completion of the entrusted work, the contractors are required to submit the 
‘As Built Drawings’ and ‘Completion Plans’ clearly showing the actual work 
done and deviations, if any , from the originally sanctioned 
specifications/drawings, due to site conditions.  Such revised drawings were to 
be preserved in the SWD division and made use of during subsequent 
modifications/rectification of SWDs in that location.   
These drawings/plans are essential reference materials for subsequent 
management, as a large number of works are entrusted and executed as 
‘emergency works’ without approval of the action plan and without preparing 
estimates, proper survey and investigation of work site.   
The ‘As Built Drawings’ and ‘Completion Plans’ were not forthcoming from 
the records furnished to audit in respect of any of the zones.  Non-availability 
of ‘as built drawings’ is fraught with the risk of damage to structures/bed of 
drains during maintenance, particularly in stretches where drains are covered. 
The State Government stated (January 2019/August 2020) that the CE, SWD is 
insisting and obtaining those drawings and completion plans before issue of 
completion certificates for the  works.  However, the drawings and plans were 
not furnished to audit for verification. 
Recommendation 1 2: BBMP should prepare action plans, comprehensive 
project reports, completion plans etc., maintain a works history register and 
repository of all such records for future use in planning and implementation.   
4.3.4 Execution of SWD works by Zonal Executive Engineers 
For all general purposes, BBMP is divided into eight zones having zonal offices 
each containing an Engineering Division headed by an Executiv e Engineer.  
Such Zonal Engineering Divisions are responsible for general maintenance 
(roads, tertiary/road side drains etc.) at wards level under their zones.  However, 
for the purpose of management of storm water drains, BBMP is divided into 
nine zones (as indicated in Chapter 1) and has a separate division headed by the 
Chief Engineer who is assisted by the Executive Engineers of these nine zones.  
Hence, execution and implementation of SWD works were to be carried out by 
the EEs in-charge of SWD. 
The analysis of the the trends and practices in tenders relating to SWDs through 
the e-procurement portal of Government of Karnataka, however, showed that 
tenders for 110 SWD works costing `38.59 crore were invited and got executed 
by the Zonal Executive Engineers who were not responsible for SWD works.  
Audit further observed that 10 works were awarded to a single contractor for a 
total cost of `10.88 crore during Feb ruary 2018 by the Zonal EE,  RR Nagar 
zone.  Allowing multiple authorities to invite tenders and execute SWD works 
coupled with the absence of basic registers/records, could facilitate duplication 
of claims for the same works by both the SWD division and regular zonal 
offices.  Hence, this matter needs to be investigated. 

Chapter IV 
 
 
62 
The ACS concurred (December 2018) with the audit observation and directed 
the CE, SWD to ensure implementation of SWD works by SWD division only.  
The State Government replied (August 2020) that action would be taken  to 
execute the works relating to storm water drains through the SWD division. 
4.3.5 Delay in completion of works 
It was the responsibility of the employer (respective EEs in general and CE in 
respect of six package works) to ensure that the works entruste d to contractors 
were completed within the time limit prescribed in the work order.  In the 
absence of the basic records, audit could not ascertain the total number of works 
executed for SWDs and adopt any sampling method for selection of work files.  
Hence, 143 works files (includes 15 files pertaining to works entrusted to 
Karnataka Rural Infrastructure Development Limited (KRIDL)) that were made 
available were examined.  
Audit observed that in 25 works test-checked, there were delays in completion 
of works ranging from one month to 33 months.  The reasons for the delays and 
action taken for the delays were, however, not forthcoming from the records 
made available. 
This apart, the BBMP had entrusted 22 SWD related works to KRIDL under 
clause 4(g) of the  KTPP Act, during the period 2013 -14 to 2017 -18 without 
inviting tenders treating the works as ‘emergency works’ and an amount of 
`15.02 crore was paid to KRIDL for these works.   However, in six out of 15 
test-checked works, audit observed delays in completi on ranging from one 
month to 23 months defeating the objective of entrusting works without calling 
for tenders .  The works that were delayed comprised construction of road 
bridge, box drains, retaining wall etc.  The prolonged delay in completion of 
these works inordinately distressed the  pedestrian and vehicular movement .  
Besides, BBMP ’s decision  to entrust works to KRIDL contravened the 
recommendations of the Committee on Local Bodies and P anchayat Raj 
Institutions prohibiting direct entrustment to KRIDL.  
 
The State Government endorsed (August 2020) the reply of the Commissioner 
that efforts were made by the divisional engineers to complete the work within 
the date fixed for the completion, but as drains pass th rough residential areas 
and main roads, the delay caused in completion are due to problems such as 
availability of  work sites and permission from various other government 
authorities.  Further, works were entrusted to KRIDL directly based on the 
recommendations and approval of the Government, as the works were of 
emergent in nature. 
It is clear from the reply that the works were taken up without ensuring that the 
work front was available and free from all encumbrances and administrative 
hurdles such as coordination with other government authorities for shifting of 
utility lines etc., highlighting the absence of proper planning before entrustment 
of work.  The reply that works entrusted to KRIDL were of emergent in nature 
was not justifiable as the delay in completion of the works ranged up to 23 
months.   

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
63 
4.3.6 Avoidable expenditure on diversion of water course 
The general specifications o f tender document/agreement stipulated that the 
rates included the cost of shoring, coffer dam channels or other incidental 
servicing necessary for diverting the water and it should be maintained in good 
working condition till the completion of the structure. 
Audit observed that diversion of water course by providing coffer dam was 
estimated as a separate item and payments were also made to the contractors to 
the extent of `4.10 crore in 115 test-checked works, which was extra contractual 
and avoidable.  In  response to a similar observation (Paragraph 4.1.11.4 of 
Report no. 6 of the year 2013 – Government of Karnataka), the Committee on 
Local Bodies and Panchayat Raj Institutions had opined that in cases where the 
original estimates included all items requir ed for construction of coffer dams, 
incurring expenditure as a separate item was not permitted. 
The State Government endorsed (August 2020) the reply of the Commissioner 
that the item of coffer dam was provided in the estimates and payment made as 
it was an absolute necessity for diversion of water course during execution of 
the works of construction of retention walls/bed protection for SWDs as there 
was continuous flow in all the SWDs throughout the days due to discharge of 
sewage.  The reply of the Commissioner cannot be accepted as water diversion 
forms part of excavation, and contract conditions prohibit extra payment.   
Besides, audit also observed that only the available earth/silt in the drain  was 
used for diverting the water course as exhibited (Exhibit 4.11) below: 
Exhibit 4.1 1: Instances of available earth/silt used for diverting water 
course 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


Chapter IV 
 
 
64 
 
 
 
 
     Source: Photographs taken during field visits 
4.3.7 Excess payments on item of backfilling 
As per the specifications for Roads and Bridges issued by GOI, Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways (MORTH), the cost of excavation for 
foundations of Roads and Bridges and retaining walls included backfilling the 
space between the foundation masonry/concrete and the sides of excavation 
with approved material including its compaction. 
Audit observed that the contractors were paid `4.41 crore in respect of 62 test-
checked works towards the item of backfilling the foundation. Payment for 
backfilling separately to the contractors was not warranted a s the specification 
in the estimate and the rates quoted by the contractors for excavation for 
foundation included this item of work. This amounted to extending undue 
financial benefits to the contractors. 
In response to a similar observation (Paragraph 4. 1.11.5 of Report no. 6 of the 
year 2013 – Government of Karnataka), the Committee took a serious view of 
the excess payments and directed that action be initiated against the concerned 
Chief Engineer, Executive Engineer and other officers and to recover th e loss 
caused to the exchequer besides blacklisting the contractors.  However, no 
action was taken by BBMP so far. 
The State Government endorsed (August 2020) the reply of the Commissioner 
that the item of backfilling was provided in the estimates for stre ngthening the 
structure on abutment side for allowing seepage of water through granular layer 
into weep holes and action would be taken to restrict the item to provide 
granular/porous layer only in estimates for retention walls of SWDs.  The reply 
is incorrect as cost of excavation for foundations of Roads and Bridges and the 
retaining walls includes backfilling. 
4.3.8 Payment made without approval of lead chart 
As per codal provisions, cost of lead and lift for conveying the material should 
be paid only af ter getting the lead chart approved by the competent authority.  
The lead chart should clearly show the distance from the point of the work to 
the place of disposal and the nature of land in which the material has been 


Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
65 
dumped.  In case of private land, it was also necessary to obtain the written 
consent from the land owner for dumping drain waste in the land. 
Audit observed that an amount of `9.97 crore had been paid to contractors in 
respect of 98 test -checked works though the required lead chart was not 
prepared and approved by the competent authority for transporting the desilted 
waste from SWDs.    In the absence of the approved lead chart, the genuineness 
of claims and payment towards desilting and conveyance was doubtful.   
The State Government stated (August 2020) that the Engineers concerned 
would be instructed to document the rate analysis and lead chart pertaining to 
works showing the distance from the place of work and site for disposal.  It 
further stated that works executed by SWD division were generally of 
emergency nature and due to the shortage of sanctioned strength for putting in 
place a separate technical wing in the division, few omissions might have crept 
into the estimates since they were prepared in a hurry .  It also stated that a 
technical wing has been established in the division with a Technical Assistant 
and subordinate engineers and estimates are being appro ved duly showing 
google map lead chart. 
It is clear from the reply that the audit objection has been accepted by the 
Government.  The reply is, however, silent on the action taken or proposed to 
be taken to ascertain the genuineness of the payments made in  the absence of 
lead charts.   
Recommendation 1 3: Since SWD works are identified as emergency works, 
BBMP should ensure that the works are completed within the prescribed time 
schedule.    It should also consider establishing a separate technical wing for  
meticulous scrutiny of the estimates to ensure execution of works economically 
and efficiently.   
Recommendation 14: The State Government should ensure strict action against 
the officers/officials responsible for non -compliance with Government 
instructions and Committee recommendations. Care should be taken to avoid 
excess/avoidable payments to contractors.   
4.3.9  Improper implementation of SWD works under Nagarothana Yojane 
The State Government approved (June 2016) 408 SWD works (remodelling / 
improvements to existing drains) costing `800 crore for implementation under 
Nagarothana Yojane during the period 2016-18.  Of these, while 49 works were 
entrusted individually, the CE, SWD grouped 359 works into six packages as 
detailed in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Statement showing the grouping of 408 works 
Sl. 
No. 
Group Number of 
works 
Total cost  (` 
in crore) 
1 Six package works 359 671.82 
2 Emergency maintenance works 19 26.40 
3 Essential emergency works 30 101.78 
Total 408 800.00 
Source: Information furnished by CE, SWD 

Chapter IV 
 
 
66 
The CE, SWD furnished only the soft copies of the details of progress achieved 
in these package works to audit.  Analysis revealed the following: 
(i) The progress report in respect of Package -2 (consisting of 33 works 
estimated at `45.30 crore) submitted to audit by CE, SWD was 
apparently incorrect as all the works were shown to have been completed 
with the executed quantities being shown the same as estimated while 
there were huge variations in financial progress as indicated in 
Appendix 4.1. 
(ii) Of the 326 works entrusted under the other five packages which were 
stipulated for completion between September 2018 and March 2019 
(excepting Package -2), 279 works were reported completed and 15 
works had not commenced even as of October 2019 due to reasons like 
non-clearance of encroachments, not obtaining permission for shifting 
of utilities/traffic diversion, change of location, etc.   
(iii) While the works under packages 5 and 6 were stated to be completed 
within the time prescribed, audit observe d that the progress of works 
under Package-1 was extremely tardy as only 50 per cent of the works 
were completed even after lapse of one year from the scheduled date of 
completion.  
(iv) The laxity in execution of works was evident from the fact that 32 works 
were lingering for periods ranging from six months to one year after the 
scheduled date of completion for the packages.  Details are furnished in 
Appendix 4.2. 
Moreover, verification of records disclosed the following ir regularities in 
implementation/execution of works under the different packages. 
(a) The State Government had specifically stipulated that BBMP should 
group these works into different packages costing not less than `10.00 crore and 
obtain technical sanction from the competent authorities in accordance with the 
KTPP Act and Rules.  
The CE, SWD, pooled a total of 359 works into six packages with number of 
works ranging from 20 to 138 works and estimated cost ranging from `45.30 
crore to `176.95 crore.  This had minimised/restricted the scope of bidding and 
resulted in limited participation of bidders and was, thus, biased as is evident 
from the fact that there were single bids for Packages 1, 2 and 3 while Package 
5 had five bidders.  The details of bidders for Packages 4 and 6 were not made 
available to audit. 
(b) The CE did not prepare the DPRs for the execution of works under 
Nagarothana Yojana despite specific instructions from the Government.  The 
CE replied (August 2020) that DPRs prepared during 2011 were the basis for 
the works and the same agencies were asked to prepare the tender document by 
updating the estimate to the current Schedule of Rates (SR) at no extra cost.   He 
further stated that required physical survey and total station survey was 
conducted by consultant agencies before commencement  of work and 
modifications made to Bill of Quantities ( BOQ) specification as per site 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
67 
conditions. The strip plans prepared earlier by DPR agencies were used for the 
purpose.  
Audit, however, observed that the longitudinal cross-section diagrams based on 
which the estimates were prepared for the works under core areas of Bengaluru 
pertained to the year 2005-06 or earlier.   The action and reply of the CE, thus, 
indicates that the estimates were prepared without conducting site inspection 
and the procedure of  preparing estimates was only a mere formality that was 
being complied with for undertaking the works.   The fact that modifications 
were made to BOQ underlines the relevance of the existing DPRs and the strip 
plans that were stated to have been used.  The reply that tender documents were 
prepared by updating the estimate to the current SR at no extra cost contradicts 
the recommendation of the CE for making balance payment to an agency citing 
execution of this work (Paragraph 4.1.5.2 ibid). 
(c) The rationale behind pooling of the works was not forthcoming from the 
records made available to audit.  However, pooling of huge number of works 
spread out across different locations/zones (Package 3 had 86 works to be 
executed under 9 assembly constituencies and Package 4 contained 138 works 
spread across 11 assembly constituencies) contributed to delay in completion.  
This is evident from the fact that Packages 5 and 6, which pertained to RR Nagar 
zone, were only completed within the timeframe. 
(d) The packages were entrusted with a consolidated Schedule -B totalling 
the quantities from each estimate and payments were also made accordingly.  
This facilitated the contractors/engineers to execute works without reference to 
estimated length/quantity for the indivi dual works.  Audit observed that while 
the executed quantity in individual works far exceeded (63 to 587 per cent) the 
estimate, works were declared complete even though the total executed quantity 
was much less than the estimate ( 46 to 94 per cent).  Details  are furnished in 
Appendix 4.2. 
Substantial variation in length/quantities in respect of works in the packages and 
limiting the total quantity to Schedule-B quantities undermined the preparation 
of estimates for individual works and their consequent approv al by the 
competent authorities.  This also highlights the disregard to the codal provisions 
by BBMP authorities.  
(e) In the absence of defined drain identification number in the 
nomenclature of works proposed/executed under packages, audit could not 
verify whether all the works executed were identified SWDs or drains of other 
types. 
(f) None of the photographs on record, in any package, were taken 
identifying a ‘fixed photo spot’ clearly showing the status before and after the 
execution; as a result of wh ich audit could not ensure the genuineness of 
execution/ completion of works (as works were spread out in various locations 
and all drains look alike and works are similar in nature).  The details of 
inspections, if any, conducted by the EEs and the inspec tion reports thereon 
were not available.  

Chapter IV 
 
 
68 
The CE, SWD during the exit conference stated that the package works were 
nearing completion and would be completed early.  Audit, however, observed 
that works were not completed even as of October 2019.  Though the S tate 
Government stated (August 2020) that the up -to-date progress of all packages 
would be furnished to audit, the same was yet to be furnished (December 2020). 
No specific reply was furnished for the other observations pointed out in audit. 
Recommendation 15: The State Government should conduct an independent 
verification of the status and quality of all SWD works to ensure their quality 
and completion. 
4.3.10 Non-implementation of the Master Plan  
The verification of available volumes (four out of eleven) of master plan of 
drains showed that, apart from remodelling of SWDs, the master plan had also 
proposed works for recharge structures in the drains, intercepting drains, 
segregation of sewage/ sewerage system from SWDs, removal of bottlenecks, 
interlinking of drains and lakes to hold flood discharges, etc.  However, audit 
observed that except for remodelling of drains by constructing concrete walls 
and bridges, none of these recommended items had been incorporated in 
estimates or executed by BBMP.  This defeated the objective of preparation of 
master plan. 
The State Government accepted (August 2020) that BBMP had carried out work 
of around 15 to 20 per cent of the master plan estimates.  It further stated on 
completion of all the works identified in the master plan, flooding problem 
could be minimised with other benefits such as improved environmental 
condition, ground water quality and quantity and also the possibility of 
harnessing rain water at city level as alternate source of water to Bengaluru.  
The reply, however, did not specify the time frame or the plan of action in this 
regard. 
4.3.11 Non-preparation of storm water drainage manual 
A manual/code is intended to define the scope of the administrative and 
executive functions of the department/or ganisation. It primarily describes the 
procedure to be followed by the authorities in dealing with activities concerning 
planning, design, execution and maintenance of assets created besides 
maintaining and rendering accounts properly.   
The IRC guidelines  (paragraph 12.5) provide for a maintenance manual for 
SWDs, clearly indicating the work to be carried out, the frequency for that work, 
the equipment and labour to be used and most important, any safety measures 
and equipment required.  Further, the CPHEEO suggest preparation of an action 
plan for maintenance of SWD to ensure proper functioning of the drains. 
Audit noted that BBMP, which is responsible for storm water management was 
yet to prepare a comprehensive SWD manual to systematically design, execute 
and maintain the SWD infrastructure of the city.   Even the action plan as 
suggested by CPHEEO was not prepared. 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
69 
The State Government stated (January 2019) that action would be taken for 
preparation of maintenance manual for SWDs.  No action was, however, taken 
by the authorities concerned for prepa ration of manual for SWDs (December 
2019). The position remained the same as per the updated reply (August 2020). 
Provisions of National Disaster Management guidelines were violated as BBMP 
did not possess fool-proof data on the total number/length and nat ure of 
different types of drains as well as complete master plan of drains.  
Discrepancies between master plan for the city and master plan of drains 
regarding mapping of drains and their nomenclature remained unreconciled. 
BBMP failed to prepare a SWD man ual to systematically design, execute and 
maintain the SWD infrastructure of the city and also did not possess on record 
the comprehensive DPRs for improvement of SWDs; the DPRs prepared being 
incomplete and deficient.  Many of the works proposed in the ma ster plan of 
drains were not taken up so far.   
Failure to factor in reasons for high intensity rainfall due to rapid urbanisation 
and non-adherence to the provisions of IRC while designing and construction 
of roads/drains coupled with improper and delayed execution of works affected 
free movement of storm water leading to frequent flooding in various parts of 
the city.      
Even though large number of works were abandoned due to poor performance 
of contractors, the contracts were rescinded without risk and cost and without 
retaining the security deposit. This led to extension of undue financial benefit 
to the contractors.  BB MP lost financial assistance under JnNURM for storm 
water drainage due to non -submission of UCs as many of the works taken up 
were abandoned.  The absence of basic records such as action plans, progress 
reports, works history registers etc., was fraught wi th the risk of incorrect 
reporting and duplication of works. 
 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
4.1.1  BDA did not have on record the first two development plans. The third 
plan was incomplete and deficient.  The fourth plan (RMP-2015) which 
is valid even as of now did not classify the drains in accordance with 
the buffer zone parameters.  Many existing drains and water bodies 
identified as per the master plan of drains prepared by BBMP were not 
shown in the RMP. 
4.1.2 There were delays in preparation of the Comprehensive Development 
Plans/Master Plans. 
Conclusion
 
Summary of important audit findings 

Chapter IV 
 
 
70 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
4.1.3 The master plan prepared by BBMP was incomplete as did not take into 
consideration the tertiary drains. Many drains shown in RMP and large 
number of drains which were in existence but not found in RMP were 
not mapped raising questions on the validity and reliability of the 
database. 
4.1.4 The CE, SWD, did not possess comprehensive data of different roads 
and tertiary/surface road side drains within the jurisdiction of BBMP.  
The absence of comprehensive inventory of drains with BBMP and its 
failure to classify them properly contributed to lack of clarity on critical 
issues including the extent of buffer zone to be maintained. 
4.1.5 The DPRs prepared for Bengaluru core area were deficient. Major 
works taken up were stopped due to non -availability of land and poor 
performance of contractors which led to loss of JnNURM assistance, 
non-recovery of amounts from contractors and irregular p ayments to 
contractors.  The DPRs for Bengaluru agglomeration area which were 
prepared without the required guidelines  was not made available to 
audit.  Preparation of DPRs without the basic data of drains rendered 
them unreliable. 
14 SWD works estimated to cost of `61.21 crore were taken up 
specifically for sewage diversion and to improve environmental 
condition near water bodies. The joint inspection sho wed that sewage 
was flowing invariably in all the stretches of drains and was also directly 
being discharged into lakes.  This rendered the expenditure largely 
unfruitful. 
4.2.1 In the absence of DPRs, the methodology, data and specifications 
adopted for remodeling of drains could not be vouched by Audit.  
Scrutiny of estimates for SWDs executed by BBMP showed that none 
of the estimates for construction/improvements to SWDs included the 
items of providing detention ponds/retention facilities and infiltrati on 
drains. There was lack of coordination among various authorities within 
BBMP resulted in absence of proper linkage between roads and SWDs. 
4.3.1 Basic records such as tender register, works register, action plans and 
progress reports were not maintained.  The CE did not furnish the work-
wise details in justification of the claims for executing works for a 
length of 177.02 km.  Hence, audit could not ascertain/identify the 
actual site/stretch at which these works were reportedly executed, 
particularly where the drains were fully covered for long stretches and 
also the correctness of the claims. 
4.3.2/ 
4.3.3 
Three out of the nine zones had not maintain ed the prescribed Works 
History Register and ‘As Built Drawings’ and ‘Completion Plans’ were 
not forthcoming from the records furnished to audit in respect of any of 
the zones. 
4.3.4 The Zonal Executive Engineers, who were not responsible for SWD 
works, invited t enders for 110 SWD works costing `38.59 crore.  
Allowing multiple authorities to invite tenders and execute SWD works 
and absence of basic registers/records, could facilitate duplication of 

Planning, designing and construction of storm water drains 
 
 
71 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
claims for the same works by both the SWD division and regular zonal 
offices. 
4.3.6  BBMP estimated diversion of water course by providing coffer dam as 
a separate item and  paid `4.10 crore to the contractors in 115 test -
checked works, which was extra contractual and avoidable. 
4.3.7 Though cost of exca vation for foundations of Roads and Bridges and 
retaining walls included backfilling the space between the foundation 
masonry/concrete and the sides of excavation with approved material 
including its compaction, BBMP paid the contractors `4.41 crore in 
respect of 62 test -checked works towards this item resulting in 
extending undue financial benefits to the contractors. 
4.3.8 BBMP paid an amount of `9.97 crore to contractors in respect of 98 
test-checked works though the required lead chart was not prepared and 
approved by the competent authority for transporting the desilted waste 
from SWDs.    In the absence of the approved lead chart, the genuineness 
of claims and payment towards desilting and conveyance was doubtful. 
4.3.10 Though the master plan of drains proposed works for recharge 
structures in the drains, intercepting drains, segregation of sewage/ 
sewerage system from SWDs, removal of bottlenecks, interlinking of 
drains and lakes to hold flood discharges, etc., audit obs erved that 
BBMP had neither incorporated these items in the estimates or executed 
them except for remodelling of drains by constructing concrete walls 
and bridges. 
 

 
 73 
 
 
5.1.1 Flow of sewage in storm water drains 
The SWDs are meant to carry only the runoff from the rain water, and thus were 
to be generally dry during off monsoon period.  Section 230 of the Karnataka 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (KMC Act, 1976) and Section 72 of the 
Bengaluru Water Supply and Sew erage Board Act,1964 specifically prohibit 
laying sewerage lines inside SWDs.  The IRC guidelines (Paragraph 8.1) 
prohibit sewerage drains and its content entering the SWDs. 
The study conducted by Audit with RRSC to analyse the time series land use 
changes and status of drains (as mentioned in Paragraph 2.4) revealed 
intersection or overlapping areas between drains and sewer lines that were the 
likely areas/ zones of possible intermixing of rain water and sewage, a few of 
which were validated by field visit s.  The sewer line layer obtained from 
BWSSB was overlaid on drainage maps and the intersection of the two layers 
was extracted to identify the overlapping areas.  Audit observed that there were 
continuous stretches where the drains and sewer lines interse ct/overlap each 
other.  The total length of such stretches was about 16.0 km with about 728 
points of intersection in Koramangala valley and about 28.09 km with about 
342 points of intersection in Vrishabhavathi valley.  Typical example of 
overlapping of drains and sewer lines is depicted in Exhibit 5.1. 
Exhibit 5.1: Intersection of SWD and sewer lines 
                    Koramangala valley 
 
 
 
5
Chapter
 Protection and maintenance of 
storm water management systems
5.1 Protection of storm water drains 

Chapter V 
 
 
74 
Vrishabhavathi valley 
 
 
  
 
Overlap of sewer line (yellow colour) and drain (blue colour) 
Audit also observed that sewerage lines were laid inside the SWDs and large 
quantity of sewage was invariably let into SWDs in complete disregard of the 
codal provisions.  Out of 1,440 MLD of sewage generated in BBMP areas, about 
780 MLD (54 per cent ) was discharged into SWDs/water bodies without 
treatment.  BWSSB, which is responsible for sewage disposal within the 
jurisdiction of BBMP area currently operates 27 Sewage Treatment Plants 
(STPs) with an operational capacity of 1 ,073 MLD.  The utilisation efficiency 
was only 60 per cent  with 644 MLD of total sewage reaching these STPs .   
Works in respect of 11 STPs with an operational capacity of 520 MLD were in 
progress as at the end of March 2021.  Further, though 110 villages were made 
part of the BBMP area in 2007, BWSSB was yet to provide sanitation facilities 
to these villages.    
The joint inspection of drains confirmed the existence of sewerage lines within 
SWDs.  Further, audit noticed sewage being discharged into the SWDs directly 
or through frac tured manholes at many places ( Exhibit 5.2 ).  This can be 
attributed to the absence of regular inspections by BBMP as indicated in 
Paragraph 5.2.1. Consequently, none of the SWDs were dry irrespective of the 
rainfall. 
Exhibit 5.2: Photos showing the flow of sewage in SWDs 
 
 
Direct discharge of sewage into SWD at 
Pattanagere, RR Nagar Zone 
 
 
Discharge of sewage into SWD through fractured 
manhole at Seshadripuram, West Zone 
 
https://youtu.be/_4s2d
2Tjw1w 
 
Sewage Mixing 
https://youtu.be/jcX0jF
zwgGw 
 
Sewage Mixing 


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
75 
 
 
Sewage flowing in SWD at Ejipura, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Discharge of sewage into SWD through fractured 
manhole at Yeshwanthpur , RR Nagar Zone 
 
 
Discharge of sewage into SWD through BWSSB pipeline 
at Silk Board Junction, Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Sewage flowing in the SWDs due to chain of fractured  
manholes in the drain connecting to Herohalli Lake, 
Dasarahalli Zone 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
Thus, the failure of BBMP to identify and avoid mixing of  sewage led to the 
misuse of SWDs as sewers.  Since the water in SWDs is not treated in the same 
manner as sewage, the possibility of untreated sewage going into water bodies 
affecting the quality of ground water is very high.  This carries substantial risk 
of spurt in vector/water borne diseases such as dengue, typhoid, cholera, 
hepatitis, etc., and adverse environmental outcomes including disappearance of 
biodiversity and aquatic ecosystems. 
The Chief Health Officer (Public Health), BBMP (CHO) confirmed the outburst 
of cholera in the city during March 2020 and stated that seven out of the 25 
suspected cases had been confirmed as cholera.  The CHO, inter alia, attributed 
sewage flowing in open SWDs to the spreading of epidemic in the city. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that BWSSB had laid sewerage 
lines and manholes inside the SWDs and as such there were leakages at many 
places leading to mixing of sewage with drain water. This had increase d the 
pressure on SWDs which has to carry water mixed with sewage throughout the 
year.  It further stated that BBMP was in constant dialogue with BWSSB to 
segregate sewage from SWD and action was being taken by BWSSB for 
segregation. 


Chapter V 
 
 
76 
The reply reiterates t he absence of coordination between various agencies.  
However, the details of the action taken for segregation was not furnished for 
verification.  
5.1.1.1  Absence of STPs along SWDs 
The IRC guidelines (Chapter 8) stipulate that sewerage drains and their content 
shall strictly be forbidden from entering SWDs. This can be achieved by 
providing cut-off drains for sewage all along the SWDs and leading to water 
body/storage tank.  The sewage can then be treated through STPs and used for 
watering plants on medians, etc.  Any excess can be led to the main SWD. 
Though all types of SWDs invariably carried huge quantity of sewerage, BBMP 
had not installed STPs for treatment of polluted water in SWDs.  Severely 
polluted water was being discharged into lakes and rivers, without due concern 
for social, environmental and health impacts. 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Vrishabhavathi valley had indicated that 
an amount of `6.73 crore was incurred on construction of STPs at 13 locations 
during the period 2008 -09 as against an estimated cost of `7.48 crore.   The 
records relating to five out of 13 STPs were provided to audit.  Scrutiny revealed 
that the works entrusted included both civil works and erection and 
commissioning of STPs and the works were abandoned after civil works without 
installation of machinery.  The exact reasons for abandoning the works or the 
details of actual expenditure incurred for construction were not forthcoming 
from the files.  However, as per the letters of the contractors who were entrusted 
with the works, the reasons for abandoning could be traced to the absence of 
arrangement for supply of sewage to STPs and instructions by BBMP 
authorities not to execute the machinery part.  This defeated the objective of 
treating sewage flowing in SWDs before letting into water bodies. Further, in 
the absence of data on the exact location of these STPs, audit could not 
locate/identify such installations during the joint inspections.    
The State Government replied (August 2020) that BWSSB was responsible for 
construction and operation of STPs in Bengaluru and sewage flow in SWD was 
due to illegal connection of sewer in SWD which was not a planned activity.  It 
further stated that an attempt was made by BBMP for construction of STPs 
along drains under JnNURM scheme as a pilot project in Vrishabhavathi valley 
wherein the STP sizes were in the range of 250 KLD to 1 MLD whereas the 
sewage flow in the drain was more than 100-200 MLD. Hence, none of the STPs 
were commissioned, SWD lines were not connected to any STPs and SWD 
division was not maintaining the STPs. 
The reply was silent on the wasteful expenditure of `6.73 crore incurred under 
JnNURM scheme towards construction of these incomplete  STPs.  Specific 
reasons for non -completion and installation of STPs were not furnished.  
Moreover, as per the revised DPR of Vrishabhavathi valley referred to in 
Paragraph 4.1.5.1, the work of construction of STPs were executed by BBMP 
without obtaining t he approval of the Ministry.  In the absence of the records 
pertaining to all the works and the fact that the 90 per cent of estimated cost of 

 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
77 
expenditure incurred was on execution of civil works, the State Government 
needs to investigate to ascertain whet her the construction of STPs  were 
necessary and actually executed. 
5.1.1.2  No quality control measures such as quality monitoring for SWD 
flow leading to pollution of water bodies 
The IRC guidelines (Paragraph 12.9) stipulate that the drainage system should 
be inspected at least twice a year, out of which at least one should be 
immediately after heavy rains and the quality and quantity of outflow should be 
observed and recorded.  Monitoring the quality of water flowing into the SWD 
channels was to be ensured, with stricter norms for solid waste disposal, 
industrial effluent control and any illegal discharge of waste into the drainage 
network, in view of the impact on the health of th e ecosystem and human 
consumption.   All possible efforts need to be made for continuous and constant 
removal of pollutants and effluents in the drainage system. 
Despite being aware that the drains were connected to water bodies and the 
runoff gets ultimat ely discharged into rivers which would be used for human 
consumption downstream, BBMP had not taken any action to either involve the 
Pollution Control Board in getting the water samples tested at different 
stretches, to maintain the quality of water or arr ange for any study on the 
ecological impact of the SWDs on environment. In the absence of required 
quality control methodology for SWDs, the lakes of Bengaluru are extremely 
polluted due to sustained flow of untreated sewage and industrial effluents, 
resulting in lakes frothing/catching fire repeatedly through solid/liquid waste 
floating on its surface, or flammable methane generated from its oxygen-starved 
waters (Exhibit 5.3). 
 
Exhibit 5.3: Photos showing lakes in Bengaluru affected by pollutants 
 
 
 
Fuming Bellandur Lake 
 
 
Frothing Yamaluru Lake 
 


Chapter V 
 
 
78 
 
 
Dead fish in Ulsoor Lake 
 
 
DRDO Lake, CV Raman Nagar 
     Source: Media reports 
The audit contention is substantiated by the findings of the ‘Report on 
Inventorisation of Water Bodies in Bengaluru Metropolitan Area’ prepared by 
the Environmental Management and Policy Research Institute and submitted 
(September 2017) to Karnataka Lake Conservation and Development 
Authority.  As per the report, the water quality rating study showed that 98 per 
cent of the lakes were unsatisfactory and only 2 per cent  were satisfactory 
during monsoon season.  The study further indicates that majority of t he lakes 
in Bengaluru Metropolitan area were in under -deteriorated condition and unfit 
for direct human consumption as the sewage inflow, various pollution loads 
from different sources and changing land use patterns were imposing 
detrimental effects on the quantity and quality of water of all the lakes.  BBMP 
in response to an audit query also accepted that as many as 89 lakes were 
directly connected to SWDs. 
Further, the NGT had warned (December 2019) that it would penalise officials 
for their failure to meet the deadline to build STPs to stop polluted water from 
entering the city lakes and had set September 2020 as the deadline to create the 
STPs and lay sewerage networks to stop unchecked discharge of sewage water 
into the Bellandur, Agara and Varthur lakes. 
As per the information furnished (March 2020) by CE, Lakes Division, BBMP, 
the STPs were installed to prevent flow of polluted water only for eight lakes 
and the work was in progress for another nine lakes.  Considering the laxity in 
installation of STPs, despite instructions/intervention of Courts/NGT, the 
possibility of BBMP meeting the given deadlines for arresting assimilation of 
sewage with water bodies and preserving healthy ecology appears bleak.  Audit 
observed that BWSSB has submitted (June 2020) an affidavit to NGT, seeking 
extension of time due to restrictions during lockdown period. 
The State Government informed (August 2020) that action would be taken to 
verify the pollution levels in the SWDs with the help of State Pollution Control 
Board.  The details of action taken were, however, not provided.  The reply also 
reflects the apathy on the part of State Government and BBMP towards 
monitoring of the state of lakes and SWDs. 


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
79 
Recommendation 16: BBMP should accord high priority to prevent discharge 
of sewage into SWDs.   There is a need to prepare and execute (i) medium term 
strategy for complete cessation of sewage contamination of storm water and 
lakes eventually and (ii) a short-term strategy for installation of sewage 
treatment plants in coordination with BWSSB to prevent contamination of water 
bodies. 
5.1.2 Absence of buffer zone and boundary marking for SWDs 
Buffer zones are areas of land adjacent to a drain or waterbody which are meant 
for providing utilities such as power, pipelines for water/oil/gas etc., and also to 
facilitate easy maintenance of drains. 
The RMP 2015 stipulated a buffer zone (no -development area) of 50m, 25m 
and 15m (measured from the centre of the drain) on either side of primary, 
secondary and tertiary drains. This buffer area was modified (May 2016) by the 
NGT to 50m, 35m and 25m (measured from the edge of the drain).   Further, 
under Section 58 of the KMC Act, 1976, BBMP had the obligatory function of 
putting in place substantial boundary marks of such description and in s uch 
positions as shall be approved by the Government, defining the limits or any 
alteration.   
Audit observed during the joint inspection of drains that none of the test -
checked drains had ‘boundary markings’ on either sides clearly specifying the  
‘no-development area’ and the stipulation regarding buffer zone was not 
adhered to in respect of any of the drains.  This not only contravened the 
stipulations regarding the buffer zone/no -development area but also paved the 
way for construction adjacent to the drai ns without any off -set space and 
encroachment of drains.   
On audit pointing out the lapse, the State Government stated (August 2020) that 
action had been taken to form (October 2018) a team under the Chairmanship 
of the Joint Director of Land Records to mark the boundary of SWDs in a phased 
manner wherever the land is available along the SWDs and that the work of 
survey and marking the SWD boundary is in progress. 
5.1.3 Survey of encroachments and their removal thereon 
Section 234 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (KMC Act, 
1976) clearly prohibits construction/erection of any building, wall, fence or 
other structure on SWDs and empowers the Commissioner, BBMP to remove 
such structures and recover the cost from the offenders.  Paragraph 4.23.1 of 
NDM guidelines clearly state s that the drains should be delineated and 
boundaries fixed.  Further, the Karnataka High Court directed (2011) BBMP to 
conduct a detailed survey of encroachments on SWDs and to clear all 
encroachments.  
BBMP initially provided a list of 1,988 encroachments identified under its 
jurisdiction but did not furnish the source/period of information.  Hence, audit 
could not ascertain whether any survey was actually conducted to identify the 
encroachments.  
https://youtu.be/zF-
_XoPIjFg 
 
Encroachments on 
drains 


Chapter V 
 
 
80 
During the joint inspection of about 70  drains 25, Audit observed 23 cases of 
significant encroachments ( Exhibit 5.4 ) as listed in Appendix 5.1 .  Out of 
these, 16 cases were not in the list provided by BBMP.  Thus, the completeness 
and reliability of the data on encroachments available with CE, SWD was 
doubtful. 
                                                 
25 Including few unmapped drains 
  Exhibit 5.4: Photographs showing the encroachments on SWDs 
 
 
 
Himagiri Meadows Apartments, 
Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Naurang Function Hall, 
Tavarekere, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Private Property at Koramangala   
5th Block 
 
Private property on JC Road, 
Koramangala Zone 
 
Private property, Lalbagh Road, 
Koramangala Zone 
 
Ansal Forte Apartment, Near 
Silk Board, Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Commercial building at 
Koramangala 7th block 
 
 
Private property at BSK 1st Stage, 
Srinivasanagar, South Zone 
 
Padmavathi Kalyana Mantapa, 
Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
81 
 
(Arrow marks in red colour shows the width and direction of flow of SWD) 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
Audit observed that out of 1,988 encroachments identified by BBMP, 1,225 
encroachments were stated to have been removed leaving a balance of 763 
encroachments as of October 2018.  As per the latest information furnished 
(December 2020) by CE, SWD, BBMP had identified a total of 2,626 
encroachments in various zones, of which 428 were stated to have been removed 
during the year 2016-17 and 1,484 were removed from 2018-19 onwards.  The 
balance 714 encroachments were yet to be removed.  While 52 cases of non -
removal were attributed to pending court cases, the reasons for not removing 
the balance encroachments were not furnished to audit.   
The veracity of the claim of having removed the encroachments was doubtful 
as audit observed during joint inspection that one of the encroachment stated to 
have been removed continued to exist as illustrated below. 
 
Illustration 
RN193 (Primary SWD) under Rajarajeswari Nagar zone was encroached upon 
by way of constructing Padmavathi and Meenakshi Kalyana Mantapas. As per 
the information furnished to audit by BBMP, the said encroachment was 
removed on 18.08.2016.  However, a joint physical inspection (11 June 2018) 
showed that the kalyana mantapas were existing on either side of the drain and 
were connected with a concrete platform linking the two buildings (Exhibit 5.5).  
The impact of the continued encroachment could be seen by way of rainwater 
entering (20 October 2020) into the dining area of the kalyana mantapa (Exhibit 
5.6). 
  
 
Spartacus Apartments, 4th T Block, 
Jayanagar, Koramangala Zone 
 
Ranka Nest Apartments, West 
Zone 
 
Surana College, 
Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
https://youtu.be/tt_kMn
aHFgY 
 
Encroachments on 
drains 


Chapter V 
 
 
82 
Exhibit 5.5: Existence of kalyana mantapas and concrete platform on 
drain 
 
Exhibit 5.6: Flooding of dining area of kalyana mantapa 
   Source: Media reports and photographs taken during joint inspection 
Apart from the above, audit also observed that the evictions so carried out were 
incomplete as only certain portions of the encroached buildings were razed and 
no further action was taken for improving the conditions of the drains (Exhibit 
5.7).  Hence, the claim of BBMP that 1,912 encroachments were removed 
cannot be accepted at face value. 
  


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
83 
Exhibit 5.7: Status of evictions stated to have been carried out by BBMP 
under RR Nagar zone 
  
 
  
 
 
 
      Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that action was being taken to 
clear encroachments in a phased manner after obtaining the survey maps and 
encroachment markings from the Revenue Department. It further stated that 
action would be taken to clear the encroachments noticed by the joint inspection 
team, following the due procedure.   
 
Recommendation 1 7: BBMP needs to escalate its efforts to conduct robust 
surveys to identify and evict all encroachments on SWDs and maintain the 
stipulated buffer zone. 
 


Chapter V 
 
 
84 
The drainage system is at its best, when it is maintained properly as designed. 
For this purpose, it is necessary that the drains keep their shape and slope in the 
designed manner during their life time. It is also necessary to ensure that the 
drains retain their full cross section, particularly for the monsoons. The system 
of maintenance can be classified into three categories. 
a) Periodical inspection and maintenance;  
b) Continuous regular maintenance; and 
c) Special maintenance/Repairs for improvement. 
5.2.1 Periodical inspection of drains 
Failure of drains would occur due to deficiency in maintenance. The IRC 
guidelines (paragraph 12.3) stipulates periodical inspection and maintenance of 
drains with principal activities26, particularly at the entry and exit points during 
the rains.  The IRC further stipulates that  all cross drainage structures need to 
be inspected to observe any blockage due to debris, logs an d other such 
materials, problem locations identified and records kept updated.   
The details of periodical inspection of drains by field engineers carried out if 
any, were not made available to audit for scrutiny.  During the joint inspections, 
audit observed severe blockages of surface drains as well as SWDs ( Exhibit 
5.8) indicating either that inspection was not carried out by the field engineers 
or that no action was taken on the report of the field engineers.  
Exhibit 5.8:  Photographs showing the blockage of drains 
 
Near Hulimavu lake, Bommanahalli Zone 
 
Pattanagere, Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
 
                                                 
26 Desilting, clearing of weeds, cleaning of obstruction/debris/blockage, repairing of lining 
immediately at the commencement of damage or deterioration, etc. 
5.2 Factors affecting/impeding connectivity/smooth flow of storm 
water in drains: Issues concerning maintenance of the SWD 
infrastructure 
https://youtu.be/z
TsaSmJYZ-o 
 
Absence of regular 
inspection 


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
85 
 
Kodipalya, Rajarajeshwarinagar  Zone 
 
Jayanagar 7th Block, South Zone 
 
Koramangala 6th Block, Koramangala Zone 
 
Padmanabhanagar, South Zone 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
The State Government replied (August 2020) that though there was not record, 
the drains were generally inspected by field engineers  for proposing 
maintenance work.  The reply cannot be accepted as document ation is a very 
vital evidence for having undertaken the field visits and also for preparing the 
action plans for regular maintenance of drains.  The fact that regular 
maintenance was absent as discussed below indicates that inspection of drains 
was not actually carried out.  
  
5.2.2 Absence of regular maintenance of drains 
The BBMP did not take up maintenance of drains regularly and continuously 
leading to blockage and growth of vegetation in the drains, consequently 
resulting in drains overflowing during rains, particularly where the utility lines 
were laid.  Absence of regular ins pection and maintenance also facilitated 
damage to fencing/ walls of drains allowing inordinate dumping of debris. The 
lack of maintenance can be linked to the absence of periodical physical 
inspection of SWDs and documentation of the findings of the inspe ctions by 
field engineers. This was compounded by the fact that BBMP failed to prepare 
action plans for regular maintenance activity and also the maintenance manual 
indicating the roles and responsibilities of the concerned.   


Chapter V 
 
 
86 
Audit observed during joint inspections of drains that SWDs were filled with 
debris, vegetation and were heavily silted indicating absence of regular 
maintenance of drains (Exhibit 5.9). 
 
Exhibit 5.9:  Photos showing the status of drains due to inadequate 
maintenance 
 
 
Vegetation inside SWD at Magadi Road Railway 
Bridge, West Zone 
 
 
Dumped debris/wastes and garbage inside SWD at 
Ejipura, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Vegetation inside SWD Akshaya Nagar, 
Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Dumped wastes and garbage inside SWD near 
Football Stadium, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Vegetation inside SWD at Vyalikaval, West Zone 
 
 
Vegetation inside SWD at Peenya, 
Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
87 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that maintenance of drains has now 
been entrusted on annual maintenance contract after inviting tenders and 
obtaining the approval of the competent authority and the work was in progress 
since 2019-20.  
The reply reiterates the fact that regular and continuous maintenance of drains 
was absent prior to 2019-20.  However, audit observed that only 377 km of drain 
length (45 per cent ) out of the total 842 km was entrusted for annual 
maintenance.  Zone-wise analysis further revealed the following: 
• The complete length of drains of 73.6 km was entrusted only under East 
zone 
• The entrustment was 97 per cent, 71 per cent and 62 per cent in South 
zone, Koramangala zone and West zone respectively (Core Bengaluru 
area). 
• In the other five zones, it was less than 50 per cent and ranged from 9 
per cent to 49 per cent (Bengaluru agglomeration area). 
The partial entrustment for annual maintenance, thus, would not yield the 
desired results unless the complete length of existing  drains are taken up for 
maintenance on a regular basis. 
Recommendation 1 8: BBMP should put in place adequate mechanism to 
conduct and document periodical inspection and maintenance of all categories 
of drains.   
5.2.3 Entrustment of desilting works during monsoon period 
The IRC guidelines (paragraph 12.6) stipulated desilting of all the drains before 
the onset of monsoon.  Generally, the calendar months from June to September 
were regarded as ‘monsoon period’. Paragraph 4.12.4.3 of NDM guidelines 
stipulate that pre-monsoon desilting of all major drains shall be completed by 
31 March each year.  It further stated that the periodicity of cleaning drains 
should be worked out based on the local conditions for which a roster should be 
worked out and strictly followed.  
Audit observed from the records made available, that BBMP had taken up 175 
desilting works at a total cost of `117.29 crore during 2013 -17 for selective 
chainage and not for the entire stretch of the drains.   Only the records pertaining 
to 14 works costing `17.56 crore were furnished to audit for verification. 
Scrutiny of records disclosed that works were entrusted to contractors between 
July to November allowing a time period varying from 1 month to 24 months 
(including monsoon period) for completion. Evidently, the works would be 
carried out during the monsoon period only. This clearly violated the provisions 
of the IRC/NDM guidelines that the works were to be completed before the 
onset of the monsoon. Moreover, desilting for select lengths and not the 
complete length of drains defeats the very purpose of desilting of drains, as silt 
from the stretch left unattended upstream would flow downstream filling up the 
stretch that has already been desilted.  Since the works were completed before 
the commencement of audit  and in the absence of majority of the work files, 

Chapter V 
 
 
88 
audit could not identify the break in stretches, if any and also ascertain the 
occurrence of such instances necessitating taking up the same works again.   
Audit also observed that BBMP had not prepared an y action plan for desilting 
of drains before onset of monsoon nor was a roster of cleaning works prepared 
and followed. 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that Bengaluru, in the recent past, 
was receiving spells of rains during off -monsoon periods a lso forcing the 
execution of works to prolong to rainy season.  It further stated that action would 
be taken to avoid such omissions in future and to entrust and get the work 
completed before onset of monsoon. 
5.3.1 Absence of penal provisions for violations 
Paragraph 13.1 of IRC guidelines stipulate that ‘since large quantum of public 
funds are spent on SWD implementation, time has come for enforcement of 
certain disposable systems wherein the offending party shall b e penalised and 
booked under various punitive clauses of respective urban local bodies’.   It 
further provided for deployment of patrolling vehicles and imposing criminal 
proceedings in the light of serious choking of SWDs by reckless disposal of 
debris.   
The BBMP had neither enacted any penal clauses for violations/dumping of 
debris nor had initiated action for patrolling along SWDs. The absence of penal 
provision for booking the defaulters would lead to undeterred dumping of 
debris, construction and demolition waste, garbage including plastic into SWDs. 
The State Government stated (January 2019/August 2020) that action was being 
taken in this regard.  However, the details of action initiated in this regard were 
not furnished to audit (November 2019/December 2020). 
5.3.2 Absence of information, education and communication activities 
Behavioural change is vital for effective management of drainage infrastructure, 
particularly in urban domains.  Information, education and communication 
(IEC) is a multilevel tool for promoting and sustaining risk-reducing behaviour 
change in individuals and communities. The IEC campaign should target 
households, shops, and commercial and institutional premises as well as other 
stakeholders such as government service providing a gencies, municipal 
officials, elected representatives, non -government organisations (NGOs), the 
informal sector, media, etc., to ensure their participation in nicely managing the 
urban storm water drainage and solid waste management systems in the city.  
Various manuals and rules pertaining to solid waste management underscored 
the importance of IEC activities and required the State Government and ULBs 
to create public awareness and educate stakeholders in proper disposal of solid 
wastes adopting measures like re-use, reduction and recycling of wastes.     
Audit observed that p oor awareness and civic sense, coupled with insufficient 
solid waste management  led to a situation where the urban population dum p 
5.3 Monitoring and awareness 

 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
89 
debris/wastes and construction and demolition wastes into SWDs. As against 
4,200 and 4,500 tonnes per day (TPD) of waste generated excluding bulk 
generation during 2018-19 and 2019-20, BBMP had lifted 2940 and 3800 TPD, 
the collection efficiency being 70 and 84 per cent respectively.  BBMP did not 
have secondary storage or transit facilities because of which the primary waste 
collected was transported directly to compactors at transfer points located at 
intersection of roads.  This arrangement resulted in  either throwing of 
unwanted/non-recyclable wastes into nearby vacant plots/drains or open 
burning of such wastes by BBMP workers themselves.  This also facilitated 
dumping of wastes by public at such spots. 
Despite widespread disposal of all sorts of wast es into SWDs by households  
and industries/commercial establishments, the BBMP had not taken up any IEC 
activities or awareness camps for educating the population regarding 
importance of SWDs and their proper upkeep.  Audit observed during JPVs that 
people resorted to damaging/breaking the chain link fencing erected along the 
SWDs for dumping wastes (Exhibit 5.10).  Absence of penal provision against 
offenders facilitate uncontrolled and continuous dumping of debris/wastes in 
SWDs. 
Exhibit 5.10: Photos showing dumping of debris/wastes in/adjacent to 
SWDs and breakage of chain link fence of SWDs  
 
 
 
Austin Town, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Ejipura, Koramangala Zone 
 
 
Manjunathanagar, South Zone 
 
 
Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
 


Chapter V 
 
 
90 
 
 
Akshayanagar, Bommanahalli Zone 
 
 
Cholarapalya, South Zone 
Source: Photographs taken during joint inspections 
Besides, the SWDs which carry high level of sewerage with chemical 
contaminants get stagnant/blocked with siltation/vegetation and turn into 
breeding areas for mosquitoes and othe r hazardous phylum/protozoa.   It is, 
therefore, imperative for the BBMP to conduct health awareness campaigns in 
the localities along the SWDs that are more prone to hazards.  The BBMP had 
neither obtained information on epidemic outbreaks nor arranged fo r health 
camps in any part of the city.  
The State Government stated (January 2019/August 2020) that action would be 
taken to conduct IEC programmes and awareness campaigns to educate citizens 
regarding up keeping of SWDs.  Audit, however, observed that no ac tion had 
been initiated in this regard even as of December 2020. 
5.3.3 Absence of grievance redressal mechanism 
Grievance redressal is a mechanism through which the BBMP could connect to 
people in resolving the issues related to encroachments, dumping of debris/ 
wastes, blockages, silting, functioning of officials etc. 
Audit observed that grievance redressal mechanism was absent in the office of 
CE, SWD as the Complaint Register to record the grievances had not been 
maintained.  Specific records were not maintained even in respect of 
applications received for obtaining information through Right to Information 
Act. 
Absence of grievance redressal mechanism with particular reference to SWDs 
would result in complaints regarding encroachments and dumping of debris 
being ignored thereby allowing defaulters to go unpunished. 
The State Government stated (January 2019/August 2020 ) that there is a call 
centre operating in BBMP for receiving complaints.  It further stated that action 
would be taken to obtain and furnish the details of complaints received and 
attended to and maintain complaint register to record all types of complain ts. 
However, the same were not furnished to audit (November 2019/December 
2020).   


 Protection and maintenance of storm water management systems 
 
 
91 
 
 
Recommendation 19: BBMP should educate the urban population on the effects 
of improper management of SWDs and explore the possibility of involving 
Residential Welfare Associations/Non-Government Organisations for effective 
management of waste/drains and providing them with incentives. 
Failure of BBMP to coordinate with BWSSB in preventing mixing of sewage 
in SWDs despite both their Acts specifying separation o f sewage and storm 
water flows led to contamination of fresh water lakes.  This, in turn, led to 
temporary measures disrupting inter -connectivity between water bodies and 
drains.  Though RMP 2015 stipulated a buffer zone on either side of primary, 
secondary and tertiary drains and section 58 of the KMC Act, 1976 stipulated 
putting in place boundary marks for such descriptions, none of the test-checked 
drains had boundary markings.  As a result, it paved the way for encroachment 
of drains as well as construc tion in buffer zone.  Despite identifying 2 ,626 
encroachments on SWDs, BBMP was yet to take action on 714 encroachments.  
The completeness and reliability of the data on encroachments available with 
BBMP was also doubtful as audit noticed significant insta nces of 
encroachments during joint inspection of drains.  The action stated to have taken 
to clear the encroachments was not complete. 
Severe blockages of surface drains/SWDs were noticed indicating absence of 
periodical inspections as well as its regular maintenance. Failure to adopt 
quality monitoring measures and non -installation of STPs, despite Court 
directives resulted in unabated contamination of water bodies.  Non-enactment 
of penal clauses for violation/dumping of debris in SWDs and absence of a 
grievance redressal mechanism allowed defaulters (encroachment and dumping 
of debris) to go unpunished.  In addition, BBMP did not take up any IEC 
activities/ awareness camps for educating people regarding the importance of 
SWDs and their proper upkeep.  T hus, the failure of BBMP to protect and 
maintain the drain infrastructure resulted in continuous abuse of the drains.  
 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
5.1.1  Sewerage lines were laid inside the SWDs and large quantity of sewage was 
invariably let into SWDs though the codal provisions prohibit mixing of 
sewage with storm water. Out of 1,440 MLD of sewage generated in BBMP 
area, about 780 MLD (54 per cent) was discharged into SWDs/water bodies 
without treatment.   
Conclusion 
Summary of important audit findings 

Chapter V 
 
 
92 
Para 
number 
Audit findings 
BBMP had incurred `6.73 crore on construction of STPs at 13 locations during 
the period 2008-09. Scrutiny of records relating to five STPs showed that the 
works entrusted included both civil works and erection and commissioning of 
STPs and the works were abandoned after civil works without installation of 
machinery. This defeated the objective of treating sewage flowing in SWDs 
before letting into water bodies. 
BBMP had not taken any action to get the wat er samples tested despite being 
aware that the drains were connected to water bodies and the runoff gets 
ultimately discharged into rivers which would be used for human consumption 
downstream. 
5.1.2 Though RMP and NGT stipulated maintenance of buffer zone  on either side 
of the drains, joint inspection of drains showed that none of the test -checked 
drains had ‘boundary markings’ on either sides specifying the ‘no -
development area’ resulting in constructions adjacent to the drains without any 
off-set space and encroachment of drains. 
5.1.3 BBMP was yet to remove 714 encroachments out of the identified  2,626 
encroachments in various zones.  Audit observed 23 cases of significant 
encroachments, out of which 16 cases were not in the list provided by BBMP. 
Thus, the completeness and reliability of the data on encroachments available 
with CE, SWD was doubtful. 
The veracity of BBMP’s claim of having removed the encroachments was 
doubtful as audit observed during joint inspection that one of the 
encroachments stated to have been removed continued to exist and the 
evictions carried out were also incomplete. 
5.2.1 The details of periodical inspection of drains by field engineers carried out 
were not made available to audit.  During the joint inspections, audit observed 
severe blockages of surface drains as well as SWDs indicating either that 
inspection was not carried out by the field engineers or that no action was taken 
on the report of the field engineers. 
5.2.2 The joint inspections of drains showed that SWDs were filled with debris, 
vegetation and were heavily silted indicating absence of regular maintenance 
of drains. 
5.2.3 Scrutiny of records of 14 works costing `17.56 crore showed that BBMP had 
taken up the desilting works during monsoon period in violation of the 
IRC/NDM guidelines which stipulated desilting before the onset of monsoon. 
5.3.1/ 
5.3.2 
As against 4,200 and 4,500 TPD of waste generated excluding bulk generation 
during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20, BBMP had lifted 2940 and 3800 TPD 
respectively.  BBMP did not have secondary storage or transit facilities 
because of which the primary waste collected was transported directly to 
compactors at transfer points located at intersection of roads.  This 
arrangement resulted in either throwing of unwanted/non -recyclable wastes 
into nearby vacant plots/drains or open burning of such wastes by BB MP 
workers themselves. 
BBMP had not taken up any IEC activities or awareness camps for educating 
the population regarding importance of SWDs and their proper upkeep.  Joint 
inspection showed that people resorted to damaging/breaking the chain link 
fencing erected along the SWDs for dumping wastes.  Further, BBMP neither 
enacted any penal clauses for violations/dumping of debris nor had initiated 
action for patrolling along SWDs. 
 

 
 
93 
 
 
BBMP was provided with funds under various schemes like JnNURM, 
Nagarothana Yojane, Special Infrastructure Projects, Finance Commission 
Grants etc., apart from its own funds for management of SWDs. 
The details of allocation and expenditure for the years 2013 -14 to 2017 -18 
towards management of SWDs was as indicated in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Allocation and expenditure towards management of SWDs 
(` in crore) 
Year Allocation Expenditure Remarks 
2013-14 107.37 82.07  
2014-15 105.09 102.54  
2015-16 102.58 148.25 BBMP had incurred expenditure on ongoing works 
under JnNURM but funds were not received from 
the central government  as the scheme was over by 
end of 2014-15.  The expenditure was, therefore, met 
out of its own funds. 
2016-17 186.88 205.90 Apart from SWD  works, the State Government 
released funds under Nagarothana Yojane to BBMP 
for various other activities.  While the BBMP 
accounted for the receipts under Nagarothana 
Yojane as a lump sum allocation without exhibiting 
breakup for different activities in its budget 
estimates, the expenditure was shown distinctly for 
each activity including SWD works.  In the absence 
of distinct allocation for SWD, amount allocated 
could not be identified.   
2017-18 268.46 599.58 
Total 770.38 1,138.34  
Source: Data furnished by CE, SWD and Annual Budget Estimates 
 
Analysis of the BBMP budget for the audit period showed that Government 
grants which constituted about 38 per cent in 2013-14 increased to 55 per cent 
in 2017-18.  This indicated the BBMP’s increased dependency on Government 
grants for undertaking its activities.  Further, the expenditure incurred on SWD 
constituted a meagre two to eight per cent of both the total receipts and the total 
expenditure of BBMP during the above period.  
 
Audit observed that SWD works were not taken up under any of the other urban 
development schemes such as Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation, Smart C ities Mission  etc. indicating the absence of 
convergence with these schemes and the lack of priority towards storm water 
management. 
6
Chapter
 Financial Management
6.1 Allocation and expenditure towards management of SWDs 

Chapter VI 
 
 
94 
Annual financial planning is critical for proper functioning of any organisation.  
Annual budget proposals were to be worked out based on the cost of the works, 
funds received, expenditure incurred, anticipated expenditure and probable fund 
requirement in the ensuing year for the implementation of the works. 
The CE, SWD did not furnish the annual budget proposals prepared, if any, to 
audit.  Hence, audit compared the expenditure figures exhibited in the budget 
estimates o f BBMP with the cash book maintained by CE, SWD and found 
variations as shown in Table 6.2.   
Table 6.2: Statement showing the variation in expenditure figures 
between budget estimates and cash book 
(` in crore) 
Year Expenditure as per Budget 
estimates 
Expenditure as per 
cash book 
Difference 
2013-14 86.36 82.07 (+) 4.29 
2014-15 58.41 102.54 (-) 44.13 
2015-16 148.56 148.25 (+) 0.31 
2016-17 195.74 205.90 (-) 10.16 
2017-18                   570.98 599.58 (-) 28.60 
Total  1,138.34  
Source: Data furnished by CE, SWD and Annual Budget Estimates 
The continued discrepancy indicated the omission on the part of the authorities 
concerned to reconcile and report the correct expenditure figures in the budget 
estimates which is an essential function to ensure financial accuracy.  Further, 
the laxity also exposes the financial indiscipline reigning in BBMP.  
Non-provision of separate budget for maintenance - BBMP did not provide 
separate budget for the maintenance of SWDs, despite the recommendation by 
the IRMA.  
The State Government endorsed (January 2019/August 2020) the reply of the 
Commissioner that action would  be taken to reconcile the differences with 
concerned authorities and to ensure reporting expenditure in budget estimates 
as per actuals. However, the details of reconciliation or specific reasons for 
discrepancy was not furnished to audit (November 2019/December 2020). 
As stipulated vide recommendations of the 14th Finance Commission, the 
BBMP was to earmark a minimum of 10 per cent of basic grants received by it 
for implementation of SWD works.  The BBMP had received `664.34 crore 
during the period 2016 -18 but had released only `24.65 crore for SWD works 
resulting in short release of `41.78 crore.   
Non-compliance to recommendations of the Finance Commission and s hort-
release of funds for SWDs works would impact works as proposed in the master 
plan and diversion of funds for other purposes, leading to a situation where 
SWDs works do not get adequate priority.   
6.2 Deficiencies in preparation of annual budget proposals 
6.3 Short-provision of funds under 14th Finance Commission 

Financial Management 
 
 
95 
The State Government stated (August 2020) that action would be taken to 
earmark 10 per cent of total basic grant receipts for implementation of SWD 
works. 
The BBMP maintained four different savings bank accounts, one each for the 
four zones for accounting funds under JnNURM.  The JnNURM cell at BBMP 
was implementing works and operating the funds.   Scrutiny of the cashbook 
maintained by JnNURM cell showed that the transactions pertaining to SWDs 
under JnNURM came to an end by January 2015.   An amount of `2.37 lakh 
was lying in these bank accounts as of May 2018.  Audit further observed that 
`7.00 lakh held in term deposits had not been accounted for in the cashbook 
indicating improper financial management.  BBMP did not initiate action to 
close the account s and transfer the funds either to the main account or to the 
SWD account even after four years of the closure of the scheme thoug h it was 
incurring expenditure out of its own funds for the balance works under 
JnNURM. 
The State Government endorsed (January 2019) the reply of the Commissioner 
that the matter would be brought to the notice of higher authorities for further 
action and the same was reiterated in its reply of August 2020.  Evidently, 
BBMP had not taken any action in this regard.  The non -closure of bank 
accounts and non-accounting of the term deposits despite being pointed out by 
audit is fraught with the risk of the amounts in these accounts going unnoticed.   
BBMP (SWD Division) maintained a non -interest bearing current account 
(bearing No.04091010005485) instead of interest bearing savings bank account 
since April 2012.  The funds required for implementation of SWD works were 
released to this account from the BBMP main account till April 2015.  The last 
transfer of funds for implementation of works was `20 crore on 6 April 2015.  
The balance as at the end of June 2015 was `12.21 lakh.  Thereafter (July 2015 
onwards), payments were directly released to the contractor’s bank accounts 
from the BBMP main account and amounts deducted from the bills towards 
statutory deductions like Income tax, VAT/GST, labour cess, royalty, 
Contractors Benevolent Fund and further security deposit were transferred to 
this account for onward remittance to the authorities concerned. 
The said account was converted into a flexi super current account from July 
2017 wherein funds in excess of balance of `5.00 lakh was auto transferred to 
term deposits.   
Audit analysed the pass sheets and observed that cheques issued towards 
remittance of income -tax and Contractor’s Benevolent Fund deducted out of 
contractor’s bills amounting to `43.86 lakh and `37.32 lakh respectively could 
not be traced to the pass sheets.  Evidently these cheques could have remained 
uncashed.  The CE, SWD had not conducted any reconciliation in this regard. 
6.4 Continued maintenance of bank accounts for JnNURM  
6.5 Non-reconciliation of statutory recoveries remitted to departments 
concerned  

Chapter VI 
 
 
96 
In the absence of reconciliation, audit c ould not ascertain the amounts under 
various components that formed part of the balance of `31.95 crore available in 
sweep-in deposit accounts.   
The State Government endorsed (January 2019/August 2020) the reply of the 
Commissioner that instructions had been issued to accounts branch to reconcile 
the balance in bank account regularly. However, the details of reconciliation, if 
any, was not furnished to audit (November 2019/December 2020). 
Non-maintenance of basic financ ial records - The provisions of Karnataka 
Public Works Accounts Code stipulate maintenance of various records for 
proper accounting of transactions like Grants Register, Deposit 
Register/Register of Securities, Schedule of Works Expenditure, Monthly 
Account, Register of Advances, and other miscellaneous records.  However, 
audit observed that none of these registers/records were maintained by the CE, 
SWD despite incurring significant expenditure on tendered works. 
Improper maintenance of cash book  - Audit observed that the cashbook 
maintained by the CE, SWD was improper as:  
• The balance on hand at the beginning of each day was not brought forward 
on the receipt side.  The closing balance was not stuck at the end of each 
day, the abstract of transact ions at the end of the month was not recorded, 
the entries in the cashbook were attested by zonal EEs instead of the Head 
of the office (CE, SWD); 
• Reconciliation between cash book balance and bank balance was not 
conducted and recorded; and 
• A single cashbo ok was maintained in the office though works were 
approved and executed under various schemes and in different zones.  As a 
result, scheme-wise and zone-wise expenditure could not be verified. 
The State Government endorsed (August 2020) the reply of the Co mmissioner 
that instructions had been issued to the accounts branch to maintain all the 
records as prescribed under the codal provisions. 
Recommendation 20: BBMP should prepare the budget clearly indicating the 
scheme-wise receipts of funds and expenditure incurred thereon and for both 
capital and revenue activities under each function.  
BBMP had a weak financial control mechanism as it did not maintain basic 
financial records such as grants register, deposit register, register of securities, 
schedule of work expenditure, register of advance etc.  Further, the cash book 
maintained by the CE, SWD was deficient. The budget exercise was deficient 
and did not indicate the allocation of funds for SWD activities under 
Nagarothana Yojana.  The expenditure incurred on SWD constituted two to 
eight per cent of the total expenditure of BBMP during the period 2013 -14 to 
6.6 Weak financial control mechanism 
Conclusion 

Financial Management 
97 
2017-18.  There was no separate budget for maintenance of SWDs  and SWD 
works were not taken up under any other development schemes i ndicating the 
lack of commitment by BBMP towards effective storm water management. 
Para 
number 
Audit findings
6.1 BBMP was largely depended on Government grants.  The expenditure 
incurred on SWD constituted a meagre two to eight per cent of both the 
total receipts and the total expenditure of BBMP during the period 2013-
14 to 2017-18. 
6.2 There were discrepancies between the figures exhibited in the budget 
estimates and actual expenditure recorded in the cash book.  This 
indicated the lack of reconciliation mechanism and correct reporting of 
expenditure and exposes the financial indiscipline reigning in BBMP. 
6.3 BBMP short provided the funds under 14 th Finance Commission to the 
extent of `41.78 crore. 
6.5 The CE, SWD had not maintained the basic records such as Schedule 
of works expenditure, monthly accounts, register of advances etc. The  
cash book maintained was improper as it did not indicate the closing 
balance at the end of each day and reconciliation between cash and bank 
balances was not carried out and recorded.  
Bengaluru          (E. P. Nivedita) 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit-I)         
 Karnataka 
Countersigned 
New Delhi          (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
The      Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Summary of important audit findings
26 JUL 2021
30 JUL 2021

 
 
 99 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3/Page 2) 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under Bommanahalli Zone 
 


 
 
 100 
Appendix 1.1 contd… 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under East Zone 
 
 
  


 
 
 101 
Appendix 1.1 contd… 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under Rajarajeshwarinagar Zone 
 
 
  


 
 
 102 
Appendix 1.1 contd... 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under South Zone 
 
 
  


 
 
 103 
Appendix 1.1 contd… 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under West Zone 
 
 


 
 
 104 
Appendix 1.1 concld… 
Storm water drains as mapped in master plan of BBMP under Mahadevapura Zone 
 


 
 
 105 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7/Page 12) 
Statement showing the gist of audit observations and recommendations of Committee on 
Local Bodies and PRIs pertaining to storm water drainage works executed under 
JnNURM (Para 4.1 of Report no. 6 of 2013, Government of Karnataka) 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Paragraph 
No. 
Gist of audit 
observation 
Recommendations Compliance 
1 
4.1.7 Delay in completion 
of projects 
Initiate disciplinary action on officials 
for the dereliction of duty causing loss of 
financial assistance  
Not 
complied 
2 
4.1.9.2 Diversion of funds 
towards interior 
works of the Office 
of CE, SWD 
Initiate disciplinary action on engineers 
responsible for diversion of funds in 
contravention of the financial rules. 
Not 
complied 
3 
4.1.9.4 Non-renewal of 
Bank Guarantees 
The bank guarantees should be 
compulsorily renewed on expiry to 
ensure quality of works executed by the 
contractors. 
Not 
complied 
4 
4.1.11.1 Execution of 
additional / 
supplementary works 
Initiate disciplinary action on erring 
officers/officials.   
Not 
complied 
5 4.1.11.2 Irregularities in 
awarding contracts 
Initiate disciplinary action on officials 
responsible for flouting KTPP norms. 
Not 
complied 
6 
4.1.11.3 Irregularities in 
holding negotiations 
with contractors 
The Committee taking serious note of 
the non-submission of information 
sought for by it, directed the department 
for submission of a detailed report.  
Not 
complied 
7 
4.1.11.4 Avoidable 
expenditure on 
diversion of water 
course 
The Committee opined that the original 
estimates included all items required for 
construction of coffer dams and 
incurring expenditure as a separate item 
was not permitted. 
Not 
complied 
8 
4.1.11.5 Excess payments on: 
Item of Back filling 
Adoption of rates for 
‘manual means’ 
though works 
executed 
mechanically 
Lead charges for 
earth 
Disciplinary action to be taken against 
the officials and to recover the financial 
loss of ₹5.98 crore from the officials 
found responsible. 
Blacklist the contractors  
Instructed the Principal Secretary, UDD 
to submit the details of action taken in 
this regard to the Committee 
Not 
complied 
9 
4.1.11.7 Defective estimates 
in chain link fencing 
works 
All the factors should be taken into 
consideration while preparing the 
estimates and payments for other than 
the estimated works should be avoided.  
The practice of making payments 
towards extra works should be avoided 
so that there is no scope for suspicion. 
Not 
complied 

 
 
 106 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.1/Page 13) 
Status of compliance to NDMA Guidelines by the State Government/BBMP 
Sl. 
no. 
Paragraph 
no. 
Actionable item Action taken by State 
Government / BBMP 
Audit observations 
1 
4.5.1 All ULBs/States/UTs shall 
prepare an inventory of the 
existing storm water drainage 
system on a Geographic 
Information System (GIS) 
platform.  The inventory was 
to be both watershed based 
and ward based with clear 
mapping of the major as well 
as minor systems. 
BBMP got prepared the 
inventory of drains under 
its jurisdiction, as a Master 
Plan of drains which 
identified only the Primary 
and Secondary drains.   
The tertiary drains, which 
are substantially 
contributing components 
of drainage system were 
not identified and 
mapped.  This rendered 
the Master Plan deficient. 
2 
4.7.1 Catchment will be the basis 
for planning and designing the 
storm water drainage systems 
in all ULBs. 
Master Plan of Drains 
adopted catchment and 
watershed basis  
 
3 
4.12.4.3 Pre-monsoon desilting of all 
major drains will be 
completed by March 31 each 
year; 
Besides the pre-monsoon de-
silting of drains, the 
periodicity of cleaning drains 
should be worked out, based 
on the local conditions. The 
roster of cleaning of such 
drains should be worked out 
and strictly followed 
Neither periodic action plan 
prepared for desilting of 
drains before onset of 
monsoon nor roster of 
cleaning worked out and 
followed 
The works for desilting of 
drains, at various different 
stretches, entrusted to 
contractors during the 
monsoon period 
4 
4.12.4.3 Suitable interventions in the 
drainage system like traps, 
communitors, trash racks can 
reduce the amount of solid 
waste going into the storm 
sewers. 
Not adopted for any of the 
drains 
Floating debris and 
sewage observed 
continuously in all types 
of drains during joint 
verification 
5 4.12.4.3 Ageing systems will be 
replaced on an urgent basis 
Not adopted  
6 
4.12.4.3 A master plan will be prepared 
to improve the coverage of the 
sewerage system so that 
sewage will not be discharged 
into storm water drains 
Master Plan of Drains 
recommended for taking 
measures to evade sewage 
mixing into storm water 
drains 
No measures taken to 
avoid mixing of sewage 
into storm water drains.  
Instead, audit observed 
damaged/open manholes, 
direct discharge of 
sewage into drains 
contaminating the flow in 
storm water drains. 
7 4.13.3.1 All road re-leveling works or 
strengthening/overlay works 
Not followed Repeated relaying of 
roads on existing surfaces 

 
 
 107 
will be carried out by milling 
the existing layers of the road 
and recycling of materials 
obtained as a result of the 
milling so that the road levels 
will be not be allowed to 
increase. 
led to increase in 
elevation of roads than 
level of houses in the 
street over a period of 
time 
8 
4.13.4.1 Inlets should be provided on 
the roads to drain water to the 
roadside drains and these 
should be designed, based on 
current national and 
international practices. 
Generally complied with  Audit observed variations 
in levels of road and 
inlets leading to 
stagnation of water on the 
roads. No provision was 
made to drain out water at 
many road humps. 
Absence of monitoring 
led to clogging of inlets.  
9 
4.16.1 Every building in an urban 
area will have rainwater 
harvesting as an integral 
component of the building 
utility. ULBs will ensure that 
this is implemented. 
Rain water harvesting made 
(May 2011) mandatory for 
houses constructed on a 
plot measuring 1200 square 
feet    
Instead of BBMP (which 
has a database of more 
than 20 lakh properties), 
the authority which 
sanctions plan for 
construction of buildings, 
the responsibility of 
implementing RWH 
entrusted to BWSSB, 
which is having very 
limited coverage, 
compared to total number 
of properties under the 
jurisdiction of BBMP. 
40 per cent of the 
buildings under the 
purview of BWSSB have 
not adopted the rain water 
harvesting units  
10 
4.17.2 Concept of Rain Gardens will 
be incorporated in planning 
for public parks and on-site 
storm water management for 
larger colonies and sites that 
are to be developed. People 
will be encouraged to adopt 
this concept even for sites 
already developed. 
Not complied with  
11 
4.18.1 All urban water bodies will be 
protected. Efforts will also be 
made to restore water bodies 
by de-silting and taking other 
measures. Efforts will also be 
made to revive water bodies 
that have been put to other 
uses. Water bodies will be an 
integral part of the storm 
water system. 
Lakes/water bodies under 
the jurisdiction of BBMP, 
headed by a Chief Engineer 
is responsible maintenance 
and development of lakes.  
As many as 89 lakes in 
the city are directly 
connected to storm water 
drains which carry high 
level of sewage and 
chemical contaminants  
 

 
 
 108 
12 
4.19.1 Urban storm water 
management systems will 
include detention and 
retention facilities to mitigate 
the negative impact of 
urbanization on storm water 
drainage. 
Not adopted  
13 
4.21.1 Integrated planning and 
coordination will be ensured 
to take into account all 
components of the urban water 
systems, and Best 
management practices should 
be adopted by all ULBs to 
reduce the load on the major 
drainage system. 
Department/stakeholder 
functioning independently 
 
14 
4.22.6.2 Low-lying areas should be 
reserved for parks and other 
low-impact human activities; 
Wherever unavoidable, 
buildings in low-lying areas 
should be constructed on stilts 
above the High Flood Level 
(HFL)/Full Tank Level (FTL). 
Not complied with  
15 
4.23.1 Encroachments on nallahs / 
drains / watercourses will be 
removed by providing 
alternative accommodation to 
the Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
people and appropriate 
rehabilitation package for 
other categories of people; 
The nallahs/ drains/ 
watercourses/ flood plains 
should be clearly delineated 
and boundaries fixed in new 
developments. There will be 
strict enforcement of the 
relevant byelaws/regulations 
in the new layouts, and 
Any encroachment on the 
drain will attract penal action 
and be treated as a cognizable 
offence, both against the 
encroachers and the officials 
responsible for enforcement of 
the byelaws/ regulations. 
Survey conducted, with the 
office of Land Records to 
identify encroachments on 
storm water drains. 
 
 
 
 
Boundary marks not fixed 
in respect of any of the 
drains 
 
 
 
 
 
No penal action on either 
encroachers or the of 
officials responsible for 
enforcement of the 
byelaws/regulations for 
their dereliction 
Action towards clearance 
of encroachments is 
apparently too sluggish 
 
 
 
 
 
Buildings allowed to 
construct abutting the 
drains and without 
allowing the buffer zone 
for drains 
 
 
 
Data of encroachments 
with BBMP is deficient as 
audit observed large 
number of encroachments 
on drains, for which no 
action has been taken. 
 
  

 
 
 109 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.1/Page 16) 
List of disused lakes under BBMP 
Sl. 
No. 
Zone Name of the lake Village and survey 
number 
Area 
Acres Guntas 
1 Bangalore 
South 
Tavarekare Tavarekere -74 10.00 16.00 
2 Karisandra Lake Karisandra - 7 13.00 0.00 
3 Nandi Shettappa Lake Jaraganahalli-53 0.00 0.00 
4 Chikkalsandra Lake Chikkalasandra-76 12.00 26.00 
5 Ittmadu Ittamadu-17 4.00 0.00 
6 Bommanahalli Belakahalli  
(Lingannana Kere) 
Belakahalli-172/2A 7.00 0.00 
7 Doresani Palya Belakahalli-167 56.00 37.00 
8 East Konena Agrahara lake Konena Agrahara -60 20.00 10.00 
9 Byatagunte Palya 
Lake 
Byatagunte palya-14 5.00 25.00 
10 Geddalahalli  Lake Geddalahalli-03 21.00 18.00 
11 Lingarajapura Lake Lingarajapura-49 16.00 14.00 
12 Mahadevapura Vijanapura Lake Vijanapura-42 29.00 15.00 
13 RR Nagar Bovimaranahalli Halagevaderahalli -
124 
22.00 34.00 
14 Gundopanth Lake Pantharapalya-59 2.00 1.00 
15 West Anche ramana kere 
(Gangondanahalli) 
Gangondana halli-8 0.00 17.00 
16 Sanigoruvahalli Sanigoruvahalli-120 15.00 24.00 
17 Shivanahalli 
(Agrahara Dasarahalli) 
Agrahara dasarahalli-
72 
9.00 25.00 
18 Kamakshi palya Sanegoruvanahalli-60 6.00 35.00 
 Total 247.00 297.00 
Source: Information furnished by CE, Lakes Division, BBMP 
  

 
 
 110 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.2, Page 20)   
Typical changes (change in size and shape) noticed in lakes  
Koramangala valley 
 
Vrishabhavathi valley 
 
 


 
 
 111 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.2, Page 20)  
Table showing a few lakes converted for other purposes 
Name of Lake Status now 
Akkithimmanhalli Lake Hockey Stadium 
B.Channasandra Lake BDA Layout - East of NGEF Layout 
Baalayyana Lake  Sports Ground 
Bagalagunte Hosa Lake Residential Layout 
Challaghatta Lake Golf ground - Karnataka Golf Association 
Challakere Lake BDA Layout - HBR 2nd Block 
Channasandra-2 Lake BDA Layout - HRBR 1st Block 
Chennammana Lake BDA Layout - Banashankari 2nd Stage 
Dasarahalli Lake Dr. B.R Ambedkar Stadium 
Dharmambudhi Lake Majestic Bus Stand 
Domlur Lake BDA Layout - Domlur 2nd Stage 
Government Lake BDA Layout - Nagarabhavi 2nd Stage 
Government Lake BDA Layout - RMV 2nd Stage 
Government Lake BDA Layout - HBR 1st Block 
Government Lake BDA Layout - Banashankari 6th Phase 
Hennur-Nagavara Lakes BDA Layout - HBR Layout 1st Stage, 5th Block 
Jakkarayana Lake Sports Ground 
Kadugondanahalli Lake Ambedkar Medical College 
Kamakshipalya Lake Sports Ground 
Karanji Lake Gandhi Bazar Residential area 
Kempambudhi Lake Sewerage collection tank 
Kethmaranahalli Lake BDA Layout - Rajajinagar 1st Block 
Kodihalli Lake Residential Layout 
Koramangala Lake National Games Village housing complex 
Krishnarajapuram Lake BDA Layout - East of NGEF Layout 
Kurubarahalli lake Residential Layout 
Lingannana Lake BDA Layout - Sarakki Dollars Colony 
Manganahalli Lake BDA Layout - Sir MV Layout 6th Block 
Marenahalli Lake Residential Layout 
Miller's Tank Guru Nanak Bhavan, Badminton Stadium 
Nagashettihalli Lake Space Department 
Sampangi Lake Sports Stadium 
Shivanahalli Lake Playground, Bus stand 
Shoolay Lake Football Stadium 
Siddikatte Lake KR Market 
Srinivagalu Lake BDA Layout - ST Bed Layout Koramangala 
Subhashnagar Lake Residential Layout 
Thippasanda Lake BDA Layout - HAL 2nd and 3rd Stage 
Venkatarayana Lake BDA Layout - Banashankari 6th Phase 
Yellugunte Lake BDA Layout - HSR 3rd Sector 
Source : Sri Koliwad Committee Report, http://parisaramahiti.kar.nic.in/lostlakes.html, and 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lakes_in_Bangalore 

 
 
 112 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.2, Page 25) 
Results of verification of few drains in Vrishabhavathi valley 
 
Covered drain in Sheshadripuram 
 
Drain encroached and covered by an apartment 
 


 
 
 113 
Appendix 3.5 contd. 
 
Outlet of Sankey tank 
 
Covered drain adjacent to Sankey tank 
  


 
 
 114 
Appendix 3.5 concld. 
 
Discharge of sewage into SWD through fractured manhole  
 
Covered drain 


 
 
 115 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.9, Page 66) 
Statement showing the details of SWD works executed under Package 2 of Nagarothana Yojane 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Work Estimated 
cost 
Financial 
Progress 
Length 
(as per 
estimate) 
Physical Progress Remarks Percentage of 
excess/savings 
over 
estimated 
cost 
Tackled 
Length 
Balance 
Length 
(` in lakh) (in metres) 
1 Construction of SWD behind Old Age Home near Voddrapalya 
at Geddalahalli in KR Puram ward no:25 
100.00 24.75 40.00 40.00 0.00 Completed (-) 75 
2 Construction of Box Drain to SWD near outlet of Horamavu 
Agara tank and U Shape drain in ward no:25 
250.00 395.86 600.00 600.00 0.00 Completed 58 
3 
Construction of drain to SWD from Poojarappa layout to 
Chelekere main road joining glass factory and Construction of 
drain to SWD from Nagreshwara -Nagenahalli to Geddalahalli 
ward no:25 
200.00 247.99 253.00 253.00 0.00 Completed 24 
4 Construction of RCC drain to SWD near Kot hanur village and 
Hennur main road ward no:25 
100.00 125.78 134.00 134.00 0.00 Completed 26 
5 Construction of RCC drain to SWD from bank avenue layout via 
Papaiah layout joining Horamavu kere . 
100.00 128.34 265.00 265.00 0.00 Completed 28 
6 Construction of RCC drain to SWD joining Benns Satya layout 
in Geddahalli village ward no:25 
100.00 189.45 213.00 213.00 0.00 Completed 89 
7 Remodelling of SWD near Kothanur and B.Narayanapura  in 
ward no:25 
250.00 186.09 307.00 307.00 0.00 Completed (-) 26 
8 Remodelling of SWD near Yarrannapalya Madakari Nayaka 
road Muneshwara nagar to Arun ice cream in ward no:25 
200.00 240.02 130.00 130.00 0.00 Completed 20 
9 Construction of Box Drain at 1st cross Ramamurthy nagar near 
Arun ice cream behind ITI compound ward no :51 
100.00 42.11 75.00 75.00 0.00 Completed (-) 58 
10 Remodelling of SWD near Ambedkar slum of R.R.Layout  ward 
no:51 
150.00 194.33 291.00 291.00 0.00 Completed 30 
11 Construction of culverts to SWD and allied works in Vijinapura 
ward no:51 
200.00 280.06 271.00 271.00 0.00 Completed 40 

 
 
 116 
12 Construction of SWD near NRI layout and providing chain link 
fencing to SWD in KR Puram ward no:26 
100.00 109.85 200.00 200.00 0.00 Completed 10 
13 Remodelling of SWD near Gayathri layout and Basavanapura 
main road MD272 Ward no:52 
100.00 165.36 214.00 214.00 0.00 Completed 65 
14 Construction of RCC drain near  TC Palya back side of Assidan 
School behind Garden City College (balance portion) ward no:52 
90.00 79.42 180.00 180.00 0.00 Completed (-)12 
15 Remodelling of SWD from Koudenahalli tank to Vengiahana 
kere near Brundavananagar and Anandapura ward no:52 
150.00 203.85 225.00 225.00 0.00 Completed 36 
16 Remodelling of SWD near Vengiahana kere in ward no:52 250.00 317.35 397.00 397.00 0.00 Completed 27 
17 Construction of RCC Bridge and SWD at KV Layout  60.00 105.56 110.00 110.00 0.00 Completed 76 
18 Construction of RCC drain and culvert to SWD near Pai layout 
Ward no:56 
100.00 115.25 136.00 136.00 0.00 Completed 15 
19 Construction of RCC drain near Darga Mahal (balance portion) 
ward no:56 
100.00 14.82 95.00 95.00 0.00 Completed (-) 85 
20 Construction of RCC drain from Seggahalli lake towards 
Medahalli ward no:53 
150.00 174.19 146.00 146.00 0.00 Completed 16 
21 Remodelling of SWD to MD 271 from Chikkadevasandra lake 
to Gokula and near Cambridge College ward no:53 
200.00 201.05 231.00 231.00 0.00 Completed 1 
22 Construction of culverts and drain at Medahalli to Yellamallappa 
chetty lake ward no:53 
150.00 185.60 328.00 328.00 0.00 Completed 24 
23 Remodelling of SWD from Koudenahalli tank via Manjunatha  
layout and Priyadarshini layout.ward no:53 
150.00 141.36 365.00 365.00 0.00 Completed (-) 6 
24 Construction of RCC drain from Mahadevapura lake to join 
Doddanekkundi lake ward no: 81 
90.00 183.30 184.00 184.00 0.00 Completed 104 
25 Construction of RCC drain near SCT college (balance portion) 
ward no: 81 
50.00 80.07 91.00 91.00 0.00 Completed 60 
26 Construction of SWD and providing chain link fencing to SWD 
near Chinnapa layout in K.R.Puram constituency 
100.00 120.80 97.00 97.00 0.00 Completed 21 
27 Construction of RCC drain to SWD near Choice Bakery in 
Mahadevapura old village ward no: 81 
50.00 69.23 100.00 100.00 0.00 Completed 38 
28 Construction of RCC  culvert to Vibuthipura  lake outlet and 
Remodelling of SWD in ward no: 81 
200.00 0.00 130.00 0.00 130.00 Yet to 
commence 
 

 
 
 117 
29 Remodelling of SWD near Kalappa block in ward no: 81 150.00 175.82 206.00 206.00 0.00 Completed 17 
30 Remodelling of SWD near Kumbarkote via Abbaiah Reddy 
layout and Nagappa Reddy layout in ward no: 81 
200.00 231.13 370.00 370.00 0.00 Completed 16 
31 Construction of RCC U drain to SWD from Gangashetty lake to 
Nethravathi layout  
90.00 113.56 250.00 250.00 0.00 Completed 26 
32 Construction of RCC box drain and Remodelling of SWD near 
Annasandrapalya in ward no:87 
200.00 329.90 513.00 513.00 0.00 Completed 65 
33 Constructing RCC boundary markings in Mahadevapura zone 50.00 Details not furnished 
Source: Progress reports furnished by CE, SWD as of October 2019 
 
  

 
 
 118 
Appendix 4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3.9, Page 66 & 67) 
Statement showing the details of SWD works executed under Nagarothana Yojane 
 (` in crore) 
Package 
Number 
of works 
Estimated 
cost 
Agreed 
cost 
Date of work 
order 
Stipulated date 
for completion 
Completed Ongoing Yet to 
start 
Execution more 
than estimated 
length  
Execution less than 
estimated length in 
completed works 
(In numbers) No. of 
works 
Up to No. of 
works 
Up to 
1 43 128.57 158.49 30-03-2017 30-11-2018 21 20 2 21 196% 6 (-) 52% 
3 86 155.00 191.32 03-04-2017 03-12-2018 73 10 3 20 234% 18 (-) 94% 
4 138 176.95 219.24 20-03-2017 20-03-2019 128 2 8 63 587% 63 (-) 71% 
5 39 95.00 116.38 23-03-2017 23-09-2018 37 0 2 12 113% 22 (-) 68% 
6 20 71.00 86.83 23-03-2017 23-09-2018 20 0 0 8 63% 10 (-) 46% 
Total 326     279 32 15     
Source: Progress reports furnished by CE, SWD as of October 2019 
Note: The progress report in respect of Package -2 submitted to audit by CE, SWD was grossly incorrect as all the works were shown to have 
been completed with estimated quantity and executed quantity being the same while there were huge variations in financial progress.  Hence, audit 
could not analyse the actual progress achieved. 
 

 
 
 119 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.3, Page 80) 
Instances of encroachments noticed during joint physical verification 
Drain-ID Location Encroached by 
V-201 Peenya Surana College 
K-100 JC Road Cargo Tarpaulins Industries 
K-100 JC Road Private Property 
K-100 Lalbagh Road BBMP leased property 
V-100 Near Dobhi Ghat Vyalikaval Education Society 
V-100 Adjacent to Magadi road railway bridge Rank Nest Apartment 
K-102 0.00 chainage Private Property (Standard 
Chartered Bank) 
K-102 0.00 chainage Private Property 
K-102 Next to Empire Hotel BBMP waste segregation unit 
K-102 KHB Colony, 5th Block, Koramanagala Private Property (Opposite to Nati 
Mane shop) 
K-102 17th B Main, 5th Block, Koramanagala Private Property No.97 
K-102 4th Cross, 5th Block, Koramanagala Private Property 
K-102 6th Block, Koramangala Private properties between 17th E 
and F main roads  
K-102 5th A cross, 6th Block, Koramangala No. 868, Sipani Grande Apartments 
(private property) 
K-102 Koramangala 6th Block Koramangala Club 
RN-193 RR Nagar Padmavathi Kalyana Mantapa 
V-301 Ittamadu Terrace Garden apartments 
-- Madivala RO drinking water plant of BBMP  
V-113 Okalipuram RO drinking water plant of BBMP  
BH-524 Gottigere Himagiri Meadows Apartments 
complex 
BH-554 Adjacent to Madivala lake, Hosur Road Ansal Forte Apartments 
BH-554 Hosur Road Tirumal splendour Apartments 
BH-554 Adjacent to Madivala lake, Hosur Road Adithya Tussar Apartments 
Source: Joint physical verifications 
  

 
 
 120 
ArcGIS: It is a geographic information system for working with maps and geographic 
information maintained by the  Environmental Systems Research Institute  (ESRI). It is 
used for creating and using maps, compiling geographic data, analyzing mapped 
information, shari ng and discovering geographic information, using maps and 
geographic information in a range of applications, and managing geographic 
information in a database. 
Cadastral map:  A large -scale map showing the boundaries of subdivisions of land, 
usually with the directions and lengths thereof and the areas of individual tracts, 
compiled for the purpose of describing and recording ownership. It may also show 
culture, drainage, and other features relating to use of the land. 
Chainage: Chainage is a measure of distance between two points (invented in 1620 by 
Edmund Gunter), which refers to a technique of measurement where steel chains of 100 
links were once used to measure distances in surveying.  While such equipment is no 
longer used for measurement, the term chainage is still commonly used particularly in 
relation to construction of roads, drains and irrigation channels. 
Check dam: These are relatively small structures constructed to slow down the flow of 
water for controlling soil er osion. The purpose of check dam is to retain water up 
stream, so that the water percolates into the ground and recharges the ground water 
table. 
Dependability: Dependable rainfall is defined as the rainfall, which can be expected 
in a set number of years out of a total number of years. 
Detention ponds: These are temporary holding areas for storm water that store peak 
flows and slowly release them, reducing the demand on treatment facilities during storm 
events and prevent flooding. 
Geographic information system (GIS): It is a framework (software/applications) for 
gathering, managing, and analyzing data.  It analyzes spatial location and organizes 
layers ofinformation into visualizations using maps and 3D scenes. For ex, when a road 
is laid, the alignment, le ngth, classification of the road and location on earth can be 
maintained using a Geographical Information System.  Distinctiveness – Maintain 
information of assets by inserting and updating records in a database using the 
software. 
Global Positioning Syste m (GPS): It is a radio navigation system that allows land, 
sea, and airborne users to determine their exact location, velocity, and time 24 hours a 
day, in all weather conditions, anywhere in the world. 
Infiltration drains: Infiltration drains are the chan nels constructed with filter media 
adjacent to the pavement of the road and regular drains to facilitate water from 
pavement to enter infiltration drains for allowing recharging and in case of excess, will 
flow to regular drains. 
Injection wells:  Injection wells are structures similar to a tube well but with the 
purpose of augmenting the groundwater storage of a confined aquifer by pumping in 
treated surface water under pressure. 
Glossary 

 
 
 121 
Percolation ponds/tanks: It is an artificially created surface wate r body, submerging 
in its reservoir a highly permeable land so that surface runoff is made to percolate and 
recharge the ground water storage. 
Primary Drains: These are natural drainage systems connecting series of major water 
bodies' up to the disposal location in a particular catchment area. They originate as a 
tributary of a river basin and receive water from one or more watershed regions 
through secondary drainage network, tertiary drainage network or directly from road 
side drains during their course of flow. 
Recharge pit: A recharge pit is a small well like structure which allows the rainwater 
to replenish groundwater by recharging the underground aquifers. It can be built just 
to help the water infiltration in an area. 
Remote sensing:  It is the process of detecting and monitoring the physical 
characteristics of an area by measuring its reflected and emitted radiation at a distance 
(typically from satellite or aircraft). Analysis of images of the earth continuously 
captured by various satellites as they travel in their orbits.  Depending on the time and 
frequency of presence in the orbit over a particular region, the image will reveal 
absence or presence of objects at different points in time.   For ex, it can help calculate 
the approximate area of a lake at different points in time.  Distinctiveness - Help view 
places beyond easy reach, during floods, deep forests. 
Retention facilities:  These are basically extended detention facilities, infiltration 
basins and swales that could be used f or water supply, recreation, pollutant removal, 
aesthetics and importantly recharging of ground water.   
Return period:  Probable time gap/frequency between two rainfall events of a 
particular magnitude. 
Secondary Drains: These are natural or manmade networ k of drains connecting to a 
primary drain or a water body. They originate from a particular watershed region and 
receive water from one or more micro watershed regions through tertiary drainage 
network or from road side drains during their course of flow. 
Swale: A swale is a shady spot, or a sunken or marshy place. A swale may be either 
natural or man-made. Artificial swales are often infiltration basins, designed to manage 
water runoff, filter pollutants, and increase rainwater infiltration. 
Tertiary Drain s: These are natural or manmade network of drains connecting to 
secondary drains or a water body. They originate from a network of road side drains 
and receive water from micro watershed regions directly or through road side drains 
or in combination of bot h.  Any higher capacity road side drain when compared to a 
normal road side drain is also a tertiary 