Presented to the Legislature on 11 November 2021 
 
 
REPORT OF THE COMPTROLLER  
AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
on 
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE TO FLOODS 
IN KERALA 
 
 
Government of Kerala 
Report No. 6 of the year 2021 


Presented to the Legislature on 11 November 2021 
 
REPORT OF THE  
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR 
GENERAL OF INDIA 
 
on 
 
PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE TO FLOODS 
IN KERALA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA 
Report No. 6 of the year 2021

 
 
 i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Para 
No. Description Page 
No. 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary vii 
Chapter I - Introduction 
1.1 Organisational set-up for flood control 1 
1.2 Audit Objectives 3 
1.3 Audit Criteria 3 
1.4 Audit scope and methodology 4 
1.5 Acknowledgement 5 
Chapter II - Planning and Capacity Building 
Planning 
2.1 Inadequate provision for flood management in the State Water Policy 7 
2.2 Non-preparation of State level Master Plan for water resource s development and 
management 8 
2.3 Non-enactment of legislation to identify and demarcate Flood Plains in the State 10 
2.4 Flood Hazard Map not conforming to criteria 12 
Capacity Building in Disaster Management 
2.5 Implementation of Civil Defence in the State 14 
2.6 Revamping of Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Academy 20 
2.7 Non-functioning of Virtual Cadre for Disaster Management 22 
Chapter III - Flood forecasting and reservoir operation 
3.1 Adequacy of rain gauges in Periyar basin 25 
3.2 Adequacy of flow gauge density in Periyar Basin 28 
3.3 Flood Forecasting Stations not set up in the State 28 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
ii 
Para 
No. Description Page 
No. 
3.4 Non-completion of a project intended for obtaining data required for flood 
management 29 
3.5 Inadequacies of State Emergency Operations Centre 31 
Reservoir operation 
3.6 Assessment of impact of dam spillage on flooding in downstream areas 43 
3.7 Siltation of reservoirs and reduction in storage capacity 52 
Chapter IV - Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
4.1 Result of LULC study in the Periyar basin 55 
4.2 Illegal constructions on Cheruthoni riverbed in Idukki district 58 
4.3 Diversion canal for Chengalthodu inadequate to prevent inundation 60 
4.4 Obstruction to flood discharge through Thottappally Spillway 63 
Chapter V - Financial management and survey 
Financial management 
5.1 Management of the State Disaster Mitigation Fund 67 
5.2 Execution of immediate restoration activities in post flood scenario 73 
Results of survey  
5.3 Pre-flood preparedness 76 
5.4 Flood Management - Operational phase 76 
5.5 Post flood review 77 
Chapter VI - Conclusion and Recommendations 
6.1 Conclusion 83 
6.2 Recommendations 84 
  

 
 
Table of Contents 
iii 
Appendices 
Appendix 1.1:  Statement showing list of institutions covered by Audit 87 
Appendix 2.1:  Details of encroachment of water bodies noticed in the test-checked districts 
and status of action taken by Departments 88 
Appendix 2.2:  Statement showing shortage of equipment, vehicles and infrastructural 
facilities in Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Academy 90 
Appendix 3.1:  Salient features of Mullaperiyar, Idukki, Idamalayar, Lower Periyar dams 
and Bhoothathankettu barrage 92 
Appendix 3.2:  Rule curve framed in 1983 for Idukki dam 93 
Appendix 3.3:  Rule curve framed in 2020 for Idukki and Idamalayar dams 94 
Appendix 3.4:  Procedure followed for conduct of simulations of reservoir operations using 
rule curves 95 
Appendix 3.5:  Sample simulations of Idukki reservoir using 1983 rule curve 96 
Appendix 3.6:  Sample simulations of Idukki reservoir using 2020 rule curve 100 
Appendix 3.7:  Sample simulations of Idamalayar reservoir using 2020 rule curve 105 
Appendix 4.1:  LULC analysis for Idukki district 110 
Appendix 4.2:  LULC analysis for Ernakulam district 111 
Appendix 4.3:  LULC analysis for flood prone region of Ernakulam district 112 
Appendix 5.1:  Statement showing name of LSGI, Taluk and number of respondents 
covered by Audit in selected districts while conducting survey of affected 
persons 
113 

 
 
 v 
 P R E F A C E  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2019 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the 
State of Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India. 
This Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Preparedness 
and response to floods in Kerala’ covering the period 2014-19. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from Departments of 
Revenue and Disaster Management, Power and Water R esources at each stage 
of the audit process. 
 

 
 
 vii 
S U M M A R Y  
 
EXECU TIV E SUMMARY 
E X E C U T I V E  
 
Out of the total area of the State, 14.52 per cent is estimated to be prone to 
floods. As per India Meteorological Department data, Kerala received 
2346.60 mm of rainfall from 01 June 2018 to 19 August 2018 which was 
about 42 per cent  above the normal. Rainfall in the State was 164 per cent  
above normal i n the period 01-19 August 2018. The devastating floods in 
Kerala during August 2018 severely affected 13 of the 14 districts in the State 
resulting in huge loss of life and property. 
With a view to assess the preparedness and response of Government of Kera la 
(GoK) to minimise the magnitude of losses due to floods, a Performance Audit 
of ‘Preparedness and response to flood s in Kerala’ was conducted. The major 
findings of the Performance Audit are given below. 
Planning and Capacity Building 
The Kerala State Water Policy 2008 was not updated in accordance with the 
National Water Policy and lacked provision for flood control and flood 
management in the State. 
(Paragraph 2.1) 
Provisions in the Kerala State Water Policy 2008 requiring the preparation of a 
State Level Master Plan for water resources development, formulation of 
Master Plans for the major rivers of the State and constitution of a State Level 
Authority for coordinating all water related activities at the river basin level 
were not complied with. 
(Paragraph 2.2) 
Flood plains of the State are yet to be demarcated and flood plain zoning 
legislation remains to be enacted.  
(Paragraph 2.3)  
No large -scale flood hazard map is available in the State; State’s Disaster 
Management Plan includes flood susceptibility map not conforming to Central 
Water Commission ( CWC) criteria for flood prone area. According to GoK , 
responsibility to provide the large -scale map is that of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, CWC, etc. 
(Paragraph 2.4) 
The Civil Defence Training I nstitute building at Thrissur, which was to cater 
to the dedicated purpose of a full -time residential training institute for civil 
defence, has not served the intended purpose even after the passage of five 
years. 
(Paragraph 2.5.1) 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
viii 
Subsequent to signing of  MOU of Aapda Mitra scheme in November 2016, 
procedural delay at various individual stages resulted in d istribution of 
emergency responder kits in December 2019, one year after completion 
(October 2018) of training of the first batch of Aapda Mitra volunte ers. 
Disaster response skills acquired by the volunteers could not be used for the 
benefit of the local community despite severe flood having affected the State 
in August 2019. 
(Paragraph 2.5.3) 
Flood forecasting and reservoir operation 
Only six rain gauges against the requirement of 32 gauges (as per existing BIS 
norms) are available for rainfall estimation in Periyar basin by IMD. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
Despite 275 flood forecasting stations having been set up by CWC across the 
country by the year 2017, no flood forecasting stations had been set up by the 
CWC in the State. GoK had not furnished to the CWC list of reservoirs/ cities 
and towns requiring setting up of inflow forecasting stations/  level forecasting 
stations. However,  the Government  had resolved to develop a full -fledged 
inflow forecasting and flood early warning system under National Hydrology 
Project 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
A project for obtaining real time  data on rainfall, streamflow etc. failed to 
deliver reliable data on real time basis even after a lapse of five years. 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
Though the Disaster Management  Plan 2016 envisaged S tate Emergency 
Operations Centre to be equipped with a full -fledged state -of-the-art IT and 
Communication network with an intelligent Decision Support System (DSS) 
capable of prediction and early warning of major hydro -meteorological 
hazards and support for emergency operation, even two years after the targeted 
date of completion of April 2019, the system cannot be relied upon to predict 
and give early warning of major hydro -meteorological hazards since its 
effective functioning is dependent on the receipt of externally sourced real 
time data which is yet to be made available.  
(Paragraph 3.5.1) 
Communication infrastructure was non -functional in some areas including 
dam sites and Government offices during or subsequent to the 2018 floods.  
(Paragraph 3.5.2) 
Contribution of the spills from Idamalayar and Idukki dams together, to the 
flows at Neeleswaram gauge station during the days 14 to 18 August 2018 was 
46.43 per cent, 36.12 per cent, 29.54 per cent, 23.34 per cent and 16.99 per 
cent respectively. C ontribution of spills from Mullaperiyar to the inflows at 
Idukki during August 15-18 ranged between 27.93 and 36.62 per cent.  

 
 
 ix 
Executive Summary  
There was no rule curve in place for the guidance of dam operators at 
Idamalayar reservoir at the time of the 2018 floods. Rule curve for Idukki 
reservoir framed in 1983 were not reviewed until after the floods of 2018.  
Though reservoir operations at Idukki during 14 to 18 August 2018 resulted in 
lower spill of 467.51 MCM compared to 558.19 MCM (indicated through 
simulation studies) which would have resulted had the Rule  Curve (of 1983) 
been followed strictly, outflows still exceeded inflows on one day (17 August 
2018) in respect of Idukki reservoir  and on two days (16 and 17 August 2018) 
in respect of Idamalayar reservoir. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
Though Reservoir Operation Guidelines require capacity surveys of reservoirs 
to be undertaken at least once in five years, n o capacity surveys or 
sedimentation studies were conducted in any of the KSEBL reservoirs 
between 2011 and August 2019 (when Audit was undertaken).  However, 
seven sedimentation studies were carried out in 2020. 
Sedimentation assessments of major reservoirs Idukki, Idamalayar, Kakki and 
Sholayar were last conducted in 2004, 2011, 1999 and 2003 respectively. In 
respect of Banasurasagar dam, commissioned during 2005, se dimentation 
study is yet to be conducted. KSEBL informed that i n the backdrop of the 
2018 floods , sedimentation study for Idukki, Idamalay ar, Kakki, 
Banasurasagar and Sholayar reservoirs has been  included in Dam 
Rehabilitation and Improvement Project-II. 
In respect of reservoirs under the control of the Water Resources Department, 
though siltation studies had revealed significant levels of siltation in 
Aruvikkara reservoir (43 per cent ), Mangalam reservoir (21.98 per cent ), 
Peppara reservoir (21.70 per cent), desiltation activities were yet to take off 
other than in Mangalam reservoir which commenced in December 2020. 
 (Paragraph 3.7) 
Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
The Land Use Land Cover analysis for the entire Periyar basin inclu ding the 
test-checked districts of Idukki and Ernakulam revealed an increase in the 
built-up area by nearly 450 per cent during 1985-2015 and decrease in water 
bodies by nearly 17 per cent. During 2005-2015, the built-up area increased by 
nearly 139 per cent. Had the same rainfall and spills of 2018 occurred with 
1985 land use conditions, the flood depth at Neeleswaram gauge station would 
have reduced from 12.32 m to 10.03 m and the flood inundated area would 
have reduced from 520.04 sq. km to 414.76 sq. km. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
Continuing presence of encroachments on Cheruthoni river bed obstructed the 
free flow of the river resulting in damages during the 2018 floods.  
(Paragraph 4.2) 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
x 
Despite passage of 20 years since the commissioning of the airport and 
instances of severe flooding in the area, the Irrigation/ Revenue and Disaster 
Management wings/ LSGIs concerned/ CIAL have not been able to ensure a 
well-maintained diversion canal adequate to carry the Chengalthodu waters (in 
the event of heavy flooding) into the Periyar river to sustain the overall 
hydrology of the area and ward off the potential risks of riverine flooding to 
the resident population. 
(Paragraph 4.3)  
Lower than target ted dredging to deepen and widen the leading channel of 
Thottapally spillway coupled with the presence of over 500 trees planted 
inside the spillway mouth resulted in reduction of spillway capacity, 
contributing to the flood situation in Alappuzha in August 2018. 
 (Paragraph 4.4) 
Financial management and survey 
Though 7124 works of immediate repair and restoration of damages in 2018 
flood were approved for execution under State Disaster Response Fund, 18 per 
cent of the works were yet to be completed even after a lapse of two years and 
eight months (April 2021) . The Government informed that the pending works 
were expected to be completed by May 2021. 
(Paragraph 5.2)

 
 
  
A u g u s t  1 9 ,  2 0 1 8  
A l a p p u z h a  D i s t r i c t 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 

 
 
  

 
 
 1 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The National Centre for Earth Science Studies (NCESS) estimates1 that 
14.52 per cent  of the total area of Kerala is prone to floods. Floods are the 
most common of natural hazards that affect people, infrastructure and natural 
environment in Kerala . Incidence of floods in the State is becoming more 
frequent and severe.  While high intensity  rainfall causes flooding during 
monsoons in the State, increase in  flood plain occupancy and reclamation of 
water bodies and wetlands  over the years have contributed to increasing flood 
damages. Hence, flood management needs to be accorded high priority i n the 
disaster management profile of the State. The mitigation of damages caused by 
floods is dependent upon a combination of pre-flood preparedness, operational 
flood management and post flood review.  
Government of Kerala (GoK), in line with the Disaster Management Act, 2005 
enacted the Kerala State Disaster Managem ent Rules, 2007 and promulgated 
the Kerala State Disaster Management Policy, 2010 for holistic disaster 
management in the State.  The Kerala State Disaster Management Authority 
(KSDMA) under the Revenue and Disaster Management Department was 
constituted (2007) to lay down guidelines to be followed by the various 
departments of GoK in the formulation of their development plans and 
projects such that integrated measures could be taken for prevention of 
disasters and provide necessary technical assistance for disaster management. 
A Performance Audit on ‘Preparedness and response to flood s in Kerala’ 
covering the period 2014 -19 was conducted to assess whether planning and 
implementation of fl ood management measures were effective with focus on 
the floods in 2018. 
1.1. Organisational set-up for flood control 
The Kerala State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA) 2 is assisted in the 
execution of its functions by the State Executive Committee (SEC) w hich was 
constituted (2007) by the GoK with the Chief Secretary to  the Government as 
the Chairperson. The Head of the Department of Revenue and Disaster 
Management, who is the Convenor of SEC and Head of the Department of 
KSDMA, acts as the State Relief Commissioner.  
District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMA) have been constituted in 
all 14 districts to act as the planning, coordinating and implementing bodies 
for disaster management and to mobili se resources of all relevant departments 
at their level . As per Kerala State Disaster Management Plan approved in 
2016, the Water Resources Department is the nodal department for 
 
1  Estimated in 2010 on the basis of multi hazard zonation maps prepared by NCESS 
2  with the Chief Minister of the State as the ex -officio Chairperson and nine members including the 
Minister of Home and Vigilance, Minister for Agriculture and Principal Secretary, Revenue and 
Disaster Management Department forming part of the Authority 
1 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
2 
preparedness, and the Revenue and Disaster Management Department, for 
response and recovery in times of flood.  
Emergency Operations Centres at the State (SEOC) and district level (DEOC) 
function under KSDMA and DDMAs respectively, for prompt assessment and 
relay of information to facilitate quick response and effective decision making. 
The Departments of Water Resources and Power, thr ough their subordinate 
wings/ officers, implement structural and non -structural measures for disaster 
risk reduction to effectively manage flood scenarios in the State. The 
organograms presented below depict the organisational set up of disaster 
management in the State. 
Institutional set up for disaster management 
 
 
Kerala State Disaster Management 
Authority 
▪ Constituted under Sub -section (1) of 
Section 14 of DM Act, 2005 
▪ Chief Minister (Chairperson) 
State Executive Committee 
▪ Constituted under Sub-section (1) of 
Section 20 of DM Act, 2005 
▪ Chief Secretary of the State - 
Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer 
of State Authority (Section 14)  
Member Secretary, Kerala State 
Disaster Management Authority 
District Disaster Management Authority,  
State Emergency Operations Centre/ 
District Emergency Operations Centres, 
Other Agencies 
 
State Relief Commissioner 
▪ Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue 
and Disaster Management Department 

 
 
 3 
Chapter I – Introduction  
Institutional set up for disaster management (contd.) 
 
1.2. Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to assess whether  
• planning for flood management was comprehensive and effective;  
• implementation of measures for management and control of floods 
was effective; 
• preparedness and response to the floods in 2018 was adequate and 
timely. 
1.3. Audit Criteria 
Audit observations were  benchmarked against the criteria derived from the 
following documents: 
• The Disaster Management Act 2005 
• NDMA Guidelines on Management of Floods 2008 
• Kerala State Disaster Management Rules 2007 
• State Disaster Management Policy 2010 
• National Disaster Management Plan 2016 
Flood Management – Departments 
Involved 
Revenue and Disaster 
Management Department 
Water Resources 
Department 
Power Department 
Kerala State Disaster 
Management Authority  
Coordinating, monitoring and 
directing measures for organising 
rescue, relief and rehabilitation 
Six Chief 
Engineers 
Dam Safety 
Wing 
Preparedness 
and mitigation 
activities 
Inspects dams 
to monitor 
safety 
Kerala State Electricity 
Board Limited 
Dam Safety Organisation 
headed by Chief Engineer 
(Civil, Dam Safety and 
DRIP) 
Monitor safety of dams, 
regulate reservoir operation 
to mitigate flood 
District Disaster Management 
Authorities, Other Departments, Local 
Self-Government, etc. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
4 
• State Disaster Management Plan 2016 
• National Water Policy 2002, 2012 
• Central/ State Government Orders, Circulars, Codes , Manuals and 
Guidelines of KSDMA, other implementing agencies etc.  
1.4. Audit scope and methodology 
Audit adopted a two-stage sampling methodology for selection of four out of 
14 districts (25 per cent) for test check. While Idukki district was judgmentally 
selected due to the maximum concentration of large dams, the remaining three 
districts of Alappuzha, Ernakulam and Thrissur were selected through risk -
based sampling. Eight3 Taluk Offices in these four districts ( two per district ) 
which were worst hit during 2018 floods  were also selected for detailed 
scrutiny. The detailed list of institutions covered by Audit is given in 
Appendix 1.1.  
The Performance Audit covering the period 2014 -19 was conducted between 
May 2019 and February 2020 by scrutiny of relevant records of the Revenue 
and Disaster Management Department and the Water Resources Department in 
Government Secretariat and the various agencies 4 connected with the 
management of floods at State/ District/  Taluk/ Village level including the 
Kerala State Disaster Management Authority, SEOC, Institute of Land an d 
Disaster Management (ILDM), India Meteorological Department (IMD) , 
Kerala State Electricity Board  Limited etc. An  Entry Conference was held on 
18 June 2019 with the Principal Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management 
Department, Secretary, Water Resourc es Department (who was also the 
Secretary, Power Department) and heads of audited institutions , including the 
Chairman, Kerala State Electricity Board  Limited wherein the scope, 
objectives, criteria, and methodology of audit  including selection of districts 
for test check were discussed.  
On conclusion of audit, Exit Conferences were held with the various 
Departments mentioned in the Report through video conferencing on different 
dates as per the Government’s request and in th e wake of COVID pandemic , 
during which the audit findings and recommendations of audit were discussed 
in detail. Additional remarks offered by the  Government with respect to the 
audit findings have been considered in the finalisation of the Report. Exit 
Conferences with Principal Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management 
Department along with the Commissioner, Disaster Management and  Member 
Secretary, KSDMA was held on 18 January 2021, with Secretary, Power 
Department along with Chairman, Kerala State Elec tricity Board Limited on 
 
3  Alappuzha district: Kuttanad and Chengannur; Ernakulam district: Aluva and Paravur; Thrissur 
district: Chalakkudy and Thalappilly; Idukki district: Idukki and Devikulam Taluk Offices  
4  Office of the Chief Engineer, Irrigation department, Dam safety offices, KSEBL/ Irrigation division 
offices of test-checked dams, offices of Disaster Management Authorities and Emergency Operations 
Centres in selected districts and Disaster Management sections in taluks. 

 
 
 5 
Chapter I – Introduction  
23 January 2021  and with Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources 
Department on 02 February 20215. 
Audit methodology included scrutiny of records in selected offices, j oint field 
visits with department officers  to dam sites, ri ver basins, flood prone areas, 
flood management structures etc. Audit also conducted a survey of 800 
persons affected by flood in the test-checked districts. Audit engaged the 
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore as Consultant to study the Kerala 
floods of August 2018 from a hydrological perspective. The study area was the 
Periyar river basin, which covers an area of 5159.71 square kilometres. The 
Government has communicated its concern over the fact that a simulation 
study by the Consultant IISc B angalore ha s been relied upon for auditing a 
crisis management period, viz. the floods of August 2018. Audit’s response is 
that the simulation studies by technical experts, though undertaken ex post 
facto, are reliable as a constructive tool, even for a crisis management 
situation. In this instance, the exercise has been useful in re -creating the 
hydrological scenario of the 2018 floods for the purpose of examining whether 
reservoir operations could have been handled differently with the then 
available set of data and thus facilitate better preparedness to handle similar 
challenging situations, that may arise in the future.  
1.5. Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Department of Revenue 
and Disaster Management, Department of Water Resources and Department of 
Power, Government of Kerala in the conduct of the Performance Audit. The 
co-operation extended by officials of Central Water Commission, India 
Meteorological Department, Kerala State Electricity Board Limited (KSEBL), 
Kerala State Disaster Management Authority, Irrigation Design and Research 
Board, Dam Safety Organisation, Kottayam, Kerala State Remote Sensing and 
Environment Centre  and District Disaster Management Authorities in 
Alappuzha, Thrissur, Ernakulum and Idukki is gratefully acknowledged. Audit 
records its appreciation for the efforts of Prof. P. Pradeep Mujumdar and his 
team from IISc, Bangalore in submitting a Report on the 2018 Kerala floods. 
Audit has relied, inter alia , upon the Consultant’s study for observations 
relating to  Reservoir Operations and impact of Land Use and Land Cover 
change, included in this Report.  
 
5  Discussion was held with  the Executive Director, Cochin International Airport Limited on 
29 January 2021. 

 
 
  
A u g u s t  1 9 ,  2 0 1 8  
A l a p p u z h a  D i s t r i c t 
CHAPTER II 
PLANNING AND CAPACITY BUILDING 

 
 
  

 
 
 7 
 
 
 
PLANNING AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
The Disaster Management Act  (DM Act) enacted by Parliament in 2005 
envisages a continuous and integrated process of planning, coordinating and 
implementing measures for disaster management. The Act stipulated that a 
State Authority shall be vested with the responsibility for laying down policies 
and plans for disaster management in a State. In Kerala, at the district level, 
District Disaster Management Authorities were also constituted in September 
2008 following the constitution of the State Disaster Management Authority. 
The KSDMA assis ted by the State Executive Committee, is responsible for 
measures to be taken for mitigation, capacity building and preparedness by the 
various departments and to issue such guidelines as may be necessary.  
Planning 
2.1. Inadequate provision for flood management in the State 
Water Policy 
The Government of India formulated a National Water Policy (NWP) in 1987 
which was revised in 2002 and subsequently in 2012. The NWP envisaged and 
included provisions relating to the management of flood. The NWP 2002 
envisaged that States would formulate a Master Plan for flood control and 
management for each flood prone basin, and provide for adequate flood -
cushion in water storage projects as well as strict regulation of settlements and 
economic activity in the flood p lain zones to minimi se the loss of life and 
property on account of floods . The NWP 2012 required operating procedures 
for reservoirs to be evolved and implemented in such a manner so as to have 
flood cushion and to reduce trapping of sediment during flood season. It also 
mentions that  encroachments and diversion of water bodies must not be 
allowed and restoration must be promoted to the extent feasible.  NWP 2012 
envisages the drafting of State Water Policy (SWP) in accordance w ith NWP 
keeping in mind the ba sic concerns and principles as also a unified national 
perspective. 
Audit observed that as against the NWP, the Kerala SWP, as formulated by the 
Water Resources Department (July 2008) did not consider the aspect of 
management of floods in the State. The pr ovisions in the Water Policy of G oI 
which placed emphasis on preparedness for flood, moderni sation of flood 
forecasting using real time  data acquisition system linked to forecasting 
model6, evolving and implementing operating procedures for reservoirs in 
order to have flood cushion, increasing preparedness for sudden and 
unexpected floods were not included in the Water Policy formulated by G oK. 
During the course of the Performance Audit, Audit came across issues7 such as 
 
6 Paragraphs 17.2, 17.3, 17.4 and 17.5 of the NWP 2002 
7 Paragraphs 2.3, 3.3 and 3.7 and Appendix 2.1 of this Report 
2 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
8 
the absence of legislation to demarcate flood plains, encroachment of water 
bodies, absence of flood forecasting stations , inadequate desiltation activities 
etc. Non-inclusion of elements of flood control measures in the State Water 
Policy was indicative of the relative low priority given to flood management 
issues possibly because Kerala was not considered a flood prone State until 
recent years.  
The Department of Water Resources replied (November 2020 and April 2021) 
that though the SWP 2008 does not explicitly provide for flood management/ 
forecasting, the Department had given emphasis to flood preparedness/ 
forecasting in the past and 131 rain gauges, 54 river gauge stations and nine 
fully automatic climatic stations had become operational prior to the floods of 
2018. In order to equip the State to contain disasters of similar magnitude as 
that which took place owing to the unprecedented heavy rainfall, after the 
2018 floods, the Government resolved to develop a full -fledged inflow 
forecasting and flood early warning sy stem under the National Hydrology 
Project in all river basins with real time  monitoring through tipping bucket 
rain gauge (99 nos.), radar level sensor (56 nos.) and automatic weather 
stations (13 nos.). Orders have been issued to develop a single authorit ative 
platform Kerala Water Resources Information System for all water resources 
related information. The Department stated that these facts indicate that the 
Government had a functional mechanism with respect to flood forecasting and 
was quick to formulate measures for real time flood forecasting in the wake of 
the after effects of 2018 floods. The reply also indicated that a drafting 
Committee was constituted in November 2017 for formulating a revised SWP, 
which was reconstituted in January 2021 and the Committee submitted a 
revised draft of the amended SWP on 05 April 2021. Revised State Water 
Policy containing the provisions for flood management based on State specific 
requirements w ould be promulgated when the new Government comes to 
power. 
The response  of the Department confirms the inadequacy of provisions 
relating to flood management in SWP as depicted in the audit paragraph. 
Recommendation 2.1: Government of Kerala may consider revision of the 
State Water Policy to include aspects relating to flood management, in line 
with the National Water Policy and after considering the specific 
requirements of the State. 
2.2. Non-preparation of State level Master Plan for water 
resources development and management 
The State Water Policy (SWP) 2008 considered the micro watershed as the 
basic unit and the river basin as an integrated unit of micro -watersheds. It 
envisaged preparation of a State level Master Plan for water resource s 
development and management by compiling the status and action plans in each 
micro watershed, sub -basins and river basins in a hierarchical form. 
Additionally, Master Plans for the major rivers of the State were to be 
prepared which would form the basis of any river -based project. A State Level 

 
 
 9 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
River Authority was also to be constituted for coordinating all water related 
activities at the river basin level. A G oI report of the National Commission on 
Flood had observed as early as in March 1980 that the practice of undertaking 
flood schemes on ad hoc basis was unscientific and recognised an urgent need 
for preparing basin -wise Master Plans which would indicate priority of 
schemes for implementation. 
Audit noted that a State Level River Management Authority was yet to be 
constituted. Non-constitution of the same meant absence of an institutional 
mechanism for ensuring co -ordination between different implementing 
agencies and for monitoring prioriti sation of works undertaken. The canal 
work in C ochin International Airport Limited (refer Paragraph 4.3 of this 
Report) is an example of a case where the State Level River Management 
Authority could have monitored the prioriti sation of the works to be 
undertaken to prevent inundation of the airport and areas in the vicinity during 
the floods of 2018. 
Audit further observed that during 2014 -19, the Irrigation Department of GoK 
expended `178.99 crore for flood control/  mitigation works in the State 
including 273 works at a cost of `55.17 crore in the test-checked districts of 
Thrissur, Idukki, Ernakulam and Alappuzha . Works were also executed under 
the River Management Fund, Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) scheme, Kuttanad Development Scheme  and 
Project Management works. These works were taken up at different locations, 
based on the requests from local people, people’s representatives and local 
bodies without being linked to a comprehensive plan for the management of 
floods. In the test-checked districts, Audit noticed that no survey or 
investigation was conducted to identify the flood prone/  vulnerable areas for 
prioritising the works to be undertaken.  
Audit was informed (March 2020) that the Master Plan of only one river 8 viz. 
Chaliyar besides two 9 of the five tributaries of the B harathapuzha River had 
been completed. Thus, Master Plans of 42 out of 44 rivers are yet to be 
prepared though envisaged in the State Water Policy. Non -availability of 
Master Plans for the major rivers of the State implies scope for inclusion of 
flood control works on ad hoc basis. 
GoK stated (March 2020) that micro watershed plans containing details of 
traditional water bodies such as ponds, lakes, streams and springs were 
prepared at Grama and Block Panchayat level under ‘Haritha Kerala Mission’. 
However, the fact remains that a State level Master Plan for water resources 
development and management as envisaged in the SWP is yet to be prepared.  
During the Exit conference (February 2021), Additional Chief Secretary, 
Water Resources Department stated that a draft bill had been finali sed for 
constitution of River Basin Conservation and Management Authority. The 
Department also informed (April 2021) that when the model code of conduct 
 
8  Out of 44 major rivers in Kerala  
9 Gayatripuzha and Thoothapuzha  

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
10 
is lifted, the bill is expected to be passed as an ordinance. As per t he State 
Water Policy 2008, preparation of State level Master Plan for water resources 
development and management is to be a combined effort of various 
stakeholder departments and the formulation of the same is progressing under 
the authority of Town and C ountry Planning Department. With respect to the 
preparation of master plans for major rivers in the State, priority will be given 
to those rivers that are prone to flood and passing through densely populated 
areas viz. Periyar, Chalakkudy, Pamba, Meenachil , Muvattupuzha, Karamana, 
Bharathapuzha and Chaliyar rivers. 
Recommendation 2.2: Government may ensure compliance with the 
provisions of the Kerala State Water Policy such as formulation of a State 
level Master Plan for water resource s development and man agement, 
formulation of Master Plans for the major rivers besides constituting a State 
Level Authority to coordinate all water related activities at the river basin 
level. 
2.3. Non-enactment of legislation to identify and demarcate 
Flood Plains in the State 
Flood plain zoning is a concept central to flood plain management. This 
concept recogni ses the fact that the flood plain of a river is essentially its 
domain and any intrusion into or developmental activity therein must 
recognise the river’s ‘right of way’ 10. Flood plain zoning measures aim at 
demarcating zones or areas likely to be affected by floods of different 
magnitudes or frequencies and probability levels, and specify the types of 
permissible developments in these zones, so that whenever floods actually  
occur, the damage can be minimi sed, if not avoided. A model draft bill for 
flood plain zoning legislation was circulated by the Union Government in 
1975 to all the States. The proposed legislation envisaged creation of a Flood 
Zoning Authority, survey of flood plains and prohibit ion or restriction in the 
use of these land s. The National Disaster Management Authority’s (NDMA) 
guideline on ‘management of floods’ also has a section on  enforcement and 
regulation related to flood plain zoning. 
The State of Kerala has not enacted flood plain zoning legislation and the 
flood plains of the S tate ha ve not be en identified and demarcated. Had the 
exercise of identification and demarcation of the flood plains been undertaken, 
the same could have been used by GoK in their activities on flood control. 
The Department of Water Resources replied (November 2020) that the State of 
Kerala had informed  (2013) the Ministry of Water Resources and Ganga 
Rejuvenation about the practical difficulties and limitations of enacting the 
flood plain zoning legislation in Kerala. It added that the topography of Kerala 
was unique when compared with the States that had implemented the 
legislation.  
 
10 Source: Planning Commission, GoI, Report of Working Group on Flood Management and region -
specific issues for XII Plan (2011). 

 
 
 11 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
However, Audit observes that while there may be challenges in implementing 
such a legislation as envisaged for flood plain zoning, it should not become an 
absolute deterrent to even initiate a process of identification of the flood plain 
zones for the 44 major rivers as well as the level of urbani sation and 
development activities. As per the NDMA Guidelines also, flood plain zoning 
is necessary to minimi se damage in the case of floods by rivers. According to 
Kerala State Disaster Management Plan, 2016, flood plains are flood prone 
and hazardous if developmental activities in them exce ed an acceptable level. 
It further states that reclamation and settlement in flood plain areas is a major 
cause of flood damage in the State. Further, during the course of audit, 91 3 
encroachments of water bodies were noticed in the selected districts as 
detailed in Appendix 2.1. Legislation to identify and demarcate flood plain 
zones of the State would enable the Government to take proactive measures in 
controlling potential encroachment activities in the flood plains.  
The Department replied (April 2021) that in India, only three States namely 
Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand had enacted the legislation as of 
December 2016. Kerala had never been considered as a major flood prone 
State till the flood of 2018 unlike the States located in Indo Gangetic plain. 
The States located on the banks of Ganges, Yamuna and Brahmaputra basins 
are yet to enact the Flood Plain Zoning Bill. Flood plain zoning need s 
institutional support and interdepartmental coordination. Though Kerala has an 
undulating topography and a high population density, Government recognises 
it is a vital tool in preventing flood. Feasibility study on enacting the Flood 
Plain Zoning Bill in the State would be conducted when the new Government 
comes to power. 
Audit noticed that the need to prevent encroachments along rivers and flood 
plains was again emphasised in the  draft River Regulation Zone notification, 
2016, under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 which was circulated to 
the States by the Ministry of Env ironment, Forests, and Climate change 
(MoEFCC). The notification proposes to declare river stretches and flood plain 
zones as river conservation zones and to regulate or prohibit developmental 
activities in these zones. Further, though the Coastal Regulati on Zone 
Notification of January 2011 (as amended in 2019) envisages that coastal land 
from High Tide Line upto 50 m 11 on the landward side along rivers subject to 
tidal influence fall under the coastal regulation zone and would be regulated as 
per the prov isions of the Act, this would not suffice to check encroachments, 
as flood  plains of only some rivers/stretches of rivers in some districts are 
covered under the CR Zones.  
Flood plains and river beds are some of the natural features that allow 
absorption of heavy rainfall or a river’s overflow and facilitate mitigation of 
adverse effects, hence permitting uncontrolled constructions and 
encroachments, particularly in an era of climate change could be extremely 
short-sighted. Recognising the river’s right to  expand and contract over 
seasons is vital. Notwithstanding the practical difficulties in implementing 
 
11  100 m upto 17 January 2019  

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
12 
flood plain zoning legislation/ regulation in a densely populated State like 
Kerala, the Government needs to ensure through active stakeholder 
engagement that this gap in the regulatory framework is not allowed to persist.  
Recommendation 2.3: G overnment of Kerala may initiate action for  a 
legislation/regulation on flood plain zoning, a s well as constitute  an 
Authority to identify and demarcate flood plai n zones of the State and to 
prohibit or restrict the use of these lands. 
2.4. Flood Hazard Map not conforming to criteria 
Flood Hazard Mapping is a vital component to facilitate the identification of 
areas at risk of flooding and also helps to prioriti se mitigation and response 
efforts12. 
An Expert Committee constituted by G oI13 for scientific assessment of flood 
prone areas in India defined (June 2013) flood prone areas as such areas 
affected by floods which have a return period of 10 years viz. probability of its 
recurrence and emphasised that the return period of flood would b e one of the 
important criteria for classification of flood prone areas. Flood prone areas 
were to be initially categorised as Severe, Moderate and Normal. Methodology 
for identifying these areas as such were also detailed by the Expert Committee. 
The Expert Committee recommended that each State should set up a Regional 
Committee which, among other things, would be responsible for delineating 
flood prone areas of the State based on methodology finali sed by it. The State 
was bound to follow the procedures la id down by the Expert Committee. In 
line with GoI recommendations, GoK constituted14 (October 2014) a Regional 
Committee to identify, demarcate and classify the flood prone areas in Kerala. 
GoK formulated a Kerala State Disaster Management Plan approved by  the 
SEC and KSDMA (September 2016) which was intended to be an ever -
evolving document formulated under the Disaster Management Act 2005. 
Audit noticed that the map adopted by GoK and incorporated in the Kerala 
State Disaster Management Plan 2016 was prepa red (2010) by the National 
Centre for Earth Science Studies (NCESS) 15 in 1:50,000 scale using satellite 
images. Though Central Water Commission (CWC)  in June 2013 had fixed 
the return period of flood as the criteria for identifying flood prone areas, GoK 
continues to rely upon a flood prone area map prepared in 2010 which does 
not adhere to the criteria fixed by CWC for earmarking an area as flood prone.  
The inadequacy of the maps adopted in the DM Plan was evident from the 
reply of NCESS to Audit (July 20 19) that large scale maps would be required 
for application at the local level. The need for integrating field mapping, high 
resolution satellite images and Digital Elevation Models for generation of 
database for local level application was also emphasised by NCESS. 
 
12  Source: Flood Hazard Atlas of Odisha prepared by National Remote Sensing Centre, GoI 
13  Ministry of Water Resources, Central Water Commission 
14 Additional Ch ief Secretary, Water Resources Department as Chairman, Chief Engineer, CWC 
Coimbatore as Member Secretary, Secretary, KSDMA as member and two other members 
15 NCESS – formerly known as Centre for Earth Science Studies 

 
 
 13 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
Thus, flood susceptibility map of NCESS as adopted by GoK in its Disaster 
Management Plan needs to be revisited in order to make it useful for local 
level applicability.  
Audit observed that the Regional Committee 16 constituted (October 2014) to 
identify, demarcate and classify the flood prone areas in Kerala by July 2015 
met only twice during 2014-19 and could not achieve its stated objective. 
GoK in its response stated that  
• the flood susceptibility map was prepare d by the State in 2010 when 
the Expert Committee’s recommended methodology was not 
available. It is not meant to be a substitute for the large scale Flood 
Hazard map required to be prepared (in accordance with the 
methodology prescribed by the Expert Commi ttee) and provided by 
the Ministry of Water Resources, National Remote Sensing Centre, 
Survey of India and Central Water Commission as notified in the 
Disaster Management Plan of 2016 and the National Disaster 
Management Guidelines -Management of Floods 2008, which when 
obtained, would be incorporated in the State Disast er Management 
Plan.  
• The Department said that CWC informed (May 2020) that there was 
not much progress in the matter of large -scale flood mapping due to 
non-availability of high -resolution di gital elevation models for the 
States. Thus, the delay in identification, demarcation and 
classification of flood prone areas cannot be attributed to the State 
Government. 
• In the Exit Conference (18 January 2021) Member Secretary, 
KSDMA stated that the NCE SS map adopted in the State DM Plan 
2016 had an accuracy of 70 per cent  which was sufficient for all 
planning purposes. 
The reply of the Government confirms the audit observation that the State is 
yet to have a large -scale flood hazard map satisfying the c riteria, even though 
the flood hazard map is a vital component for identification of risk prone areas 
and to prioriti se response efforts. Though seven years have elapsed since the 
methodology was prescribed for preparation of flood prone map, the State is 
still dependent on the 2010 map. 
Audit observed that United Nations Development Programme  in its Post 
Disaster Needs Assessment document 17 (released after the Kerala floods of 
2018) referring to the available map notes that the same has been prepared at a 
scale of 1:50,000 while indicating that this has resulted in awareness among 
 
16 Based on the recommendations of Expert Committee for Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Areas 
in India, Government of Kerala constituted (October 2014) a Regional Committee with Additional 
Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department as Chairman to identify, demarcate and classify the 
flood prone areas in Kerala. 
17  Commissioned by the Kerala Government, the Kerala PDNA was undertaken jointly by experts from 
the line Ministries and the United Nations. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
14 
the citizens about hazards and environmental conservation, these maps should 
ideally be prepared at a scale of 1:10,000 or 1:5000 if they are to be useful for 
planning and policy making. Accordingly, t he contention raised in the Exit 
Conference that this map is sufficient for planning is not acceptable because 
the map does not meet the criteria set by CWC and also since NCESS, which 
created this map had informed Audit that the map is insufficient. 
Recommendation 2.4: Government of Kerala may take steps to ensure 
availability of large scale flood hazard maps conforming to CWC criteria 
which would facilitate planning, policy making and prioritisation of flood 
mitigation activities by identifying flood risk areas. 
Capacity Building in Disaster Management 
2.5. Implementation of Civil Defence in the State 
The Disaster Management Act envisages requisite institutional mechanisms to 
promote general education, awareness and community train ing in regard to 
forms of disasters to which different parts of the State are vulnerable and the 
measures that may be taken by such community to prevent the disaster, 
mitigate and respond to such disaster.  In order to create a mechanism for 
efficient and e ffective response to any natural or manmade emergency, a 
sizable trained volunteer force of emergency responders at the grassroot s level 
needs to be made available as standby in all vulnerable urban/  rural areas 18. 
Accordingly, amendment was enacted (2009) to the definition of “civil 
defence” contained in the Civil Defence Act,  1968 so as to bring within its 
scope the measures which may be taken for the purpose of disaster 
management during, at, before, or after any disaster. Since the community was 
invariably the first responder to any disaster, adequate awareness and 
preparedness of the community to respond to any such emergency/  disaster 
would be very crucial in mitigating the damage and suffering.  
In Kerala, the post of Director of Fire Force was redesignated (October 1980) 
as the Commandant General (Home Guards, Civil Defence and Fire Services ). 
However, Civil Defence was officially formed in the State under the Fire and 
Rescue Services Department only on 30 August 2019. Consequently, the 
implementation of three schemes launched by G oI during 2009 -2016 to 
strengthen civil defence in the State viz., ‘Revamping of Civil Defence’,  
‘Mainstreaming Civil Defence in Disaster Risk Reduction’ and the ‘ Aapda 
Mitra’ scheme suffered setbacks.  An amount of `4.43 crore was released by 
GoI during the period towards implementation of these schemes, which could 
not also be effectively utilised. Audit noticed that due to non -formation of 
Civil Defence in the State, little headway was made in implementing these 
schemes meant to ensure the availa bility of an active volunteer -based 
 
18  Suggestions of K . M. Singh (Member NDMA) Committee to integrate Civil Defence in Disaster  
Management framework, endorsed by Home Minister’s Civil Defence Advisory Committee in April 
2008 

 
 
 15 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
emergency force for disaster mitigation. The following three paragraphs 
highlight the issues observed by Audit. 
2.5.1. Unfruitful expenditure of `1.54 crore on construction of Civil 
Defence Training Institute 
Audit observed that under 
the scheme ‘Revamping of 
Civil Defence’ launched by 
GoI in July 2009, `154.20 
lakh out of `195 lakh 
received from GoI was 
expended on construction of 
a Civil Defence Training 
Institute (CDTI) at Viyyur in 
Thrissur district. Joint field 
verification (October 2019) 
revealed that though the 
building, completed in 2014, 
was envisaged to function as a State level residential training institute for civil 
defence under the Fire and Rescue Services Department  (F&RSD), it was 
being utilised  as a camping place for members of the National Disaster 
Response Force (NDRF), with the classrooms and dormitory converted as 
barracks. Audit observed 
that the building which was 
in possession of Revenue 
Department till April 2018, 
was handed over to F&RSD 
on the pre-condition that the 
NDRF battalion was to be 
accommodated in the 
building until a new own 
building was identified. 
Joint verification (October 
2019) revealed that 
possession of only a small 
room had in fact been 
transferred to the Director 
of CDTI, which was used for office functioning, with the rest of the building  
continuing to be occupied by NDRF. The residential training centre to impart 
training to civil defence volunteers has not become functional despite passage 
of over five years.  Had th e State rolled out Civil Defence, selected the 
volunteers and trained them in a timely manner, the CDTI building could have 
catered to the envisaged objective. 
Figure 2.2: CDTI being used as barracks for NDRF battalion 
and materials being stored in lobby 
29 October 2019, CDTI, Viyyur, Thrissur District 
Photo taken by Audit party, attested by Director, Fire and 
Rescue Services Academy 
Figure 2.1: Civil Defence Training Institute Building 
29 October 2019, CDTI, Viyyur, Thrissur District 
Photo taken by Audit party, attested by Director, Fire and 
Rescue Services Academy 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
16 
Audit had previously pointed out 19 the non-functioning of CDTI due to delay 
in creation of posts  and purchase of equipment, to which GoK replied 
(November 2016) that the responsibility to activate CDTI has been entrusted 
to KSDMA. The reply offered by GoK in November 2020 was that the 
temporary pre-positioning of NDRF team in the building facilitated  judicious 
utilisation of an otherwise idling building. It was also stated that there was 
adequate facility in the Fire and Rescue Service s Academy to provide captive 
training to Civil Defence Volunteers and in -service men. The reply is contrary 
to facts as it was the responsibility of KSDMA to activate CDTI building so as 
to cater to the dedicated purpose of a full -time residential training institute for 
civil defence, which remains unrealised. Further, DG, F&RS stated (December 
2020) that as a variety of training schedules 20 were being conducted in Fire 
and Rescue Services Academy, it was essential to allot maximum space for the 
residential training of civil defence volunteers at CDTI. On pointing this out in 
Exit Conference (January 2021), GoK stated that  though allocations were 
made for construction of CDTI and DG, F&RS designated as Director General 
(Civil Defence), Civil Defence was not notified in the State until 2019. For 
this reason, even if a building was constructed there, no training would have 
happened and the scenario of State’s flood response would not have changed. 
The reply reveals the low priority given to the formation of Civil Defence and 
for equipping the volunteers as emergency responders in crisis situations. 
Despite designating Director of Fire Force  as the Head of Civil Defence as 
early as in October 1980, the State was left without any civil defence 
volunteers for the past 38 years.  
During the Exit Conference, Audit was informed that, now that a separate 
piece of land has been allotted to NDRF for constructing their own building 
and Civil Defence has been formed, NDRF would move out soon.  In view of 
the idling of existing infrastructure provided for training in the past years and 
construction of new building not having commenced  yet, the possibility of 
NDRF moving out and the entire building of CDTI being utilised for Civil 
Defence related trainings in the near future remains doubtful. 
2.5.2. Mainstreaming Civil Defence in Disaster Risk Reduction 
Government of India scheme ‘Mainstreaming Civil Defence in Disaster Risk 
Reduction’ for strengthening the Civil Defence setup in the Most Vulnerable 
Districts/ Multi Hazard Districts envisaged creating a response system based 
on minimum permanent staff backed by skilled volunteers. Six 21 districts in 
Kerala were classified (2014) as ‘Most Vulnerable’. Ministry of Home Affairs 
released (November 2014) `225.52 lakh as first instalment of grant -in-aid to 
the State for the financial year 2014-15. This included `198.52 lakh for the six 
most vulnerable  districts and `27 lakh to the CDTI envisaged under the 
scheme ‘Revamping of Civil Defence’. Audit observed that the entire `225.52 
 
19 Paragraph 4.4.6.1 of the Audit Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year 
ended March 2016, currently under consideration of PAC. 
20 Station officer course, Driver Mechanic course, Fireman course etc. 
21 Ernakulam, Kannur, Kottayam, Kozhikode, Thiruvananthapuram and Wayanad 

 
 
 17 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
lakh received in November 2014 was retained by the Finance Department until 
March 2017, when it was provided in the budget as Supplementary demand for 
grants, as proposed by the Revenue Department . As the Director General of 
Civil Defence did not receive the money, the scheme could not be 
implemented and the amount was resumed by GoK in June 2017 without any 
further disbursement. Thus, GoI assistance of `225.52 lakh for strengthening 
of Civil Defence set up in the State could not be utili sed for the envisaged 
purpose. GoK replied that a request has been made (November 2020) to Home 
Department to revalidate the amount for impleme ntation of the scheme by 
F&RSD. 
2.5.3. Slow pace of implementation of Aapda Mitra Scheme 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) approved ‘Aapda Mitra’, a 
100 per cent  Centrally Sponsored Scheme, with focus on training 6000 
community volunteers in disaster response in the 30 most flood prone districts 
(200 volunteers per district) in India. This was to bestow them with skills 
needed to respond to the immediate needs of their community and undertake 
basic relief and rescue tasks during emergency situations such as floods, flash 
floods and urban flooding. In Kerala, Kottayam district was selected for 
implementation of the scheme. Consequent upon signing (November 2016) of 
MOU of two -year validity with KSDMA, NDMA released `22.70 lakh 22 to 
GoK in February 2017. 
Audit observed that while more than half of the beneficiary States23 had 
completed the selection of volunteers and w ere about to commence training 
for volunteers in 2017 itself, KSDMA forwarded the list of selected volunteers 
from Kottayam district to NDMA only in February 2018.  Verification of 
records at F&RSD and KSDMA showed that though the allotted funds were 
resumed in February 2018, GoK released the amount subsequently to KSDMA 
in June 2018 and KSDMA arranged training to 200 enlisted volunteers from 
Kottayam from October 2018 to March 2019. Thus, the services of the 
envisaged trained team of community volunteers were not available during the 
floods of August 2018. 
Audit further observed that the emergency responder kits 24 to the trained 
volunteers were distributed by KSDMA only in December 2019, one year 
after the completion of training of the first batch of volunteers. Purchase of 
emergency stockpile25 was still under process (May 2020). 
 
22 50 per cent of the sanctioned amount 
23 Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghala ya, Nagaland, 
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Bihar, Uttarakhand and West Bengal as per the information provided 
by NDMA in March 2021. 
24 Kits comprising Life Jacket, Solar Torch, Safety gloves, Nylon rope, Pocket knife, First Aid Kit, 
Rain coat, Water bottle etc. 
25 Stockpile consisting of Personal Floatation device, Torch, Safety Gloves, Rope, Lifebuoy, Oars, 
Paddles, Anchors, Bailer, OB Motor, Fire Extinguisher, Emergency Spotlight, Stretcher, Tool Kit, 
Walkie-talkie, first aid kits, GPS sets etc. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
18 
The Department of Revenue and Disaster Management replied (November 
2020) that 
• While the project was launched in November 2016, the modalities for 
implementation were briefed in the National Technical Committee 
meeting on 0 1 April 2017 following which the first meeting of the 
State Project Steering Committee was held on 31 August 2017 in 
which public notice for the scheme was handed over to DDMA 
Kottayam for circulation. The scheme was formally inaugurated on 
13 October 2017.  
• Owing to adverse ways and means position, the first instalment of 
`22.70 lakh allotted to KSDMA vide GO dated 14 March 2018 was 
not released and after allotment in 2018 -19, the amount was finally 
credited to KSDMA account in June 2018, after which alone  
activities such as printing of training modules, training of volunteers 
etc. could be taken up. 
• Fire and Rescue Services Academy was approved as the training 
Academy by NDMA on 08 June 2018. 
• The catastrophic floods of August 2018 rendered the entire 
operational machinery out of gear and KSDMA being in the vanguard 
of the Disaster Management activities could not provide attention to 
other matters.  
• The second instalment of `22.70 lakh was allot ted vide GO dated 21  
December 2019. Despite the delay in receipt of funds, KSDMA 
managed to supply the emergency responder kits in December 2019 
itself. 
• GeM portal through which emergency responder kits were purchased 
had many glitches and required frequen t communication with GeM 
portal managers for rectification. Samples of each item had to be 
purchased first to get assurance of quality and this took time. 
• KSDMA has organised various programmes to ensure continued 
participation of volunteers in the mission  ‘towards safe state’. 
Exposure and orientation programme (29 January 2019), training on 
Civil Defence (10 December 2019), annual refresher training for 
volunteers (09 to 12 July 2019), meeting with Unit Coordinators (13  
November 2019) were conducted. 
• The State is considered by NDMA as a model State in the 
implementation of Aapda Mitra scheme. NDMA decided to conduct 
the national review meeting in Kerala in 2020 to demonstrate the 
achievements of Aapda Mitra in Kottayam district. 
• Further, Government of India has extended (July 2020) the project till 
31 December 2020 as most States could not complete the programme 
owing to local implementation difficulties. 

 
 
 19 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
• Training by Fire and Rescue Services Academy commenced on 22  
October 2018 after the floods of 2018 (mea nt for 200 volunteers in 
batches of 25) on specific dates. Many volunteers dropped out citing 
personal and livelihood reasons, captive nature and length of training 
etc. Aapda Mitra being a voluntary capacity building programme, 
there is no legal provision  to demand work from volunteers who 
render work voluntarily based on request. 
• The programme was successful in Kerala as owing to the pragmatic 
approach of NDMA, KSDMA and the DDMA, they were able to 
impart a spirit of voluntarism in the participants. 
During the Exit Conference, it was added that the scheme deadline has been 
extended to March 2021. 
Audit noticed that subsequent to signing of MoU of Aapda Mitra Scheme in 
November 2016, procedural delay at various individual stages 26 resulted in 
distribution o f emergency responder kits in December 2019, one year after 
completion (October 2018) of training of the first batch of Aapda Mitra 
volunteers. Thus, the disaster response skills acquired by the volunteers were 
yet to be supplemented with vital equipment f or basic relief and rescue and 
coordinated under the Aapda Mitra scheme for the benefit of the local 
community, despite another severe flood having affected the State in August 
2019. The justification of Government that the extension of the project (July 
2020) till 31  December 2020 (and subsequently till 31  March 2021) by GoI 
due to the fact that most States could not complete the programme owing to 
local implementation difficulties is not acceptable as a reason for justifying the 
slow pace in Kerala which has a higher degree of disaster risks as compared to 
the rest of the country (Paragraph 1.2 of Kerala State Disaster Management 
Plan 2016) and more so when there was only one selected district (Kottayam) 
as part of the programme. Further, it was seen that the list forwarded to 
KSDMA was taken directly from the Community Rescue Volunteer Scheme 
list in Kottayam by the DDMA. Being readily available, this could have been 
forwarded much earlier than February 2018 to NDMA, had the level of 
preparedness been higher. 
Though it was stated that the F&RS Academy was approved by NDMA as the 
training Academy in June 2018 only, as pointed out in Paragraph 2.5.1 of this 
report, the State had a Civil Defence Training Institute right from 2014, which 
if utilised as a dedica ted training institute, could have catered to the training 
needs of Aapda Mitra too. Further, DG (F&RS), had earlier requested 
(November 2017) Revenue and Disaster Management Department to handover 
the CDTI building and premises urgently for conducting tra inings of Aapda 
Mitra/ Community Rescue Volunteer Scheme. 
 
26  First m eeting of the State Project Steering Committee took place five months after the National 
Technical Committee meeting, hence request for list of volunteers was sent only in August 2017 by 
KSDMA, list forwarded by DDMA Kottayam received by KSDMA in November 2017 was 
forwarded to NDMA only in February 2018, release of funds by GoK in June 2018 and of second 
instalment by December 2019. 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
20 
Though the reply mentioned (November 2020) that the State has been 
considered by NDMA as a model State in the implementation of Aapda Mitra 
scheme and that NDMA even decided to conduct the national review meeting 
in Kerala in 2020 to demonstrate the achievements in Kottayam district, Audit 
noted that the document forwarded in support of the ‘national review’ meeting 
in fact pertained to a ‘regional assessment’ workshop and the contention of 
Kerala being a model State in Aapda Mitra was not supported by documents. 
Recommendation 2.5: The State may initiate action to operationalise the 
Civil Defence Training Institute for the fulfilment of the intended objective 
of training and equipping sufficient number of Civil Defence volunteers. 
Civil Defence needs to be strengthened in the State through ensuring 
a) adequacy of communication facilities and trained volunteers including 
availability of licensed HAM radio operators, and b) availability o f 
emergency responder kits to enable timely and effective rescue operation 
during emergency/ disaster situations.  
2.6. Revamping of Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Academy 
The Director General (Fire and Rescue Services) (DG) requested Government 
of Kerala (Aug ust 2016) to allot `98.25 lakh 27 from the savings of the 13 th 
Finance Commission grant -in-aid for revamping F&RS Academy at Viyyur, 
Thrissur. The proposal included procurement of vital equipment for rescue 
operation during flood such as Self -Contained Unde rwater Breathing 
Apparatus (SCUBA) Set ( `26 lakh), Breathing Air Compressor ( ` six lakh) 
etc. Accordingly, GoK accorded Administrative sanction (September 2016) 
for the proposal and the funds were credited by KSDMA to the treasury 
account of DG (F&RS) in March 2017. 
Audit observed from scrutiny of records at the F&RSD that the funds 
remained idle with F&RSD until March 2018, when these were resumed by 
GoK. Further examination revealed that though tenders were invited (May -
June 2018) by F&RSD for the purchas e of requisite items in 2018 -19, these 
had to be cancelled (August 2018) as the funds were already revoked by GoK. 
Nevertheless, even without obtaining Utili sation Certificates from F&RSD, 
KSDMA recorded the entire amount resumed by G oK as expenditure for the 
year 2016-17. 
Joint physical verification conducted by Audit along with Assistant Director, 
F&RS Academy (October 2019) revealed severe shortage of equipment, 
vehicles and infrastructural facilities (Appendix 2.2) in the Academy. With 
the sparse facili ties available in the F&RS Academy, Audit observed that the 
3173 trainees who enrolled in Academy during the audit period (2014 -19) 
could not get the benefit of quality training in simulated environment to equip 
them both mentally and physically for quick response during a crisis situation.  
 
27  The amount was from fund provided by 13 th FC during the period 2010 -11 to 2014 -15 of which 
`103.97 lakh remained unutili sed with KSDMA. The remaining amount of `5.72 lakh in the fund 
balance of KSDMA was approved by GoK (March 2017) to be utili sed for making the SEOC Green 
Energy Compliant. 

 
 
 21 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
GoK replied (November 2020) that KSDMA had to book the amount as outgo 
of funds since the amount allotted and released by Government under the 
supplementary grant was in turn released to F&RSD and the same has 
subsequently been resumed by Government. The efforts made by the 
department to procure items in 2018 -19 fell through because the Government 
did not release the resumed funds mainly due to the adverse ways and means 
position arising from the floods of 2018. GoK also  referred to the audit 
contention that had the purchases been effected the material could have been 
utilised for training purposes as hypothetical. The reply is not justifiable as 
KSDMA should have monitored more closely the utilisation of funds released 
by it. GoK informed in the Exit conference (January 2021) that the proposal to 
re-credit the funds to F&RSD and revalidate it for the purposes for which 
allotted or return the funds to KSDMA for capacity building has been rejected 
(July 2020) by the State Executive Committee. 
Audit notes that the shortage of equipment at the Academy was also 
accompanied by shortages in Fire and Rescue stations and hence needs 
immediate attention as Fire and Rescue Services Department, established in 
1962 is the dedicated force under Government of Kerala equipped for rescue 
services during disasters.  In exercise of the powers vested in the Disaster 
Management Act 2005, KSDMA proposes the annual fund requireme nts to 
Government of Kerala for Disaster Management . Analysis of records relating 
to formulation of Annual plans of KSDMA from 2016-17 onwards  showed 
that though regular provision of funds to F&RSD was made in the annual plan 
proposals of KSDMA  and `25 cro re allotted earlier28 for the purchase of 
modern rescue equipment, the equipment in the test-checked fire stations was 
not adequate to meet the unprecedented flood situation in 2018. The fire 
station at Chengannur, for instance, one of the worst hit areas during 2018 
flood did not possess Rubber Dinghy boats, speed fibre boats or sc uba sets. 
Rubber dinghy boats from Tamil Nadu and Odisha  had to be depended upon . 
No high beam lights were available for night rescue operations . 
Communication devices such as HAM radios were not seen utilised effectively 
in test-checked districts.  
Audit observed that urgent attention needs to be given to reviewing 
availability of equipment in possession of the Academy and fire stations across 
the State. 
Recommendation 2.6: Priority needs to be given to review the adequacy  of 
equipment, vehicles and infrastructural facilities in the Fire and Rescue 
Services Academy as well as in Fire and Rescue stations so that the GoK’s 
dedicated force for rescue service s may be adequately equipped  to handle 
any flood or other disaster situation. 
  
 
28  between 2009-10 and 2012-13 

 
 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
22 
2.7. Non-functioning of Virtual Cadre for Disaster Management 
The Kerala State Disaster Management Plan (KSDMP) approved (September 
2016) by Government of Kerala with its focus on d isaster risk reduction in the 
State, envisaged formation of a Virtual Cadre for Disaster Management. The 
Virtual Cadre would principally be 15 selected individuals (one from each 
district and one at the State level) from each department, with at least 20 y ears 
or more of service left. The members of this Virtual Cadre would be the 
departmental nodal officers responsible for liaising and coordinating with 
KSDMA and DDMAs in disaster management. It was envisaged that the 
disaster-specific nodal departments th rough Virtual Cadre would also work in 
tandem with the State Emergency Operation s Centre (SEOC) and District 
Emergency Operations Centres (DEOC) for ensuring coordinated response to 
disastrous events. 
Departments were to intimate to KSDMA, the names of mem bers nominated 
to the Virtual Cadre. State Government was to issue an Executive order under 
Section 16 29 of the DM Act, 2005 formali sing30 the Virtual Cadre once the 
selection list was approved by the State Executive Committee (SEC). Audit 
observed the following; 
• Consequent upon the formulation of KSDMP in September 2016, 
GoK issued (November 2017 and February 2018 31) orders instructing 
Heads of 26 Departments to furnish details of officials to be included 
in the Virtual cadre to KSDMA before 31 December 2017.  Eight32 
Departments forwarded (between November 2017 and May 2018) the 
lists of officials to be included in the Virtual Cadre of disaster 
management. The information furnished by five 33 out of the eight 
Departments was not in consonance with  the criteria stipulated in the 
Government order with reference to educational qualification, date of 
entry in service and years of service left. Though the data w ere 
returned to the departments seeking rectification, no further response 
was obtained from the departments.  
• KSDMA did not take up  with SEC,  the matter of approval of the 
selection lists of the three remaining departments. Consequently, 
GoK did not issue executive orders under Section 16 of Disaster 
Management Act, 2005 for formalising the Virtual Cadre. 
 
29 The State Government shall provide the State Authority with such officers, consultants and 
employees, as it considers necessary, for carrying out the functions of the State Authority 
30  Paragraph 5.3 of State Disaster Management Plan 
31  Order was issued for including one more Department. 
32 i) Commissionerate of Land Revenue, ii) Public Works Buildings, iii) Directorate of Panchayat, iv) 
Directorate of Health Services, v) Directorate of Mining and Geology, vi) Directorate of Groun d 
Water Department, vii) Directorate of Soil Survey and Soil Conservation and viii) CE Irrigation and 
Administration 
33 i) Directorate of Panchayat, ii) Directorate of Health Services, iii) Directorate of Mining and 
Geology, iv) Directorate of Soil Survey a nd Soil Conservation and v) CE Irrigation and 
Administration 

 
 
 23 
Chapter II – Planning and capacity building  
Government cited (November 2020) insufficient allotment of funds and 
difficulty in enrolment to a voluntary and non -remunerative service as hurdles 
in implementation of the scheme and stated that 96 officers from eight 
departments have been initi ally provided training and inducted and that more 
personnel are expected to be inducted subject to availability of funds and 
willingness of officers. 
To the specific question of why lists of officials of the three  Departments 
mentioned above were not prese nted to SEC and Executive orders issued 
formalising the cadre, Member Secretary KSDMA replied in the Exit 
Conference (January 202 1) that a prudent examination was required before 
finalising the cadre.  
Audit is of the view that considering the envisaged role of the Virtual Cadre in 
disaster risk reduction through effective liaising and coordination with 
KSDMA/ DDMAs and SEOC/  DEOCs, it is imperative that the State gives 
attention to  operationalise effectively the Virtual Cadre across all the 
departments at the earliest. Since the State Government was to issue an 
Executive order under Section 16 of the DM Act, 2005 formali sing the Virtual 
Cadre once the selection list was approved by the State Executive Committee, 
non-approval of a selection list would in effect be reflective of the relative low 
priority being given to implementation of this item in the State’s Disaster 
Management Plan.  Since the Kerala State Disaster Management Authority 
currently functions with only 2734 full time employees , the role that could be 
potentially played by an active Virtual Cadre during disasters cannot be 
underestimated.  
Recommendation 2.7: Virtual Cadre needs to be formalised and 
strengthened in the State so that the disaster -specific nodal departments 
could work in tandem with the State/ District Emergency Operations Centres 
through the cadre, for ensuring coordinated response to disastrous events.
 
34  Position as in March 2019 

 
 
  
A u g u s t  1 0 , 2 0 1 8  
C h e r u t h o n i  D a m ,  I d u k k i  D i s t r i c t 
CHAPTER III 
FLOOD FORECASTING AND RESERVOIR OPERATION 

 
 
  

 
 
 25 
 
 
 
FLOOD FORECASTING AND RESERVOIR OPERATION 
Flood Management  includes planned engineering measures  (structural and 
non-structural) aimed not only at controlling the flood, but also providing 
optimum utilisation of stored surplus water during lean season s. Structural 
measures include multipurpose reservoirs and retarding structures for storage 
of flood waters, channel improvements to increase flood carrying capacity of 
the river, embankments for keeping the water away from flood prone areas, 
improvements in drainage system etc. which have the effec t of restricting the 
movement of flood water into flood plains.  Non-structural measures such as  
flood forecasting and warning, soil conservation, flo od proofing, flood plain 
zoning etc. largely depend upon how accurately the estimation of future stage 
or flow of incoming flood and its time sequence at selected points along the 
river, could be predicted35. 
The devastating floods in Kerala during August 2018 severely affected 13 of 
the 14 districts in the State resulting in huge loss of life and property. Kerala 
received 2,346.60 mm rainfall between 01 June and 19 August 2018, which 
was about 42  per cent higher than the normal rainfall of 1 ,649.50 mm during 
the same period 36. Further, the rainfall over Kerala during June, July and 
August 01 - 19, 2018 was 15  per cent , 18  per cent  and 164  per cent  
respectively above normal (CWC, 2018). As the Performance audit included 
examining technical aspects which required expert support, Indian Institute of 
Science (IISc) Bangalore was engaged as Consultant to  study the Kerala 
floods of August 2018, from a hydrological perspective. The focus of the 
study was the Periyar river basin which covers an area of 5 ,159.71 square 
kilometres. The following paragraphs are the findings of Audit including those 
based on the study undertaken through IISc, Bangalore.  
3.1. Adequacy of rain gauges in Periyar basin 
Rain gauges 37 are instruments used by meteorologists and hydrologists to 
gather and measure the amount of liquid precipitation over an area in a 
predefined period of time. Measurement of rainfall at several critical locations 
in the basin is extremely important because  of the high spatial variability of 
rainfall. The accuracy of rainfall estimation over a region with significant 
spatial variability in rainfall is dependent on distribution of rain gauges in the 
region. Rain gauge density 38, therefore, plays an important role in quantifying 
the rainfall amount over a region.  
 
35  Manual on Flood Forecasting, CWC, 1989 
36  CWC Report, 2018 
37  Rain gauges are also known as udometers, pluviometers, or ombrometers. 
38  Rain gauge density is defined as the ratio of the area of the catchment to the number of rain gauges 
there. 
3 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
26 
An examination of the existing density of IMD rain gauges 39 in the Periyar 
basin with respect to norms stipulated by the Bureau of Indian Standards 40 was 
carried out by IISc, to assess the adequacy of  rain gauges in the basin. Figure 
3.1 shows the locations of the existing rain gauges and flow gauges in the 
basin. 
Figure 3.1: Locations of existing rain gauges and flow gauges in the Periyar basin (2019)  
(Source: IMD, CWC and Irrigation Department) 
The rain gauge density as recommended by BIS code (IS 4987 :1994) is given 
in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Recommended minimum rain gauge density 
Region type Rain gauge density 
(sq. km per gauge) 
Plains 500 
Regions with average elevation of 1000 m above MSL 250-400 
Hilly areas with heavy rainfall 150 
(Source: BIS Code, IS 4987:1994) 
Periyar basin is characteri sed largely as a hilly terrain upto Neeleswaram and 
receives heavy rainfall. Therefore, according to the IS 4987:1994 one rain 
gauge per 150 sq. km is required in the basin, up to Neeleswaram (Region type 
III), whereas, the area downstream of Neeleswaram lie s in the Region type I 
 
39  IS 5225:1992 provides that the Director General of Meteorology, New Delhi has been designated the 
sole authority for ensuring the correct rainfall registration in India. 
40  IS 4987:1994 Recommendations for establishing network of rain gauge stations. 


 
 
 27 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
(Plains) and therefore requires one rain gauge per 500 sq. km. The Periyar 
basin is divided into a number of sub -catchments. The details of additional 
rain gauges needed in the catchments are given in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Number of IMD rain gauges in place and additional numbers required 
Catchment Area  
(sq.km) 
Density of rain 
gauge required 
(sq.km/gauge) 
Minimum number 
of rain gauges 
required 
Existing number 
of IMD rain 
gauges 
Additional 
numbers 
required 
Start of the basin 
boundary till Vandiperiyar 737.61 150 5 0 5 
Idukki 569.55 150 4 1 3 
Idamalayar 469.49 150 4 0 4 
Free Periyar (downstream of 
Idukki and Idamalayar till 
Neeleswaram) 
2367.22 150 16 2 14 
Downstream of Neeleswaram 1015.83 500 3 3 0 
Total 5159.71  32 6 26 
(Source: Kerala Floods 2018, Report of IISc, Bangalore, July 2020) 
It is therefore evident that against the recommended minimum requirement of 
32 rain gauges in the Periyar basin, only six rain gauges were in place. Audit 
observes that the shortfall of 26 rain gauges in the basin resulted in lack of real 
time data on spatially distributed rainfall which could have an adverse impact 
on flood forecasting and alleviation measures.  
Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department, GoK, stated 
(November 2020) that the Irrigation D epartment maintains 10 meteorological 
stations with rain gauges  in Periyar basin . Audit was also informed that 
installation of 18 Tipping Bucket Rain Gauges w as in progress and 
Government intend s to develop a full -fledged inflow forecasting and flood 
early warning system National Hydrology Project (NHP).  
Though agencies like KSEBL, Irrigation Department etc. maintain rain gauges 
in Periyar basin, IMD informed (February 2021) Audit that only data 
generated by those gauge stations conforming to IMD standards (measured at 
0830 hours IST daily and re ported to IMD) is utili sed by IMD.  Since data 
from Irrigation Department gauges were not utili sed by IMD, they were not 
considered while  assessing the adequacy of rain gauges in Periyar basin. 
However, as the already installed/ proposed to be installed rai n gauges under 
the NHP could also be useful for increasing the accuracy of rainfall estimation 
by IMD, the Irrigation Department may examine the feasibility of sharing of 
data with the IMD for the purpose by ensuring that the  gauges conform to 
IMD specifications. This needs to be prioriti sed as irregular distribution of 
rain gauges could create an information gap in time and space , ultimately 
hindering decision -making.  
The Government further replied (April 2021) that the equipment for installing 
18 Tipping Bucket Rain Gauges in Periyar basin under National Hydrology 
Project have IMD specifications and therefore, the data generated by TBRGs 
of Irrigation Department could be used by the IMD. Ni ne of these have 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
28 
already been installed and the remaining nine TBRGs will be installed, 
commissioned and made fully operational by 31 May 2021. 
Recommendation 3.1: Adequacy of the number of rain gauges capable of 
generating real time data in order to ensu re accuracy of rainfall estimation 
may be ensured. System of sharing data from rain gauges with IMD must be 
put in place at the earliest. 
3.2. Adequacy of flow gauge density in Periyar Basin 
Flow gauge41 density helps to determine the minimum network of flow ga uges 
required to avoid serious deficiencies in developing and managing water 
resources42. Adequate flow gauge density is especially important in flood 
prone regions to provide useful information on flow depth/  discharge to help 
in operational decisions.  
Audit observed that against the requirement of three flow gauges in the 
5,159.71 sq.km. Periyar basin as per W orld Meteorological Organisation 2008 
norms (one flow gauge per 1 ,875 sq.km. hilly terrain), five flow gauges were 
installed in the Periyar basin by CWC and the Irrigation Department, of which 
three gauges at Kalady, Mangalapuzha and Marthandavarma are maintained 
by the Irrigation Department and the other two gauges at N eeleswaram and 
Vandiperiyar are maintained by the CWC. Thus, the existing number of flow 
gauges in the basin as a whole, was adequate. However, there was shortfall of 
one flow gauge in the free Periyar catchment, comprising of 2,367.22 sq.km of 
hilly terrain. Thus, in addition to the Neeleswaram flow gauge, an additional 
flow gauge needs to be located just upstream of Bhoothathankettu barrage 43, 
which is a major control point in the basin, receiving flows from a large free 
catchment (contributed by Perinjan kutty, Pooyamkutty and Muthirapuzha 
tributaries and overflows/  spills from Idukki, Lower Periyar and Idamalayar  
dams). 
Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department, GoK replied 
(November 2020 and April 2021 ) that in addition to the three gauges i n the 
Periyar basin, it is proposed to install three44 Radar Level Sensors (RLS) under 
NHP. Once it is fully operational, it is expected that heavy flow from upper 
catchment of Bhoothathankettu could be measured and observed on real time 
basis. Chief Engineer, Irrigation Design and Research Board (IDRB ) has 
assured that the RLS, which will provide real time data in every 15 minutes, 
will be commissioned and made fully operational by 31 May 2021. 
3.3. Flood Forecasting Stations not set up in the State 
The activity of flood forecasting includes level forecasting and inflow 
forecasting. Level forecasts are issued once the water level in a river touches  a 
 
41  Flow gauge is a device that measures flow rate of a liquid, gas or steam. It could be measuring, for 
instance, the velocity of fluid over a known area. 
42  Source: World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), 2008. 
43  IISc Report on Kerala Floods by P P Mujumdar et al. 
44  at Bhoothathankettu, Malayattoor and Neriyamangalam 

 
 
 29 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
pre-defined warning level (usually one meter below the danger level but 
dependent on threat perception of the particular location). The level forecasts 
help user agenc ies in deciding mitigating measures like evacuation of people 
and shifting people and their movable properties to safer locations. Inflow 
forecasting is used by various dam authorities in optimum operation of 
reservoirs for safe passage of flood downstream  as well as to ensure adequate 
storage in the reservoirs for meeting demand during non-monsoon period. 
Audit noticed that CWC requested (November 2011) Government of Kerala to 
provide the list of reservoirs which required inflow forecasting stations and list 
of cities/ towns for flood forecasting purpose . CWC confirmed (August 2019) 
to Audit that GoK  did not furnish the details and hence, no Flood Forecasting 
Stations (FFS) were set up by the CWC  in th e State. This was des pite 275 
flood forecasting stations having been set up by CWC across the country by 
the year 2017. 
The Department of Water Resources (WRD) replied (November 2020) that the 
Irrigation Department had to address specific technical matters such as the 
technology of flood forecasting proposed to be used, usability of the system in 
steep, flashy rivers in Kerala. The viability of an effective forecasting system 
suitable for peculiar terrain of Kerala was discussed with CWC officials on 
several occasions.  
Audit h owever noticed that subsequent to floods of 2018, three level 
forecasting stations and two inflow forecasting stations were installed (2019) 
by CWC in the State indicating the suitability of the FFS in the State.  
The Department informed (April 2021) that the list of flood prone cities/  
towns requiring flood forecasting stations and also the list of reservoirs, which 
need inflow forecasting has been forwarded on 17 April 2021. Government is 
on course to develop a full -fledged inflow forecasting and a flood early 
warning system under National Hydrology Project operational in all river 
basins in Kerala for real time monitoring by installing 99 Tipping bucket Rain 
Gauges, 56 Radar Level Sensors and 13 Automatic Weather Stations. 
Equipment including data loggers  have been procured and 33 TBRGs, one 
RLS and seven AWS installed and the remaining would be installed by 31 
May 2021. 
The failure of GoK to provide list of reservoirs and cities/towns to CWC 
resulted in non -installation of FFS in the State and resultant d eprival of data 
which State could have utilised for flood forecasting purpose.  
3.4. Non-completion of a project intended for obtaining data 
required for flood management 
The project Modernisation of Hydrology Information System implemented by 
Irrigation Department, GoK involved supply, installation and commissioning 
of Real Time Data Acquisition System (RTDAS) capable of delivering real 
time data on rainfall, streamflow etc. and assuring data retrieval for a specific 
period without interruption. The objective  of RTDAS was to provide reliable 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
30 
hydrological information required for flood/  drought management, water 
availability and quality management, streamflow forecasting, integrated 
operations of reservoirs etc. 
Based on competitive tender, the work was awarded (April 2014) to the lowest 
bidder45 for `1.34 crore with time of completion  (TOC) as three months (July 
2014). The TOC was initially extended up to 25 October 2014 based on the 
supplier’s request . Citing delay in installation of server (to be done by 
Irrigation Department), it was extended upto 30 September 2016. No further 
extension of time was provided and `30.19 lakh being the cost of 14 Radar 
Level Sensors (RLS) was paid to the firm in June 2016. 
Audit observed that though all the equipment were installed , many of them 
were not functional (status as of August 2020) as detailed in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Status of Real Time Data Acquisition System 
Sl. 
No. Item of work Quantity  Unit rate Total quoted 
amount 
Status of execution (as of 
August 2020) 
1 
Supply, installation, testing and commissioning of 
Tipping Bucket Rain Gauges (TBRG) with data 
collection platform consisting of data logger 
8 79,080 6,32,640 
Data from one TBRG was 
not being received in the 
central server. 
2 
Supply, installation, testing and commissioning of 
Automatic Weather Stations (AWS) with data 
collection platform consisting of data logger 
19 2,65,300 50,40,700 
Data from nine AWS was  
not being received in the 
central server. 
3 
Supply, installation, testing and commissioning of 
Radar Level Sensors (RLS) in river gauging stations 
with data collection platform consisting of data 
logger 
18 2,75,100 49,51,800 
Data from five RLSs was  
not being received in the 
central server.  
4 
Installation and commissioning of ground station 
consisting of telemetry GSM/GPRS transmission 
system and software to evaluate streams of data  
1 2,25,000 2,25,000 Commissioned in June 
2019 
Total (less discount offered two per cent)   1,06,33,137  
AMC for five years after two years’ warranty period   27,64,200  
Grand total   1,33,97,33746  
(Source: Data furnished by the Irrigation Department) 
The Department had also noticed errors in data received from certa in 
equipment and had intimated A udit that the process of verifying the reliability 
of data by comparing it with manual data was underway. Audit noticed that 
though more than five years hav e elapsed, the objective of obtaining real time 
hydrological data useful for improving flood management c apabilities 
remained unachieved. 
Government replied  (November 2020  and April 2021 ) that even though 
instruments with IMD calibration and certification were installed, the 
instruments failed to deliver reliable data on real time basis. Most of the data 
could not be retrieved through data logger and showed variations when 
compared with manual reading. Despite Irrigation Department’s constant 
follow-up, the firm did not attend to the same. Notice to the firm was issued on 
16 April 2021 for termination of contr act and the concerned Chief Engineer 
 
45  M/s. Astra Microwave Products Ltd, Hyderabad 
46   The firm had quoted 11.82 and 54.16 per cent  less tha n the estimated amount for equipment and 
AMC respectively. 

 
 
 31 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
has been directed to take steps to blacklist the firm for breach of agreement 
conditions. 
3.5. Inadequacies of State Emergency Operations Centre 
3.5.1. Non-availability of data required for the functioning of Decision 
Support Syste m established in State Emergency Operation s 
Centre 
The State Emergency Operations Centre (SEOC) is the research and 
technology laboratory of KSDMA and is the State nodal office for the 
collection, compilation and analysis of data received from all Government 
departments and institutions on a no -cost basis. DM Plan 2016 envisaged 
SEOC to be equipped with a full -fledged state -of-the-art IT and 
Communication network with an intelligent Decision Support System (DSS) 
capable of prediction and early warning of ma jor hydro -meteorological 
hazards and support for emergency operation. 
The work of setting up an Information Technology and Communication 
System (IT & CS) in SEOC which includes DSS was awarded (April 2016) to 
Keltron, a State Public Sector Undertaking with  the targeted date for 
completion of work fixed as April 2019. The estimated cost of the project was 
`5.96 crore to be met from the 13 th Finance Commission grant. The work was 
to be completed in three phases. While the first phase involving IT set up, base 
configuration etc. was completed in January 2017, the second phase which 
involved development of Decision Support System, Standard Operating 
Procedure etc. was completed in October 2017. The third phase viz., scaling to 
the new SEOC building and continued handholding remains to be completed 
(March 2020). KSDMA stated that 85 per cent of the project was completed 
and payment of `4.54 crore made to Keltron till date (October 2019). The 
target date for completion was extended up to 31 March 2020 at the request of 
Keltron.  
According to the Flood Management Organisation of Central Water 
Commission, flood forecasting requires hydro -meteorological data on real 
time basis at least hourly or sub-hourly for the parameters of rainfall and water 
level. According to the pre -development solution design document prepared 
by M/s. Element Blue 47 for KSDMA, 10 sets of real time data which includes 
rainfall, temperature, humidity etc. were to be provided by KSDMA.  
KSDMA stated (March 20 20) that though the DSS was capable of ingesting 
multiple real time data, KSDMA was unable to enable this part since no real 
time data was provided by IMD, CWC or Geological Survey of India . Audit 
examination of records to ascertain reasons for dearth of r eal time data 
necessary to make the DSS fully operational, revealed the following.  
 
47  M/s. Element Blue prepared the solution design document which describes the system requirement, 
operating environment, system and sub system architecture, files and database design, input format s, 
output lay-outs detailed designs.  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
32 
• None of the 69 manual rain gauges utilised by the Indian 
Meteorological Department (IMD) generate real time data. Real time 
data is obtained only from the seven functional Automatic Weather 
Stations and 10 Automatic Rain Gauges of IMD. 
• The 22 rain gauges installed by KSEBL also do not generate real time 
data. 
• Out of the 39 river gauges operated by Central Water Commission, 
only one generated real time data. However, Audit ob served that 
KSDMA had no access to this data, though CWC was sharing data 
from this telemetric station with the Karnataka State Disaster 
Monitoring Centre. 
• Audit noticed that the DSS was to function on the basis of 10 
available data sources which included, inter alia, weather data source 
(rainfall, temperature, humidity etc.), satellite images and derivatives, 
water data (reservoir water level, river flow data etc.), seismic data 
etc. However, Audit observed that historical data available with 
KSDMA was lim ited to rainfall, temperature, humidity and dry bulb 
temperature (provided by IMD). 
• The Flood Hazard Susceptibility map prepared by NCESS in 2010 
has been configured in the DSS despite it not possessing the 
necessary characteristics of such a map, as point ed out in Paragraph 
2.4 of this Report. Since the DSS looks up in this map for the nearest 
rainfall scenario and identifies the nearest probability scenario from 
the look up library and uses it for identifying critical assets 48 and 
areas needing external a ssistance49, the inadequacies of the map 
would impair the capabilities of the DSS. 
Audit noticed that before commencement of the IT and CS project, the State 
IT department had raised doubts (June 2014) about the availability of data and 
cost involved in collection of data. KSDMA clarified  (July 2014) that weather 
data ( near real time to daily), seismic data (near real time), reservoir data 
(daily digital from KSEBL) and historical data from IMD and Irrigation 
Department (stream flow) were available with KSD MA. Being the nodal 
agency for collection, compilation and analysis of data, it was incumbent upon 
SEOC to ensure availability of required data for prediction and early warning 
of major hydro -meteorological hazards and intelligent support for emergency 
operation. However, as per details furnished to Audit, data presently available 
with SEOC was limited. The absence of real time/  historical data and an 
adequate flood hazard map would impair the functioning of the DSS. 
Department of Revenue and Disaster Manag ement in its reply dated 
(December 2020) stated the following points; 
 
48  critical assets such as schools, hospitals, shelters etc. 
49  Source: Pre-development solution design document. 

 
 
 33 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
• Establishing warning systems and providing disaster alerts are the 
functions of notified Central agencies under the Disaster Management 
Act 2005/ NDM Plan and not of KSEOC. 
• Decision Supp ort System of KSDMA is not for analysing raw data 
and generating alerts. KSDMA’s function is confined to crisis 
management in accordance with the magnitude of an event as 
projected by the notified agencies.  
• KSDMA referred to GOs dated 18 October 2019 and 06 May 2020 as 
examples of KSEOC’s efforts for ensuring real time data. Since 2017, 
it has been engaging with IMD (which has statutory responsibilities 
laid down in NDM Plan) for sourcing real time data. 
• CWC has only one real time monitoring station in  the State. It is the 
responsibility of CWC to have increased the number after assessing 
the hazard potential. Kerala was never identified nationally as a 
priority State for implementation of flood monitoring systems. 
Detailed demands of KSDMA for improvin g flood forecasting was 
placed before CWC (March 2017) and the Rajya Sabha Committee 
on Petitions (30 May to 02 June 2017).  
• One of the fundamental requirements of real time operations is the 
availability of accurate river flow forecasts. The dilemma of pr udent 
inflow forecasting is reflected in the counter affidavit of Government 
of India in WP (C) 2996 of 2018 where CWC has admitted the 
limited scope of riverine flood forecasting systems in Kerala. The 
technology and science are not developed as yet to im plement a 
pragmatic and usable forecasting system in Kerala’s flashy rivers. 
Until these technical bottlenecks are resolved, it is not possible to 
determine the feasibility and usability of inflow forecasting and flood 
forecasting in the rivers of Kerala. Hence, Audit observation that 
KSDMA/ KSEOC should have such data was contested. 
• DSS of KSDMA is a management decision making tool and not 
meant for such analysis.  
• KSDMA possesses data of satellite images, various derivatives such 
as slope, aspect, NDVI, S eismic Catalogue etc. as well as reservoir 
data, together with over 60 geospatial data. KSEOC utili sed the 
available data for providing risk maps to districts50 for enabling crisis 
management. Maps of immediate threat zones due to any opening of 
shutters of Cheruthoni dam of Idukki reservoir overlaid with satellite 
images were provided to DEOCs of Idukki, Thrissur and Ernakulam 
on 28  July 2018 based on the inundation history of 2013 and rapid 
assessment of available satellite images.  
 
50  by email with maps dated 28.07.2018 from KSEOC to DEOC 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
34 
• The Flood Susceptibility Map of Kerala is accurate enough for all 
practical purposes and can be used for DM preparedness till such time 
as CWC is able to provide large scale flood prone area maps.  
• KSDMA was in receipt of daily rainfall data from IMD. Seis mic data 
was available real time during the period from KSEB - KSDMA joint 
project. Reservoir data of KSEBL reservoirs was available in digital 
format from KSEBL as well as historic data from IMD, Irrigation 
department and Ground Water department. Inadequac y of real time 
monitoring systems of Central agencies is a reason for KSEOC 
developing a system with futuristic data management possibility. 
Audit observes that the DM Plan 2016 envisaged SEOC to be equipped with a 
full-fledged state-of-the-art IT and Communication network with an intelligent 
Decision Support System (DSS) capable of prediction and early warning of 
major hydro -meteorological hazards and support for emergency operation.  
Even two years after the targeted date of completion of April 2019, the s ystem 
cannot be relied upon to predict and give early warning of major hydro -
meteorological hazards since its effective functioning is dependent on the 
receipt of externally sourced real time data which is yet to be made available . 
The IT department of GoK  had even before commencement of the project 
raised doubts about the availability of data for functioning of the DSS. The 
reply of GoK is silent about how D SS is to be optimally used by KSDMA in 
the absence of required data and how the State proposes to me et the pressing 
need of an effective early warning system. The inadequacies of Flood Prone 
Area Map of the State and the lack of GoK response to the request of CWC to 
install Flood Forecasting Station have also been discussed in Paragraphs 2.4 
and 3. 3 of this Report. Prudent project implementation would require the 
consideration of the likelihood of essential inputs being available in time, for 
effective functioning of the system and fulfilment of what is stated in the 
State's Disaster Management Plan. 
Recommendation 3.2: Keeping in view the criticality of flood management 
projects and in order to ensure their successful and time -bound 
implementation, Government may ensure that projects for procurement/ 
installation of systems meant for flood managemen t such as information 
systems, decision support system etc., 
(i) are entered into only after fulfilment of a pre -determined common 
list of prerequisites as well as consideration of aspects such as a) the 
likelihood of timely availability of input data from  all sources including 
external sources, b) whether Government would be in a position to meet its 
commitments such as installations of servers without delay, previous 
experience of bidders etc. and  
(ii) are covered by a stringent monitoring mechanism with  clearly 
defined responsibilities and accountability. 

 
 
 35 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
3.5.2. Maintenance of Communication Infrastructure 
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 51 envisages that the State Executive 
Committee would ensure that communication systems are in order. 
Recognising that communication systems were the first to be affected in the 
event of a calamity, the Handbook on Disaster Management issued by 
KSDMA therefore required all Emergency Operation s Centres (EOC) 52 to 
have built -in redundancy of different layers of communication netwo rks for 
ensuring effective communication system even during the most adverse 
circumstances. Keeping communication system in order even during the most 
adverse circumstances would be one of the main functions of the EOC. 
Tahsildars of Idukki and Chalakudy Taluks informed Audit that there was total 
failure of communication infrastructure in their respective areas during the 
floods of 2018. Assistant Engineer (AE) in charge of Poringalkuthu dam in 
Thrissur informed Audit that communication infrastructure in th e dam had 
failed on 16 August 2018 and could be restored only after one week. Similarly, 
AE of Lower Sholayar dam (Thrissur District) informed Audit that a landslide 
had occurred during the 2018 floods obstructing the road to dam office and no 
reliable and  uninterrupted communication facility was available in the dam 
site. The official at the dam site had depended on the mobile network of Tamil  
Nadu which was available at some distance from the dam. Officials of both the 
dams intimated Audit that failure of  communication network had created 
difficulty in contacting higher authorities for help and directions.  
Audit, therefore examined the status of implementation of various projects/  
schemes meant for ensuring failsafe communication in the State as availabil ity 
of reliable communication systems would be integral to flood preparedness. 
The Revenue and Disaster Management Department informed ( November 
2020) that uninterrupted communication systems 53 required in SEOC and 
DEOC to combat disaster as laid down in the Orange Book include dedicated 
mobile phone, optical fibre internet, hotline, landphone, Fax, VSAT module, 
Satellite phones, police wireless, Whatsapp groups, Facebook, Twitter, 
dedicated email, HAM radio and YouTube channel. The healthy mix of 
civilian and official communication systems through several media reduces 
significantly chances of communication failure. When one system fails, 
another would be used and none of them is an always -on system. It 
acknowledged that GSM, telephonic and internet communi cation was 
temporarily disrupted in parts of Idukki due to power failure and optical fibre 
 
51  Section 22(2)(p) of the Disaster Management Act 2005 
52  Recognising the need for such a State-level dedicated facility for disaster management, the 
Government of Kerala (GoK) has established the State Emergency Operati ons Centre (SEOC). The 
SEOC is envisaged to cater to varying levels of disasters with a state -of-the-art Decision Support 
System (DSS), integrated with a multichannel communication network. It has advanced redundant 
satellite-based communication network (National Disaster Management Services Project) and multi -
channel terrest rial communications systems including VHF, GSM, 4G, 3G and broadband internet 
connectivity. ( Paragraph 1 and 2 of the EOCESFP 2015, renamed in 2019 as Orange Book of 
Disaster Management). 
53  According to the reply of Government there are 16 types of commun ication systems, however,  the 
reply as well as the Orange Book lists only 14 types of communication system. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
36 
disconnection and the Cell -sites on Wheels (CoWs) deployed provided the 
required connectivity. Deployment of communication systems at dam sites 
was taken care of, ad equately by dam owners and management of dams was 
not a function of KSDMA. 
Audit observes that the Disaster Management Act 2005 does not exclude 
communication systems at dam sites from the purview of the SEC or 
KSDMA.  
The deficiencies in maintenance of ef fective communication systems, as 
noticed during the course of audit, are detailed below. 
3.5.2.1. National Disaster Management Services 
The National Disaster Management Services (NDMS), a project implemented 
by National Disaster Management Authority, envisaged to provide to States, 
failsafe communication infrastructure54 and technical support55. Thus, VSAT56 
phones were installed by BSNL at the SEOC at Thiruvananthapuram and 
DEOCs at Idukki, Ernakulam and Wayanad during March and  April 2016 
respectively. Satellite phones were also provided to these districts after the 
floods of 2018 for providing additional redundancy in communication. 
Government of Kerala also nominated (March 2016) the Member Secretary, 
KSDMA as the nodal officer for the Project. 
Audit examined the status of the VSAT communication system/ satellite 
phones in the test -checked districts and noted that the system was not 
completely dependable as seen from the following; 
• Audit was informed (October 2019) by the Additional District 
Magistrate, Idukki that VSAT connection was not working regularly 
and that voice of the speaker was not audible. The connection was not 
working from 15  August 2018 and that only after issuing many 
reminders to SEOC was it repaired in December 2019.  
It is signific ant that VSAT was not functional in Idukki during the 
floods of 2018, when terrestrial and mobile communication network 
in the district had failed. Further, the system in Idukki district became 
functional after over a year.  
 
54  NDMS is a grant -in-aid in kind project to establish a satellite -based communication network in all 
States. In Kerala, the project is implemented in creating satellite -based communication linkages 
between SEOC and DEOCs of Idukki, Ernakulam and Wayanad. The instrumentation includes 
VSAT Connectivity, Satellite Phones and HF Radio sets. The satellite -based network was to provide 
additional redundancy in communication. The project was implemented by SEOC vide GO (Rt) No. 
2203/2016/DMD dated 30  March 2016. MoU was entered between the NDMA and Government of 
Kerala on 05 May 2016 for the implementation of the project with duration of 24 months (EOCESFP 
2015, renamed in 2019 as Orange book of Disaster Management). Paragraph 4 of the revised scheme 
proposal for NDMS pilot project for satellite -based communication network refers to failsafe 
communication infrastructure. 
55  Source: Paragraph 4 of revised schem e proposal for NDMS pilot project for satellite -based 
communication network. 
56  Very small aperture terminal 

 
 
 37 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
• VSAT at DEOC, Ernakulam remained non -functional for about 45 
days during January-November 2019. VSAT at DEOC, Wayanad was 
non-functional in October -November 2019 as per SEOC, 
Thiruvananthapuram records.  
• Audit observed that even in SEOC which commenced ope ration in its 
new premises at Thiruvananthapuram from January 2019, VSAT was 
re-installed only in November 2019. SEOC could not utili se this 
communication tool for about 10 months. NDMA also informed 
SEOC (November 2019) that daily testing of VSAT sites at  SEOC, 
Thiruvananthapuram and DEOC, Idukki indicated either faulty or 
non-responsive systems and required that these VSAT sites be made 
functional.  
• Audit noticed that though satellite phones had been made available at 
DEOCs and dams, they would not functi on indoors and were 
unreliable during overcast conditions. The inability of Satellite 
phones to function during adverse weather conditions affects its 
effectiveness as a means of communication during disaster. 
• Joint check conducted by Audit along with depa rtmental officers at 
DDMA Idukki (25 October 2019) revealed that the satellite phone 
was non -functional. ADM Idukki cited expiry of validity period of 
satellite phone connection as a reason for non -functioning of satellite 
phones. 
The Department responded (December 2020) that NDMS is not a fail proof 
communication system but an alternate communication system along with the 
other systems provided by KSDMA. Performance of NDMS depends on 
BSNL for bandwidth and hardware maintenance, ISRO for satellite health, 
KSEBL for power, weather systems for cloud cover and failure of any of these 
can result in the system becoming non -functional. Inadequacy of bandwidth 
was reported to NDMA in December 2016. Ensuring connectivity through 
ISRO bandwidth was BSNL’s responsibi lity. KSDMA informed BSNL and 
NDMA in September 2016 that the system was agreed to be commissioned 
only after imparting necessary training to its engineers and ensuring seamless 
functioning. Initial handing over of systems occurred only on 05 October 2018 
and final handing over on 01 and 02 February 2019 after training of DEOC 
and SEOC staff at BSNL. The department stated that Audit was commenting 
on a non -commissioned system. Since handing over, the system was 
augmented further and is maintained meticulously. It added that all complaints 
other than power related, could only be reported to the toll -free number of 
BSNL. The logbook of VSAT at SEOC indicated that calls were made to 
DEOC, Idukki on 10 August 2018, 30 August 2018, 14 September 2018 and 
19 November 2018. The log also indicated that the system did work prior to 
and during the flood and the voice of the speaker was clear. As  regards the 
relocation of VSAT to the new SEOC premises after a gap of one year, the 
department stated that KSDMA took all pos sible steps to operationali se the 
VSAT terminal through frequent requests to BSNL and intervention of 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
38 
NDMA. Satellite phones were delivered on 17 August 2018. As it is with any 
satellite signals, reflectivity interference could affect signals temporarily in 
cloudy conditions and high solar insolation. Possibility of purchasing antenna 
to enable indoor use of the device is being explored with BSNL. The non -
functioning of satellite phone during physical verification was attributed to the 
lack of support from the service provider who got it functional on 22  
November 2019 after detailed proposal for recharge was received from him on 
13 November 2019. The reply added that during the short durations when 
satellite phones were non-functional, there were other communication systems 
to supplement the failsafe communication. 
Audit observes that the department’s response corroborates the audit 
observations as the NDMS system (VSAT and satellite phone) with all its 
limitations did not provide assurance of be ing a fully dependable 
communication system. The observations of Audit regarding the non -
functioning of VSAT and satellites phones are based on the remarks provided 
by end users, i.e., ADM ( Disaster Management ), Idukki, engineers in dam 
sites and officials  at DEOC. Audit observed that no entries were made in the 
VSAT log maintained by DEOC, Idukki after 26 March 2018. Further, the 
reply of Government that functioning of Satellite phone is temporarily affected 
during cloudy conditions and high solar insolation, is supportive of the audit 
finding. As regards the Department’s contention that commissioning of VSAT 
had not taken place by the time of the 2018 floods, the fact remains that the 
system was being relied upon by the end -users from March/  April 2016 and  
the department itself lists and recogni ses VSAT module among the effective 
communication systems followed in KSDMA. As part of its normal time 
functions, the SEOC was to ensure proper functioning of multi -channel 
alternate communication systems.57  
3.5.2.2. Non-functional Very High Frequency Radio communication system  
The Department of Revenue and Disaster Management established58 a network 
of 379 Very High Frequency (VHF) Radios 59 in the State (2010) for enforcing 
effective early warning system with an outlay of `2.65 crore. VHF radio 
network of KSDMA is a wireless communication technology similar to that 
used by the Police Department. The advantages of VHF communication over 
other forms of communication includes its ability to function in severe weather 
conditions as the equipment is shock and dust proof, resistant to humidity and 
able to work with a 12-volt battery. 
 
57  Paragraph 4.1 of EOCESFP 2015, renamed in 2019 as Orange Book of Disaster Management 
58  with the financial assistance of UNDP and the Tsunami Rehabilitation Programme 
59  State level - 5, Revenue Divisional Office - 2, District level - 14, Taluks - 63 and vulnerable Village - 
295. 

 
 
 39 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
A survey conducted by Audit in 2013 for inclusion in the Report of CAG 60, 
had revealed that 82 per cent  of the equipment were non -functional, due to 
improper installation, non -execution of repair works and absence of 
technically skilled personnel. The letter of Director, Institute of Land and 
Disaster Management (ILDM) (January 2018) addressed to Additional Chief 
Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Managem ent, GoK also indicates that VHF 
network was inactive since its installation. Audit observed that an amount of 
`35 lakh (November 2013) was provided to ILDM for engaging technical staff 
to revamp 61 the VHF equipment at Collectorate and Taluk level and 
subsequently 130 equipment were repaired. However, the revamping activities 
were abandoned in November 2016 due to lack of further Government 
sanction. A revamping proposal of `1.28 crore submitted to GoK by ILDM 
(January 2018) is yet to receive approval (Dece mber 2019). VHF equipment 
which was installed incurring an expenditure of `2.65 crore to ensure hassle 
free communication was not functional during the floods of 2018 in any of the 
test-checked District Collectorates and Taluks. Deputy Collector (DM) Idukk i 
stated (December 2019) that they were dependent on the VHF maintained by 
Police for communication during the floods of 2018. Taluks and villages 
which are involved in ground level relief and rescue works during disaster 
have to depend mainly on land phones, email, CUG mobile network and a 
fully functional VHF would be a step towards strengthening the 
communication network at the ground level.  
The Revenue and Disaster Management Department responded (November 
2020) that as VHF systems were meant not for day -to-day communication but 
for use in periods of dis aster (unlike in the Police department), they are liable 
to frequent repairs on account of prolonged idling. VHF systems were used 
intermittently after the warranty period depending on the periodic repairs. The 
asset installed in 2008-10 being more than 10 years old had outlived its normal 
useful life. Any further spending on the asset would result in unfruitful 
expenditure, hence the decision not to sanction further expenditure and to 
recommend handing over to the Police department. By preventing avoidable  
expenditure on revamp and utilising the wireless phones of the Police 
personnel for flood management, the 2018 flood situation was managed well 
by KSDMA and the DDMAs. The department avoided expenditure on a failed 
and redundant system, it added. 
Audit no ticed that though Government had provided different types of 
communications, most of them were vulnerable to failure during a disaster 
owing to their dependence on internet or terrestrial network. The VHF of 
Police department had withstood the disaster of 2018 as stated in the 
paragraph and hence can be considered as a reliable communication network. 
 
60  Report of C&AG of India on General and Social Sector, Government of Kerala for the year ended 
March 2013. The survey was part of Paragraph 3.9 ‘Unfruitful expenditure on Early Warning 
Systems’. The paragraph was discussed in PAC and PAC had sought additional details from 
Revenue and Disaster Management Department. 
61  for repairing nine out of 14 VHF supplied to Co llectorates, 24 out of 64 VHF supplied to Taluks and 
three out of five Repeaters. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
40 
The Kerala State Disaster Management Plan, 2016 elaborates the procedure 
for maintaining the VHF system and ensuring that the system remains 
functional, it inc ludes daily checking and sorting out any technical issues 
using the services of Police Telecommunication wing. Hence, the contention 
of Government that VHF networks were not intended for day -to-day 
communication purposes but for use during periods of disaster, and equipment 
were liable for frequent repair on account of prolonged idling, is not 
acceptable. 
Recommendation 3.3: KSDMA may ensure that fail -safe communication 
infrastructure is available in vital installations such as at dam sites and that 
a built -in redundancy of different layers of communication capable of 
functioning during the most adverse circumstances exists in flood -prone 
locations across the State. 
3.5.3. Non-functional state-of-the-art Digital Seismographs 
Idukki district in Kerala hosts 17 dams including the 125 -year-old 
Mullaperiyar dam 62. Consequent to an earthquake of 3.8 M on Richter scale 
(July 2011) in the  Idukki region, GoK decided to establish (August 2011) a 
state of the art digital system of seismographs in and around Mullaperiyar dam 
site for obtaining real time  Seismic data as the existing equipment were 
analogue type and incapable of immediate analysis of data. The work was 
awarded to M/s. Encardio Rites Electronics Pvt. Ltd. (M/s. Encardio) for `3.90 
crore. The new equipment w as capable of providing reliable, compact and 
portable data. As stated earlie r in this R eport, the data from the seismographs 
would also be an input to the Decision Support System being established at the 
SEOC. 
After setting up (March 2014) six digital seism ographs and five 
accelerographs63 near and around Mullaperiyar dam site 64 for the effective 
monitoring of seismic activities, GoK further accorded sanction (August 2016) 
to purchase one full spare set 65 of GURALP seismograph for `50.93 lakh for 
installation at a suitable site within the ILDM premises66.  
Audit observed that though the vendor supplied (December 2016) one full set 
of GURALP seismograph along with its allied items and the instruments, these 
were not installed and were stored in the KSDMA building. Audit further 
observed that the warranty period of the six digital seismographs and  five 
accelerographs, set up in March 2014, expired in March 2017. A proposal 
(March 2017) of the vendor offering a three -year AMC for `66.32 lakh was 
not successf ully concluded. Resultant non -maintenance of the equipment 
 
62  Mullaperiyar dam lies in seismic zone III, where as per the seismic zoning map of India, earthquake 
of intensity seven in the Richter scale could be expected. 
63  An electromagnetic device used to measure acceleration forces 
64  Seismographs at Vallakadavu, Meencut, Chottupara, Aladi, Kulamavu and Pamba; Accelerographs 
at Idukki dam and Vallakadavu observatory in Idukki District 
65  Since the spares of any malfunctioning instr ument are to be imported, components from the spare 
instrument could be used as a replacement till M/s. Encardio substitutes the spare. 
66  Institute of Land and Disaster Management under Department of Revenue at Thiruvananthapuram 
which accommodated the SEOC till it was shifted to the new building in January 2019. 

 
 
 41 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
possibly led to the seismographs installed in Idukki becoming non -functional 
since January 2019 . No seismic data is being received by the Central 
Receiving Station (CRS) since then. Sanction accorded by GoK in July 2018 
for entering into an AMC with the vendor became infructuous as the vendor 
M/s. Encardio intimated KSDMA (December 2018) that they had ceased 
functioning as the distributor for GURALP instruments in India. A fter 
inspection of equipment, a new vendor intimated (August 2019) KSDMA that 
majority of the original equipment had reached its end of life and offered to 
replace/ repair the faulty instruments for `49.50 lakh before entering into an 
AMC. The offer was no t accepted ( January 2020 ) pending receipt of 
clarifications from the original vendor.  
Want of proper  maintenance of the seismographs and related equipment 
resulted in expenditure of `3.90 crore becoming infructuous with the State 
being forced to depend on  data from the erstwhile analogue seismograph 
instead of obtaining real time seismic data. Further, non-installation of  the 
seismograph purchased in December 2016 meant idling of equipment worth 
`50.93 lakh for the last three years in Thiruvananthapuram. 
The R evenue and Disaster Management D epartment in its reply (December 
2020) stated as follows; 
• The paragraph has nothing to do with the subject matter of 
preparedness for floods. 
• The six digital seismographs and five accelerographs set up in March 
2014 were proprietary items. Any repair or AMC had to be through 
services of the principal/  their authorised dealers in India. Extended 
warranty period expired in 2017. AMC could not be concluded 
beyond this period since the authorised dealer ceased to function after 
December 2018. New vendor after inspection in August 2019 
reported that majority of the items had reached their end of life.  
• The equipment custodian KSEBL had utilised its internal skills to 
revitalise and use the system as long as the original equipment 
continued to work. 
• The offer of the new dealer to repair the instruments for `49.50 lakh 
and then enter into AMC did not appear economical, since the 
equipment had already outlived their normal life. 
• Audit conclusion of failure to ensure adequate maintenance resulting 
in infructuous expenditure was pre-conceived and irrelevant. 
• The pu rpose of collecting seismic data is served by two digital 
seismographs in the State, one of IMD in Thiruvananthapuram and 
the second of NCESS at Peechi. 
• Audit observation on non -installation of the spare seismograph was 
not accepted as the spare intended f or replacement in the event of 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
42 
failure of one of the already installed seismographs could not be 
considered as idling equipment. 
During the Exit conference  (18 January 2021), it was also informed that the 
seismographs were not for detection of e arthquakes in the State. The 
responsibility of earthquake detection and monitoring is that of IMD and 
KSDMA is in receipt of such detections that are relevant to the State.  The 
purpose of the KSDMA funded, KSEBL established seismic monitoring 
system was for confined monitoring of the selected area in Idukki and at a 
global scale of earthquake detection and monitoring, all the systems deployed 
in Idukki would only count as one system. Further, under the initiative of 
KSDMA, the National Centre for Seismology (NCS), New Delhi has deployed 
one seismograph in Idukki. Therefore, earthquake detection purpose is well 
served. The system was funded by KSDMA to KSEBL and KSEBL had the 
responsibility of deploying and maintaining the system ever since the 
beginning. During the act ive period of the system, the system worked 
satisfactorily.  
The contention of the Government that the seismographs  at 
Thiruvananthapuram and Peechi are sufficient could not be accepted since 
while initiating the project proposal by KSEBL, expert opinions from National 
Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) and NCESS were obtained by KSEBL 
and NGRI had opined that any network around a reservoir should be located in 
such a way that there is minimum azimuthal gap and a station should be 
located in the  centre of the network for assessing depth resolution of 
earthquakes. NCESS while underscoring the necessity of the project added 
that the seismic ob servatories of IMD and NCESS could  complement the 
proposed network. Further, following mild tremors in Iduk ki area in February 
2020, KSEBL conducted a meeting (March 2020) to assess the situation and it 
was opined that the observation s from the above Seismographs are highly 
important for the study of seismic behaviour of Idukki region as it has link 
with the sa fety of KSEBL dams and hence action is to be taken to initiate 
reviving the equipment/ system.  Audit clarifies that it is based on the linkage 
to dam safety and possibility of flooding from dam break that this audit 
observation has been included in this Au dit Report. GoK’s contention that the 
spare equipment cannot be considered as idling  is also not acceptable as the 
sanction order for purchase of the spare instrument specifically stated that the 
spare instrument shall be mounted in the campus of Institute  of Land and 
Disaster Management , Thiruvananthapuram  and data received in the present 
network at the Central Receiving Station at KSDMA.  
In the wake of frequent mild tremors which occurred in Idukki during 
February 2020, KSEBL contacted CWC for expert adv ice and CWC 
recommended to constitute an expert group with representation from a few 
organisations including National Centre for Seismology (NCS), New Delhi.  
NCS as part of their study installed (March 2020) seismic equipment in Idukki 
utilising their own funds and the data was streamed to its Headquarters at New 
Delhi. KSDMA’s contention that the equipment installed by NCS is more than 

 
 
 43 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
sufficient cannot be accepted since the objective of the subject scheme was to 
extract real time seismic data which would be relayed to the State’s own CRS 
that c ould be monitored at  close quarters as recommended by NGRI and 
NCESS. Audit observes that the single sei smograph set up in 2020 is not 
intended to be a substitute for a system of six seismographs and five 
accelographs in place earlier.  
Further, Audit noticed that the situation which warranted the establishment of 
these seismographs in 2014 still exists as evident from the tremors felt in 
Idukki as recently as February 2020. 
Recommendation 3.4: Keeping in view the role of the seismograph network 
in Idukki in studying seismic behaviour and their linkage to the safety of 
dams in the  region, Government of Kerala may ensure that the network of 
seismographs as recommended by NGRI is put in place at the earliest and 
the agencies concerned receive real time seismic data from these locations. 
Reservoir operation 
Dams ensure a large number of potential benefits, but are also structures with 
potential hazards. Any uncontrolled or excessive release of huge amount of 
water has potential for loss of life and damage to property due to flooding. Of 
the 59 dams in the State, 17 dams are in Idukki district.  Kerala received 
2,346.60 mm rainfall between 01 June and 19 August, 2018, which was about 
42 per cent higher than the normal rainfall.  
Audit engaged the services of the Indian Institute of Science Bangalore (IISc) 
to study, from a hydrological perspective,  the operations of reservoirs in the 
Periyar basin,  during and immediately preceding the flood period 67. Salient 
features of Mullaperiyar, Idukki, Idamalayar, Lower Periyar dams and 
Bhoothathankettu barrage are given in Appendix 3.1. While the Mullaperiyar 
dam is controlled by Tamil Nadu, the Idukki and Idamalayar dams are under 
the control of  KSEBL. Lower Pe riyar dam is situated downstream of Idukki 
dam and has a very small capacity compared to the three major dams. Audit 
findings with regard to reservoir operations are given in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
3.6. Assessment of impact of dam spillage on flooding in 
downstream areas 
Audit evaluated the relative contributions of the spills from the two major 
dams, Idukki and Idamalayar, to the flood flow observed at Neeleswaram 
gauge station, based on observed data. Contribution of the spills from 
Mullaperiyar dam to the Idu kki inflows was also examined. Data on reservoir 
inflows, power house (PH) discharge, spills, storage and water levels at the 
dams, barrage and flow gauges provided by the KSEBL, CWC and Irrigation 
Department was used to assess the impact of the spills on the floods.  
 
67  June - August 2018 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
44 
Since observed flow and river level data was available at Neeleswaram gauge 
station, the spills from the reservoirs were compared with the observed flow at 
Neeleswaram to assess the impact of spills on the floods. The percentage 
contribution of the reservoir spills, on a daily scale, to the Neeleswaram gauge 
station is shown in Table 3.4.  
Table 3.4: Contribution of daily spills from Idukki and Idamalayar dams to the 
observed flow at Neeleswaram gauge station 
Date 
Total observed spills from 
Idukki and Idama layar 
dams (MCM)* 
Flow observed at 
Neeleswaram 
(MCM) 
Contribution of total spills from 
Idukki and Idamalayar dams to flow 
at Neeleswaram (per cent)68 
1 2 3 [(2) / (3)] * 100 
14-08-2018 91.06 196.13 46.43 
15-08-2018 192.47 532.83 36.12 
16-08-2018 234.53 793.93 29.54 
17-08-2018 185.85 796.44 23.34 
18-08-2018 104.11 612.75 16.99 
*The spills presented for Idukki and Idamalayar dams for a day correspond to the observed 
flow during the 24 hours from 7AM on that day to 7AM on the next day. 
(Source: Report of IISc, Bangalore) 
The contribution of the spills from Idamalayar and Idukki dams together, to 
the flows at Neeleswaram gauge station during the period 14  to 18 August 
2018 was significant at 46.43  per cent, 36.12 per cent, 29.54 per cent, 23.34 
per cent and 16.99 per cent respectively, though as the extreme rainfall event 
continued for a few days, the contribution of the spills in percentage terms is 
seen to have declined.  
Further, as the spills from the Mullaperiyar dam pass through the Vandiperiyar 
gauge station and sub sequently contribute to the inflows to the Idukki 
reservoir, the role of spills from Mullaperiyar dam in the escalation of flows at 
Idukki reservoir during the flood period was also examined as shown in 
Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Contribution of spills from Mullaperiyar dam to Idukki inflows 
 
Date 
Spills from 
Mullaperiyar dam 
(MCM) 
Inflows observed at 
Idukki dam (MCM)* 
Contribution of spills from 
Mullaperiyar to Idukki inflows   
(per cent) 
1 2 3 [(2) / (3)] * 100 
14-08-2018 2.17 84.18 2.58 
15-08-2018 46.10 165.06 27.93 
16-08-2018 56.74 154.96 36.62 
17-08-2018 33.87 111.70 30.32 
18-08-2018 33.26 92.51 35.95 
*The flow data presented for Idukki and Mullaperiyar dam correspond to the observed flow 
during the 24 hours from 7AM on that day to 7AM on the next day. 
(Source: Report of IISc, Bangalore) 
 
68  The volume of total spills from the two dams (Idukki and Idamalayar) together is added and its 
percentage contribution is analysed to the flows at the barrage and Neeleswaram gauge station. 

 
 
 45 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
As evident from the table, the operation of the Mullaperiyar dam had a 
negligible effect on 14 August but its contribution to the inflows at Idukki was 
significant during 15  to 18 August (>20 per cent), considering the magnitude 
of the floods.  
Government in its response stated  (September 2020) that the contribution of 
Mullaperiyar dam to the inflows of Idukki during the period of severe floods 
from 15-18 August 2018 was very significant. Since sudden and unexpected 
releases from Mullaperiyar dam by Tamil Nadu Government was expected 
any moment without notice and the quantum of inflow to Idukki reservoir was 
not known in advance, KSEBL had to provide sufficient flood cushion to 
ensure safety of the dam as well as controlled release. But for the sudden 
release of 169.97 MCM of water from Mullaperiyar during the extreme flood 
days, the attenuation of downstream flood would have been more significant. 
The departmental response indicates the need to prioritise and have in place an 
integrated reservoir management plan, particularly in multi dam basins. This is 
significant both because i) the control of reservoir/ dam operations in the State 
is distributed among KSEBL and the Irrigation department and ii) there is the 
likely impact of spills from dams under the control of one State in the 
downstream reservoirs and rivers of another State.  
The National Disaster Management Plan lists among the responsibilities of the 
State (in the context of understanding floods) , the implementing and 
monitoring of flood preparedness, river basin  and reservoir management plans 
including updating rule curves and improving the system of water release from 
reservoirs.69  
Audit examined the aspect of the compliance of dam operators to rule curves 
and the findings are as follows. 
3.6.1. Compliance of dam owners to rule curves 
A Rule Curve or rule level specifies the storage or empty space to be 
maintained in a reservoir during different times of the year with the 
assumption that a reservoir can best satisfy its purposes if these storage levels 
are maintained. The rule curve as such does not give the amount of water to be 
released from the reservoir as it will be dependent on the amount of inflows 
and other extracti ons. The rule curves are generally derived by operation 
studies using historic or generated flows70. Though it is always desirable to fill 
a reservoir up to Full Reservoir Level (FRL) (or upto Maximum Water Level 
(MWL) during emergency situations, if the d am is structurally stable ), it is 
 
69  Paragraph 7.2.1, NDMP 2019 
70  Upper rule curve represents the water levels to be maintained in the reservoir such that if these are 
maintained throughout the year, all the demands from the reservoir can be fully met. Keeping the 
upper rule level below FRL (in monsoon months) can give extra room for flood absorption in the 
reservoir. Lower rule curve is calculated such that if the storage level goes below this level, only the 
highest priority demands can be met throughout the year. Gene rally, the water level in the reservoir 
is maintained between upper and lower rule curve values. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
46 
generally recommended that some spill should be made from the reservoir to 
keep up the downstream river channel and to avoid encroachment in the river.  
During field visit, the IISc team accompanied by Audit personnel were  
informed by KSEBL that no rule curve was followed for reservoir operations 
during the flood period. However, Audit noticed that KSEBL had in its 
possession the Rule Curve framed in 1983 ( Appendix 3.2). Audit observed 
that only after the floods of 2018, KS EBL developed new rule curves 
(KSEBL, 2019) which were updated in 2020 (KSEBL, 2020)  though the 
Operation of Reservoir – Guidelines71 envisaged (Paragraph 5.0) that the rule 
curves are to be reviewed constantly and if necessary, modified so as to have 
the best operation of reservoirs.  
Audit made available to IISc, the rule curves (1983 and 2020)  for the Idukki 
dam along with the rule curve s for the operation of the Idamalayar reservoir 
(2020) (Appendix 3.3), for carrying out simulations of reservoir operat ion to 
determine the volume of spills that would have resulted if these rule curves 
were followed during the flood period. The simulations of the reservoir 
operation were carried out for the period June to September 2018.  The steps 
followed in simulating the reservoir operation are given in Appendix 3.4. The 
results of the simulations are given below. 
3.6.2. Operation of Idukki reservoir using the 1983 rule curve 
The Idukki reservoir operation was simulated with the rule curves developed 
in the years 1983 ( Appendix 3.5) and 2020 ( Appendix 3.6) to determine the 
quantum of spills and to compare these spills with the actual spills that 
occurred during the 2018 flood period. Table 3.6 shows the observed spills at 
Idukki dam during the flood period and the spills  if the rule curves of 1983 
were followed.  
  
 
71  IS 7323:1994, reaffirmed in1999 

 
 
 47 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
Table 3.6: Comparison between actual spills and the spills simulated using the 
rule curves of 1983 for Idukki dam 
Date  Actual spills 
2018 
(MCM)**  
Spills when rule levels are applied (MCM)  
Initial storage level for simulation (starting date - June 30)  
Upper Rule Level#  Lower Rule Level*  Actual Storage Level## 
14-08-2018  46.26  74.06  0.00  74.06  
15-08-2018  111.24  154.94  0.00  154.94  
16-08-2018  124.65  144.88  123.82  144.88  
17-08-2018  115.20  101.59  101.59  101.59  
18-08-2018  70.16  82.72  82.72  82.72  
Total  467.51  558.19  308.13  558.19  
#Start with upper level; Spills computed once storage crosses upper level  
*Start with lower level; Spills computed once storage crosses upper level  
##Start with actual level; Spills computed once storage crosses upper level  
**The actual spills (2018) pre sented for a particular day are the observed spills during the 24 hours 
from 7 AM on that day to 7 AM on the next day 
(Simulations were carried out from June to September 2018; results for the flood period alone are 
shown)  
(Spills are accounted only if the simulated level exceeds the crest level)  
(Source: Report of IISc, Bangalore) 
The simulations revealed that the spills from Idukki reservoir during the flood 
period (14 -18 August) would have been higher (558.19 MCM against the 
actual spills of 467.51 MCM) if the simulations started with the actual storage 
level or the upper rule level. Thus, for reservoir operations during the floods of 
2018, the rule curve of 1983 for Idukki reservoir could not have  been relied 
upon to achieve minimal or no spi lls. This shows the necessity for ensuring 
rule curves are regularly updated as required by the National Disaster 
Management Plan and by the Reservoir Operation Guidelines 72. In the case of 
Idamalayar reservoir, there was no rule curve in place at the time of the 2018 
floods for the guidance of dam operators. 
However, subsequent to the floods of 2018, and based on the Central Water 
Commission’s recommendations in their Study Report on ‘Kerala Floods of 
2018’ to review rule curves for major reservoirs in  the State, the existing rule 
curves were reviewed by KSEB. Subsequently, rule levels as prepared by 
CWC were approved by the Government of Kerala in May 2020. KSEB L also 
resolved to give approval to the modified rule levels prepared by CWC for 
operation o f Idukki, Idamalayar, Kakki and Banasurasagar reservoirs.  Audit 
also noted that in the new O&M Manual 73, reservoir operation protocols 
including “rule curves” were included. 
3.6.3. Dam operations based on 2020 rule curves 
In order to see how the application of Ru le curve of 2020 for Idukki dam 
operations would impact spills from the reservoir in case a scenario similar to 
the floods of August 2018 were to happen again, simulation studies were 
carried out. Simulation of the reservoir operation of Idukki reservoir s hows 
 
72  IS 7323:1994 (Paragraph 5.0) - Rule curves once prepared should be constantly reviewed and 
modified so as to have the best operation of the reservoirs. 
73  As per the guidelines of CWC of January 2018. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
48 
that if it was operated according to the rule curve of 2020, the spills from the 
reservoir during the flood period would be 531.03 MCM which is higher than 
the actual spills of 467.51 MCM (14-18 August, 2018) as shown in Table 3.7. 
Table 3.7: Comparison between actual spills and the spills simulated using the 
rule curve of 2020 for Idukki dam 
Date  
  
Actual spills  
(2018) (MCM)** 
Spills when rule level is applied (MCM)  
Initial storage level for simulation (starting date -June 10)  
Rule Level#  Actual Storage Level##  
14-08-2018  46.26  68.63  68.63  
15-08-2018  111.24  149.51  149.51  
16-08-2018  124.65  139.45  139.45  
17-08-2018  115.20  96.16  96.16  
18-08-2018  70.16  77.29  77.29  
Total  467.51  531.03  531.03  
#Start with rule level; Spills computed once storage crosses rule level  
##Start with actual level; Spills computed once storage crosses rule level  
**The actual spills (2018) presented for a particular day are the observed spills during the 24 hours from 
7 AM on that day to 7 AM on the next day  
(Simulations were carried out from June to September 2018; results for the flood period alone are shown) 
(Spills are accounted only if the simulated level exceeds the crest level)  
(Source: Report of IISc, Bangalore) 
When the exercise was carried out similarly ( Appendix 3.7 ) for Idamalayar 
dam using the new rule curve of 2020, the study indicated that the spills when 
reservoir operations were carried out using the rule curve would be lesser than 
the actual s pills in 2018.  Table 3.8 shows the observed spills at Idamalayar 
dam during the flood period and the spills if the rule curve of 2020 is 
followed.  
Table 3.8: Comparison between actual spills and the spills simulated using the 
rule curve of 2020 for Idamalayar dam 
Date  
  
Actual spills 
(2018) (MCM)** 
Spills when rule level is applied (MCM)  
Initial storage level for simulation (starting date - June 10) 
Rule Level#  Actual Storage Level##  
14-08-2018  44.80  56.13  56.13  
15-08-2018  81.23  97.20  97.20  
16-08-2018  109.88  85.54  85.54  
17-08-2018  70.65  51.24  51.24  
18-08-2018  33.94  33.38  33.38  
Total  340.50  323.49  323.49  
#Start with rule level; Spills computed once storage crosses rule level  
##Start with actual level; Spills computed once storage crosses rule level  
**The actual spills (2018) presented for a particular day are the observed spills during the 24 hours from 
7 AM on that day to 7 AM on the next day 
(Simulations were carried out from June to September 2018; results for the flood period alone are shown) 
(Spills are accounted only if the simulated level exceeds the crest level)  
(Source: Report of IISc, Bangalore) 
It is observed that if the Idamalayar reservoir was operated according to the 
rule curve of 2020, the spills from the reservoir during the floo d period (14-18 
August, 2018) would be 323.49 MCM (less than the actual spills of 340.50 

 
 
 49 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
MCM). Even if the rule curve of 2020 was followed considering the observed 
actual level on June 10 for initialisation, the spills during the flood period 
would still h ave been 323.49 MCM which is less than the actual spills of 
340.50 MCM.  
Hence, the simulation studies using the 2020 rule curve for Idamalayar gave a 
result indicating lesser spills unlike in the case of Idukki. 
The Department in its reply (December 2020) said that as per the rule curve of 
2020, the water level to be maintained at the Idukki reservoir during 11 to 20 
August is 2,386.81 feet with 1,725.71 MCM. This would give a dynamic flood 
cushion of 270.63 MCM (upto FRL 2 ,403 ft). The dynamic flood cushion 
would enable the dam managers to transiently accommodate the heavy inflow 
into the reservoir during the flooding period and distribute the consequent spill 
in a regulated manner.  
Audit notes that even after a considered decision by KSEBL in consultation 
with KSDMA in August 2018 to introduce a dynamic flood cushion of four 
feet below FRL (68.87 MCM) (the rule curve of 1983 for Idukki reservoir 
permitted KSEBL to store water during the month of August 2018 upto FRL), 
spills of 467 MCM could not be avoided. Audit also saw that despite such 
decision, the outflow did exceed inflow in respect of Idamalayar reservoir on 
two days (16-17 August, 2018) and in respect of Idukki on one day (17 August 
2018). 
Hence, KSEBL may consider the feasibility of conducting simulation or other 
studies to ensure that the approved rule curve of 2020 along with provision of 
dynamic flood cushion would suffice to handle situations similar to the 
extreme rain event of 2018 with minimal spills, if any. 
Need for assurance about the adequacy of the new rule curves is emphasised 
also because IISc’s studies 74 to examine the effect of reservoir spills on the 
flood inundation depth and extent showed that if the discharge from 
Bhoothathankettu barrage consiste d only of the runoff generated with heavy 
rainfall75, the extent of simulated flood spread would have reduced from 
520.04 sq. km to 441.44 sq. km and the maximum simulated depth (with 
respect to ground level) at Neeleswaram would have reduced from 12.32 m to 
9.68 m76. KSEBL acknowledged (June 2020) that the 15 per cent reduction of 
area was a realistic assessment.  
The Secretary, Power Department (December 2020) in his response to the 
audit observation said that t he methodology followed by KSEBL in 
controlling the flow is to operate within the dynamic flood cushion below the 
FRL and ensure that the levels do not exceed the FRL. Keeping in view this 
principle, the inflow and outflow in both Idukki and Idamalayar were 
coordinated. While so coordinating, the su dden inflow without notice from 
 
74  using HEC-RAS 
75  and no contribution from reservoir spills 
76  Simulations by IISc using HEC -HMS modelling showed that the flood peaks obtained from the 
‘with-dam scenario’ were attenuated when compared to the virgin simulations (no dam scenario). 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
50 
Mullaperiyar as well had to be reckoned. Still the crisis situation was managed 
well within the prescribed parameters. In Idamalayar on 15  August 2018, the 
FRL was breached by 0.15 m and the outflow maintained was less than inflow 
and on 16 August 2018 the FRL was again breached by 0.75m and still the 
outflow was maintained at a lower level. At that point of time , due to the 
extreme flood situation, the inflow increased drastically and there was no other 
alternative but to increase the outflow to maintain the FRL, considering the 
safety of dam, as well. The Secretary, Power Department further stated that the 
position as explained above would indicate that the reservoir operation in the 
crisis situation was prudently managed and spills were maintained at optimum 
levels. 
The Government vide letter dated 16 April 2021 also informed that in the case 
of Idamalayar reservoir, the difference between total ou tflow and total inflow 
was only 9.86 MCM which is only 2.90 per cent  of the total inflow of 338 
MCM into this reservoir. Considering the total combined inflows of 946.4 0 
MCM (608.40 + 338), a total combined outflow of 815.37 MCM (excluding 
PH discharge from Idukki reservoir) was only discharged to the Periyar basin 
from both reservoirs (between 14 and 18 August 2018). The integrated 
operation by KSEBL resulted in moderation of 131.03 MCM. KSEBL had let 
the outflow exceed inflow only in the recession limb of  the flood hydrograph 
which is a standard operation procedure. The response indicated that in 
Idamalayar, for five hours on 15  August 2018, the outflow was marginally 
more than the inflow (in the rising limb of the flood hydrograph) but this was 
before the flood hydrograph’s sharp rising and touching its peak inflow. This 
was unavoidable as Idamalayar reservoir levels breached its FRL and 
integrated reservoir operation necessitated such release. A ttenuation of 1 ,128 
cumecs when the peak inflow of 2 ,328 cume cs occurred at 03:00 hrs on 16  
August 2018 in Idamalayar reservoir  was also pointed out. Further, as Idukki 
PH discharges to the adjacent Muvattup uzha basin and not to Periyar basin, 
the same should not be added to the outflows to the Periyar basin. 
The de partmental reply above seeks to indicate that spills that took place, 
including outflow exceeding inflow (on two days in the case of Idamalayar 
reservoir and one in Idukki reservoir), during the August 2018 floods were 
optimal and acceptable given the circ umstances such as inflow from 
Mullaperiyar without warning and the fact that the outflow exceeded the 
inflow on the receding limb. However,  the KSEB’s response that outflow 
exceeds inflow only in the receding limb, is silent about the downstream 
conditions. The Neeleswaram CWC Gauge station in the month of August 
2018 recorded very high -water flow on 15 and 16 August (as well as on 17 
and 18 August). On all these days (15 to 18 August 2018), the flow (refer 
Table 3.4 of this Report) exceeded 363 MCM/day whi ch was adequate for the 
river to breach its banks 77. The water level as measured at Neeleswaram CWC 
Gauge station on 16, 17 and 18 August was similarly very high at 12.10 m, 
 
77  Response of KSEBL dated June 2020 relying on research article by Dr K.P Sudheer, IIT Madras, et 
al, ‘Role of dams on the floods of August 2018 in Periyar River Basin, Kerala’. 

 
 
 51 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
12.12 m and 10.55 m respectively when compared to average water level of 
4.55 m 78 for the month of August 2018. Thus, the release of water from the 
dams so close to the peak inflow (even if it was in the recession limb) could 
aggravate the flood situation downstream. Further, on 17 August 2018, the 
hourly data indicates that the outflo ws from Idukki dam exceeded the inflows 
during 16 hours of the day and on 16 and 17  August, the outflows from 
Idamalayar reservoir exceeded the inflows for 10 and 21 hours of the day 
respectively. Besides, even if PH discharge were to be excluded for Idukki, the 
net inflow would be negative ( -3.50 MCM) for Idukki on 17 August. Further, 
in the case of Idamalayar, though attenuation occurred at peak inflow, the fact 
is that net inflow over the 14 -18 August period was negative ( -9.86 MCM). 
Besides, the Guideli nes for operation of spillway gates of Cheruthoni dam 
(1990) specify that outflow is never to exceed inflow except under 
emergencies and when the reservoir is to be depleted to the desired level.  
Thus, Audit feels that it cannot be cited as a standard oper ating procedure, 
even during the receding limb of a flood hydrograph, particularly so close to 
the peak inflow.  
Hence, Audit reiterates the need for assurance about the adequacy of the new 
rule curve along with the provision of dynamic flood cushion given the fact 
that the frequency of incidents of excessive rainfall and flooding in the State 
has increased in recent  years. As the rainfalls in July 2018 had resulted in an 
average inflow of 25 MCM per day to Idukki and the average inflow to Idukki 
between 09 August 2018 and 19  August 2018 was more than three times and 
of the order of 79 MCM per day, which was unprecedented in the history of 
the dam, there is an urgent need to be prepared for such extreme rainfall events 
in the future  including through establishment of inflow forecasting stations 79. 
The possibility of unscheduled releases from upstream reservoirs also needs to 
be considered along with the factoring of downstream conditions. It is 
desirable further to develop the rule curves keeping in view the integrated 
operation of the major reservoirs in the basin. Rule curves developed 
considering various aspects including integrated operation of reservoirs would 
provide more assurance.  
Recommendation 3.5:  
a) KSEB may ensure flood release operations for reservoirs are based on 
approved rule curves  which further need to be regularly reviewed and 
updated.  
b) KSEB may conduct simulation or other studies to ensure that the 
approved rule curves of 2020 for Idukki and Idamalayar would be adequate 
to handle situations similar to the extreme rainfall event of 2018, without 
consequential flooding.  
 
78  Water level on 14 August was 5.91 m as per CWC data. 
79  The reservoir level can be better managed by providing a dynamic cushion to moderate flood 
through meticulous planning by reviewing the reservoir levels and inflow forecast at all time step s.  
(Source: Rule curve for major reservoirs of KSEB – May 2019) 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
52 
c) Feasibility of putting in place rule curves based on integrated operation of 
reservoirs within an approved time frame must also be considered. 
3.7. Siltation of reservoirs and reduction in storage capacity 
Dams and Reservoirs are subject to siltation. Sedimentation causes los s of 
active storage volume, and thus reduced ability to compensate for outflows for 
hydro power, irrigation, drinking water and flood retention. Uncontrolled 
deforestation, forest -fires, overgra zing, improper methods of tillage, unwise 
agriculture practices and other activities are mainly responsible for accelerated 
soil erosion which causes siltation in dams. Paragraph 7.10 of Reservoir 
Operation Guidelines 80 issued by the Bureau of India n Standards requires 
capacity surveys of reservoirs to be undertaken once in three to five years or 
when the loss of capacity was five per cent, whichever was earlier.  
• Audit observed that of the 18 reservoirs 81 under the ownership of 
KSEBL, sedimentation stud ies of only 11 82 were carried out during 
the period from 1989 to 2011. As on the date of audit  (August 2019), 
no capacity surveys or sedimentation studies were conducted in any 
of the KSEBL reservoirs after 2011. Though the sedimentation 
surveys (in 2007 and 1995 respectively) indicated significant capacity 
loss as i n Kallarkutty dam (47 per cent of gross storage in 45 years) 
and Anayirankal reservoir (30.92 per cent in 33 years), KSEBL had 
not conducted any further study to assess the change in silt deposit 
and reduction in the capacity of the dams. Though KSEBL iden tified 
(2010) six dams 83 for conducting desiltation, none of them had been 
desilted till the date of audit (August 2019). 
Secretary, Power Department stated (September 2020) that the live 
storage in five major reservoirs viz. Idukki, Idamalayar, Kakki, 
Banasurasagar and Sholayar (out of 18 reservoirs 84) constitutes 92.27 
per cent. Siltation is negligible in these major reservoirs as its annual 
storage loss is less than 0.2 per cent as per the sedimentation studies 
conducted through various agencies. In resp ect of the eight small 
reservoirs for which studies were conducted , desilting could not be 
carried out due to difficulty in depositing removed silt and obtaining 
permission from Forest Department. The Handbook on assessing and 
managing reservoir sedimentat ion published by CWC in February 
2019 indicates that the annual storage loss due to sedimentation is 
significantly low in Kerala reservoirs. 
Audit observes that the statement that sedimentation in the five major 
KSEBL reservoirs is negligible is not based on any recent study or  
 
80  IS 7323:1994, Paragraph 7.10 
81  Eighteen storage reservoirs which are formed under 32 dams. 
82  Kakki, Kallarkutty, Lower Periyar, Ponmudy, Poringalkuthu, Kundala, Madup etty, Anayirankal, 
Pamba, Kuttiadi, Idukki and Idamalayar reservoirs 
83  Lower Periyar, Kallarkutty, Ayyappancovil and Kulamavu area of Idukki Hydro Electric Project, 
Anayirankal, Kundala and Madupetty Reservoirs 
84  with live storage capacities ranging from 0.39 to 1460 MCM 

 
 
 53 
Chapter III – Flood forecasting and reservoir operation  
assessment (through CWC or otherwise) as sedimentation assessment 
of Idukki, Idamalayar, Kakki and Sholayar were conducted during 
2004, 2011, 1999 and 2003 respectively. In respect of Banasurasagar 
reservoir, commissioned during 2005, no sedimentation study is seen 
conducted. Thus, 9 to 20 years have elapsed since conduct of capacity 
survey or sedimentation study, even though Reservoir operation 
guidelines (IS 7323:1994) provide for capacity survey every three to 
five years.  
Kerala State Electricity Board Ltd. informed vide letter dated 01 
February 2021 that sedimentatio n study had been repeated for 
Poringalkuthu and Kundala reservoirs in 2020. KSEBL also 
completed sedimentation surveys for five more reservoirs viz. 
Kallarkutty, Madupetty, Ponmudy, Anayirankal and Sengulam in 
2020 but reports of the survey are awaited.  Proposals for conducting 
sedimentation studies for the remaining reservoirs are now included 
under Dam Rehabilitation and Improvemen t Project (DRIP ) - II and 
submitted to CWC for their approval.  Chief Engineer (Civil – Dam 
Safety and DRIP) further stated (February 2021) in the backdrop of 
the 2018 floods that it was decided to carry out  the sedimentation 
study for Idukki, Idamalay ar, Kakki, Banasurasagar and Sholayar 
reservoirs and  the same is included in Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improvement Project-II. 
• Audit observed that the position was slightly better in the case of 20 
reservoirs under the control of the Water Resources Department. 
Siltation study was conducted in respect of all these reservoirs. The 
study revealed significant levels of siltation in Aruvikkara reservoir 
(43 per cent), Mangalam reservoir (21.98 per cent), Peppara reservoir 
(21.70 per cent ) etc. However, desiltation acti vities were not 
undertaken in any of these reservoirs. Though sanction was accorded 
(September 2017) by GoK for desiltation of Mangalam and Chulliyar 
reservoirs, the works were yet to commence as of the date of audit 
(November 2019).  
In its reply, the Water Resources Department (November 2020) stated that 
silting was generally less in Irrigation dams. However, Audit observed that 
sedimentation in Peppara, Mangal am and Kanjirampuzha reservoirs of 21.70, 
21.98 and 21.27 per cent of its storage capacity was significant.  
During the Exit Conference (02 February 2021) and subsequently, vide letter 
from ACS, Water Resources Department dated 19  April 2021, Audit was 
informed that the desilting of Mangalam dam commenced 85 in the first week 
of December 2020 and that of Meenkara, Valayar and Chulliyar reservoirs 
entrusted to Kerala State Mineral Development Corporation Ltd . and Kerala 
Irrigation Infrastructure Development C orporation. With respect to 
 
85  ACS, WRD reply dated 19  April 2021 indicated that work for desilting Mangalam dam is a three -
year long project which started on 17  December 2020. As on 10  April 2021, 0.098 MCM sediments 
(3.32 per cent) removed out of a total estimated quantity of 2.95 MCM.  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
54 
Kanjirappuzha reservoir, bathymetric survey has been completed. 
Administrative sanction was accorded for the desiltation of Aruvikkara 
reservoir in January 2021 and two bids received are under consideration of  the 
High-Level Empowered Committee. Further, though all efforts are taken to get 
the dams desilted, as the participation in tendering process was very low, the 
works had to be retendered more than once. ACS also stated that with the 
constitution of River Basin Conservation and Management Authority , the 
coordination work could be institutionalised and turned into a regular process. 
Recommendation 3.6: In view of the possible loss of active storage volume of 
dams through sedimentation and its consequential adverse impact on flood 
control, KSEB and Irrigation Department may ensure that sedimentation 
studies as prescribed in Reservoir Operation Guidelines issued by Bureau of 
Indian Standards are conducted and timely action taken to arrest the 
capacity loss of reservoirs. 

 
 
  
D e c e m b e r  2 0 ,  2 0 1 9  
C h e r u t h o n i  r i v e r b e d ,  
I d u k k i  D i s t r i c t 
CHAPTER IV 
IMPACT OF CHANGE IN LAND USE AND LAND COVER 

 
 
  

 
 
 55 
 
 
 
IMPACT OF CHANGE IN LAND USE 
AND LAND COVER  
‘Land Cover’ refers to the Earth’s surface cover such as forest land, wasteland, 
grassland, barren soil, river/  water bodies and built -up area etc. whereas the 
utilisation/ modification of the land for various socio -economic purposes such 
as urbanisation, afforestation and cultivation is classified as Land Use. Change 
in the Land Use and Land Cover (LULC) alters the natural hydrologic al 
processes of a region. Increased urbanisation results in the loss of existing 
natural drainage capacity of that area and prevents rainw ater infiltration into 
the soil. This results in a rapid increase in the surface runoff generated which 
leads to surface flooding which can only be mitigated with proper drainage 
infrastructure. 
Towards assessing the impact of changes in land use pattern o n the floods of 
2018, Audit availed the services of IISc to conduct an LULC analysis of the 
Periyar basin with specific reference to the two selected districts of Idukki and 
Ernakulam. To make the assessment, LULC data and maps of 100 m 
resolution of Idukki and Ernakulam districts for the years 1985, 1995 and 2005 
were sourced from National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA). For the 
years 2005 and 2015, the LULC data and maps 86 were obtained from Kerala 
State Remote Sensing and Environment Centre (KSREC).  The common year 
2005 for which data was available from both the sources was used to validate 
the two datasets against each other to enable a continuous LULC change 
analysis over the three decades from 1985 -2015. The results of the analysis of 
LULC in the Periyar basin and in the test-checked districts of Idukki and 
Ernakulam are given below. Further, this chapter includes findings on illegal 
constructions on Cheruthoni riverbed, diversion canal for Chengalthodu 
inadequate to prevent inundation and obstruct ion to flood discharge through 
Thottappally spillway. 
4.1. Result of LULC study in the Periyar basin  
The Periyar basin has an area of 5 ,159.71 sq. km, out of which about 97 per 
cent is in Kerala and about three per cent is in Tamil Nadu. Within Kerala, the 
basin has 3,011.65 sq. km in Idukki district (⁓58 per cent), 1,724.34 sq.km in 
Ernakulam district (⁓33 per cent ) and 282.34 sq. km in Thrissur district 
(⁓six per cent). The LULC analysis for the entire Periyar basin in cluding the 
test-checked Idukki and Ernakulam districts revealed that the built -up area 
increased by nearly 450 per cent during 1985-2015 (from 60 sq. km in 1985 to 
330 sq. km in 2015). During the same period, the water bodies decreased by 
nearly 17 per cent (from 267 sq. km in 1985 to 221.44 sq. km in 2015). During 
the last decade 2005 to 2015 alone, the built -up area increased by nearly 139 
per cent (from 138 sq. km in 2005 to 330 sq. km in 2015) and the water bodies 
 
86 The LULC maps on a scale of 1:50,000 were procured from KSREC (converted to raster of 30 m 
resolution) 
4 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
56 
decreased by 1.26 per cent (from 224.26 sq. km in 2005 to 221.44 sq. km in 
2015) in the Periyar basin. 
During the course of the audit, instance s of encroachment of water bodies, 
river banks were noticed in the test-checked districts. Encroachment of water 
bodies accentuates risk and exacerbate s the State’s vulnerability to natural 
disasters87. The Kerala Land Conservancy Act 1957, contained provisions for 
removal of any encroachment or obstruction in river bank or kadavu and it was 
the responsibility of the Village Officer to report to the Dist rict Collector 
promptly all cases of encroachments on lands which are the property of 
Government. However, Audit observed 913 encroachments on four rivers/  
water bodies in the districts of Thrissur, Idukki and Alappuzha which 
obstructed the free flow of th e river and consequent inundation of adjacent 
areas during the 2018 flood. Issues such as lack of timely action in preventing 
encroachments, failure of revenue authorities to remove encroachment, non - 
conducting of survey to determine the boundaries of a r iver etc. contributed to 
shrinkage in areas covered by water bodies as indicated in Appendix 2.1. 
4.1.1. Land Use and Land Cover in Idukki district 
As stated above, 3 ,011.65 sq.km of land in Idukki district is situated in the 
Periyar Basin. The LULC analysis revealed that in Idukki district, a very 
significant increase of around 658 per cent (Appendix 4.1) in built-up area has 
occurred during the decade of 2005-2015. Such an increase in the built-up area 
adversely affects the flood runoff, exacerbatin g the inundation during heavy 
rain events. A study of the transition of land use 88 (in percentage) from one 
type to another in Idukki district from 2005 to 2015 revealed that 7.30 per 
cent89 of agricultural land, 1.04 per cent90 of forest land and 1.34 per cent91 of 
water bodies in 2005, were converted to built -up land by 2015. Thus, in 
Idukki, the increase in built -up land from 2005 to 2015 was mainly the result 
of conversion of agricultural land, forest land and water bodies etc. 
4.1.2. Land Use and Land Cover in Ernakulam district 
Periyar Basin also comprises of 1 ,724.34 sq.km in Ernakulam district. 
Analysis of data for Ernakulam district revealed ( Appendix 4.2 ) a very 
significant increase in built -up area of around 212 per cent  during the three 
decades 1985-2015 and an increase of around 73 per cent in built-up area in 
the decade of 2005 -2015. Also, the extent of water bodies in the district 
decreased by nearly 14 per cent  during 1985 -2015. Such an increase in the 
built-up area, accompanied by a decrease in wate r bodies adversely affects the 
flood runoff, intensifying the inundation during heavy rain. As in the case of 
 
87  Rebuild Kerala Development Programme, Chapter 1, Encroachment of water bodies as an example 
of poor maintenance of existing assets 
88 Transition of land use is change from one type of land use to another, which may be human induced 
or naturally occurring, over the years. (Source: IISc Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 
89 103.40 sq. km out of total agricultural land of 1,416.15 sq. km in 2005 
90 22.84 sq. km out of total forest land of 2,196.35 sq. km in 2005 
91 1.46 sq. km out of total water bodies of 109.02 sq. km in 2005 

 
 
Chapter IV – Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
57 
Idukki district, a study of the transition of land use in Ernakulam district 
revealed that 12 per cent92 of agricultural land in 2005 was converte d to built-
up area during the period 2005 -2015. Audit also observed that 1.10 per cent93 
of water bodies were converted to built-up area during 2005-2015. 
4.1.3. Land Use and Land Cover in flood prone region of Ernakulam 
district 
The floods of 2018 severely impacted areas downstream of the Neeleswaram 
gauge station till the Arabian Sea covering the towns of Kalady, Perumbavoor, 
Aluva, North Paravur and parts of Ernakulam city and Cochin International 
Airport (flood affected region) with a total area of about 791 sq. km (about 46 
per cent of Ernakulam district). Audit examined the LULC over the last three 
decades of the flood affected region to assess the impact of floods because of 
change in LULC. This is necessary to understand whether the increase in built-
up area in the Ernakulam district and the reduction in extent of water bodies 
resulted in the enormous damage to the region during 2018 floods.  
In the flood -affected region, 86.76 sq. km of agricultural land (of total 
agricultural land of 566.34 sq. km in 2005) and 1.09 sq. km of water bodies (of 
total area of water bodies 69.62 sq. km in 2005) was converted to built -up area 
between 2005 and 2015 (Appendix 4.3). 
The change in land use during the past three decades (1985 -2015) resulted in a 
notable impact on the floods of 2018. Significant increase in built -up area and 
notable decrease in water bodies in recent years have rendered the Periyar 
basin vulnerable to floods. The results of Hydrologic modelling94 also revealed 
that had t he same rainfall and spills of 2018 occurred with 1985 land use 
conditions, the flood depth at Neeleswaram gauge station would have reduced 
from 12.32 m to 10.03 m and the flood inunda ted area would have reduced 
from 520.04 sq. km to 414.76 sq. km. 
In resp onse to the audit observations on LULC, the Revenue and Disaster 
Management Department stated (November 2020) that Kerala has witnessed 
rapid urbanisation in the last two decades with 47.10 per cent  of the 
population living in urban areas and the rise in n umber of urban settlements 
expected to continue. The State Disaster Management Authority, on 
identifying land use as a major determinant factor of vulnerability in the State, 
had identified and succeeded in ensuring risk sensitive land use restrictions 95 
in the State through the State Disaster Management Plan besides a disaster 
 
92 208.5 sq. km out of total agricultural land of 1,737.86 sq. km in 2005 
93 2.09 sq. km out of total water bodies of 190.70 sq. km in 2005 
94 IISc used a two-dimensional (2D) HEC-RAS model for this purpose 
95  No permission for blasting type quarrying in high hazard zones of Kerala, Restriction on 
construction types in Wayanad district owing to hazard proneness based on KSDMA ’s advice,  
Limiting extraction of groundwater to 25  per cent of the permitted amount in the light of drought, 
Prevention of obstruction of streams and natural drains through amendment in the Kerala 
Municipality/ Panchayat Building Rules in 2019, Report of the Technical Committee suggesting 
amendments to the techno -legal regime issued to the Local Self -Government Department to amend 
the Kerala Municipal/ Panchayat Building Rules by the State Executive Committee of KSDMA. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
58 
vulnerability linked relocation scheme. Enactment of a new integrated, risk 
sensitive and terrain specific legislation as highlighted in the Rebuild Kerala 
Development P rogramme (seeking to explore solutions to Kerala’s 
urbanisation problems) was the only means of reducing disaster vulnerabilities 
of the State. Hence audit observation only reiterated known facts and the State 
has already started local and customised solutions.  
The exercise undertaken in audit brought to light the extent of drastic change 
in land use in the Periyar basin during the past three decades (1985 -2015), 
which resulted in a notable impact on the floods of 2018. The study 
underscores the need for urgent and c oordinated efforts of stakeholders in 
arresting the rapid conversion of Land cover, to mitigate the severity of future 
flood scenarios in the State. Whereas urbanisation is essential to cater to the 
needs of growing population, unplanned and imprudent increase in built up 
area would trigger further depletion of pervious land cover. Besides the steps 
already undertaken, the State needs to  review the nee d for a legislation on 
flood plain zones/ initiate steps to prioritise the identification and demarcation 
of flood plain zones. 
Audit notes that the Rebuild Kerala Development P rogramme of Rebuild 
Kerala Initiative draws attention to the fact that rapid ur banisation influenced 
habitations into uncontrolled expansion on both banks of the rivers/  water 
bodies thereby encroaching into water channels/  bodies and constricting the 
flood plains. Arresting further unplanned increase in coverage of built -up area 
of land cover is the critical need of the hour. 
Recommendation 4.1: In view of the drastic change in land use over the past 
few decades with its impact on the recent floods, Government may initiate 
urgent steps to review the adequacy of the measures initiate d to reduce the 
risk of vulnerability to floods, attributable to changes in land use.  
Government may also initiate steps for an integrated and comprehensive 
legislation and a land use policy after reviewing the existing land 
management related Acts/ rules / regulations/ policies etc. to reduce disaster 
vulnerabilities, as highlighted in the Rebuild Kerala Development 
Programme. 
4.2. Illegal constructions on Cheruthoni riverbed in Idukki 
district 
Cheruthoni river is located in Idukki district. The water from Cher uthoni dam 
along with that of two other dams at Idukki and Kulamavu, is used by KSEBL 
for production of electricity at the Moolamattom Power house. The spillway of 
Idukki Hydro Electric Project in the Cheruthoni Dam, when opened, releases 
water from the dam into Cheruthoni river.  
The Disaster Management Plan 2016 had warned that consequent upon 
encroachment of the riverbed downstream of this dam, opening the shutters of 
the dam would result in damage to property. However, lack of continuous 
monitoring and timely action to evict encroachers led to the obstruction of free 

 
 
Chapter IV – Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
59 
flow of the river and consequent damages in 2018 floods. Audit observed that 
the Idukki Township Area Development Scheme, 1980, classified 238.72 
hectares of land, situated downstream of Cheruthoni Dam in between the road 
from Cheruthoni town to Neriyamangalam and Cheruthoni river, as 
Construction Free Zone (CFZ). This area falls under Maximum Flood Level 
(MFL) demarcated by KSEBL. No construction could be done in this area a s 
the opening of dam shutters would damage buildings and habitations in this 
area. But disregarding the apparent danger, buildings were constructed along 
the course of the Cheruthoni River within CFZ/  MFL. It is evident from a 
letter written (March 1993) b y Chairman, KSEBL to GoK that KSEBL had 
constraints in opening the dam spillway fearing the adverse effects on life and 
property downstream of the river. 
Consequent to a mass petition filed by residents of Idukki (March 2008) 
before Hon’ble Chief Minister regardi ng illegal constructions of multi -storied 
buildings in CFZ at Cheruthoni, a detailed enquiry by the LSGD and Power 
departments identified 62 buildings in the CFZ which would be inundated in 
the event of opening of dam shutters. Though GoK directed (November 2009) 
Secretary, Vazhathope Grama Panchayat to remove the buildings constructed 
in CFZ, no action was taken to comply with the direction resulting in many 
buildings and houses 96 being washed 
away and foundations of several 
buildings getting damaged consequent 
to the opening of shutters of 
Cheruthoni dam during the floods of 
August 2018. More importantly, the 
Tahsildar Idukki reported (April 
2019) that new buildings were again 
coming up in the area where the 
buildings were washed away in 2018.  
The constructions were in violation of 
the orders (August 2016) of the 
District Collector in his capacity as 
Chairman of DDMA prohibiting 
construction in areas within t he MFL 
of the Cheruthon i River. The Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, Idukki also 
reported (April 2019) that there was 
reconstruction of old buildings which 
were damaged in the floods of 2018, 
in violation of the order of District 
Collector. No action has also been 
 
96 Palace Hotel, Central Bakery, Keral a Bakery, Newspaper shop, Sreenilayam stores, Akshaya 
Kendra, Muthoot shop, KTM veg store, comfort stations, other vegetable shops etc. and eight 
numbers of houses 
Figure 4.1: Reconstruction of hotel building 
washed away in flood of 2018. 
20 December 2019, Cheruthoni riverbed, Idukki 
District,  
Photo taken by Audit party, attested by Tahsildar, 
Idukki Taluk 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
60 
taken to remov e or relocate 155 encroachments identified by a joint 
verification team 97 constituted (November 2019) by the District Collector. 
Complaints on encroachments received by the Revenue Department were also 
not acted upon by the department. The Tahsildar (Land Records), Idukki 
affirmed to Audit (November 2019) that none of the 34 complaints received 
upto 2019 by the Taluk Surveyor/  Village Officer relating to encroachment of 
rivers/ canals were acted upon.  
Lack of continuous monitoring and timely action to evic t the encroachers led 
to the obstruction of free flow of the river and consequent damages in 2018 
floods. Further, the encroachment caused operational bottlenecks for spillway 
opening as the people occupying these illegally constructed buildings were to 
be given sufficient time for evacuation before the gates were opened. 
Principal Secretary, Revenue and Disaster Management Department stated 
(January 2021) that a joint inspection under the leadership of Town Planner, 
Idukki has reported that there are appro ximately 285 constructions in the CFZ 
and directions were given to Vazhathope GP for taking action against illegal 
construction. In the Exit Conference (January 2021), Commissioner, Disaster 
Management stated that the District Collector had been insisting on removal of 
structures in the CFZ and MFL region and orders were issued by District 
Collector in 2016. However, due to court cases both in High Court and 
National Green Tribunal, progress in eviction was slow. The Commissioner 
assured that the matter was being pursued nevertheless. 
Recommendation 4.2: The Government needs to prioritise speedy resolution 
of the issues relating to removal of unauthori sed constructions from the 
construction free zone in Cheruthoni as also to ensure no new construction 
is allowed to come up in future within the demarcated zone.  
4.3. Diversion canal for Chengalthodu inadequate to prevent 
inundation 
The Land Use and Land Cover analysis of the Periyar Basin as conducted by 
IISc revealed significant increase in built -up area and reduction in the extent 
of water bodies . Several towns downstream of Neeleswaram gauge station 
including parts of Ernakulam city and areas in and around Cochin 
International Airport experienc ed aggressive flooding  in August 2018 . The 
severity of floods in 2018 caused Cochin International Airport Limited (CIAL) 
to shut down the airport for 15 days. Audit , therefore, sought to validate the 
LULC analysis with field verification and scrutiny of records at various 
offices.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that 1 ,253 acres of land w ere acquired for 
constructing the airport, which included wetlands utilised for paddy cultivation 
 
97  Dam Safety Officer, KSEB, Vazhathope, Town Planning Officer, Idukki, Tahsildar (LR), Iduk ki, 
Secretary Grama Panchayat, Vazhathope, Village Officer, Idukki and Taluk Surveyor, Taluk Office, 
Idukki. 

 
 
Chapter IV – Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
61 
with canals and a portion of the Chengalthodu98 flowing through. Government 
of India accorded (March 1995) environmental clearance for constr uction of 
the airport, subject to the fulfilment of the condition that ‘for diversion of 
Chengalthodu, appropriate measures such as construction of bund/  diversion 
canal etc. to regulate the flow of water from Periyar river into the existing 
Chengalthodu must be adopted, to ensure that the overall hydrology of the area 
does not change.’ 
Audit sought the dimensions of Chengalthodu which originally flowed 
through the area acquired by CIAL before construction of the airport, from 
Taluk/ Land Acquisition offices in Aluva. The said details were not available 
either in the office of the Special Tahsildar (Land Acquisition) 99, 
Nedumbassery or the Taluk office, Aluva . Consequently, as requested by 
Audit, the survey wing in Taluk office Aluva conducted a comprehensive 
survey100 of the original flow route of Chengalthodu prior to construction of 
airport, after accessing basic records, lithoma ps etc. and survey plans from 
District Survey Office and taluk/ village offices. The survey revealed that 
while the existing stretch of Chengalthodu originating from the Periyar and 
flowing till the northern boundary wall of CIAL was approximately 3.5 km 
long and 60 m wide, the total length of the flow route within CIAL area before 
construction of airport was estimated to be 2.06 km with approximate width of 
52 m. Audit observed101 that the stretch within the acquired area was filled up 
by CIAL, thereby disrupting the natural flow route of the water body causing 
stagnation of water and severe inundation during monsoons. 
While conceding that the river had been blocked at the point wh ere it touches 
the northern boundary wall of the airport, CIAL informed (December 2020) 
that the stretch of Chengalthodu which flowed through the middle portion of 
the runway area was diverted in the process of converting the acquired area 
into airport, mo re specifically the runway and taxiway. It was also stated that 
CIAL had created a diversion canal approximately 3.5 km long and 38 m 102 
wide in 1999 itself and that the length of the canal remained unaltered even 
today. However, the minutes of post 2018 flood meetings attended by Revenue 
and Disaster Management and Irrigation Departments/ CIAL/ LSGI authorities 
mentioned that the said channel remained without having been deepened and 
cleaned, obstructing the smooth flow of water in monsoons, leading to loca l 
protests.  
Audit observed from records that consequent upon an aggravated flood 
situation in August 2013, areas in the vicinity of CIAL were inundated, 
forcing suspension of normal operation of the airport for a day. Subsequently, 
 
98 A rivulet collecting excess water from Periyar river, starting in Kanjoor village and having natural 
course through Chengal, Thuravankara, Manjal i, Chowara and finally merging with Periyar at 
Kuzhippallam. ‘Thodu’ is the Malayalam word for small river/ creek/ canal. 
99  The office was severely affected by floods in 2018 and 2019, with many of its records getting 
dampened and termite-infested 
100 The survey was conducted from December 2019 to January 2020 
101  Chengalthodu Report of the Irrigation Division, Ernakulam post 2018 floods 
102  The width stated by CIAL alongwith bund road; the survey sketch showed width of 20 m. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
62 
CIAL requested National  Institute of Technology (NIT), Calicut to conduct a 
study to suggest remedial measures to prevent recurrence of such an event. 
NIT Calicut observed (2013) that as the diversion channel proposed by CIAL 
had very limited carrying capacity, it could not be e xpected to bring down the 
flood discharge and levels in Chengalthodu and adjoining areas considerably 
and eliminate the threat of submergence. As an additional safety measure, NIT 
recommended that CIAL may complete the diversion channel with maximum 
possible width, depth, and bed slope, taking sufficient precaution to prevent 
inundation of the land along its alignment. However, insuffic iency of 
measures taken since then is evident from the report of Irrigation Department 
post the deluge in 2018 stating that  the diversion canal constructed by CIAL 
was totally inadequate to drain off the excess influx from Periyar as well as 
rainwater from the areas in the vicinity, which resulted in acute flooding in the 
area.  
Cochin International Airport Limited  stated in t he replies and during 
discussion (December 2020, January 2021) that the site for the airport was 
selected by the expert team from Airports Authority of India, and GoK vide 
Government Order dated 15 November 1996 approved diversion of 
Chengalthodu so as to carry out construction of runway and apron over 
Chengalthodu. It was also informed that the width of Chengalthodu varies 
from place to place and at places is 20 m as against 60 m indicated by Audit. 
Considering the 400 m wide operational area of airport an d some meandering 
of the rivulet, the maximum length of the rivulet inside the operational area 
would be 600 m against the 2.06 km length stated by Audit. Audit should have 
relied upon the Survey of India Map of 1993 rather than follow a methodology 
of the  superimposition of lithomap of Aluva taluk over satellite map of the 
area. 
Cochin International Airport Limited  further stated that historical data 
indicates that the maximum water flow from Chengalthodu to Periyar could be 
41.53 cumecs. The unprecedented  water flow in the Periyar during the 2018 
flood calamity, near the Airport area was 6 ,500 cumecs due to very heavy 
rainfall and excess spillage from upstream dams. The water flow rather than 
the construction of the airport caused severe flooding in Periya r, its tributaries 
and flood arms. Areas downstream and upstream of Periyar were also badly 
flooded in 2018 floods.  
Audit clarified (January 2021) that it had relied upon the actual measurements 
of the detailed survey conducted by the Survey wing of Taluk Office Aluva for 
over a month, to assess the extent of water body that has been filled to make 
way for the runway of the airport, from the point at which it was blocked at the 
northern boundary wall of CIAL till the point at which it continues to flow 
outside the airport boundary. The superimposition 103 of the lithomap over 
satellite map was only for reconfirmation, which also revealed the length of  
Chengalthodu within CIAL area to be over 2 km. CIAL requested to share the 
 
103  At Land Use Board Thiruvananthapuram 

 
 
Chapter IV – Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
63 
survey sketch with them, which was complied with by Audit. Minutes of the 
conference were approved (February 2021) by Audit and CIAL. 
Audit observed that action to survey and demar cate the flood plains of 
Chengalthodu, as well as conserve and ensure unhindered flow route for the 
river had not been taken even after the flooding in 2013. Despite passage of 20 
years since the commissioning of the airport and in cidents of severe floodin g 
in the area, the Irrigation/ Revenue and Disaster Management wings/  LSGIs 
concerned/ CIAL have not been able to ensure a diversion canal adequate to 
carry the Chengalthodu waters (in the event of heavy flooding) into the Periyar 
river to sustain the over all hydrology of the area and ward off the potential 
risks of riverine flooding to the resident population. Considering that the flood 
hydrograph in NIT Report had observed that the peak flood discharge near the 
mouth of Chengalthodu (entrance from Periyar  river) at Neeleswaram on 
Periyar river was 472 cu mecs in 2013 (the time taken by the flood wave to 
travel from Neeleswaram to the mouth of the Chengalthodu is just about 14 
minutes104) and also the flood flow through Chengalthodu 6 ,500 cu mecs in 
2018, the Government needs to ensure adequacy of the dimensions of the 
diverted route of Chengalthodu as well as its maintenance, so as to lessen the 
impact of possible inundation in the airport and surrounding areas during the 
monsoons.  
CIAL stated (December 2020) that GoK had accorded sanction (February 
2019) to a c omprehensive flood mitigation plan for safeguarding the areas in 
the vicinity of airport from future floods. Of the 26 works taken up as part of 
the flood mitigation plan at a cost of `129.30 crore, 13 works were stated as 
completed and the remaining works  were still in progress.  CIAL informed  
(January 2021) that the works relating to the diversion canal were expected to 
be completed before the upcoming monsoon. Government of Kerala informed 
(January 2021) that reply to the matter has been furnished (Decemb er 2020) to 
Audit by CIAL. 
Recommendation 4.3: Government may a) ensure the adequacy of planned/ 
ongoing works under the comprehensive flood mitigation plan for 
safeguarding CIAL and its surrounding areas and b) review the pace of 
progress vis-à-vis the t argets so that risk of loss to life and property in case 
of extreme rainfall/ flooding is minimised.  
4.4. Obstruction to flood discharge through Thottappally 
Spillway 
The Thottappally Spillway 105 (TSW) situated 20 km south of Alappuzha was 
commissioned in 1955 as an easy and only direct outlet for the combined flood 
discharge of Pamba, Achencovil and Manimala rivers into the sea before it 
reaches lower Kuttanad area, preventing heavy damages to the  life and 
 
104  NIT Report 2013 
105  The TSW included a regulator cum bridge 360 metres long having 40 vents and a leading channel 
1,310 m long and 365 m wide, starting from the confluence point of Pam ba and Achencovil rivers at 
Veeyapuram. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
64 
property of people in Kuttanad. TSW was to include a regulator cum bridge 
365 m long having 40 vents and a leading channel 1 ,310 m long and 365 m 
wide, starting from the confluence point of Pamba and Achencovil rivers at 
Veeyapuram. Audit scrutin y of records revealed that in the upstream side of 
the spillway, the width of the leading channel was only about 80 m from 
Veeyapuram to Thottappally, which reduced the discharge capacity of TSW to 
700 cumecs against the envisaged capacity of 1800 cumecs. 
Consequently, water discharged through the spillway to the sea was severely 
restricted, during the flood of 2018, resulting in heavy flooding 106 and 
casualties in Kuttanad and other regions in Alappuzha and parts of 
Pathanamthitta.  
The Chief Engineer (Mechanical), Irrigation Department confirmed (July 
2020) that against the targeted dredging of the east side of Thottappally (lake 
side) for a length of 500 m with a width of 320 m, works were executed only 
in a stretch of 380 m length and 1 60 m width 107. Audit notes that d redging 
works in the leading channel which remained to be completed imply  reduced 
carrying capacity. 
Scrutiny of records at Office of the Chief Engineer, Kuttanad 108 indicated that 
there was gradual accretion of sand on the south side of a brea kwater which 
was constructed (2004) to facilitate opening of Thottappally Fishing Harbour 
about 100 m north of spillway mouth. The width and carrying capacity of the 
spillway mouth was further reduced to one third of its original state , after the 
Social Fo restry Department, without seeking permission from Irrigation 
Department, planted (2010) casuarina trees on this sand base, right inside the 
spillway mouth.  Incomplete dredging and widening of leading channel of 
Thottapally spillway and delay in removal of  the trees planted inside the 
spillway mouth resulted in reduction of capacity of the spillway, thus 
contributing to the flood situation in Alappuzha in August 2018. 
 
106  Source: Letter from CE Kuttanad to Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department (June 
2019) 
107  Excluding a stretch of 80 metre length and 50 metre width 
108  Chief Engineer, Inland Navigation and Kuttanad package under Water Resources Department, 
Government of Kerala 

 
 
Chapter IV – Impact of change in Land Use and Land Cover  
65 
 
Figure 4.2: Thottappally spillway aerial view, 
July 2018, Alappuzha District 
Source: Mechanical Division, Irrigation Department, Alappuzha 
In the aftermath of the August 2018 floods, the Principal Chief Conservator of 
Forests (PCCF) issued instructions (May 2019) to cut down the trees in view 
of the risk of an impending disaster. However, the Social Forestry wing of the 
district, citing environmental reasons, did not comply with the order. Orders of 
the District Collector invoking the provisions of Disaster Management Act 
2005 (June 2019), for taking immediate action to cut down these trees which 
were obstructing natural flow through the spillway mouth were also not 
complied with. 
Chief Engineer, Kuttanad informed Audit during the joint site verification  
(04 October 2019) that though attempts were made to cut down the trees on 
the basis of District Collector’s order, only four trees could be removed as the 
local people had vehemently resisted the move, stating that these trees acted as 
a protective shield against wind.  
Water Resources Department confirmed (November 2020) that discharge 
envisaged through the spillway had been reduced from 1800 cumecs due to the 
siltation in the leading channel. Further, any change in width of the upstream 
channel requires rehabilitation of people from the heavily populated banks. 
Additional Chief Secretary, Water Resources Department informed 
(November 2020 and April 2021) Audit that 550 casuarina trees planted within 
the 380m width of the downstream, and reckoned to be obstructing the flow of 
floodwaters were cut down by the District Administration, Alappuzha on 22 
May 2020, by which the width at the spillway mouth was extended by 230m  
thereby reaching the required width of 380m.  
It was also informed that with a view to deepen and widen the estuary, 
Irrigation Department started removal of mineral sand from spillway mouth 
and downstream of the spillway on 20 May 2020. Accordingly, an e stimated 
quantity of 2,42,831 cu.m sand was dredged; out of which a quantity of  
1,75,319 cu.m sand was removed. Within a few months after completing the 
dredging, a sand bar has been formed at the spillway mouth, occupying a 
width of 75 m. The present accumulation of mineral sand at the downstream is 
Width of sea mouth is reduced 
to one-third of its original width 
due to sand accretion 
consequent to construction of 
harbour and trees planted on the 
deposited sand. 
Casuarina trees planted by 
Social Forestry Department on 
the sand base blocking free 
flow of flood water into sea. 
Thottappally spillway regulator 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
66 
estimated to be 2,49,000 cu.m (April 2021).  Steps were being taken to remove 
the since accumulated mineral sand from the downstream of the spillway 
mouth in order to ensure smooth flow of flood waters during t he upcoming 
monsoon season. 
Audit observes that Water Resources Department and District Administration 
Alappuzha would further need to ensure regular monitoring and deepening of 
the leading channel upstream of TSW and timely breaking of developing sand 
bar if any, which are crucial in ensuring unhindered flow of flood waters to the 
sea. Had the above authorities proactively intervened, to remove the trees  
obstructing the spillway mouth prior to 2018 monsoon, the flood situation in 
Alappuzha could have been mitigated to a considerable extent. 
Recommendation 4.4: Government may, prioritise works such as deepening 
of the leading channel upstream of TSW and timely breaking of developing 
sand bar, if any,  at the sea mouth so as to ensure unhindered flow of flood 
waters to the sea , giving due consideration to extant environment related 
instructions while so doing.  

 
 
  
A u g u s t  1 9 ,  2 0 1 8  
A l a p p u z h a  D i s t r i c t 
CHAPTER V 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND SURVEY  
  

 
 
  

 
 
 67 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND SURVEY 
Financial management 
Audit analysed the procedures followed in administration of the State Disaster 
Mitigation Fund and extent of utilisation of State Disaster Response Fund for 
immediate restoration activities in the post 2018 flood scenario and the 
resultant observations are presented in the following paragraphs. 
5.1. Management of the State Disaster Mitigation Fund 
In line with the stipulation in the Disaster Management Act, 2005 requiring 109 
the State Disaster Management Authority to recommend making available 
funds for mitigation 110 and preparedness measures in relation to disasters, a 
State Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF) was constituted ( December 2011 ) 
exclusively for projects meant for the  mitigation of disasters. The Guidelines 
for administration of SDMF were issued (June 2012) by GoK to ensure 
consistency111 in the use of the Mitigation Fund and promote measures to 
reduce future loss to life and property, protect the infrastructure and ult imately 
help build disaster resistant communities. The Guidelines envisage (Para graph 
2.5) that the State Disaster Management Plan formulated by the SDMA, SEOC 
and the Department of Revenue and Disaster Management 112 should form the 
basis for the effective utilisation of SDMF. Audit noticed the following 
deviations in the management of the Fund. 
5.1.1. Need for proactive role of KSDMA to ensure higher provision of 
funds 
The Guidelines stipulated that the annual contribution of GoK to SDMF for 
each financial year would be as recommended by SDMA, to be provided every 
year in the State budget. The budgetary provisions and expenditure under 
SDMF during the audit period from 2014-19 are detailed in Table 5.1. 
  
 
109  Section 18(2)(f) of the Disaster Management Act 2005 
110  ‘Mitigation’ refers to the lessening or limitation of the adverse impacts of hazards and related 
disasters. (Source: Guidelines for the Administration of State Disaster Mitigation Fund, June 2012) 
111  Guidelines for the Administration of the State Disaster Mitigation Fund, June 2012 
112  Page 3 of State Disaster Management Plan 2016 
5 

 
 
 68 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
Table 5.1: Budgetary provisions and expenditure of SDMF during 2014-19 
(` in crore) 
Year Funds provided 
in the Budget 
Expenditure against 
budget provision  
2014-15  0.05  0.00 
2015-16 42.50 32.50 
2016-17 10.10  1.00 
2017-18  6.25   6.25 
2018-19  1.00  0.81 
Total 59.90 40.56 
(Source: Detailed Appropriation Accounts of the respective years) 
As seen above, the funds received from GoK were meagre in all years other 
than 2015 -16 when GoK made available `42.50 crore for the fund.  Also, 
contrary to stipulations in the Guidelines, KSDMA did not formulate a S tate 
level mitigation plan/ strategy detailing all mitigation activities  to be 
undertaken in the State. 
In reply, the Department of Revenue and Disaster Management stated  
(November 2020) the following: 
• ‘Mitigation’ de notes the proactive steps aimed at reducing the risk, 
impact or effect of a disaster or threatening disaster situation. SDMF 
Guidelines require that the SDMF should be a demand -driven rather 
than supply-driven mechanism.  
• It was further stated that Audit h ad ignored the fact that the Disaster 
Management Act of 2005 mandates Government of India to constitute 
a National Disaster Mitigation Fund, which remains to be created.  
Expenditure from SDMF is met entirely out of State Funds and 
allocation is based on re commendation of KSDMA, but subject to 
availability of funds, the ways and means position of the Government 
and Governmental priorities. 
• Government further stated that there was no statutory obligation on 
KSDMA or SEC to frame mitigation plans (unlike the r equired 
preparation of Disaster Management Policy, the DM Plan and 
Guidelines for the integration of measures for prevention of disasters 
and mitigation) under the Disaster Management Act 2005.  
• Under the DM Act (section 18(2)), in specific cases of mitiga tion, 
KSDMA has to a) recommend provision of funds for mitigation and 
preparedness measures (Kerala is one of the few States to have 
created the SDMF and utilised it, complying with the statutory 
requirement) and b) review the development plans of the diff erent 
departments of the State and ensure that the prevention and mitigation 
measures are integrated therein. In compliance of th e statutory 
requirements, KSDMA carried out a detailed examination of the 
budget heads and plans of departments and suggested a ction points as 
guidelines for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction. 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
69 
• The mitigation plans are to be laid by the respective departments 
depending on the site-specific conditions with the general guidance of 
the State and District Disaster Management Plans.  It is not a statutory 
requirement that the State Disaster Management Authority create a 
separate Disaster Mitigation Plan. SDMF is demand driven and when 
specific funding demands are submitted by departments or DDMAs 
to the SEC, they are examined and approval given based on merits.  
The reply is not tenable since KSDMA was tasked with coordinating and 
implementing disaster mitigation projects through DDMAs, empanelled 
NGOs, other departments, local self-governments, self-help groups etc. As the 
coordinating and implementing agency, KSDMA should have taken proactive 
steps including interacting with various stakeholders for assessment of their 
needs and obtaining funds from GoK for attainment of such objectives. 
Contrary to requirements of the Guidelines (Para graph 2.5) framed by 
KSDMA itself, no State level mitigation strategy was formulated, apart from 
including in the Disaster Management Plan , a Chapter on Disaster 
Preparedness and Mitigation, which had no indication of a Mitigation Strategy 
in the context of flood as threatening disas ter other than Operation Anantha in 
Paragraph 3.14 and Mullaperiyar Crisis Management Plan (Para graph 3.10). 
Audit observes that had KSDMA chalked out a Mitigation Plan detailing 
vulnerabilities and ensured a strategy in place to mitigate potential disasters, 
KSDMA’s recommendations for funds would have been based on the same. 
Audit notes that t he Guidelines (Para graph 2.5) for the administration of the 
SDMF envisage that once the State level mitigation strategy has been detailed, 
the works which could be taken up at the district, block and grama Panchayat 
level for shorter duration could be culled out of the Long -term disaster 
mitigation/ prevention plans. Further, it also provides that in its functioning, 
the SDMF should be based on a risk reduction plan which suggests a definite 
set of measures - structural or non -structural. If these Guidelines had been 
adhered to, i dentified projects could have been presented before SEC for 
approval and sufficient funds fo r mitigation activities could have been 
provided in the budget. A passive approach by KSDMA in this regard possibly 
contributed to the low budgetary allocation for SDMF over the years. Audit 
notes that the Guidelines also provide scope for utilising the SDMF for 
supporting mitigation projects of short -term nature that may be implemented 
within a period of maximum three years that emerge out of a threatening 
situation (besides the projects identified through the State Disaster 
Management Plan) but this does not endorse the view that no State Level 
Mitigation Plan or Strategy was warranted. 
That the National Disaster Mitigation Fund has not been constituted in the 
country, makes it all the more important for KSDMA to formulate a State 
level Mitigation Plan/ Strategy and make recommendations based on the same 
for securing funds for the SDMF.  

 
 
 70 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
5.1.2. Deviation from procedures laid down for administration of State 
Disaster Mitigation Fund 
The Guidelines for administration of SDMF envisage that the Fund is utilised  
for supporting mitigation projects (as distinguished from preparedness and 
response measures) of short -term nature that may be implemented within a 
period of maximum of three years, either identified in State Disaster 
Management Plan or emerging out of a threate ning situation. The guidelines 
also envisaged utili sation of the funds only for such mitigation activities that 
were not covered under any of the existing plan schemes and stipulated that 
the interventions should be in areas which were otherwise not suppor ted by 
regular or other Government schemes.  
The mitigation projects evolved by any agency shall be assessed and approved 
by DDMAs which shall forward them to SDMA. The proposals accepted by 
SDMA with respect to financial feasibility, compliance with guide lines etc. 
shall be placed before SEC. All project proposals seeking assistance from 
SDMF were to have seven elements 113 as chapters to be evaluated with marks. 
The SEC was solely responsible for selection, approval/  disapproval of a 
project proposal after reviewing all pertinent information regarding the project 
proposal. 
Audit observed that only seven projects as listed below in Table 5.2114, were 
taken up under SDMF during the seven-year period till March 2019. 
Table 5.2: Projects taken up under SDMF till March 2019 
 (` in crore)  
Sl. 
No. Name of project (Proposed by) Amount 
expended 
1.  Mullaperiyar Crisis Management Plan (DDMA Idukki and SDMA) 1.31 
2.  Operation Anantha in Thiruvananthapuram and Kannur districts (DDMA 
Thiruvananthapuram) 23.72 
3.  Pulimuttu Construction (Harbour Engineering Department) 10.00 
4.  Side wall construction for a residence (DDMA, Thiruvananthapuram) 0.25 
5.  Drought Mitigation (Kerala Water Authority) 6.00 
6.  Urgent rectification works to left bank of Muvattupuzha river 
(Government) 0.50 
7.  Mud flow prevention at Wayanad (Government) 0.04 
 Total 41.82 
(Source: Details furnished by KSDMA) 
Audit could not obtain documentary evidence for adherence to the 
aforementioned stages in administration of SDMF from connected records at 
KSDMA/ GoK. Proposals were not seen routed by DDMAs to SEC through 
 
113  (i) Introduction (ii) Identification of hazards/ proposed implementation site (iii) Materials and 
methods (iv) Deliverables (v) Financial budgeting (vi) Timeline (vii) Profile of proposing or 
implementing authority/ agency and technical advisor  
114  Table 5.2 shows the total expenditure incurred on all the seven projects funded by SDMF from 2012 
till March 2019, whereas Table 5.1 details expenditure on SDMF projects during the audit period 
from 2014-15 to 2018-19. 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
71 
KSDMA and project proposals not seen approved by SEC, except in Sl.No .2 
for which ratification was obtained.  
Though project proposals seeking assistance from SDMF were to be evaluated 
by SEC with marks to be allotted on the basis of seven elements, there were no 
recordings in the files to indicate that this process had been complied with and 
that projects had in fact been approved by SEC. Aud it however observed that  
bypassing crucial stages in selection of projects like routing proposals from 
DDMAs to KSDMA to SEC for approval, SEC’s review of the chapters in 
project proposals prior to approving/  disapproving a proposal  etc. is a cause 
for concern as regards transparency in prioritisation of projects.  
Government in its reply (November 2020) stated that the SEC and the 
Government were adequately satisfied with the projects and proposals that are 
sanctioned from SDMF as testified by documents an d justifications pertaining 
to each of the project and that the guidelines have been scrupulously followed 
in each case.  
However, Audit notes that the role that is envisaged for the SEC is that of an 
approving and sanctioning authority for project proposa ls, rather than a role 
where it steps into the picture after the decision has already been taken to 
sanction from SDMF.  
The clarification of Member Secretary , KSDMA in the Exit Conference 
(January 2021) on delegation of financial powers wherein works upto ` one 
crore could be approved at the level of Principal Secretary (Revenue  and 
Disaster Management Department) cannot be regarded as a justification to 
evade the stipulated sequence of phases of approval of project proposals by 
SEC. The approval of the project by the SEC after following due procedure is 
to precede the financial sanction. Even the Government order115 only delegates 
the financial powers of the SEC  to the Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue 
and Disaster Management. 
Audit was also informed (November 2020) that it had been ensured that all 
listed mitigation activities did not have funding from any other source. As 
regards items at 4 and 6 in Table 5.2, it was indicated as follows: 
In the case of work cited at Sl.  No. 4, it was stated that competent authorities 
examined the matter and reported the potential loss to life and property and the 
District Collector reported the matter to the Government. The G overnment 
decided to release funds from SDMF and recover the costs from the concerned 
parties who may have triggered the failure to the cliff. As regards Sl.  No. 6, it 
was stated that based on the report of DDMA Kottayam, Government decided 
to support this 'proactive measure’ in the light of the specific fact that this was 
a mitigation activity requiring immediate application of resources to avoid a 
threatening disaster situation as corroborated by the technical report of 
Irrigation Department 116. In both cases, powers vested upon SDMA and 
 
115  GO (Rt) No. 2167/2016/DMD 
116  The nodal department for flood preparedness and mitigation 

 
 
 72 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
DDMA under Section 50 of Disaster Management Act, 2005 were complied 
with. 
Chapter 3 of the Mitigation Fund Guidelines warrants execution of necessary 
measures by the Secretary SDMA for the prevention/ mitigation of threatening 
disaster situation where immediate measures are necessary to protect the 
community from an anticipat ed disaster. However, in such cases, approval 
from the Convenor and Chairperson of SEC are to be kept in the file. Any 
such action taken by  KSDMA should be submitted for ratification before the 
SEC in the subsequent meeting. In both cases, no records in support of the 
above were available in DDMA/ KSDMA/ Government. Audit observes that if 
action was warranted under Section 50 of the Act in re spect of both these 
cases, then these procedures as per Chapter 3 should also have been complied 
with.  
Audit observed that as per Paragraph 2.6 of the Guidelines, the Secretary, 
State Disaster Management Authority will ensure financial feasibility of the 
project, ensure that no other funding from Government of Kerala is available 
or possible for the proposed project and ensure compliance with the guidelines 
for the utili sation of the SDMF before presenting to  the SEC for its 
consideration. 
Audit observes that in the specific instance of these two works, they failed to 
meet the criterion of other sources of funding not being available/  possible. 
Audit does not agree with the manner in which SDMF has been 
operationalised merely as a funding window to accommodate projects, without 
adequate justification in file to show what considerations had been taken into 
account in reaching the decision that SDMF funds could be sanctioned for the 
same. 
Audit noted that despite the District Collecto r Thiruvananthapuram requesting 
funds (07 June 2017 ) under State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF)  to execute 
Sl. No. 4 on an urgent basis and the Council of Ministers  also deciding  (14 
June 2017) to sanction `25 lakh from SDRF, it was noticed that Revenue and  
Disaster Management Department sanctioned ( 22 June 2017 ) funds for 
executing the work from SDMF,  without offering any justification in files. 
Due to non-availability of sufficient funds under SDMF, the amount could be 
released to District Collector only o n 27 January 2018, of which `8.96 lakh 
alone had been spent till date, for the completed first phase of the work. 
Hence, clearly, this was not an instance where power under Section 50 of the 
Disaster Management Act should have been utilised to permit emergency 
procurement. 
The work at  Sl. No. 6, belonged to the category of works for which funding 
was possible under Flood Control/  River Management  Fund by Water 
Resources Department/ District Collector. Even the Finance Department had 
raised this query. Audit observes that even if funds were not immediately 
available under the Flood Control/  River Management Fund, this does not 
appear to be an adequate justification for utilisation of SDMF since  the work 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
73 
was seen completed only in  June 2020, after a  period of over two years. The 
Secretary, KSDMA should have ensured that not only was no other funding 
from Government of Kerala available at that point of consideration but also 
that no other funding was possible for the proposed project. Clearing such 
items for consideration under SDMF, from the financial perspective, may be at 
the cost of other potential proposals for which no other source of funding was 
possible at all. 
Recommendation 5.1: a) In order to ensure effective utili sation of SDMF, a 
State level Mitigation Plan/ Strategy may be for mulated as envisaged in the 
Guidelines for administration of SDMF, based on which shorter duration 
flood mitigation works could be taken up at the district, block and 
Panchayat levels.  
b) KSDMA also may ensure that all project proposals seeking assistance  
from SDMF are presented before SEC for selection and approval.  
5.2. Execution of immediate restoration activities in post flood 
scenario 
Section 48 (1) (a) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 stipulates 
constitution of State Disaster Response Fund ( SDRF) at the State level. Based 
on the recommendations of the Finance Commission, Government of India 
and State Government contribute funds to SDRF in the ratio 75:25 (during 
2018-19 the sharing pattern was 90:10). The Revenue and Disaster 
Management (R&DM)  Department sanctions funds from SDRF for meeting 
the expenditure towards relief assistance to victims of disasters, immediate 
repair and rest oration of infrastructure damaged during disasters etc. The 
details of funds expended under SDRF during 2014-15 to 2018-19 are detailed 
in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3: Details of funds expended under SDRF during 2014-15 to 2018-19 
(` in crore) 
Year 
 
Opening 
Balance 
Funds received from Total Expenditure Closing 
Balance GoI NDRF117 GoK 
2014-15 77.73 119.50 … 39.83 237.06 215.15 21.91 
2015-16 21.91 138.75 … 46.00 206.66 134.14 72.52 
2016-17 72.52 145.50 … 48.50 266.52 150.66 115.86 
2017-18 115.86 153.00 164.72 51.00 484.58 197.50 287.08 
2018-19 287.08 192.60 2904.85 21.40 3425.10118 1311.12 2113.98 
(Source: Finance Accounts of the respective years) 
Consequent upon the floods in 2018, R&DM Department allotted funds from 
SDRF to all District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMA) to meet the 
immediate post deluge needs such as evacuation of people, supply of food 
items, immediate relief assistance etc.  In addition to the funds allotted to 
 
117 National Disaster Response Fund; The additional a ssistance received from NDRF during 2017 -18 
and 2018-19 were for Ockhi and Flood respectively  
118 includes `19.17 crore provided by GoK as arrears of interest on uninvested balance in the Fund 

 
 
 74 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
DDMAs, R&DM Department sanctioned `891.85 crore between August 2018 
and June 2019 to various departments/  agencies such as Water Resources, 
Police, Public Works,  Directorate of Health Services, Clean Kerala Company 
etc. to meet the expenses in connection with distribution of food items, 
removal of non -biodegradable waste in flood affected areas, supply of 
drinking water, search and rescue operations, restoration of infrastructure like 
roads, bridges, irrigation structures etc. 
Audit observed that Water Resources (Irrigation) Department, which was the 
nodal department for flood preparedness was sanctioned `536.27 crore for 
immediate repair and restoration of damaged infrastructure during 2018 flood 
based on the proposal submitted by six119 Chief Engineers of Water Resources 
(Irrigation) Department. The Apex Committee of the Irrigation Department 
approved (May/ July/ August 2019) a total of 7124 works such as rectification 
of flood damages in Regulator -cum-Bridges, rectification works in canals, 
removal of silt and debris etc. for an amount of `515.51 crore. Of these , only 
1406 works (20 per cent) for an amount of `49.47 crore were seen completed 
(January 2020). 
As per the SDRF guidelines , the works of immediate na ture alone could be 
funded from SDRF. Though these works were said to be immediate repair and 
restoration works, even after a lapse of two years and eight months, they were 
yet to be completed (April 2021) . As the works taken up were priority items 
such as  rectification of damaged structures, removal of silt and debris from 
canals, streams etc. and deepening them for increasing their carrying capacity 
etc. partial/  non-completion of these works would increase the impact of 
floods in ensuing years also. 
Government replied (November 2020) that as the works under SDRF were 
proposed to rectify the urgent damages inflicted to the infrastructure during the 
flood, the cost of most of the works offered were small, due to which many of 
the works had to be retendered.  Further, during the implementation stage of 
works undertaken, the State was lashed with another flood.  
Audit notes that as per Paragraph 8.38 of Manual of Administration of State 
Disaster Response Fund, assistance for damage to infrastructure is permissi ble 
for repair/  restoration of immediate nature. Such expenditure is normally 
incurred within a short span mostly during the initial period of immediate 
relief operations itself and that such aspects were to be kept in view while 
projecting the requirement  under this sector. GoK also informed that 63 per 
cent of the approved works have been undertaken and that the expenditure 
stands at 49 per cent (November 2020).  
In the Exit conference (February 2021), Additional Chief Secretary (Water 
Resources Department), while agreeing to the audit contention that works 
could have been executed much faster, stated that there was delay in planning 
and obtaining Administrative Sa nctions from the Revenue and Disaster 
 
119 Chief Engineers in Irrigation and Administration, Project I, P roject II, Kuttanad Package, IDRB and 
Mechanical 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
75 
Management Department for execution of works. It was also assured that 
efforts are being taken to complete all works by May 2021. 
In its reply (December 2020), the Revenue and Disaster Management stated 
that vide GO dated 27 March 2018, the time limit for implementation is 
decided as one year and six months from date of release of funds. However, in 
the specific case of works relatin g to 2018 floods, the 2019 floods that 
followed within a period of one year created force majeure  conditions after 
taking up the works which delayed the execution of most of the civil works in 
the State.  
In his reply (April 2021), ACS, Water Resources Dep artment informed that as 
on 16  April 2021, agreement have been executed for 95.39 per cent  of the 
works120 and 82.62 per cent of works have already been completed. It was also 
stated that all the works were expected to be completed within a period of two 
months. 
Audit observes that even after the passage of several months after the 2019 
floods, the fact remains that works (which  had been approved in the wake of 
the August 2018 floods) are expected to be completed only by May-June 2021. 
Recommendation 5.2: Government may put in place a system of periodic 
monitoring of status of works of immediate nature funded by SDRF to 
ensure t hat works sanctioned are completed on priority basis, given the 
State’s increasing vulnerability to severe flooding events.  
Results of survey  
One of the objectives of the Performance Audit was to assess whether the 
preparedness and response to the floods  in 2018 was adequate and timely. 
During the Entry Conference (June 2019), Audit intimated Government that it 
was proposed to conduct a survey of affected people in the selected districts. 
The Principal Secretary to Government , Revenue and Disaster Managem ent 
Department informed that most of the immediate response activities 
undertaken in 2018 floods could not be sufficiently documented and hence 
were not readily available for verification by Audit. It was also suggested that 
the authenticity of details recorded under th e survey need to be verified by the 
institutional heads concerned.  Audit conducted a survey among 800 persons 
affected by 2018 flood during the period from September 2019 to February 
2020 in 32 LSGIs of the four selected districts. Two taluks in each distr ict and 
four LSGIs in each taluk were selected for the survey. The respondents for the 
survey were selected randomly from the list of flood affected persons 
maintained by the LSGIs. The name of LSGI, taluk and number of 
respondents are detailed in Appendix 5.1. The individual responses of 800 
flood victims to queries relating to pre -flood preparedness, operational phase 
of flood management and post flood review, duly attested by the Secretaries of 
LSGIs, have been compiled and the summary is presented below. 
 
120  ACS informed vide letter dated 19  April 2021 that a total of 6,923 works amounting to `52,940.39 
lakh were progressing under the supervision of the six Chief Engineers of Irrigation Department. 

 
 
 76 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
5.3. Pre-flood preparedness 
The National Disaster Management Plan, 2016 envisages121 that the Revenue 
and Disaster Management Department, SDMA, SEOC, DDMA and all other 
relevant Departments/  Agencies are responsible for disseminating early 
warning signals and information to the District Administration, local 
authorities and the public at large upto the last mile in the areas likely to be 
affected by a disaster so as to reduce loss of life and property. 
• Six hundred and one persons (75 per cent ) stated that they had not 
received any warnings/  alerts from village/  taluk/ local body 
authorities before the occurrence of the 2018 floods. Out of those 
who had not received the alerts, 411 persons came to know about the 
catastrophe only when water level rose suddenly and 99 persons 
faced the reality in the form of landslides which ravaged their houses 
and property. 
• Seventy-three per cent  (582) stated that they were not informed of 
any steps for evacuation from their areas in view of the impending 
flood. 
• Five h undred and fifty four respondents were ignorant about the 
meaning of yellow/ orange/ red alerts issued by authorities at the time 
of disaster.  
The responses on pre-flood preparedness indicate that warnings/alerts by local 
administration/ Disaster Manageme nt authorities to the public before the 
impending floods were not adequate at the last mile. This also reinforces the 
audit observation on inadequate early warning and communication facilities 
detailed in Paragraph 3.5.2 of this Report. Ignorance of the pe ople at the 
grassroots level about the colour coding of various alerts points to the fact that 
the steps taken by Disaster Management authorities to generate awareness 
about the importance/ relevance of each type of alerts and precautionary steps 
to be taken by the public based on specific alerts were insufficient.  
5.4. Flood Management - Operational phase 
State Government, SDMA, SEOC, DDMA, all other relevant Departments/ 
Agencies, State Disaster Response Force and Civil Defence had to make quick 
assessment of evacuation needs such as the number of people and animals to 
be evacuated and mode of evacuation, mobilise transport and resources for 
evacuation, identify and prepare sites for temporary relocation of affected 
people and animals. The State Disaster Manag ement Plan 2016 was to include 
 
121  Paragraph 4.9, Responsibility matrix on preparedness and response, Page 101 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
77 
specific provisions 122 for evacuation, safety and the rehabilitation of animals 
affected by flood. 
• It was stated by 534 respondents that no Government/  LSGI officials 
had approached them and briefed them about the gravity of t he 
situation, when water level started rising.  
• Four hundred and ninety four out of 800 persons informed that no 
authorities had asked them to move to safer locations, 252 persons 
stated that they were asked to move to safer spots by various 
Government off icials who visited their households when the water 
level was rising and 225 had conveyed their willingness to move. 
• Of the 49 6 victims who owned pet animals, 402 persons could not 
shift their cattle/  poultry/ pet animals to safe locations. However , 88 
out of t he 9 4 persons who were able to safeguard their animals 
informed that they did not obtain help from departmental officials in 
moving the animals to safer locations. 
5.5. Post flood review 
• Of the 45 8 persons who moved to the relief camps, 44 5 opined that 
sufficient quantity of quality food, drinking water, medical supplies 
and toilet facilities were available in the relief camps. 391 among 
these persons opined that adequate drainage facilities were pr ovided 
in the camps and 326 stated that they even received counselling in the 
camps to deal with the trauma. The commendable standard of 
facilities provided in the relief camps which operated during the crisis 
is evident from the above. 
• Out of the 800 affe cted persons covered in the survey, 67 2 persons 
(84 per cent ) confirmed the receipt of the immediate assistance of 
`10,000 provided by the Government to the victims in flood affected 
regions for cleaning and removing the dirt and mud deposited inside 
houses. This is indicative of the efficacy of response system as 
regards disbursement of monetary assistance during the crisis 
situation. 
Government, in its reply (November 2020) contested the results emanating 
from the survey citing the following grounds: 
• The survey was based on a sample population of only 800 individual 
victims which is not representative enough for generalisation as at 
least 30 per cent  of the total population needs to be covered for a 
 
122  Sl. Nos. 2 and 15 of Responsibility Matrix for preparedness and response under paragraph 4.8 in 
National Disaster Management Plan 2016 delegate to States the responsibility of quick assessment of 
evacuation needs such as the number of people and animals to be evacuated and mode of evacuation, 
mobilising transport and resources for evacuation, identifying and preparing sites for temporary 
relocation of affected people and animals etc. and require the States to include these provisions in the 
State Disaster Management Plans. 
 

 
 
 78 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
prudent/ credible statistical survey. The reactions w ere of selected 
public, whose reactions could not be considered as reliable and 
dependable. Further, effectiveness of survey conducted 15 months 
after the event was also doubtful.  The original records relating to the 
survey findings were not provided by Au dit to KSDMA till date for 
examining the reliability of data and results.  
• There are factual contradictions  in the data mentioned in paragraph 
5.3 and 5.4. Whereas in 5.3 it is stated that 582 persons held that they 
were not informed of any steps for evacu ation, in 5.4 it is mentioned 
that 534 respondents were not briefed about gravity of the situation. 
• Audit cannot expect the State to disseminate an early warning as IMD 
had not predicted the ‘extremely heavy rain’ which resulted in the 
deluge. Based on the National Disaster Management Plan of 2016 123, 
Audit observation concerning responsibility for  dissemination of 
warning signals was not correct.  Central Agencies are to provide the 
information to the State Agencies and they in turn have to pass it on 
to the district Administration and local authorities. There was no early 
warning available to the State regarding the August 2018 floods. The 
actual rainfall exceeded several fold the IMD’s predicted rainfall and 
forecast of dates also varied. Prediction system of IMD and CWC, the 
Central agencies involved itself could not capture the extremely 
heavy rainfall which led to the floods and hence the communication 
itself could be based only on the level of alert. Deluge resulted from 
extremely heavy rainfall and such rainfall was not predicted before 15 
August 2018.  
• All information available with KSDMA and the Government and the 
warnings/ advisories issued besides the Hon’ble Chief Minister’s 
directions and briefings were shared with the public through print, 
audio, visual and social media including KSDMA’s Facebook page.  
In spite  of the absence of dedicated disaster communication radio 
channel or nation -wide last mile connectivity other than through 
print, visual, audio and social media, the State Government, with the 
support of CDoT 124, NDMA and BSNL, started using location -based 
messaging system for the first time in the country during the 2018 
floods and sent out 16 lakh advisory messages to public. Mike 
announcements were also carried out in critical areas. 
• Audit failed to consider the drawbacks of the early warning systems 
of IMD and CWC which is the first link of the chain in early warning. 
 
123  As per the National Disaster Management Plan 2016, it is the responsibility of the Central Agencies 
to undertake a) to issue forecasts, alerts, warnings, b)  provide early warnings (wherever possible) to 
reduce loss of life and property, and c) disseminate warnings and information to Central Ministries/ 
departments/ agencies and to the State Government. It is the responsibility of State agencies to i) 
disseminate early warning signals to the district administration, local authorities and public at large 
in areas likely to be affected by a disaster so as to reduce loss of life and property ii) disseminate 
warnings and information upto the last mile. 
124  Centre for Development of Telematics 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
79 
As even IMD started issuing colour coded alerts to Kerala only from 
08 August 2018, it is not proper for Audit to sugg est imparting 
training on colour coded warnings to public when Kerala was in the 
midst of the fury of floods. KSDMA issues specific action protocols 
for public, district authorities and departments based on SOPs which 
are in simple Malayalam and do not need training. 
• During crisis, Government/ LSGI officials and the public as well as 
voluntary organisations join hands and combat the situation. Audit 
has attempted selective reading to serve the purpose of pointing 
fingers, without examining the real situatio n and on -the-spot 
requirement during floods. 
• There is no statutory obligation under Disaster Management Act, 
2005 upon KSDMA, Government or LSGI officials to physically visit 
individuals and brief them of the gravity of any situation  in almost 
30 per cent of the State’s populated area. During crisis management, 
physical presence of rescue forces was ensured for rescue operations. 
The public was alerted at large and conveyance was provided to those 
unable to move by themselves. 
• Specific public alerts were is sued in all media  to let loose pets and 
domestic animals. Carrying pets along with evacuated families is not 
the best practice in a severe flood situation. 
The response of Audit to the points contested is as follows; 
• The purpose of the survey was to unders tand the public perception in 
the context of flood preparedness, operational phase of flood 
management and post flood activities of the Government. This was 
sought to be carried out with Audit’s limited resources, through 
survey questionnaire s issued to 80 0 persons  in flood ravaged areas  
and the results of the survey indicate d a mixture of positive and 
negative feedback. Since the survey was conducted in the presence of 
Revenue/ Local Self-Government officials and the survey responses 
sheets also bear the seal and signature of the Secretary of the GPs  in 
each instance, there is no reason to doubt the results of survey or the 
process followed. Confidentiality has been maintained as regards 
sharing the filled in questionnaires as data collected includes person al 
data such as name, address, mobile number and ration card number. 
• There is no contradiction between response sets obtained in respect of 
any of the questions. The response to questions in 5. 3 pertained to 
pre-flood scenario  and that in 5. 4, related to actual crisis situation.  
Audit notes that a person who had been briefed about the gravity of 
the situation may not have been informed about the steps for 
evacuation. 
• Audit notes that the contention that the State could not be expected to 
disseminate early warning in the absence of alerts from competent 

 
 
 80 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
Central agencies is not acceptable based on the laws and procedures 
in place (SOPs); 
(i) Section 38, 2 (h) of the DM Act, 2005 states that it is the 
responsibility of the State Government to “establish  adequate 
warning system up to the level of vulnerable group”. Early 
Warning Dissemination is one of the most important roles of 
Emergency Operation s Centre ( EOC) (EOCESFP125 2015, 
Paragraph 4). The EOC utili ses Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT ) tools and various other 
modes available for transmission of early warning to the 
vulnerable groups and also activate the responders. 
(ii) While IMD is a competent agency for weather warnings 
(EOCESFP 2015, Para graph 4.1), the functions of SEOC, vide 
the same paragraph, include issuing warnings to district 
administrations and, if necessary, to public based on predefined 
thresholds of environmental variables (rainfall, water level, 
seismological inputs, wave height etc.) and specific warnings 
from India Meteorol ogical Department (IMD), Central Water 
Commission etc. Thus, there should have been an effective 
system in place to issue warnings based on predefined 
thresholds of environmental variables and SEOC/ KSDMA 
should not have merely  depended on the receipt of e arly 
warnings from IMD, CWC etc.  
(iii) The SEOC is a nerve centre of, inter alia , early warning 
(EOCESFP 2015, Paragraph 1.1). One of the objectives of the 
SEOC is to conceptualise and implement hazard early warning 
systems (EOCESFP 2015, Para graph 2.1). Para graph 2.1 also 
envisages that once made operational, the Decision Support 
System (DSS) of SEOC would enable the prediction and early 
warning of major hydro -meteorological hazards and provide 
support for emergency operations in the event of hazards. 
However, in the absence of real time data, the DSS could not 
fulfil the envisaged role of providing early warning of major 
hazards during the August 2018 floods. Unless real time data is 
made available, the DSS would not be able to enable the 
prediction and early w arning of major hydro -meteorological 
hazards in the future also. 
(iv) The State Disaster Management Plan 2016 also requires the 
Water Resources Department, the nodal department for disaster 
preparedness, to ensure proper early warning mechanism for 
flood by monitoring water level of surface water bodies. 
 
125  Emergency Operations Centres and Emergency Support Functions Plan 2015 of KSDMA, renamed 
as Orange Book of Disaster Management in May 2019. 

 
 
Chapter V – Financial management and survey 
81 
• Audit acknowledges the positive steps taken by the DM authorities to 
communicate with the public during the floods of 2018 utilising  
different media and other resources. However, Audit notes that at 
least one ot her Report (Post Disaster Needs Assessment, October 
2018)126 also documents gaps/  challenges in early warning 
communication to the last mile 127 indicating that the system certainly 
needs to be made more effective to ensure better preparedness for the 
future.  
• The National Disaster Management Plan 2016 details matrix of 
responsibilities assigned to Government/ agencies/ community at 
different leve ls for coordinated preparedness/response.  The 
questionnaire was prepared in line with the delegation of 
responsibilities underscored by NDMP. Audit proposed to assess 
whether warnings w ith respect to the impending likely disastrous 
situation of inundation,  consequent on continuous heavy rainfall and 
opening of shutters of all dams in the State had been disseminated till 
the last mile by Government.  It was also a review of the extent of 
compliance to instructions from State/  DDMAs by officials at taluk/ 
village/ LSGI level during crisis situation, sourced from the public 
who were the direct victims of the deluge. Situations in which people 
got to know of the disaster during odd hours at night when water 
rushed into their houses were reported to Audit in the c ourse of the 
survey. T he audit exercise may be viewed as a constructive aid in 
improving response operations in future disaster scenarios. The 
Action Plan for Rebuild Kerala Development  Programme on 2018 
floods by Rebuild Kerala Initiative of Government of  Kerala 
mentions limited/ restricted/ restrained dissemination of disaster risk 
information and lack of awareness of disaster risks as among the 
underlying multi-sector issues that contributed to the heavy impact of 
floods which exacerbated the vulnerability of State to disasters.  
• District specific colour coded alerts were disseminated to the public 
through visual media. The intention of Audit was to highlight the 
necessity of imparting timely information to the public on the colour 
coded warnings, as to what is to be done on receipt of specific type of 
alerts. Colour coding of IMD has been in place for some years and 
the authorities as well as the public in Kerala and particularly in 
 
126  Commissioned by the Kerala Government, the Kerala PDNA was undertaken jointly by e xperts from 
the line Ministries and the United Nations. 
127  There were two major problems identified in early warning communication to the last mile;  
1) warnings not understood: Some of the district administrations indicated that the warnings like red 
alert or orange alert issued by the IMD for the entire district were not understood well enough to 
elicit response action or preparedness planning. More detailed locali sed warnings indicating the 
taluks and panchayats are required to take appropriate actio ns and 2) warnings understood but 
ignored: Although Kerala is prone to floods, it does not experience regular flooding. Hence 
community preparedness to respond to such a disaster was low. Although the flood warnings were 
provided to the community, there wa s reluctance to respond to them due to lack of knowledge about 
the impact of the flood. 
 (Extracted from the Chapter on Disaster Risk Reduction in the PDNA Report) 

 
 
 82 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
hazard prone areas ought to have been made familiar with the coding 
system and its implications much before the floods as part of the 
disaster preparedness.  
• Audit also notes that had a strong early warning system and timely 
evacuation been in place, possibly more animals which were sources 
of livelihood to many, could have been saved through shifting to safe 
shelters etc. 

 
 
  
CHAPTER VI 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
S e p t e m b e r  0 1 ,  2 0 1 8  
A l a p p u z h a  D i s t r i c t 

 
 
 

 
 
 83 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
6.1. Conclusion 
Kerala State Disaster Management Plan 2016 records that the State has a 
higher degree of disaster risks as compared to the rest of the country. As noted 
in the Rebuild Kerala Development Programme, floods are the most common 
of natural hazards that affect the people, infrastructure and natural 
environment in Kerala, and incidence of floods in the State is becoming more 
frequent and severe . Audit observed that in the context of management of 
floods, better planning, implementation and integration of efforts of different 
authorities/ bodies are among the measures urgently required to enable the 
State to be better prepared to face any eventuality of extreme rainfall and 
severe flooding in the future.  
The preparation of a State Level Master Plan for water resources development, 
formulation of Master Plans for the major rivers of the State and constitution 
of a State Level Authority for coordin ating all water related activities at the 
river basin level need to be prioritised. Flood plains of the State are yet to be 
demarcated and flood plain zoning legislation remains to be enacted. The State 
needs to explore options for having in place a reliab le large-scale flood hazard 
map. Infrastructure needs to be strengthened and shortages of equipment met 
for effective functioning of Fire and Rescue personnel. Flood forecasting 
stations need to be set up on priority and real time data be made available at  
the earliest for optimal results through systems such as the DSS.  Vendor 
selection should be such as would ensure projects deliver expected outputs and 
within the  prescribed time frame.  Effective functioning of communication 
infrastructure at all times re quires to be ensured, particularly in flood prone 
locations across the State. 
Even after a considered decision by KSEBL in consultation with KSDMA in 
August 2018 to introduce a dynamic flood cushion of four feet below FRL 
(68.87 MCM), spills of 467 MCM cou ld not be avoided  in respect of Idukki 
reservoir. Extreme care needs to be taken to ensure that outflow d oes not  
exceed inflow except under emergencies in respect of operations of major 
reservoirs to avoid potential flooding disasters. Integrated reservoir operations 
in multi-dam basins needs to be ensured. 
Land Use and Land Cover change analysis of the Periyar basin revealed 
significant increase in built -up area and notable decrease in water bodies in 
recent years, rendering the basin vulnerable t o floods. Continuous monitoring 
and timely action is essential for eviction of encroachers obstructing free flow 
of the river waters and to ensure removal of  operational bottlenecks hindering 
smooth spillway operations. 
Works of immediate repair and restor ation approved for execution under 
SDRF in the wake of the 2018 floods remained to be completed even after a 
6 

 
 
 84 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
lapse of two years and eight months . Strict monitoring by Revenue and 
Disaster Management/ Local Self-Government/ Water Resources Departments 
of the progress of works meant to lower the potential risk of riverine flooding 
and of dredging works in channels etc. is a must to ensure that optimal results 
accrue without delay. 
6.2. Recommendations 
Government of Kerala may consider revision of the State Water P olicy to 
include aspects relating to flood management, in line with the National Water 
Policy and after considering the specific requirements of the State. Feasibility 
of bringing a legislation for flood plain zoning, and an Authority to identify 
and demarcate flood plain zones of the State and to prohibit or restrict the use 
of these lands is to be considered. The State may initiate action to 
operationalise the Civil Defence Training Institute in Thrissur for the 
fulfilment of the intended objective of tra ining and equipping sufficient 
number of Civil Defence volunteers to respond to emergency/ disaster 
situations. Priority needs to be given to review the adequacy of equipment, 
vehicles and infrastructural facilities in the Fire and Rescue Services Academy 
as well as in Fire and Rescue stations so that the GoK’s dedicated force for 
rescue services may be adequately equipped to handle any flood or other 
disaster situation. 
Government may ensure adequacy of the number of rain gauges capable of 
generating real time data in order to ensure accuracy of rainfall estimation. 
Projects for procurement/ installation of systems meant for flood management 
such as decision support system etc., may be entered into only after ensuring 
timely availability of input data from all sources including external sources. 
Kerala State Disaster Management Authority may ensure that fail -safe 
communication infrastructure is available in vital installations such as at dam 
sites and that a built -in redundancy of different layers of communi cation 
capable of functioning during the most adverse circumstances exists in flood -
prone locations across the State. 
Kerala State Electricity Board may ensure flood release operations for 
reservoirs are based on approved rule curves and that the approved rule curves 
of 2020 for Idukki and Idamalayar would be adequate to handle situations 
similar to the extreme rainfall event of 2018, without consequential flooding.  
In view of the drastic change in land use over the past few decades with its 
impact on the r ecent floods, Government may initiate urgent steps to review 
the adequacy of the measures initiated to reduce the risk of vulnerability to 
floods, attributable to changes in land use. Government may also initiate steps 
for an integrated and comprehensive legislation and a land use policy. 
The Government needs to prioritise speedy resolution of the issues relating to 
removal of unauthori sed constructions from the construction free zone in 
Cheruthoni as also to ensure no new construction is allowed to come up  in 
future within the demarcated zone.  Adequacy of planned/ ongoing works 
under the comprehensive flood mitigation plan for safeguarding Cochin 

 
 
 85 
Chapter VI – Conclusion and Recommendations 
International Airport Ltd. and its surrounding areas may be ensured and the 
pace of implementation is to be revi ewed so that risk of loss to life and 
property in case of extreme rainfall/ flooding is minimised.  Government may 
also prioritise works such as deepening of the leading channel upstream of 
Thottappally Spillway and timely breaking of developing sand bar, i f any, at 
the sea mouth so as to ensure unhindered flow of flood waters to the sea , even 
while ensuring compliance with extant environment related instructions . A 
system of periodic monitoring of status of works of immediate nature funded 
by State Disaster Response Fund may be followed to ensure that works 
sanctioned are completed on priority basis.  
 (ANIM CHERIAN) 
Thiruvananthapuram,  Principal Accountant General 
The 05 October 2021     (Audit - I), Kerala 
Countersigned 
New Delhi,  (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
The 12 October 2021  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 


 
 
  
APPENDICES 
A u g u s t  1 9 ,  2 0 1 8  
A l a p p u z h a  D i s t r i c t 

 
 

 
 
 87 
Appendices 
Appendices  
Appendix 1.1 
Statement showing list of institutions covered by Audit 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4) 
Sl. 
No. Name of District Name of institutions covered by Audit 
1.  Alappuzha  
District Disaster Management Authority, District Emergency 
Operations Centre, Chengannur Taluk, Kuttanad Taluk, Major 
Irrigation Division, Minor Irrigation Division, Mechanical 
Division, Chief Engineer Kuttanad Package, Kuttanad 
Development Division Thanneermukkom, Fire Stations at 
Thakazhi and Chengannur 
2.  Ernakulam  
District Disaster Management Authority, District Emergency 
Operations Centre, Aluva Taluk, Paravur Taluk,  Office of the 
Special Tahsildar, Nedumbassery, Village Office, Nedumbassery, 
Major Irrigation Division, Minor Irrigation Division, Fire stations 
at Aluva and North Paravur, Idamalayar dam, Bhoothathankettu 
barrage, Central Water Commission Regional Office 
3.  Idukki  
District Disaster Management Authority, District Emergency 
Operations Centre, Idukki Taluk, Devikulam Tal uk, Major 
Irrigation Division, Minor Irrigation Division, Idukki dam, Lower 
Periyar dam, Madupetty dam, Kallarkutty dam, Fire Stations 
4.  Thrissur  
District Disaster Management Authority, District Emergency 
Operations Centre, Chalakkudy Taluk, Thalappilly T aluk, Major 
Irrigation Division, Minor Irrigation Division, Vazhani Dam, 
Poringalkuthu Dam, Lower Sholayar Dam, Civil Defence 
Training Institute, Fire and Rescue Services Academy 
5.  Thiruvananthapuram  
Revenue Disaster Management Department, Water Resources 
(Irrigation) Department, Finance Department, Transport 
Department, Kerala State Disaster Management Authority, State 
Emergency Operations Centre, India Meteorological Department, 
Fire and Rescue Headq uarters, Chief Engineer Irrigation, Design 
and Research Board, Chief Engineer Irrigation and 
Administration, Chief Engineer Mechanical, Chief Engineer 
Project II, Institute of Land and Disaster Management, Dam 
Safety Organisation, Kerala State Electricity Board Limited, Land 
Use Board, Commissionerate of Land Revenue 
6.  Dam Safety Organisation of KSEBL, Pallom, Kottayam district  
 
  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
88 
Appendix 2.1 
Details of encroachment of water bodies noticed in the test-checked districts and 
status of action taken by Departments* 
(Reference: Paragraphs 2.1, 2.3, 4.1) 
Sl. 
No. Location details Number of 
encroachments 
Extent of 
land (in 
Ha) 
Whether 
complaints 
received or not 
1.  Deviyarpuzha at Adimali -Valara stretch (Survey  no. 
205 and 206) in Idukki district 23 0.2221 8 nos. from 
2013 to 2016 
Performance Audit Party examined 11 files relating to the encroachment of Deviyarpuzha maintained at Taluk Office, 
Devikulam. All these files pertained to the complaints of local people and departments regarding illegal construction of 
buildings by encroachment of the river bed and obstructing the free flow of the river. However, no action was taken to 
identify the extent of encroachment by surveying the area. Superintendent of Police (Intelligence), Special Branch CID, 
Thiruvananthapuram reported (December 2012) to the District Collector, Idukki about encroachments of Deviyarpuzha 
by constructing multi -storied buildings and warned that non -eviction of these encroachments would lead to furth er 
encroachments of the area. In one case, Village Officer, Mannamkandam Village after conducting preliminary enquiry 
reported (January 2015) that there were 23 number of encroachments (0.2221 ha) of Deviyarpuzha at Adimali -Valara 
stretch near Irumbupalam.  The encroachers had been occupying the land for more than five years. No further action 
was taken in this regard. A joint site verification (December 2019) revealed that the riverbank was encroached upon by 
constructing huge buildings which reduced the wi dth of the river to a narrow stretch and thereby obstructed the free 
flow of the river which caused inundation of adjacent area in 2018 flood. No survey of the river to demarcate the 
boundaries was conducted to identify and evict the encroach ers. Taluk Officer, Devikulam Taluk replied that out of 53 
complaints and KLC cases regarding the encroachment of rivers and water bodies received in Devikulam Taluk upto 
2018-19, only one eviction has taken place till date. Other cases were pending in the of fice either with the survey or or 
with the village officer. 
2.  Kanoli Canal in Thrissur district 832 17.97  Yes in May 
2008 
Kanoli Canal is part of west coast canal network of Kerala and the canal was constructed by combining the rivers and 
streams along the coasts. In Thrissur District Kanoli canal starts from Kodungallur Taluk and passes through 
Kodungallur, Thrissur, Chavakkad and Mukundapuram Taluks. A complaint regarding encroachment of land in Kanoli 
Canal was received (May 2008) in the Chief Minister’s Public Grievance Cell, Thiruvananthapuram. Chief Minister 
ordered time bound disposal of the case and stringent action against the encroachers. Deputy Director, Survey, Thrissur 
reported (January 2011) to the District Collector that there were 832 number of encroachments covering an area of 
17.9673 hectares on the sides of Kanoli canal in four taluks in Thrissur District. Di strict Collector, Thrissur (August 
2011) informed Revenue Department that details of all encroachments with their sketches were passed on to Additional 
Irrigation Division, Thrissur for eviction. Executive Engineer, Additional Irrigation Division, Thrissur  reported to the 
District Collector, Thrissur (April 2018) that since Kanoli Canal was declared as National Waterway 3 in 2016, 
eviction of encroachments would be undertaken by National Waterway Authority of India. But the fact remains that 
encroachments c ontinued without eviction even after the lapse of nine years from the date of identification of 
encroachments. A joint site verification of Kanoli Canal (December 2019) at Chavakkad Taluk revealed large scale 
cultivation of coconut trees on both sides and across the canal obstructing and diverting the free flow of the river. 
Around six meters of the canal was filled with sand and fenced for private use. Local residents stated that the area 
adjacent to the canal was flooded in 2018 and they were shifted to relief camps.  
3. Bharathapuzha at Nambiar Pallam in Thrissur 11 0.5136 Yes in March 
2017 
A complaint was received at District Collectorate, Thrissur regarding the encroachment of Bharathapuzha at Nambiar 
Pallam in March 2017. Tahsildar (L and Records), Thalappilly reported (June 2017) that encroachment was found in 
Bharathapuzha at Nambiar Pallam on preliminary enquiry but no natural boundary and survey stones were available to 
fix the river purambokku. After conducting the survey of the area in  December 2018, Tahsildar, Thalappilly identified 
11 number of encroachments covering an area of 0. 5136 ha at Nambiar Pallam and requested the District Collector to 
release an amount of `28,000 incurred for planting survey stones at the site. Though funds were available in R iver 
Management Fund, the amount was not released till date. Encroachers were occupying the land for eight to 40 years. It 
was observed that though the complaint regarding river encroachment was received in March 2017, the survey t o 
identify the extent of encroachment was carried out in December 2018 and no further action was taken till date.  

 
 
Appendices 
89 
Sl. 
No. Location details Number of 
encroachments 
Extent of 
land (in 
Ha) 
Whether 
complaints 
received or not 
4. Uttarappalliyar river (Alappuzha) 47 NA** Yes in 
2007 and 2015 
The original river course through Venmani, Ala, Cheriyanadu, Puliyoor and Ennakkad villages was blocked due to 
intermittent encroachments. As part of rejuvenation activities, survey and demarcation of boundaries of the river was 
attempted in April 2017. Though complaints were received in 2007 and 2015, action in this regard was initiated by the 
Revenue Department only on 17 April 2017 when Uttarappalliyar Rejuvenation Campaign was launched by pooling 
funds from River Management Fund for survey and demarcation of boundaries of the river. However, survey could not 
be conducted in three villages, as the resurvey records contained little or no trace of the river route in these villages. 
Unless a fresh survey is conducted using the Lithomaps and records prior to resurvey, and boundaries of the river 
demarcated, effective control of encroachment and rejuvenation of river path will not be realised. Though the Land 
Revenue Commissioner repeatedly sought detailed report from the District Collector on the scope of re-establishing the 
flow route of the river through the five villages, there was no response in file  (December 2019). As the river used to 
serve as a balancing channel between the water levels in Achencovil river and Pamba river, its stagnancy caused severe 
floods in the villages during 2018. 
5. Kuttamperoor river (Alappuzha) NA** NA** Yes 
May 2008 
The river flows through Ennakkad and Mannar Villages in Chengannur Taluk. The river has a length of 7.2 km in 
Alappuzha district. Continuous encroachment identified on either side of the river causing shrinkage of the width of the 
river to about 15m to 20m against the actual width of 70m. No survey of the entire stretch of the river was conducted 
till 2018 floods. The villages through which the  river flowed were severely affected during 2018 flood. Irrigation 
Department took up (March 2019) rejuvenation of the river under NABARD assisted scheme, which is yet to be 
completed.  
6. District Collector Ernakulam stated that noticeable encroachments were not reported in the District. The justification 
is not tenable as survey of rivers is to be conducted in order to identify illegal encroachments in rivers. However, Audit 
observed that no survey of water bodies was conducted in Paravur, one of the selected Taluks. Detection of 
encroachments is not possible in the absence of survey and demarcation of boundaries of rivers. 
* Based on examination of files at respective field offices.  ** Details not available 
  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
90 
Appendix 2.2 
Statement showing shortage of equipment, vehicles and infrastructural facilities 
in Kerala Fire and Rescue Services Academy 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.6) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
shortage Description Number of items 
in possession 
Number of 
items in 
shortage 
1.  
Equipment 
Trailer Pump 5 Nil 
2.  Portable Pump (serviceable) 1 Nil 
3.  Generator (230 volt) 1 Nil 
4.  BA Set (serviceable)  8 50 
5.  SCUBA Set (serviceable)  3 20 
6.  BA Compressor set (serviceable) 1 2 
7.  Float pump 2 Nil 
8.  Hydraulic equipment set (serviceable)  1 1 
9.  Chain saw (serviceable) 2 10 
10.  Concrete cutters (serviceable) 2 3 
11.  Rubber Dinghy with OB engine Nil 2 
12.  Fibre Boat Nil 2 
13.  Fire Fighting Suit Nil 70 
14.  Chemical suits Nil 25 
15.  Pneumatic rescue tools Nil 2 sets 
16.  High pressure portable pumps Nil 3 
17.  Rope rescue kit and accessories Nil 10 sets 
18.  Life detectors  Nil 5 
19.  Demolition hammers Nil 3 sets 
20.  Thermal imaging cameras Nil 3 
21.  Extinguishers Nil 50 
22.  Rope Launcher  Nil 2 
23.  Leak arrest kit Nil 5 
24.  Canister  Nil 20 
25.  Inflatable Tent  Nil 2 
26.  Inflatable Light  1 3 
27.  Portable Water Mist Nil 5 
28.  Exhaust Blower Nil 2 
29.  Basic life support accessories - 
Mannequins, AED etc. 
Choking arrester kits 
Stretchers etc. 
 
Nil 
2 
 
3 sets each 
10 
30.  Multi-Purpose Rescue Tools 1 Nil 
31.  
Vehicles 
Fire tender 1 Nil 
32.  Mobilising bus (old  - proposed for 
condemnation) 1 1 
33.  Excavator 1 Nil 
34.  Jeep 2 Nil 
35.  Bolero Jeep 2 Nil 
36.  Ambulance Nil 2 
37.  Water mist tender Nil 1 
38.  Emergency Rescue tender 1  1 
39.  Quick response vehicle  1 1 
40.  SCUBA Van  Nil 1 
41.  Mess Van Nil 1 

 
 
Appendices 
91 
Sl. 
No. 
Nature of 
shortage Description Number of items 
in possession 
Number of 
items in 
shortage 
42.  
Shortage of 
infrastructure 
facilities 
Fire lab 
43.  Multipurpose rescue tower 
44.  Smart class rooms 
45.  Computer lab 
46.  BA smoke room gallery 
47.  Fire lift 
48.  Fixed firefighting installations models 
49.  Drill grounds - 8 acres additional 
50.  Conference room-under construction 
51.  Barrack-under proposal, design and approval stage 
52.  Library 
53.  Health club 

 
 
 92 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
Appendix 3.1 
Salient features of Mullaperiyar, Idukki, Idamalayar, Lower Periyar dams and Bhoothathankettu barrage 
(Reference: Chapter 3, Paragraph on Reservoir operation) 
Name of Dam/ 
Barrage and 
source of data  
FRL128  
(m, MSL)  
MWL129  
(m, MSL)  
MDDL130 
(m, MSL)  
Capacity 
at FRL  
(MCM)  
Live131 
storage 
capacity  
(MCM)  
Capacity at 
dead 
storage132 
level (MCM)  
Free 
board133 
over MWL  
(m)  
Spillway type and 
discharge design 
volume (cumecs)  
Number, type and 
size of gates  
Extent of 
catchment 
area  
(sq. km)  
Discharge 
capacity 
(cumecs)  
Mullaperiyar 
Dam  
(Irrigation 
Department)  
-*  -*  41.45  -*  299.26  144.17 0.91  Vertical and radial 
shutter type,  
3454.65  
13 numbers  
10.97 x 4.87 m 
(3 number of 
vertical gates)  
12.19 x 4.87 m 
(10 number of 
radial gates)  
602.95  59.46 
Idukki dam/ 
Cheruthoni dam  
(KSEBL) 
732.43  734.11  694.94  1996.34  1459.49  536.81  1.79  Chute, 5012  5 numbers of radial 
gates,  
12.19 x 10.36 m  
650.00 557.50  
Idamalayar dam  
(KSEBL)  
169.00 171.20  115.00 1089.80  1017.80  72.00 0.80  Ogee, 3248  4 number of radial 
gates, 11.5 x 9.7 m  
380.79 
(excluding 
101 sq. km 
Nirar 
catchment)  
NA  
Lower Periyar 
dam  
(KSEBL)  
253.00 256.00 237.74 5.30  4.50  0.80  1.00 Ogee, 11200  5 number of radial 
gates,  
13.5 x 15.65 m  
584.00 338.94  
Bhoothathankettu 
barrage  
(Irrigation 
Department) 
34.95   -    Electrically operated 
framed steel shutters 
with vertical lifting 
arrangements of chain 
pulley blocks equipped 
with counterweight 
boxes, 7079 
3 numbers  
9.14 x 10.36 m  
12 numbers  
12.19 x 9.14 m 
3048.00  
* matter is sub judice 
 
128  Full Reservoir Level (FRL) corresponds to the water level when the dam is filled to its full capacity.  
129  Maximum Water Level (MWL) corresponds typically to the top level of the gates. At MWL, the flow over spillway will be at design flood discharge. 
130 Minimum Drawn Down Level 
131  Live storage is the storage between FRL and the dead storage level 
132  Dead storage is the minimum amount of water to be maintained in the dam 
133  The storage between MWL and FRL is available as flood cushion. 

 
 
Appendices 
93 
Appendix 3.2 
Rule curve framed in 1983 for Idukki dam 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.1) 
 
(Source: Records at KSEBL) 
   
  


 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
94 
Appendix 3.3 
Rule curve framed in 2020 for Idukki and Idamalayar dams 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.1) 
Time Step Reservoir Level in meter 
Idukki Idamalayar 
June 10th 723.29 161.00 
June 20th 723.29 161.00 
June 30th 723.29 161.00 
July 10th 724.00 161.50 
July 20th 724.80 161.75 
July 31st 725.60 162.50 
August 10th 726.50 163.00 
August 20th 727.50 163.50 
August 31st 728.50 164.00 
September 10th 729.25 165.00 
September 20th 730.00 166.00 
September 30th 730.59 166.30 
October 10th 730.84 166.60 
October 20th 731.17 166.80 
October 31st 731.31 167.00 
November 10th 731.46 168.50 
November 20th 731.53 168.50 
November 30th 731.53 168.50 
 
  

 
 
Appendices 
95 
Appendix 3.4 
Procedure followed for conduct of simulations of reservoir operations using rule 
curves 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.1) 
The Idukki reservoir operation is analysed with the rule curves developed both in 
1983 and 2020 whereas the Idamalayar reservoir operation is analysed with only the 
rule curve of 2020.  
The reservoir operation was simulated by IISc, Bangalore for its study as follows 
 
St+1 = St + Qt – Rt – Et – Spillt                   (Eq. A)  
where,  
St+1: reservoir storage at the end of the period t  
St: reservoir storage at the beginning of the period t  
Qt: the inflow to the reservoir during the period t  
Rt: release from the reservoir during the period t  
Et: evaporation loss from the water surface in the reservoir during the period t  
Spillt: excess water spilled from the reservoir during the period t  
Period t is the time interval for which the reservoir operation is simulated. This may 
be for example a month, a day, an hour etc. All terms are expressed in volume units 
(MCM). Eq. A uses the principle  of continuity. The rule curve analysis is carried out 
for the entire monsoon period from June to September 2018. 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
96 
Appendix 3.5 
Sample simulations of Idukki reservoir using 1983 rule curve 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.2) 
Day  
Storage for 
upper levels 
(MCM) 
Storage for 
lower rule 
levels (MCM) 
Storage at the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
30-06-2018  1315.47 805.58 805.58 705.00 1.83 9.81 0.13 813.44 0.00 813.44 
01-07-2018  1337.36 816.83 813.44 705.26 0.00 8.89 0.13 822.20 0.00 822.20 
02-07-2018  1359.24 828.08 822.20 705.56 0.00 10.72 0.13 832.78 0.00 832.78 
03-07-2018  1381.12 839.32 832.78 705.91 0.00 8.00 0.13 840.66 0.00 840.66 
04-07-2018  1403.01 850.57 840.66 706.17 0.00 6.53 0.13 847.05 0.00 847.05 
05-07-2018  1424.89 861.81 847.05 706.39 0.00 5.56 0.13 852.48 0.00 852.48 
06-07-2018  1446.78 873.06 852.48 706.57 0.00 5.04 0.13 857.39 0.00 857.39 
07-07-2018  1468.66 884.31 857.39 706.73 0.00 6.46 0.13 863.72 0.00 863.72 
08-07-2018  1490.54 895.55 863.72 706.95 0.00 9.50 0.13 873.09 0.00 873.09 
09-07-2018  1512.43 906.80 873.09 707.24 0.00 19.66 0.13 892.62 0.00 892.62 
10-07-2018  1534.31 918.05 892.62 707.80 0.00 34.60 0.13 927.09 0.00 927.09 
11-07-2018  1556.19 929.29 927.09 708.78 0.00 32.70 0.13 959.66 0.00 959.66 
12-07-2018  1578.08 940.54 959.66 709.71 2.06 28.23 0.13 985.69 0.00 985.69 
13-07-2018  1599.96 951.78 985.69 710.46 1.94 40.69 0.13 1024.31 0.00 1024.31 
14-07-2018  1621.84 963.03 1024.31 711.56 1.85 33.21 0.13 1055.54 0.00 1055.54 
15-07-2018  1643.73 974.28 1055.54 712.45 1.39 53.77 0.13 1107.78 0.00 1107.78 
16-07-2018  1665.61 985.52 1107.78 713.85 1.59 61.92 0.13 1167.99 0.00 1167.99 
17-07-2018  1687.49 996.77 1167.99 715.34 3.27 41.73 0.13 1206.32 0.00 1206.32 
18-07-2018  1709.38 1008.02 1206.32 716.29 5.01 38.02 0.13 1239.20 0.00 1239.20 
19-07-2018  1731.26 1019.26 1239.20 717.11 5.92 35.83 0.13 1268.98 0.00 1268.98 
20-07-2018  1753.14 1030.51 1268.98 717.85 6.74 29.70 0.13 1291.81 0.00 1291.81 
21-07-2018  1775.03 1041.75 1291.81 718.41 5.63 22.64 0.13 1308.69 0.00 1308.69 
22-07-2018  1796.91 1053.00 1308.69 718.83 5.40 20.09 0.13 1323.25 0.00 1323.25 
23-07-2018  1818.79 1064.25 1323.25 719.19 6.83 23.50 0.13 1339.79 0.00 1339.79 
24-07-2018  1840.68 1075.49 1339.79 719.57 8.87 39.11 0.13 1369.90 0.00 1369.90 

 
 
Appendices 
97 
Day  
Storage for 
upper levels 
(MCM) 
Storage for 
lower rule 
levels (MCM) 
Storage at the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
25-07-2018  1862.56 1086.74 1369.90 720.21 9.12 39.35 0.13 1399.99 0.00 1399.99 
26-07-2018  1884.44 1097.99 1399.99 720.86 9.74 39.98 0.13 1430.10 0.00 1430.10 
27-07-2018  1906.33 1109.23 1430.10 721.51 9.82 24.83 0.13 1444.99 0.00 1444.99 
28-07-2018  1928.21 1120.48 1444.99 721.83 9.68 24.36 0.13 1459.54 0.00 1459.54 
29-07-2018  1950.09 1131.72 1459.54 722.14 10.05 23.41 0.13 1472.78 0.00 1472.78 
30-07-2018  1971.98 1142.97 1472.78 722.42 10.04 21.75 0.13 1484.36 0.00 1484.36 
31-07-2018  1993.86 1154.22 1484.36 722.67 10.07 19.14 0.13 1493.29 0.00 1493.29 
01-08-2018  1993.86 1168.36 1493.29 722.86 10.07 14.83 0.13 1497.92 0.00 1497.92 
02-08-2018  1993.86 1182.51 1497.92 722.96 10.09 12.53 0.13 1500.23 0.00 1500.23 
03-08-2018  1993.86 1196.66 1500.23 723.01 9.59 11.37 0.13 1501.89 0.00 1501.89 
04-08-2018  1993.86 1210.81 1501.89 723.05 9.30 9.10 0.13 1501.55 0.00 1501.55 
05-08-2018  1993.86 1224.96 1501.55 723.04 9.50 7.97 0.13 1499.89 0.00 1499.89 
06-08-2018  1993.86 1239.11 1499.89 723.00 9.00 8.46 0.13 1499.23 0.00 1499.23 
07-08-2018  1993.86 1253.26 1499.23 722.99 9.05 16.46 0.13 1506.50 0.00 1506.50 
08-08-2018  1993.86 1267.40 1506.50 723.15 9.99 39.58 0.13 1535.96 0.00 1535.96 
09-08-2018  1993.86 1281.55 1535.96 723.78 9.95 57.45 0.13 1583.33 0.00 1583.33 
10-08-2018  1993.86 1295.70 1583.33 724.80 9.98 61.03 0.13 1634.26 0.00 1634.26 
11-08-2018  1993.86 1309.85 1634.26 725.82 9.96 45.44 0.13 1669.62 0.00 1669.62 
12-08-2018  1993.86 1324.00 1669.62 726.48 9.99 48.44 0.13 1707.94 0.00 1707.94 
13-08-2018  1993.86 1338.15 1707.94 727.18 10.00 45.99 0.13 1743.80 0.00 1743.80 
14-08-2018  1993.86 1352.30 1743.80 727.84 9.99 84.18 0.13 1817.86 0.00 1817.86 
15-08-2018  1993.86 1366.44 1817.86 729.21 9.99 165.06 0.13 1972.80 0.00 1972.80 
16-08-2018  1993.86 1380.59 1972.80 732.03 9.95 154.96 0.13 2117.68 123.82 1993.86 
17-08-2018  1993.86 1394.74 1993.86 732.40 9.98 111.70 0.13 2095.45 101.59 1993.86 
18-08-2018  1993.86 1408.89 1993.86 732.40 9.66 92.51 0.13 2076.58 82.72 1993.86 
19-08-2018  1993.86 1423.04 1993.86 732.40 9.98 62.88 0.13 2046.63 52.77 1993.86 
20-08-2018  1993.86 1437.19 1993.86 732.40 9.95 37.54 0.13 2021.33 27.46 1993.86 
21-08-2018  1993.86 1451.34 1993.86 732.40 9.68 29.95 0.13 2014.00 20.14 1993.86 
22-08-2018  1993.86 1465.48 1993.86 732.40 9.98 24.60 0.13 2008.35 14.49 1993.86 
23-08-2018  1993.86 1479.63 1993.86 732.40 9.96 20.39 0.13 2004.16 10.30 1993.86 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
98 
Day  
Storage for 
upper levels 
(MCM) 
Storage for 
lower rule 
levels (MCM) 
Storage at the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
24-08-2018  1993.86 1493.78 1993.86 732.40 9.96 18.96 0.13 2002.72 8.86 1993.86 
25-08-2018  1993.86 1507.93 1993.86 732.40 9.96 17.77 0.13 2001.55 7.68 1993.86 
26-08-2018  1993.86 1522.08 1993.86 732.40 9.93 16.42 0.13 2000.22 6.35 1993.86 
27-08-2018  1993.86 1536.23 1993.86 732.40 9.97 18.44 0.13 2002.20 8.34 1993.86 
28-08-2018  1993.86 1550.38 1993.86 732.40 9.91 18.71 0.13 2002.53 8.67 1993.86 
29-08-2018  1993.86 1564.52 1993.86 732.40 9.97 15.79 0.13 1999.55 5.69 1993.86 
30-08-2018  1993.86 1578.67 1993.86 732.40 8.69 15.17 0.13 2000.21 6.35 1993.86 
31-08-2018  1993.86 1592.82 1993.86 732.40 10.01 15.83 0.13 1999.56 5.69 1993.86 
01-09-2018  1993.86 1596.33 1993.86 732.40 10.01 14.17 0.13 1997.89 4.03 1993.86 
02-09-2018  1993.86 1599.84 1993.86 732.40 9.96 8.49 0.13 1992.26 0.00 1992.26 
03-09-2018  1993.86 1603.35 1992.26 732.37 9.74 7.58 0.13 1989.98 0.00 1989.98 
04-09-2018  1993.86 1606.86 1989.98 732.33 9.20 7.38 0.13 1988.03 0.00 1988.03 
05-09-2018  1993.86 1610.36 1988.03 732.30 9.14 6.99 0.13 1985.74 0.00 1985.74 
06-09-2018  1993.86 1613.87 1985.74 732.26 10.03 6.88 0.13 1982.47 0.00 1982.47 
07-09-2018  1993.86 1617.38 1982.47 732.20 9.89 4.57 0.13 1977.01 0.00 1977.01 
08-09-2018  1993.86 1620.89 1977.01 732.11 9.55 3.39 0.13 1970.72 0.00 1970.72 
09-09-2018  1993.86 1624.40 1970.72 732.00 9.31 3.82 0.13 1965.09 0.00 1965.09 
10-09-2018  1993.86 1627.91 1965.09 731.90 9.76 3.61 0.13 1958.81 0.00 1958.81 
11-09-2018  1993.86 1631.42 1958.81 731.79 8.51 3.68 0.13 1953.85 0.00 1953.85 
12-09-2018  1993.86 1634.93 1953.85 731.70 7.73 2.89 0.13 1948.89 0.00 1948.89 
13-09-2018  1993.86 1638.43 1948.89 731.61 6.89 4.70 0.13 1946.57 0.00 1946.57 
14-09-2018  1993.86 1641.94 1946.57 731.57 6.49 0.99 0.13 1940.94 0.00 1940.94 
15-09-2018  1993.86 1645.45 1940.94 731.47 7.14 2.64 0.13 1936.31 0.00 1936.31 
16-09-2018  1993.86 1648.96 1936.31 731.39 5.89 3.04 0.13 1933.33 0.00 1933.33 
17-09-2018  1993.86 1652.47 1933.33 731.33 5.28 2.76 0.13 1930.68 0.00 1930.68 
18-09-2018  1993.86 1655.98 1930.68 731.28 5.11 2.93 0.13 1928.37 0.00 1928.37 
19-09-2018  1993.86 1659.49 1928.37 731.24 4.96 3.77 0.13 1927.04 0.00 1927.04 
20-09-2018  1993.86 1662.99 1927.04 731.22 6.40 3.55 0.13 1924.06 0.00 1924.06 
21-09-2018  1993.86 1666.50 1924.06 731.16 7.30 2.46 0.13 1919.10 0.00 1919.10 
22-09-2018  1993.86 1670.01 1919.10 731.07 7.05 2.22 0.13 1914.13 0.00 1914.13 

 
 
Appendices 
99 
Day  
Storage for 
upper levels 
(MCM) 
Storage for 
lower rule 
levels (MCM) 
Storage at the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1a 1b 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
23-09-2018  1993.86 1673.52 1914.13 730.98 4.16 3.96 0.13 1913.80 0.00 1913.80 
24-09-2018  1993.86 1677.03 1913.80 730.97 6.13 7.58 0.13 1915.12 0.00 1915.12 
25-09-2018  1993.86 1680.54 1915.12 731.00 5.20 4.34 0.13 1914.13 0.00 1914.13 
26-09-2018  1993.86 1684.05 1914.13 730.98 6.14 5.61 0.13 1913.47 0.00 1913.47 
27-09-2018  1993.86 1687.56 1913.47 730.97 5.02 5.81 0.13 1914.13 0.00 1914.13 
28-09-2018  1993.86 1691.06 1914.13 730.98 5.77 9.54 0.13 1917.77 0.00 1917.77 
29-09-2018  1993.86 1694.57 1917.77 731.05 5.32 10.42 0.13 1922.74 0.00 1922.74 
(Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
100 
Appendix 3.6 
Sample simulations of Idukki reservoir using 2020 rule curve 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.2) 
Day 
Storage for 
rule level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
Loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.38 43.53 0.13 1555.00 41.02 1513.98 
11-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 3.52 52.36 0.13 1562.69 48.71 1513.98 
12-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 4.26 34.28 0.13 1543.87 29.89 1513.98 
13-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.18 25.39 0.13 1537.07 23.09 1513.98 
14-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.13 16.99 0.13 1528.71 14.73 1513.98 
15-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.33 12.95 0.13 1525.47 11.49 1513.98 
16-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.67 13.84 0.13 1526.02 12.04 1513.98 
17-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.10 7.62 0.13 1519.38 5.40 1513.98 
18-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.90 8.42 0.13 1519.38 5.39 1513.98 
19-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.63 9.86 0.13 1522.08 8.10 1513.98 
20-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.55 12.27 0.13 1523.57 9.58 1513.98 
21-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.27 13.21 0.13 1524.79 10.81 1513.98 
22-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.21 12.42 0.13 1524.06 10.08 1513.98 
23-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 3.88 12.61 0.13 1522.58 8.60 1513.98 
24-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.49 9.00 0.13 1520.37 6.39 1513.98 
25-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 2.43 10.90 0.13 1522.32 8.34 1513.98 
26-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.96 9.22 0.13 1521.10 7.12 1513.98 
27-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.40 10.37 0.13 1522.83 8.85 1513.98 
28-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.62 10.35 0.13 1522.58 8.60 1513.98 
29-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.37 8.87 0.13 1521.35 7.37 1513.98 
30-06-2018  1513.98 1513.98 723.30 1.83 9.81 0.13 1521.83 4.59 1517.24 
01-07-2018  1517.24 1517.24 723.37 1.40 8.89 0.13 1524.60 4.10 1520.50 

 
 
Appendices 
101 
Day 
Storage for 
rule level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
Loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
02-07-2018  1520.50 1520.50 723.44 2.49 10.72 0.13 1528.60 4.84 1523.76 
03-07-2018  1523.76 1523.76 723.51 2.23 8.00 0.13 1529.41 2.38 1527.03 
04-07-2018  1527.03 1527.03 723.58 2.72 6.53 0.13 1530.70 0.41 1530.29 
05-07-2018  1530.29 1530.29 723.65 2.99 5.56 0.13 1532.73 0.00 1532.73 
06-07-2018  1533.55 1532.73 723.70 2.71 5.04 0.13 1534.92 0.00 1534.92 
07-07-2018  1536.81 1534.92 723.75 2.66 6.46 0.13 1538.59 0.00 1538.59 
08-07-2018  1540.07 1538.59 723.83 1.03 9.50 0.13 1546.93 3.59 1543.33 
09-07-2018  1543.33 1543.33 723.93 1.85 19.66 0.13 1561.02 14.42 1546.59 
10-07-2018  1546.59 1546.59 724.00 3.05 34.60 0.13 1578.01 27.60 1550.41 
11-07-2018  1550.41 1550.41 724.08 1.16 32.70 0.13 1581.82 27.59 1554.23 
12-07-2018  1554.23 1554.23 724.17 2.06 28.23 0.13 1580.26 22.22 1558.05 
13-07-2018  1558.05 1558.05 724.25 1.94 40.69 0.13 1596.66 34.80 1561.86 
14-07-2018  1561.86 1561.86 724.33 1.85 33.21 0.13 1593.10 27.42 1565.68 
15-07-2018  1565.68 1565.68 724.42 1.39 53.77 0.13 1617.92 48.42 1569.50 
16-07-2018  1569.50 1569.50 724.50 1.59 61.92 0.13 1629.70 56.39 1573.32 
17-07-2018  1573.32 1573.32 724.57 3.27 41.73 0.13 1611.65 34.52 1577.13 
18-07-2018  1577.13 1577.13 724.65 5.01 38.02 0.13 1610.01 29.06 1580.95 
19-07-2018  1580.95 1580.95 724.72 5.92 35.83 0.13 1610.73 25.96 1584.77 
20-07-2018  1584.77 1584.77 724.80 6.74 29.70 0.13 1607.60 19.13 1588.47 
21-07-2018  1588.47 1588.47 724.87 5.63 22.64 0.13 1605.35 13.18 1592.16 
22-07-2018  1592.16 1592.16 724.95 5.40 20.09 0.13 1606.72 10.86 1595.86 
23-07-2018  1595.86 1595.86 725.02 6.83 23.50 0.13 1612.40 12.84 1599.56 
24-07-2018  1599.56 1599.56 725.09 8.87 39.11 0.13 1629.67 26.41 1603.26 
25-07-2018  1603.26 1603.26 725.16 9.12 39.35 0.13 1633.36 26.40 1606.96 
26-07-2018  1606.96 1606.96 725.24 9.74 39.98 0.13 1637.07 26.41 1610.66 
27-07-2018  1610.66 1610.66 725.31 9.82 24.83 0.13 1625.54 11.19 1614.35 
28-07-2018  1614.35 1614.35 725.38 9.68 24.36 0.13 1628.91 10.85 1618.05 
29-07-2018  1618.05 1618.05 725.45 10.05 23.41 0.13 1631.29 9.54 1621.75 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
102 
Day 
Storage for 
rule level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
Loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
30-07-2018  1621.75 1621.75 725.53 10.04 21.75 0.13 1633.33 7.88 1625.45 
31-07-2018  1625.45 1625.45 725.60 10.07 19.14 0.13 1634.38 4.30 1630.08 
01-08-2018  1630.08 1630.08 725.69 10.07 14.83 0.13 1634.71 0.00 1634.71 
02-08-2018  1634.71 1634.71 725.78 10.09 12.53 0.13 1637.02 0.00 1637.02 
03-08-2018  1639.34 1637.02 725.83 9.59 11.37 0.13 1638.67 0.00 1638.67 
04-08-2018  1643.97 1638.67 725.86 9.30 9.10 0.13 1638.34 0.00 1638.34 
05-08-2018  1648.60 1638.34 725.85 9.50 7.97 0.13 1636.68 0.00 1636.68 
06-08-2018  1653.23 1636.68 725.82 9.00 8.46 0.13 1636.01 0.00 1636.01 
07-08-2018  1657.86 1636.01 725.81 9.05 16.46 0.13 1643.29 0.00 1643.29 
08-08-2018  1662.49 1643.29 725.95 9.99 39.58 0.13 1672.75 5.63 1667.12 
09-08-2018  1667.12 1667.12 726.41 9.95 57.45 0.13 1714.49 42.74 1671.75 
10-08-2018  1671.75 1671.75 726.50 9.98 61.03 0.13 1722.68 45.50 1677.18 
11-08-2018  1677.18 1677.18 726.60 9.96 45.44 0.13 1712.54 29.92 1682.61 
12-08-2018  1682.61 1682.61 726.70 9.99 48.44 0.13 1720.93 32.89 1688.04 
13-08-2018  1688.04 1688.04 726.80 10.00 45.99 0.13 1723.90 30.43 1693.47 
14-08-2018  1693.47 1693.47 726.90 9.99 84.18 0.13 1767.54 68.63 1698.91 
15-08-2018  1698.91 1698.91 727.00 9.99 165.06 0.13 1853.85 149.51 1704.34 
16-08-2018  1704.34 1704.34 727.10 9.95 154.96 0.13 1849.22 139.45 1709.77 
17-08-2018  1709.77 1709.77 727.20 9.98 111.70 0.13 1811.36 96.16 1715.20 
18-08-2018  1715.20 1715.20 727.30 9.66 92.51 0.13 1797.92 77.29 1720.63 
19-08-2018  1720.63 1720.63 727.40 9.98 62.88 0.13 1773.40 47.34 1726.06 
20-08-2018  1726.06 1726.06 727.50 9.95 37.54 0.13 1753.53 22.51 1731.01 
21-08-2018  1731.01 1731.01 727.59 9.68 29.95 0.13 1751.16 15.19 1735.96 
22-08-2018  1735.96 1735.96 727.68 9.98 24.60 0.13 1750.45 9.53 1740.91 
23-08-2018  1740.91 1740.91 727.77 9.96 20.39 0.13 1751.21 5.35 1745.86 
24-08-2018  1745.86 1745.86 727.86 9.96 18.96 0.13 1754.73 3.91 1750.81 
25-08-2018  1750.81 1750.81 727.95 9.96 17.77 0.13 1758.50 2.73 1755.76 
26-08-2018  1755.76 1755.76 728.05 9.93 16.42 0.13 1762.12 1.40 1760.71 
27-08-2018  1760.71 1760.71 728.14 9.97 18.44 0.13 1769.05 3.39 1765.66 

 
 
Appendices 
103 
Day 
Storage for 
rule level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
Loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
28-08-2018  1765.66 1765.66 728.23 9.91 18.71 0.13 1774.33 3.72 1770.62 
29-08-2018  1770.62 1770.62 728.32 9.97 15.79 0.13 1776.31 0.74 1775.57 
30-08-2018  1775.57 1775.57 728.41 8.69 15.17 0.13 1781.92 1.40 1780.52 
31-08-2018  1780.52 1780.52 728.50 10.01 15.83 0.13 1786.21 1.66 1784.55 
01-09-2018  1784.55 1784.55 728.57 10.01 14.17 0.13 1788.58 0.00 1788.58 
02-09-2018  1788.58 1788.58 728.65 9.96 8.49 0.13 1786.98 0.00 1786.98 
03-09-2018  1792.61 1786.98 728.62 9.74 7.58 0.13 1784.70 0.00 1784.70 
04-09-2018  1796.65 1784.70 728.58 9.20 7.38 0.13 1782.74 0.00 1782.74 
05-09-2018  1800.68 1782.74 728.54 9.14 6.99 0.13 1780.46 0.00 1780.46 
06-09-2018  1804.71 1780.46 728.50 10.03 6.88 0.13 1777.18 0.00 1777.18 
07-09-2018  1808.74 1777.18 728.44 9.89 4.57 0.13 1771.73 0.00 1771.73 
08-09-2018  1812.78 1771.73 728.34 9.55 3.39 0.13 1765.44 0.00 1765.44 
09-09-2018  1816.81 1765.44 728.22 9.31 3.82 0.13 1759.81 0.00 1759.81 
10-09-2018  1820.84 1759.81 728.12 9.76 3.61 0.13 1753.53 0.00 1753.53 
11-09-2018  1824.88 1753.53 728.00 8.51 3.68 0.13 1748.57 0.00 1748.57 
12-09-2018  1828.92 1748.57 727.91 7.73 2.89 0.13 1743.61 0.00 1743.61 
13-09-2018  1832.95 1743.61 727.82 6.89 4.70 0.13 1741.29 0.00 1741.29 
14-09-2018  1836.99 1741.29 727.78 6.49 0.99 0.13 1735.66 0.00 1735.66 
15-09-2018  1841.03 1735.66 727.68 7.14 2.64 0.13 1731.03 0.00 1731.03 
16-09-2018  1845.07 1731.03 727.59 5.89 3.04 0.13 1728.05 0.00 1728.05 
17-09-2018  1849.10 1728.05 727.54 5.28 2.76 0.13 1725.40 0.00 1725.40 
18-09-2018  1853.14 1725.40 727.49 5.11 2.93 0.13 1723.08 0.00 1723.08 
19-09-2018  1857.18 1723.08 727.45 4.96 3.77 0.13 1721.76 0.00 1721.76 
20-09-2018  1861.22 1721.76 727.42 6.40 3.55 0.13 1718.78 0.00 1718.78 
21-09-2018  1864.41 1718.78 727.37 7.30 2.46 0.13 1713.82 0.00 1713.82 
22-09-2018  1867.60 1713.82 727.28 7.05 2.22 0.13 1708.85 0.00 1708.85 
23-09-2018  1870.80 1708.85 727.18 4.16 3.96 0.13 1708.52 0.00 1708.52 
24-09-2018  1873.99 1708.52 727.18 6.13 7.58 0.13 1709.84 0.00 1709.84 
25-09-2018  1877.19 1709.84 727.20 5.20 4.34 0.13 1708.85 0.00 1708.85 

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
104 
Day 
Storage for 
rule level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
Loss 
(MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
26-09-2018  1880.38 1708.85 727.18 6.14 5.61 0.13 1708.19 0.00 1708.19 
27-09-2018  1883.57 1708.19 727.17 5.02 5.81 0.13 1708.85 0.00 1708.85 
28-09-2018  1886.77 1708.85 727.18 5.77 9.54 0.13 1712.49 0.00 1712.49 
29-09-2018  1889.96 1712.49 727.25 5.32 10.42 0.13 1717.46 0.00 1717.46 
(Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 

 
 
Appendices 
105 
Appendix 3.7 
Sample simulations of Idamalayar reservoir using 2020 rule curve 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.6.3) 
Day  Storage for 
the rule 
level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss (MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
10-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.77  28.30  0.00  886.53  26.53  860.00  
11-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.12  23.16  0.00  882.04  22.04  860.00  
12-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.38  26.34  0.00  884.96  24.96  860.00  
13-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.30  22.60  0.00  881.30  21.30  860.00  
14-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  2.16  24.18  0.05  881.96  21.96  860.00  
15-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.32  16.33  0.04  875.98  15.98  860.00  
16-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.56  10.58  0.02  869.99  9.99  860.00  
17-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.15  11.14  0.00  869.99  9.99  860.00  
18-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.81  8.28  0.02  867.46  7.46  860.00  
19-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.95  8.46  0.05  866.46  6.46  860.00  
20-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.76  10.68  0.04  869.88  9.88  860.00  
21-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.59  13.29  0.00  872.70  12.70  860.00  
22-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.61  13.66  0.02  873.04  13.04  860.00  
23-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.53  12.93  0.02  872.38  12.38  860.00  
24-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.54  7.53  0.03  866.97  6.97  860.00  
25-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.62  7.62  0.03  866.97  6.97  860.00  
26-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.34  8.85  0.00  868.51  8.51  860.00  
27-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.68  7.30  0.03  866.58  6.58  860.00  
28-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  1.49  10.02  0.01  868.51  8.51  860.00  
29-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.54  10.21  0.00  869.67  9.67  860.00  
30-06-2018  860.00  860.00  161.00  0.44  9.86  0.03  869.38  7.97  861.41  
01-07-2018  861.41  861.41  161.05  0.36  7.63  0.02  868.66  5.83  862.83  
02-07-2018  862.83  862.83  161.10  0.28  7.25  0.04  869.76  5.51  864.25  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
106 
Day  Storage for 
the rule 
level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss (MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
03-07-2018  864.25  864.25  161.15  0.73  7.87  0.00  871.39  5.73  865.66  
04-07-2018  865.66  865.66  161.20  0.75  5.83  0.04  870.70  3.62  867.08  
05-07-2018  867.08  867.08  161.25  0.61  4.03  0.06  870.44  1.95  868.49  
06-07-2018  868.49  868.49  161.30  1.20  3.74  0.02  871.01  1.10  869.90  
07-07-2018  869.90  869.90  161.35  1.63  4.21  0.06  872.42  1.10  871.32  
08-07-2018  871.32  871.32  161.40  1.26  6.72  0.00  876.78  4.05  872.73  
09-07-2018  872.73  872.73  161.45  0.29  9.49  0.00  881.93  7.78  874.15  
10-07-2018  874.15  874.15  161.50  0.29  17.45  0.00  891.31  16.45  874.86  
11-07-2018  874.86  874.86  161.53  0.45  39.76  0.00  914.18  38.61  875.56  
12-07-2018  875.56  875.56  161.55  0.35  29.87  0.00  905.08  28.81  876.27  
13-07-2018  876.27  876.27  161.58  0.56  21.40  0.00  897.12  20.14  876.98  
14-07-2018  876.98  876.98  161.60  0.53  28.63  0.02  905.06  27.38  877.69  
15-07-2018  877.69  877.69  161.63  0.34  27.81  0.00  905.16  26.77  878.39  
16-07-2018  878.39  878.39  161.65  0.42  40.34  0.00  918.31  39.21  879.10  
17-07-2018  879.10  879.10  161.68  0.18  37.63  0.00  916.55  36.74  879.81  
18-07-2018  879.81  879.81  161.70  0.61  32.01  0.00  911.21  30.69  880.52  
19-07-2018  880.52  880.52  161.73  0.49  28.81  0.06  908.78  27.55  881.23  
20-07-2018  881.23  881.23  161.75  0.82  24.34  0.00  904.75  21.58  883.17  
21-07-2018  883.17  883.17  161.82  1.64  24.18  0.03  905.68  20.56  885.11  
22-07-2018  885.11  885.11  161.89  0.98  19.46  0.08  903.51  16.45  887.05  
23-07-2018  887.05  887.05  161.95  2.30  15.41  0.00  900.16  11.17  889.00  
24-07-2018  889.00  889.00  162.02  4.02  23.14  0.00  908.12  17.18  890.94  
25-07-2018  890.94  890.94  162.09  4.90  39.95  0.00  925.99  33.11  892.88  
26-07-2018  892.88  892.88  162.16  5.93  21.48  0.00  908.44  13.61  894.83  
27-07-2018  894.83  894.83  162.23  5.76  19.60  0.02  908.65  11.88  896.77  
28-07-2018  896.77  896.77  162.30  5.19  12.42  0.03  903.97  5.26  898.71  
29-07-2018  898.71  898.71  162.36  5.84  16.78  0.00  909.66  9.00  900.66  

 
 
Appendices 
107 
Day  Storage for 
the rule 
level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss (MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
30-07-2018  900.66  900.66  162.43  5.73  13.83  0.03  908.72  6.12  902.60  
31-07-2018  902.60  902.60  162.50  5.84  19.96  0.00  916.72  12.69  904.03  
01-08-2018  904.03  904.03  162.55  5.81  10.74  0.02  908.94  3.48  905.46  
02-08-2018  905.46  905.46  162.60  5.82  9.03  0.03  908.64  1.75  906.89  
03-08-2018  906.89  906.89  162.65  5.81  9.62  0.05  910.65  2.33  908.32  
04-08-2018  908.32  908.32  162.70  5.77  7.61  0.11  910.05  0.30  909.75  
05-08-2018  909.75  909.75  162.75  5.77  6.72  0.08  910.62  0.00  910.62  
06-08-2018  911.18  910.62  162.78  5.78  7.83  0.03  912.64  0.03  912.61  
07-08-2018  912.61  912.61  162.85  5.77  19.07  0.00  925.91  11.87  914.04  
08-08-2018  914.04  914.04  162.90  5.71  61.93  0.00  970.27  54.80  915.47  
09-08-2018  915.47  915.47  162.95  5.67  46.37  0.00  956.18  39.28  916.90  
10-08-2018  916.90  916.90  163.00  5.67  33.92  0.00  945.15  26.82  918.33  
11-08-2018  918.33  918.33  163.05  5.69  17.28  0.00  929.92  10.16  919.76  
12-08-2018  919.76  919.76  163.10  5.69  31.81  0.07  945.80  24.61  921.19  
13-08-2018  921.19  921.19  163.15  5.47  37.08  0.00  952.80  30.18  922.62  
14-08-2018  922.62  922.62  163.20  5.40  62.96  0.00  980.18  56.13  924.05  
15-08-2018  924.05  924.05  163.25  1.96  100.59  0.00  1022.68 97.20  925.48  
16-08-2018  925.48  925.48  163.30  0.00  86.97  0.00  1012.45 85.54  926.91  
17-08-2018  926.91  926.91  163.35  0.00  52.67  0.00  979.58  51.24  928.34  
18-08-2018  928.34  928.34  163.40  0.00  34.81  0.00  963.15  33.38  929.77  
19-08-2018  929.77  929.77  163.45  0.01  28.17  0.00  957.92  26.72  931.20  
20-08-2018  931.20  931.20  163.50  3.91  21.94  0.00  949.23  16.73  932.50  
21-08-2018  932.50  932.50  163.55  4.48  15.16  0.00  943.17  9.37  933.80  
22-08-2018  933.80  933.80  163.59  5.82  12.41  0.03  940.36  5.26  935.10  
23-08-2018  935.10  935.10  163.64  5.26  10.39  0.00  940.23  3.83  936.40  
24-08-2018  936.40  936.40  163.68  4.93  8.57  0.04  940.01  2.31  937.70  
25-08-2018  937.70  937.70  163.73  5.70  6.89  0.06  938.83  0.00  938.83  

 
 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
108 
Day  Storage for 
the rule 
level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss (MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
26-08-2018  939.00  938.83  163.77  5.77  7.14  0.04  940.17  0.00  940.17  
27-08-2018  940.30  940.17  163.81  5.77  7.57  0.06  941.90  0.30  941.60  
28-08-2018  941.60  941.60  163.86  5.72  7.43  0.02  943.29  0.39  942.90  
29-08-2018  942.90  942.90  163.91  5.84  7.11  0.05  944.12  0.00  944.12  
30-08-2018  944.20  944.12  163.95  5.85  5.80  0.03  944.05  0.00  944.05  
31-08-2018  945.50  944.05  163.95  5.84  6.71  0.02  944.90  0.00  944.90  
01-09-2018  948.38  944.90  163.98  5.85  6.71  0.01  945.75  0.00  945.75  
02-09-2018  951.26  945.75  164.01  5.84  6.42  0.06  946.27  0.00  946.27  
03-09-2018  954.14  946.27  164.03  5.84  6.42  0.05  946.79  0.00  946.79  
04-09-2018  957.02  946.79  164.04  5.87  5.87  0.08  946.71  0.00  946.71  
05-09-2018  959.90  946.71  164.04  5.88  5.88  0.05  946.66  0.00  946.66  
06-09-2018  962.78  946.66  164.04  5.92  5.64  0.14  946.24  0.00  946.24  
07-09-2018  965.66  946.24  164.03  5.99  5.71  0.10  945.87  0.00  945.87  
08-09-2018  968.54  945.87  164.01  6.01  5.76  0.06  945.55  0.00  945.55  
09-09-2018  971.42  945.55  164.00  6.01  6.19  0.09  945.64  0.00  945.64  
10-09-2018  974.30  945.64  164.00  5.99  4.54  0.11  944.08  0.00  944.08  
11-09-2018  977.18  944.08  163.95  6.00  0.00  0.11  937.98  0.00  937.98  
12-09-2018  980.06  937.98  163.74  6.00  1.53  0.09  933.42  0.00  933.42  
13-09-2018  982.94  933.42  163.58  6.00  0.98  0.11  928.29  0.00  928.29  
14-09-2018  985.82  928.29  163.40  5.36  0.93  0.14  923.73  0.00  923.73  
15-09-2018  988.70  923.73  163.24  5.94  1.14  0.05  918.88  0.00  918.88  
16-09-2018  991.58  918.88  163.07  5.55  0.79  0.09  914.04  0.00  914.04  
17-09-2018  994.46  914.04  162.90  5.46  0.95  0.05  909.48  0.00  909.48  
18-09-2018  997.34  909.48  162.74  5.75  1.84  0.05  905.51  0.00  905.51  
19-09-2018  1000.22  905.51  162.60  5.45  0.00  0.04  900.03  0.00  900.03  
20-09-2018  1003.10  900.03  162.41  4.53  1.43  0.02  896.91  0.00  896.91  
21-09-2018  1003.96  896.91  162.30  5.43  0.10  0.05  891.54  0.00  891.54  

 
 
Appendices 
109 
Day  Storage for 
the rule 
level 
(MCM) 
Storage at 
the 
beginning of 
the day 
(MCM) 
Reservoir 
level (m, 
MSL) 
PH 
discharge 
(MCM) 
Inflows to 
reservoir 
(MCM) 
Evaporation 
loss (MCM) 
Storage at the 
end of the day 
before spills 
(2)+(5)-(4)-(6) 
(MCM) 
Spills 
(MCM) 
Storage 
after 
spills 
(MCM) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
22-09-2018  1004.83  891.54  162.11  5.65  0.63  0.07  886.44  0.00  886.44  
23-09-2018  1005.69  886.44  161.93  5.89  1.18  0.10  881.63  0.00  881.63  
24-09-2018  1006.56  881.63  161.76  4.67  2.81  0.10  879.67  0.00  879.67  
25-09-2018  1007.42  879.67  161.69  5.89  3.09  0.00  876.87  0.00  876.87  
26-09-2018  1008.28  876.87  161.60  5.38  0.65  0.03  872.11  0.00  872.11  
27-09-2018  1009.15  872.11  161.43  5.94  1.26  0.08  867.35  0.00  867.35  
28-09-2018  1010.01  867.35  161.26  5.70  0.73  0.07  862.31  0.00  862.31  
29-09-2018  1010.88  862.31  161.08  5.68  2.42  0.10  858.95  0.00  858.95  
(Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 

 
 
 110 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
Appendix 4.1 
LULC analysis for Idukki district 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.1) 
Land Use  
Area  
1985  
(from  
NASA)  
Area  
1995  
(from  
NASA)  
Area  
2005  
(from  
KSREC)  
Area  
2015  
(from  
KSREC)  
Areal 
change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
Change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
(%)*  
Areal 
change 
from  
1985 to  
2015  
Change 
from  
1985 to  
2015  
(%)*  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  
Forest land  1966.78  1955.22  2196.35  2124.99  -71.35  -3.25  158.21  8.04  
Agricultural land  1589.22  1601.99  1416.15  1598.35  182.20  12.87  9.13  0.57  
Built-up  
(Cities/ Towns/ 
Villages)  
11.39  11.40  20.40  154.57  134.16  657.56  143.18  1257.02  
Wasteland  99.73  96.80  142.33  142.81  0.48  0.34  43.08  43.20  
Grassland  591.01  592.33  478.58  231.64  -246.94  -51.60  -359.37  -60.81  
Water bodies  120.26  120.65  109.02  113.24  4.22  3.87  -7.02  -5.84  
Total  4378.39  4378.39  4362.82$  4365.59$          
*Negative sign indicates a decrease in area for a particular class and positive sign indicates an increase in 
area.  
$The difference in the total areas is due to a slight inconsistency in the data for the two years obtained from 
KSREC. However, this difference is negligible.  
LULC transition matrix for Idukki district (2005-2015) 
(in per cent) 
2005 
2015 
  Forest 
land  
Agricultural 
land  Grassland  Wasteland  Water 
bodies  
Built-up  
(Cities/Towns/ 
Villages)  
Forest land  88.12  8.39  1.78  0.49  0.18  1.04  
Agricultural land  0.60  91.00  0.48  0.33  0.29  7.30  
Grassland  32.67  21.52  35.22  7.91  1.23  1.45  
Wasteland  12.98  10.61  11.51  63.03  0.05  1.82  
Water bodies  3.69  3.72  0.26  0.03  90.96  1.34  
Built-up  
(Cities/ Towns/ Villages)  2.05  11.19  0.02  0.30  0.50  85.94  
(Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 
  

 
 
 111 
Appendices 
Appendix 4.2 
LULC analysis for Ernakulam district 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.2) 
Land Use  
Area  
1985  
(from  
NASA)  
 Area  
1995  
(from  
NASA)  
Area  
2005  
(from  
KSREC)  
Area  
2015  
(from  
KSREC)  
Areal 
change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
Change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
(%)*  
Areal 
change  
from 1985 to 
2015  
Change 
from  
1985 to  
2015  
(%)*  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  
Forest land  654.78  624.79  830.58  837.21  6.63  0.80  182.43  27.86  
Agricultural land  1961.04  1916.65  1737.86  1555.66  -182.2  -10.48  -405.38  -20.67  
Built-up  
(Cities/Towns/ 
Villages)  
140.65  182.26  253.93  439.14  185.21  72.94  298.49  212.22  
Wasteland  2.73  2.73  15.83  26.12  10.29  65.00  23.39  856.78  
Grassland  86.53  116.49  39.63  21.32  -18.31  -46.20  -65.21  -75.36  
Water bodies  219.51  222.32  190.70  188.81  -1.89  -0.99  -30.7  -13.99  
Total  3065.24  3065.24  3068.54$  3068.26$          
*Negative sign indicates a decrease in area for a particular class and positive sign indicates an increase in 
area.  
$The difference in the total areas is due to a slight inconsistency in the data for the two years obtained from 
KSREC. However, this difference is negligible.  
LULC transition matrix for Ernakulam district (2005-2015) 
(in per cent) 
2005 
2015 
  Forest 
land  
Agricultural 
land  Grassland  Wasteland  Water 
bodies  
Built-up  
(Cities/Towns/  
Villages)  
Forest land  97.29 1.06 0.73 0.63 0.21 0.08 
Agricultural land  1.31 85.56 0.06 0.33 0.74 12.00 
Grassland  7.82 44.58 30.71 6.59 0.13 10.17 
Wasteland  11.12 6.51 1.23 73.32 6.44 1.38 
Water bodies  1.11 7.12 1.00 0.01 89.66 1.10 
Built-up  
(Cities/ Towns/Villages)  0.11 10.83 0.01 0.39 0.58 88.08 
(Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018) 
  

 
 
 112 
Performance Audit of ‘Preparedness and response to floods in Kerala’ 
Appendix 4.3 
LULC analysis for flood prone region of Ernakulam district 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1.3) 
Land Use  
Area  
1985  
(from  
NASA)  
 Area  
1995  
(from  
NASA)  
Area 2005  
(from  
KSREC)  
Area  
2015  
(from  
KSREC)  
Areal 
change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
Change 
from  
2005 to  
2015  
(%)*  
Areal 
change 
from  
1985 to  
2015  
Change 
from  
1985 to  
2015  
(%)*  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  sq. km  
Forest land  27.44  27.38  38.26  49.56  11.30  29.53  22.12  80.63  
Agricultural 
land  613.15  588.99  566.34  489.68  -76.66  -13.54  -123.47  -20.14  
Built-up 
(Cities/Towns/ 
Villages)  
48.44  72.02  104.26  182.59  78.33  75.13  134.15  276.94  
Wasteland  0.59  0.59  1.47  3.76  2.29  155.53  3.17  538.08  
Grassland  7.65  7.65  11.50  2.22  -9.28  -80.69  -5.43  -70.98  
Water bodies  92.90  93.54  69.62  63.50  -6.12  -8.79  -29.40  -31.64  
Total  790.17  790.17  791.46$  791.32$          
*Negative sign indicates a decrease in area for a particular class and positive sign indicates an increase in 
area.  
$The difference in the total areas is due to a slight inconsistency in the data for the two years obtained from 
KSREC. However, this difference is negligible.  
LULC transition matrix for flood prone region of Ernakulam district 
(2005-2015) 
(in per cent) 
 2015 
2005 
  Forest 
land  
Agricultural 
land  Grassland  Wasteland  Water bodies  
Built-up  
(Cities/ Towns/ 
Villages)  
Forest land  90.75  6.85  0.00  1.52  0.39  0.49  
Agricultural land  2.49  81.01  0.04  0.27  0.87  15.32  
Grassland  6.84  60.90  17.16  5.05  0.00  10.05  
Wasteland  0.24  28.71  0.18  62.07  0.00  8.80  
Water bodies  0.04  15.21  0.00  0.00  83.18  1.57  
Built-up  
(Cities/ Towns/ 
Villages)  
0.02  9.74  0.00  0.12  0.52  89.60  
 (Source: IISc, Bangalore’s Report on Kerala Floods 2018)  

 
 
 113 
Appendices 
Appendix 5.1 
Statement showing name of LSGI, Taluk and number of respondents covered by 
Audit in selected districts while conducting survey of affected persons 
(Reference: Chapter 5, Paragraph on Results of survey) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
District 
Name of 
Taluk 
Office 
Name of LSGI 
Number of 
persons 
surveyed 
1.  
Alappuzha 
Chengannur 
Chengannur Municipality 25 
2.  Pandanad Grama Panchayat 25 
3.  Thiruvanvandoor Grama Panchayat 25 
4.  Ala Grama Panchayat 25 
5.  
Kuttanad  
Champakkulam Grama Panchayat 25 
6.  Muttar Grama Panchayat 25 
7.  Nedumudi Grama Panchayat 27 
8.  Neelamperoor Grama Panchayat 25 
9.  
Ernakulam 
Aluva  
Aluva Municipality 26 
10.  Kalady Grama Panchayat 26 
11.  Parakkadavu Grama Panchayat 31 
12.  Sreemoolanagaram Grama Panchayat 28 
13.  
Paravur 
Alangad Grama Panchayat 30 
14.  Chendamangalam Grama Panchayat 30 
15.  Karumalloor Grama Panchayat 22 
16.  Puthenvelikkara Grama Panchayat 26 
17.  
Idukki 
Idukki 
Kanjikuzhy Grama Panchayat 15 
18.  Konnathady Grama Panchayat 20 
19.  Vathikudy Grama Panchayat 20 
20.  Vazhathope Grama Panchayat 24 
21.  
Devikulam  
Adimaly Grama Panchayat 20 
22.  Mankulam Grama Panchayat 25 
23.  Munnar Grama Panchayat 19 
24.  Vellathooval Grama Panchayat 17 
25.  
Thrissur 
Chalakkudy 
Chalakkudy Municipality 19 
26.  Kadukutty Grama Panchayat 28 
27.  Koratty Grama Panchayat 24 
28.  Melur Grama Panchayat 34 
29.  
Thalappilly  
Chelakkara Grama Panchayat 32 
30.  Pazhayannur Grama Panchayat 22 
31.  Vallathol Nagar Grama Panchayat 32 
32.  Wadakkancherry Municipality 28 

 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND  
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA  
https://cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://cag.gov.in/ag1/kerala/en  