 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Ground Water Management and Regulation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
M
inistry of Jal Shakti 
Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation 
Report No. 9 of 2021 
(Performance Audit) 

  

 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Chapter Contents Page No.  
 Preface i 
 Executive Summary iii 
1 Introduction 1 
2 Management of Ground Water 11 
3 Ground Water Regulation  31 
4 Implementation of schemes on Ground Water Management 
and Regulation  
65 
5 Sustainable Development Goals and Ground Water 85 
 Annexures 93 
 
 
 
 
  

 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation i 
 
Preface 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2018 has been prepared 
for submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. This Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India contains the observations of 
Performance Audit of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation for the period 2013-18. The instances mentioned in 
this Report are those which came to notice in the course of test 
audit for the period 2013-18 as well as those which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported in previous 
Audit Reports; matters relating to the period subsequent to 
2017-18 have also been included, wherever necessary. 
Accordingly, facts have been updated till September 2020 
wherever information was received from the Department.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation iii 
Executive Summary 
Introduction and background 
Ground water is the water which exists below the surface in the zone of saturation 
and can be extracted through wells or any other means or emerges as springs and 
base flows in streams and rivers. Ground water accounts for nearly 62 per cent of the 
total requirement of water in irrigation, 85 per cent  in rural water supply and 
45 per cent in urban water supply. Therefore, sustainable development and efficient 
management of ground water poses a complex challenge for governance in India. 
India is also committed to achieving the targets under United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals by ensuring availability and sustainable management of water and 
sanitation for all. 
Water being a State subject, the legislation for regulation and development of ground 
water is to be enacted by the State Governments/Union Territories (UTs). However, 
the regulation of Ground water utilisation is done both at Central and State levels. At 
the Apex level, the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (DoWR,RD&GR) is allocated with overall planning and policy making for 
the development of ground water resources and establishment of utilisable resources. 
In pursuance of the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court (1996), the Central Ground 
Water Authority (CGWA) was constituted (January 1997) for the purpose of regulation 
and control of ground water management and development and to issue necessary 
directions for this purpose. In 13
1 States/UTs (as of March 2019), the regulation of 
ground water is done by the States themselves through State Ground Water Authority 
or Government orders. 
The Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is the national agency under DoWR,RD&GR 
for assessment, management and development of ground water resources in the 
country. Ground water resources are estimated assessment unit wise. As on 
31
st March 2017, out of 6,881 assessment units all over India, 1,186 have been 
categorised as Over-exploited, 313 as Critical, 972 as Semi-critical, and 4,310 units as 
Safe. There are 100 assessment units which are completely saline. The number of 
Over-exploited and Critical administrative units are significantly higher in Delhi, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan. In Punjab, 80 per cent  of the 
assessment units are critical or over-exploited.  
CGWA releases guidelines for ground water abstraction from time to time.  Under the 
guidelines (November 2012/November 2015), which were in force at the time of audit, 
CGWA had notified 162 critical/ over-exploited areas for the purpose of regulation of 
                                                           
1  Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, NCT Delhi (through 
Government Orders), Tamil Nadu (through Government Orders), Telangana, West Bengal, 
Chandigarh (through bye-laws), Puducherry and Lakshadweep. 

Report No. 9 of 2021  
iv Ground Water Management and Regulation  
ground water development. In notified areas, abstraction of ground water was not 
permissible for any purpose other than drinking and domestic use. In the non-notified 
areas, CGWA could permit extraction of ground water for industrial/ infrastructural/ 
mining projects.   
In pursuance of the directions of the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal, CGWA notified 
revised guidelines in September 2020. The new guidelines now have pan-India 
applicability and will prevail in case of any difference with the States’ guidelines. Some 
of the earlier provisions such as notification of areas by CGWA have been dispensed 
with, while some new provisions, such as differential charges for extraction of ground 
water in different categories of areas (safe, critical, semi-critical and over-exploited) 
have been introduced. 
A Central Sector Scheme on ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’ was 
approved for implementation during XII Plan period (2012-17) with an estimated cost 
of ` 3,319 crore and an overall objective of proper assessment and management of 
ground water resources so as to ensure its sustainability. The scheme was continued 
during 2017-20 at an estimated cost of ` 992 crore. At the State level, State 
Governments implement their own schemes for water supply, controlled irrigation, 
ground water recharge, reducing dependence on ground water, reducing 
contamination of ground water, etc.  
The ground water scenario in India is beset by challenges due to the competing needs 
of agriculture, industrialisation and the pressures of increasing population in the 
context of uncertain rainfall. Contamination and depletion of ground water also leads 
to vulnerability of livelihoods besides posing a serious health risk. Accordingly, we 
decided to take up a Performance Audit of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation with the objective of ascertaining the overall framework for ground water 
sector in India through a holistic perspective by examining whether: 
1) the mechanism for management of ground water in Indi
 a is adequate, 
efficient and effective;  
2) ground water regulations are implemented efficiently  and effectively;  
3) the targets and objectives of the schemes on Ground Water Management 
and Regulation were achieved efficiently and effectively; and   
4) appropriate steps have been taken to achieve the rel evant targets under 
Sustainable Development Goal 6 relating to ground water. 
Key Audit findings 
Chapter 2: Management of Ground Water 
The percentage of utilisation of ground water with respect to recharge, known as 
stage of extraction of ground water in the country was 63 per cent. In 13 States/UTs, 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation v 
the stage of extraction was higher than the national stage of extraction. Four 
States/UTs (Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan) had a stage of extraction of more 
than 100 per cent , indicating that extraction of ground water has surpassed the 
recharge of ground water. At the district level, in 24 States/UTs, 267 districts had stage 
of extraction more than 63 per cent ranging from 64 per cent to 385 per cent. During 
the period 2004 to 2017, the stage of extraction of ground water has increased from 
58 to 63 per cent. During the same period, the percentage of safe blocks has decreased 
while the percentage of blocks categorised as semi-critical, critical and over-exploited 
has steadily increased.  
(Para 2.2) 
The assessment of ground water resources was to be done every two years. During 
the audit period, CGWB conducted such assessments for 2013 and 2017 and published 
the Reports in June 2017 and July 2019 respectively. CGWB did not carry out this 
assessment for 2015 resulting in a gap of four years in assessment between 2013 and 
2017.  
 (Para 2.3) 
Against the proposed number of 50,000 observation wells (by the end of the XII Plan 
period i.e. 2012-17) to measure ground water level, a network of only 15,851 
observation wells were being monitored a
s of 31 March 2019.  CGWB also proposed 
to undertake Real time Ground Water Monitoring in various aquifers across the 
country through purpose built wells equipped with Digital Water Level Recorders 
(DWLRs) and Telemetry
2 in convergence with the ground water component under 
National Hydrology Project (NHP)3, which was still being planned as of March 2020.  
(Para 2.4) 
The number of observations wells having water depth more than 40 metres 4 was 
significant in Rajasthan  (20 per cent), Delhi (10 per cent) and Haryana (five per cent). 
On the other hand, ground water depth was less than five meters in Meghalaya 
(100 per cent), Nagaland (100 per cent), Puducherry (100 per cent) and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands (99 per cent). A comparison of depth to water level of post-monsoon 
2018 with the decadal mean of post-monsoon (2008-17) relating to data available 
from 14,387 observation wells of CGWB indicated that in 5,115 (about 36 per cent) 
                                                           
2 Telemetry is the collection of measurements or other data at remote or inaccessible points and 
their automatic transmission to receiving equipment for monitoring. 
3 National Hydrology Project was approved in April 2016 as a central sector scheme with a total 
outlay of ` 3,679.76 crore with the objective of improving the extent, quality, and accessibility of 
water resources information, decision support system for floods and basin level resource 
assessment/planning and strengthening the capacity of targeted water resources professionals 
and management institutions in India. 
4  Maximum range of depth categorized by CGWB. 

Report No. 9 of 2021  
vi Ground Water Management and Regulation  
wells there was a rise in water level. However, 9,260 (about 64 per cent) wells showed 
decline in water level. In 12 wells, there was no change in water level.  
(Para 2.5.1) 
As per the data for 2015 based on 15,165 locations in 32 States tested by CGWB, 
ground water had levels of contaminants higher than permissible limits of Arsenic 
(697 locations), Fluoride (637 locations), Nitrate (2,015 locations), Iron 
(1,389 locations) and Salinity (587 locations).  
(Para 2.5.3) 
To enable the States to enact Ground Water Legislation, DoWR, RD&GR circulated 
(2005) a Model Bill to all the States/UTs for regulation and development of ground 
water. However, the Model Bill was under review (December 2019) as per the 
suggestions of NITI Aayog.
 As of December 2019, 19 States/UTs had enacted 
legislation for management of ground water. In four of these States, the legislation 
was only partially implemented; in six other States, enactment of the ground water 
legislation was pending for various reasons. The remaining States/UTs had not taken 
action to enact legislation for ground water. The lack of clear guidelines from the 
Department impacted the legislations implemented by the States.
 
(Paras 2.6 & 2.7) 
There was shortage of human resources in Scientific and Engineering categories in 
CGWB and its regional and divisional offices. As of March 2019, there was a vacancy 
of 37.51 per cent, 26.93 per cent and 26.60 per cent in the Scientific, Engineering and 
Ministerial categories respectively. In spite of shortage of technical workforce, some 
of the Regional Offices had also deputed their technical staff (Scientific and 
Engineering) for administrative work. 
(Para 2.9) 
There was a vacancy ranging between 12 and 82 per cent in the Departments/Agencies 
dealing with ground water at State/UT level. Shortage of human resources posed 
constraints in the effective discharge of functions of the State/UT agencies. Due to 
lack in infrastructure and facilities, some of the State agencies were not able to carry 
out requisite laboratory tests which affected the management of ground water in the 
State. 
(Para 2.11.1 & 2.11.2) 
Chapter 3: Ground Water Regulation 
Out of a sample of 328 cases in 18 States where the Consent to Operate (CTO) granted 
to a project proponent included a condition which required NOC for ground water 
extraction, 253 projects (77 per cent) were operating without NOCs.  
(Para 3.3.1) 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation vii 
In 15 States for which data was made available to audit, 3,189 Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) licenses were issued to packaged drinking water units since 2013, of 
which in 2,475 cases (78 per cent), the project proponents were operating without 
obtaining NOCs from CGWA.  
(Para 3.3.2)  
During 2013-19, CGWA accorded 3,517 fresh NOCs and renewed 320 NOCs for ground 
water withdrawal to various industry, mining and infrastructure projects. As on 
31 March 2019, 10,758 applications for grant of NOC and 144 applications for renewal 
were pending. Thus, the quantum of pending NOCs was three times more than the 
fresh NOCs issued during last six years.  
(Para 3.4) 
In 474 cases, renewal of NOC was due during 2013-18 but the project proponents did 
not apply for renewal. CGWA did not take any action under section 15 of the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 against these project proponents. Thus, even after 
expiry of the NOC, existing industries/projects continued to draw ground water 
without any regulation.  
(Para 3.5) 
There were numerous cases in which conditions stipulated in the NOCs were violated. 
Despite the widespread violations, CGWA issued (2013-18) show cause notices to only 
99 project proponents. 
(Para 3.10.1) 
During joint field visits to the industries/project sites (other than individual 
households) for verification of compliance with conditions laid out in NOCs, 
widespread non-compliance of conditions mentioned in the NOC was noticed such as 
illegal extraction of ground water (Andhra Pradesh), non-installation of water flow 
meters (Gujarat, Odisha and West Bengal), improper maintenance of rainwater 
recharge structures (Gujarat and Haryana), absence of monitoring of water quality 
data (Odisha), wastage of water in a notified/over-exploited area (Karnataka) etc.   
(Para 3.10.2)  
Chapter 4: Implementation of schemes on Ground Water Management and 
Regulation  
Against the Budget Estimate of ` 2,349.48 crore for 2012-19, the Actual Expenditure 
under the Scheme was ` 1,109.73 crore.   
(Para 4.2) 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021  
viii Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Area of 24.8 lakh sq. km area was identified for Aquifer Mapping in the country. CGWB 
covered an area of 13 lakh sq. km. (52 per cent) as of September 2020. Further, Aquifer 
Mapping Reports for only 6.5 lakh sq. km. were finalised and ground water modelling 
for ~3 lakh sq. km. were completed as of September 2020.  
 (Para 4.3.1 & 4.3.3) 
Though CGWB had published aquifer mapping reports, a web-based system for easy 
dissemination of the information on the aquifer mapping was not designed, as 
envisaged. 
(Para 4.3.5) 
Of the 201 reports included in the programme, Aquifer mapping reports of only 168 
districts were shared with District Administration till November 2019. Many States did 
not take action on the recommendations made by CGWB in the aquifer mapping 
reports due to constraints such as map scale being too small to locate the areas, 
non-receipt of funds from CGWB or Central Government to implement the reports in 
the field, etc. 
(Para 4.3.7) 
Although an outlay of ` 575.38 crore was provided for the period 2013-17 under the 
component Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWM) in accordance with the 
National Water Policy 2012, no expenditure was incurred. The component was 
dropped from the subsequent EFC memo of 2017-20 and is now being taken up as a 
separate scheme on participatory ground water management through the Atal Bhujal 
Yojana (ABHY). However, unlike the PGWM, ABHY will be implemented only in few 
selected locations in seven States
5, therefore, both in scale and size, the ABHY is not a 
replacement for PGWM which was dropped. 
(Para 4.4) 
No action was taken on four out of 12 recommendations made (December 2012) by 
an Expert Group constituted for benchmarking of various activities of CGWB with 
international best practices, on capacity building in CGWB.  
(Para 4.5.2)  
Deficiencies were observed in schemes of some States; such as delay in completion of 
schemes, ground water level data not analysed before recommending proposals for 
construction of tube wells (Bihar); delay in finalisation of project on Ground Water 
Recharge action plan (Delhi); shortfall in the activities of State Ground Water 
Conservation Mission, lag in achievement of targets for implementing the use of 
sprinkle irrigation (Uttar Pradesh), etc. 
(Para 4.6) 
                                                           
5 Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation ix 
Chapter 5: Sustainable Development Goals and Ground Water  
Against the target value for percentage annual ground water withdrawal against net 
annual availability of 70 per cent under target 6.4, the national level was at 63 per cent 
however, there were eight States/UTs where this value was higher than the target of 
70 per cent. Out of 534 districts in 22 States/UTs, 202 districts had stage of extraction 
ranging from 71 per cent to 385 per cent. 
(Para 5.2.1) 
Target 6.6 is related to protecting and restoring water-related ecosystems including 
mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes. Under the component of 
Aquifer Mapping and Preparation of Aquifer Management Plan of GWMRS, against 
target of 11.85 lakh sq.km. to be mapped (2012-20), CGWB achieved 13 lakh sq. km. 
as of September 2020, however, Aquifer Mapping Reports in respect of nearly 6.5 lakh 
square km (i.e. 50 per cent of the area covered) only had been finalised.    
(Para 5.2.2) 
No action was taken in respect of Target 6 b related to supporting and strengthening 
the local communities in water management.  
(Para 5.2.3) 
 
Recommendations 
We recommend that 
1. The Department may ensure that assessment of ground water resources, water 
level and quality is done at the prescribed intervals so as to maintain current 
data on the status of ground water in the country and to utilise such data for 
planning management strategies.  
2. The Department may take action to increase the number of observation wells 
with Digital Water Level Recorders and Telemetry to monitor ground water in 
line with the targets committed under the Ground Water Management and 
Regulation Scheme/ National Hydrology Project.  
 
3. The Department may take expeditious action to revise the Model Bill and also 
pursue with the remaining States for bringing comprehensive laws/regulations 
to deal with ground water management.  
4. The Department should address the human resource con straints of 
CGWB/CGWA by also engaging with other experts and going for strategic 
partnerships to ensure smooth functions in processes of groundwater 
management and governance.  

Report No. 9 of 2021  
x Ground Water Management and Regulation  
5. For effective implementation of Ground Water Regulat ion and Management, 
Department should address the human resource crunch reported by the State 
Governments and also encourage them to adopt latest technologies for 
assessment and monitoring of ground water.  
6. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ne ed to develop effective 
coordination with various other agencies granting consents to projects to ensure 
that the requisite permissions to extract ground water are also obtained.  
7. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ma
 y develop a mechanism 
to ensure timely processing of requests for ground water extraction. 
8. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ne ed to establish a system 
for periodic inspections and review of the projects to ensure compliance to the 
conditions mentioned in the No Objection Certificates. 
9. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ne
 ed to enforce penal 
provisions strictly as per the Environment Protection Act/State Acts/Rules 
against the cases of violation of conditions mentioned in the No Objection 
Certificates for effective ground water regulation.  
10. Given the targets of the Department and limited expe
 nditure incurred vis a vis 
budget outlay, the Department may review its strategy for utilising the allocated 
funds and completing the planned activities under the Ground Water 
Management and Regulation Scheme. The Department may also consider 
putting in place a business continuity plan for the scheme.  
11. The Department may develop a strategy for expeditiou
 s completion of aquifer 
mapping and modelling of the identified area within a reasonable time period.  
12. Central Ground Water Board may take suitable action to develop the web-based 
system for easy dissemination of information regarding aquifer mapping on 
priority basis. 
13. The Department may ensure proper coordination betwee
 n Central Ground 
Water Board and State Governments for implementing the recommendations 
made in the National Aquifer Mapping project reports. 
14. Participatory Ground Water Management, being one of 
 the key activities for 
sustainable ground water management, may be executed in a time-bound 
manner through Atal Bhujal Yojana and this scheme may be considered for 
scaling up to the entire country, thus involving all the States.  
15. Central Ground Water Board may take appropriate acti
 on to ensure that 
recommendations of the report of the Expert Group for augmenting its 
infrastructure, technological upgradation and for capacity building are 
implemented within a reasonable time frame. 

Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation xi 
16. The Department may impress upon the State Government s to review the 
performance of their ground water schemes and take measures to ensure that 
the envisaged results are achieved by adopting an integrated approach for 
recharge/augmentation of ground water. 
17. The Department may review the mandate of CGWB and ta ke steps to strengthen 
the organisation to achieve the commitments made by the country in the 2030 
agenda for Sustainable Development Goals.  
18. The Department may assess the progress made under ea
 ch of the identified 
targets and take definite action to ensure that India is able to achieve the 
relevant Sustainable Development Goals as committed.   
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 1 
Introduction 
 
 
1.1 Background 
Water is essential for life, living and livelihood. Increasing population, growing 
urbanisation and rapid industrialisation combined with the need for raising 
agricultural production generates competing demands for water.  
Ground Water is defined as water which exists below the surface in the zone of 
saturation and can be extracted through wells or any other means or emerges as 
springs and base flows in streams and rivers. Ground water has steadily emerged as 
the backbone of India’s agriculture and drinking water security. It accounts for nearly 
62 per cent of the total requirement of water in irrigation, 85 per cent in rural water 
supply and 45 per cent in urban water supply. Therefore, efficient management of 
ground water is significant for sustainable use of water. 
A National Water Policy for the development and management of water resources 
and establishing a framework for creation of a system of laws, institutions and plan of 
action with a unified national perspective was adopted in September 1987, which was 
updated and revised in 2002 and 2012.  The National Water Policy 2012 recognised 
that ground water was being exploited inequitably and without any consideration to 
its sustainability leading to its over-exploitation in several areas. The policy envisaged 
that there was a need to map the aquifers
1 to know the quantum and quality of ground 
water resources (replenishable as well as non-replenishable) in the country which may 
be periodically updated. This process should be fully participatory, involving local 
communities. Further, the National Policy emphasised that declining ground water 
levels in over-exploited areas needed to be arrested by introducing improved 
technologies in water use, incentivising efficient water use and encouraging 
community based management of aquifers. In addition, where necessary, projects for 
artificial recharge should be undertaken so that extraction is less than the recharge, 
thereby allowing aquifers to maintain ground water levels. 
India is a signatory to the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, 
which consists of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that are to be achieved 
by 31 December 2030. SDG-6 relating to clean water and sanitation, seeks to ensure 
availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. The targets 
set under SDG-6 include increasing water-use efficiency across all sectors, ensuring 
sustainable withdrawals, supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and 
protection and restoration of water-related ecosystems including aquifers. India is 
committed to fulfilment of the 2030 agenda and the Department of Water Resources, 
                                                           
1 Aquifers are geologic formations (i.e. sands and gravels) which permit appreciable quantity of 
water to move through them.  
 Chapter  
1 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
2 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR,RD&GR) 2 has been identified as 
the nodal Department for implementing schemes for management and regulation of 
ground water for achieving the targets set under SDG-6.  
NITI Aayog has been entrusted with the role to co-ordinate the implementation of 
SDGs. NITI Aayog has identified ‘percentage annual ground water withdrawal against 
net annual availability’, known as stage of extraction, as one of the indicators for SDG-
6. As per NITI Aayog, the national target value for this indicator for the year 2030 
should be 70 per cent. 
1.2 Institutional framework for Ground Water Management and Regulation 
Water being a State subject, the legislation for regulation and development of ground 
water is to be enacted by the State Governments/Union Territories (UTs). However, 
the regulation of ground water utilisation is done both at Central and State levels. 
1.2.1 Entities involved 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
At the Apex level, DoWR,RD&GR is responsible for laying down policy guidelines and 
programmes for development and regulation of the country's water resources. The 
Department has been allocated with overall planning for the development of ground 
water resources, establishment of utilisable resources and formulation of policies for 
exploitation, overseeing of and providing support to State level activities in ground 
water development.
 
Central Ground Water Board  
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is the National Apex Agency entrusted with the 
responsibilities of providing scientific inputs for management, exploration, 
monitoring, assessment, augmentation and regulation of ground water resources of 
the country.  
CGWB is headed by a Chairman and has six Members 3. The Board has established 18 
Regional Offices/ Directorates ( Annexure 1.1 ), each headed by a Regional Director, 
which are responsible for implementation of the Annual Action Plan of the Board 
pertaining to the Region.  The post of the Regional Director is a key post for field 
functions in the Region, which comprises of one or more States. The Regional Director 
heads a multi-disciplinary team of scientists of the Region and controls the State Unit 
Offices and Engineering Divisions falling in that jurisdiction. The organisation setup of 
CGWB is depicted in Chart 1.1. 
                                                           
2 Vide Government of India notification dated 14 June 2019, the erstwhile Ministry Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has been converted into a Department under the 
newly created Ministry of Jal Shakti.  
3 Finance, CGWA, Headquarters, South, Training and Technology & Water Quality (TT&WQ), North 
and West.  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 3 
 
Central Ground Water Authority  
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India passed several orders in 19964, issuing directions 
to the Government of India for setting up of a Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) 
under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, declaring it as an authority and 
delegating powers under the said Act for the purposes of regulation and control of 
groundwater development. With a view to preserving and protecting the 
groundwater, the Hon’ble Court further directed that CGWA should regulate 
indiscriminate boring and withdrawal of groundwater in the country and issue 
necessary directions. 
In pursuance of Supreme Court orders, and in exercise of the powers conferred by 
sub-section (3)
5 of Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, CGWA was 
constituted (January 1997) for the purposes of regulation and control of groundwater 
management and development. CGWA is responsible for regulation and control, 
                                                           
4 In the matter of M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India and others (I.A. No. 32 in W.P. (C) No. 4677 of 1985 
decided on 10 December 1996. 
5 The Central Government may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority or authorities by such 
name or names as may be specified in the order for the purpose of exercising and performing such 
of the powers and functions (including the power to issue directions under Section 5 of the Central 
Government under this Act and for taking measures with respect to such of the matters referred to 
in sub section (2) as may be mentioned in the order and subject to the supervision and control of 
the Central Government and the provisions of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise 
the powers or perform the functions or take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such 
authority or authorities had been empowered by this Act to exercise those powers or perform those 
functions or take such measures. 
Chairman
Member 
(Finance)
Finance & 
Accounts 
officer
Member 
(CGWA)
 Member (Hq)
 Member 
(South)
Member 
(TT&WQ*)
Member 
(North & 
West)
Regional 
Directorates 
(18)
State Unit 
Offices (11)
Division 
Offices (17)
Chart 1.1: Organisational structure of CGWB 
*Training and Technology and Water Quality  
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
4 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
management and development of ground water in the country and issuing necessary 
regulatory directions for this purpose, including grant of No Objection Certificates 
(NOC) for extraction of ground water. CGWA can also resort to penal provisions 
contained in the said Act.  The jurisdiction of the Authority extends to the whole of 
India.  
State agencies  
At the State level also, there are various agencies/bodies/institutions involved in the 
ground water sector. As of March 2019, in 13
6 States/UTs, regulation of ground water 
development and management was being done either through constitution of State 
Ground Water Authorities (SGWAs) or by Government orders.   
1.3 Assessment of Ground Water resources 
In the States having predominantly hard rocks, the assessment unit is the watershed7 
whereas in the States covered predominantly with alluvium and/ or soft rocks, 
administrative blocks 8 are chosen as assessment units. These assessment units are 
categorized for ground water development based on stage of ground water 
extraction. There are four categories, namely - 'Safe' areas which have ground water 
potential for development; 'Semi-critical' areas where cautious groundwater 
development is recommended; 'Critical' areas; and 'Over-exploited' areas, where 
there should be intensive monitoring and evaluation and future ground development 
be linked with water conservation measures. The criteria for categorisation of 
assessment units are listed in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Criteria for Categorisation of Assessment Units 
Stage of Ground Water Extraction  Category 
≤70%  Safe 
>70% and ≤90%  Semi-Critical 
>90% and ≤100%  Critical 
> 100%  Over-Exploited 
Source: Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India 2017 
Apart from the four categories mentioned above, blocks where the entire assessment 
area is seen to have poor quality ground water are demarcated as ‘Saline’.  
1.4 Regulation of Ground Water development 
To enable the States to enact Ground Water Legislation, a Model Bill to regulate and 
control development of ground water was circulated (2005) by DoWR,RD&GR to all 
                                                           
6 Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh (through bye-laws), Delhi NCT (through Govt. Orders), Goa, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders), Telangana and West Bengal.   
7 Watersheds are natural hydrological entities that cover a specific aerial expanse of land surface from 
which the rainfall runoff flows to a defined drain, channel, stream or river at any particular point. The 
terms region, basin, catchment, watershed, etc. are widely used to denote hydrological units. 
8 An administrative block is a unit of administration in state such as block/taluka/mandal/tehsil. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 5 
the States/UTs. The Department was in the process of re-drafting the Model Bill 9 to 
suit the changing ground water scenario. As of December 2019, 19 10 States/UTs had 
enacted legislation on ground water. 
CGWA issues guidelines from time to time for the regulation of ground water. Under 
the guidelines (November 2015), CGWA had notified 162 critical/ over-exploited areas 
for the purpose of regulation of ground water development, under Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986 by CGWA for regulation of ground water development and 
management. In notified areas, abstraction of ground water is not permissible for any 
purpose other than drinking and domestic use. The 162 notified areas are located in 
parts of Andhra Pradesh (five), Daman & Diu (one), Delhi (three), Gujarat (four), 
Haryana (17), Karnataka (22), Madhya Pradesh (seven), Puducherry (one), Punjab (45), 
Rajasthan (35), Tamil Nadu (18), Telangana (two), Uttar Pradesh (one) and West 
Bengal (one).  
The Blocks /Talukas/Mandals/areas, other than those notified by CGWA for regulation 
of ground water development and management are non-notified areas . In these 
areas, CGWA issues NOC to industrial/ infrastructural / mining projects for ground 
water withdrawal.  
As mentioned in para 1.2, there are 13 self-regulated States where regulation of 
ground water development and management was being done by the States 
themselves.  These 13 States/UTs have their own mechanism for evaluation of 
proposal/request for NOC for ground water abstraction. 
The authorities that can issue NoCs for extraction of ground water in various areas are 
shown in Figure 1.1. 
Figure 1.1: Authorities for issue of NOC 
 
*For example, in Chandigarh, the permission to abstract ground water is granted by three Government 
agencies viz. Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh Administration and Land Acquisition Officer.  In Jammu 
& Kashmir, under the JKWRRM Act 2010, the Chief Engineer/ In charge, PHED has been designated as 
competent authority to issue licenses in relation to drinking water supply and ground water. 
                                                           
9 Ground Water (Sustainable Management) Bill, 2017 
10 Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Maharashtra, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. 
Notified Areas 
•The District Administrative 
Heads in case of 
Administrative Block or 
Taluka, or the Head of the 
Municipality (in case of 
Municipal Area)
Non-Notified areas 
•CGWA
13 self regulated 
States
•The agencies to issue 
NOC vary from State to 
State.* 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
6 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
In pursuance of the directions of the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (NGT), CGWA 
revised its guidelines for the regulation of ground water. These guidelines (September 
2020) have been given pan-India applicability. Several significant changes have also 
been brought about, such as dispensing with the practice of notifying areas, revised 
guidelines for grant of NOC in different categories of assessment units, differential 
charges for extraction of ground water in these areas, etc.  
1.5 Government initiatives for management and regulation of ground water 
A Central Sector Scheme on ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’ was 
approved (August 2013) for implementation during XII Plan period (2012-17) with an 
estimated cost of ` 3,319 crore and having an overall objective of proper assessment 
and management of ground water resources so as to ensure its sustainability. The 
scheme consists of continuing activities from the XI Plan viz. Technological up-
gradation, Ground Water Monitoring, Assessment, Regulation, Publication, Seminars, 
Awards, technical assistance to States and spill over work of the project of Artificial 
Recharge & Exploration. In addition, two new activities were introduced in the scheme 
for 2012-17, namely the National Project on Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) and 
Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWM). The broad objectives of the 
scheme are Aquifer mapping
11 at prescribed scales, formulation of Aquifer 
Management Plan to quantify water availability and water quality in various aquifers 
for facilitating sustainable management of ground water resources at regional and 
local level through participatory management approach, capacity building of 
functionaries of Panchayati Raj Institutions, local community and grass root workers, 
upgradation of technological capabilities and infrastructure of the CGWB and 
regulation and control of ground water development. 
The scheme was approved (March 2018) for continuation during 2017-20 at an 
estimated cost of ` 992 crore. PGWM, which was one of the components of GWMR 
scheme during the XII Plan period, was dropped from the scheme. 
Apart from the Central Scheme, State Governments implement their own schemes
12 
for water supply, controlled irrigation, ground water recharge, reducing dependence 
on ground water, reducing contamination of ground water, etc.  
1.6 Why we chose the topic 
The ground water scenario in India is beset by challenges due to the competing needs 
of agriculture, industrialisation and the pressures of increasing population in the 
                                                           
11 Aquifer mapping is a scientific process wherein a combination of geologic, geophysical, hydrologic 
and chemical field and laboratory analyses are applied to characterise the quantity, quality and 
sustainability of Ground Water in aquifers. 
12 For example, Andhra Pradesh implemented (i) Neeru-chettu, (ii) NTR jalasiri and (iii) Neeru-
pragathi schemes towards Ground Water conservation, crop cultivation and rainwater harvesting 
recharge measures 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 7 
context of uncertain rainfall. Contamination and depletion of ground water also leads 
to vulnerability of livelihoods, besides posing a serious health risk.  
It is against this background that we decided to take up a Performance Audit of Ground 
Water Management and Regulation. 
1.7 Audit Objectives 
Performance Audit of Ground Water Management and Regulation seeks to ascertain 
the overall framework for ground water sector in India through a holistic perspective 
by examining whether: 
1) the mechanism for management of ground water in Indi a is adequate, 
efficient and effective;  
2) ground water regulations are implemented efficiently  and effectively;  
3) the targets and objectives of the schemes on Ground Water Management 
and Regulation were achieved efficiently and effectively; and   
4) appropriate steps have been taken to achieve the rel evant targets under 
Sustainable Development Goal 6 relating to ground water. 
1.8 Audit sample  
A. Sampling for the purpose of audit objective 1: Groun d water Management 
In each State/UT, three districts having the maximum number of unsafe blocks (Over-
exploited, critical and semi-critical) were selected for examining the issues relating to 
water quantity. Similarly, for issues relating to water quality, one district with 
maximum number of blocks affected with arsenic excess and one district with 
maximum number of blocks affected with fluoride excess were selected.  
B. Sampling for the purpose of audit objective 2: Groun d water Regulation  
Notified Areas: A sample of 60 NOCs was selected for each State wherever such NOCs 
have been issued. In case the number of NOCs was less than 60 in a State, all the NOCs 
were selected.  
Non-Notified Areas: A sample of 40 NOCs were selected for each State/UT (20 NOCs 
for Industry and 10 NOCs each for Infrastructure and Mining). Wherever the number 
of total NOCs selected in all three categories was less than 40, additional number of 
NOCs were selected from Industries, Infrastructure and Mining in that order.  
In case of renewal of NOCs, bifurcation into industry, infrastructure and mining was 
not available and hence 10 NOCs (in all) from each State were taken-up for audit.  
States having their own regulatory mechanism: In the 13 States/UTs having their own 
regulatory mechanism i.e. regulated through State Ground Water Authority or 
Government Orders of concerned States/UTs, from the notified areas, a sample of 60 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
8 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
NOCs were selected for each State wherever such NOCs have been issued. If the 
number of NOCs were less than 60 in a State, all the NOCs were selected. For the 
non-notified areas, a sample of 40 NOCs were selected for each State/UT on random 
basis. 
C. Sampling for the purpose of audit objective 3: Centr al Sector Scheme on 
Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Out of 201 Aquifer Mapping (NAQUIM) Reports prepared under GWMRS for 29 States/ 
UTs, 20 per cent reports, for each State and UT, subject to a minimum of three reports, 
totalling 70 reports were selected for Audit scrutiny at CGWB, its regional offices and 
State Government. In the case of technological upgradation, 100 per cent of the items 
procured were examined at CGWB and its regional/ divisional offices from the list of 
equipment/software/rigs to be procured during 2012-17. In addition, 20 per cent of 
the items not procured were examined to assess the reasons for delay and its impact 
on work of CGWB. 
1.9 Audit scope and methodology  
Performance Audit was conducted for the period 2013-14 to 2017-18. The scope of 
Audit included examination of the following areas/issues:  
(a) Status of ground water quantity and quality in 3313out of 36 States/UTs;  
(b) Framework for ground water management in 33 States/U Ts, implementation 
and monitoring;  
(c) Ground water regulation in States covered under CGWA  guidelines and NOCs; 
(d) Framework and guidelines for issuing NOC in 13 State s/ UTs regulated through 
State Ground Water Authority (SGWA) or Government Orders; and 
(e) Implementation of Ground Water Management and Regula tion Scheme during 
2013-14 to 2017-18, action taken by the State Governments on the Aquifer Maps 
and Management Plan Report prepared by CGWB in 33 States/UTs. 
Records of the following entities were scrutinised for examining above issues: 
(i) DoWR,RD&GR for overall policy and direction; 
(
ii) Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change ( MoEF&CC) for 
environment related matters with water quality; 
(iii) Central Ground Water Authority; 
(
iv) Central Ground Water Board and its Regional Offices;  
(v) State Regulatory Agencies/ Authorized Offices; 
                                                           
13 Three States/UTs (A&N Islands, Mizoram and Sikkim) regulated by CGWA where CGWA has neither 
given any NOC, nor notified any area were exempted from the scope of Performance Audit. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 9 
(vi) WAPCOS Ltd.; and 
(
vii) Central Pollution Control Board.  
D
ata relating to ground water from various departments/agencies of State/Central 
government like Power Utility/Commercial Tax/Bureau of Indian Standard/Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India/Ministry of Agriculture was also examined. In 
addition, field visits to the industries/project sites/units where NOCs have been 
granted for ground water extraction were also undertaken.  
We held an entry meeting with CGWB and DoWR,RD&GR on  10 April 2018 in which 
we explained the audit objectives, scope and methodology. Subsequently, revised 
objectives, scope and the criteria were communicated to DoWR,RD&GR on 10 January 
2019. The draft Audit report was issued to the Department in August 2019 and their 
response was received in November 2019. An exit conference was held on 22 January 
2020 with the Department to discuss the audit findings, conclusions and audit 
recommendations. The draft final Audit Report was issued to the Department in 
August 2020 and their response was received in September 2020. While 
DoWR,RD&GR in general acknowledged that the report was insightful and brought out 
many significant issues, their comments on the specific audit observations have been 
suitably incorporated in the Audit Report. 
This Audit report includes audit findings from field audit conducted for the period 
2013-18. The audit observations relating to Ground Water Regulation are based on 
the CGWA guidelines of November 2012/November 2015.  In September 2020, CGWA 
has released revised guidelines, wherein several issues relating to ground water 
regulation highlighted by Audit have been dealt with. These revisions have also been 
suitably mentioned in this Audit Report.  
1.10 Audit criteria  
The following are sources of audit criteria: 
(a) Environment Protection Act, 1986  
(
b) National Water Policy (2002 and 2012) 
(
c) Water Policy of concerned States/UTs 
(
d) Legislation, regulatory Frameworks and Government or ders of concerned 
States/UTs 
(e) Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) note of the sche me of Ground Water 
Management and Regulation 
(f) Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA ) and its approval 
(g) Manual on Aquifer Mapping 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
10 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
(h) Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) signed by CGWB w ith various 
agencies 
(i) General Financial Rules 
(
j) National Green Tribunal (NGT) Judgment 
(
k) Standards for assessment of water quality (IS:10500)  issued by Bureau of 
Indian Standards 
(l) Studies/guidelines14of World Health Organisation (WHO) highlighting linkages 
between ground water contaminants and related diseases  
1.11 Structure of the Audit Report 
The Audit Report comprises five Chapters including this introductory chapter. Chapter 
2 discusses the mechanism for management of ground water in the country. Chapter 
3 contains issues relating to regulation of ground water by CGWA and State 
Authorities. In Chapter 4 we have discussed implementation of schemes on Ground 
Water Management and Regulation whereas in Chapter 5 the extent of achievement 
of relevant targets under SDG 6 have been stated.  
1.12 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation extended by the DoWR,RD&GR, CGWB, State 
agencies, MoEF&CC and other audited entities during the course of the Performance 
Audit.  
 
  
                                                           
14 WHO Guidelines for Drinking Water Quality, 2004 and other related reports 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 11 
Management of Ground Water 
 
 
2.1 Introduction  
Ground water is an annually replenishable resource but its availability is non-uniform 
in space and time. Technically, dynamic ground water refers to the quantity of ground 
water available in the zone of water level fluctuation, which is replenished annually. 
As per Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India (as on 31st March 2017)
15 published 
by CGWB in July 2019, annual replenishable ground water resource for the entire 
country has been assessed as 432 billion cubic meter (bcm). Keeping 39 bcm for 
natural discharge, the net annual ground water availability for the entire country is 
393 bcm.  The sources of ground water recharge are depicted in Chart 2.1.
 
 
 
CGWB has categorised ground water assessment units based on the Stage of 
Extraction of ground water. As per Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India
16 (as on 
31st March 2017), out of 6,881 assessment units all over India, 1,186 have been 
categorised as Over-exploited, 313 as Critical, 972 as Semi-critical, and 4,310 units as 
Safe (Chart 2.2). There are 100 assessment units which are completely saline.  
 
 
                                                           
15 A report published by CGWB containing an assessment of the status of Ground Water resources, 
availability and utilisation in the country. The assessment is carried out jointly by CGWB and State 
Ground Water Departments at periodical intervals.  
16 A report published by CGWB containing an assessment of the status of Ground Water resources, 
availability and utilisation in the country. The assessment is carried out jointly by CGWB and State 
Ground Water Departments at periodical intervals.  
251.9
66.49
36.34
77.13
Recharge from rainfall during monsoon
season
Recharge from other sources during
monsoon season
Recharge from rainfall during non-
monsoon season
Recharge from other sources during non-
monsoon season
(Figures in bcm)
Chart 2.1: Sources of Ground Water recharge  
 Chapter  
2 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
12 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Chart 2.2: Categorisation of Assessment Units 
 
 
The top five States having the highest percentage of Over-exploited and Critical 
administrative units are Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Rajasthan, as 
shown in Chart 2.3. The State-wise details are depicted in Annexure 2.1.  
Chart 2.3: States having significant number of unsafe units 
 
It can be seen from Chart 2.3 that Punjab has the highest percentage (80 per cent) of 
critical and over-exploited units. Out of 138 assessment units in Punjab, only 22 units 
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Punjab
Rajasthan
Delhi
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Punjab Rajasthan Delhi Haryana Himachal
Pradesh
Safe 22 45 3 26 3
Semi- Critical 5 29 7 21 1
Critical & Over-exploited 111 218 24 81 4
Safe Semi- Critical Critical & Over-exploited
Source: Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India (31 March 2017) 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 13 
(16 per cent) are safe and five units (four per cent) are semi-critical. The remaining 111 
units (80 per cent) are critical and over-exploited.  
Water being a State subject, the legislation for regulation and development of ground 
water is to be enacted by the State Governments/Union Territories (UTs). The 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR,RD&GR) is responsible for overall planning for the development of ground 
water resources, establishment of utilisable resources and formulation of policies for 
exploitation, overseeing of and providing support to State level activities in ground 
water development. The Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has the mandate of 
developing and disseminating technologies and monitoring and implementing 
national policies for the scientific and sustainable development and management of 
India's ground water resources, including their exploration, assessment, conservation, 
augmentation, protection from pollution and distribution. Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA) deals with ground water regulation related issues. 
This chapter discusses the mechanism for management of ground water in India. The 
chapter is divided into two sections.  Section A covers issues in assessment of 
availability, utilisation and quality of ground water and mechanism for monitoring of 
ground water. Audit observations on functioning of regulatory bodies involved in 
management of ground water are discussed in Section B. 
 
SECTION A: ASSESSMENT AND MONITORING OF GROUND WATER 
2.2 Extraction of Ground Water 
The Annual Ground Water Draft (i.e. extraction of ground water) of the entire country 
for the reference year 2017 has been estimated as 249 bcm, of which 221 bcm i.e. 
about 89 per cent is for used for irrigation. The remaining 11 per cent i.e. 28 bcm is 
used for domestic and industrial purposes. The status of ground water development 
in India during the period from 2004 to 2017 is given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Comparative status of ground water development 
Categorisation  Percentage of blocks during year 
 2004 2009 2011 2013 2017 
Safe 71 73 69 69 63 
Semi-critical 10 9 11 10 14 
Critical 4 3 3 4 5 
Over-exploited 15 14 16 16 17 
Saline 0 1 1 1 1 
The above comparison shows that the percentage of safe blocks has decreased while 
the percentage of blocks categorised as semi-critical, critical and over-exploited has 
steadily increased over time.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
14 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
The percentage of utilisation of ground water with respect to recharge is known as 
stage of extraction of ground water. The stage of extraction in the country has 
increased from 58 per cent in 2004 to 63 per cent in 201717. State wise assessment of 
ground water resources availability, utilisation and stage of extraction showed that 13 
States/UTs
18 had a stage of extraction higher than the overall national stage of 
extraction, as shown in Chart 2.4.  
Chart 2.4: States having stage of extraction of ground water higher than national average 
 
Four States/UTs (Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Rajasthan) had a stage of extraction of 
more than 100 per cent. This indicated that extraction of ground water has surpassed 
the recharge of ground water. If unchecked, this may eventually exhaust the ground 
water resources completely in these States/UTs. The State wise position is shown in 
Annexure 2.2.  
At the district level, it was seen that out of 565 districts in 24 States/UTs, 267 districts 
(47 per cent) had stage of extraction more than 63 per cent (Chart 2.5). The stage of 
extraction in these 267 districts ranged from 64 per cent to 385 per cent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
17 Source: Dynamic Assessment of Ground Water of the respective years 
18 Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Puducherry, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh.  
166
140 137
120
89 86 81 74 70 70 66 65 64
0
2
0
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Stage of Extraction (%)
Stage of extraction Stage of extraction in India

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 15 
Chart 2.5: Districts having high stage of extraction of ground water 
 
2.3 Assessment of Ground Water  
As per the approved (August 2013) Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
memorandum for 2012-17, the assessment of ground water resources in terms of 
ground water quantity, utilisation pattern, stage of extraction of ground water, 
categorisation of units, etc. was to be done every two years by CGWB. Based on this 
data, Dynamic Ground Water Assessment Report was to be compiled, to enable 
further planning and management of ground water by CGWB.  
During the audit period, CGWB conducted such assessments for 2013 and 2017 and 
published the Reports in June 2017 and July 2019 respectively. CGWB did not carry 
out this assessment for 2015 resulting in a gap of four years in assessment between 
2013 and 2017.  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (October 2019) that it had awarded the work related to 
automation of estimation of these resources to the Indian Institute of Technology, 
Hyderabad which is likely to reduce the time period substantially for this process. The 
Department added (January 2020) that the Department was considering undertaking 
such assessments through use of better technologies such as heli borne surveys which 
are expected to be more efficient and thereby help in reducing the time taken for such 
assessments. 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Chandigarh
Daman & Diu
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Lakshadweep
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Odisha
Puducherry
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand
West Bengal
No. of districts having SoE more than 63 per cent Total no. of districts

Report No. 9 of 2021   
16 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Regular assessment is essential to take up timely interventions for management of 
ground water. Inability to do the same would hamper the regulation of ground water, 
as the scenario is dynamic in nature.   
2.4 Ground Water Monitoring   
CGWB assesses the water level in the country through its observation wells. In the 
approved Cabinet Note for the Ground Water Management & Regulation Scheme 
(GWMRS) for the XII Plan period (2012-17), CGWB proposed to increase monitoring of 
wells to measure ground water level from 15,653 wells to 50,000 wells (by March 
2017) through an approved scheme called Ground Water Management & Regulation 
Scheme (GWMRS) for the XII Plan period (2012-17) having an outlay of ` 3,319 crore. 
CGWB also proposed to undertake Real time Ground Water Monitoring in various 
aquifers across the country through purpose built wells equipped with Digital Water 
Level Recorders (DWLRs) and Telemetry
19 in convergence with the ground water 
component under National Hydrology Project (NHP) 20. It was observed that as of 
March 2020, CGWB was still planning and was yet to undertake real time Ground 
Water monitoring through DWLRs and Telemetry which indicated that progress in this 
area was not as per targets of the GWMR Scheme. 
A
s of 31 March 2019, a network of only 15,851 observation wells for monitoring water 
quality (as detailed in Annexure 2.3) were established. Thus, CGWB was falling behind 
its targets for establishing monitoring wells and for undertaking Real Time Ground 
Water monitoring, both of which are crucial for efficient management of ground water 
resources.  
2.5 Assessment of Ground Water quantity and quality 
2.5.1  Assessment of water levels  
CGWB measures ground water levels four times a year during January, March/April/ 
May, August and November. Ground water samples are collected from these 
observation wells once a year during the month of March/April/ May to obtain 
background information of ground water quality changes on regional scale, which is 
used for planning ground water development and management programmes.  
CGWB collected data relating to depth of water level of 15,165 wells in the post-
monsoon period in 2018. As per this data, depth of the water level ranged from 0 to 
130.20 meters in these wells. In States like Rajasthan, Haryana and Delhi, number of 
                                                           
19 Telemetry is the collection of measurements or other data at remote or inaccessible points and 
their automatic transmission to receiving equipment for monitoring. 
20 National Hydrology Project was approved in April 2016 as a central sector scheme with a total 
outlay of ` 3,679.76 crore with the objective of improving the extent, quality, and accessibility of 
water resources information, decision support system for floods and basin level resource 
assessment/planning and strengthening the capacity of targeted water resources professionals 
and management institutions in India. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 17 
wells having water depth more than 40 metres 21 was significant (Rajasthan – 
20 per cent, Delhi – 10 per cent and Haryana – five per cent). On the other hand, in states 
like Meghalaya, Nagaland, Puducherry and Andaman & Nicobar Islands, ground water 
depth was less than five meters (Meghalaya-100 per cent , Nagaland-100 per cent , 
Puducherry-100 per cent and Andaman & Nicobar Islands-99 per cent). The State wise 
details are indicated in the Annexure 2.4. A comparison of depth to water level of 
post-monsoon 2018 with the decadal mean of post-monsoon (2008-17) relating to 
data available from 14,387 wells indicated that in 5,115 (about 36 per cent) of wells 
there was a rise in water level. However, 9,260 (about 64 per cent ) wells showed 
decline in water level. In 12 wells, there was no change in water level. The State wise 
details are given in the Annexure 2.5. 
In addition to CGWB, 11 States also have their own monitoring wells. The position of 
rise and fall of water level in the wells monitored by the State agencies is shown in 
Chart 2.6. 
Chart 2.6: Decadal water level fluctuation in State monitored wells 
 
Of the total 11,394 wells monitored by State Government agencies in the 11 States, 
5,993 wells (53 per cent) indicated fall in water level compared to the decadal water 
level, while 5,401 wells (47 per cent) showed rise or no change in water level. The data 
presented above indicates a predominant trend of decline in ground water levels as 
assessed by both CGWB and the States, which is a cause for concern.   
2.5.2  Factors affecting Ground Water Quantity 
Factors affecting ground water quantity were available in respect of 14 States/UTs. In 
these States/UTs, power subsidy for agriculture, cultivation of water intensive crops, 
rainfall deficit and urbanisation/population growth and extensive use of water in 
irrigation/industries were identified by the States/UTs as the major reasons affecting 
the quantity of ground water, as shown in Figure 2.1. 
                                                           
21 Maximum range of depth categorized by CGWB. 
552
224
989
13
997
323
945
3
130
794
431
702
288
504
42
746
433
969
31
881
1,018
379
Andhra Pradesh
C
hhattisgarh
Gujarat
Himachal Pradesh
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Puducherry
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Number of wells Rise/No change Fall

Report No. 9 of 2021   
18 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Figure 2.1: Factors affecting ground water quantity 
 
For the States/UTs in which this assessment was not conducted, the specific factors 
affecting ground water quantity were not identified, which could pose a constraint in 
development of effective strategies for management of ground water. 
2.5.3 Assessment of Ground Water Quality  
CGWB is required to monitor the water quality every year during the pre-monsoon 
season. Samples are collected in bottles (one litre) after thoroughly rinsing the bottle 
with the samples to be collected and the bottles are sealed at the site. Collected 
ground water samples are analysed for major parameters like Calcium, Magnesium, 
Potassium, Arsenic, Carbonates, Chlorides, Nitrates, Sulphates, Iron, Fluorides, 
Electrical Conductivity, pH etc. Sample analysis is carried out as per standard 
procedures outlined in American Public Health Association (APHA) manual. 
CGWB had water quality data as of 2015 only. As per the water quality data for 2015, 
the number of States and districts (based on 15,165 locations in 32 States tested by 
CGWB) having contaminants higher than permissible limit (as per BIS standards
22) are 
shown in Table 2.2. 
Table 2.2: CGWB data on contamination of ground water in excess of limits  
Contaminant Number of States 
affected 
Number of districts 
affected 
Number of locations 
exceeding limit 
Arsenic 19 99 697 
Fluoride 23 188 637 
Nitrate 20 335 2,015 
Iron 25 282 1,389 
Salinity 17 167 587 
                                                           
22 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has prescribed Drinking Water Specifications (last revised in 2012). 


  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 19 
Excess levels of contaminants in ground water pose a serious health hazard. For 
instance, Audit noticed that 305 of the 697 locations (i.e. 44 per cent) where ground 
water was found to be contaminated with high levels of Arsenic were in West Bengal 
alone. Similarly, ground water in Punjab was found to be contaminated with higher 
than permissible levels of Arsenic (13 locations), Fluoride (18 locations) and Salinity 
(nine locations). The lack of up to date data on water quality also adversely affects 
development of a timely and focussed approach for appropriate ground water 
management strategies besides preventing assessment of progress made through 
implementation of such strategies. 
Apart from CGWB, nine
23 States/UTs were also monitoring ground water quality. The 
number of locations exceeding limits prescribed by BIS as per quality data of 
monitoring wells of States/UTs is shown in Table 2.3.  
Table 2.3: Contamination of ground water in excess of limits in State monitored wells 
State/UT Number of locations exceeding limit 
 Arsenic Fluoride Nitrate Iron Salinity Chloride 
Andhra Pradesh - 755 3,828 - - 439 
Gujarat - 187 20 - 628 471 
Himachal Pradesh Test not 
conducted 
0 0 0 0 0 
Karnataka - 135 467 158 65 14 
Odisha - 34 138 627 27 265 
Puducherry - - 26 8 10 13 
Punjab - 1 0 9 0 0 
Tamil Nadu Test not 
conducted 
76 126 Test not 
conducted 
404 106 
Telangana - 150 416 - 31 9 
Note: Blank fields indicate that data was not provided by the concerned State agency 
As per CGWB data (Table 2.2) there were a total of 637 locations having excess 
Fluoride content. However, the data available with Andhra Pradesh (Table 2.3) 
showed 755 locations having excess Fluoride content in the ground water in that State 
alone.  Similarly, CGWB’s data for nitrate showed that 2,015 locations had nitrate 
beyond the permissible limit; whereas the data available with Andhra Pradesh showed 
that 3,828 locations had excess nitrate. This indicated that the number of observation 
wells maintained by CGWB were inadequate to comprehensively monitor the ground 
water. This also indicates the need to integrate the findings of CGWB and States so as 
to provide more reliable indicators in respect of the ground water scenario in the 
country.  
                                                           
23 These nine states include six states i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu 
Telangana and Puducherry which have their own regulation for Ground Water. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
20 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that monitoring of ground water quality was 
done every year and the data shared through the India WRIS portal. Audit however, 
noticed (October 2020) that the WRIS portal contained data as of 2015-16 only.  
2.5.4  Factors affecting Ground Water Quality  
Broadly, the quality of ground water is affected by Anthropogenic (generated by 
human activity) and Geogenic (generated by geological process) activities. The factors 
affecting ground water quality were available in respect of 11 States/UTs (Figure 2.2). 
Figure 2.2: Factors affecting ground water quality 
 
Most of the States/UTs that conducted assessment of change in quality of ground 
water reported excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides, disposal of industrial and 
municipal waste and sea water intrusion as factors for deterioration of ground water 
quality. This also poses serious health issues for the general populace. Information on 
cases of fluorosis and arsenic poisoning were provided by 15 States24 (Chart 2.7). 
  
                                                           
24 Data was available for the period 2013-18 (Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Kerala, Puducherry, 
West Bengal – Bankura District for Fluorosis and Nadia District for Arsenic), 2013-19 (Madhya 
Pradesh), 2017-18 (Daman & Diu, Karnataka-Vijayapura District, Punjab and Telangana) and 2017-
19 for Maharashtra. For three states i.e. Chattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand, information regarding 
period was not available. 


  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 21 
Chart 2.7: Cases of Fluoride and Arsenic poisoning 
  
No cases of fluorosis reported from sampled districts of Haryana and Puducherry. No cases of Arsenic reported 
from Daman & Diu, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Puducherry and 
Telangana. 
The number of cases of fluorosis was significant in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and 
Madhya Pradesh. West Bengal was also affected by the problem of Arsenic poisoning. 
In the absence of any such assessment by the remaining States/UTs, the threats due 
to contamination of ground water could not be ascertained in these States/UTs, which 
might, in turn, affect planning and development of appropriate strategies for 
management of ground water. 
 
SECTION B: FUNCTIONING OF REGULATORY BODIES 
2.6 Model Bill on Ground Water  
To enable the States to enact Ground Water Legislation, DoWR,RD&GR circulated 
(2005) a Model Bill to all the States/UTs for regulation and development of ground 
water. In view of the changing ground water scenario, the Department constituted a 
committee for re-drafting the Model Bill viz. Ground Water (Sustainable 
Management) Bill, 2017. As of December 2019, the Model Bill was under review as 
per the suggestions of NITI Aayog.
 
2.7 Legislative framework in States/UTs  
The Table 2.4 shows the position of ground water legislation as of December 2019 in 
the 33 States/UTs.  
  
8885
60
729
95
451
3200
7158
550
40
244
926
3975
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
Andhra Pradesh
Daman & Diu
Delhi
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Odisha
Punjab
Telangana
West Bengal
Fluorosis cases 
56
127
0 50 100 150
West Bengal
Chhattisgarh
Arsenic cases

Report No. 9 of 2021   
22 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Table 2.4: Implementation of legislation on ground water 
States in which legislation has 
been fully implemented 
States in which legislation has 
been partially implemented  
States in which legislation has 
not been implemented 
Assam 
Chandigarh 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
Goa 
Himachal Pradesh 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Punjab 
Karnataka 
Kerala 
Lakshadweep 
Puducherry 
West Bengal 
Telangana 
Uttar Pradesh  
Odisha 
Andhra Pradesh 
Bihar 
Maharashtra 
Uttarakhand 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Chhattisgarh 
Daman & Diu 
Delhi 
Gujarat 
Haryana 
Jharkhand 
Madhya Pradesh 
Manipur 
Meghalaya 
Nagaland 
Rajasthan 
Tamil Nadu 
Tripura 
Out of 33 States/UTs, 19 States/UTs had enacted legislation. In four States /g15 Audit 
found that legislation was only partially implemented. The details in these four States 
are given in Table 2.5/g17 
Table 2.5: Incomplete implementation of legislation on ground water 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
The Andhra Pradesh Water Land & Trees Act was enacted in 2002 and the 
Andhra Pradesh Water, Land and Trees Authority (APWALTA) was constituted 
(2002) under this Act. APWALTA was to be re-constituted every two years for 
members nominated under sub-section (k) and every three years for members 
nominated under sub-section (l) and (m) of section 3 of this act. APWALTA was 
constituted in 2002 and it was reconstituted in 2004. Further reconstitution of 
APWALTA has not taken place after the bifurcation of the State in June 2014. 
In addition to APWALTA, Water, Land and Trees Authority (WALTA) were also 
to be constituted at district and ma ndal levels. District level WALTA was 
constituted in all the 13 districts in  2002-03. However, in three selected 
districts viz. Anantapuramu, Chitoor and YSR Kadapa, reconstitution of the 
district level WALTA authorities was not found on record. As per the WALTA 
Rules, 2004, dedicated staff was to be provided to carry out WALTA functions. 
This was, however, not done and multiple departments were dealing with 
ground water. 
Government of Andhra Pradesh stated (July 2019) that necessary steps would 
be initiated in this regard. 
2.  Bihar The Bihar Ground Water (Regulation and Control of Development and 
Management) Act 2006 was passed (January 2007). Though the Act enabled 
the State Government to make rules for the purpose of the Act, 
rules/regulations to implement the Act were not framed even after a lapse of 
12 years. Further, as per this Act, State Ground Water Authority (SGWA) was 
to be constituted which was not constituted as of March 2019.  
3.  Maharashtra The State Legislative Assembly passed the Maharashtra Groundwater 
(Development and Management) Act, 2009 which was notified and made 
effective from 01 June 2014 to facilitate and ensure sustainable, equitable and 
adequate supply of groundwater. However, Rules for implementation of the 
Act were not finalised (October 2019). In the absence of Rules, important 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 23 
Sl. 
No.  
State Audit observation 
provisions in the Act such as notifying area for regulating use of groundwater, 
preparation of Integrated Watershed Development and Management plan, 
registration of owners of wells, registration of drilling rig owners and operators 
were not implemented.  
4.  Uttarakhand The Uttarakhand Water Management and Regulatory Act was passed in 2013 
to provide for the establishment of the Uttarakhand Water Management and 
Regulatory Authority for regulating water resources. As the matter relating to 
appointment of Chairperson and Members was pending in court, the Water 
Management and Regulatory Authority could not be established. As such the 
Act could not be made functional and rules were not framed.  
In six other States, enactment of the ground water legislation was pending for various 
reasons, which are briefly mentioned in Table 2.6. 
Table 2.6: Ground Water legislations under process in States/UTs 
Sl. 
No. 
State Reason for not implementing Ground Water legislation 
1.  Chhattisgarh The draft bill for regulation of ground water was pending at the State 
Government level since 2012. In the meantime, the regulation of ground 
water was being done by CGWA. 
2.  Delhi The Delhi Jal Board (DJB) was established under sub- section 3 of Section 
1 of Delhi Water Board Act, 1998 (Delhi Act 4 of 1998). The Act provided 
that DJB may plan, regulate and manage the extraction of ground water 
in Delhi in consultation with CGWA as one of the functions of the Board. 
In January 2011, Delhi Water Board (Amendment) Bill, 2011 was 
proposed by DJB, which enlarged the scope to include therein the 
regulation, control and development of ground water. The proposed 
amendment was meant to provide ‘Planning for regulation, control and 
development’ of ground water as one of the functions of the board 
instead of only ‘extraction and management’ of ground water. However, 
the amendment bill was yet to be enacted by the Legislative Assembly 
despite lapse of more than seven years. 
3.  Jharkhand A draft bill for Jharkhand Ground Water Development and Management 
(Regulation and Control) Act was prepared (2006) by the Directorate of 
Ground Water, which was yet to be passed as of March 2019. The 
regulation of ground water was being done by CGWA. 
4.  Madhya Pradesh A draft bill to regulate and control the development of ground water 
resources was prepared on the basis of the model bill circulated by DoWR, 
RD&GR, which was yet to be approved as of March 2019. 
5.  Rajasthan During 2006 to 2017, Ground Water Department and the State Water 
Resources Planning Department prepared five draft bills25.However, none 
of these bills was enacted (January 2019).  
6.  Tamil Nadu The Tamil Nadu Ground Water (Development and Management) Act, 
2003 was repealed in September 2013 to enact a comprehensive law to 
develop and manage ground water. However, the new Act was yet to be 
enacted as of March 2019. A draft model bill was circulated (May 2016) 
                                                           
25 (i) The Rajasthan Regulation and Control of Development and Management of Ground Water Bill 
2006 (ii) The Rajasthan Regulation and Control of Development and Management of Ground Water 
Bill 2011. (iii) The Rajasthan Ground Water (Regulation of Drinking Water Purpose) Bill 2012 (iv) 
Water Resources Management Bill 2012 (passed in Rajasthan legislation but not converted into 
act) and (v) Rajasthan Ground Water Regulation, Conservation and Management Bill 2016, 2017. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
24 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
State Reason for not implementing Ground Water legislation 
by the Government of India for comments from the stakeholders, which 
was pending finalisation.  
The State Government stated (March 2019) that a comprehensive Act 
would be enacted after receipt of the final draft bill from the Government 
of India.   
The remaining States/UTs had not taken action to enact legislation for ground water. 
2.8 Meetings of CGWB and CGWA 
CGWB 
As per the order issued by DoWR,RD&GR (June 2000) reconstituting the Board, 
members of CGWB were required to meet at least once in three months. Audit 
observed that against the requirement of 28 meetings
26 during 2012-2019, only two 
meetings of CGWB were held (July 2013 and April 2015). No further meetings of CGWB 
were held after April 2015. Considering its role as the national body for providing 
inputs for management of ground water, the infrequent meetings of CGWB indicate 
the limited extent of its involvement in the proper guidance and monitoring for 
sustainable development and management of ground water resources of the country. 
Department accepted (September 2020) the observation and assured that meetings 
of CGWB would be conducted periodically. 
CGWA 
CGWA is chaired by the Chairman of CGWB and has 15 members including five Special 
Invitees from different Ministries/ Departments. Audit noticed that there was no 
prescribed frequency of meetings of the CGWA. During the period 2013-18, only 11 
meetings of CGWA were held. These meetings were held at irregular intervals ranging 
from four to 12 months. As the apex body for regulation and management of ground 
water in the country, infrequent meetings of CGWA may affect the discharge of 
functions of the Authority. 
2.9 Human Resource constraints faced by Central agencies managing Ground 
Water 
CGWB carries out its activities through 18 Regional Offices, 17 Divisional offices and 
11 State unit offices located in States/UTs. CGWB had a sanctioned strength 
(March 2019) of 4,012 personnel, out of which 2,745 i.e. 68 per cent  belonged to 
Scientific and Engineering category, who carry out most of the important functions of 
CGWB relating to data collection, compilation and monitoring issues relating to 
ground water. The remaining 32 per cent belong to Ministerial categories.  
                                                           
26 Four meetings in a year for seven years (2012-19). 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 25 
There was shortage of human resources in every category including Scientific and 
Engineering categories in CGWB and its regional and divisional offices. Over the period 
2014 to 2019, vacancies remained highest in the scientific category ranging from 
33.48 per cent  (2015) to 37.51 (March 2019). Vacancies in engineering category 
ranged from 24.14 per cent (2014) to 27.41 per cent (2018) while in the Ministerial 
category, the vacancies ranged from 25.47 per cent (2014) to 30.51 per cent (2015).  
As of March 2019, there was a vacancy of 26.93 per cent and 26.60 per cent in the 
engineering and Ministerial categories respectively. 
Audit observed that CGWB was unable to fill up the vacancies as their revised 
Recruitment Rules (RRs) were not approved by the Department. CGWB sent amended 
draft RRs for various posts to DoWR,RD&GR during 2016 to 2017. For 13 posts 
(including that of Chairman, CGWB), as detailed in Annexure 2.6, amended draft RRs 
were sent to the Department as early as April 2016. However, these were not finalised 
by the Department as of November 2019. 
Audit also observed that there was delay in completing the administrative procedures 
for filling up posts. As of June 2018, the Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) 27 
was under process for filling up 394 posts (96 Scientific, 168 Engineering and 130 
Ministerial posts). It was observed that out of 394 posts, only 84 posts could be filled 
up (13 Scientific, 31 Engineering and 40 Ministerial posts) by April 2019. Thus, 310 
posts were yet to be filled up as of April 2019 which indicated the slow progress in 
filling up posts. Some of the Regional Offices of CGWB reported to Audit that shortage 
of human resources was affecting their working (Figure 2.3).  
Figure 2.3: Human Resource constraints in Regional offices of CGWB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
27 As per the old RRs 
Ahmedabad 
Bhopal 
Dehradun 
Lucknow Nagpur 
Processing of NOCs 
and post NOC 
monitoring affected 
doneaffected. 
Constraints in monitoring the conditions of NOCs, ensuring implementation of Ground 
Water recharge, inspection of Projects/Industries granted NOC, ensuring installation 
of Piezometer(s) fitted with AWLR and execution of Ground Water regime monitoring. 
Overstressed human 
resources engaged in 
multi-tasking jobs. 
Hindrance in inspection 
of compliance as per 
conditions laid down in 
the NOC. 
Post-NOC 
monitoring affected. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
26 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
In spite of shortage of technical workforce, some of the Regional Offices had also 
deputed their technical staff (Scientific and Engineering) for administrative work as 
detailed in Table 2.7. 
Table 2.7: Technical staff deputed for administrative work 
Sl. 
No. 
Regional Office Details 
1.  North Himalayan 
Region, Dharamshala 
5 Scientific/Technical staff were deployed for administrative work 
such as Drawing and Disbursement Officer (DDO), Establishment 
Section, Accounts Section, Store Section, Legal work, etc. 
2.  Western Region,  
Jaipur 
6 Scientists were deployed to discharge duties as DDO, Vigilance 
Officer, Rajbhasha Officer, etc. 
3.  Uttaranchal Region, 
Dehradun 
3 Scientists were deployed to discharge duties as DDO, Public 
Information Officer (PIO), Hindi Officer etc. 
4.  North West Himalayan 
Region, Jammu 
4 Scientific/Technical staff were deployed for administrative work 
such as DDO, Officer in Charge(Store and vehicle), Hindi Officer, 
etc. 
5.  South Eastern Coastal 
Region, Chennai 
9 Scientists (Scientist D/Assistant Hydro-geologist) were deployed 
to function as “Persons in-charge of Stores and Stock”. 
6.  Southern Region, 
Hyderabad 
3 Scientists were deployed to discharge duties as DDO. 
7.  North Western  
Region, Chandigarh 
5 Scientists discharged duties as DDO 
DoWR,RD&GR stated (January 2020) that the process of augmenting the human 
resources takes time due to the involvement of various recruitment agencies and 
other related formalities; however the Department was taking action such as 
outsourcing some of the work so that the existing technical personnel of CGWB could 
be appropriately utilised. 
2.10 Institutional framework for Ground Water management in States/UTs 
As of March 2019, out of 33 states, only 14 states 28 had dedicated 
departments/agencies dealing with ground water related issues.  
Absence of a dedicated department for dealing with ground water related issues may 
result in lack of coordination among the multiple agencies as well as gaps in the 
mechanisms for management of groundwater, as observed in the case of Telangana, 
mentioned in Box 2.1.  
Box 2.1: Coordination issues in management of ground water in Telangana 
In Telangana, coordination among the departments involved with issues related to management of 
ground water was inadequate, as- 
i) Telangana State Pollution Control Board while giving ‘Consent to Establish’ to industries did not 
incorporate any conditions to obtain permission/NOC from State Ground Water Department 
(SGWD) for ground water abstraction. 
                                                           
28 Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Punjab, Puducherry, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 27 
ii) While rejecting the application (for permission/NOC) of Industry, the State Ground Water 
Department (SGWD) conveyed to the concerned WALTA authority to seize the existing 
borewells (if any) available in the premises of the Industry. However, the details of action taken 
by the authorities were not communicated to SGWD. 
iii) Based on the proposals from various departments for conducting survey and investigation to 
identify sites for establishing Artificial Recharge Structures (ARS), the GWD recommended 
various sites for such ARS.  However, the SGWD had no information, whether the ARS 
recommended by them were established or not. 
iv) On implementation of Act in the State, all the wells were to be registered with the authority. 
However, the Administrator of the State WALTA Authority (Commissioner, Rural Development 
Department) did not have the details regarding the number of wells registered after 
implementation of the Act. 
v) As per section 4 of WALTA, the authority shall meet at least once in three months as such place 
and time as the Chairman may decide. However, no meeting was conducted during the period 
2013-14 to 2017-18. 
2.11 Constraints faced by States/UTs 
2.11.1 Human Resource constraints  
In the 14 States having a dedicated department/agency for management of ground 
water, Audit observed shortage of personnel (as of March 2018) in agencies of 11 such 
States/UTs dealing with ground water, as shown in Table 2.8. 
Table 2.8: Shortage of human resources in States/UTs 
Sl. 
No 
State/UT SS PIP Vacancy Vacancy % 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 661 337 324 49 
2.  Himachal Pradesh 9 2 7 78 
3.  Jharkhand 58 27 31 53 
4.  Karnataka 369 68 301 82 
5.  Kerala 499 418 81 16 
6.  Madhya Pradesh 451 281 170 38 
7.  Odisha 325 170 155 48 
8.  Puducherry 190 69 121 64 
9.  Punjab 67 59 8 12 
10.  Tamil Nadu 609 342 267 44 
11.  Uttar Pradesh 692 456 236 34 
 Total 3,930 2,229 1,701 43 
SS: Sanctioned Strength; PIP: Persons in Position 
Thus, there was a vacancy ranging between 12 and 82 per cent  in the 
Departments/Agencies dealing with ground water at State/UT level. Such vacancies 
posed constraints in the effective discharge of functions by the State/UT agencies. In 
Odisha, Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer, to be used for determination of 
Arsenic in ground water, was not utilised during 2008-18 due to absence of staff and 
therefore, Arsenic was not tested in ground water. In Tamil Nadu, exploration and 
drilling work, random check and monitoring of NOCs issued and collection and testing 
of water samples were affected due to shortage of staff. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
28 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
2.11.2 Infrastructure constraints  
Audit observed that due to lack of infrastructure and facilities, some of the State 
agencies were not able to carry out requisite laboratory tests which affected the 
management of ground water in the State (Figure 2.4). 
Figure 2.4: Infrastructure constraints in States 
Andhra Pradesh 
 
 • Four regional labs (level II) at Vishakhapatnam, 
Rajamahendravaram, Kurnool and Kadapa were established. All the 
four labs were functioning. 
• After bifurcation (June 2014), the existing centralized laboratory at 
Hyderabad was allotted to Telangana State but new laboratory was 
not established in Andhra Pradesh.  
• In the Water Quality Laboratory, Dowleswaram, East Godavari 
district, water quality data for both pre and post monsoon (2010 to 
2015) and for pre-monsoon (2017) were not analysed as the 
instruments were not in working condition. Further, this lab could 
not analyse the Arsenic level in ground water samples as it did not 
have the necessary equipment. 
Bihar 
 
 • There was no infrastructure with State agency associated with 
Ground water management and regulation. State government had 
not taken any action in this regard. Thus, there was no testing of 
ground water and consequent management by the State agency.  
Kerala 
 • Due to unavailability of vehicles, proper inspections, enquiries and 
studies were not carried out.  
• All the machinery and equipment were many years old and required 
replacement.   
• Though pumping tests were to be done for all 14 districts, there 
were only four pumping test units available for scientific aquifer 
management. 
• All three labs in Thiruvananthapuram, Kozikode and Ernakulam are 
functional, but at Thiruvananthapuram, the ‘Atomic Absorption 
Spectrophotometer was under repair and Arsenic analysis could not 
be conducted.  The Kozhikode Lab faced serious space constraint; 
LPG cylinder was kept in a room with minimum ventilation along 
with chemicals and acids.  Supporting staff posts viz. Chemical 
Assistant, Laboratory Attender and Office Assistant were vacant.  
Vacancy issues were prevalent at Ernakulam also. 
Madhya Pradesh 
 • There were seven labs to test the quality of ground water located 
at Bhopal, Jabalpur, Ujjain, Gwalior, Sagar, Satna and Balaghat. All 
seven labs were working. 
• It was reported by the Water Resources Department (December 
2018) that up-gradation of laboratory and data centre equipment, 
software and hardware were required. A demand for ` 40 lakh was 
raised and approval of the same has been sought. In the absence of 
upgraded infrastructure, testing of samples was constrained.  
Maharashtra 
 • Though the Maharashtra Groundwater (Development and 
Management) Act, 2009 was passed with effect from 01 June 2014, 
rules for implementation of the Act were not finalised. Pending 
notification of Rules, detailed needs analysis for assessing the 
infrastructure requirement was not done by the Government. 
• In the absence of assessment, the requirement and adequacy of 
testing could not be ascertained in audit. 
Odisha  • In Directorate of Ground Water Development, there are five Water 
Quality Laboratories, eight Divisional Data Processing Centres and 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 29 
one State Level Ground Water Data Processing Centre.  However, 
up-gradation of hardware and software, database of software and 
water quality laboratories was required.  
• Audit observed that no proposal regarding up-gradation of 
hardware and software, database of software was sent to the 
higher authority by Directorate of Ground Water development. 
Tamil Nadu 
 • Only 30 of the required 388 geophysical resistivity meters were 
available in nine divisions; of the 53 old geophysical instruments, 
23 were not in working condition and obsolete. There was also 
shortage of chemical equipment which affected testing processes.  
• Though there was a requirement of 1,190 piezometers, new 
piezometers were not drilled and no logger was available in good 
condition to carry out exploration and geophysical logging; the 
server and plotter were non-functional and obsolete.  
• Water samples were not tested for presence of iron due to limited 
number of laboratories. Out of 9,032 water samples to be collected 
and tested, only 3,870 were collected and tested (2017).  
• Purchases of various equipment amounting to ` 24.92 crore 
approved by DoWR,RD&GR (August 2018) were yet to be made as 
of January 2019. 
2.12  Conclusion  
Over the period from 2004 to 2017, there has been a decline in the percentage of 
assessment units categorised as safe, whereas the percentage of blocks categorised 
as semi-critical, critical and over-exploited has steadily increased. The overall stage of 
extraction of ground water has increased from 58 per cent in 2004 to 63 per cent in 
2017. There are 13 States/UTs that have a higher stage of extraction ranging from 
64 per cent (Gujarat) to 166 per cent (Punjab). This indicates that timely interventions 
are required to check the depletion of ground water levels.  
The ground water samples in a number of States were found to be contaminated by 
high levels of Arsenic, Nitrate, Fluoride and Iron. Significant shortcomings were 
noticed in the mechanism for assessing the quality of ground water. The Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) conducted assessment of ground water resources after 
a gap of four years against the prescribed frequency of two years. Although it is 
required to monitor the water quality every year, CGWB possesses data on water 
quality only as of 2015. The absence of up to date data affects timely and focussed 
intervention to prevent further deterioration and deprives the CGWB of the means for 
assessing the effectiveness of such interventions in maintaining envisaged ground 
water levels and quality.  
CGWB could establish a network of only 15,851 observation wells for monitoring 
water quality, against the target of 50,000 wells planned during the XII Plan period 
(2012-17). The Real Time Ground Water Monitoring through wells equipped with 
Digital Water Level Recorders (DWLRs) and Telemetry, envisaged to be done during 
the XII Plan period by CGWB was still in the planning stage as of March 2020. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
30 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Although water is a State subject, only 19 States (as of December 2019) had laws 
regulating ground water and only 14 States/UTs had dedicated agencies to deal with 
issues relating to ground water.  
Both CGWB and State agencies dealing with ground water faced shortage of staff, 
which adversely affected discharge of their duties such as monitoring of No Objection 
Certificates issued, testing of water samples, etc. Many States/UTs did not have the 
required infrastructure for carrying out tests for ground water. The State agencies 
were unable to carry out requisite laboratory tests, which affected the management 
of ground water.  
2.13 Recommendations 
1. The Department may ensure that assessment of ground water resources, water 
level and quality is done at the prescribed intervals so as to maintain current 
data on the status of ground water in the country and to utilise such data for 
planning management strategies. 
 
2. The Department may take action to increase the number of observation wells 
with Digital Water Level Recorders and Telemetry to monitor ground water in 
line with the targets committed under the Ground Water Management and 
Regulation Scheme/ National Hydrology Project.  
 
3. The Department may take expeditious action to revise the Model Bill and also 
pursue with the remaining States for bringing comprehensive laws/regulations 
to deal with ground water management.  
 
4. The Department should address the human resource con straints of 
CGWB/CGWA by also engaging with other experts and going for strategic 
partnerships to ensure smooth functions in processes of groundwater 
management and governance.  
5. For effective implementation of Ground Water Regulat
 ion and Management, 
Department should address the human resource crunch reported by the State 
Governments and also encourage them to adopt latest technologies for 
assessment and monitoring of ground water. 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 31 
Ground Water Regulation 
 
 
 
3.1 Introduction 
Although Water is a State subject, the regulation of ground water abstraction is being 
done at both Central and State levels.  
At the central level, Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) constituted in January 
1997 under sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Environment Protection Act, 1986 as 
per direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, has been vested with responsibility 
for regulation and control of groundwater development and management. CGWA has 
been granted the powers to, amongst others, regulate and control, manage and 
develop ground water in the entire country and to issue necessary directions for this 
purpose. 
CGWA has issued Guidelines from time to time for evaluation of proposals/requests 
for ground water abstraction with the objective of ensuring sustainability of ground 
water both in terms of quantity and quality, looking into the variations in availability 
of water in different climatic regions and diverse hydro-geological conditions in 
various States of the country. CGWA regulates ground water development and 
management by issuing ‘No Objection Certificates’ (NOC) for ground water extraction 
to industries or infrastructure projects or Mining Projects etc. Necessary conditions 
for implementation by the proponent are laid down in the NOC issued by CGWA. 
Under the Guidelines (November 2015), CGWA notified 162 critical/ over-exploited 
areas for the purpose of regulation of ground water development. In the notified 
areas, permission (NOC) to abstract ground water was not accorded for any purpose 
other than drinking water. In the notified areas, the District Administrative Heads in 
case of Administrative Block or Taluka, or the Head of the Municipality (in case of 
Municipal Area) were designated as the authorities for issuing NOCs for extraction of 
ground water. 
In non-notified areas, ground water withdrawal could be considered for Industries/ 
Infrastructure/ Mining projects also.  
With effect from September 2020, CGWA has issued revised guidelines, in which the 
system of notifying areas by CGWA has been dispensed with. NOCs are now to be 
issued by CGWA on the basis of the assessment units viz. safe, semi-critical, critical 
and over-exploited.  
 Chapter  
3 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
32 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
At the State level, as of March 2019, 13 29 States/UTs have constituted State Ground 
Water Authority (SGWA) or issued Government Orders. In these States, NOCs for 
ground water withdrawal are granted by the respective SGWAs or designated 
authority.  The mechanism of regulation in these States/UTs is outlined in 
Annexure 3.1. 
The findings in respect of regulation of ground water usage are discussed in this 
chapter.  
3.2 Uniformity in guidelines between CGWA and self-regulated States/ UTs 
The directions of Hon’ble NGT (August 2018) mention that the guidelines of CGWA 
must have pan-India applicability. CGWA informed (June 2019) Audit that States/ UTs 
where regulation was being done through State Government orders, more or less 
follow CGWA guidelines. In 13 States/UTs, SGWAs have been established under 
appropriate legislation and have their own mechanism for evaluation of 
proposal/request for NOC for ground water abstraction. However, Audit observed 
that in seven of these States, there were variations between the CGWA and the State 
level guidelines. These included differences between the areas notified by CGWA and 
SGWA, difference in categorisation of areas (as Safe, Critical, Over-exploited), etc. The 
variations are listed in the Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Variations between State and CGWA guidelines 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Variation 
1.  Chandigarh Three government agencies, instead of one (in CGWA guidelines) issue 
permission letter/NOC in respect of withdrawal of ground water and these 
agencies had different conditions in the permission letters. 
2.  Delhi In Notified Areas, NOCs were also issued for other than drinking purpose, 
which is contrary to CGWA guidelines. 
Advisory Committee/ Competent Authority did not incorporate some of 
the provisions of CGWA guidelines in the terms and conditions of NOC/ 
permission issued by them. 
3.  Goa Before issue of NOC, detailed report of ground water status in the aquifers, 
recycling of water etc. was not obtained from the project proponent, as 
prescribed in CGWA guidelines. 
4.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
Provision for artificial recharge to ground water through rain water 
harvesting structure in the premises was not incorporated, as done in the 
CGWA guidelines. 
5.  Karnataka Permit/NOCs are issued only in the notified area and not for non-notified 
areas. As such, Karnataka Ground Water Authority (KGWA) is not issuing 
NOCs in non-notified area. 
6.   Tamil Nadu  Individual households are exempted from obtaining NOC, whereas this is 
not so in CGWA guidelines. 
No specific mention of mandatory recycle/reuse (for various purposes 
except recharge to ground water) for all the NOCs and quantum of ground 
                                                           
29 Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, NCT Delhi (through 
Government Orders), Tamil Nadu (through Government Orders), Telangana, West Bengal, 
Chandigarh (through bye-laws), Puducherry and Lakshadweep. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 33 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
Variation 
water recharge to be established by the firms have been made in the 
guidelines, which is included in CGWA guidelines. 
7.  West Bengal 
 
No separate provisions have been made for notified and non-notified 
areas whereas this distinction is made in CGWA guidelines. 
No provision has been made for artificial recharge structure for ground 
water recharge, as required in CGWA guidelines.  
No provision has been made for renewal of permits, which is included in 
CGWA guidelines.  
The divergent guidelines of the States also resulted in certain specific issues in 
regulation of ground water in the States, that are cited subsequently in this chapter 
and discussed more specifically in para 3.8. 
Based on the directions of the Hon’ble NGT, CGWA revised (September 2020) the 
guidelines, according it pan-India applicability and mandating that wherever States/ 
UTs have their own ground water abstraction guidelines which are inconsistent with 
the CGWA guidelines, the provisions of CGWA guidelines will prevail. In case the 
guidelines followed by States/ UTs contain more stringent provisions than CGWA 
guidelines, such provisions may also be given effect to. 
Audit observed some good practices being followed in a few of these States though 
not included in the CGWA guidelines, as given in Box 3.1.  
Box 3.1: Good practices included in the guidelines of States/UTs having their own 
regulation 
Himachal Pradesh: The condition of payment of royalty on extraction of ground water through 
energised means had been included in the NOC issued. Further, drilling of tube well/bore had to be 
got done from a firm registered with SGWA. 
Karnataka: The guidelines state that spacing of 500 metres should be maintained from the existing 
public source of drinking water as per Section 3 of Karnataka Ground Water Act, 1999. 
Tamil Nadu: The National and State Water Policies envisage assessment of water in smaller 
hydrological units.  For the purpose of effective regulation and implementation of assessment, the 
State Ground & Surface Water Resources Data Centre (SG&SWRDC) has decided (2011 onwards) to 
take the firka as the assessment Unit, since a firka is smaller than a block in extent.  This was expected 
to help to identify the ground water potential pockets within the over exploited and critical blocks 
and thereby prohibit a part of an over exploited block from further ground water extraction, whereas 
allow other parts of the block for ground water extraction.  
3.3  Project proponents extracting Ground Water without obtaining NOC 
As per the CGWA guidelines of the year 2012, only new units and industries (Industry, 
Infrastructure and mining projects) seeking expansion fell under the purview of the 
guidelines. In the revised guidelines of November 2015, all existing industries/projects 
which were drawing ground water and had not obtained NOC from CGWA, either due 
to its coming into existence prior to formation of CGWA or due to exemption from 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
34 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
obtaining NOC as per earlier guidelines, were also required to apply to CGWA with 
immediate effect for NOC for ground water withdrawal. 
Audit observed that CGWA did not have any estimate of the number of 
industries/infrastructure/mining projects that were extracting ground water without 
proper NOC. CGWA extended the deadline for submission of application for existing 
industries five times 30 (latest up to 30 September 2019). The revised Guidelines 
(November 2015) also stipulated that no application for NOC should be entertained 
without referral letters from the statutory authority (Central and State Government 
Departments and Agencies 31). CGWA received copies of environmental 
clearances/Terms of Reference from MoEF&CC and State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authorities where ground water abstraction was envisaged in the project.  
However, CGWA had no mechanism to ensure that such project proponent applies to 
CGWA for NOC before commencing its operations.   
Without information on the number of existing project proponents that were 
extracting ground water without NOC; and in the absence of a mechanism to ensure 
that new project proponents receiving conditional clearances from other statutory 
authorities applied for NOC, CGWA was unable to effectively control unauthorised 
extraction of ground water. During the course of Audit, records from State Pollution 
Control Boards (SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees (PCCs), Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS), Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), etc. were 
examined and it was observed that most of the projects granted Consent to Operate, 
licenses, were withdrawing ground water without any NOC from CGWA/ SGWAs. The 
findings in this regard are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
The Department stated (October 2019) that extensions of deadlines for submitting 
application for renewal of NOCs had been granted to existing industries in view of the 
large number of such units in the country which are required to obtain NOC and the 
limited human resources available with CGWA. 
The Department further stated (October 2019) that the mandatory requirement of 
referral letter while applying for NOC has become redundant after the directions of 
the Hon’ble NGT requiring all users of ground water to obtain NOC from CGWA.  
Given its mandate to regulate the use of ground water in the country, CGWA was 
required to ensure that all project proponents obtain NOC before extracting ground 
water, in accordance with the extant guidelines. 
                                                           
30 Up to 31.12.2017 vide public notice dated 04.10.2017, up to 30.06.2018 vide public notice dated 
01.01.2018, up to 30.09.2018 vide public notice dated 29.06.2018, up to 31.03.2019 vide public 
notice dated 14.11.2018, up to 30.09.2019 vide public notice dated 09.04.2019. 
31 MoEF&CC or State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) or State Level Expert Appraisal Committee 
(SEAC) or State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SLEIAA) or Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) or Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) or Department of Industries 
or any other authority mandated by Central or State Government. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 35 
3.3.1 Projects granted Consent to Operate by SPCBs/ PCCs 
As per the provisions of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, no 
industry, operation or process can be established without obtaining prior consent 
from the concerned State Board. The SPCBs/PCCs are responsible for prescribing 
consent application form and consent fees. Most of the SPCBs/ PCCs issue Consent to 
Establish (CTE) followed by Consent to Operate (CTO). 
Audit examined a sample of 328 cases 32 in 18 States where the CTO granted to a 
project proponent included a condition which required NOC for ground water 
extraction, and found that only 75 projects in 13 States/ UTs had obtained the 
requisite NOCs. Thus, 253 projects (77 per cent) were operating without NOCs (State 
wise position in Chart 3.1).  
Chart 3.1: Projects operating without NOC 
 
In the CTOs granted by nine33 States (other than the 18 States mentioned above), the 
condition to obtain NOC for ground water extraction was not included, while in one 
UT (Lakshadweep) no CTOs were granted during the audit period. No information was 
available in respect of two States (Assam and Nagaland). In one State (Tamil Nadu), 
CTOs are granted only after NOCs have been obtained, which has been highlighted as 
a good practice in Box 3.3. 
The huge number of defaulters indicates that a lack of mandatory linkage between 
the SPCBs/PCCs and CGWA has led to unchecked extraction of ground water.   
The Department stated (October 2019) that the CTOs are granted by SPCB for 
industries using both surface water and ground water and proponents abstracting 
ground water only shall approach CGWA/ SGWAs for obtaining NOC. Further, the 
concerned DMs/DCs have been authorised by the CGWA to initiate suitable action 
                                                           
32 The list of CTOs was obtained from SPCB/PCC and the list was cross-checked with NOC issued by 
CGWA/ State Ground Water authorities. 
33 Chandigarh, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur, 
Meghalaya and Kerala 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Percentage cases in which NOC was not obtained

Report No. 9 of 2021   
36 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
against illegal boring wherever noticed. DoWR,RD&GR added (January 2020) that in 
respect of CTOs granted by SPCB, it was learnt that SPCBs were not renewing CTOs of 
those project proponents who had failed to obtain NOC for ground water abstraction. 
It is noteworthy that the cases highlighted by Audit were those in which CTOs granted 
included a condition for obtaining of NOC from CGWA/SGWA, since the project 
involved extraction of ground water. Further, the reply was silent about the action 
taken by CGWA/DMs/DCs against the defaulting project proponents. 
Some significant findings on operation of facilities without obtaining NOC for 
Ground Water 
A few specific instances of operation of facilities without obtaining NOCs, are 
mentioned in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Operation of facilities without obtaining NOC for ground water 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit Observation 
1. Gujarat Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB) provided details of 3,589 34 various water 
intensive units. Of these, NOCs had been granted by the Regional Director office, 
CGWA to only eight units and 613 applications were pending with CGWA, 
Ahmedabad for granting NOC. It was observed that 2,968 units had not applied for 
NOC. Thus, 3,581 units were withdrawing ground water and using as raw material 
without NOCs. 
2. Haryana Haryana State Pollution Control Board (HSPCB) had issued CTO/CTE to 5,069 
industrial projects in four regions (Faridabad, Sonepat, Dharuhera and Panchkula) 
between April 2013 and December 2018, of which 3,643 units were using ground 
water for their activities.  It was seen that only 840 units had applied for NOC of 
which 48 NOCs were granted during the period 2013-18.  Thus, 3,595 units in the 
State were extracting ground water without NOCs.   
3. Jammu 
& 
Kashmir 
Out of 22,474 industrial units registered during 2013-18 with Jammu and Kashmir 
State Pollution Control Board (JKSPCB), 75 units were water intensive. However, 
while granting CTO to these 75 units, JKSPCB did not impose any condition for 
obtaining NOC for ground water abstraction. Audit noticed that 73 out of these 75 
water intensive units had not obtained NOC from the competent authority and 
were extracting ground water without any authorisation. JKSPCB stated (July 2018) 
that it would initiate the process to incorporate a condition in the CTO for 
obtaining NOC from concerned authorities. 
Further, in West Bengal, during a project site visit, Audit found exploitation of ground 
water by an RBI bank note production company, which is discussed in Box 3.2. 
Box 3.2: Exploitation of ground water by project proponent in West Bengal 
Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran (P). Ltd, Salboni, West Bengal: 
The proponent constructed nine tube wells between 1993 and 2018 for domestic, industrial and 
horticultural use. During joint site visit (September 2018) by the Audit team with the officers of the 
West Bengal Pollution Control Board (WBPCB), it was noticed that the firm was abstracting ground 
water through seven tube wells for which they had not taken any permit from the State Ground 
                                                           
34 Mineralized water-71, Dairy-102, Fertilizer-64, Pulp & Paper-125, Sugar-23, Tanneries-3 and 
Textile-3,201 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 37 
Water Authority, State Water Investigation Directorate (SWID), which was required as per terms and 
conditions of the CTO received from WBPCB.  
  
Tube wells at Bharatiya Reserve Bank Note Mudran (P). Ltd, Salboni  
Audit also noticed good practices seen in two States, which are highlighted in the 
Box 3.3.  
Box 3.3: Good practices in grant of NOCs for projects 
In two States, it was observed that a system was established whereby consent for operation could 
only be granted after NOC for ground water extraction was obtained.   
1. Tamil Nadu: According to the regulation for management of ground water and issue of NOC 
for extraction of ground water, the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board and BIS should issue 
the permission only after obtaining the NOC from the State. Further, no schemes can be 
formulated in over-exploited and critical firkas and all the schemes should be formulated 
through the State Ground and Surface Water Resources Data Centre, Chennai.   
2. Maharashtra: From 2012 onwards, CTO is granted to project proponent by Maharashtra 
Pollution Control Board (MPCB) only after the proponent obtains the NOC from CGWA. As per 
the guidelines of CGWA, from November 2015, NOC for ground water withdrawal was made 
mandatory for all industries/projects in the State using ground water irrespective of its date 
of coming into existence. Accordingly, MPCB have issued notices to the industry/projects 
directing them to apply for necessary NOC from CGWA for ground water use. CTO is issued 
only after the industry/projects submit copy of the application submitted to CGWA for issue 
of NOC to use ground water. 
 
3.3.2 Projects granted license by Bureau of Indian Standards  
License to use the Standard Mark on a product is accorded by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) only after BIS has ensured the capability of the manufacturer to 
manufacture the product continuously in accordance with the relevant Indian 
Standard. There is no provision in the Rules and Regulations of BIS for imposing the 
condition of obtaining NOC from CGWA before grant of license to Packaged Drinking 
Water units.  
Audit observed that in 15 States for which data was made available to audit, BIS 
licenses were issued to 3,189 packaged drinking water units since 2013. Of these, only 
642 proponents obtained NOC from CGWA/State authorities for ground water 
extraction. Thus, in 2,475 of 3,189 cases i.e. in 78 per cent of the licenses granted by 


Report No. 9 of 2021   
38 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
BIS, the project proponents were operating without obtaining NOCs from CGWA 
(Chart 3.2). 
Chart 3.2: Cases in which NOC was not obtained by Packaged Drinking Water units 
 
In the absence of a mandatory linkage between licenses granted by BIS and the 
obtaining of NOC from CGWA, the instances of project proponents not obtaining NOC 
may persist. 
The Department accepted (October 2019) that there was a gap in the number of NOCs 
obtained by Packaged Drinking Water units and the licenses granted by BIS
. 
DoWR,RD&GR further stated (September 2020) that CGWA had held meetings with 
FSSAI, wherein it was agreed that FSSAI would not issue license to industries that do 
not have NOC for ground water extraction. 
3.3.3  Projects granted license by other agencies 
Audit observed cases of licenses issued by other Central and State agencies in 13 
States, in which NOCs for ground water extraction was not obtained. The findings in 
respect of 12 States are mentioned in Table 3.3. The findings in respect of Jammu & 
Kashmir are discussed separately in the next paragraph. 
Table 3.3: NOC for ground water not obtained in licenses granted by other Central/State 
agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit observation 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Audit noticed from the data of the Andhra Pradesh State Tax (GST) department 
pertaining to water intensive units for 2013-19 that out of 351 units, only 55 
units had obtained permission from ground water and Water Audit 
Departments (GW&WAD). Thus, 296 water intensive units were drawing ground 
water without any authorisation. Administrator, APWALTA confirmed (July 
2019) that only three units had approached for NOC, of which one case was 
under process and two had been denied permission. 
2. Bihar The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) had issued licenses to 
57 water intensive industries in the State. Audit noticed that out of these 
industries, only four industries had obtained NOC from the CGWA for 
abstraction of ground water. The remaining 53 units were operating without 
NOCs. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Percentage cases in which NOC was not obtained

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 39 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit observation 
3. Goa Out of 86 water intensive industries that were granted licenses by the Food and 
Drug Administration, we scrutinised 45 records and observed that in 18 cases 
ground water abstraction structures (well/bore-well) were available in the 
premises of the manufacturers but were not registered with the Ground Water 
Authority.  
The department stated (April 2019) that the Ground Water Officers had been 
notified to take immediate action in this regard.  
4. Karnataka (i) FSSAI had issued 409 licenses during the period 2013-18 to water intensive 
industries such as packaged drinking water, beverages, etc. and the source of 
water was stated to be bore well/ground water. Out of 409 licenses issued by 
FSSAI, 72 industries were located in Notified Areas and 337 industries were 
located in Non-Notified areas. Project proponents of the 72 licenses granted in 
Notified Areas
35 did not apply or obtain NOC from KGWA and were operating 
without NOC. This was irregular, as the guidelines of KGWA do not permit issue 
of NOCs for these type of industries. 
(ii) Regional Transport Office (RTO) which is the authority for registration of 
lorries/tankers, had registered/issued license to 1,106 tankers (including water 
tankers) during the period 2014-19. Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
(BBMP) which is the authority for issuing trade license to tankers, had 
issued/renewed 758 trade licenses for water supply during 2014-18. These 
licenses were issued without ensuring the source of water and without 
obtaining NOC from KGWA.  Thus, regulation of ground water viz., identification 
of source of water extracted, if ground water is to be extracted, then the extent 
of ground water to be extracted, actual quantity extracted, quality of ground 
water which is being supplied, etc. were not ensured before grant of licenses. 
5. Odisha As per the records of Chief Engineer, Water Service, Government of Odisha, out 
of 452 firms/projects abstracting ground water in the State, 268 firms/projects 
were withdrawing ground water without obtaining NOC from CGWA. 
6. Punjab FSSAI had issued 75 licenses to water intensive Food Business Operators in 
Punjab.   We observed that only three units were issued NOCs for ground water 
abstraction by the CGWA.   
7. Rajasthan NOC is required for registration of distilleries and breweries from the office of 
the Excise Commissioner, Udaipur. It was seen that 10 distilleries and nine 
breweries were registered in their office of which NOCs were issued to only four 
distilleries and seven breweries. Out of remaining six distilleries, NOCs for five 
were under process and one unit did not apply. Similarly, of the two remaining 
breweries, NOC for one was under process and one unit did not apply. 
8. Tamil 
Nadu 
Out of total 1,259 licenses issued by FSSAI (Central and State) up to April 2018, 
only 414 obtained NOC for drawing of ground water from SG&SWRDC.  
9. Telangana (i) Under the WALTA Act 2002, all bore wells were to be registered with the 
concerned authority and any unauthorised bore wells were to be seized/closed. 
Applications of 12 Industries in Nizamabad District were rejected by SGWD 
during the period 2016-18. It was seen that three firms (out of 12 rejected cases) 
already had existing bore wells in their premises. SGWD stated that the 
concerned authority was informed about the unauthorised bore wells. 
However, no action was taken to seize/close these bore wells. Audit team 
visited the three industries in October 2018 and found that these were still 
withdrawing ground water from unauthorised bore wells. 
(ii) The SGWD, Nizamabad identified (March 2017) 46 Packaged Water Plants 
that were abstracting ground water without obtaining NOC. The Audit team 
along with the staff of GWD Nizamabad visited three of these plants during 
October 2018 and found that these plants continued to withdraw ground water 
                                                           
35 In Karnataka (self-regulated State), NOCs/permits are issued only in Notified areas.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
40 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit observation 
from unauthorised bore wells. Similarly, 283 such water plants were also 
identified in Hyderabad district.  
Though penal provisions 36 are prescribed under WALTA Act, no action in this 
regard was taken in both the above cases.  
10. Tripura Scrutiny revealed that out of 17 functional packaged drinking water industries, 
14 had applied for NOC. Of these, NOCs were issued to 12 industries by the 
CGWA though all the 17 industries had been granted licenses by BIS and FSSAI. 
Application of one industry was under process and one application was returned 
due to lack of documents. 
11. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Guidelines of CGWA (November 2015) stipulate that NOC must also be obtained 
for infrastructure projects including Metro/Railway station for withdrawal of 
ground water. Audit observed that the North Central Railway (NCR) was 
abstracting ground water at the rate of 8,096.922 37 cubic meter per day for 
washing, cleaning, etc. and 38,702.99 38 cubic meter per day through tube wells 
for drinking purposes, without obtaining NOC contrary to the provisions of 
above said guidelines. Railway authorities were also unaware of the provision 
of obtaining NOC as per CGWA guidelines. 
NCR stated (October 2018) that water supply arrangements were old and there 
were no guidelines for taking NOC from CGWA. However, the reply was not 
tenable as in the revised guidelines of November 2015, all existing 
industries/projects which were drawing ground water and had not obtained 
NOC from CGWA, either due to its coming into existence prior to formation of 
CGWA or due to exemption from obtaining NOC as per earlier guidelines, were 
also required to apply to CGWA with immediate effect for NOC for ground water 
withdrawal.  
12. West 
Bengal 
During 2013-18, the General Manager, District Industrial Centre and Ex- officio 
Environment Officer (Hooghly district), issued CTE to 31 packaged drinking 
water projects. Out of these 31 projects, only 16 projects had applied to SWID 
for necessary permit to abstract ground water. Of these 16, only seven projects 
had taken necessary permit from SWID to abstract ground water till July 2018. 
The application of seven projects had been rejected and two applications were 
under process. 
3.3.3.1  Jammu and Kashmir  
(i)  Illegal extraction/exploitation of Ground Water by industrial units  
As per provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Water Resources (Regulation and 
Management) Act (JKWRRM) 2010, the licensing authority can exercise powers to take 
all steps necessary for the prevention of illegal use of water, including the power to 
break open the door of any premises where sinking of well or extraction of ground 
water may be going on
39.  
Audit noticed from the information provided by the State Excise and Industries 
Departments that 7840 industrial units had installed 92 bore/ tube wells for extracting 
                                                           
36 As per section 35 of WALTA act, whoever contravene the provision of the act or violates any rules 
made under the act should be punished with fine not less than ` 1,000 extended up to ` 5,000. 
37 For Agra and Jhansi division only 
38 For Allahabad, Agra and Jhansi division only 
39 Provided that the owner or any other person in occupation of the premises, if present therein 
refuses to open the door on being called to do so. 
40 Jammu: 47; Kashmir :31 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 41 
ground water without obtaining licenses. The Public Health Engineering Department 
(PHED), however, did not initiate any action to identify the commercial establishments 
involved in illegal extraction of ground water and enforce the provisions of the Act. 
Consequently, there was continued illegal extraction of ground water and non-
recovery of license fee of ` 92 lakh
41 as well as water charges in these cases. A joint 
verification by Audit and representatives of Excise Department (September 2018) 
conducted in respect of nine industrial units (Breweries/ Liquor bottling plants) 
confirmed that ground water was being extracted by eight such units through 10 bore/ 
tube wells without license. One industrial unit had ceased to operate.  
 
  
 
Oakland Bottlers   Basantar Bottlers   Kashmir Bottlers  
 
  
 
Trikuta Bottlers   Dewan Modern Breweries   New India Breweries  
  
 
Dewan Modern Breweries   Basantar Breweries   Srhgam Bottlers  
                                                           
41 92 bore wells/ tube wells at the rate of ` one lakh each 


Report No. 9 of 2021   
42 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
PHED stated (July 2018) that the respective authorities have been directed to 
regularise the extraction of ground water by these units and assess/ recover the usage 
charges, along with arrears.   
(ii)  Permission granted for Ground Water extraction without ensuring NOCs 
from the designated authority 
Under the JKWRRM Act 2010, the Chief Engineer/Incharge, PHED has been designated 
as competent authority to issue licenses in relation to drinking water supply and 
ground water.  
Audit noticed that State Industrial Development Corporation (SIDCO) Samba and Bari 
Brahmana, Jammu granted permission to 128 industrial units to install 138 bore wells 
within their premises. Of the 128 industrial units, only five units had obtained NOC 
from the authority designated under the JKWRRM Act 2010 for installation of six bore 
wells. The remaining 123 units were operating 132 bore wells without valid NOCs. 
PHED, Jammu informed (January 2019) SIDCO that the permissions granted by SIDCO 
would be treated as illegal and cancelled and asked SIDCO to direct the concerned 
industrial units to obtain NOCs from the PHE Department. 
3.4 Delay in processing of applications by CGWA for grant/renewal of NOC in 
non-notified areas 
In non-notified areas, CGWA issues NOC to industrial/infrastructural/mining projects 
for ground water withdrawal as per the guidelines/criteria for evaluation of 
proposals/requests for ground water abstraction. NOC is accorded in non-notified 
areas for a period of two years initially and is renewed for a period of three years 
thereafter. Subsequently, NOCs can be renewed every five years subject to 
compliance of conditions mentioned in the renewed NOC. Applications for 
issuance/renewal of NOC can be made online through NOCAP
42. The permitted 
timeline for issuance of NOC by CGWA is 60 days after verification of the completeness 
of the application with respect to fulfilment of conditions. 
During 2013-19, CGWA accorded 3,517 fresh NOCs and renewed 320 NOCs for ground 
water withdrawal to various industry, mining and infrastructure projects (both Online 
and Offline). Audit observed that 10,758 applications for grant of NOC and 144 
applications for renewal were pending as on 31 March 2019. Thus, the quantum of 
pending NOCs was thrice the number of fresh NOCs issued during last six years.  
The period wise delay in processing of applications is given in Table 3.4. The State-wise 
details of NOC pending and renewal are given in Annexure 3.2. 
 
 
                                                           
42 Online application for Issue of NOC to abstract Ground Water. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 43 
Table 3.4: Delay in processing applications for grant/renewal of NOC 
Delay in days Number of pending NOC 
for fresh applications 
Number of pending applications for 
renewal of NOC 
Less than 30 days 0 11 
31-90 0 24 
91 to 180 days 2,183 25 
181 to 365 days 4,755 25 
More than one year to 
three years 
3,820 56 
More than three years 0 3 
TOTAL 10,758 14443 
The Department stated (October 2019) that pendency of applications was due to 
shortage of human resources44 in the Regional Offices and CGWA and delays in receipt 
of stipulated documents as per the guidelines from the proponents.  DoWR,RD&GR 
further stated that as per the directions of Hon’ble NGT (OA no. 59/2012 dated 
03.01.2019) all applications for grant of NOC as well as renewal from Over-exploited, 
Critical and Semi-critical areas have been put on hold pending final directions of the 
Hon’ble NGT, increasing the number of pending applications.  
The reply was not tenable as there were 8,575 applications pending for grant of NOC 
for more than 181 days even before the issue of such orders by NGT. Further, in 
pursuance of the directions of the Hon’ble NGT, CGWA has issued (September 2020) 
revised guidelines and therefore, needs to expedite the processing of pending 
applications.  
3.5 Non-receipt of applications for renewal on expiry of NOC 
As mentioned in para 3.4, NOC initially granted for two years can be renewed for three 
years and then every five years. Audit observed that in 474 cases, renewal of NOC was 
due during 2013-18 but the project proponents did not apply for renewal. CGWA did 
not take any action under section 15 45 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
against these project proponents. Thus, even after expiry of the NOC, existing 
industries/projects continued to draw ground water without any regulation. 
The Department stated (October 2019) that show cause notices had been issued by 
Regional Offices to defaulting firms. DoWR,RD&GR further stated that in many States 
                                                           
43 Information in respect of seven out of 23 States was received from CGWA.  
44 DoWR, RD&GR stated (September 2020) that only 10 posts had been created for Secretariat of 
CGWA at Headquarters. No posts had been created for CGWA work in Regional Offices. In Regional 
Offices, officers who had been deployed for Authority work was also performing their routine 
scientific duties. 
45 Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules made or 
orders or directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect of each such failure or contravention, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both, and in case the failure or contravention continues, with 
additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure 
or contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
44 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
the CTO issued by the respective SPCBs was not considered for renewal if the project 
proponent did not have the NOC for ground water abstraction from CGWA/ SGWAs.  
However, the Department did not provide actual number of show cause notices issued 
against the above mentioned 474 cases. 
3.6 Installation of piezometers 
Guidelines for ground water abstraction (November 2015), inter alia stipulated that 
piezometer for monitoring the ground water level is to be installed/constructed by the 
project proponent at a minimum distance of 50m from the pumping well through 
which ground water is being drawn. Ground water levels should be measured 
monthly. The details regarding coordinates, reduced level (with respect to mean 
level), depth, zone tapped and assembly lowered should be provided for bringing the 
piezometer into the National Hydrograph Monitoring System
46 of CGWB and for its 
validation.  
Audit observed that no details regarding installation of piezometers, data on water 
level, change in water level, etc. were received from the project proponents. 
Consequently, piezometers were neither brought into the National Hydrograph 
monitoring system of CGWB, nor validated. In the absence of above mentioned data 
from these piezometers, the data relating to ground water situation in the country 
was not complete to that extent. CGWA did not take action
47 against project 
proponents for not complying with this requirement.  
Department stated (October 2019) that water level data of Piezometers was being 
received from the proponents on annual basis. Efforts were on to ensure that this data 
was appropriately integrated into the database of CGWB and to develop suitable 
protocols to enable CGWA/CGWB to assess the impact of withdrawal of ground water 
by industries/Infrastructure Units/ Mining Projects on the ambient ground water 
regime. The reply indicates that CGWB had not assessed the impact of ground water 
extraction by the project proponents so far. The reply was also silent about the extent 
of compliance by the proponents and the timelines for integration of data into 
database of CGWB. 
3.7 Regulation of Ground Water Extraction in Notified areas 
CGWA has notified 162 assessment units/areas in 14 48 States/ UTs for the purpose of 
regulation of ground water development. These areas were notified based on over-
exploitation, contamination, sustainability of ground water resources or the need for 
protecting limited available fresh water resources for drinking and domestic uses. 
                                                           
46 The National Hydrograph Network stations set up is a system of spatially distributed observation 
point at which periodic monitoring of Ground Water and regime behaviour are done. 
47 Non-compliance of conditions mentioned in the NOC may be taken as sufficient reason for 
cancellation of NOC accorded/ non-renewal of NOC.  
48 Out of these, seven States have their own regulation 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 45 
Regulation of ground water development in Notified areas is to be done through 
district administrative heads who have been declared as Authorised Officers under the 
provisions of section 4 of the Environment Protection Act, 1986. All issues pertaining 
to granting of NOCs for ground water withdrawal, checking violations, sealing of tube 
wells, launching of prosecution against offenders, etc. are to be addressed by the 
Authorised Officers. For more effective regulation of ground water development and 
management, constitution of Technical Advisory Committees under the Chairmanship 
of District Collector/Deputy Commissioners had been proposed. Such Committees 
also render advice to the District Collectors/Deputy Commissioners in matters 
pertaining to regulation of ground water development and management.  
Recognising that notification of assessment units/blocks was done as per existing 
priorities and knowledge base and that no uniform standards/criteria were adopted 
for such notification, DoWR,RD&GR constituted a committee (October 2017) to 
review the criteria for notification and to suggest standard criteria for notification of 
assessment units.  
The Report of the committee was placed (September 2018) before the members of 
the CGWA and it was unanimously agreed to do away with the practice of notification 
of assessment units for ground water.  
Accordingly, CGWA issued revised guidelines (September 2020) stipulating conditions 
for grant of NOCs for units in areas based on their categorisation as Safe, semi-critical, 
critical and over-exploited. Under the revised guidelines, in over exploited areas, NOCs 
can now be granted to new industries falling in the category of Micro, Small and 
Medium Enterprises (MSME).  
Audit noticed that 155 of the 162 areas notified earlier fell in the category of ‘over-
exploited’. As per the previous guidelines, no extraction of ground water for other 
than drinking water purposes was permitted in such areas, by virtue of their having 
been notified.  With the latest revision of Guidelines, NOC to MSME units, in such 
areas will now be permissible even though they are categorised as over-exploited.  
Significant observations in respect of regulation of ground water in Notified Areas are 
given in the paragraphs below. 
3.7.1  Constitution of and meetings of Advisory Committee 
In Notified Areas, permission to abstract ground water through any energised means 
is not accorded for any purpose other than drinking water. The permission would be 
granted by the Authorised Officer in consultation with the Advisory Committee 
constituted for this purpose. The constitution of Advisory Committee was under the 
supervision of the concerned District Magistrate. The Advisory Committees were 
supposed to meet once in a month for evaluating the proposals received for NOC by 
the respective DC/DM in the notified area.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
46 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Audit observed that there was no provision for constitution of Advisory Committee in 
one State (West Bengal). No Advisory Committee was constituted in one State (Andhra 
Pradesh), and in five States/UTs, the meetings of Advisory Committee were not held 
at regular intervals, as mentioned in Table 3.5. No information was available in respect 
of the remaining States/UTs. 
Table 3.5: Non-constitution of Advisory Committees 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit observation 
1.  Diu & Daman Advisory Committee was constituted in 2004 for Diu Notified Area and 
extension was also given to the Committee till April 2019. However, no 
meeting of the Advisory Committee was held in Diu district till February 
2019 i.e. for nearly 15 years since constitution of the Committee. 
2.  Gujarat Advisory Committees for all three notified talukas of Gandhinagar district 
(notified in September 2000/November 2012) and for Mehsana Taluka of 
Mehsana district (notified in November 2012) were constituted in February 
2014 and February 2018 respectively after a delay of more than 13 years 
and five years respectively. Further, only four Advisory Committee 
meetings were held in Gandhinagar district and no meeting was held in 
Mehsana district.  
Further, in both Gandhinagar and Mehsana districts, as per order 
(December 2012) of CGWA, New Delhi, the Advisory Committee was to be 
constituted under Chairmanship of District Collector with five members of 
different organisations. However, the Authorised officer cum District 
Magistrate, Gandhinagar while constituting the committee, did not include 
representatives of the Non-Government Organizations for all the three 
talukas in Gandhinagar district. Similarly, the Authorised Officer in Mehsana 
did not include representative from the Regional Director, CGWA 
Ahmedabad which is one of key members of the Advisory Committee.  
While accepting the audit observation, the Collector, Gandhinagar and 
Collector, Mehsana stated (September 2018 and October 2018) that 
representative of NGO and Regional Director, CGWA, Ahmedabad 
respectively would be added. 
3.  Haryana Out of 11 notified districts in Haryana, District Level Advisory Committees  
had been constituted in 10 districts (except Kaithal district). There was no 
prescribed frequency of meeting of the district level Advisory Committees. 
The meetings of the committees were held only for issuance of NOCs for 
extraction of ground water during the period year 2013-18.  Meetings were 
not held for monitoring purpose. 29 meetings were held in five test-
checked districts during 2013-18. 
4.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
Out of the seven notified areas in the State, Advisory Committee was 
constituted for only one notified area in Indore district. In Indore, 36 
meetings were held during 2013-19. 
5.  Rajasthan Advisory Committee was constituted in nine of the twelve notified areas. 
Advisory Committee was not constituted in Karauli district and no 
information was provided in respect of Ajmer and Barmer district. 
The concept of Advisory Committees was introduced in notified areas in order to have 
effective regulation of ground water extraction.  However, absence of Advisory 
Committee or infrequent meetings defeated the very purpose for which the 
committee was intended. However, in the revised guidelines (September 2020), the 
process of notifying of areas by CGWA has been dispensed with.  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 47 
3.7.2 Non submission of drilling information by ‘other than Individual households’  
As per Guidelines for ground water abstraction in respect of ‘other than Individual 
households’ in notified area, installation of water meters in the abstraction structure 
was mandatory and confirmation of such installation should be given to the 
Authorised Officer under intimation to the concerned Regional office of CGWB 
immediately after construction. All details of the drilling, such as location of well 49, 
formations encountered, depth and diameter of the constructed ground water 
abstraction structures, type of pipes used, yield of bore well/tube well, fracture zones 
encountered/zones tapped and ground water quality, etc., were to be furnished to 
the nodal agency authorised and to CGWB Regional Office within 15 days of the 
completion of the construction. 
Audit observed that CGWA/ Regional Offices of CGWB did not ensure that such 
information was received from ‘other than Individual households’ that had been 
granted NOCs in the notified area. Thus, CGWA had no data on the parameters 
prescribed in the guidelines in respect of the authorised bore wells drilled in the 
notified areas. 
3.8 Regulation of Ground Water by States having their own regulation 
Thirteen50 States/ UTs have constituted State Ground Water Authority (SGWA) or 
issued Government Orders for the purpose of ground water regulation. In these 
States, regulation for ground water is carried out by the SGWAs or the designated 
authorities. Audit observed deficiencies in regulation of ground water in six 
States/UTs. The audit findings are mentioned in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Regulation of ground water in self-regulated States 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit Observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
In addition to the notified areas declared by CGWA, the SGWA also notifies 
areas separately based on periodical Ground Water Estimation Committee 
(GEC) assessments 51 under APWALTA Act 2002. The SGWA notified 1,227 
villages in 168 blocks/mandals of nine districts of Andhra Pradesh as over-
exploited during January 2018 based on GEC 2012-13 Report. CGWA had 
notified five mandals52 consisting of 97 villages.  The difference was due to the 
fact that the CGWA considers mandal as the unit for notifying areas while the 
State Regulatory authority considers the village as the unit for notifying areas. 
This resulted in a situation where some villages in a mandal notified by the 
                                                           
49 Latitude and Longitude 
50 Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, NCT Delhi (through 
Government Orders), Tamil Nadu (through Government Orders), Telangana, West Bengal, 
Chandigarh (through bye-laws), Puducherry and Lakshadweep. 
51 In Andhra Pradesh, periodical assessment of Ground Water level village level was made by the GEC 
and GEC reports were sent to CGWB. After approval of CGWB, the State WALTA issued notification 
contains a list of OE villages where ban is imposed on Ground Water extraction except for drinking 
purposes. GEC reports were prepared in 2007-08, 2008-09, 2010-11, 2012-13 (2016-17 approved 
by CGWB and due for notification). 
52 Chilamatur, Giddaluru, Narpala, Tirupathi rural and Vempalli 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
48 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit Observation 
CGWA may not be considered as over-exploited in the notified list of the State 
as shown in Table 3.6.1. 
Table 3.6.1: Difference in villages notified by CGWA and SGWA 
Sl. 
No. 
District Mandal 
notified by 
CGWA 
Number 
of 
villages 
in the 
mandal 
notified 
by 
CGWA 
Number of 
Villages 
notified as 
over-exploited 
by APWALTA 
Number of 
villages 
not 
notified 
by 
APWALTA  
1 Ananthapuramu Chilamatur 21 6 15 
2 Narpala 12 3 9 
3 Chittoor Tirupathi 
Rural 
29 10 19 
4 Prakasam Giddaluru 20 11 9 
5 YSR Kadapa Vempalli 15 4 11 
 Total 97 34 63 
Thus, 63 villages which are in the mandals notified as over-exploited by the 
CGWA do not have a ban on permissions (NOCs) as they are not notified as 
over-exploited villages by the State. Due to non-imposition of restrictions on 
use of ground water for commercial/ industrial use in non-notified villages in 
the CGWB notified Mandal, remaining villages slip into over exploited 
category from semi-critical/critical villages within in a short period. 
Water Resources Department (WRD) stated (July 2019) that the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh was notifying certain villages as over exploited and 
imposing ban on construction of new wells for all purposes, except for 
drinking water. Further, Andhra Pradesh is the only State in India which 
assesses the ground water potential at village level; therefore notification was 
also implemented at village level. 
The fact however, remained that the difference in categorisation of over-
exploited areas resulted in lack of regulation in some of the areas that were 
excluded by the State Department.  
2.  Delhi In July 2010 Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) 
declared all the districts of National Capital Territory of Delhi as notified 
areas. Audit observed that NOCs were issued by the competent authority for 
purposes other than drinking water. The Competent Authority issued 407 
NOCs to infrastructure projects and 169 NOCs in irrigation and agricultural 
projects during the period 2013-18 in the five districts selected for audit.   
Further, these projects/cases were required to follow the terms and 
conditions mentioned in the NOC.  Audit observed that State regulatory 
authorities had not laid down any mechanism to monitor the compliance of 
the terms and conditions mentioned in the NOC. No guidelines were framed 
for inspection of the site by Authorised Officer/Competent Authority to 
verify the compliance of conditions for ground water withdrawal mentioned 
in the NOC. As a result, the Competent Authority/ Authorized Officers did not 
conduct any inspection of the site and were therefore unaware of the extent 
to which the project proponents were complying with the terms and 
conditions of the NOC. As per notification (July 2010) of Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), the Advisory Committee was 
required to convene at least 60 meetings (12 per year) during the period 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 49 
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit Observation 
2013-18. Audit however noticed that only four to 31 meetings53 were held in 
the five districts during the period. 
3.  Karnataka CGWA has notified 22 areas in Karnataka whereas the SGWA has notified 43 
areas as per its discretionary powers. Out of the 22 notified areas of CGWA, 
21 areas are also appearing in the SGWA’s list of notified areas.  
Audit observed that applications for NOCs in Bangalore Rural (106), Bangalore 
Urban Districts (578) and BBMP areas (10,971) were pending from 2013-14 
onwards. The reasons for pendency were attributed to difficulty in inspecting 
sites, as there were only two Geologists working under the District Office to 
cover all 198 BBMP wards and four taluks in their Districts, applications 
pending for want of information/inspection from District offices, etc. It was 
also stated that the office was not able to correspond with the applicant due 
to lack of contact address. 
In Karnataka, the power to grant permit for withdrawal of ground water for 
agricultural purpose is delegated to the District Ground Water Committee. 
NOCs for agricultural purpose were issued in Belagavi, Bagalkote and 
Chikamagalur Districts. NOC conditions stipulated that low water yield crops 
were to be grown. However, the application format for NOC did not have a 
declaration of the nature/type of crop to be grown by the applicant. There 
was also no system of obtaining completion report from the applicants. In the 
absence of information on the type of crop grown, violation if any, of the 
conditions could not be detected, as the Department had also not conducted 
any inspection.54 
4.  Kerala In Kerala, SGWA has notified 5 blocks whereas CGWA has not notified any 
blocks. 
5.  Puducherry As per CGWA, only Puducherry Region55 has been included as a Notified Area. 
However, the Government of Puducherry declared Puducherry (categorised 
as over-exploited region) and Karaikal (categorised as a safe region) regions 
as Notified Areas with effect from February 2005.  
Pondicherry Ground Water Authority (PGWA) issues permits for extraction of 
water for drinking, agricultural, industrial and infrastructure projects.  A 
Regional Committee was constituted (July 2010) for evaluation of applications 
for ground water clearance for industrial and infrastructure purposes.   
The total number of applications received was not available as separate 
records were not maintained to monitor the receipt and clearance of 
applications for renewal of registration. However, as on 31 March 2018, 11 
applications for renewal of registration were pending to be processed by 
PGWA. The period of delay ranged from 341 to 365 days and PGWA attributed 
the delay to shortage of human resources.  
6.  West 
Bengal 
As per guidelines of CGWA, NOC can be issued in a notified area only for 
drinking water and only if there was no public water supply in the area. CGWA 
declared one notified area namely Haldia Industrial Complex in August 2000. 
There was no separate or special provision in the State Ground Water Act for 
management and regulation of ground water in the notified area, however, 
State Level Authority (SLA) decided (June 2009) to maintain the status of 
                                                           
53 West District-4, South District-14, North West District-10, South West District – 31 and East District 
– 17 Meetings 
54 Karnataka Ground Water (Regulation and Control of Development and Management) Act 2011 and 
rules 2012 does not provide any specific condition or prescribed frequency to carry out any 
inspection. However, section 17 of the Act empowers the department to inspect the wells. 
55 The UT of Puducherry has four regions. Out of these four regions, Government of Puducherry 
declared Puducherry and Karaikal regions as notified areas. Yanam and Mahe regions are non-
notified areas.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
50 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
State Audit Observation 
Haldia as a notified area with necessary guidelines of CGWA for management 
and regulation of ground water. SLA had also proposed (June 2009) for 
amendment of the State Ground Water Act to maintain the status of the 
notified area but no amendment was made as of February 2019.  
Audit observed that during 2013-18, 17 permits were issued to 10 industry 
and infrastructure projects in Purba Midnapore in the notified area of Haldia 
for abstraction of ground water although public water supply was available in 
the area. Thus, the CGWA guidelines were not followed. 
It was further noticed that there was delay in issue of six permits in Purba 
Midnapore for periods ranging from 34 to 90 days due to non-conduct of 
meetings by the District Level Authority in time. 
The revised guidelines (September 2020) stipulate that wherever States/ UTs have 
come out with their own ground water abstraction guidelines, which are inconsistent 
with the CGWA guidelines, the provisions of CGWA guidelines will prevail. Further, the 
process of grant of NOC has been made online through a web based application 
system.  
3.9 Submission of quarterly progress reports by SGWA 
As per the guidelines (2015) for ground water abstraction, SGWAs were required to 
send quarterly progress reports to CGWA for records. Audit observed that no such 
reports were obtained by CGWA. CGWA sought such (October 2018) reports from its 
regional offices at the instance of audit. However, CGWA stated (June 2019) that in 
spite of repeated requests and follow up, the said progress reports were received from 
only three States/UTs, namely Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. The 
remaining 10 States/UTs had not responded and no progress could be obtained from 
these States. In absence of these reports, CGWA was unaware of the status of 
regulation in these States. 
DoWR,RD&GR stated (October 2019) that to address this problem of non-reporting by 
States, CGWA had proposed to develop a common platform for every State/ UT with 
a simple online system and that once a final decision on policy/guidelines for 
regulation of ground water was taken by the Hon’ble NGT, appropriate action to 
develop the common application system would be initiated. 
The revised guidelines issued by CGWA (September 2020) stipulate that self-
compliance of conditions laid down in the NOC shall be reported by the users online 
in the web portal of CGWA/SGWA. CGWA needs to ensure that project proponents 
duly submit their self-compliance on its portal.  
3.10  Post NOC monitoring by CGWA and Authorised officers  
3.10.1  Violation of conditions mentioned in NOCs 
As per Section 15 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, CGWA has been 
conferred with the powers to resort to penal provisions to those who failed to comply 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 51 
with or contravened any of the provisions of this Act. CGWA appointed (October 2017) 
the District Magistrate/ Deputy Commissioner of each revenue area in 2356 States/UTs 
as the ‘Authorised Officer’ for the purpose of enforcement of directions of CGWA and 
conditions laid down in the NOCs issued by the Authority for ground water withdrawal. 
Audit conducted joint field visits along with CGWA, 
 State Authorities and Authorised 
officers in Notified and Non-Notified Areas to the industries/project sites (other than 
individual households) in selected cases
57 for verification of compliance with 
conditions laid out in NOCs granted by CGWA and the Authorised officers. Audit 
observed that there was widespread non-compliance of conditions mentioned in the 
NOC, as discussed in the following paragraphs.  
(i) General conditions of NOC that were violated 
The conditions of NOC that were violated and the extent of violations is shown in Table 
3.7. The State-wise findings are given in Annexure 3.3. 
Table 3.7: Cases in which conditions in NOCs were violated 
Sl.  
No. 
Category No. of 
projects in 
which 
condition 
was 
mentioned 
in NOC 
No. of 
cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC 
was 
violated 
Percentage 
of cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC was 
violated 
1. Number of Tube Wells 
Tube wells, bore wells and Dug wells are ground 
water abstraction structures. As per the conditions 
of NOC, the project proponent has to construct 
prescribed number of tube wells/bore wells as 
specified in NOC.  
1,238 104 8 
2. Installation of Water Meter 
A water flow meter is an instrument capable of 
measuring the amount of water passing through a 
pipe. While issuing the NOC to various projects, 
there was a condition that water meter should be 
fitted with bore well/tube well by the firm at its own 
cost and ground water abstraction was to be 
monitored.  
 
 
967 378 39 
3. Installation of Piezometer 
Piezometer is a bore well/tube well used only for 
measuring the water level by lowering the 
tape/sounder or automatic water level measuring 
709 351 50 
                                                           
56 Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujrat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Andaman & Nicobar, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu and Lakshadweep 
Islands. The remaining States/UTs have their own mechanism for regulation of Ground Water.  
57 Non-notified Areas -595, Notified Areas – 221, Self-Regulated - 472 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
52 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl.  
No. 
Category No. of 
projects in 
which 
condition 
was 
mentioned 
in NOC 
No. of 
cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC 
was 
violated 
Percentage 
of cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC was 
violated 
equipment. As per condition of NOCs, Piezometers 
were required to be installed in consultation with 
CGWB.  
4. Installation of Automatic Water Level Recorder 
As per NOC condition, the piezometers installed 
were to be fitted with Automatic Water Level 
Recorder (AWLR) for real time monitoring of ground 
water level.  
342 210 61 
5. Monitoring of Pre and Post Monsoon ground 
water Quality 
As per NOC condition, each water extraction unit 
had to monitor ground water quality twice in a year 
during pre-monsoon (in the month of May/June) 
and post-monsoon (in the month of 
October/November) periods.  
659 285 43 
6. Monitoring of water level data of wells 
As per NOC condition, the firms had to install 
piezometer in the premises and monitoring ground 
water level data through it.  
688 334 49 
7. Construction of Rain Water Harvesting Structures 
Units granted permission for extraction of ground 
water have to adopt artificial recharge of ground 
water by constructing rain water 
harvesting/recharge structures. The recharge 
should be implemented within the premises and/or 
same water shed/assessment unit.  
987 429 43 
8. Maintenance of rain water recharge structures 
Artificial recharge efforts are aimed at 
augmentation of natural movement of surface 
water into ground reservoir through suitable civil 
construction techniques. These have to be properly 
maintained and desilting should be done 
periodically.  
558 220 39 
9. Submission of Compliance Reports 
Compliance in respect of conditions specified in 
NOC was to be submitted to Regional Office of 
CGWA/ Regulatory agency.  
776 438 56 
10. Withdrawal of yearly ground water in excess of 
prescribed limit  
NOC issued by CGWA prescribes the quantum of 
yearly ground water that can be withdrawn by a 
project proponent.  
787 61 8 
11. Installation of Sewage/Effluent Treatment Plants 
The firm granted with NOC had to ensure proper 
recycling and reuse of waste water after adequate 
treatment.  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (October 2019) that 
functioning of Sewage/Effluent Treatment Plants 
673 237 35 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 53 
Sl.  
No. 
Category No. of 
projects in 
which 
condition 
was 
mentioned 
in NOC 
No. of 
cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC 
was 
violated 
Percentage 
of cases in 
which 
condition 
mentioned 
in NOC was 
violated 
was under the purview of Pollution Control Boards. 
The reply is not acceptable as being one the 
conditions in the NOC, compliance to the same was 
to be monitored by CGWA also.  
 (ii) Conditions specific to Notified areas 
There are some conditions in the NOC granted to project proponents that are specific 
to notified areas. The authorised officers in consultation with the Advisory Committee 
would decide on standards for the area/ district under their jurisdiction. Such specific 
conditions that were violated by proponents are discussed below and the extent of 
violations is shown in Table 3.8. The State wise findings are given in Annexure 3.4. 
Table 3.8: Specific conditions violated in notified areas 
Condition Number 
of 
Sampled 
project 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified 
Out of projects where such 
condition was specified, number of 
projects in which 
Percentag
e of 
projects in 
which the 
condition 
was 
violated 
 
conditio
n was 
complied 
with 
complianc
e could 
not be 
ascertaine
d in Audit  
condition 
was 
violated 
Diameter of Tube well/Bore 
well 
The maximum diameter of 
ground water abstraction 
structures is restricted to 150 
mm by CGWA. In case of 
Government water supply 
agencies, housing societies, 
the specifications (size, 
diameter) of the tube well can 
be higher depending on the 
ground water availability and 
requirement.  
281 152 102 10 40 26 
Capacity of pump 
The maximum capacity of the 
pump for ground water 
abstraction structures is 
restricted to five HP by CGWA. 
In case of Government water 
supply agencies, housing 
societies, tube well, this can be 
higher depending on the 
ground water availability and 
requirement. 
221 130 57 
16 57 44 
Formation encountered to be 
sent to CGWB 
As per CGWA guidelines, 
details of the drilling done by 
279 85 3 7 75 88 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
54 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Condition Number 
of 
Sampled 
project 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified 
Out of projects where such 
condition was specified, number of 
projects in which 
Percentag
e of 
projects in 
which the 
condition 
was 
violated 
 
conditio
n was 
complied 
with 
complianc
e could 
not be 
ascertaine
d in Audit  
condition 
was 
violated 
the proponent had to be 
furnished to the nodal agency 
authorised and to CGWB, 
Regional office within 15 days 
of the completion of the 
construction. 
Significant percentage of cases in which conditions stipulated in the NOCs were 
violated defeated the purpose of imposing such regulation of monitoring the quantity 
and quality of ground water and ensuring water conservation measures. Further, 
despite the widespread violations, CGWA issued (2013-18) show cause notices to only 
99 project proponents. This indicated that CGWA was unable to strictly and effectively 
impose the conditions subject to which NOCs were granted.  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that CGWA had initiated taking action with 
effect from November 2019 to impose penalty on the proponents who failed to 
comply with the conditions specified in the NOC. 
3.10.2  Specific cases observed by Audit 
A few specific cases are discussed below. 
3.10.2.1 Andhra Pradesh 
The Ground Water and Water Audit Department rejected (February 2016) the 
application of Sai Ganga Water Care R.O. Plant, Guntur for permission to extract 
ground water on the ground that the proposed plant was located in a residential area 
and that ground water extraction for sale was not permitted. However, during field 
visit, Audit observed that the unit was operating and extracting ground water illegally 
in violation of APWALTA Rules. This is due to lack of an effective mechanism to detect 
such activities.  
Andhra Pradesh Ground Water and Water Department stated that this violation was 
to be regulated by Tahasildar of concerned Mandal. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 55 
  
Illegal extraction of ground water by Sai Ganga Water Care R.O. Plant, Guntur 
3.10.2.2  Gujarat 
(i) Violation of multiple conditions of NOC by water intensive unit 
NOC was granted (October 2016) 
to M/s Huntsman International (I) 
Pvt. Ltd., a manufacturer of dyes 
(water intensive unit) situated in 
Vadodara district for abstracting 
ground water of 2,000 cubic 
meter/day (and not exceeding 
7,30,000 cubic meter/year) 
through seven shallow tube wells 
(in depth range of 40 to 70 m). 
Two existing tube wells were to 
be converted to piezometers for deeper ground water aquifer monitoring. In all, the 
firm was to install four to five piezometers to measure ground water levels on monthly 
basis.  
Operation of Tube well by-passing water flow meter 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
56 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
During joint site visit (December 2018) Audit observed that the unit had constructed 
seven tube wells within the factory premises in such a way that ground water was 
being extracted without metering. Further, the firm did not convert the two existing 
tube wells into piezometers for deeper ground water aquifer monitoring, as 
required in the conditions of the NOC but was instead extracting ground water from 
them without installing water flow meter. Also, the firm had installed only three 
piezometers within the factory premises against the required four to five 
piezometers and did not monitor ground water level data on monthly basis. 
The firm was also required to construct water recharge structures and adopt two to 
three villages for Water Security Plan in Vadodara District as mandated in the NOC. 
The firm neither took initiatives for implementing Water Security Plan nor 
constructed water recharge structures. The firm had constructed only one rain water 
harvesting structure in the premises of a primary school in one village in July 2018. 
Thus, the firm violated most of the conditions stipulated in the NOC.  
(ii)  Non maintenance of rain water recharge structures 
NOC was granted (November 2014) by CGWA to M/s Rohan Dyes & Intermediates Ltd., 
a manufacturer of chemical products situated in Anand district for extraction of 
ground water of 666 cubic meter/day 
(and not exceeding 2,29,770 cubic 
meter/year). The unit was required to 
implement rain water harvesting and 
ground water recharge measures of 
1,18,057 cubic meter/year. 
The unit had proposed to install four 
recharge tube wells of 100 meter depth 
in its premises for recharging by rain water. As per design of recharge structure, the 
upper layer of recharge pit would be covered with coarse sand layer and the second 
layer would be gravel pack filter. 
Water Recharge pit 
Tube wells being operated without installing water flow meter 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 57 
During joint visit (January 2019) of the unit premises, Audit found that the firm had 
constructed only two number of recharge tube wells. The recharge pits were also not 
being maintained properly as vegetation, dry soil, garbage and mud layer was seen on 
the upper layer instead of coarse sand layer.  
Due to non-maintenance of proper recharge structures the extent of fresh water 
recharge, if any, and compliance with the condition in the NOC could not be 
ascertained.  
3.10.2.3  Haryana 
As per terms and conditions of NOC, units were required to undertake artificial 
recharge of ground water through Roof Water Harvesting System (RWHS) in the 
premises within 45 days of issuance of NOCs and confirm the construction of RWHS 
to the Authorised Officer for verification.  During physical verification of the sites of 
10 units, Audit found that these units had not constructed RWHS as required. In 
another six units inspected during February to May 2018, RWHS were found to be 
not maintained properly. 
Muddy structure at R.C. Sood 
and Co. Private Limited, 
Faridabad  
Water logged structure at RPS 
Infrastructure, Faridabad  
Bushes/grass at M/s 
Continental  
Devices, Faridabad  
   
  
Leaves and mud in RWH 
structure at Food Corporation of 
India, Faridabad  
Muddy and water logged RWH 
structure at Apparel Export 
Promotion Council, Faridabad  
Bushes at BKN Government 
Polytechnic, Mahendergarh 
3.10.2.4 Karnataka  
The District Ground Water Authority granted permission (October 2017) to M/s 
Embassy One Developers Private Limited, Bengaluru for drilling 10 bore wells. The firm 
had constructed two 30 storey towers on a 6.5 acre plot in Bengaluru. The bottom of 
the lower basement under both the blocks was below ground water level due to which 
the lower basement floor was subjected to water pressure and subsequent seepage.   


Report No. 9 of 2021   
58 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
As per the Consultant report 58 (January 2017), total ground water desired to be 
pumped out per day was stated to be 1,213 cubic metre per day.  Water accumulated 
around the building structure was collected at the collection sumps and 500 cubic 
metre per day was being dewatered through the process of comprehensive sub-soil 
drain system.  
It was specified in the NOC that the water coming out of de-watering should be put to 
productive/effective use. However, joint inspection by Audit revealed that the 
collected water was pumped and lifted to the water storage tanks and after the tanks 
were filled, the water from the collection sumps overflowed to the drain. This was 
contrary to the condition specified in the NOC and resulted in improper utilisation and 
wastage of water in a notified/over-exploited area. 
  
Water over-flowing from storage tanks 
3.10.2.5  Madhya Pradesh 
In 10 sampled infrastructure projects, Audit observed that four of these infrastructure 
projects had not obtained CTO from Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
(MPPCB).  
After being pointed out by Audit, MPPCB stated (December 2018) that court cases had 
been filed against three project proponents and in one case pertaining to M/s 
Sukhsagar Medical College and Hospital Jabalpur, the Regional Officer, Jabalpur had 
been directed to initiate court proceedings for operating the projects without 
obtaining CTO from MPPCB. 
3.10.2.6  Odisha 
CGWA accorded (July 2017) NOC to M/s Jai Laxmi Agro Foods Pvt. Ltd, Cuttack, a 
proposed Agro Based Food Products manufacturing unit, for abstraction of ground 
water. As per condition in the NOC, the firm was permitted to extract ground water of 
90 cubic metre per day and 28,300 cubic metre per year through two bore wells. No 
                                                           
58 The bottom of the lower basement was below Ground Water level. Because of this it was subjected 
to water pressure and hence seepage. Therefore, the Company had engaged consultant to 
undertake studies and to derive a comprehensive dewatering system so as to keep the Ground 
Water level below the lower basement system. 


  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 59 
additional ground water abstraction structures were to be constructed for this 
purpose without prior approval of CGWA.  
During site inspection by the 
Audit Team (February 2019) it 
was found that the firm had 
also constructed one dug well 
for which approval of CGWA 
was not taken. The bore wells 
and dug well were not fitted 
with water meter and log books 
were also not maintained.  As 
such, quantity of ground water extracted by the unit could not be ascertained. The 
firm had also not installed any piezometer and also not been monitoring quality data 
both for pre-monsoon and post-monsoon periods as per condition of the NOC. Action 
taken report in respect of implementation of NOC conditions was to be submitted to 
CGWA within one year but the firm had not submitted any action taken report to 
CGWA. In its proposal for NOC, the firm had proposed for construction of one 
infiltration basin (pond) for rain water harvesting and to use it for plant work. 
However, the firm did not construct such infiltration pond for rain water harvesting. 
Further, the project also did not adopt any nearby villages for implementation of 
water conservation measures. 
 
  
Regional Director, Bhubaneshwar stated that appropriate action as per the existing 
guidelines would be initiated at the earliest. 
 
 
Dug well constructed without permission of CGWA 
 
Bore wells without piezometer and water meter in Odisha 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
60 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
3.10.2.7 West Bengal 
The State Ground Water Authority (SWID) issued 
four permits (April 2017) to M/s Haldia 
Petrochemicals situated in a notified area in Purba 
Midnapore district to install four tube wells for 
abstraction of groundwater at the rate of 100 cubic 
meter per day per tube well. Ground water 
abstraction was permitted only for the period from 
15
th March to 15 th July every year. There were 
conditions for installation of water meter, 
implementation of rooftop rain water harvesting 
structure, submission of water quality reports to 
SWID annually. However, there was no provision 
for installation of Piezometer, AWLR, water quality 
monitoring of pre monsoon and post monsoon, renewal of permits, installation of 
Sewage/Effluent Treatment Plants, submission of drilling details to SWID, etc.  
During the joint site visit (June 2018), it was noticed that the firm had constructed four 
tube wells but had not installed water meters and also did not maintain log books. As 
such, the quantity of ground water abstracted by the firm per day and the period when 
extracted could not be ascertained. The firm did not submit any water quality report 
to SWID. No rain water harvesting structure was implemented; rooftop rain water was 
being stored in an existing reservoir. In absence of Piezometer, season-wise 
fluctuation of ground water level also could not be ascertained.  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (October 2019) that human resource constraints had affected 
CGWA from putting in place a mechanism for monitoring of NOC conditions by 
proponents in general, except in cases for renewal, where site inspections were being 
carried out.  
Audit also noticed good practices being followed by some of the project proponents, 
which are highlighted in Box 3.4.  
Box 3.4: Good practices by project proponents 
Andhra Pradesh 
During physical verification in mining unit M/s RBSSD & FN Das, it was found that the unit had 
maintained a green belt in the form of plantation of trees covering an area of 40,000 sq. m and 
planted about 4.50 lakh grass seeds. In addition, the unit also maintained 1,250 m of garland drains 
and 1,375 m of retaining wall to prevent soil erosion from over-burdened dump. 
Assam 
During physical verification of M/s Ajanta Pharma Limited, which was granted NOC by CGWA in 
November 2016, it was seen that the industry had complied with all the conditions specified in the 
NOC viz., abstraction of ground water as per the NOC, maintenance of log book indicating abstraction 
of ground water, fitting of water meter with tube well, installation of piezometers for water level 
Tube well at Haldia Petrochemicals 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 61 
monitoring, construction of rain water harvesting structure, STP/ETP treatment plant for reuse of 
waste water. Besides, the industry also submitted compliance report to the Regional Director, CGWB, 
NER as per the NOC.  
  
Madhya Pradesh 
During joint site inspection of M/s Udaypur Beverages, Ltd, Jabalpur, a water-intensive industry, the 
unit was found to comply with all the conditions mentioned in the NOC. The plant is equipped with 
ETP and STP facility and is reusing and recycling the treated effluent water for in-house gardening, 
irrigation, cleaning and for use in utilities like boiler, cooling towers and washers. All the wells were 
found to be fitted with water meters and piezometers with ALWR to ensure monitoring of ground 
water abstraction. The unit had also implemented ground water recharge measures. Sixteen 
rainwater harvesting structures were found to have been constructed and properly maintained with 
zero discharge of water outside the premises. The project proponent had carried out de-silting and 
rejuvenation of Bilpura Pond located in the vicinity of the Project, resulting in augmentation of 
ground water resources of the area. The project proponent had taken environmental initiatives by 
planting more than four thousand plants and trees in the surrounding area of the project and 
maintained the green belt. Result-oriented efforts of the industry to preserve sustainable 
development and promote water conservation measures have been duly recognised by Government 
of Madhya Pradesh through award of Paryavaran Puruskar  for the year 2014-15 and various 
appreciation awards.  
  
Well maintained structures at M/s Udaypur Beverages, Ltd, Jabalpur 
 
 
 
                 ETP at M/s Ajanta Pharma Limited                                         Rainwater harvesting structure 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
62 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
3.11 Other issues -Registration of drilling rigs and bore wells  
10 States/UTs59 had established a mechanism for registration of drilling rigs and boring 
wells used for extraction of ground water. This is a good practice, as it serves to keep 
a record of the number of drilling rigs or boring wells deployed and the extent of 
drilling activities undertaken in the State.  Audit however, observed deficiencies in five 
States/UTs in implementation of this mechanism as mentioned in Table 3.9 below. 
Table 3.9: Deficiencies in mechanism for registration of drilling rigs 
Sl. No. State Remarks 
1.  Chandigarh As per Guidelines issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in August 2010, 
registration of all drilling agencies with the District 
Administration/Statutory Authority was mandatory. However, the UT 
Administration had not registered any drilling agency. 
2.  Delhi The National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi regulates ground water 
through notification of July 2010, issued by the Environment Department 
with the approval of the Honourable Lt. Governor, which was amended in 
January 2014. The terms and conditions of the amended notification of 
January 2014 provided for mandatory registration of all the drilling 
machines/rigs utilised for boring purposes with the office of Divisional 
Commissioner/ Deputy Commissioner (Revenue). Amended notification 
further provided that the movement of drilling machines/rigs should be 
allowed for specified purpose/ place and duration by the concerned 
Deputy Commissioner (Revenue) offices. However, no drilling agency was 
registered with Deputy Commissioner’s offices and there was no check on 
the movement of drilling machines as required under the notification of 
January 2014. 
3.  Karnataka As per Rule 10 (2) of Ground Water Rules 2012 of the State, the drilling 
agencies are required to furnish monthly information regarding location, 
date and number of bore wells drilled with depth, casing and yield of each 
bore well. However, only 55 out of 131 drilling agencies had submitted this 
information. 
4.  Maharashtra Maharashtra Ground Water (Development and Management) Act, 2009, 
stipulated registration of drilling rig owners and operators in the State. 
However, in the absence of rules, these provisions in the Act were not 
implemented.  
5.  Telangana The rig owners/operators were instructed to submit monthly progress 
reports containing details of drilling works taken-up, to the Ground Water 
Department. However, all the 153 registered rig operators in test checked 
districts (i.e. Rangareddy, Warangal (Urban), Gadwal and Nizamabad) did 
not submit these reports. 
In the above States/UTs, due to lack of registration of the drilling agencies and non-
receipt of periodic reports on drilling activities, the extent of drilling work undertaken 
for abstraction of ground water could not be ascertained which defeated the purpose 
of establishing such mechanism to regulate drilling activities. 
                                                           
59 Chandigarh, Delhi, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Puducherry, Rajasthan 
and Telangana.  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 63 
In 12 States/UTs60, there was no mechanism for registration of drilling rigs61 or boring 
wells used for extraction of ground water. In the absence of such mechanism, there 
was scope for unregulated extraction of ground water. No information was available 
in respect of the remaining 11 States/UTs. 
In the revised guidelines (September 2020), CGWA has introduced a provision 
whereby State/UT Governments shall be responsible for registering drilling rigs 
operating within their jurisdiction and for maintaining the database of wells drilled by 
them. 
 
3.12 Conclusion 
CGWA has been granted the powers to regulate and control ground water in the 
country but consents for operation of various projects are granted by multiple 
agencies such as Pollution Control Boards, Bureau of Indian Standards, Food Standard 
and Safety Assessment of India, etc. A linkage between the consents granted by these 
agencies and CGWA for those projects requiring ground water abstraction was 
missing, due to which many of the units granted consents by these other agencies 
were operating without obtaining NOC from CGWA.  
There were delays in issuing of new NOCs and renewal of existing NOCs by CGWA. A 
total of 10,758 applications for grant of NOC were pending for periods ranging 
between 90 days to three years. Similarly, 144 applications for renewal of NOCs were 
pending with CGWA for periods exceeding three years.  
Though CGWA has issued comprehensive guidelines for evaluation of proposals for 
grant of No Objection Certificate (NOC) for abstraction of ground water, prescribed 
conditions to be followed by the project proponents after receipt of NOC, sustainable 
utilisation of ground water, recharge measures, etc., these guidelines were not 
implemented effectively. 
CGWA has also been conferred with the powers to resort to penal provisions to those 
who failed to comply with its directions. However, this was not implemented strictly, 
as widespread violations of the conditions mentioned in the NOCs were found during 
site inspection of the project proponents, such as illegal extraction of ground water, 
non-installation of water flow meters, improper maintenance of rainwater recharge 
structures, absence of monitoring of water quality data, etc. During 2013-18, CGWA 
had issued show cause notices to only 99 project proponents. 
 
                                                           
60 Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Lakshadweep, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Tripura. 
61 Drilling rigs are structures housing equipment used to drill water wells, oil wells, or natural gas 
extraction wells. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
64 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
3.13 Recommendations 
1. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ne ed to develop effective 
coordination with various other agencies granting consents to projects to 
ensure that the requisite permissions to extract ground water are also 
obtained.  
2. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ma y develop a mechanism 
to ensure timely processing of requests for ground water extraction. 
3. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies ne ed to establish a system 
for periodic inspections and review of the projects to ensure compliance to the 
conditions mentioned in the No Objection Certificates. 
4. Central Ground Water Authority and State agencies need to enforce penal 
provisions strictly as per the Environment Protection Act/State Acts/Rules 
against the cases of violation of conditions mentioned in the No Objection 
Certificates for effective ground water regulation. 
 
 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 65 
Implementation of schemes on 
Ground Water Management and 
Regulation
 
 
 
 
4.1 Introduction 
According to the National Water Policy (2012), there is a need to evolve a National 
Framework Law as an umbrella statement of general principles governing the exercise 
of legislative and/or executive (or devolved) powers by the Centre, the States and the 
local governing bodies. This should lead the way for essential legislation on water 
governance in every State of the Union and devolution of necessary authority to the 
lower tiers of government to deal with the local water situation. There is also a need 
to map the aquifers to know the quantum and quality of ground water resources 
(replenishable as well as non-replenishable) in the country. This process should be 
fully participatory involving local communities and may be periodically updated. There 
should be concurrent mechanism involving users for monitoring if the water use 
pattern is causing problems like unacceptable depletion or building up of ground 
water, salinity, alkalinity or similar quality problems, etc., with a view to planning 
appropriate interventions. 
As per the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) note (June 2013), the 
scheme “Ground Water Management and Regulation” (GWMR) had been proposed 
for aquifer mapping and effective management of ground water with focus on 
vulnerable areas. GWMR scheme was a Central Sector Scheme of DoWR,RD&GR 
during the XII plan (2012-17) with an estimated cost of ` 3,319 crore to be 
implemented by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). The Scheme had four 
components: (a) National Project on Aquifer Management (NAQUIM), (b) 
Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWM), (c) Technological up-gradation 
and (d) Ground Water Monitoring, Assessment, Regulation, Publication, Seminars, 
Awards, technical assistance to States and spill over work of the project of Artificial 
Recharge & Exploration. The scheme was recommended by the Expenditure and 
Finance Committee (EFC) in May 2013 and approved (August 2013) by the CCEA.  
The scheme envisaged Aquifer mapping for an accurate and comprehensive micro-
level picture of ground water in different hydro-geological settings of India by using 
modern techniques like heli borne geophysical surveys, Geographic Information 
System (GIS) based thematic maps, ground water modelling and real time digital water 
level monitoring. The scheme also sought for PGWM through collaborative approach, 
involving Central and State organisations, research institutes, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRIs), Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and local community to 
enable the community and stake holders to monitor and manage ground water 
themselves. 
 Chapter  
4 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
66 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
The broad objectives of the GWMR scheme (2012-17) were as under:  
1. Aquifer mapping for delineation of aquifer dispositi on in three dimension 
along with their characterisation on 1:50,000 scale in 8.89 lakh sq.km and 
further detailing up to 1:10,000 scale in some of the vulnerable (Over-
exploited, Critical, Semi-critical) areas. Prior to this, the mapping had been 
done (before May 2013) at a scale of 1:250,000 and in two dimension scale. 
2. Formulation of Aquifer Management Plan to quantify w ater availability and 
water quality in various aquifers for facilitating sustainable management of 
ground water resources at regional and local level through participatory 
management approach.  
3. Capacity building of functionaries of PRIs, local co
 mmunity and grass root 
workers. 
4. Up-gradation of technological capabilities and infra structure of the CGWB to 
align with proposed aquifer mapping and participatory management of ground 
water approach. 
5. Regulate and control ground water development. 
The EFC approved (March 2018) continuation of the scheme for 2017-20 at an 
estimated cost of ` 992 crore.   However, PGWM62, which was one of the components 
of GWMR scheme during the XII Plan Period was dropped from the scheme. Activities 
to be carried out during 2017-2020 under GWMR scheme were (a) National Aquifer 
Mapping and Management Programme; (b) Ground Water Monitoring, Resource 
Assessment, Regulation, Information Dissemination, etc. including Workshops, 
Seminars, Technical assistance to State and Central Organisations, etc.; and (c) 
Strengthening of infrastructure for technological up-gradation (Machinery & 
Equipment) through procurement of Hydro-geological, Geophysical and Chemical 
equipment, Scientific Software, Computers, Drilling machines, Motor Vehicles and 
ancillary equipment. 
Audit observations on the implementation of GWMR scheme are discussed in this 
chapter. 
4.2 Financial performance of GWMRS  
The approved outlay, Budget Estimate (BE), Revised Estimate (RE) and Actual 
Expenditure under each component of the Scheme during 2012-19 are shown in 
Table 4.1. 
 
                                                           
62 The activities of PGWM were stated to be included under a proposed new scheme titled Atal Bhujal 
Yojana (ABHY). Thus, no activities were undertaken towards Participatory Ground Water 
Management. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 67 
Table 4.1: Financial information of GWMR Scheme 
(Amount in `  crore) 
Component Approved 
outlays 
(2012-19) 
Budget 
Estimate 
(2012-19) 
Revised 
Estimate 
(2012-19) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
(2012-19) 
Aquifer Mapping 2,585.58 1,934.91 1,115.19 1,006.53 
Ground Water Regime Monitoring, 
Assessment, Regulation, 
Publication, Seminars, Awards, 
etc.  
543.73 
Technological Up-gradation 346.35 414.57 176.58 103.2 
Participatory Ground Water 
Management 
575 0 0 0 
TOTAL 4,050.66 2,349.48 1,291.77 1,109.73 
(Source: Figures provided by CGWB) 
It is seen from Table 4.1 that against approved outlay of ` 4,050.66 crore, the actual 
expenditure under GWMRS during 2012-19 was ` 1,109.73 crore which was only 
27 per cent of the approved outlay. The limited expenditure and inability to meet the 
financial targets envisaged under the scheme indicates deficient performance. The 
achievement of physical targets set during the period 2012-19 is discussed in the 
subsequent paragraphs.  
4.3  Aquifer Mapping 
Aquifer mapping is a scientific process wherein a combination of geologic, 
geophysical, hydrologic and chemical field and laboratory analyses are applied to 
characterise the quantity, quality and sustainability of ground water in aquifers. An 
accurate and comprehensive micro-level picture of ground water in India through 
aquifer mapping in different hydrogeological settings would enable robust ground 
water management plans at the appropriate scale to be devised and implemented. 
This would help in achieving drinking water security, improved irrigation facility and 
sustainability in water resources development. CGWB had also published (2013) 
“Manual on Aquifer Mapping” which attempted to evolve uniform protocols for 
various activities such as collection and compilation of available information on 
aquifer systems, demarcation of their extents and their characterisation, analysis of 
data gaps, generation of additional data for filling the identified data gaps and 
preparation of aquifer maps at the desired scale. CGWB had identified an area of 
24.8 lakh sq. km. for Aquifer mapping. 
4.3.1  Targets of aquifer mapping and achievements 
(i) One of the key objectives of NAQUIM (2012-17) was delineation of aquifer 
disposition in three dimensions along with their characterisation on 1:50,000 scale in 
8.89 lakh sq. km. and further detailing up to 1:10,000 scale in 0.67 lakh sq. km. of the 
vulnerable (Over-exploited, Critical, Semi-critical) areas. During the 4
th meeting of 
National Inter-Departmental Steering Committee (NISC) held in September 2016, the 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
68 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
target areas for NAQUIM were revised and reduced from 8.89 lakh sq.km. to 5.25 lakh 
sq. km. to be covered by March 2017. Against this, CGWB covered an area of 6.31 lakh 
sq.km. during the XII Plan period. 
During 2017-2020, CGWB targeted aquifer mapping and formulation of Management 
Plans on 1:50,000 scale for 6.60 lakh sq. km. The balance area of 11.90 lakh sq. km 63 
was to be covered in subsequent years. The scheme aimed to cover the entire country 
with special focus on challenges confronting the ground water sector such as ground 
water depletion, water quality issues related to geogenic and anthropogenic factors, 
water stress areas in terms of volumetric availability, and other issues such as 
sustainability of springs particularly in the hilly areas, etc. As of September 2020, 
CGWB had covered an area of 13 lakh sq. km.  
Audit observed that CGWB took eight years to cover 52 per cent of the total identified 
area of 24.8 lakh sq. km. Considering the time still required to complete aquifer 
mapping of the remaining 11.8 lakh sq. km, the Department needs to develop a 
strategy for completing the work within a reasonable time period.   
DoWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that the remaining area of 11.8 lakh sq. km. 
was targeted to be covered by 2023.  
(ii) CGWB had finalised Aquifer Mapping Reports in respect of only 6.5 lakh sq. km. 
(i.e. 50 per cent  of the area of 13 lakh sq.km. covered) for 29 States/ UTs as of 
September 2020. The detailed mapping in 1:10,000 scale for 0.67 lakh sq. km. of the 
vulnerable (Over-exploited, Critical, Semi-critical) areas was not done at all. Audit also 
noticed that this scale of mapping was not included in the scheme for the period 
2017-20. 
(iii) It was also proposed to prepare micro level plans to facilitate implementation of 
various supply and demand side interventions to ensure long-term sustainability of 
local ground water resources. In the first phase, it was proposed to have detailed 
Aquifer Management Plans for 1,000 such representative Panchayats  during 
2
018-2064. The selection of the Panchayats was to be made on the basis of the stage 
of ground water development, ground water contamination profile and ground water 
development prospects including requests of the State agencies to address any 
specific ground water related problems.  
As of September 2020, only 329 micro level management plans had been prepared. 
Thus, the target to prepare micro level plans to empower 1,000 representative 
Panchayats for sustainable management of ground water resources during 2018-20 
remained unachieved.  
                                                           
63  24.8 lakh sq. km. minus area of 6.31 lakh sq. km. covered during XII Plan period and 6.60 lakh sq. 
km. targeted during 2017-20. 
64 350 Panchayats during 2018-19 and 650 during 2019-20.  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 69 
The Department stated (October 2019) that CGWB was trying to achieve the targets 
in spite of significant shortage of human resources. The Department had recently 
hired M/s WAPCOS Ltd.65 as Project Monitoring Consultant to undertake some of the 
activities such as tendering/supervision, etc. in a time-bound manner, which was likely 
to help CGWB to concentrate more on R&D activities.  
The issue of shortage of human resources has already been discussed in Chapter 2. As 
recommended by Audit at the end of Chapter 2, the Department needs to address 
these constraints by also engaging with other experts and going for strategic 
partnerships to ensure smooth functions in processes of ground water management 
and governance. 
4.3.2  Incomplete aquifer mapping reports 
The systematic mapping of an aquifer encompasses a host of activities such as 
collection and compilation of available information on aquifer systems, demarcation 
of their extents and their characterisation, analysis of data gaps, generation of 
additional data for filling the identified data gaps and finally, preparation of aquifer 
maps at the desired scale. As per the EFC (2012-17), the scientific work
66 had to be 
executed using available in-house resources and also be outsourced.  
The GWMR scheme envisaged that CGWB (through its Regional Offices) would identify 
data gaps for 8.89 lakh sq. km. by 31 March 2015. Further, as per the Manual on 
Aquifer Mapping of CGWB, once the collection, compilation, data gap analysis and 
additional data generation to fill the identified data gaps are completed, the final and 
most important step was the preparation of the aquifer map, which brings together 
various aspects of the aquifers and their ground water resources in the form of a map, 
which can then be used by the stakeholders to plan their sustainable development 
and management.  
Out of 18 Regional Offices of CGWB, only five had submitted the data gaps in time. 
The work to be executed through outsourcing was initiated only in April 2016 and was 
therefore badly delayed (discussed in detail in para 4.2.3). Consequently, though 
mapping reports for 6.3 lakh sq. km. were finalised, additional data
67 to fill the 
identified data gaps was not generated. As such, all these aquifer mapping reports 
were incomplete and their utility to the stakeholders to plan their sustainable 
development and management was limited. Moreover, CGWB did not furnish the 
details of the amount of data 68 required, data available and the data gaps in these 
aquifer mapping reports. Further, Audit noticed that the parameters as well as 
                                                           
65 A Public Sector Enterprise under DoWR,RD&GR 
66 Geologic, geophysical, hydrologic and chemical field and laboratory analyses 
67 The data gaps indicate the data which is not available to prepare comprehensive aquifer mapping 
reports. The additional data is the data required to fill up such data gaps. 
68 Pertaining to number of wells, VES, Soil Infiltration Studies, Aquifer Parameters, Recharge 
Parameters etc. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
70 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
number of monitoring stations were inadequate as illustrated in one case in Box 4.1 
below. 
Box 4.1: Illustration from Report on Aquifer Mapping and Ground Water Management of 
Jodhpur, Rajasthan 
Para 1.4 of the Report on Aquifer Mapping and Ground Water Management of Jodhpur, Rajasthan 
prepared by CGWB documents that validation and geo-referencing of the location coordinates, 
lithologs and hydrogeological data is needed and State GWD data is lacking in aquifer parameters. It 
was also recorded that available data was limited largely to State Highways and main roads only. The 
report mentioned that in order to get a clear 3D hydrogeological geometry of the aquifer system and 
water level behaviour, there was a need to generate more data by Groundwater exploration, Vertical 
Electrical Sounding (VES) and to establish more numbers of monitoring stations for better 
understanding of the ground water regime behaviour in terms of quantity and quality.  
DoWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that aquifer maps and management plans for 
the areas covered during 2012-17 were prepared using existing data and new data 
generated through in-house activities. Only the part of data generation envisaged 
through outsourced drilling was delayed due to various reasons. Thus, the maps and 
management plans were prepared with most of the relevant data like exploratory 
wells, water level, water quality, pumping tests etc. In view of above, though there 
was scope for further improvement, the reports can be considered complete. As 
regards generation of additional data through exploratory drilling, total data 
requirements in respect of number of exploratory boreholes for covering the entire 
country had been rationalised to nearly 18,000, of which about 15,000 had already 
been constructed or are at various stages of construction. Process for outsourcing of 
construction of the remaining approximately 3,000 wells had already been initiated.  
The reply of the Department illustrates that there was scope for further improvement 
in the aquifer maps and management plans based on the generation of the additional 
data. However, the reply is silent about the timelines for revision of reports with 
additional data. 
4.3.3  Non preparation of Ground Water models 
Ground water models provide a tool to estimate ground water availability for various 
water use strategies and to determine the cumulative effects of increased water use 
and drought conditions. A ground water model is a numerical representation of the 
aquifer system capable of simulating historical and predicting future aquifer 
conditions. The purpose of the NAQUIM program was to provide an Aquifer Response 
Model that can be used to develop reliable and timely information on ground water 
availability for the region to ensure adequate supplies or recognise inadequate 
supplies over a 15 year planning period. As mentioned in para 4.2.1, CGWB had carried 
out aquifer mapping of an area of 13 lakh sq.km. as of September 2020. However, 3D 
modelling was completed only for an area of about three lakh sq. km. only. 
CGWB had entered into a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) with Indian Institute of 
Technology, Kanpur (IIT) and Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (IISc) for 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 71 
Development of Ground Water Flow Models and Preparation of Aquifer Management 
Plans as shown in Table 4.2 below. 
Table 4.2: Ground water modelling work undertaken 
Institution Date of 
MoA 
Sanctioned 
cost 
(`` `` lakh) 
Targeted 
date of 
completion 
Areas to be covered 
IIT August 
2017 
93.22 September 
2018 
81,120 sq.km in Punjab and Haryana and 
66,193 sq.km in Bundelkhand region in 
parts of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya 
Pradesh 
IISc September 
2017 
34.10 October 
2018 
48,294 sq.km in Karnataka 
 
As per the MoA, IIT and IISc were to submit Inception Reports containing detailed work 
plan and timelines specific to the study area keeping in view the objectives, scope, 
methodology, timeline and deliverables outlined in the agreement, by November 2017 
and December 2017 respectively. Further, Monitoring Committees were to be 
constituted by drawing officers from CGWB and the two institutions but the timelines 
for their constitution were not specified in the MoA. The committees would monitor 
the progress of the work, provide guidance in execution of the study and resolve all 
technical and administrative issues regarding implementation of the study. However, 
frequency of monitoring was not prescribed. The Monitoring Committees were 
constituted in November 2017. The progress of work was as follows: 
Work undertaken in Punjab, Haryana and Bundelkhand region by IIT Kanpur: 
IIT Kanpur submitted its inception report in April 2018 after a delay of more than five 
months. The first meeting of the Monitoring Committee was held in May 2018 in 
which it was observed that the work had not progressed beyond data compilation and 
conceptualisation stage in Bundelkhand region. The committee suggested that 
mid-term evaluation of the progress be undertaken at the end of two months from 
the date of the meeting i.e. in July 2018. The second meeting of the committee was 
held in December 2018 after a gap of six months, in which progress report of only 
Punjab region was submitted. The committee observed that the report did not cover 
all the objectives of MoA, therefore it was considered as an interim report.  
Audit observed that one of the major roles of CGWB was to provide relevant data 
available to IIT Kanpur. Audit observed that there was delay on the part of CGWB in 
this regard, thereby affecting timely implementation of the project. Due to this, the 
modelling projects were extended on no cost basis in Punjab and Haryana till 
November 2018 and in Bundelkhand till February 2019. The final report was yet to be 
submitted by IIT Kanpur (February 2019). 
Work undertaken in Karnataka by IISc: 
IISc submitted its inception report in July 2018 i.e. after a delay of more than seven 
months. The report of IISc was evaluated by an Evaluation Committee and its 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
72 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
comments were sent to IISc (October 2018) with the request to revise the inception 
report. Some of the shortcoming noticed in the inception report were as follows: 
 The inception report was very brief.  
 Detailed work plan as per the MoA timelines and the conceptual model 
framework are missing in the inception report.  
 The report does not include details of data availabi lity, source, format, scale 
etc. as well. 
 The document does not elaborate the work done and do es not provide any 
insight into the future work plan or timelines. 
Audit observed that CGWB was yet to receive the revised inception report from IISc 
(February 2019). There were two meetings of the Monitoring Committee in May 2018 
and December 2018. However, progress of the project remained slow.   
Thus, ground water modelling work undertaken by CGWB was not completed as 
scheduled. As such, CGWB could not provide a tool to estimate ground water 
availability for various water use strategies and to determine the cumulative effects 
of increased water use and drought conditions. 
DoWR,RD&GR stated (September 2020) that ground water modelling for ~3 lakh sq. 
km was expected to be completed by 2022. The fact remained that CGWB would still 
be falling short in the preparation of 3D models for the remaining areas that had 
already been mapped. 
4.3.4 Delay in undertaking outsourcing works 
In view of limited in-house human resources and infrastructure, CGWB had proposed 
(May 2013) the outsourcing of various tasks to take-up the physical targets envisaged 
in the XII plan. The year wise financial targets for outsourcing works under GWMR 
scheme are shown in Table 4.3. 
Table 4.3: Outsourcing works under aquifer mapping 
Activity Years  (Amount in `` `` crore)  
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
Data Generation (Hydrogeological, 
Geophysical, Chemical, 
Hydrological etc)- In house and 
Outsourcing 
- 16.57 61.86 273.62 390.92 742.97 
Ground Water Exploration-through 
drilling agencies 
- 34.95 80.99 176.61 496.53 789.08 
During 2017-18, CGWB outsourced 14 works to various private firms and two works 
to WAPCOS at a total cost of ` 313.78 crore for construction of Exploratory and 
Observation wells.  
Audit observed that CGWB initiated the file for outsourcing the work of exploration 
(wells) only in April 2016 i.e. in the last year of the XII plan period. For next 12 months 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 73 
(till March 2017), CGWB could not finalise the proposal. As a result, the additional data 
required to fulfil the identified data gaps could not be generated on time and the 
targets stipulated by the CCEA for XII plan could not be achieved. Further, only one 
project was completed within original time schedule. Six works were completed after 
a delay of 86 to 558 days. One project was foreclosed by the Department and another 
was rescinded. Five works were still continuing with delay ranging between 92 to 626 
days. A total amount of ` 194.39 crore was released for the 12 works as of 
October 2019. The details of the outsourced works are given in the Annexure 4.1. 
Delay in completion of work identified under aquifer mapping would delay the 
assessment of ground water and therefore affect the development of ground water 
management plans. 
The Department stated (October 2019) that the total data requirements were finalised 
after the reprioritisation of areas (5.25 lakh sq. km.) in September 2015 and 
completion of the data gap analysis. Department also attributed the delay to handing 
over of sites in phase wise manner as per the clearances received from the State 
government, non-commencement of works by the contractor, idle rigs for wanting of 
casing pipes, etc.  
The reply was, however, silent about the delay (till April 2016) on part of CGWB in 
initiation of proposal for outsourcing works. The fact remained that delay in 
completion of outsourced works affected the achievement of targets of aquifer 
mapping under GWMR scheme.  
4.3.5 Designing of web-based system 
The Manual on Aquifer Mapping stipulated that the GIS data prepared under the 
project should be stored in such a way as to provide direct access to users without use 
of proprietary software through a suitably designed web-based system for easy 
dissemination of the information.  
Audit observed that CGWB had published reports, but had not provided direct access 
to users by designing any web-based system for easy dissemination of the information 
regarding the aquifer mapping carried out during 2012-18. 
The Department stated (October 2019) that the aquifer maps and management plans 
at present were being disseminated in the (i) Reports-that contain the maps and (ii) 
The AIMS
69 web-page (aims-cgwb.org) where the maps were posted and that CGWB 
was planning to develop web-based system for better dissemination of the outputs.   
Audit however, noticed that the aquifer maps disseminated on the system were only 
in the form of single view three dimensional images. As such, the purpose of preparing 
the data in 3-D was defeated.  
                                                           
69 Aquifer Information and Management System (AIMS) is being developed through the Rajiv Gandhi 
National Ground Water Training and Research Institute, Raipur.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
74 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
DoWR,RD&GR acknowledged (January 2020) that aquifer mapping reports need to be 
published for public consumption and presented in a manner that is easily interpreted 
and utilised by even the common users and that efforts would be made in this 
direction. 
4.3.6  Supervision and guidance by Project Management Unit  
A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) was to be set up in CGWB to manage, 
supervise and provide technical guidance to help project implementation. The Terms 
of Reference of the PMU were to supervise and provide technical guidance in 
implementation of NAQUIM, monitoring of various activities envisaged under 
NAQUIM and to assist in matters related to project implementation. The PMU 
consisted of a Coordinator and three members and was to work under the overall 
supervision and guidance of Member, Survey, Assessment & Monitoring (SAM). Three 
officers of CGWB had to assist the PMU in day to day activities. 
Audit observed that no timeline for constitution of the PMU was prescribed by CGWB. 
The PMU was constituted by CGWB in August 2015, i.e. after a delay of more than 
three years since initiation of the scheme in 2012.  
CGWB informed (July 2018) Audit that all the three members were transferred/ 
promoted (between September 2015 to November 2017) and one of the officers 
assigned to assist PMU was also deputed to another wing. The assignments of the 
PMU were undertaken by the coordinator of PMU with assistance from the remaining 
officers. Audit observed that no efforts were made to replace the officials for proper 
functioning of PMU. As a result, the PMU could not supervise and provide technical 
guidance in implementation of NAQUIM and get continuous feedback about 
constrains and bottlenecks in implementation of various activities and anticipated 
outsourcing work of data generation.  
While DoWR,RD&GR reiterated (October 2019) that the members of PMU had been 
transferred/ promoted it remained silent about the action taken to provide 
substitutes for the transferred/promoted officials. 
4.3.7  Action by State Governments on Aquifer mapping reports  
The involvement of State machinery including various departments, was essential if 
the Aquifer Management Plans were to be implemented. CGWB was to involve State 
Agencies in Aquifer Mapping and implementation of Aquifer Management Plan 
activities.  Of the 201 reports included in the programme, Aquifer mapping reports of 
only 168 districts were shared with District Administration till November 2019. From 
the information available in respect of 27 States/UTs, it was seen that no action was 
taken by 14 States
70 on the recommendations made in the reports. In one State 
                                                           
70  Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Telangana and Uttarakhand.  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 75 
(Gujarat) the report of CGWB was yet to be approved by the State agency. A few States 
reported constraints such as map scale being too small to locate the areas, non-receipt 
of funds from CGWB or Central Government to implement the reports in the field 
(Karnataka and Maharashtra), insufficient information in the reports (Punjab, West 
Bengal), etc. due to which the States were unable to implement the recommendations 
made in the reports. The remaining States had reported partial implementation of the 
recommendations of CGWB. The State wise Audit observations in respect of sampled 
reports and constraints faced by the State agencies are given in the Annexure 4.2. 
4.4  Participatory Ground Water Management 
According to the National Water Policy (2012), declining ground water levels in over-
exploited areas needed to be arrested by introducing improved technologies of water 
use, incentivising efficient water use and encouraging community based management 
of aquifers. The EFC Note for GWMR scheme, approved in August 2013, stated that 
Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWM) required a coordinated effort 
involving Government Departments, research institutes, PRIs, civil society 
organisations and the stakeholders at the village level who would guide collective 
sharing and use of ground water based on a careful understanding of the storage and 
transmission characteristics of different aquifer units. Two levels of programme 
implementation were envisaged namely, programme facilitation and participatory 
outreach programme for project delivery to the end users.  
The programme facilitation role was to be played by DoWR,RD&GR, CGWB and State 
Ground Water Resource Centres (SGWRC). The focus of the facilitation would be to 
build the capacities of managers, planners, technocrats on the concept of PGWM and 
Demand Management. Facilitation included arrangements for project 
implementation involving the State Implementing Partners (SIPs) and District Support 
Organisations (DSOs). In both cases, the national and State level authorities were 
expected to act as facilitators for the delivery of project services. National State and 
District Level facilitation centres were envisaged so that community workers/ 
volunteers would be trained in collection of primary hydro-geological data and 
periodic monitoring of wells. These grass root workers would also sensitise villagers 
about the ground water trends, optimal water usage and quality of ground water with 
the aim of planning water-use as per the water budget. 
For the purpose, CGWB was to hire services of a Technical Support Agency (TSA) 
primarily to build capacities of SIPs which, in turn, were to form partner DSOs at 
District level through CGWB and TSA. The TSA was to deliver a set of consistent project 
management functions and technical services (activities, programmes, guidelines, 
farmer water school methodologies etc.) at State level. 
The Participatory Outreach Programme for Project Delivery for the End Users was to 
consist of programmes such as National Level Brain Storming Programmes, State Level 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
76 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Awareness Programmes, District Level Orientation Programmes, Skill Development 
Programmes for District Support Groups, Panchayat Raj Institution Sensitisation - 
Block level discussion for priority Aquifer Management Units/Blocks, Induction 
programmes for knowledge development of grass root level workers enabling them 
to understand the aquifer management plan and their implementation modalities, 
Skill development for handling and use of water level and quality monitoring 
equipment and organising Farmers Water School/Community participation Camps. 
An outlay of ` 575.38 crore
71 was provided for the period 2013-17 but no expenditure 
was incurred. As per the approved CCEA note, during the year 2014-15, CGWA had to 
ensure selection of National level TSA, SIPs in 10 States, District Support Cell and 
Contractual Hiring of grass root ground water workers by SIP/DSO. However, even 
after lapse of four years (2014-18), CGWB could not finalise the proposal for selecting 
these agencies.  
Audit observed that though approval of the scheme was communicated in September 
2013, the proposal for PGWM was initiated only in March 2014. CGWB took 11 months 
to prepare the draft terms of reference (TOR) for hiring of TSA in 10 States and sent 
the same to DoWR,RD&GR in February 2015. DoWR,RD&GR sought (March 2015) 
some additional information for further consideration, which was provided by CGWB 
in  March 2016, i.e. after 12 months.  No further correspondence was done with 
DoWR,RD&GR on the proposal. CGWB initiated (March 2016) another proposal for 
implementation of PGWM in Lalitpur and Jhansi Districts of Bundelkhand Area of Uttar 
Pradesh, which was also not finalised. Eventually, the PGWM component was dropped 
for continuation in the GWMR scheme for 2017-20.  
Due to slow progress of work by CGWB, no meaningful work was done under PGWM 
and the objective of ground water management at grass root level through 
sensitisation of villagers about the ground water trends, optimal water usage and 
quality of ground water, as envisaged by the National Water Policy (2012) could not 
be achieved. 
The Department accepted (October 2019) that the envisaged activities under the 
Participatory Ground Water Management could not be completed but added that the 
component was dropped from the subsequent EFC memo of 2017-20 and was being 
taken up as a separate scheme on participatory ground water management through 
the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY). 
However, unlike the PGWM, the ABHY that has been launched by DoWR,RD&GR in 
December 2019 will be implemented only in selected locations in seven States 72 
covering 8,350 Gram Panchayats in 78 districts. So, both in scale and size, the ABHY is 
                                                           
71 ` 332.15 crore for facilitation, ` 137.23 crore for outreach programme and ` 106 crore for travel, 
overheads, etc.  
72 Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 77 
not a replacement for PGWM. The fact remained that PGWM, though envisaged under 
GWMRS was not executed for more than seven years.  
4.5  Technological Up Gradation and Capacity Building 
Keeping in view the emerging challenges of ground water in the country, CGWB felt 
the need to upgrade its techniques and equipment. The technological advancements 
being utilised worldwide were to be adopted by CGWB to upgrade its infrastructural 
and human resource capabilities and bring CGWB at par with international standards 
for better management of ground water resources. Accordingly, a benchmarking of 
various activities of CGWB with international best practices was done by international 
experts from the United States Geological Service (USGS) in 2012.  
In December 2012, the Expert Group submitted its report to DoWR, RD&GR, which 
constituted a committee to review this benchmarking report and to accept or modify 
its recommendations. The committee submitted its report to DoWR, RD&GR in 
August 2013.   
The recommendations were of considerable importance looking into future 
infrastructure and human resource requirements to improve upon the efficiency and 
output from CGWB. The major recommendations from this benchmarking exercise 
included technological up-gradation including use of advanced equipment, 
institutional strengthening and capacity building. However, it was observed that 
CGWB did not take adequate action in these areas as detailed in the paragraphs below. 
4.5.1  Procurement of equipment 
On the basis of recommendations of benchmarking exercise, CGWB finalised 
technological up-gradation component in the GWMR Scheme (2012-17). As per the 
approved report of the EFC, funds amounting to ` 305 crore were approved for 
technological up-gradation in CGWB. Under this up-gradation, various equipment 
(Hydrological, Geophysical, Chemical, Drilling) and software were to be procured to 
help achieve the objectives of the scheme.  
It was observed that as of March 2019, CGWB could procure equipment and software 
amounting to only ` 107.85 crore (35.34 per cent) against ` 305.17 crore allocated in 
the EFC (Details are shown in Annexure 4.3). Against proposed 37 Drilling Rigs, which 
were important for digging monitoring wells, only 17 rigs could be procured. Out of 
these 17 rigs, 15 were operational (October 2019). 
The Department stated (October 2019) that there was a delay in tendering due to 
shortage of staff and lack of tendering skills. CGWB had earlier stated (October 2018) 
that the rest of the equipment/software would be procured by 2019-20. 
As a result of the delay, the equipment/software intended to be used during XII Plan 
is now expected to be received only by 2019-20 i.e. end of the next plan (2017-20). 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
78 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
4.5.2  Capacity Building 
The Expert Group’s Report on Benchmarking gave (December 2012) 12 
recommendations relating to capacity building in CGWB. All the recommendations 
were accepted (August 2013) for implementation by the Review Committee. 
However, out of 12, no action was taken in respect of four recommendations by CGWB 
as shown in the Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Status of recommendations of Expert Group on capacity building 
Sl. 
No. 
Recommendation Remarks of the Review 
Committee 
Status 
1. Selected CGWB officers/staff should 
attend international conferences 
and present important findings. 
Accepted. No such conferences were 
co-ordinated by CGWB’s 
training institute. 
2. A mentorship programme should be 
developed between CGWB and 
international experts to provide one-
on-one training for specialised 
hydro-geologic techniques and 
applications. 
Accepted. No such programmes 
undertaken. 
3. Attendance at scientific conferences 
is an especially important aspect of 
capacity building. 
Accepted. A separate 
budget provision may be 
made for it. 
No separate budget 
provision was made.  
4. CGWB should provide references on 
its website for self-training in the 
field of hydrogeology. 
Accepted. In addition, 
references pertinent to 
Artificial Recharge and 
Drilling Technologies 
should also be put on 
website. 
No references were found 
on CGWB’s website. 
Thus, in spite of these recommendations being of considerable importance for CGWB 
with respect to its future infrastructure and human resource requirements, CGWB 
failed to take action on some of the significant recommendations. 
The Department accepted (October 2019) that recommendations were not 
implemented completely. It further added that CGWB would make all efforts to 
implement these recommendations. 
4.6 Schemes/initiatives of States/UTs for management of Ground Water 
To tackle the problems affecting quality and quantity of ground water, States/UTs 
implemented various schemes for water supply, irrigation, ground water recharge, 
effluent treatment, etc. The initiatives of a few States such as Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, 
Gujarat and Telangana have been effective in management of ground water. These 
cases are discussed in the Box 4.2.  
 
 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 79 
Box 4.2: Successful initiatives of State Governments in management of Ground Water 
 
Andhra Pradesh 
Geo-tagging of existing borewells 
 
The State was monitoring the ground water levels in the 1,254 piezometers fitted with Digital Water 
Level Recorders (DWLRs) that provide data on a real time basis, which was available online73. Further, 
in view of the increased demands and stress on groundwater aquifers, the State Government had 
geo tagged all existing agriculture bore wells for planning site specific groundwater recharge plans 
and better regulation of ground water extraction. 
 
The ground water availability increased during 2016-17 even though rainfall during 2016-17 was 
29 per cent less than the normal. However, in the absence of data on net ground water availability 
and rainfall deviation for the previous years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, Audit could not establish 
a relationship between the rainfall and the ground water quantity. the State Government stated 
(January 2019) that the reasons for change in ground water quantity were (i) implementation of 
Neeru-Chettu programme, i.e., water conservation activity and (ii) transfer of water from surplus to 
deficit basins. 
 
Delhi 
Installation of Rain Water Harvesting System 
DJB installed 288 Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) systems in their own structures since 2003 up to 
March 2019. These RWH systems have annual ground water recharge potential of about 122 million 
litres. In order to promote RWH, DJB offered 10 per cent  rebate in the water charges levied to 
consumers if RWH system was installed in their buildings having plot size of more than 100 sq. m. 
Further, DJB also provided rebate to the extent of 15 per cent in the water charges to the consumers 
who had installed both RWH system and recycling plant. However, in the buildings of plot size more 
than 500 sq. m, DJB levies penalty by increasing water charges to the extent of 50 per cent  if 
consumers did not install RWH system. A penalty of ` 29.64 crore was imposed on 11,271 consumers 
on plots/ properties of 500 sq. meters for non-installation of RWH system. Total rebate of 
` 14.24 crore had been given in monthly water bills to 1,007 consumers of DJB up to July 2018. 
Thus, the scheme appeared to be effective to an extent in encouraging consumers to install RWH 
systems. However, the larger number of consumers paying penalty for not installing RWH systems 
indicates that DJB needs to take sterner measures to impose implementation of RWH systems by its 
consumers. 
Utilization of treated effluent 
To discourage ground water utilisation by large institutions/public departments/private agencies, 
DJB issued public notices 74 whereby treated effluent could be taken by any institution/department 
by laying pipelines and making pumping arrangement from the Waste Water Treatment Plant to 
intended locations by the agencies/individuals at their own cost. DJB would facilitate the agencies to 
lay the conveyance systems at the cost of the beneficiaries. Operation and maintenance cost of the 
conveyance would also be borne by the beneficiaries at a nominal rate of ` four per 1,000 litres.  At 
present, about 89 million gallons of treated effluent75  was being utilized per day by various agencies 
such as Central Public Works Department (CPWD), DJB’s STPs, Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) etc. for irrigation, washing, horticulture and industrial usage. 
Thus, the initiative by DJB has been effective to an extent in utilisation of treated effluents instead 
of ground water. 
                                                           
73 http://coreuat.ap.gov.in/cmdashboard/UserInterface/G roundWater/GroundWaterReports.aspx 
74 DJB issued public notification on 18.01.2014, 25.04.2018, 12.05.2018 and 09.07.2019 
75 Out of a total of 490 million gallons of treated effluents generated per day (31 March 2019) 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
80 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Gujarat 
Construction of Khet Talavadi, Bori Bandh and check dams 
The State Government has undertaken schemes for water conservation such as Khet Talavadi (farm 
ponds), construction of Bori Bandh (small dams using sand bags) and construction of check dams. As 
on March 2019, 3,21,722 Khet Talavadi, 3,59,657 Bori Bandh and 1,84,933 check dams had been 
constructed in the State. These initiatives have resulted in increase of recharge of ground water 
about 700 Million Cubic Meter/year in 2017 which is about 50 per cent  increase in the Utilizable 
ground water recharge as compared to 2002. The Stage of Ground Water development has improved 
from 75 per cent to 64 per cent; Number of Over-exploited blocks have reduced from 30 in 2002 to 
25 in 2017; number of Critical blocks reduced from 12 to 5 and Semi Critical blocks reduced from 63 
to 11. The number of Safe blocks increased from 104 in 2002 to 194 in 2017. 
State wide drinking water supply grid 
To reduce dependency on ground water and provide safe drinking water, the State Government 
implemented State wide drinking water supply grid, based on Narmada Water and other surface 
sources. A total of 17,843 villages and 350 towns were planned to be covered under Narmada based 
Water Grid and other source based Water Grids. Of this, 13,107 villages and 207 towns were covered 
as of March 2019.  
Of the selected four districts viz. Mehsana, Banaskantha, Kutch and Dahod, all villages of Kutch and 
Mehsana districts; 1,112 villages (out of 1,234 villages) and 192 villages (out of 691 villages) of 
Banaskantha and Dahod districts were covered under Narmada Based and other surface sources 
water supply project. Grid based drinking water supply in 122 villages of Banaskantha district and 
499 villages of Dahod district were still to be covered. Thus, the targets of Kutch, Mehsana and 
Banskantha were largely achieved. 
Installation of Micro Irrigation system (MIS) was made mandatory in March 2012 for getting 
electricity connection for agriculture purpose for better utilisation of water resources. The GWRDC 
had implemented MIS on 808 tube wells (December 2018) for irrigation purpose. 
Sujalam Sufalam Jal Abhiyan 
The State Government has launched Sujalam Sufalam Jal Abhiyan in 2018 with an aim to spread 
water conservation activities with people’s participation. The objectives of the schemes are to 
enhance storage capacity of existing water bodies like reservoirs, check dams, village tanks, forest 
ponds, farm ponds; and de-silting and construction/repairing of existing check dams, rejuvenation 
of rivers, recharging Ground Water, etc. Activities such as deepening of ponds, desilting & repair of 
check dams and cleaning of canals and drains have been undertaken, which have resulted in increase 
of ground water level up to 5-7 feet due to increase in water storage.  
Telangana 
Telangana Government initiated (2014-15) “Mission Kakatiya” programme for revival and 
restoration of about 46,530 minor irrigation tanks in the state, in five phases. Impact assessment of 
the scheme was done in nine selected water basins categorised as over-exploited basins. It was seen 
that the ground water resources of these basins were increased to 11.4 TMC (as per GEC 2016-17) 
from 10 TMC in 2012-13. The stage of ground water development has also shown a decrease of eight 
per cent in the State. Further, after implementation of the scheme the overall categorisation of these 
‘Over-exploited’ basins were changed to ‘Critical’. 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 81 
Deficiencies observed in schemes of four selected States are discussed below. 
4.6.1 Bihar  
4.6.1.1 Incomplete schemes 
Work related to construction of eight Mini Water Supply Schemes in Arsenic affected 
villages of Begusarai was allotted to M/s Punj Lloyd Ltd. (April 2010) for a duration of 
12 months at a sanctioned cost of ` 1.74 crore. An amount of ` 1.41 crore was paid to 
the agency till March 2014. Work was, however, rescinded by the department in 
January 2015 due to non-completion. Revised technical sanction of ` 1.41 crore for 
the remaining work was approved (September 2017) but the tender process was not 
initiated by the department as of February 2019. Thus, expenditure incurred on the 
schemes did not serve any purpose and the population of Arsenic affected habitations 
remained deprived of safe drinking water. 
4.6.1.2  Scheme for irrigation by using Ground Water 
With an aim to   get more farmers to construct private tube wells by for irrigation 
purpose, the State launched subsidy based Nizi Shatabdi Nalkup Scheme in July 2015. 
As per one of the provisions of the guideline of this scheme, selection of blocks for 
construction of shallow/ deep tube well should be based on the data of ground water 
level provided by district administration and CGWB.  
It was seen that 348 tube wells had been constructed (up to December 2018) in six
76 
blocks that had been declared as semi-critical as per the Dynamic Ground Water 
Resource Report 2013. This indicates that ground water level data was not analysed 
before recommending the construction proposals of farmers.  
Minor Irrigation Division stated (February 2019) that after getting information 
regarding semi-critical and critical zone of some blocks, applications were not 
sanctioned for boring/drilling of tube wells in these blocks. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Division was to allow blocks for construction of 
shallow/ deep tube well duly considering the available data regarding ground water 
level. However, it did not follow the guidelines of the scheme while sanctioning 
subsidy. 
4.6.2 Delhi 
DJB submitted (August 2018) a Ground Water Recharge action plan to the National 
Green Tribunal (NGT). As per the proposed action plan, DJB would trap or stop sewage 
flow into 12 identified water bodies. It would either use the treated effluent from a 
nearby decentralised Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) plan for rejuvenation of water 
bodies or install bio-remediation
77 STP’s to clean waste water flowing into the water 
                                                           
76 Naokothi (15), Bhagwanpur (5), Gaya sadar (3), Nagarmausa (30), Rajgir (132) and Silao (163) 
77 The use of microorganism metabolism to remove pollutants. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
82 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
bodies. No completion date was stipulated in the action plan to complete the 
proposed project and the project was still at the initial stage. Inclusion of time bound 
milestones in the project plan may serve to implement the plan in a more effective 
manner after its approval.  
4.6.3 Telangana 
Although the “Mission Kakatiya” programme of the Telangana Government resulted 
in increase of ground water resources and decrease in stage of ground water 
extraction as discussed in the Box 4.2, it was observed that certain other schemes of 
the State Government were actually promoting ground water extraction. As per the 
Annual General Report of Ground Water Department for the year 2017-18, there were 
471 and 609 bore wells drilled under Scheduled Castes Special Development Fund 
(SCSDF) and Scheduled Tribes Special Development Fund respectively.  Further, it was 
noticed that although WALTA Guidelines limits the depth of bore wells to 120 m, depth 
of 128 bore wells ranged between 122 m to 150 m. It was also seen that 36 out of 471 
bore wells established under SCSDF Scheme were drilled in ‘notified’ villages. 
The State Government needs to ensure that the objectives of its various schemes are 
consistent with the overall goal of improving the ground water scenario in the State.  
The State Government stated (August 2019) that the drilling of bore wells beyond the 
permissible limit and in over-exploited areas was taken up after obtaining permission 
from the competent authority. The reply was not acceptable as the State Act/Rules or 
Guidelines did not provide for any exemptions to such provisions. 
4.6.4 Uttar Pradesh 
4.6.4.1 State Ground Water Conservation Mission 
Government of Uttar Pradesh launched ‘State Ground Water Conservation Mission’ in 
the State from August 2017 to conserve ground water focusing on the stressed blocks 
through convergence/integration of the schemes run by the different departments. 
Ground Water Department (GWD) was nominated as nodal agency and it prepared a 
consolidated Master Recharge Plan for 271 identified stressed blocks which included 
activities viz. construction/renovation of check-dams, ponds, recharge structures, etc. 
During 2018-19, allocation of ` 2,059.98 crore was made, against which expenditure 
of only ` 946.42 crore was incurred. Scrutiny revealed that there was shortfall in the 
activities ranging between 18 per cent (renovation of ponds) and 91 per cent  
(construction of check dams). Due to non-completion of various activities, the 
objective of conserving ground water in stressed blocks was not fully achieved.    
4.6.4.2  Shortfall in distribution of sprinklers for drip irrigation 
With the objective of reducing groundwater consumption through sprinkler irrigation 
in over-exploited/critical/semi-critical blocks of the State, the State Government 
started a programme ‘per drop more crop’ in 2017-18 for distribution of sprinkler sets 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 83 
for drip irrigation to the farmers of 48 out of 75 districts identified by the State on 
subsidised rates. Audit noticed that against the target (2018-19) of distribution of 
9,135 sprinkler sets costing ` 55.63 crore to the farmers, only 3,934 (43 per cent ) 
sprinkler sets amounting to ` 24.43 crore to the farmers of 47 districts could be 
distributed in 2018-19 due to lack of awareness and motivation amongst farmers for 
use of sprinklers. Thus, the State was falling behind its targets for implementing the 
use of sprinkle irrigation. 
4.6.4.3  Construction of tube wells in banned area for withdrawal of ground water 
On the basis of Ground water Estimation Report-2011, the State Government issued 
order (October 2014) prohibiting construction of new wells in 179 blocks declared 
over-exploited/critical by CGWB. However, test-check of records of Executive 
Engineer, Tube well Construction Division, Agra revealed that 28 tube wells were 
constructed in seven stressed blocks
78 after the date of issue of notification of the 
order. The State Government needs to take immediate action against the violation of 
its orders and also review the situation in the other blocks declared as over-
exploited/critical. 
4.7 Conclusion 
Implementation of Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme was not 
accomplished as envisaged. Against an approved outlay of ` 4,050.66 crore, 
expenditure of ` 1,109.73 crore only was incurred. CGWB identified an area of 
24.8 lakh sq. km. for aquifer mapping against which 13 lakh sq.km was achieved. 
Against this, Aquifer Mapping Reports for only 6.5 lakh sq. km. were finalised and 
ground water modelling for ~3 lakh sq. km. were completed as of September 2020. 
CGWB had not provided direct access to users by designing any web-based system for 
easy dissemination of the information relating to aquifer mapping. Many States did 
not take action on the recommendations made by CGWB in the aquifer mapping 
reports due to constraints such as map scale being too small to locate the areas, non-
receipt of funds from CGWB or Central Government to implement the reports in the 
field, etc. 
The objective of ground water management at grass root level through sensitisation 
of villagers about the ground water trends, optimal water usage and quality of ground 
water through Participatory Ground Water Management (PGWM) was also not 
achieved. With the dropping of this component, activities under PGWM that were 
earlier planned across the entire country will now be implemented through the Atal 
Bhujal Yojana (ABHY) scheme only in selected locations in seven states.  
                                                           
78 Shikohabad of District Firozabad, Chandaus, Khair of District Aligarh, Sasni and Mursan of Hathras, 
Nidhauli Kalan of Etah and Sahawar of Kasganj. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
84 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
The report of an Expert Group that conducted benchmarking of various activities of 
CGWB with international best practices was reviewed by a committee, which made 
several recommendations in the area of infrastructure and capacity building. CGWB 
did not take sufficient action on the recommendations of this committee. 
While some of the schemes implemented in the States were effective in improving the 
condition of ground water levels in the States, there were schemes in which the 
envisaged targets were not achieved and therefore, needed better control and 
implementation to ensure the desired results.  
4.8 Recommendations 
1. Given the targets of the Department and limited expe nditure incurred vis a vis 
budget outlay, the Department may review its strategy for utilising the 
allocated funds and completing the planned activities under the Ground Water 
Management and Regulation Scheme. The Department may also consider 
putting in place a business continuity plan for the scheme.  
2. The Department may develop a strategy for expeditiou s completion of aquifer 
mapping and modelling of the identified area within a reasonable time period.  
3. Central Ground Water Board may take suitable action to develop the web-
based system for easy dissemination of information regarding aquifer mapping 
on priority basis. 
4. The Department may ensure proper coordination betwee n Central Ground 
Water Board and State Governments for implementing the recommendations 
made in the National Aquifer Mapping project reports. 
5. Participatory Ground Water Management, being one of the key activities for 
sustainable ground water management, may be executed in a time-bound 
manner through Atal Bhujal Yojana and this scheme may be considered for 
scaling up to the entire country, thus involving all the States.  
6. Central Ground Water Board may take appropriate action to ensure that 
recommendations of the report of the Expert Group for augmenting its 
infrastructure, technological upgradation and for capacity building are 
implemented within a reasonable time frame. 
7. The Department may impress upon the State Government s to review the 
performance of their ground water schemes and take measures to ensure that 
the envisaged results are achieved by adopting an integrated approach for 
recharge/augmentation of ground water. 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 85 
Sustainable Development Goals 
and Ground Water  
 
 
5.1 Introduction  
Sustainable development has been defined as development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs. Sustainable development calls for concerted efforts towards building an 
inclusive, sustainable and resilient future for people and the planet. The 193 Member 
States of the United Nations (UN) officially adopted a new sustainable development 
agenda entitled, “Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development” at the Sustainable Development Summit held at UN Headquarters in 
New York in September 2015. This agenda contains 17 Goals and 169 targets.  The 
action for achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) started on 
1 January 2016 and these are expected to be achieved by 31 December 2030. Of these 
17 goals, one goal i.e. Goal 6- ‘Ensure availability and sustainable management of 
water and sanitation for all’ is related to clean water and sanitation. The targets under 
this goal are shown in Box 5.1. 
Box 5.1: Targets under Goal 6 
6.1 By 2030, achieve universal and equitable access to safe and 
affordable drinking water for all; 
6.2 By 2030, achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and 
hygiene for all and end open defecation, paying special attention 
to the needs of women and girls and those in vulnerable 
situations; 
6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by reducing pollution, eliminating 
dumping and minimising release of hazardous chemicals and 
materials, halving the proportion of untreated wastewater and substantially increasing 
recycling and safe reuse globally; 
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors and ensure sustainable 
withdrawals and supply of freshwater to address water scarcity and substantially reduce the 
number of people suffering from water scarcity; 
6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water resources management at all levels, including through 
trans-boundary co-operation as appropriate;  
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related ecosystems, including mountains, forests, 
wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes;  
6. a By 2030, expand international co-operation and capacity-building support to developing 
countries in water and sanitation related activities and programmes, including water 
harvesting, desalination, water efficiency, wastewater treatment, recycling and reuse 
technologies; and  
6. b Support and strengthen the participation of local communities in improving water and 
sanitation management. 
 
 Chapter  
5 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
86 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
5.2 Activities towards achievement of SDG-6 relating to Ground Water 
NITI Aayog has been entrusted with the role to co-ordinate ‘Transforming our world: 
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development’ (SDGs). NITI Aayog is required to 
periodically collect data on SDGs and to act proactively to fructify the goals and targets 
quantitatively as well as by maintaining high standards of quality. Ministry of Statistics 
and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) undertook a parallel exercise of interaction 
with the Ministries to evolve indicators reflecting the SDG goals and targets. To 
achieve these tasks, the draft mapping of the goals and targets vis a vis the Nodal and 
other Ministries has been carried out in consultation with MoSPI.  
For Goal 6, the targets identified by NITI Aayog for DoWR,RD&GR as related to ground 
water are as shown in Table 5.1.  
Table 5.1: SDG Targets relating to Ground Water 
Target Scheme Concerned 
Ministry/Department 
6.4 By 2030, substantially increase water-use efficiency 
across all sectors and ensure sustainable withdrawals and 
supply of fresh water to address water scarcity and 
substantially reduce the number of people suffering from 
water scarcity.  
Ground Water 
Management 
and Regulation  
 
DoWR,RD&GR 
6.6 By 2020, protect and restore water-related 
ecosystems, including mountains, forests, wetlands, 
rivers, aquifers and lakes. 
Ground Water 
Management 
and Regulation 
 
DoWR,RD&GR 
6.b Support and strengthen the participation of local 
communities in improving water and sanitation 
management.  
Not linked* DoWR,RD&GR 
*this target was not linked to a scheme by NITI Aayog 
In the background of the mapping of SDGs by NITI Aayog, Audit assessed the status 
against the relevant targets under SDG 6 from the records of CGWB and 
DoWR,RD&GR. The observations are as follows.  
5.2.1 Target 6.4 
For target 6.4, NITI Aayog has identified one indicator i.e. ‘percentage annual ground 
water withdrawal against net annual availability’. As per NITI Aayog, the national 
target value for this indicator for the year 2030 should be 70. Thus, this target will be 
achieved if percentage annual ground water withdrawal against net annual availability 
i.e. Stage of Extraction is 70 per cent or less. 
As already pointed out in Chapter 2 of this report, over the period from 2004 to 2017, 
there has been a decline in the percentage of assessment units categorised as safe 
(<70%), whereas the percentage of blocks categorised as semi-critical, critical and 
over-exploited (>70%) has steadily increased. The overall stage of extraction of ground 
water has increased from 58 per cent in 2004 to 63 per cent in 2017. Audit observed 
that while this value is 63 per cent at national level as per the last assessment of CGWB 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 87 
(March 2017), there are eight States/UTs where this value was higher than the target 
of 70 (Chart 5.1).  
Chart 5.1: States having high stage of extraction of Ground Water 
 
At the district level however, it was seen that out of 534 districts in 22 States/UTs, 202 
districts had stage of extraction more than 70 per cent (Chart 5.2). The stage of 
extraction in these 202 districts ranged from 71 per cent to 385 per cent. Details are 
shown in Annexure 5.1. 
Chart 5.2: Districts having high stage of extraction of Ground Water 
 
89
120
137
86
74
166
140
81
0
2
0
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Chandigarh Delhi Haryana Himachal
Pradesh
Puducherry Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu
Stage of extraction %
National target
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Andhra Pradesh
Bihar
Chhattisgarh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jharkhand
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Punjab
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
Telangana
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal
Chandigarh
Daman Diu
Lakshadweep
Puducherry
No. of districts having SoE more than 70 per cent Total no. of  districts

Report No. 9 of 2021   
88 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Department/CGWB needs to review the progress made under target 6.4 against the 
latest assessment of stage of extraction of ground water and plan interventions to 
address the issues at both Centre and State level. 
5.2.2  Target 6.6 
Target 6.6 is related to protecting and restoring water-related ecosystems, including 
mountains, forests, wetlands, rivers, aquifers and lakes. CGWB had, as a part of its 
‘Ground water Management and Regulation Scheme’ proposed a component of 
Aquifer Mapping and Preparation of Aquifer Management Plan during XII Plan 
(2012-17) which was to be further continued during 2017-20. Under the Aquifer 
Mapping, a combination of geologic, geophysical, hydro-geologic, hydrologic and water 
quality data are integrated to characterise the quantity, quality and distribution of 
ground water in aquifers. Audit observed that of the total identified area of 24.8 lakh 
sq. km. to be mapped under NAQUIM, 13 lakh sq. km. had been covered as of 
September 2020 but Aquifer Mapping Reports in respect of nearly 6.5 lakh sq. km. (i.e. 
50 per cent of the area covered) for 29 States/ UTs only had been finalised.   There were 
other shortcomings also which have already been discussed in Chapter 4 of this report.  
Considering the fact that CGWB has not been able to prepare the maps for all the 
aquifers, Centre and State governments, in the absence of these maps, may not be 
able to plan and implement strategies to protect these aquifers as per target. It is 
pertinent to mention that this target is to be achieved by the year 2020.  
5.2.3  Target 6 b 
Target 6 b is related to supporting and strengthening the local communities in water 
management. The National Water Policy (2012) also envisages that declining ground 
water levels in over-exploited areas need to be arrested by introducing improved 
technologies of water use, incentivising efficient water use and encouraging 
community based management of aquifers. Accordingly, DoWR,RDGR had, as a part 
of its ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme’ proposed a component of 
participatory management during XII Plan (2012-17). Participatory management was 
envisaged to enable the community and stake holders to monitor and manage the 
ground water as common pool resources themselves. This required a coordinated 
effort involving Government departments, research institutes, Panchayati Raj 
Institutions, civil society organisations and stakeholders at village level.  
However, as highlighted in Chapter 4 of this report, no action on this component was 
taken by the Department. Further, in the context of extension of this scheme for 
2017-20, this component, which had a pan-India scope was removed and included 
under another scheme Atal Bhujal Yojana, launched in December 2019, but limited to 
seven States only. Hence, there was delay in government initiative in respect of this 
target and as such, target 6 b remains unachieved in respect of ground water. 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 89 
5.3 Conclusion 
The activities of CGWB were not aligned with the targets and indicators set by NITI 
Aayog for achievement of SDGs. In respect of SDG-6.4 relating to stage of extraction 
of ground water, although the national level was within the target set, there were 
eight States/UTs where the levels of the target had been breached. CGWB had not 
achieved its own targets for mapping of aquifers and was thus, not in a position to 
enable the States/UTs to plan strategies for protection and restoration of aquifers as 
targeted under SDG-6.6. CGWB had not taken any action with regard to SDG-6b, as 
the component relating to this SDG viz. participatory management of ground water 
was removed from the Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme and 
included in another scheme that was launched only in December 2019. 
5.4 Recommendations 
1. The Department may review the mandate of CGWB and ta ke steps to 
strengthen the organisation to achieve the commitments made by the country 
in the 2030 agenda for Sustainable Development Goals.  
2. The Department may assess the progress made under ea ch of the identified 
targets and take definite action to ensure that India is able to achieve the 
relevant Sustainable Development Goals as committed.   
 
 
N
ew Delhi 
Dated: 08 October 2021 
(SANJAY KUMAR JHA) 
Director General of Audit 
Environment and Scientific Departments 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 18 October 2021 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 91 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
92 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 93 
Annexure 1.1 (Refer para 1.2.1) 
Regional Offices of Central Ground Water Board 
1. North West Himalayan Region, Jammu  
2. North Himalayan Region, Dharamshala  
3. North Western Region, Chandigarh  
4. Uttaranchal Region, Dehradun 
5. Northern Region, Lucknow 
6. Western Region, Jaipur 
7. Mid-Eastern Region, Patna  
8. Eastern Region, Kolkata 
9. North Eastern Region, Guwahati  
10. West Central Region, Ahmedabad  
11. Central Region, Nagpur  
12. North Central Region, Bhopal  
13. North Central, Raipur 
14. South Eastern Region, Bhubaneshwar 
15. Southern Region, Hyderabad 
16. South Western Region, Bangalore 
17. South Eastern Coastal Region, Chennai  
18. Kerala Region, Trivandrum 
 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
94 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 2.1 (Refer para 2.1) 
Categorization of Blocks/Mandals/Talukas in India (2017) 
  
Sl. 
No. 
  
State/ UTs 
 Total No. 
of 
Assessed 
Units 
Safe Semi- 
Critical 
Critical Over- 
Exploited 
Saline 
Nos. % Nos. % Nos % Nos. % Nos. % 
States 
1 Andhra Pradesh 670 501 75 60 9 24 4 45 7 40 6 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 11 11 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
3 Assam 28 28 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4 Bihar 534 432 81 72 13 18 3 12 2 0 0 
5 Chhattisgarh 146 122 84 22 15 2 1 0 0 0 0 
6 Delhi 34 3 9 7 21 2 6 22 65 0 0 
7 Goa 12 12 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 Gujarat 248 194 78 11 4 5 2 25 10 13 5 
9 Haryana 128 26 20 21 16 3 2 78 61 0 0 
10 Himachal Pradesh 8 3 38 1 13 0 0 4 50 0 0 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 22 22 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
12 Jharkhand 260 245 94 10 4 2 1 3 1 0 0 
13 Karnataka 176 97 55 26 15 8 5 45 26 0 0 
14 Kerala 152 129 78 30 20 2 1 1 1 0 0 
15 Madhya Pradesh 313 240 77 44 14 7 2 22 7 0 0 
16 Maharashtra 353 271 77 61 17 9 3 11 3 1 0 
17 Manipur 9 9 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
18 Meghalaya 11 11 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Mizoram 26 26 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20 Nagaland 11 11 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 Odisha 314 303 96 5 2 0 0 0 0 6 2 
22 Punjab 138 22 16 5 4 2 1 109 79 0 0 
23 Rajasthan 295 45 15 29 10 33 11 185 63 3 1 
24 Sikkim 4 4 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
25 Tamil Nadu 1,166 427 37 163 14 79 7 462 40 35 3 
26 Telangana 584 278 48 169 29 67 11  70 12 0 0 
27 Tripura 59 59 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
28 Uttar Pradesh* 830 540 65 151 18 48 6 91 11 0 0 
29 Uttarakhand 18 13 72 5 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 West Bengal ** 268 191 71 76 28 1 0 0 0 0 0 
 Total  6,828 4,265 62 968 14 312 5 1,158 17 98 1 
Union Territories 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
36 35 97 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 
2 Chandigarh            
3 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
1 0 0 1 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4 Daman & Diu 2 1 50 0 0 1 50  0 0 0 0 
5 Lakshadweep 9 6 67 3 33 0 0 0 0 0 0 
6 Puducherry 4 2 50 0 0 0 0 1 25 1 25 
 Total UTs 53 45 85 4 8 1 2 1 2 2 4 
 Grand Total 6,881 4,310 63 972 14 313 5 1,186 17 100  1 
Blocks- Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, M.P., Manipur, Mizoram, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Tripura, UP; Taluks -Karnataka, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra; Mandal - Andhra Pradesh, Telangana; Districts (Valley) 
- Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland; Islands - 
Lakshadweep, Andaman & Nicobar Islands; Firka-Tamil Nadu; Region - Puducherry 
UT - Chandigarh, Dadar& Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu; Tehsil-NCT Delhi 
*Uttar Pradesh: There are total 820 blocks and ten cities. 
** The Ground Water Resources Assessment as on 2013 has been considered for the State of West Bengal. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 95 
Annexure 2.2 (Refer para 2.2) 
State-Wise Ground Water Resources of India, 2017 (in billion cubic meter) 
Sl. 
No. 
States / UTs Ground Water Recharge Total 
Natural 
Discharge  
Annual 
Extractable 
Ground 
Water 
Resources 
 Current Annual Ground Water 
Extraction 
Annual 
GW 
Allocation 
for the 
Domestic 
use as on 
2025 
Net 
Ground 
Water 
Availabili
ty for 
future 
use 
Stage of 
Ground 
Water 
Extraction 
(%) 
Monsoon Season Non-monsoon Season Total Annual 
Ground 
Water 
Recharge 
Irrigation industrial Domestic Total 
Recharge 
from 
rainfall 
Recharge 
from 
other 
sources 
Recharge 
from 
rainfall 
Recharge 
from 
other 
sources 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
 States               
1 Andhra Pradesh 9.96 5.62. 1.21 4.42 21.22 1.07 20.15 7.85 0.14 0.90 8.90 1.48 12.31 44.15 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1.89 0.18 0.95 0.01 3.02 0.36 2.67 0 0 0.01 0.01 0.03 2.64 0.28 
3 Assam 20.22 0.43 7.28 0.74 28.67 4.42 214.26 1.97 0.06 0.69 2.73 0.79 21.43 11.25 
4 Bihar 19.83 3.95 3.14 4.50 31.41 2.43 28.99 10.78 0.66 1.83 13.26 1.83 15.78 45.76 
5 Chhattisgarh 7.82 1.86 0.76 1.64 11.57 1 10.57 3.98 0.05 0.67 4.70 0.79 5.76 44.43 
6 Delhi 0.13 0.06 0.03 0.11 0.32 0.02 0.30 0.09 0.02 0.24 0.36 0.29 0.02 119.61 
7 Goa 0.19 0.03 0.01 0.05 0.27 0.11 0.16 0.02 * 0.03 0.05 0.04 0.07 33.50 
8 Gujarat 15.95 3.40 0 3.02 22.37 1.12 21.25 12.84 0.11 0.63 13.58 0.90 7.98 63.89 
9 Haryana 3.56 2.55 1.03 3.00 10.15 1.01 9.13 11.53 0.34 0.63 12.50 0.72 0.87 136.91 
10 Himachal Pradesh 0.34 0.02 0.11 0.04 0.51 0.05 0.46 0.20 0 0.19 0.39 0.34 0.16 86.37 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 1.00 0.50 0.88 0.51 2.89 0.29 2.60 0.20 0.07 0.50 0.76 0.50 1.84 29.47 
12 Jharkhand 5.25 0.13 0.41 0.42 6.21 0.52 5.69 0.80 0.22 0.56 1.58 0.56 4.13 27.73 
13 Karnataka 6.59 4.36 2.67 3.22 16.84 2.05 14.79 9.39 * 0.95 10.34 1.14 5.41 69.87 
14 Kerala 3.91 0.04 0.68 1.13 5.77 0.56 5.21 1.22 0.01 1.44 2.67 1.57 2.41 51.27 
15 Madhya Pradesh 27.10 1.51 0.82 6.99 36.42 1.95 34.47 17.43 0.22 1.24 18.88 1.72 15.84 54.76 
16 Maharashtra 20.59 2.29 0.53 8.23 31.64 1.74 29.90 15.10 0.003 1.22 16.33 2.28 12.91 54.62 
17 Manipur 0.23 0.01 0.17 0.02 0.43 0.04 0.39 0 0 0 0.01 0.014 0.34 1.44 
18 Meghalaya 1.37 0.01 0.43 0.02 1.83 0.19 1.64 0.03 0 0.01 0.04 0.02 1.59 2.28 
19 Mizoram 0.16 0 0.05 0 0.21 0.02 0.19 0 0 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.18 3.82 
20 Nagaland 1.65 0.03 0.52 0 2.20 0.22 1.98 0 0 0.02 0.02 0.02 1.96 0.99 
21 Odisha 10.53 2.34 1.50 2.37 16.74 1.17 15.57 5.28 0.14 1.15 6.57 1.30 8.85 42.18 
22 Punjab 5.54 11.83 1.31 5.25 23.93 2.345 21.58 34.56 0.20 1.01 35.78 1.41 1.09 165.77 
23 Rajasthan 9.74 0.78 0.24 2.44 13.21 1.22 11.99 14.85 0 1.92 16.77 2.67 0.88 139.88 
24 Sikkim 5.20 0 0.43 0 5.63 4.11 1.52 0 0 0 0 0.01 1.51 0.06 
25 Tamil Nadu 6.67 9.41 1.89 2.26 20.22 2.02 18.20 13.06 0 1.67 14.73 1.85 5.66 80.94 
26 Telangana 7.56 1.42 1.88 2.76 13.62 1.25 12.37 7.09 * 1.00 8.09 1.39 4.26 65.45 
27 Tripura 0.80 0.06 0.40 0.26 1.53 1.29 1.24 0.02 0 0.08 0.10 0.11 1.11 7.88 
28 Uttar Pradesh 37.73 11.67 1.59 18.93 69.92 4.60 65.32 40.89 * 4.95 45.84 5.96 20.36 70.18 
29 Uttarakhand 1.15 0.93 0.09 0.87 3.04   0.15 2.89 1.30 0.13 0.22 1.64 0.22 1.25 56.83 
30 West Bengal** 18.71 1.51 5.26 3.85 29.33 2.77 26.56 10.84 * 1.00 11.84 1.53 14.19 44.60 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
96 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
States / UTs Ground Water Recharge Total 
Natural 
Discharge  
Annual 
Extractable 
Ground 
Water 
Resources 
 Current Annual Ground Water 
Extraction 
Annual 
GW 
Allocation 
for the 
Domestic 
use as on 
2025 
Net 
Ground 
Water 
Availabili
ty for 
future 
use 
Stage of 
Ground 
Water 
Extraction 
(%) 
Monsoon Season Non-monsoon Season Total Annual 
Ground 
Water 
Recharge 
Irrigation industrial Domestic Total 
Recharge 
from 
rainfall 
Recharge 
from 
other 
sources 
Recharge 
from 
rainfall 
Recharge 
from 
other 
sources 
 
 Total States 251.36 66.41 36.30 77.06 431.13 39.09 392.04 221.33 2.38 24.77 248.47 31.52 172.82 63.38 
 Union Territories               
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
0.35 0 0.02 0 0.37 0.04 0.33 0 0 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.32 2.74 
2 Chandigarh 0.02 0.01 0 0.01 0.04 0 0.04 0 * 0.03 0.03 0.03 0 89.00 
3 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
0.06 0 0 0.01 0.07 0 0.07 0.01 * 0.01 0.02 0.01 0.04 31.34 
4 Daman & Diu 0.02 0 0 0 0.02 0 0.02 0.01 0 0 0.01 0 0 61.40 
5 Lakshdweep 0.01 0 0 0 0.01 0.01 0.004 0 0 0.002 0.002 0 0 65.99 
6 Puducherry 0.09 0.07 0.02 0.05 0.23 0.02 0.20 0.11 * 0.04 0.15 0.04 0.05 74.33 
 Total UTs 0.54 0.08 0.05 0.07 0.73 0.08 0.66 0.13 0 0.10 0.23 0.10 0.43 34.51 
 Grand Total 251.90 66.49 36.34 77.13 431.86 39.16 392.70 221.46 2.38 24.87 248.69 31.62 173.25 63.33 
Note: *Industrial and domestic draft has not been estimated separately in Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Chandigarh, Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Puducherry **The Ground Water Resources Assessment as on 2013 has been considered for the state of West Bengal. 
 States/UTs having higher stage of extraction than the national average of 63%.            [

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 97 
 
Annexure 2.3 (Refer para 2.4) 
Observations wells of CGWB 
Sl. No. Name of the State/UTs No of Monitoring Stations for water 
quality                                                        
(As on March 2019) 
 STATES  
1 Andhra Pradesh 635 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 29 
3 Assam 389 
4 Bihar 729 
5 Chhattisgarh 935 
6 Delhi 64 
7 Goa 93 
8 Gujarat  620 
9 Haryana 460 
10 Himachal Pradesh 114 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 266 
12 Jharkhand 472 
13 Karnataka 1466 
14 Kerala 364 
15 Madhya Pradesh 1,210 
16 Maharashtra 1,719 
17 Manipur 0 
18 Meghalaya 52 
19 Nagaland 25 
20 Orissa 1,278 
21 Punjab 312 
22 Rajasthan 703 
23 Tamil Nadu 816 
24 Telangana 469 
25 Tripura 90 
26 Uttar Pradesh 869 
27 Uttarakhand 203 
28 West Bengal 1,301 
  UTs   
1 Andaman & Nicobar 112 
2 Chandigarh 16 
3 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 18 
4 Daman & Diu 14 
5 Puducherry 8 
 TOTAL 15,851 
 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
98 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 2.4 (Refer para 2.5.1) 
State-wise Depth to water Level and Distribution of Percentage of Wells for the Period of 
November 2018 
Sl. No. Name of 
State 
No. of 
wells 
analysed 
Depth to 
Water Level 
(mbgl) 
Number & Percentage of Wells Showing Depth to Water Level (mbgl) in the Range of  
0-2 2-5 5-10 10-20 20-40 > 40 
Min Max No % No % No % No % No % No % 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
102 0.10 6.49 91 89.22 10 9.80 1 1.0 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
730 0.00 44.27 219 30.00 256 35.07 172 23.6 77 10.55 5 0.68 1 0.14 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
10 1.37 7.89 1 10.00 5 50.00 4 40.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
4 Assam 177 0.16 18.20 64 36.16 92 51.98 17 9.60 4 2.26 0 0.00 0 0.00 
5 Bihar 654 0.64 13.50 77 11.77 375 57.34 183 27.98 19 2.91 0 0.00 0 0.00 
6 Chandigarh 8 2.66 32.82 0 0.00 3 37.50 0 0.00 2 25.00 3 37.50 0 0.00 
7 Chhattisgarh 599 1.12 24.10 19 3.17 365 60.93 191 31.89 20 3.34 4 0.67 0 0.00 
8 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
17 1.46 10.78 2 11.76 9 52.94 5 29.41 1 5.88 0 0.00 0 0.00 
9 Daman & 
Diu 
11 0.55 6.16 5 45.45 4 36.36 2 18.18 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
10 Delhi 83 1.02 65.00 2 2.41 17 20.48 20 24.10 22 26.51 14 16.87 8 9.64 
11 Goa 30 0.78 13.51 5 16.67 14 46.67 8 26.67 3 10.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
12 Gujarat  755 0.00 60.41 115 15.23 177 23.44 242 32.05 157 20.79 58 7.68 6 0.79 
13 Haryana 315 0.04 102.00 37 11.75 52 16.51 70 22.22 89 28.25 51 16.19 16 5.08 
14 Himachal 
Pradesh 
103 0.31 31.58 30 29.13 36 34.95 19 18.45 14 13.59 4 3.88 0 0.00 
15 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
187 0.27 25.95 38 20.32 103 55.08 35 18.72 8 4.28 3 1.60 0 0.00 
16 Jharkhand 281 0.64 15.90 21 7.47 145 51.60 107 38.08 8 2.85 0 0.00 0 0.00 
17 Karnataka 1,380 0.05 30.70 220 15.94 482 34.93 499 36.16 165 11.96 14 1.01 0 0.00 
18 Kerala 1,462 0.10 33.05 263 17.99 445 30.44 602 41.18 141 9.64 11 0.75 0 0.00 
19 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1,331 0.00 45.62 74 5.56 395 29.68 571 42.90 256 19.23 34 2.55 1 0.08 
20 Maharashtra 1,659 0.01 50.80 180 10.85 571 34.42 586 35.32 282 17.00 39 2.35 1 0.06 
21 Meghalaya 23 0.12 4.73 10 43.48 13 56.52 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
22 Nagaland 3 1.55 3.88 1 33.33 2 66.67 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
23 Odisha 1,290 0.00 13.69 420 32.56 698 54.11 165 12.79 7 0.54 0 0.00 0 0.00 
24 Puducherry 4 1.31 2.85 3 75.00 1 25.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
25 Punjab 261 0.55 43.31 16 6.13 47 18.01 51 19.54 64 24.52 80 30.65 3 1.15 
26 Rajasthan 1,034 0.20 130.20 43 4.16 150 14.51 228 22.05 217 20.99 188 18.18 208 20.12 
27 Tamil Nadu 562 0.00 67.40 96 17.08 158 28.11 189 33.63 87 15.48 22 3.91 10 1.78 
28 Telangana 567 0.00 99.70 60 10.58 175 30.86 170 29.98 113 19.93 41 7.23 8 1.41 
29 Tripura 21 1.17 6.03 8 38.10 12 57.14 1 4.76 0 0.00 0 0.00 0 0.00 
30 Uttar 
Pradesh 
737 0.17 40.10 95 12.89 289 39.21 203 27.54 125 16.96 24 3.26 1 0.14 
31 Uttarakhand 47 0.82 58.43 7 14.89 17 36.17 12 25.53 5 10.64 4 8.51 2 4.26 
32 West Bengal 722 0.22 32.01 76 10.53 363 50.28 167 23.13 97 13.43 19 2.63 0 0.00 
Total 15165   2298 15.15 5481 36.14 4520 29.81 1983 13.08 618 4.08 265 1.7 
Range  0.00 130.20             
 
 
 
 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 99 
Annexure 2.5 (Refer para 2.5.1) 
State-wise Decadal Water Level Fluctuation with Mean - November (2008 to 2017] and November 2018 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
wells 
analysed 
Range in m Rise Fall Rise Fall Wells 
showing 
no 
change 
Rise Fall 0-2 m 2-4 m >4 m 0-2 m 2-4 m >4 m    
Min Max Min Max No % No % No % No % No % No % No % No % No % 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
730 0.01 9.93 0.01 18.37 173 23.7 14 1.9 8 1.1 352 48.2 110 15.1 73 10.0 195 27 535 73 0 0 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
10 0.26 0.26 0.1 2.74 1 10.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 8 80.0 1 10.0 0 0.0 1 10 9 90 0 0 
3 Assam 176 0.05 3.7 0.01 4.29 80 45.5 5 2.8 0 0.0 81 46.0 7 4.0 2 1.1 85 48 90 51 1 1 
4 Bihar 638 0.01 6.68 0 8.4 207 32.4 23 3.6 1 0.2 312 48.9 72 11.3 23 3.6 231 36 407 64 0 0 
5 Chandigarh 8 0.03 0.1 0.63 17.79 3 37.5 0 0.0 0 0.0 3 37.5 0 0.0 2 25.0 3 38 5 63 0 0 
6 Chhattisgarh 513 0.02 9.68 0.02 17.7 86 16.8 21 4.1 9 1.8 289 56.3 92 17.9 16 3.1 116 23 397 77 0 0 
7 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
17 0.34 2.73 0.1 5.26 2 11.8 1 5.9 0 0.0 11 64.7 1 5.9 2 11.8 3 18 14 82 0 0 
8 Daman & Diu 11 0.08 2.99     9 81.8 2 18.2 0 0.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 11 100 0 0 0 0 
9 Delhi 83 0.05 11.64 0 13.16 19 22.9 1 1.2 3 3.6 23 27.7 20 24.1 17 20.5 23 28 60 72 0 0 
10 Goa 30 0.24 6.49 0.06 7.64 7 23.3 0 0.0 2 6.7 15 50.0 4 13.3 2 6.7 9 30 21 70 0 0 
11 Gujarat 752 0.01 7.66 0.02 16.09 191 25.4 64 8.5 34 4.5 232 30.9 128 17.0 103 13.7 289 38 463 62 0 0 
12 Haryana 305 0.02 15.05 0.01 16.03 90 29.5 12 3.9 6 2.0 109 35.7 51 16.7 37 12.1 108 35 197 65 0 0 
13 Himachal 
Pradesh 
110 0.05 10.49 0.06 13.27 74 67.3 6 5.5 10 9.1 18 16.4 1 0.9 1 0.9 90 82 20 18 0 0 
14 Jammu & 
Kashmir 
155 0.02 1.92 0.01 2.93 49 31.6 0 0.0 0 0.0 100 64.5 6 3.9 0 0.0 49 32 106 68 0 0 
15 Jharkhand 276 0.01 3.28 0.01 4.7 110 39.9 3 1.1 1 0.4 128 46.4 29 10.5 4 1.4 114 41 161 58 1 0 
16 Karnataka 1,373 0.01 8.33 0.01 19.23 413 30.1 68 5.0 32 2.3 581 42.3 163 11.9 114 8.3 513 37 858 62 2 0 
17 Kerala 1,452 0.01 11.75 0.01 7.15 527 36.3 42 2.9 11 0.8 831 57.2 37 2.5 3 0.2 580 40 871 60 1 0 
18 Madhya 
Pradesh 
1,329 0.01 14.17 0.01 17.52 298 22.4 47 3.5 34 2.6 588 44.2 221 16.6 137 10.3 379 29 946 71 4 0 
19 Maharashtra 1,633 0.01 15.94 0.01 19.43 330 20.2 49 3.0 21 1.3 763 46.7 263 16.1 207 12.7 400 24 1233 76 0 0 
20 Meghalaya 23 0.03 4.26 0.03 1.66 11 47.8 0 0.0 1 4.3 11 47.8 0 0.0 0 0.0 12 52 11 48 0 0 
21 Odisha 1,284 0.01 5.3 0 8.72 555 43.2 42 3.3 3 0.2 611 47.6 61 4.8 11 0.9 600 47 683 53 1 0 
22 Puducherry 4 0.27 0.66 0.19 0.19 3 75.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 1 25.0 0 0.0 0 0.0 3 75 1 25 0 0 
23 Punjab 249 0.04 4.43 0.04 11.69 56 22.5 9 3.6 1 0.4 94 37.8 37 14.9 52 20.9 66 27 183 73 0 0 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
100 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl.  
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
wells 
analysed 
Range in m Rise Fall Rise Fall Wells 
showing 
no 
change 
Rise Fall 0-2 m 2-4 m >4 m 0-2 m 2-4 m >4 m    
Min Max Min Max No % No % No % No % No % No % No % No % No % 
24 Rajasthan 618 0.02 17.05 0 17.9 155 25.1 48 7.8 43 7.0 178 28.8 92 14.9 102 16.5 246 40 372 60 0 0 
25 Tamil Nadu 550 0.01 14.35 0.03 16.94 166 30.2 52 9.5 37 6.7 161 29.3 77 14.0 57 10.4 255 46 295 54 0 0 
26 Telangana 560 0.01 13.6 0.01 17.93 165 29.5 29 5.2 11 2.0 162 28.9 86 15.4 107 19.1 205 37 355 63 0 0 
27 Tripura 21 0.01 0.82 0.1 5.42 14 66.7 0 0.0 0 0.0 6 28.6 0 0.0 1 4.8 14 67 7 33 0 0 
28 Uttar 
Pradesh 
734 0.01 13.75 0.02 10.89 251 34.2 28 3.8 10 1.4 347 47.3 75 10.2 23 3.1 289 39 445 61 0 0 
29 Uttarakhand 41 0.04 8.64 0.03 8.08 23 56.1 2 4.9 1 2.4 10 24.4 1 2.4 4 9.8 26 63 15 37 0 0 
30 West Bengal 702 0.01 8.72 0 14.27 165 23.5 27 3.8 8 1.1 351 50.0 81 11.5 68 9.7 200 28 500 71 2 0 
Total 14,387         4,233 29.4 595 4.1 287 2.0 6376 44.3 1,716 11.9 1,168 8.1 5,115 36 9,260 64.4 12 0 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 101 
Annexure 2.6 (Refer para 2.9) 
Details of posts for which amended RRs not finalized 
Sl. No. Post Date of sending the draft RRs to 
Ministry 
1. Chairman 06.04.2016 
2. Member 19.04.2017 
3. Regional Director (Scientific) 24.04.2017 
4. Group A (Scientific) 04.01.2017 
5. Artist 04.09.2017 
6. Assistant Chemist 06.04.2016 
7. Office Surveyor 06.04.2016 
8. Sr. Technical Assistant (Hydrometeorologist) 30.06.2017 
9. Surveyor 22.09.2017 
10. Draftsman 20.09.2017 
11. Photographer Grade II 21.09.2017 
12. Library and Information Officer 14.09.2016 
13. Sr. Private Secretary 24.11.2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
102 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 3.1 (Refer para 3.1) 
 
Mechanism for grant of NOC/ permission for Ground Water Extraction in 13 Self-Regulated 
States/UTs 
 
Andhra Pradesh 
In the year 2002, the Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) had enacted the Andhra Pradesh Water Land & 
Trees Act (the Act). As required under the Act, GoAP constituted (2002) the AP Water Land & Trees Authority 
(APWALTA). As per the Act, the functions of the Authority, inter alia, were to (a) promote water conservation, 
(b) regulate exploitation of ground and surface water, and (c) advise Government on the Legislative and 
administrative measure to be taken for conservation of natural resources, etc.  
The Ground Water & Water Audit (GW&WAD) Department acts as the technical agency in the matters relating 
to assessment, monitoring and management of Ground Water in the State and also grants permissions for drawl 
of Ground Water for industrial units. These permissions were termed as feasibility reports. However, APWALTA 
stated (October 2018) that it is unaware of the feasibility reports issued by GW&WAD.  
Chandigarh 
Chandigarh Administration notified “the Chandigarh Water Supply Bye-laws, 2011”. The Act ibid was amended 
in May 2016. There was no separate dedicated Department/ Ground Water Management Cell under Chandigarh 
Administration/Municipal Corporation. In U.T Chandigarh three government agencies issued permission 
letter/NOC in respect of withdrawal of Ground Water.  Municipal Corporation Chandigarh issued permission 
letters in respect of Urban areas, Chandigarh Engineering Department (Chandigarh Administration) issued 
permission letter in respect of Rural areas and Land Acquisition Officer issued permission letter in respect of 
irrigation purposes. 
Delhi 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), Department of Environment has notified (July 2010) 
all the districts in National Capital Territory of Delhi as notified area for Ground Water Regulation and 
Management vide Notification issued under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act 1986. 
Directions in said notification provided that if any person, group, authority, association or institution, intended 
to draw Ground Water through bore well or tube well (both new as well as existing and drawing Ground Water 
without permission of CGWA) for domestic, commercial, agricultural and/ or industrial uses, he should take 
prior permission from ‘Competent Authority’ (i.e. Delhi Jal Board or New Delhi Municipal Corporation as the 
case may be). Such permission should be obtained through submission of an application to Zonal offices of the 
Competent Authority in the form specified by the Competent Authority. The notification also constituted 
Advisory Committee in all districts of Delhi under chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioner (Revenue) of 
concerned district with the representatives of Delhi Jal Board, Irrigation and Flood Control Department, 
Environment Department, CGWA and a prominent NGO in the area for Ground Water regulation. The cases for 
permission should be recommended by the Executive Engineer of the Competent Authority to the Advisory 
Committee based on ground facts. The cases recommended by the Advisory Committee should be forwarded 
to the Competent Authority for grant of permission. 
Goa 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of the Goa Ground Water Regulation Act, 2002, the 
Government constituted (March 2003) ‘Goa Ground Water Cell’ to implement and to carry out the purpose of 
the Act. Goa Ground Water Cell functions under the aegis of Water Resource Department (WRD). The Chief 
Engineer (WRD) is the Ex-Officio Chairman of the Goa Ground Water Cell. The work relating to regulation of the 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 103 
Ground Water in the State is entrusted to Executive Engineers of two Divisions of the WRD, who are designated 
as Ground Water Officer (GWO), for North and South Goa and are authorised to issue No Objection Certificate 
(NOCs) to the Ground Water Consumers. 
The application for permission/ registration is received by the respective sub division offices under the 
jurisdiction of Ex Eng. WRD (Ground Water Officer) in the two districts of Goa. The application is scrutinized and 
site inspection carried out by the Asst Engineer of the respective Sub division. The detailed report is submitted 
to the respective Ground Water Officers (North & South.  Reports received from Sub Division office are split up 
as per category and registration of existing open/bore well for domestic/ agriculture well are done at division 
level. Registration of tankers is issued at division level, registration of existing open/bore well for commercial 
purpose ie Industry, Infrastructure, Hotel and Commercial is forwarded to Goa Ground Water Cell board for 
approval. NOC for sinking open well for domestic/agriculture is issued at division level and for commercial 
purpose to GGWC board for approval. 
Himachal Pradesh 
a)The applicant seeking NOC has to apply in prescribed form along with required fees and other documents like 
revenue papers, site plan, memorandum of company, lease deed, HP Pollution Control Board permission, 
Industries NOC etc (b) site verification/other recommendation of the Groundwater Organization Una (c) 
HPSGWA  issue instructions to concerned Executive Engineers and Gram Panchayats/Municipal Committees 
whose jurisdiction the area of NOC fall, for issuing public notice for finding if there is any objection n the local 
people with regard to grant of permit.(d) the Sub Committee of HPSGWA in its meeting discuss all the aspects 
and recommendations made regarding issuing of NOC. 
Jammu & Kashmir 
The application for grant of Registration Certificate (RC) for installation of bore/tube well for extraction of 
Ground Water is received in the office of the Chief Engineer PHE Department. The Chief Engineer forwards it to 
the Superintending Engineer (SE), Hydraulic & Mechanical Circle with direction to submit a detailed report along 
with comments and recommendations. The SE Hydraulic and SE Mechanical on receipt of the report and 
recommendations from the respective Civil and Mechanical Division re-submit the case along with its report and 
recommendations to the Chief Engineer PHE Department. On receipt of the report and recommendations the 
Chief Engineer either rejects or grants RC to the user for extraction and exploitation of Ground Water subject to 
certain condition for which compliance is to be ensured by the Divisional Head (Executive Engineer) of the 
respective division. Further, the raising of demand and recovery of the water usage charges from the licensee is 
also among the responsibilities of the Executive Engineer. 
Karnataka 
The Karnataka Ground Water Authority receives and evaluates the project proposals for Ground Water 
clearances. On receipt of the proposals for NOC to extract and use of groundwater, are referred to the District 
Groundwater Committee. The proposal along with the recommendations of the District Ground Water 
Committee will be placed before the State Level Technical Committee for further decisions regarding issuance 
of NOC by KGA.                               
Kerala 
The State enacted Kerala Ground Water (Control and Regulation) Act, 2002 and relevant Rules. As per Section 7 
of the Act, SGWA is the authority to issue permit/NOC. In Notified areas
79, conditional permit is being issued for 
domestic purpose limited to 1000L/Day by District Level Evaluation Committee (DLEC). Though Infrastructure 
projects, Industrial projects etc., also come under the purview of SGWA, the proposals for packaged drinking 
water projects alone were received till March 2018 and recommended to SGWA for granting NOC. 
                                                           
79  Kerala SGWA has notified five blocks.  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
104 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Lakshadweep 
The Lakshadweep Ground Water (Development and Control) Regulation, 2001 was notified in August 2001 with 
the intention of developing and controlling extraction of Ground Water in UT of Lakshadweep. Sub section (1) 
of Section 3 of the Regulation stipulates that, a State level Ground Water Authority has to be constituted for 
Lakshadweep islands, which will advise the UTL Administration for notifying any island for the Ground Water 
Regulation and Management and issue permit for extraction of Ground Water. However, no such Ground Water 
Authority has been constituted in UT of Lakshadweep till date (August 2018) and therefore no island/area has 
been notified in Lakshadweep. No mechanism has been put in place for grant of NoC in Lakshadweep, as no 
authority was constituted and no guidelines were framed by LPWD. No application for NoC has been received 
so far. 
Puducherry 
Drinking water for individual households is supplied through public water supply system maintained by PWD.  
As per Government order issued in February 2005, PGWA issues permits to PWD for Ground Water extraction 
for supply of drinking water to individual households in UTP on priority basis.  As per section 8 of the Act, 2002, 
all wells sunk in the UTP have to be registered including the non-notified areas and renewed every two years. 
Any user of Ground Water desiring to sink a well for any purpose and for registration of well sunk and for 
renewal, shall apply to the PGWA in a specified form.  PGWA will make such inspection and inquiries to satisfy 
that there is no objection to grant such permit to sink a well.  Permit is then issued by PGWA to the applicant 
with such condition as required. Applications seeking NOC for industrial and non-agricultural purposes received 
in SGWU&SC are placed before the Regional Committee constituted (July 2010) by GoP with Director of 
Agriculture as Chairman, Hydrogeologist, SGWU&SC, Puducherry as Member Secretary and five official members 
for evaluation.  The recommendations of the Committee are forwarded to PGWA for issuance of NOC to the 
applicants. 
Tamil Nadu 
Processing of applications by the E.E, PWD-Ground Water Division and should send the field investigation report 
to S.E of concerned circle. Scrutiny of Report by the S.E and the report with the remarks to be forwarded to CE's 
Office. Decision on Field Report at C.E office and Post Approval Action Plan.   
Telangana 
WALTA Authority (Authority constituted under State Water, Land and Tree Act, 2002) in the State is the 
empowered for granting NOC/Permission in respect of drinking and agricultural bore wells. At Mandal level, 
MROs and at District level, District Collectors are WALTA authority. The NOC/Permission for drilling agriculture 
bore well is granted by concerned MRO (Mandal Authority), based on the feasibility given by SGWD. In respect 
of Industries, the power to grant NOC has been delegated to Ground Water Department (2005). 
West Bengal 
As per the West Bengal Ground Water Resource (Management Control & Regulation) Act 2005, any user desiring 
to sink a well/tube well for any purpose, excepting tube well fitted with hand-pump or a well from which 
extraction or use made without the help of any mechanical or electrical device, have to make an application for 
permit to extract Ground Water, to the concerned State/District/Corporation level authority, as the case may be.  
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 105 
 
Annexure 3.2 (Refer para 3.4) 
State-wise details of NOC pending and renewal 
Information relating to Pendency  in grant of NOC as on 31.03.2019 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Number of Pending Applications 
    Delay up to 
31/03/2019 
Less 
than 30 
days 
31 to 
90 
days 
91 to 
181 
days 
181 to 
365 
days 
More 
than 1 to 
3 year 
More 
than 3 
years 
1 Andaman and 
Nicobar islands 
13 0 0 13 0 0 0 
2 Assam 12 0 0 1 9 2 0 
3 Bihar 89 0 0 9 33 47 0 
4 Chhattisgarh 863 0 0 259 568 36 0 
5 Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
27 0 0 8 13 6 0 
6 Daman and Diu 11 0 0 0 5 6 0 
7 Gujarat 1,978 0 0 247 598 1,133 0 
8 Haryana 435 0 0 98 160 177 0 
9 Jharkhand 80 0 0 13 49 18 0 
10 Madhya 
Pradesh 
248 0 0 39 127 82 0 
11 Maharashtra 390 0 0 62 171 157 0 
12 Manipur 3 0 0 1 2 0 0 
13 Odisha 161 0 0 68 61 32 0 
14 Punjab 1,144 0 0 176 328 640 0 
15 Rajasthan 4,319 0 0 866 2,383 1,070 0 
16 Sikkim 7 0 0 3 3 1 0 
17 Tripura 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 
18 Uttar Pradesh 552 0 0 256 164 132 0 
19 Uttarakhand 425 0 0 64 80 281 0 
  Total 10,758 0 0 2,183 4,755 3,820 0 
 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
106 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Information relating to Pendency in grant of renewal of NOC as on 31st March 2019  
Sl. No. State/UTs  Number of Applications Pending  
 Delay up to 31st March 2019 
Delay up to 
31/03/2019 
Less than 30 
days 
31 to 
90 days 
91 to 
180 
days 
181 to 
365 
days 
More than 
one year 
to three 
years 
More than 
three years 
1 A & N 
Islands 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh Not available 
3 Assam 
4 Bihar Not available 5 Chhattisgarh 
6 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli Not available 7 Daman & 
Diu 
8 Gujarat Not available 
9 Haryana 21 1 5 3 2 9 1 
10 Jharkhand        
11 Madhya 
Pradesh 
16 1 6 4 2 3 0 
12 Maharashtra 15 7 2 3 2 1 0 
13 Manipur 
Not available 
 
14 Meghalaya 
15 Mizoram 
16 Nagaland 
17 Odisha 
18 Punjab 58 2 10 13 14 19 -- 
19 Rajasthan 34 0 1 2 5 24 2 
20 Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
21 Tripura 
Not available 22 Uttar 
Pradesh 
23 Uttarakhand Not available 
 TOTAL 144 11 24 25 25 56 3 
 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 107 
Annexure 3.3 (Refer para 3.10.1) 
Violations of conditions of NOCs 
(i) Number of Tube Wells 
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which Tube 
well, Bore 
well, Dug 
well were 
constructed 
in excess of 
the number 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit 
(Partially)  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 0 6 0  
2. Assam 50 50 0 45 5  
3. Bihar 42 41 4 36 1 5 units not 
constructed any bore 
well 
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 2 48 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
3 3 0 3 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 3 38 1 One project was not 
completed. 
8. Haryana 35 35 6 25 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 16 1 9 6 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 47 12 30 5  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 0 50 0  
12. Manipur 3 3 0 3 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 0 4 0  
14. Nagaland 3 3 1 1 1 M/s Esther Beverages 
were abstracting 
Ground Water 
without obtaining 
renewal of NOC. 
Nagaland State Dairy 
Cooperative 
Federation Ltd. Yet to 
complete the boring 
well. Hence could not 
be ascertained. 
15. Orissa 50 49 8 38 3 Three projects not 
yet started. 
16. Punjab 50 50 4 44 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 40 1 39 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 2 9 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 10 26 4 One project was 
sealed and 3 projects 
were not operated. 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 0 39 1 One project was not 
yet operational  
TOTAL 595 582 54 493 35 
 
 
 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
108 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which Tube 
well, Bore 
well, Dug 
well were 
constructed 
in excess of 
the number 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit 
(Partially)  
Remarks, if any 
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 30 3 26 1  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 48 0 45 3  
5. Punjab 36 29 3 22 4  
6. Rajasthan 95 95 0 95 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 2 1 1 0  
9. West Bengal 10 10 0 8 2 One project was not 
constructed, One 
project not found 
during site visit 
TOTAL 221 214 7 197 10  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 37 1 18 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 60 0 42 18 12 tube wells out of 
60 sampled project 
were not 
constructed. 
06 projects were 
closed. 
 
4. Goa 40 40 0 40 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 40 26 0 14  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 40 1 36 3  
7. Karnataka 60 60 0 53 7  
8. Kerala 40 40 7 24 9 Construction of wells 
do not require NOC. 
SGWA is issuing NOC 
for energized 
extraction of water 
from wells already 
constructed.  Some 
projects are 
extracting water using 
additional pumps 
without Flow meter.  
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 6 0 6 0  
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 50 5 45 0  
12. Telangana 40 34 3 22 9  
13. West Bengal 40 35 0 31 4 Project was not 
started in four 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 109 
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which Tube 
well, Bore 
well, Dug 
well were 
constructed 
in excess of 
the number 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit 
(Partially)  
Remarks, if any 
projects; 5 (permits 
were for dewatering 
of mining) 
TOTAL 472 442 43 317 82  
Grand Total 1,288 1,238 104 1,007 127  
 
(ii) Installation of Water Meter 
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which  
Water 
meters 
were not 
installed 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
6 5 4 1 0  
2. Assam 50 50 24 25 1  
3. Bihar  42 42 13 28 1 5 units not 
constructed any 
borewell 
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 24 26 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
3 3 0 3 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 6 28 8 One project was not 
completed. 
8. Haryana 35 35 16 10 9  
9. Jharkhand 20 16 4 6 6 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 27 15 8  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 21 27 2  
12. Manipur 3 3 0 3 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 3 1 0  
14. Nagaland 3 3 3 0 0  
15. Orissa 50 49 29 17 3 Three projects not yet 
started 
16. Punjab 50 50 7 38 5  
17. Rajasthan 44 40 14 26 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 8 3 2  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
110 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which  
Water 
meters 
were not 
installed 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 13 23 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 1 38 1 One project was not 
yet operational  
TOTAL 595 585 217 318 50  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 28 21 5 2  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 0 0 0 0  
5. Punjab 36 31 8 19 4  
6. Rajasthan 95 11 11 0 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 2 2 0 0  
9. West Bengal 10 10 7 1 2 One project was not 
constructed, One 
project not found 
during site visit 
TOTAL 221 82 49 25 8  
SELF REGUATED STATES 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 19 1 0 18  
2. Chandigarh 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 22 13 6 03 3 tube wells 
closed/abandoned in 
due course 
4. Goa 40 3 0 3 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 40 15 11 14  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 40 20 17 3  
7. Karnataka 60 40 30 10 0  
8. Kerala 40 40 1 19 20 One project not 
installed water meter 
in the well permitted 
as per NOC. Two 
projects not installed 
water meter as 
operation was not 
started. Seven 
projects constructed 
additional wells and 
11 projects installed 
additional pumps in 
the well-constructed 
as per NOC. 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry 
(PGWA) 
6 4 0 3 1  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 111 
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which  
Water 
meters 
were not 
installed 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects for 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 50 13 37 0 Out of 37, 3 units not 
maintained flow 
meter readings, 19 
initially maintained. 
12. Telangana 40 2 0 1 1  
13. West Bengal 40 40 19 13 8 In 8 projects the 
construction and 
installation of tube 
wells and sump well 
not started 
TOTAL 472 300 112 120 68  
Grand Total 1,288 967 378  463 126  
 
(iii)  Installation of Piezometer 
Name of the State/UT  Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that did 
not install 
Piezometer 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Comply 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 6 0 0  
2. Assam 50 50 29 20 1  
3. Bihar 42 39 23 15 1  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 48 23 25 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 2 1 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 17 19 6 One project was not 
completed. 
8. Haryana 35 35 18 13 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 10 3 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 16 13 21  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 24 26 0  
12. Manipur 3 3 1 2 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 3 1 0  
14. Nagaland 3 2 2 0 0 Installation of 
piezometer was not 
accorded in the NOC 
in respect of Power 
Grid Corporation of 
India Ltd. (PGCIL), 
Mokokchung as the 
NOC was approved 
for abstraction of 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
112 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/UT  Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that did 
not install 
Piezometer 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Comply 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
groundwater only 
for residential use. 
15. Orissa 50 38 21 14 3 Three projects not 
yet started 
16. Punjab 50 50 24 24 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 43 27 16 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 10 1 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 38 14 20 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 33 18 15 0 Out of 18 projects 
which did not 
comply the NOC 
condition, 6 projects 
had installed less 
number of 
piezometers as 
compared to 
number mentioned 
in NOC. 11 projects 
had not installed any 
piezometer and one 
project was not yet 
operational. 
TOTAL 595 567 288 228 51  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 3 2 0 1  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 0 0 0 0  
5. Punjab 36 10 9 1 0  
6. Rajasthan 95 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 2 2 0 0  
9. West Bengal 10 0 0 0 0 No provision in the 
permit for the 
piezometer 
TOTAL 221 15 13 1 1  
SELF REGULATED STATES 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 36 13 5 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 5 5 0 0  
8. Kerala 40 
0 
0 0 0 Installation of 
Piezometer was not 
insisted in the NOC. 
Hence not installed 
in any project. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 113 
Name of the State/UT  Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that did 
not install 
Piezometer 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Comply 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects, 
that 
Compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 
50 
15 35 0 Out of 35, 14 units 
handed over 
belatedly 
12. Telangana 40 36 17 1 18  
13. West Bengal 40 
0 
0 0 0 As per State Ground 
Water Act, there was 
no provision of 
piezometer in the 
permits 
TOTAL 472 127 50 41 36  
Grand Total 1,288 709 351 270 88  
 
(iv) Installation of Automatic Water Level Recorder 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
AWLR was 
not 
installed 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 1 1 0 0  
2. Assam 50 24 19 4 1  
3. Bihar 42 22 10 11 1  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 28 17 11 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 1 2 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 17 10 4 3 Sugala Limestone 
Mines,  (Six months 
was not completed. 
8. Haryana 35 26 19 3 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 14 5 2 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 30 24 6 0  
11. Maharashtra 50 26 19 7 0  
12. Manipur 3 0 0 0 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 0 0 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 2 2 0 0 Installation of AWLR 
was not specified in 
the NOC of PGCIL 
15. Orissa 50 24 18 6 0  
16. Punjab 50 22 15 5 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 18 13 5 0  
18. Tripura 13 0 0 0 0  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
114 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
AWLR was 
not 
installed 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 26 8 14 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 23 13 10 0 Out of 13 projects 
which did not 
comply the NOC 
conditions, four 
projects had 
installed less 
number of AWLR as 
compared to 
number mentioned 
in NOC, eight project 
had not installed any 
AWLR and one 
project was not yet 
operational. 
TOTAL 595 306 194 90 22  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 3 2 0 1  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 0 0 0 0  
5. Punjab 36 7 7 0 0  
6. Rajasthan 95 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 0 0 0 0  
9. West Bengal 10 0 0 0 0 No provision 
TOTAL 221 10 9 0 1  
SELF REGULATED STATES 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 26 7 1 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 0 0 0 0  
8. Kerala 40 0 0 0 0 Installation of AWLR 
was not insisted in 
the NOC.  Hence not 
installed in any 
project. 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 0 0 0 0  
12. Telangana 40 0 0 0 0  
13. West Bengal 40 0 0 0 0 As per State Ground 
Water Act, there 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 115 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
AWLR was 
not 
installed 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
was no provision in 
the permits 
TOTAL 472 26 7 1 18  
Grand Total 1,288 342 210 91 41  
 
(v) Monitoring of Pre and Post Monsoon Ground Water Quality 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
Ground 
Water 
quality was 
not 
monitored 
twice in a 
year during 
pre-
monsoon 
and post 
monsoon 
periods 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 6 0 0  
2. Assam 50 50 24 25 1  
3. Bihar 42 41 22 17 2  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 23 27 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 1 2 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 14 5 23 1. Sugala Limestone 
Mines, (Six months 
was not completed)  
2. Raksha Shakti 
University, (Unit 
was not in 
operation) 
8. Haryana 35 35 26 5 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 6 7 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 22 28 0  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 7 31 12  
12. Manipur 3 3 1 2 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 2 2 0 0 Monitoring of 
quality data was not 
conditioned in the 
NOC in respect of 
PGCIL 
15. Orissa 50 40 20 17 3 Three projects not 
started. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
116 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
Ground 
Water 
quality was 
not 
monitored 
twice in a 
year during 
pre-
monsoon 
and post 
monsoon 
periods 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
16. Punjab 50 50 26 22 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 21 23 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 11 0 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 8 28 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 34 11 23 0 Out of 11 projects 
which did not 
comply the NOC 
conditions, eight 
projects were 
monitoring quality 
data of water once 
in year, two were 
not monitoring 
quality and one 
project was not yet 
operational. 
TOTAL 595 577 255 262 60  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 37 6 12 19  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 5 5 0 0  
8. Kerala 40 0 0 0 0 Monitoring of 
quality data was not 
insisted in the NOC.  
Hence not 
monitored by any 
project. 
 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 0 0 0 0  
12. Telangana 40 40 19 1 20  
13. West Bengal 40 0 0 0 0 As per State Ground 
Water Act, there 
was no provision in 
the permits 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 117 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
Ground 
Water 
quality was 
not 
monitored 
twice in a 
year during 
pre-
monsoon 
and post 
monsoon 
periods 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
TOTAL 472 82 30 13 39  
Grand Total 1,067 659 285 275 99  
 
(vi) Monitoring of water level data of wells 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
Ground 
Water level 
data was 
not 
monitored 
through 
piezometer  
 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects  
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 6 0 0  
2. Assam 50 50 32 17 1  
3. Bihar 42 39 25 12 2  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 24 26 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 0 3 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 21 16 5 One project was not 
completed. 
8. Haryana 35 35 29 2 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 8 5 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 28 22 0  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 14 24 12  
12. Manipur 3 3 2 1 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 2 2 0 0 Monitoring of water 
level data was not 
conditioned in the 
NOC in respect of 
PGCIL  
15. Orissa 50 38 18 17 3 Three project not 
started 
16. Punjab 50 50 28 19 3  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 25 19 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 11 0 2  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
118 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
Ground 
Water level 
data was 
not 
monitored 
through 
piezometer  
 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects  
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 38 14 20 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 33 12 20 1 One project was not 
operational 
TOTAL 595 570 303 223 44  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 23 2 3 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 5 5 0 0  
8. Kerala 40 0 0 0 0 Monitoring of water 
Level data was not 
insisted in the NOC. 
Hence not 
monitored by any 
project. 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders) 
50 50 5 30 15  
12. Telangana 40 40 19 1 20  
13. West Bengal 40 0 0 0 0 As per State Ground 
Water Act, there 
was no provision in 
the permits 
TOTAL 472 118 31 34 53  
Grand Total 1,067 688 334 257 97  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 119 
(vii) Rain Water Harvesting Structures 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which Rain 
Water 
Harvesting 
Structures 
were not 
constructed 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 4 2 0  
2. Assam 50 50 16 33 1  
3. Bihar 42 42 28 13 1  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 23 27 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 2 1 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 35 6 18 11  
8. Haryana 35 35 23 8 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 4 9 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 16 28 6  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 5 45 0  
12. Manipur 3 3 2 1 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 3 1 2 0 M/s. Esther Beverages 
did not comply with 
the construction of 
water harvesting for 
artificial recharge 
since the issue of 
NOC. 
15. Orissa 50 44 21 20 3 Three projects not 
started. 
16. Punjab 50 39 8 18 13  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 15 29 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 7 4 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 32 12 16 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 23 17 0 Out of 23 projects 
which did not comply 
the NOC condition, 13 
projects complied 
partially and one was 
not yet operational 
TOTAL 595 563 220 291 52  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 27 10 16 1  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 48 43 2 3  
5. Punjab 36 35 16 10 9  
6. Rajasthan 95 39 35 4 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 2 2 0 0  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
120 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which Rain 
Water 
Harvesting 
Structures 
were not 
constructed 
as 
prescribed 
in NOC 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
9. West Bengal 10 0 0 0 0 In the permit, no 
provision of artificial 
recharge of GW. 
However, there is a 
provision of rooftop 
rain water harvesting 
TOTAL 221 151 106 32 13  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 35 7 10 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 3 0 3 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 23 7 13 3  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 40 20 6 14  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 39 24 15 0  
8. Kerala 40 0 21 19 0 Specific directions not 
given in NOC 
regarding AR.  RWH 
not mentioned in any 
NOC. 
19 Projects.                              
(17  Projects 
constructed AR 
structures and 2 
projects constructed 
RWH structure) 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 3 0 2 1  
11. Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders) 
50 50 09 41 0  
12. Telangana 40 40 15 5 20  
13. West Bengal 40 0 0 0 0 No provision in the 
permit for Artificial 
recharge 
TOTAL 472 273 103 114 56  
Grand Total 1,288 987 429 437 121  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 121 
(viii) Maintenance of rain water recharge structures 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which rain 
water 
harvesting 
structures 
were not 
maintained 
properly 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 0 0 0 0  
2. Assam 50 50 10 23 17  
3. Bihar 42 42 28 13 1  
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 23 27 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 2 1 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 35 5 30 0  Sugala Limestone 
Mines,  (Six months 
was not completed. 
8. Haryana 35 35 23 8 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 13 2 4 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 23 23 4  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 5 45 0  
12. Manipur 3 2 2 0 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 0 0 0 0 Not conditioned in 
the NOC in respect of 
the three units. 
15. Orissa 50 20 16 4 0  
16. Punjab 50 39 7 30 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 0 0 0 0  
18. Tripura 13 6 2 2 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 20 11 5 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 22 17 1 One project was not 
yet operational 
TOTAL 595 459 185 232 42  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 27 16 10 1  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 0 0 0 0  
5. Punjab 36 35 16 19 0  
6. Rajasthan 95 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 2 2 0 0  
9. West Bengal 10 0 0 0 0 No provision 
TOTAL 221 64 34 29 1  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 35 1 9 25  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
122 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which rain 
water 
harvesting 
structures 
were not 
maintained 
properly 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 0 0 0 0  
8. Kerala 40  0 0 0 0 No NOC condition on 
maintenance of AR 
and RWH.  Not done 
by any project.  
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu 
(through Govt. 
Orders) 
50 0 0 0 0  
12. Telangana 40 0 0 0 0  
13. West Bengal 40 0 0 0 0 No provision in State 
GW Act. 
TOTAL 472 35 1 9 25  
Grand Total 1,288 558 220  270 68  
 
(ix) Submission of Compliance Reports 
Name of the State/ UTs Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
reports 
were not 
submitted 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
in  which 
complian
ce could 
not be 
ascertain
ed in 
Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 6 0 0  
2. Assam 50 50 38 11 1  
3. Bihar 42 42 26 10 6 For 6 six units, one year 
not completed 
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 40 10 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 1 2 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 15 13 14   
8. Haryana 35 35 23 3 9  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 8 5 7 7 projects yet to be 
stated. 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 27 20 3  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 13 24 13  
12. Manipur 3 3 2 1 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 3 3 0 0 Not submitted by the 3 
units as of date. 
15. Orissa 50 50 33 5 12  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 123 
Name of the State/ UTs Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
reports 
were not 
submitted 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
in  which 
complian
ce could 
not be 
ascertain
ed in 
Audit  
Remarks, if any 
16. Punjab 50 50 6 18 26  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 30 11 3  
18. Tripura 13 13 11 0 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 15 14 11 One project sealed and 3 
were not operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 23 7 16 0 17 projects did not 
complete one year of 
operation since the date 
of issue of NOC till date 
of site inspection. Out of 
seven projects which had 
not complied the NOC 
conditions, four projects 
had not submitted any 
compliance report, two 
projects had submitted 
less number of 
compliance report and 
one project was not yet 
operational.  
Renewal of NOC of 34 
projects was not due till 
date of site inspection. 
TOTAL 595 578 308 163 107  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 34 7 8 19  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 35 35 0 0  
8. Kerala 40   0 0 
 
0 0 No NOC condition. 
Not done by any project  
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0  
11. Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders) 
50 50 47 3 0  
12. Telangana 40 39 20 0 19  
13. West Bengal 40 40 21 10 9 Chemical quality of test 
report of GW was 
required to be 
submitted to SWID 
office. In 9 projects 
construction and 
installation work of 
tubewell and sump well 
has not started. 
TOTAL 472 198 130 21 47  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
124 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/ UTs Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
reports 
were not 
submitted 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
in  which 
complian
ce could 
not be 
ascertain
ed in 
Audit  
Remarks, if any 
Grand Total 1,067 776 438 184 154  
 
(x) Withdrawal of yearly Ground Water in excess of prescribed limit   
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that were 
drawing 
excess 
Ground 
Water 
(Yearly) 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 0 0 6 No log book was 
maintained by any 
firm even through it 
was specified in the 
NOC. 
2. Assam 50 50 0 17 33 One industry was 
closed and log book 
was not maintained 
in 32 projects 
3. Bihar 42 41 1 11 29 In 11 units one year 
period not 
completed 
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 0 22 28  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 0 3 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 42 9 30 3 One project was not 
completed 
8. Haryana 35 35 13 22 0  
9. Jharkhand 20 16 0 4 12  
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 0 13 37 - 
11. Maharashtra 50 50 2 27 21  
12. Manipur 3 3 0 1 2  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 0 0 4  
14. Nagaland 3 3 1 1 1 M/s Esther 
Beverages were 
abstracting Ground 
Water without 
obtaining renewal of 
NOC. Nagaland State 
Dairy Cooperative 
Federation Ltd. Yet to 
complete the boring 
well. Hence could not 
be ascertained. 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 125 
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that were 
drawing 
excess 
Ground 
Water 
(Yearly) 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
15. Orissa 50 49 0 11 38 Three project not yet 
started. 
16. Punjab 50 50 0 29 21  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 0 30 14  
18. Tripura 13 13 11 0 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 1 24 15 One industry was 
sealed and 3 were 
not operational. 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 8 30 2 One project was not 
operational 
TOTAL 595 589 46 275 268  
NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Diu & Daman UT  0 0 0 0 0  
2. Gujarat  0 0 0 0 0  
3. Haryana  30 18 14 2 2  
4. Madhya Pradesh  48 0 0 0 0 - 
5. Punjab 36 25 1 6 18  
6. Rajasthan 95 0 0 0 0  
7. Uttar Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0  
8. Tamil Nadu 2 0 0 0 0  
9. West Bengal 10 10 0 1 9  One project was not 
constructed, 
One project not 
found during site visit 
TOTAL 221 53 15 9 29  
SELF REGULATED STATES 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 18 0 0 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0  
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0 Although daily water 
abstraction condition 
was there. Out of 40 
projects, 24 did not 
comply with the 
provision 
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 40 0 12 28  
7. Karnataka 60 12 0 3 9  
8. Kerala 40 40 0 12 28 Flow meter reading 
and logbook reading 
disagree.  Delivery 
line between pump 
and flow meter was 
buried under ground. 
Additional pumps 
without water meter 
was installed in the 
same well. 
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 0 0 0 0 Yearly quantum of 
withdrawal is not 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
126 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Name of the State/UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that were 
drawing 
excess 
Ground 
Water 
(Yearly) 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not 
be 
ascertained 
in Audit  
Remarks, if any 
fixed in the permits 
issued by PGWA 
11. Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders) 
50 0 0 0 0  
12. Telangana 40 0 0 0 0  
13. West Bengal 40 35 0 9 26 Project was not 
started in four 
projects; Abstraction 
was not started in one 
project; (due to non-
maintenance of log 
book) 
TOTAL 472 145 0 36 109  
Grand Total 1,288 787 61 320 406  
 
(xi) Installation of STP/ETP 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that did 
not ensure 
proper 
recycling 
and reuse 
of waste 
water after 
adequate 
treatment 
 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit 
Remarks, if any 
NON-NOTIFIED AREAS 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 6 6 3 3 0  
2. Assam 50 50 27 22 1  
3. Bihar 42 42 20 18 4 3 units were under 
construction 
4. Chhattisgarh 50 50 25 25 0  
5. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 3 3 0 3 0  
6. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0  
7. Gujarat 42 41 4 31 6 One project was 
not completed. 
8. Haryana 35 33 18 11 4  
9. Jharkhand 20 20 3 10 7 7 projects yet to be 
started 
10. Madhya Pradesh 50 50 14 33 3  
11. Maharashtra 50 50 3 47 0  
12. Manipur 3 0 0 0 0  
13. Meghalaya 4 4 4 0 0  
14. Nagaland 3 0 0 0 0 Not conditioned in 
the NOC in respect 
of the three units. 
15. Orissa 50 50 31 16 3  

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 127 
Name of the State/ UT Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that did 
not ensure 
proper 
recycling 
and reuse 
of waste 
water after 
adequate 
treatment 
 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained 
in Audit 
Remarks, if any 
16. Punjab 50 50 16 32 2  
17. Rajasthan 44 44 18 26 0  
18. Tripura 13 13 11 0 2  
19. Uttar Pradesh 40 40 9 27 4 One project sealed 
and 3 were not 
operational 
20. Uttarakhand 40 40 10 30 0  
TOTAL 595 586 216 334 36  
SELF REGULATED AREAS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 42 35 1 16 18  
2. Chandigarh(through 
Govt. Orders) 
14 0 0 0 0 - 
3. Delhi 60 0 0 0 0  
4. Goa 40 0 0 0 0  
5. Himachal Pradesh 40 0 0 0 0  
6. Jammu & Kashmir 40 0 0 0 0  
7. Karnataka 60 5 0 5 0  
8. Kerala 40   0 0 0 0 No NOC condition 
on recycle and 
reuse. 
Not done by any 
project   
9. Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0  
10. Puducherry (PGWA) 6 2 0 0 2  
11. Tamil Nadu (through 
Govt. Orders) 
50 0 0 0 0  
12. Telangana 40 37 16 4 17  
13. West Bengal 40 8 4 4 0  
TOTAL 472 87 21 29 37  
Grand Total 1,067 673 237 363 73  
 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
128 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 3.4 (Refer para 3.10.1) 
Violation of conditions specific to Notified Areas  
(i) Diameter of the Tube well/ Bore well 
Name of the 
State 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
projects 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects where 
the diameter of 
Tube well/ 
Bore well was 
in excess of the 
prescribed limit 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects that 
complied 
with the 
NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects in 
which 
compliance 
could not be 
ascertained in 
Audit  
Remarks, if any 
Haryana  30 26 8 16 2  
Madhya 
Pradesh  
48 43 30 10 3 - 
Punjab 36 30 1 29 0  
Rajasthan 95 33 1 32 0  
Delhi 60 10 0 7 3  
Tamil Nadu 2 0 0 0 0  
West Bengal 10 10 0 8 2 One project was 
not constructed, 
one project not 
found during site 
visit 
 
TOTAL 281 152 40 102 10  
 
(ii) Capacity of the Pump 
Name of the 
State 
Number of 
Sampled 
project 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects where 
capacity of the 
pump was in 
excess of the 
prescribed 
limit 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects that 
complied with 
the NOC 
Condition 
Number of 
Sampled Projects 
in which 
compliance could 
not be 
ascertained in 
Audit (Partially)  
Remarks, if 
any 
Haryana  30 26 8 16 2  
Madhya 
Pradesh  
48 43 31 6 6  
Punjab 36 35 4 25 6  
Rajasthan 95 16 14 2 0  
Tamil Nadu 2 0 0 0 0  
West Bengal 10 10 0 8 2 One project 
was not 
constructed, 
One project 
not found 
during site visit 
TOTAL 221 130 57 57 16  
 
 
 
 
 

  Report No. 9 of 2021  
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 129 
(iii) Formation encountered to be sent to CGWB, RO 
Name of the 
State 
Number of 
Sampled 
project 
Number 
of 
Sampled 
Projects 
where 
condition 
was 
specified  
Out of projects where such condition was specified 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects where 
formation 
encountered 
was not sent to 
CGWB 
Number of 
Sampled 
Projects that 
complied with 
the condition 
of NOC 
Number of 
Sampled Projects 
in which 
compliance could 
not be 
ascertained in 
Audit (Partially)  
Remarks, if 
any 
Haryana  30 30 25 2 3  
Madhya 
Pradesh  
48 0 0 0 0  
Punjab 36 36 31 1 4  
Rajasthan 95 0 0 0 0  
Delhi 60 19 19 0 0  
West Bengal 10 0 0 0 0 No provision 
TOTAL 279 85 75 3 7  
 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
130 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 4.1 (Refer para 4.3.4) 
Projects Completed/Foreclosed/Rescinded 
Sl. 
No.  
Tender Title No. of Wells to be 
constructed/Actually constructed 
Financial Progress 
(in Crore) 
Date of Signing of 
contract 
Originally 
Targeted date 
of Completion 
Date of Completion Delay 
 Exploratory wells Observatory wells Total Amount 
released 
1. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Haryana  
57/54 57/53 12.14 8.33 12.05.17 06.02.18 10.11.18 277 
2. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Rajasthan (Package-3) 
201/201 100/44 14.67 6.75 21.07.18 04.06.19 04.06.19  Nil 
3. Tender for construction of 
Exploratory and observation wells 
in arsenic affected areas of Bihar 
40/19 5/1 9.84 3.78  - 04.03.18 13.09.19 558 
4. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Arsenic affected areas of West 
Bengal 
67/67 6/6 - - 25.04.17 
 19.01.18 15.04.18 86 
5. Tender for construction of 
exploratory and observation wells 
in Tamil Nadu 
213/192 179/115 22.27 13.43  - 07.08.18 15.03.19 220 
6. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Karnataka 
342/342 140/126 16.34 14.29 26.02.2018 26.02.18 17.12.18 294 
7. Data Generation in Punjab and 
Ghazipur (UP) year 2017-18  
(WAPCOS Project) 
97/97 27/27 32.23 26.81 (September 2017) 
 
31.07.18 31.03.19 243 
8. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Rajasthan (Package-2) Project 
foreclosed by the ministry 
101/86 50/21 5.34 3.67 24.04.17 19.01.18 Foreclosed on 
22.02.2016 
 - 
9. Tender for Construction of 
Exploratory and Observation Wells 
in Arsenic affected areas of  
Jharkhand 
40/5 9/0 3.76 0 02.05.17  22.01.18 Forfeited 
performance 
guarantee after 
rescinding of 
contract 
 - 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 131 
Ongoing Projects  
Sl. No. Tender Title No. of Wells to be 
constructed/Actually 
constructed 
Financial Progress 
(in Crore) 
Date of 
Signing of 
contract 
Originally 
Targeted 
date of 
Completion 
Delay as of  
November 2019 
 Exploratory 
wells 
Observatory 
wells 
Total Amount 
released 
1. Tender for Construction of Exploratory and Observation Wells in 
Rajasthan (Package-4) 
146/128 103/91 38.12 30.14 19.04.17 14.03.18 626 
2. Tender for Construction of Exploratory and Observation Wells in 
Telangana 
206/191 34/33 5.01 3.03 30.11.18 30.08.19 92 
3. Tender for Construction of Exploratory and Observation Wells in 
Gujarat 
227/66 94/16 45.87 9.69 20.06.17 17.03.18 623 
4. Tender for Geophysical Investigation, Exploratory Drilling and 
Chemical Analysis of Water Samples in 11 districts of Bundelkhand 
(except Lalitpur and Jhansi) 
356/141 158/25 28.89 5.21 25.01.18 20.09.18 436 
5. WAPCOS Project for Hydro geological Data Generation for Aquifer Mapping in 13 States of India80 (Drilling, construction & pumping test of  Exploratory wells and Observatory 
wells) 4 contracts were selected in audit 
West Bengal  114/105 60/54 24.72 24.08 September 
2017 
31.07.18 487 
Andhra Pradesh 107/63 57/39 19.12 11.49 
Tamil Nadu 92/90 46/19 4.50 3.38 
Uttar Pradesh 114/114 114/114 30.96 30.31 
                                                           
80  Site selection was to be done within 60 days and all 2,169 sites were to be provided. However, CGWB was able to hand over only 1680 sites to WAPCOS/ Contractors 
as of March 2019. 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
132 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 4.2 (Refer para 4.3.7) 
Position of action taken by States on Aquifer Management Reports 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Block/districts for which Aquifer 
Mapping Reports are prepared 
and placed on website 
Audit Observations 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Anantapur, Chittoor , West 
Godavari (Parts)  
GW&WAD has informed that it has taken up 
water conservation activity like desilting of 
tanks, construction of check dams etc. Some of 
the recommendations in the report have been 
considered in these projects.  
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Parts of Papum Pare & East 
Kameng 
No action was taken on recommendations made 
in the reports.   
3.  Assam Lakhimpur(Parts), Karbi-
Anglong(Parts), Dhemaji(Parts) 
Although State Ground Water Coordination 
Committee had already been constituted by the 
Government of Assam in 2013, no action was 
taken on the reports. 
4.  Bihar Parts of Bhojpur, Vaishali(Parts), 
Begusarai(Parts) 
State Government had not taken any action on 
the recommendations made in the reports.  
5.  Chhattisgarh Korba(Parts), Raigarh(Parts), 
Balod(Parts) 
State Government had not taken any action on 
the three sampled Aquifer Mapping Reports. 
DoWR,RD&GR informed (October 2019) that 
CGWB had provided (in 2019) 15 block-wise 
Aquifer Mapping Reports to State Government 
for incorporation of Aquifer mapping data in 
preparation of Project  on ‘NaruaGaruaGhuruwa 
Bari’ of the Government of Chhattisgarh. 
However, the reply was silent about the 
implementation. 
6.  Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
 D&NH No action was taken on recommendation made 
by CGWB 
7.  Delhi All Tehsils Only one report of NAQUIM relating to Delhi was 
prepared by CGWB. In the 4th meeting of 
SGWCC, Chaired by the Principal Secretary (UD), 
the NAQUIM report was appreciated and it was 
decided that DJB will identify water deficient 
areas based on above report and accordingly 
schemes will be framed. It was also decided that 
DJB will avoid drawing water from contaminated 
areas. A Pilot project was decided to be started 
for desalinating the groundwater. Further action 
was awaited.  
8.  Gujarat  Junagarh, Porbandar Reports were yet to be approved by the SGWCC. 
9.  Haryana Sirsa,Fatehabad,Karnal,Kurukshetra The reports were shared with the field offices of 
Ground Water cell, Haryana and were used in 
identified location for artificial recharge, 
assessment of Ground Water resources and 
identified quality/quantity of distributions of 
aquifer in the State. However, further action 
taken by the State on the recommendations in 
the reports was not available.  
10.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Kashmir Valley  in parts of districts 
of  Anantnag, Badgam, Baramulla 
As per recommendations of the NAQUIM study 
it was decided to take up 1-2 recharge boreholes 
in the bed of Ranbir Canal for recharge to 
Ground Water in Kandi areas on experimental 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 133 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Block/districts for which Aquifer 
Mapping Reports are prepared 
and placed on website 
Audit Observations 
basis. However, action taken in this regard was 
not available. 
11.  Jharkhand Ranchi (Parts), Ramgarh,  Dhanbad 
(Parts) 
The recommendations were shared with the 
State administration during the SGWCC 
meetings held in May 2015 and March 2016. 
However, further action taken by the State on 
the recommendations in the reports was not 
available. 
12.  Karnataka Chikballapur, Tumkur(Parts), Kolar Aquifer Mapping and Management Report has 
not been implemented effectively in Karnataka 
due to following shortcomings: 
• AMP reports submitted by CGWB are in the 
Power Point Presentation form and not as 
complete reports except the Pilot Basin 
Report and Kolar Report.  
• No funds were received either from CGWB or 
from the Central Government for 
implementing the reports in the field. 
• The map scale was very small and it was 
difficult to locate the location exactly. CGWB 
had replied that the locations are marked on 
the map without field check and that GWD 
officers are good in the field and can locate 
the suitable sites on their own. 
• With shortage of staff and no budget 
available with the Department for the 
implementation of this programme, it was 
stated to be very difficult for GWD to carry 
out such detailed field checks. 
13.  Kerala Alapuzha, Ernakulum(Parts), 
Trichur(Parts) 
The Secretary, Water Resources Department 
(WRD) stated that the department was making 
all out efforts to implement the Ground Water 
Management Plans in the State wherever such 
activities were being carried out in the State.  
The State Ground Water Department uses the 
aquifer maps, wherever prepared by CGWB, to 
implement Ground Water Management Plans in 
the State. However, separate funding is not 
provided, either by the Government of India or 
by the State Government, to implement Ground 
Water Management Plans recommended in the 
reports of CGWB in this regard.  
The Department stated (October 2019) that the 
State Government makes use of these reports in 
its flag ship project ‘HarithaKeralam”, an 
endeavour in achieving water security and 
environmental protection of the State. 
14.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
Ujjain, Dewas, Sagar MPSEGC (Madhya Pradesh State Employment 
Guarantee Council) was implementing the 
Water Conservation and Artificial Recharge 
interventions proposed in the water stressed 
block Badnagar, Ujjain district under the 
technical guidance of CGWB. These 

Report No. 9 of 2021   
134 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Block/districts for which Aquifer 
Mapping Reports are prepared 
and placed on website 
Audit Observations 
interventions are proposed on the basis of 
Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan of 
Ujjain district prepared by CGWB. This project 
covers 150 villages with an area of 1,055.10 sq 
km falling in Chamala and Chambal watershed of 
Badnagar block. So far, a total of 79 structures 
have been constructed in Badnagar block. 
15.  Maharashtra Ahmednagar(Parts), 
Buldhana(Parts), Jalgaon(Parts) 
No action was taken by the State Government on 
the three sampled Aquifer Mapping Reports due 
to the following reasons: 
• The Aquifer maps were provided on the 
1:50,000 scale, which was a broader 
scale. 
• The numbers of water conservation 
structures like percolation tanks, 
recharge shafts, check dams were 
suggested. However, the actual field 
locations were not given. 
• There was no budgetary provision from 
CGWB, Nagpur or Central Government 
during 2013-18, for the implementation 
of Management Plans. 
16.  Manipur Imphal West (Part)  No action has been taken on the 
recommendations made in the reports.  
17.  Meghalaya  South Garo Hills, East Garo Hills, 
Ri-Bhoi 
No action was taken by the State Government on 
the three sampled Aquifer Mapping Reports. 
18.  Nagaland Dimapur(Parts) No action was taken by State Government on the 
recommendation. 
19.  Odisha Bhadrak, Balasore, Angul(Parts) A meeting of SGWCC was held in May, 2016. 
State Government (Directorate of Ground Water 
Development, Odisha, Bhubaneswar) has not 
taken any action on the three sampled Aquifer 
Mapping Reports for implementation on 
recommendation. 
20.  Punjab Gurdaspur, Ludhiana, Patiala, 
Sangrur 
Audit observed that in the draft report on 
Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan (2016), 
in three (districts Gurdaspur, Ludhiana and 
Sangrur), out of four selected districts, the 
information on geophysical and geological data 
were not compiled and analysis of land use 
pattern were not prepared.  In Sangrur, 
geochemical data was also not complied.  Reply 
of CGWB in this regard is still awaited (March 
2019).   
21.  Rajasthan Alwar, Bhilwara, Jaipur • Recommendations were made that 
sprinkler irrigation system should be 
adopted instead of traditional irrigation 
and cropping pattern be changed from 
wheat to gram. 
• Advisories were given during meeting of 
gram sabha / ratri gram chopal and through 
advertisements in newspapers for adopting 

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 135 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Block/districts for which Aquifer 
Mapping Reports are prepared 
and placed on website 
Audit Observations 
sprinkler irrigation system and change of 
crop pattern from wheat to gram. 
22.  Tamil Nadu Amaravathi, Bhavani, Chennai, 
Upper Ponnaiyar,  Tirupur (Parts) 
Out of five NAQUIM reports selected, the State 
had taken partial action in two cases. WRO 
department directed the plan formulation wing 
to give priority for constructing the Artificial 
Recharge Structure at the recommended site 
locations after field verification and geo-physical 
surveys in Chennai aquifer system and Upper 
Ponnaiyar basin.   
23.  Telangana Nalgonda , Nizamabad districts  The details of action taken on two sampled 
reports by Government were awaited from the 
Commissioner, Rural Development Department. 
24.  Tripura South Tripura (Parts) There was only one report of Aquifer 
Management Plan for the Parts of South Tripura 
District. There were four recommendations in 
the report and all the recommendations were 
partially implemented.  
25.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
 Meerut, Bulandshahar, 
Muzaffarnagar 
Government of UP was implementing State 
Ground Water Mission in the identified areas of 
Uttar Pradesh having Ground Water problems. 
The Mission envisaged carrying out 
comprehensive study on Ground Water 
resources and implementation of various 
techniques of water conservation and 
management in an integrated way on the basis 
of area-wise micro-planning. DoWR,RD&GR 
informed (October 2019) that Ground Water 
Department, UP had utilized the Aquifer 
Mapping carried out by CGWB in preparation of 
plans for above purpose. However, specific 
details were not furnished.  
26.  Uttarakhand Haridwar, Udham Singh Nagar 
(parts) 
No follow up action was undertaken by the State 
Government on the decision of State Level 
Ground Water Coordination Committee 
(SLGWCC). The State Government had no 
information about recommendations of 
SLGWCC and action thereon.  
27.  West Bengal Murshidabad (Parts) , Nadia 
(Parts), North 24 Parganas (Parts) 
No recommendation was made by the 
committee regarding implementation of the 
Management Plan. 
 
  

Report No. 9 of 2021   
136 Ground Water Management and Regulation  
Annexure 4.3 (Refer para 4.5.1) 
Details of equipment and software 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl.  
No.  
Description of 
Equipment, 
Software, Rigs etc. 
to be procured 
No. of items 
to be 
procured 
Amount 
allocated 
No. of  
items 
procured 
Expenditure 
(2012-19) 
1 Hydrological 
Equipment 
3,560 52.05 Nil Nil 
2 Scientific equipment 
(Chemical and 
Geophysical) 
875 58.94
 407 15.51 
3 Scientific Software 503 12.36 67 4.8 
4 Drilling equipment 55 181.82 40 87.54 
  Total 305.17   107.85 
 
 
  

  Report No. 9 of 2021 
 Ground Water Management and Regulation 137 
Annexure 5.1 (Refer para 5.2.1) 
Districts having high stage of extraction of Ground Water 
Sl. No. State/UT No. of total 
districts 
No. of 
districts 
having SoE 
more than 
70 per cent 
Percentage of 
districts having 
SoE more than 
70 per cent 
Range of 
SoE in per 
cent 
1 Andhra Pradesh 13 1 8 89 
2 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 3 0 0 - 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 16 0 0 - 
4 Assam 28 0 0  
5 Bihar 38 2 5 73 to 96 
6 Chandigarh 1 1 100 89 
7 Chhattisgarh 27 2 7 78 to 83 
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1 0 0 - 
9 Daman &Diu 2 1 50 91 
10 Delhi 12 10 83 84 to 255 
11 Goa 2 0 0 - 
12 Gujarat 33 7 21 72 to 115 
13 Haryana 22 19 86 91 to 244 
14 Himachal Pradesh 8 5 63 76 to 385 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 22 0 0 - 
16 Jharkhand 24 2 8 71 to 76 
17 Karnataka 33 12 36 76 to 211 
18 Kerala 14 1 7 80 
19 Lakshadweep 9 3 33 74 to 83 
20 Madhya Pradesh 51 10 20 73 to 127 
21 Maharashtra 34 7 21 72 to 88 
22 Manipur 10 0 0 - 
23 Meghalaya 11 0 0 - 
24 Mizoram 8 0 0 - 
25 Nagaland 11 0 0 - 
26 Odisha 30 0 0 - 
27 Puducherry 3 1 33 102 
28 Punjab 22 22 100 74 to 260 
29 Rajasthan 33 29 88 84 to 293 
30 Sikkim 4 0 0 - 
31 Tamil Nadu 32 19 59 75 to 172 
32 Telangana 31 14 45 71 to 341 
33 Tripura 8 0 0 - 
34 Uttar Pradesh 75 32 43 71 to 128 
35 Uttarakhand 4 0 0 - 
36 West Bengal 17 2 12 87 to 92 
 TOTAL 692 202 29  
 