 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Administration of Nazul Lands by 
Land and Development Office 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government  
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
No. 17 of 2021
 
(Compliance Audit) 
 
 
 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on……………… 

 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PAGE 
No. 
 Preface  iii 
 Executive Summary v 
 
Chapter I Introduction 
1.1 Organisational setup 2 
1.2 Online systems 2 
1.3 Budget and Expenditure 3 
 
Chapter II Mandate, Audit Scope and Methodology 
2.1 Scope of Audit 4 
2.2 Audit objectives 4 
2.3 Sources for audit criteria 4 
2.4 Audit methodology 4 
2.5 Audit sampling 5 
2.6 Acknowledgement  6 
 
Chapter III Assurances to PAC 
3.1 Non-production of records despite firm commitment by Ministry 7 
3.2 Authenticity of the figures of the leased properties 9 
3.3 Receipts 10 
3.4 Inspection of the properties 15 
3.5 Ineffective monitoring over provision of free treatment/ 
admission to Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in hospitals 
and schools 
18 
3.6 Lack of effective and efficient administration of lease 
applications 20 
3.7 Computerisation of records 23 
3.8 Summing Up 25 
 
Chapter IV Other Issues 
4.1 Non-receipt of other dues 26 
4.2 Non-levy of unearned increase 29 
4.3 Absence of mechanism for demarcation/ identification of 
properties of L&DO in Sub-registrar offices 30 
CONTENTS 

 
ii 
4.4 Inadequate control over properties 31 
4.5 Non-availability of sanctioned building plans and non-execution 
of lease deeds 34 
4.6 Non-renewal of temporary allotment 36 
4.7 Non-correspondence with the allottees 36 
4.8 Non-follow up on actions to be taken after conversion of 
leasehold properties into freehold 37 
4.9 Summing Up 39 
 
Chapter 5 Conclusion 40 
 
 Annexures 43-109 
 Annexure-I – Audit findings in respect of 29 sampled properties 43 
 Annexure-II - Status of the Action Taken on Recommendations 
made in the 78th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on 
‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’ 
98 
 Annexure-III – Statement showing outstanding ground rent and 
interest thereon 109 
 

iii 
  Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of compliance audit of Administration of Nazul Lands by Land 
and Development Office, an attached office of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs. The functioning of Land and Development Office was 
earlier reviewed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and 
the Audit findings were included in Report No. 6 of 2009-10.  The 
Report was discussed by the Public Accounts Committee and its 
observations and recommendations were brought out (27 April 2012) in 
their 59
th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Land and 
Development Office’.  The Public Accounts Committee further brought 
out (21 March 2013) 78
th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in their 
59
th Report.  
This Report presents the Audit findings on the follow-up action taken 
by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs/ Land and Development 
Office on the observations/ recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee. Audit covered the period from 1 April 2016 to 
31 March 2019, and the Audit findings have been subsequently updated 
upto 31 March 2021.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021  
v 
 
 
 
Land and Development Office (L&DO) is an attached office under the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs. The properties administered by L&DO fall into two broad categories: 
• N
azul lands, which were acquired in the year 1911 for the formation of the capital of 
India at Delhi; and 
• R ehabilitation lands, which were acquired by the Government of India for the speedy 
rehabilitation of displaced persons from Pakistan. 
These properties were given on leases for residential, commercial and institutional 
purposes.  As per the Annual Report of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for the 
year 2020-21, L&DO is responsible for the administration of about 60,526 leases of the 
Central Government land in Delhi, out of which 34,905 properties have been converted into 
freehold. 
The functioning of L&DO was reviewed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
(CAG) and the Audit findings were included in Report No. 6 of 2009-10.  The Report was 
discussed by the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and its observations and 
recommendations were brought out (27 April 2012) in their 59
th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’.  The PAC further brought out 
(21 March 2013) 78
th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in their 59th Report.  The follow-up action taken 
by the Ministry/ L&DO in this regard was reviewed by Audit based on examination of 
records relating to a sample of 29 Nazul properties.  
Audit findings 
Assurances to PAC 
• During the previous Audit (2009-10), L&DO did not provide important records. The 
Ministry made (July 2013) a firm commitment to the Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC) that in future there shall be no occasion of denial of records to Audit.  In the 
follow-up Audit, many of the records were not produced to Audit. 
(Para 3.1) 
• The PAC, in their 78
th Report, noted that the Ministry/ L&DO had started verifying/ 
cross-checking the records to arrive at an authentic figure of all the leased properties 
but found that position was still far from satisfactory.  It was seen during the follow-up 
Audit that L&DO still did not have the authentic figures of the leased properties under 
its administration. 
(Para 3.2) 
• The PAC, in their 78
th Report, impressed upon the Ministry/ L&DO to recover all the 
outstanding ground rent dues in a definite time-frame.  During the follow-up Audit, it 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 17 of 2021  
vi 
was found that complete information of ground rent due, demanded, paid and 
outstanding was not recorded in the ground rent register of any of the test-checked 
properties.  L&DO also did not make any efforts to recover the ground rent in time. 
(Para 3.3.2.1) 
• The PAC had impressed upon the Ministry/ L&DO to complete the revision of ground 
rent in a time-bound manner.  During the follow-up Audit, it was seen that out of 
29 properties, ground rent was due for revision in 21 properties.  However, ground rent 
was either not revised or revised belatedly/ revised incorrectly. 
(Para 3.3.2.2) 
• Mandatory inspection of the properties was to be carried out once in three years i.e., 
inspections of at least 33 per cent of the properties annually.  It was observed during 
Audit that inspections conducted by L&DO during the years 2016-17 to 2020-21 ranged 
between five per cent and eight per cent of the required mandatory inspection.  Further, 
wherever inspections were done, show-cause notices/ breach notices for violations were 
not issued on time and efforts to re-enter the property were found lacking, thereby 
rendering the inspections ineffective. 
(Para 3.4) 
• L&DO was required to dispose of applications for conversion, sale permission, 
mutation, and substitution etc., within a period of three months from the date of receipt 
of information and documents from the lessee.  During Audit, it was observed that 61 
applications were disposed of within a day.  However, 1,199 applications were rejected 
after taking more than 1,500 days.  Maximum time taken in rejecting and approving a 
particular application was more than 23 years and 18 years, respectively.  This shows 
that the processing of applications was extremely tardy. 
(Para 3.6) 
• L&DO introduced e-Dharti software for speedy disposal of public services. The Ministry 
had given assurance to the PAC (59
th Report) that computerization work related to Nazul 
properties would be completed by December 2011 and all other files/ registers would be 
digitized by June 2012.  The Ministry/ L&DO failed to fulfil its commitment/assurance 
as even after a lapse of more than eight years, the process of digitization was yet to be 
completed.  
(Para 3.7) 
With regard to Audit findings on Assurances to PAC, Audit recommends that: 
1. The Ministry may ensure that all the commitments and assurances provided to the 
Public Accounts Committee are closely monitored and implemented under intimation 
to Audit. 
2. L&DO needs to take stock of all the properties vested under its control and update all 
the relevant information pertaining to each property in the e-Dharti system, in order 

Report No. 17 of 2021  
vii 
to avoid any possibility of unauthorised construction and misuse/ unauthorised sale 
of properties. 
3. The annual budget should be prepared based on assessment of all rent assessed and 
collectable during the year. 
4. In order to enable simultaneous updation of inspection registers and follow-up, 
L&DO may consider developing a GIS enabled mobile application with cross 
integration facilities with e-Dharti portal to upload the inspection results. 
5. L&DO should develop a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure that the benefit to 
EWS beneficiaries is being provided by the Hospitals and Schools, and coordinate 
with the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to ensure that the 
conditions for admission in school and free medical treatment of EWS category are 
followed. 
Other Issues 
• For receipt of outstanding dues, demand letters in respect of only 20 properties (out of 
29 sampled properties) amounting to `326.54 crore were last issued to the lessees 
b
etween June 1977 to December 2019 of which L&DO could not recover `325.12 crore 
(
99.57 per cent). Audit observed that in 19 cases, dues towards damage, misuse, interest 
etc. amounting to `444.08 crore were outstanding. 
(
Para 4.1) 
• The unearned increase had been prescribed as 50 per cent of the difference between the 
present value of land and the last transaction value of the land.  Audit observed that in 
four cases (out of 29), the lessee had sold the properties.  However, unearned increase 
was not claimed after it came to the notice of L&DO. 
(Para 4.2) 
• L&DO has so far not issued any specific instructions to Sub-registrar offices that the 
properties under the control of L&DO should not be registered without its permission.  
In the absence of such instructions, the Sub-registrar offices would not be in a position 
to identify the properties belonging to L&DO for registration purposes. 
(Para 4.3) 
• As per lease agreements, after every transfer of the lease rights, lessee has to intimate 
the same to the lessor.  Audit observed that in five out of 29 sampled properties, lessee 
sold/ transferred the lease rights to other person without prior permission of L&DO.  
L&DO neither took any action to get the property vacated from the unauthorized 
occupants nor initiated action for re-entry. 
(Para 4.4.1) 
• L&DO was allotting plots to various entities for construction of their building and 
running their activities.  It was seen that in three cases, L&DO had to cancel the 
allotment of plot and allot another plot in lieu of the same for reasons such as allotment 

Report No. 17 of 2021  
viii 
of encroached plot, allotment of smaller plot, etc., which shows that L&DO was not 
aware of the actual status of the properties vested under its control. 
(Para 4.4.2) 
• It is the responsibility of the lessee to get the plan sanctioned from the municipal 
authority/ local body and submit it to the L&DO.  Audit found that there was no 
sanctioned building plan in eight properties out of the sampled 29 properties and L&DO 
had been demanding the same from the lessee. It was not clear how L&DO conducted 
inspections without sanctioned building plans. 
(Para 4.5.1) 
• Scrutiny of 29 properties revealed that in case of 11 properties, the perpetual lease 
deeds/ license deeds were not executed.  In the absence of lease deed, necessary clauses 
relating to misuse/ unauthorized construction, revision of ground rent, transfer of lease 
rights and re-entering upon the property cannot be enforced.  
(Para 4.5.2) 
• For conversion of leasehold properties into freehold, the allottees were required to pay 
the difference of conversion charges etc. if the land rates were revised. Audit examined 
five properties which were converted into freehold. Despite revision of land rates in 
May 2017 effective from 1 April 2000, L&DO did not calculate the difference of 
conversion charges in any of these cases resulting in non-recovery of dues. 
(Para 4.8) 
With regard to Audit findings on Other Issues, Audit recommends that: 
6. L&DO should share its verified land records with the Land Revenue Department and 
Delhi Online Registration Information System (DORIS) of the Registration 
Department of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, and should 
evolve a workable solution through which sale/ transfer of any of its properties may 
be alerted at the time of registration/ mutation. 
7. Through a suitable working mechanism, L&DO should ensure that all the approved 
building plans for all of its properties are collected from concerned local bodies. 
These should be digitised and placed in the e-Dharti portal for use. There should be 
an arrangement to communicate the deviations from the Building plan observed by 
L&DO to the concerned local body for follow-up action. 
8. L&DO should ensure that lease documents for each of its leased out property are 
traced, verified and registered. In the event of the original lessee not being found, 
L&DO should re-enter the property. 
9. L&DO should identify the revised rent collectable from all freehold conversions and 
verify if land rates were revised for these. In case of revision in land rates, the amount 
that needs to be recovered from these buyers may be assessed and followed up with 
demand notices in a time-bound manner. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
1 
Chapter I  
Introduction 
The Land and Development Office (L&DO) traces its genesis to the office of the Chief 
Commissioner of Delhi, responsible for acquiring the land for new capital of Delhi in 
1911.  The land and development work was then done by an Executive Engineer of the 
Public Works Department (PWD), known as Land and Development Officer, in the Chief 
Engineer’s office, under the control of the Secretary to the Chief Commissioner in PWD.  
The Land and Development Officer was formally charged with the land record work and 
administration on behalf of the Government of Raisina Estate.  On transfer of the work 
under the direct administrative control of the Chief Commissioner, Delhi with effect from 
1 March 1928, the office of the Land and Development Officer came into being as a 
separate organization.  In 1958, the Chief Commissioner resumed Nazul
1 lands under the 
management of the Notified Area Committee, Civil Section, Delhi and put them under the 
administrative control of the L&DO.  L&DO was brought under the control of the then 
Ministry of Urban Development, presently Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(Ministry) with effect from 1 October 1959 and since then, it had been functioning as a 
subordinate office of this Ministry until it was upgraded as an attached office of the 
Ministry vide Gazette notification dated 04 April 2000.  
The main functions of the L&DO are: 
i) administration of the leasehold properties of Central Government land, 
ii) allotment of land to various Government/ semi-Government departments and 
various political, social, charitable, educational and religious institutions, 
iii)   conversion, substitution, mutation etc., of leasehold residential, commercial, 
industrial and mixed-use properties into freehold and execution of conveyance deeds, and 
iv)   realization of Government revenue in accordance with the terms of lease deeds 
and orders/ instructions issued by the Government from time to time. 
The properties administered by L&DO fall into two broad categories: 
• N
azul lands, which were acquired in the year 1911 for the formation of the capital of 
India at Delhi; and 
• R ehabilitation lands 2, which were acquired by the Government of India for the 
speedy rehabilitation of displaced persons from Pakistan. 
 
                                                           
1   The term 'Nazul land' inter alia means land or buildings in or near towns or villages which have 
escheated to the Government; property escheated or lapsed to the State.  The term ‘Nazul land’ is 
commonly applied to any land or house property belonging to Government either as an escheat or as 
having belonged to a former Government. 
2   Rehabilitation leases, which were earlier administered by the Rehabilitation Department, were 
transferred to the L&DO in 1983 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
2 
These properties were given on lease for residential, commercial and institutional 
purposes. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for the 
year 2020-21, L&DO is responsible for the administration of about 60,526 leases of the 
Central Government land in Delhi.  These include 57,389 residential, 1,597 commercial, 
1,430 institutional and 110 industrial properties, out of which 34,905 properties have been 
converted into freehold.  
1.1 Organizational setup  
The L&DO is headed by the Land and Development Officer, who is assisted by six 
Deputy Land and Development Officers, one Engineer Officer who heads the Technical 
Branch and one Senior Accounts Officer who also acts as Internal Audit Officer of 
L&DO.  The administration of leased properties is done through six Lease sections, three 
Property sections (PS), and one Residual Property cell (RP cell).  
 
 
(PG: Public Grievances; CDN: Coordination; ESO: Estate Officer; HPIL: Hemisphere Properties India Ltd) 
As against a sanctioned strength of 197 persons, the L&DO had 99 persons in position (as 
of January 2021).  In addition, 41 persons were also working on contract basis. 
1.2 Online Systems 
L&DO has an online system known as “e-Dharti”, which is meant for speedy disposal of 
public services (such as conversion, substitution and mutation of properties) including a 
payment system.  Capability to digitize sale-permission, mortgage permission and gift 
permission was under development.  Another application, the e-Dharti Geoportal, is a 
Geographic Information System (GIS) based application for mapping its properties.  
Through this application, the lessee will be able to see the basic details of the property 
along with a map showing its location.  The NIC is managing these applications and the 
IT resources. 
 
Land and Development Officer 
Deputy 
L&DO  
Deputy 
L&DO  
Deputy 
L&DO  
Deputy 
L&DO  
Deputy 
L&DO  
L&DO  
Deputy 
L&DO  
Engineer 
Officer 
Senior Accounts 
Officer 
Lease I/ 
Lease IV/ 
RP cell/ 
Vigilance/ 
PG cell/ RTI 
Lease II B/ 
PS-III 
Admn./ 
Lease V 
Lease II A/ 
PS-I 
PS II./ 
Policy-CDN 
Lease III/ 
Conversion 
cell/ 
ESO/HPIL  
Matters relating 
to Enforcement/ 
Technical & 
Drawing Section  
Looks after the 
internal audit cell 
and accounts 
section.  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
3 
1.3 Budget and expenditure 
The budget estimates, revised estimates and actual expenditure of L&DO during the years 
2016-17 to 2020-21 is as under: 
Table 1.1: Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure of L&DO 
(` in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure 
2016-17 9.94 10.50 10.42 
2017-18 10.76 11.16 11.03 
2018-19 12.04 13.11 12.13 
2019-20 11.93 13.86 12.66 
2020-21 12.97 12.97 Not Available 
(Source: Detailed Demand for Grants of MoHUA) 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
4 
Chapter II 
Mandate, Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Compliance Audit Report has been prepared under the provisions of Section 13 of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  
The Audit has been carried out in line with the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 
and Performance Audit Guidelines, 2014 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
2.1 Scope of Audit  
The Audit covered the examination of records relating to administration of Nazul lands 
under the L&DO for the period 2016-17 to 2018-19, with particular emphasis on follow-
up of previous report of CAG on ‘Functioning of L&DO’ (No.6 of 2009-10) and the 
Reports of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) thereon.  The Audit findings have been 
updated upto the year 2020-21, wherever the information/ records were made available by 
L&DO.  
2.2 Audit objectives  
The Audit objectives were to assess whether L&DO: 
i) fulfilled the assurances to the PAC on remedial actions/ measures in respect of the 
recommendations/ observations of the PAC on the Performance Audit Report No. 6 of 
2009-10; and 
ii) effectively managed the leases as per provisions of the lease agreements and 
instructions issued from time to time. 
2.3 Sources for audit criteria 
• Lease deeds signed by L&DO with lessees 
• Office manual of L&DO 
• Office orders, amendments and other circulars of L&DO 
• General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005 and 2017 
• Annual Reports of the Ministry of Urban Development/ Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs 
• Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 
• Citizen’s Charter of L&DO 
2.4 Audit methodology  
An Entry Conference was held on 30 September 2019 wherein the audit objectives, 
criteria, scope etc., were explained to the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs and cooperation for the conduct of the follow-up audit was solicited.  Thereafter, 
examination of records of L&DO was taken up.  Besides examination of records, joint 
inspection of properties selected from sampled cases was also done with the technical staff 
of L&DO. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
5 
2.5 Audit sampling     
L&DO was requested to provide the category-wise deta ils of the properties under its 
control.  However, complete information was not provided by L&DO and a list of 2,608 
properties was furnished. Due to the outbreak of Covid-19 pandemic, the follow-up audit 
was conducted based on examination of records relating to a sample of 29 properties 
selected statistically3. These 29 properties are as under: 
Table 2.1: Properties covered in audit 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of 
Properties 
No. of properties 
covered in audit 
Details of properties covered in audit 
1. Schools 3 i) Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj 
ii) Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary 
School, New Rajinder Nagar 
iii) Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road 
2. Presses 3 i) Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar (BSZ) 
Marg 
ii) Daily Tej, BSZ Marg 
iii)  Gulab Singh & Sons, BSZ Marg 
3. Hotels 2 i) Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath  
ii) Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road 
4. Hospitals 2 i)  Vidya Sagar Institute of Mental Health 
and Neuro-Sciences (VIMHANS), Nehru 
Nagar 
ii) St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari 
5. Business 
premises 
1 F-2, Connaught Place 
6. Cinema Halls 1 Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar 
7. Trade Unions 3 i) Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU), 
Rouse Avenue 
ii) All India Trade Union Congress 
(AITUC), Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg 
iii) Indian National Trade Union Congress 
(INTUC), Bhai Veer Singh Marg 
8. Coal Depots/ 
Gas Godowns 
3 i) M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal 
Company), Prithvi Raj Lane 
ii) Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue 
iii) Kayson Enterprises (Gas Godown), Sardar 
Patel Marg  
9. Petrol Pumps 2 i) M/s Prem Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg 
ii) Krishna Filling Service Station, Minto 
Road 
10. Political 
Parties 
1 All India Trinamool Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg 
11.  Other Nazul 
Properties  
5 i) 17, Jor Bagh 
ii) Sen Nursing Home, BSZ Marg 
iii) 29, Aurangzeb Road 
                                                           
3 The statistical sample was selected through Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA) software 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
6 
Sl. 
No. 
Category of 
Properties 
No. of properties 
covered in audit 
Details of properties covered in audit 
iv) 3, Kautilya Marg 
v) 7, Garage, Gole Market 
12. Freehold 
Properties 
3 i) 12, Golf Links,  
ii) 19, Prithvi Raj Road 
iii)  1, Hailey Road 
 Total 29  
2.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Land and Development Office and 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for timely completion of the audit. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
7 
Chapter III 
Assurances to PAC 
The functioning of L&DO was reviewed by the CAG and the Audit findings were 
included in Report No. 6 of 2009-10.  The Report was discussed by the PAC and its 
observations and recommendations were brought out (27 April 2012) in their 59
th Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’.  The PAC further 
brought out (21 March 2013) 78 th Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in their 59 th Report.  The 
follow-up action taken by the Ministry/ L&DO in this regard is discussed below.  Audit 
findings on the examination of records relating to 29 sampled properties are given in this 
chapter.  Additional details on the Audit findings on individual properties are given in 
Annexure-I.  The details of the recommendations made by the PAC and action thereon by 
the Ministry/ L&DO are given in Annexure-II.   
3.1  Non-production of records despite firm commitment by the Ministry 
Section 18 of CAG’s (DPC) Act, 1971, provides that the CAG shall have the authority to 
require that any accounts, books, papers and other documents which deal with or form the 
basis of or otherwise relevant to the transactions to which his duties in respect of Audit 
extend, shall be sent to such place as he may appoint for his inspection. 
During the previous Audit (2009-10), L&DO did not provide important records such as 
ground rent register, squatter register and register of damage for Audit examination. 
In the Action Taken Note on 59
th Report of PAC, the Ministry had submitted that earlier 
these registers were not maintained up-to-date and added that these were now being 
maintained and continuously updated in the computerised format.  The Ministry also 
stated that it is ready to produce any document to Audit.  The PAC in its 78 th Report 
cautioned the Ministry that denial of records, documents and information to Audit, 
regardless of the grounds, brings avoidable mistrust and inference that there is something 
awry with the functioning of the Department.  The Committee also desired to have a firm 
commitment from the Ministry that under no circumstance, should Audit be denied access 
to any records/ information in future.  The Ministry, in its reply to the PAC, stated 
(July 2013) that it had taken note of the observation of the Committee and made a firm 
commitment that, in future, there shall be no occasion of denial of records to Audit. 
In the current follow-up Audit, from October 2019 to May 2020, 70 Audit requisitions 
were issued, seeking various records/ documents/ information relating to the specific 29 
sampled properties.  The period of Audit was further extended to 2020-21 and accordingly 
additional information was sought.  Many of the records were, however, not produced to 
Audit, as listed below: 
i) Ground Rent Registers, Lease Deed Registers, Inspection Registers, Damage 
Registers etc., for the years 2016-17 to 2020-21. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
8 
ii) System Requirement Specification (SRS), User Requirement Specification (URS) 
and Data Dictionary of e-Dharti software and data dump captured in it for analysis. 
iii) Policy/ guidelines framed for inspection and survey of properties under different 
categories of leases.  Copies of inspection reports, action taken on the shortcomings 
noticed during the inspections along with relevant documents, and targets fixed by L&DO 
for inspections of the properties and achievement there against. 
iv) Policy files on allotment of land to Petrol Pumps, Hotels, Schools/ Educational 
Institutions, Hospitals, etc. 
v) Category-wise and year-wise (2016-17 to 2018-19) receipts due, demanded, 
collected and outstanding from ground rent, penalties, unearned increase, interest etc. and 
from conversion of leasehold rights into freehold rights, substitution, etc. 
vi) Year-wise (2016-17 to 2020-21) surveys carried out to assess encroachment and 
squatting on Government land, action taken for eviction of squatters under Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971, and cases of unauthorized 
squatters pending with the Estate Officer as on 31 March 2021 indicating the year since 
when pending. 
vii) Mechanism to monitor the court imposed social obligation of hospitals and 
educational institutions (which were allotted lands by L&DO) towards free treatment and 
admission of wards of economically weaker sections. 
Thus, despite a firm commitment by the Ministry to the PAC that there shall be no 
occasion of denial of records to Audit, most of the records sought during the follow-up 
audit of L&DO were not furnished. 
L&DO stated (April 2021) that due to Covid-19 pandemic, as whole country was under 
lockdown, and due to constraints
4 imposed by the Department of Personnel and Training, 
the records could not be provided.  These would be provided in future as and when 
required/ demanded. 
The reply is not tenable as the records not produced had been sought during the pre-Covid 
period.  Although access to e-Dharti was provided to Audit, in the absence of System 
Requirement Specification, User Requirement Specification and data dictionary, Audit 
was not able to analyse the database to the desired extent.  The fact, therefore, remains 
that the Ministry/ L&DO did not fulfil the commitment given to the PAC as most of the 
information/ records requisitioned by Audit were not provided by L&DO. 
Recommendation No. 1  
The Ministry may ensure that all the commitments and assurances provided to the Public 
Accounts Committee are closely monitored and implemented under intimation to Audit. 
                                                           
4  Constraints like offices were working with limited staff due to restrictions imposed during lockdown 
and after lifting of lockdown 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
9 
3.2 Authenticity of the figures of the leased properties  
Office Manual of L&DO prescribes that records relating to leased properties need to be 
maintained by the individual Lease and Property Sections, based on their territorial 
jurisdiction for exercising control over different aspects of lease administration.  In the 
previous CAG Report (2009-10) it was reported that out of the 60,526 leases administered 
by the L&DO, 28,924 leases had been converted into freehold.  Further, as per Annual 
Report of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for the year 2020-21, 34,905 
properties have been converted into freehold.  However, detailed colony-wise break-up of 
the current leases (excluding leases converted to freehold) was not available with L&DO.  
Audit could not derive any assurance on the authenticity of these figures maintained by 
the L&DO due to inadequate documentation. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Note (on 59th report of PAC), had stated that L&DO had 
3,373 Nazul properties of which 901 properties had been converted into freehold and 
51 files for Nazul properties were not traceable.  As regards rehabilitation properties, it 
was informed that there were 49,523 residential properties. 
The PAC, in the 78 th Report, noted that pursuant to their recommendations, the Ministry/ 
L&DO had started verifying/ cross-checking the records to arrive at an authentic figure of 
all the leased properties but found that position was still far from satisfactory.  Forty-six 
missing files pertaining to the Nazul properties were yet to be traced.  The Committee 
impressed upon the Ministry/ L&DO to intensify the measures initiated and make more 
vigorous and concerted efforts to locate the missing files and complete the data input of all 
the leased properties in a definite timeline so that the entrusted responsibility of the overall 
lease administration of prime Government properties in Delhi was carried out in a smooth 
and seamless manner. 
It was seen during the follow-up Audit that L&DO still did not have the authentic 
figures of its leased properties.  It was mentioned in the Annual Reports of the Ministry 
(till 2020-21) that L&DO was responsible for administration of about 60,526 leases of 
Central Government in Delhi.  However, as per the Press Information Bureau release 
dated 07 March 2019, L&DO has started working on GIS-based mapping of all its 
approximately 65,000 properties.  Further, during the Audit, L&DO provided a list of 
46,696 leased properties, but did not provide the current status of 46 missing files. Thus, 
even after 10 years from the previous audit, the authentic figures of the leased properties 
were not yet available with L&DO. 
L&DO replied (December 2020) that digitization entailed entry of every detail about the 
property.  The Nazul properties had been covered under the digitization drive and would 
be concluded by March 2021.  L&DO further stated (April 2021) that since the cadastral
5 
mapping of properties had started in L&DO, final figures would be made available when 
mapping was completed. 
                                                           
5   Cadastral mapping is a comprehensive register of the details related to the property of an area. These 
details include the precise location, dimensions and other geographical classification of the properties 
or individual parcels of land. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
10 
The reply is not tenable as scrutiny of the records relating to the 29 sampled properties 
during the follow-up Audit revealed that the property proforma on the e-Dharti portal was 
incomplete in all cases.  Besides, the Ground Rent register was maintained in e-Dharti for 
only 21,260 out of 60,526 properties as of August 2020 and was incomplete.  The 
Ministry/ L&DO had informed the PAC in October 2013 that data inputs for 2,943 
properties were pending as on August 2013, however, the process is still not completed 
even after a lapse of more than seven years.  Thus, L&DO did not have authentic 
information on the number of properties under its control. 
Recommendation No. 2 
L&DO needs to take stock of all the properties vested under its control and update all 
the relevant information pertaining to each property in the e-Dharti system, in order to 
avoid any possibility of unauthorised construction and misuse/ unauthorised sale of 
properties. 
3.3 Receipts 
L&DO gets various types of receipts viz., premium (onetime payment towards the cost of 
land), ground rent, additional ground rent (on additional construction), misuse charges (for 
non-permissible activities), damage charges (for unauthorized constructions), unearned 
increase (on sale of the property), penalty (on misuse charges), conversion charges (for 
converting the property from leasehold to freehold) and interest (on belated payments) etc.  
Receipts of L&DO for the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 are as shown in the chart below: 
Chart 3.1: Year-wise receipts of L&DO (``
`` in crore) 
 
I
t can be seen from the above chart that while receipts in 2017-18 increased by 
`256.33 crore (154 p er cent ) over 2016-17, in 2020-21 receipts decreased by 
`145.70 crore (38 p er cent) from the previous year. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the realization of recovery depends upon various 
factors and it strives to realize the demand diligently and the yearly variation in demand 
cannot be factored in. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
166.61
422.94
324.31
378.56
232.86

Report No. 17 of 2021 
11 
Even though L&DO did not give any specific reason for variations in receipts of revenue, 
it is apparent that L&DO has not consolidated the details of receipts collectable from all 
its leased properties.  If it had done so, the annual rent collectable would have been a 
standard figure subject to minor changes. 
Recommendation No. 3 
The annual budget should be prepared based on realistic assessment of all rent assessed 
and collectable during the year. 
3.3.1 Non-productions of records relating to receipts from Nazul properties 
As per the information on e-Dharti system, L&DO received `187.22 crore as receipts on 
a
ccount of ground rent 6 from Nazul properties during the period from 2016-17 to 2018-19 
(upto October 2018).  The details of ground rent receipts from Nazul properties after 
October 2018 were not available on e-Dharti. Due to non-furnishing of records/ 
information by L&DO related to receipts, figures of e-Dharti could not be cross-examined 
and tallied.  Therefore, veracity and completeness of figures in e-Dharti could not be 
verified. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the demand in respect of individual Nazul and 
Institutional properties was being updated and L&DO would strive to recover the 
demanded amount within stipulated time frame.  
Thus, even after a decade from the tabling of the last Audit Report, L&DO was still in the 
process of updating the demands for Government dues, despite computerisation. 
3.3.2 Non-receipt and non-revision of ground rent  
3.3.2.1   Non-receipt of ground rent  
One of the main functions of L&DO is recovery of all Government dues in respect of land 
under its control.  Ground rent is an annual charge levied at prescribed rates with reference 
to the premium or onetime payment levied at the time of allotment.  The ground rent is 
payable, in advance, either in two half-yearly instalments or annually on 1 April.  Further, 
Rule 9 of GFR 2017 stipulates that it is the duty of the concerned department to ensure 
that the receipts and dues of the Government are correctly and promptly collected.  
During the previous Audit in 2009-10, as the ground rent registers were not produced to 
Audit, it was inferred that they were not maintained.  L&DO had replied in October 2011 
that earlier, these Registers were maintained manually and to improve the functioning, 
L&DO had proposed to computerize these Registers.  In the Action Taken Note on 59
th 
Report of PAC, the Ministry had submitted that in order to streamline the collection of 
ground rent, the relevant Registers were being computerized under the overall scheme of 
computerization in L&DO.  The PAC in its 78
th Report stated that the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the exact dues of ground rent of the Nazul properties and the specific 
and additional steps taken to recover all the outstanding ground rent dues in a definite 
                                                           
6  Ground rent includes additional and revised ground rent also 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
12 
timeframe.  In response, the Ministry had stated (July 2013) that as and when an applicant 
makes a request for mutation, substitution, conversion etc., all outstanding dues including 
ground rent is recovered. 
During the follow-up Audit, scrutiny of the ground rent registers of the sampled 
29 properties revealed that the details of payment of ground rent had been left blank in 
15 cases
7 (52 per cent ).  In the remaining 14 cases, though details of ground rent had 
been filled but were not updated 8.  Thus, complete information of ground rent due, 
demanded, paid and outstanding was not recorded in the ground rent register of any of the 
test-checked properties.  
L&DO did not provide the details of outstanding ground rent.  In 21 out of the 29 sampled 
cases (72 per cent ), the outstanding ground rent amounting to `8.67 crore and interest 
a
mounting to `8.92 crore as on 31 March 2021 was worked out by Aud it, as detailed in 
Annexure-III.  Out of the remaining eight properties, ground rent was not due in case of 
seven properties9, and it could not be worked out in case of one property viz., Sen Nursing 
Home, BSZ Marg due to non-availability of required information. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that as per the procedure followed by it, the updated 
demand is served on the lessee at the time of substitution, mutation and conversion of 
tenure of land from leasehold to freehold, which includes updated ground rent.  The lessee 
generally pays the demand lump-sum, which includes various components viz., damages, 
misuse charges, etc., and bifurcation of ground rent is not feasible.  Of the total leases 
being administered by L&DO, between 60-65 per cent of properties are below 100 square 
yards or less where the ground rent is very nominal.  Therefore, in cases of residential, 
commercial and industrial properties, the ground rent is recovered at the time of 
substitution, mutation and conversion.  L&DO further stated (April 2021) that they are in 
the process of digitisation of receipts and have started accepting ground rent through 
online mode.  Each property under L&DO is allotted Property ID number.  Hence, though 
it may take some time but L&DO would be able to recover the outstanding ground rent. 
The reply of L&DO is not acceptable as Rule 9 of GFR 2017 stipulates that it is the duty 
of the concerned department to ensure that the receipts and dues of the Government are 
correctly and promptly collected.  Further, PAC in its 78
th report (2012-13) impressed 
upon the Ministry/ L&DO to recover all the outstanding ground rent dues in a definite 
                                                           
7  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj; Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road; 7, Garage, Gole Market; 
Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue; Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, New Rajinder 
Nagar; M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithvi Raj Lane; 3, Kautilya Marg; Prem 
Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg; F-2, Connaught Place, Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai 
Veer Singh Marg; Gulab Singh & Sons; Sen Nursing Home; Hotel Le Meridien; Alankar Cinema; 
and Daily Tej 
8   Earliest being August 2012 (St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari) and latest being April 2018 
(VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar) 
9   12, Golf Links; 3, Kautilya Marg and Sukhdeep Coal Depot (ground rent was not due as these were 
freehold properties); All India Trinamool Congress (ground rent was not due as the possession could 
not be handed over by L&DO due to encroachment); M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (ground rent was not 
claimed due to unauthorized occupation of property); 19, Prithvi Raj Road (ground rent was not due, 
due to court’s decision); and Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road (ground rent had been paid, so not due)  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
13 
time-frame.  However, it is evident that the L&DO neither maintained proper records of 
ground rent nor made any efforts to timely recover the same.  The reply of L&DO is silent 
on non-maintenance of ground rent registers, nor does the reply mention any time-frame 
for completion of allotment of Property IDs and recovery of ground rent. 
Case Study 1 
In case of F-2 Connaught Place, the perpetual lease was executed in March 1925. The 
ground rent was fixed at the rate of `330 per annum, however, the same has not been 
realized after January 1981.  No demand letter has been issued to the lessee for payment 
of the ground rent after January 1981.  L&DO stated (December 2020 and April 2021) 
that the file had been sent to Technical Section for carrying out inspection and thereafter 
demand for revised ground rent, additional ground rent etc., would be updated.  
The reply is not tenable as the file had been sent to Technical Section earlier also 
(in June 2004) but the same was not followed up at all.  The fact remains that for the last 
40 years neither ground rent has been realized nor any demand letter issued. 
3.3.2.2 Revision of ground rent 
Ground rent is revisable at the option of lessor (L&DO) once in every 30 years.  An office 
order was issued in January 1984, whereby the earlier ground rent was to be enhanced by 
a specified multiple, depending on the period of delay in revision. 
During the previous Performance Audit (2009-10), complete details of the revision of 
ground rent of the Nazul leases that had fallen due for revision could not be ascertained in 
Audit.  In the Action taken note on 59
th report of PAC, the Ministry had stated that with a 
view to recover the outstanding ground rent at the earliest, the process of revision of 
ground rent in respect of Nazul leases had been completed. 
The PAC, in its 78
th Report, stated that there is no denying the fact that the work relating 
to ground rent revision of the pending cases got severely affected due to non-functioning 
of the ‘Revision of Ground Rent Cell’.  The Committee impressed upon the Ministry/ 
L&DO to complete the revision of the remaining ground rent cases in a time-bound 
manner. 
During the follow-up Audit, it was seen that out of 29 properties, ground rent was due for 
revision in 21 properties.  However, ground rent was not revised/ revised belatedly/ 
revised incorrectly as shown in the table below:  
Table 3.1: Non-revision/ belated revision/ incorrect revision of ground rent 
Particulars No. of 
properties 
Name of the properties 
Ground Rent not 
revised since 
allotment 
10 i) 29, Aurangzeb Road 
ii) Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road 
iii) Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj 
iv) Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai Veer 
Singh Marg 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
14 
Particulars No. of 
properties 
Name of the properties 
v) F-2, Connaught Place 
vi) VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar 
vii) Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road 
viii) Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
ix) Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath 
x) St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari (ground rent 
was not revised for two out of three plots allotted 
to St. Stephen’s Hospital) 
Ground rent was 
revised belatedly 
7 i)  Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
ii) Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
iii) Gulab Singh & Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
iv) Kayson Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg 
v) 17, Jor Bagh 
vi) Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, 
New Rajinder Nagar 
vii) St. Stephen’s Hospital (ground rent was revised 
belatedly for one out of three plots allotted to St. 
Stephen’s Hospital) 
Second revision of 
ground rent not 
done 
1 Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar (second revision was not 
done although due in the year 2017) 
Ground rent revised 
by 4 times instead 
of 10 times 
1 7, Garage, Gole Market 
Ground rent fixed 
provisionally but 
not revised, despite 
revision of land 
rates 
2 i) Centre of Indian Trade Unions, Rouse Avenue; and 
ii) All India Trade Union Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg 
L&DO stated (April 2021) that revision of ground rent is done at the time of conversion of 
property from leasehold to freehold, mutation and whenever demands are being issued.  In 
some cases, due to non-submission of documents, the revision could not take place.  
Moreover, due to Covid pandemic/ other exigencies in office, the revision of ground rent 
could not be carried out, but the same will be completed by March 31, 2022. 
The reply of L&DO is not acceptable as Rule 9 of GFR 2017 stipulates that it is the duty 
of the concerned department to ensure that the receipts and dues of the Government are 
correctly and promptly collected.  Further, the plea of Covid pandemic and other 
exigencies is also not acceptable as the ground rent had not been revised since allotment 
of the properties in 10 out of 29 cases covered in audit. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
15 
Case Study 2 
Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) and All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
were allotted (February 2009 and May 2005 respectively) land measuring 504 square 
meters at Pushp Vihar and two plots having an area of 476 square meters each at DDU 
Marg at premium (land cost) of `88 lakh per acre and annual ground rent at the rate of 
2.5 per cent of premium.  CITU was paying ground rent as fixed at the time of allotment 
(ground rent for the period 2015-18 and 2019-21 was not paid) whereas AITUC did not 
pay any ground rent since allotment.  The premium and ground rent were fixed 
provisionally as the land rates were due for revision from 1 April 2000.  After the 
revision of land rates in June 2017, the rates were revised to `929.70 lakh per acre in 
case of CITU and `447.30 lakh per acre in case of AITUC but the revise d premium and 
ground rent were not intimated to the lessee which resulted in outstanding dues 
amounting to `2.63 crore10 upto March 2021 (calculated by Audit). 
3.4 Inspection of the properties 
L&DO issued an office order in March 2008 which stipulated that the Manual of L&DO 
stands amended to the extent that mandatory inspection would be carried out once in three 
years instead of on annual basis.  Thus, L&DO was required to carry out inspections of at 
least 33 per cent of the properties annually.  As per Annual Report of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs for the year 2020-21, L&DO was responsible for 
administration of about 60,526 leases, out of which 34,905 properties had been converted 
into freehold. This showed that there were 25,621 properties remaining, which were 
required to be mandatorily inspected at least once in three years. 
The CAG’s Performance Audit Report No. 6 of 2009-10 on L&DO had stated that no 
uniform policy for routine inspection of properties had been adopted and Audit could not 
ascertain the number of inspections conducted by L&DO during 2003-08, as the Register 
of inspections was not maintained.  In the Action Taken Note on 59
th Report of PAC, the 
Ministry stated that at the time of Audit, inspection register was not maintained and these 
were now maintained and continuously updated in computerized format. 
Follow-up Audit revealed the following: 
• Records related to inspection of properties were called for but were not provided to 
Audit.  It was seen in e-Dharti that only 2,726 properties were inspected during the period 
2016-17 to 2020-21.  The year-wise inspections carried out are shown in the table below: 
Table 3.2: Year-wise inspection of properties by L&DO 
Year No. of properties 
required to be 
inspected (33%) 
No. of properties 
inspected 
Percentage of properties 
inspected against 
required inspections  
Percentage shortfall 
2016-17 8,455 495 6 94 
2017-18 8,455 663 8 92 
                                                           
10   `` `` 2.63 crore = `` `` 84.52 lakh (premium) + `` `` 41.32 lakh (ground rent) in case of AITUC + `` `` 104.83 lakh 
(premium) + `` `` 32.82 lakh (ground rent) in case of CITU  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
16 
Year No. of properties 
required to be 
inspected (33%) 
No. of properties 
inspected 
Percentage of properties 
inspected against 
required inspections  
Percentage shortfall 
2018-19 8,455 600 7 93 
2019-20 8,455 525 6 94 
2020-21 8,455 443 5 95 
Total   2,726     
It may be seen from the above table that the year-wise inspections during 2016-17 to 
2020-21 ranged between five per cent  and eight per cent  of the mandatory inspection 
required to be conducted annually. 
• Examination of section-wise details of inspections in e-Dharti showed that the 
number of properties inspected in respect of some of the sections was negligible. For 
instance, only one property each pertaining to Lease Sections 5A and 5B was inspected 
during 2016-17.  
• Audit had called for the Register of Inspections.  However, despite consistent 
efforts and multiple reminders, L&DO did not provide it.  In the absence of a reasonable 
response on the reasons for not providing the Register, Audit is of the view that either such 
Register was not maintained or was not maintained properly. 
• It was observed that out of the sampled 29 properties, inspection of only 
10 properties
11 was carried out during 2016-19. The details of inspections of the 
29 properties during 2019-20 and 2020-21 were sought, but these were not provided to 
Audit.  Misuse/ unauthorized constructions/ encroachments were observed in nine cases. 
• It was observed that since mandatory inspections (once in three years) were not 
being conducted, there was no effective mechanism for ensuring that breaches were 
intimated to the lessee. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the mandate of L&DO is to inspect each property after 
three years.  The inspection is carried out prior to mutation and conversion of tenure of 
land from leasehold to freehold.  Due to heavy workload and manpower crunch, 
sometimes it is not feasible to stick to the schedule.  L&DO has initiated the drive to 
inspect Nazul and Institutional properties as per extant order and to recover up-to-date 
Government dues.  L&DO further stated (April 2021) that the technical staff of their 
office is not provided with an official vehicle for inspection, and they use local transport 
in all weather conditions.  After inspection, they have to file an inspection report on the 
computer and work out the charges payable by the lessee.  Sometimes they are also 
engaged in other works like going for site visits/ inspections with senior officers of the 
Ministry.  In future, L&DO will fix targets for inspection of properties. 
                                                           
11  Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Gulab Singh and 
Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; M/s Kayson Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg; 7, Garage, Gole 
Market; 17, Jor Bagh; 29, Aurangzeb Road; Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road; Indian National Trade 
Union Congress, Bhai Veer Singh Marg; and 19, Prithvi Raj Road 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
17 
The reply of the L&DO is not acceptable as the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU), Department 
of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) recommended (March 2018) strength of 14 technical 
staff/ persons as against the existing strength of 13 in various technical cadres of L&DO.  
This indicates that L&DO was having shortage of only one technical person.  Lack of 
timely inspection leaves open the possibility of increasing number of breaches remaining 
undetected, with consequential non-recovery of damage/ misuse charges resulting in loss 
of revenue to the Government. 
Case Study 3 
Temporary allotment of land at Minto Road, New Delhi was made in June 2008 to 
BPCL (Krishna Filling Service Station) for setting up of Petrol pump.  The allotment 
was made on a purely temporary basis for a period of two years in the first instance.  The 
site was never inspected by L&DO after allotment.  
L&DO replied (December 2020 and April 2021) that after the allotment in 2008, the 
petrol pump was not functional due to land use and other issues.  
To verify L&DO’s claim, Audit made a physical inspection of the petrol pump (January 
2021) and found it to be functional at the site.  Despite receipt of only part payments 
from BPCL, L&DO did not bother to inspect the property to know the exact status of the 
site.  
Case Study 4 
In the previous Audit Report (2009-10), it was pointed out that in the case of Kendriya 
Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj, sub-division of plot was done by it in 2004 and a portion of 
the plot was given to a private party.  The private party constructed a building, providing 
facilities for swimming, gymnasium, taekwondo and judo.  It was also noticed by Audit 
that excavation was done at the site for construction of a deep ice hockey rink. L&DO 
was not aware that the unauthorized sports complex was being run by a private party as 
the last inspection of the premises was conducted in 1998. 
During the follow-up Audit, it was seen from the records that the sports complex in the 
school premises still existed.  Thus, a private party constructed a sports complex in the 
school in an unauthorised manner, and L&DO remained unaware of such construction 
until Audit brought it to the notice of L&DO in 2008.  Since then, L&DO has done only 
one inspection of the premises (in July 2011) and issued two letters (July 2018 and May 
2019) to the lessee for submission of complete set of sanctioned building plan.  Thus, 
due to non-conduct of timely inspections, L&DO failed to exercise effective control on 
the properties under its control. 
L&DO replied (December 2020 and April 2021) that the school authorities had so far 
not submitted sanctioned building plan, hence, the exact quantum of the breaches could 
not be ascertained.  A letter had been issued on 9 December 2020 to the school 
authorities giving them final opportunity to submit the desired documents.  If no reply 
was received, L&DO would prepare a demand note by treating the entire structure as 
unauthorized. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
18 
L&DO did not seek the sanctioned building plan from the local body.  Owing to its 
inaction, the school property situated at a prime location was exploited by a private party 
for commercial purposes.  Despite assurances to the PAC, L&DO did not take action 
against the misuse.  Instead of creating a working mechanism with the local bodies for 
getting copies of approved building plans in respect of its leased lands, L&DO chose to 
wait indefinitely for the lessee to fulfil its requirements, thereby abetting the lessee to 
alter land use at will.  
Recommendation No. 4 
In order to enable simultaneous updation of inspection registers and follow-up, L&DO 
may consider developing a GIS enabled mobile application with cross integration 
facilities with e-Dharti portal to upload the inspection results. 
3.5 Ineffective monitoring over provision of free treatment/ admission to 
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in hospitals and schools 
3.5.1 Government of India decided to assist hospitals by allotting lands at highly 
concessional rates, so as to involve them in achieving the larger social objective of 
providing health services to the people.  The Hon’ble High Court of Delhi, in its judgment 
dated 22 March 2007, directed that 20 hospitals named in the judgment and/or all other 
hospitals identically situated shall strictly provide free treatment to indigent
12/ poor 
persons of Delhi to the extent of 25 per cent  in out-patient departments (OPD) and 
10 per cent  in in-patient departments (IPD). L&DO issued an order (2 February 2012) 
regarding the policy for free treatment to indigent/ poor persons of Delhi to be followed 
by the private hospitals which had been allotted land by L&DO on concessional rates.  In 
pursuance of the Hon’ble Supreme Court order dated 9 July 2018, L&DO directed 
(August 2018) the hospitals to scrupulously follow the conditions laid down in its order 
dated 02 February 2012 and warned about cancellation of lease in case of any violations.   
In their 59
th Report, the PAC decried the glaring shortfalls on the part of hospitals in 
giving the prescribed free treatment to patients belonging to EWS and flagrant violation of 
the lease terms.  The PAC impressed upon the Ministry to warn the defaulting hospitals to 
mend their ways within a specific period failing which stringent and exemplary action, 
including cancellation of allotment, be taken against them. 
While replying to the 59
th Report of PAC, L&DO stated that a special committee headed 
by the Principal Secretary, Health (Government of NCT of Delhi) was constituted to 
ensure effective implementation of the orders of Delhi High Court.  It was further stated 
that the monthly reports received from the inspection committee set up by Delhi High 
Court were examined regularly.  
The Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi was required to send 
monthly reports to L&DO in respect of the provision of free treatment to EWS category 
patients. However, during the examination of records related to two hospitals (VIMHANS 
                                                           
12  Poor and needy persons 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
19 
hospital, Nehru Nagar and St. Stephen’s hospital, Tis Hazari) during the follow-up Audit, 
only two reports were found in respect of VIMHANS hospital (August 2018 and January 
2019) wherein it was stated that the hospital had not achieved the target of 10 per cent of 
IPD and 25 per cent of the total OPD, but no complaints regarding denial of free services 
were received against the hospital.  In respect of St. Stephen’s hospital, no such report was 
found.  
L&DO was responsible for compliance of directions of the High Court for ensuring free 
treatment to EWS category patients by the concerned hospitals.  However, it is evident 
that L&DO did not assure regular receipt of reports from the Directorate of Health 
Services.  Thus, L&DO did not pursue the matter effectively to comply with the directions 
of the High Court and the PAC. Audit, thus, could not ascertain the extent to which the 
hospitals in the leased lands of L&DO were offering free treatment to the EWS category 
patients. 
L&DO replied (January 2021 and April 2021) that as per Hon’ble Supreme Court’s order 
of July 2018, the Directorate of Health Services shall ensure/ monitor free treatment to the 
EWS category in the hospitals through a committee set up by them. A report in this regard 
is received from the Directorate of Health Services from time to time.  Based on the 
report, action as per lease terms is taken against the hospitals. 
The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that in the test-checked hospitals only two 
such reports were found in the case of VIMHANS hospital and no report was found in the 
case of St. Stephen’s hospital.  Efforts made by L&DO in obtaining regular reports were 
not found in the records provided to Audit.  L&DO also did not forward any documentary 
evidence in support of their reply.  Further, action taken against the defaulting hospitals as 
directed by the PAC was also not intimated. 
Case Study 5 
In case of VIMHANS hospital, L&DO had allotted a land measuring 3.5 acres, in Nehru 
Nagar, New Delhi, in May 1984.  L&DO stated (December 2020) that in view of 
non-compliance of EWS condition since 2003-04, the property was under re-entered 
condition (i.e., the possession of the property was taken over back by L&DO).  
However, during verification (February 2021), Audit noticed that the hospital was in 
operation and was accepting the appointments for OPD.  Further, Audit did not find any 
re-entry orders issued to the lessee and L&DO also did not provide any documentary 
evidence to that effect. 
L&DO stated (April 2021) that a demand letter dated 07 December 2020 for withdrawal 
of re-entry (i.e., for handing over the possession back to the hospital) was issued to the 
hospital.  However, the payment has not been made by the hospital till date. 
L&DO, however, did not furnish a copy of the demand letter dated 07 December 2020 to 
Audit.  Further, the reply of L&DO was silent on further action taken by it as a 
consequence of non-payment of demanded amount by the hospital. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
20 
3.5.2 In case of  schools, the Delhi Government vide circular dated 29 December 2015 
issued guidelines for reservation of 25 per cent  seats for admission under EWS/ 
Disadvantaged Group category at entry-level classes by private unaided recognised 
schools of Delhi for the academic session 2016-17 and the same was revised to 
20 per cent  for the session 2019-20. During scrutiny of records related to two schools 
(Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj and Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road), Audit observed 
that L&DO did not have any monitoring mechanism to ascertain whether conditions for 
admission of wards of EWS category was followed by the schools.  
L&DO stated (April 2021) that it is for the Directorate of School Education to look into 
the compliance of EWS condition.  The school authorities submit the report on EWS to 
the Directorate, which will send intimation to the L&DO in case of any violation. 
No records/ reports relating to the compliance of condition relating to EWS category of 
students were, however, found during Audit.  As the lands were allotted to the schools at 
concessional rates by L&DO, pro-active steps should have been taken by L&DO to verify 
the compliance to the guidelines for admission to EWS category of students. 
Thus, in the absence of an effective monitoring mechanism in L&DO, Audit could not 
ascertain the extent of achievement of social objective of providing health services 
(by hospitals) and education (by schools) to indigent people. 
Recommendation No. 5 
L&DO should develop a robust monitoring mechanism to ensure that the benefit to EWS 
beneficiaries is being provided by the Hospitals and Schools, and coordinate with the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to ensure that the conditions for 
admission in school and free medical treatment of EWS category are followed. 
3.6 Lack of effective and efficient administration of lease applications 
Citizens’ Charter of L&DO stipulates that the L&DO would ensure good quality of 
service by disposal of applications on conversion, sale permission, mutation, and 
substitution etc., within a period of three months from the date of receipt of information 
and documents from the lessee. 
It was observed during previous Audit (2009-10) that 51 per cent  of lease applications 
took more than 90 days for disposal while 5 per cent of cases took more than two years in 
disposal.  Some applications were processed with great speed and finalized within 15 days 
and others were kept pending and settled after considerable delays.  Audit had opined that 
the possibility of undue favour to certain applicants could not be ruled out. 
In its 59
th Report, the PAC had stated that there was lack of effective and efficient 
processing and disposal of lease applications by the L&DO.  The Committee stated that in 
some cases, time taken in disposal were as much as two years, whereas lease applications 
for 909 properties were processed with a remarkable speed of 15 days or lesser. In the 
Action Taken Note, the Ministry stated that L&DO has to exercise due diligence to 
safeguard the interests of the Government and genuine lessees. For this, L&DO had 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
21 
prescribed an elaborate system of verification to avoid possible frauds and forgery. It was 
also decided vide L&DO’s Office order dated 26 July 2012 that all the applications 
for conversion, sale permission, mutation, substitution etc., would be processed in a 
time-bound manner and applications which were not complete in all respects would be 
returned in original to the applicants highlighting the deficiency within 15 days. 
During the follow-up Audit, records related to disposal of lease applications were not 
provided to Audit.  However, it was observed from e-Dharti that inordinate time was taken 
in processing of different types of applications.  Audit observations are discussed below: 
3.6.1 Age-wise analysis of disposal of applications revealed the following position:  
 
Table 3.3: Time taken for disposal of applications (Position as on 29 July 2021) 
Chart 3.2: Age-wise analysis of time taken for disposal of applications (as on 29 July 2021) 
 
It could be seen from the above chart that 71 per cent of total applications were disposed 
of after the stipulated timeline of 90 days as given in the citizens’ charter. Thus, the 
performance on account of timely disposal of lease applications has even deteriorated as 
compared to what was observed during the previous Audit.  Further, while nine per cent 
of the applications were disposed of after a lapse of 1,500 days, four per cent  of 
applications were disposed of within 15 days only.  
3.6.2 Audit further observed that 61 cases of conversion, substitution and mutation were 
disposed of within a day as detailed in the table given below: 
 
785; 4%
4,483; 25%
7,795; 42%
3,627; 20%
1,710; 9%
0-15 days
16-90 days
91-365 days
366-1500 days
More than 1500 days
Application Type 0-15 
days 
16-90 
days 
91-365 
days 
366-1500 
days 
More than 
1500 days 
Total 
Conversion 225 2,140 5,058 2,310 916 10,649 
Substitution 465 2,069 2,256 1,032 580 6,402 
Mutation 80 222 394 234 162 1,092 
Sale Permission 2 19 25 20 5 71 
Mortgage Permission 12 33 57 28 42 172 
Gift Permission 1 0 5 3 5 14 
Total  785 4,483 7,795 3,627 1,710 18,400 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
22 
Table 3.4 Applications disposed of within a day 
 Conversion Substitution Mutation Total 
Approved  4 14 4 22 
Rejected 29 10 0 39 
Total  33 24 4 61 
3.6.3   It was also observed that not only the approval of applications took a long time, but 
even the rejection of applications had also been made after inordinate delays, as detailed 
in the table below: 
Table 3.5: Applications disposed of beyond 1500 days 
Application 
type 
Rejection of applications Approval of applications 
No. of 
applications 
rejected beyond 
1500 days 
Maximum time 
taken in 
rejecting a 
particular case 
(in days) 
No. of applications 
approved beyond 
1500 days 
Maximum time 
taken in 
approving a 
particular case 
(in days) 
Conversion  662 8,439 254 6,719 
Substitution 404 4,793 176 5,228 
Mutation  133 4,745 29 4,395 
Total 1,199  459  
It can be seen from the above table that 1,199 applications for conversion, substitution and 
mutation were rejected after taking more than 1,500 days. Maximum time taken in 
rejecting a particular application for conversion, substitution and mutation was more than 
23 years, 13 years and 13 years respectively.  The maximum time taken in approving a 
particular application for conversion, substitution and mutation was more than 18 years, 
14 years and 12 years respectively. This shows that the processing of applications was 
extremely tardy. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that time given in the citizens’ charter is indicative in nature 
and L&DO strives to timely process the cases relating to substitution, mutation and 
conversion of properties.  However, as the matter relates to immovable properties, the 
documents play an important role, and it becomes incumbent on L&DO to thoroughly 
scrutinize the documents submitted by the lessee or the buyer.  Generally, it happens that 
the documents submitted are incomplete or are defective and the lessee is requested to 
rectify the same.  Therefore, the finalization of cases is delayed which cannot be attributed 
to the working of L&DO.  It was further stated (April 2021) that earlier there was a policy 
that if one’s substitution/ mutation application is pending; he can apply for conversion from 
leasehold to freehold simultaneously. In the case of substitution and mutation, if documents 
are not in order, then the party takes time to reply the same. And during inspection of the 
premises if the party is not able to submit the required documents like sanctioned building 
plan etc., this also leads to delay in finalisation of the case.  Due to computerisation, it has 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
23 
been decided that only the person in whose name the property is in the records of L&DO, 
can apply for conversion to freehold property. 
The reply of L&DO is not acceptable as it took more than 1,500 days (i.e., more than four 
years) for rejection of 1,199 applications for conversion, substitution and mutation as 
against prescribed time limit of three months. L&DO’s contention that documents 
submitted used to be incomplete or defective is also not acceptable as applications that 
were not complete in all respect were to be returned in original to the applicant highlighting 
the deficiency within 15 days of receipt.  Further, there was inordinate delay in processing 
of different category of applications and only 29 per cent of the total 18,400 applications 
were disposed of within the time limit of 90 days.  The fact remains that despite 
observation of PAC that there was lack of effective and efficient processing in disposal of 
lease applications by the L&DO, there was still a significant scope for improvement in the 
disposal of lease applications by the L&DO.
 
3.7 Computerisation of records 
Computerisation helps in smoother and faster delivery of services to the public, in a 
transparent manner.  L&DO introduced e-Dharti software for speedy disposal of public 
services.  The property proforma in e-Dharti was meant for providing all important 
information about the property.  
The Ministry had given assurance to the PAC (59 th Report) that computerization work 
related to Nazul properties would be completed by December 2011 and all other files/ 
registers would be digitized by June 2012.  Further, in its Action Taken Reply (ATR) on 
the 78 th Report of PAC (2012-13), the Ministry stated that the inspection register of 
L&DO is now maintained and continuously updated in computerized format. 
During the follow-up Audit, L&DO did not provide the records relating to implementation 
of e-Dharti as a whole.  However, during the scrutiny of the records related to the sampled 
29 properties, it was observed that important registers such as inspection register, damage 
register, squatter register etc., were also not maintained in the computerised format.  It was 
also observed that: 
• Property proforma was not complete for any of the 29 properties. 
• Out of 60,526 properties, Ground Rent Register was maintained in e-Dharti for 
only 21,260 properties as on August 2020.  
• The details of payment of ground rent had been left blank in the Ground Rent 
Register in 15 cases
13.  In the remaining 14 cases, although details of ground rent had been 
                                                           
13  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj; Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road; 7, Garage, Gole Market; 
Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue; Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, New Rajinder 
Nagar; M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithvi Raj Lane; 3, Kautilya Marg; Prem 
Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg; F-2, Connaught Place; Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai 
Veer Singh Marg; Gulab Singh & Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur 
Shah Zafar Marg; Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath; Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar; and Daily Tej, 
Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
24 
filled, these were not updated.  Thus, complete information of ground rent due and paid 
had not been given for any of the sampled properties. 
• The details of the ground rent, wherever recorded in the Ground Rent Register, did 
not match with the information given in the property files.  Two cases of such 
discrepancies are mentioned as under: 
Table 3.6: Mismatch between information in Ground Rent Register & Property Files 
(Amount in `) 
Name of the Entity Ground rent paid as per 
the property file 
Ground rent paid as per Ground 
Rent Register in e-Dharti 
M/s Krishna Filling Station 69,10,176 52,79,689 
Centre for Indian Trade 
Unions 
1,91,793 56,450 
Thus, columns of the property proforma and Ground Rent Register were either left blank 
or were not updated in the e-Dharti module which defeated the purpose of 
computerization of records.  
L&DO replied (January 2021) that they are fast moving towards the process of 
digitization of records and once the process of substitution, mutation and conversion is 
initiated, the records of the said properties get automatically digitized.  
The Ministry/ L&DO failed to fulfil its commitment/assurance given to the PAC that all 
files/ registers would be computerized by June 2012 and even after a lapse of more than 
eight years, the process of digitization was yet to be completed.  Audit also observed that 
in one case (out of 29 sampled properties) there was mismatch between details available in 
original records and in e-Dharti as given below: 
Case Study 6 
In case of Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, there were discrepancies 
between the information on e-Dharti and the original records as given below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Description Data incorporated in the e-
Dharti 
As per the original record 
Lessee details Vidya Sharan Girls Sr. Sec. 
School, New Rajinder Nagar 
Vidya Bhawan Girls’ Sr. Sec. 
School, New Rajinder Nagar 
Plot Area 1.5 acre 1.472 acre 
Whether 
additional land 
allotted 
Data not filled Yes 
Date of allotment 
of additional land 
09.03.1977 13.07.1971 
Inspection Details 13.08.2003, 23.04.1982, 
02.11.1983, 08.04.1985, 
30.11.1998 
23.08.1971, 05.05.1974, 20.09.1975, 
10.04.1978, 23.04.1982, 02.11.1983, 
08.04.1985, 30.11.1998, 13.08.2003, 
13.06.2008 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
25 
3.8 Summing Up 
During the follow-up Audit, it was observed that despite Ministry’s assurances given in 
the Action Taken Notes submitted to the Public Accounts Committee, most of the 
deficiencies pointed out in the Audit Report continued to persist. Most of the documents/ 
information sought during the follow-up audit were not provided by L&DO. In the 
Performance Audit Report No. 6 of 2009-10, it was mentioned that the authenticity of the 
number of properties administered by L&DO could not be verified.  The follow-up Audit 
revealed that L&DO still did not have the authentic figures of its leased properties.  
Scrutiny of the ground rent registers of the sampled 29 properties revealed that the details 
of payment of ground rent had been left blank in 15 cases (52 per cent ) and in the 
remaining 14 cases, though details of ground rent had been filled but were not updated.  
Thus, complete information of ground rent due, demanded, paid and outstanding was not 
recorded in the ground rent register of any of the test-checked properties. Further, out of 
29 properties, ground rent was due for revision in 21 properties.  However, ground rent 
was not revised/ revised belatedly/ revised incorrectly. 
The year-wise inspections conducted by L&DO during the years 2016-17 to 2020-21 
ranged between five per cent and eight per cent of the mandatory inspection required to be 
conducted annually.  Further, wherever inspections were done, show-cause notices/ breach 
notices for violations were not issued on time and efforts to re-enter the property were 
found lacking, thereby rendering the inspections ineffective.  There was no system in 
place to monitor compliance with the condition of offering free medical care to poor and 
indigent patients and free education to children from economically weaker sections. 
Citizens’ Charter of L&DO stipulates that the L&DO would ensure good quality of 
service by disposal of applications on conversion, sale permission, mutation, and 
substitution etc., within a period of three months from the date of receipt of information 
and documents from the lessee. L&DO's administration of lease applications was, 
however, found to be ineffective and inefficient, with excessive delays in the disposal of 
applications. Besides, the objective of computerization of records was defeated by 
incomplete information in e-Dharti. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
26 
Chapter IV 
Other Issues 
In addition to the review of follow-up action taken by the Ministry/ L&DO, Audit also 
observed fresh issues on the examination of records relating to 29 sampled properties 
which are mentioned in this chapter.  Additional details on the Audit findings on the 
individual properties are given in Annexure-I.   
4.1. Non-receipt of other dues 
As per L&DO Manual, damages are charged for unauthorized construction.  The charges 
for misuse of the land/ building constructed thereon for a purpose other than that for 
which the land/building was allotted shall be levied from the date on which such misuse is 
established and up to the date of communication of terms or sanction of the building plan 
in accordance with which construction has been re-executed or the date of starting 
construction whichever is earliest. 
Examination of the property files relating to 29 sampled properties revealed the 
following: 
4.1.1 Demand letters in respect of only 20 properties amounting to `326.54 crore
14 were 
last issued to the lessees between June 1977 (29, Aurangzeb Road) to December 2019 
(Gulab Singh & Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg) of which L&DO could not recover 
`325.12 crore (99.57 p er cent), as shown in the table below: 
Table 4.1: Demand letters issued by L&DO and amount recovered there against 
(```` in lakh) 
Sl.No. Name of the Property Amount 
demanded 
Amount 
recovered 
1 Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, 
New Rajinder Nagar 
0.008 Nil 
2 Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road 796.78 0.16 
3 Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 4,211.00 Nil 
4 Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 100.97 10.00 
5 Gulab Singh & Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 878.40 Nil 
6 Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath 12,483.92 Nil 
7 Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road 13,282.85 Nil 
8 VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar 612.00 Nil 
                                                           
14   Comprising `` `` 2.59 crore on account of ground rent and `` `` 323.95 crore on account of damages, 
misuse charges and other dues. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
27 
Sl.No. Name of the Property Amount 
demanded 
Amount 
recovered 
9 F-2, Connaught Place 12.65 3.16 
10 Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar 106.34 92.93 
11 All India Trade Union Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg 
2.27 Nil 
12 M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal 
Company), Prithvi Raj Lane 
99.47 Nil 
13 Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue 0.08 0.09 
14 M/s Kayson Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg 3.53 2.00 
15 Krishna Filling Service Station, Minto Road 10.00 10.00 
16 All India Trinamool Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg 
0.18 0.18 
17 29, Aurangzeb Road 5.50 3.76 
18 12, Golf Links 2.93 2.93 
19 19, Prithvi Raj Road 17.20 17.20 
20 1, Hailey Road 27.85 Nil 
 Total 32,653.93 142.41 
4.1.2 Information in respect of Floor Area Ratio (FAR), interest rates and methodology 
adopted for calculation of different charges from time to time were not provided to Audit.  
However, based on available information as well as the demand letters previously issued 
by L&DO, in 19 cases, outstanding dues towards damage, misuse, interest 15 etc. 
amounting to `444.08 crore were worked out by Audit as shown below : 
Table 4.2 Outstanding damage charges, misuse charges and other dues 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Identity of the Property Misuse Damages Penalty on 
misuse, interest 
on belated 
payment, etc. 
1 Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road  957.40 27.85 104.19 
2 Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg  2,911.39  1,359.15 1,037.23 
                                                           
15   In the demand letters issued by L&DO, interest at the rate of 10 per cent per annum is charged on 
belated payments, and the same has been adopted by Audit. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
28 
Sl. 
No. 
Identity of the Property Misuse Damages Penalty on 
misuse, interest 
on belated 
payment, etc. 
3 Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg  0.00 91.02 14.36 
4 Gulab Singh & Sons,  Bahadur Shah 
Zafar Marg 
484.68 653.82 678.47 
5 Hotel Le Meridian, Janpath 13,625.36 232.98 4,573.68 
6 Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road 11,889.31  354.14 3,661.03 
7 VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar 673.20 354.65 205.74 
8 F-2, Connaught Place  0.00 0.00 47.64 
9 Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar  23.19 59.87 46.46 
10 Centre of Indian Trade Unions, Rouse 
Avenue 
0.00 0.00 26.05 
11 All India Trade Union Congress, Deen 
Dayal Upadhyaya Marg  
0.00 0.00 2.27 
12 M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal 
Company), Prithvi Raj Lane 
0.00 92.05 7.42 
13 Sh. Sukhdeep Singh, Rouse Avenue  0.00 0.00 0.06 
14 M/s Kayson Enterprises (Gas Godown), 
Sardar Patel Marg  
0.00 1.44 3.23 
15 17, Jor Bagh  141.56 3.37 0.00 
16 29, Aurangzeb Road  0.00 0.26 9.20 
17 3, Kautilya Marg  0.00 0.00 10.52 
18 12/10, Golf Links  0.00 0.00 42.29 
19 1, Hailey Road  0.00 1.27 0.00 
 Total 30,706.09 3,231.87 10,469.84 
 Total dues  44,407.80 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
29 
Of the remaining 10 cases, dues were not payable in three 16 cases, while it could not be 
worked out in seven 17 cases as the required information for calculation of dues was not 
found in records. 
L&DO stated (December 2020 and April 2021) that in 18 cases 18 out of the 19 cases 
pointed out by Audit, action was being taken for inspection, updation/ calculation of dues/ 
demand.  In case of the remaining one case viz. VIMHANS Hospital, it was stated that 
the property was under re-entry (i.e., its possession was taken over by L&DO) and a 
demand letter dated 07 December 2020 for withdrawal of re-entry (i.e. for handing over 
the possession back to the hospital) was issued to the hospital, however, the payment was 
not made by them till date.  
It is evident from the reply that L&DO failed to recover Government dues. Further, in 
case of VIMHANS Hospital, Audit did not find any document in the records establishing 
re-entry into the property. L&DO neither provided any supporting documents regarding 
re-entry, nor furnished a copy of the demand letter issued in December 2020, and it was 
observed that the hospital was still in operation. Further, the reply was silent on the action 
taken by L&DO upon non-payment of dues demanded in December 2020. 
4.2 Non-levy of unearned increase 
Terms for grant of sale permission as prescribed in the L&DO Manual include unearned 
increase payable by the lessee.  The unearned increase had been prescribed as 50 per cent 
of the difference between the present value of land and the last transaction value of the 
land.   
During the scrutiny of 29 sampled cases, Audit observed that in four cases 19, the lessee 
had sold the properties but unearned increase was not claimed after it came to the notice 
of L&DO.  While the details of all the four cases are given in Annexure-I, one case has 
been highlighted as a case study below: 
Case Study 7 
In respect of Sen Nursing Home, it was noticed that lease rights were transferred in June 
1974 to Ansal Saigal Properties Limited (promoter) by the lessee without knowledge of 
                                                           
16  7, Garage, Gole Market (other dues not payable); All India Trinamool Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg (possession not taken due to allotment of encroached plot); and 19, Prithvi Raj 
Road (freehold property) 
17  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj; Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai Veer Singh Marg; 
Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School, New Rajinder Nagar; Prem Service Station, J.B. Tito 
Marg; Krishna Filling Service Station, Minto Road; St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari; and Sen 
Nursing Home, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
18   Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road; Gulab Singh & Sons, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; 29, Aurangzeb 
Road; 12, Golf Links; M/s Kayson Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg; Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar; 
Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; F-2, Connaught 
Place; 1, Hailey Road, Centre of Indian Trade Unions, Rouse Avenue; 3, Kautilya Marg; M/s Kishan 
Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithvi Raj Lane; Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue; All 
India Trade Union Congress, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg; Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath; Hotel Taj 
Man Singh, Man Singh Road; and 17, Jor Bagh 
19   Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; 17, Jor Bagh; Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar; and 
1, Hailey Road 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
30 
L&DO.  Ansal constructed flats in the leased space and sold the flats to individuals.  
This came to the notice of L&DO in January 2010.  However, no unearned increase was 
claimed in the sales (to Ansal Saigal Properties Limited and subsequent sale of flats).  
As per records of L&DO, the property still stood in the name of Sen Nursing Home.  
Further, Audit could obtain details of three purchasers of flats from the Sub Registrar’s 
office (Sub-registrar-III) wherein it was seen that two of the flats had been given on rent 
by the purchasers and an agreement to sell for `1.21 crore had been executed for one 
flat in September 2011.  However, these documents were not available in the records of 
L&DO.  
L&DO replied (December 2020) that the matter had recently been examined in detail 
and it was found that the premises were under the occupation of various unauthorized 
occupants/ squatters. As such, it was decided to cancel the allotment.  Accordingly, a 
show-cause notice was issued on 09 December 2020. 
The reply may be seen in the light of the fact that the sale of the property came to the 
knowledge of L&DO in January 2010; however, no action was initiated by L&DO in 
this regard till December 2020.  L&DO issued the show cause notice only after being 
pointed out by Audit.  Further, L&DO did not provide documentary evidence of 
cancellation of allotment and copy of the show-cause notice.   
Sub-registrar office (responsible for registering the property) and L&DO were working 
in complete isolation whereas their functioning was inter-dependent in respect of 
properties where L&DO was the lessor.  Properties were changing hands from the lessee 
to buyers without the knowledge of L&DO. L&DO did not devise a mechanism to 
ensure availability of information regarding registration of properties. This not only 
resulted in financial losses on account of unearned increase, but also led to sale of 
properties to private parties with impunity.  
4.3 Absence of mechanism for demarcation/ identification of properties of L&DO 
in Sub-registrar offices 
Audit sought to ascertain the mechanism for demarcation/ identification of Government 
properties and private properties in Sub-registrar offices. While three Sub-registrar 
offices
20 stated that there was no mechanism for demarcation/ identification of 
Government properties and private properties in their offices, two offices 21 stated that 
they were provided with a list of acquired land by DDA and if any instrument pertaining 
to the said category is received for registration, the same is refused for registration.  
While DDA had ensured certain safeguards, evidently L&DO had not even thought about 
one to prevent its encroached land being sold away to the gullible public.  This resulted in 
sale of leased properties of L&DO without its knowledge, as discussed in the following 
para. 
                                                           
20   Office the Sub-Registrars (Kalkaji, Vikas Sadan and Sarojini Nagar)  
21   Office the Sub-Registrars (Seelampur and Preet Vihar)  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
31 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the observation has been complied with, as the web 
portal of L&DO has been linked with Delhi Online Registration Information System 
Government of NCT of Delhi. 
L&DO has so far not issued any specific instructions to Sub-registrar offices that the 
properties under the control of L&DO should not be registered without its permission.  In 
the absence of such instructions, the Sub-registrar offices would not be in a position to 
identify the properties belonging to L&DO for registration purposes. 
Recommendation No. 6 
L&DO should share its verified land records with the Land Revenue Department and 
Delhi Online Registration Information System of the Registration Department of the 
Government of NCT of Delhi, and should evolve a workable solution through which 
sale/ transfer of any of its properties may be alerted at the time of registration/ 
mutation. 
4.4 Inadequate control over properties 
4.4.1 Inaction despite knowledge of unauthorised occupation of property 
As per lease agreements, after every transfer of the lease rights, lessee has to intimate the 
same to the lessor.  Also, as per L&DO Manual, in case of restricted leasehold premises, 
the permission of L&DO was a pre-condition for assignment or transfer of leasehold 
rights by the lessees.  Sale without the lessor’s permission is a breach of the terms of the 
lease for which the lessor may re-enter the property and the leasehold rights may stand 
forfeited to the State. 
Audit observed that in five
22 out of 29 sampled properties, lessee sold/ transferred the 
lease rights to other person without prior permission of L&DO in contravention of the 
conditions of lease deed and provisions of L&DO Manual.  L&DO neither took any 
action to get the property vacated from the unauthorized occupants nor initiated action for 
re-entry.  Taking possession of these lands may be possible only after long drawn legal 
process which would again entail huge amount of time and money.  
While the details of all the five cases are given in Annexure-I, one case has been 
highlighted as a case study below: 
Case Study 8 
In respect of Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar, one Competent Films Private Ltd. wrote 
(November 2006) a letter to L&DO stating that the premises were bought by them from 
the lessee (Nahar Theatres Pvt Ltd).  As per records of L&DO, a surveyor of L&DO had 
visited the Lajpat Nagar area in July 2001 and came to know that the Alankar Cinema 
building had been demolished, and a new building was under construction. 
                                                           
22  Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar; Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; F-2, Connaught 
Place; 7, Garage, Gole Market; and M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithvi Raj 
Lane 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
32 
In December 2006, Competent Films Private Ltd stated that since they were the owner 
of premises, in future all communication should be sent to their registered office in 
Connaught Place.  L&DO, instead of verifying the actual state of affairs, replied (April 
2007) to Competent Films Private Ltd that they were not the lessee of the property and 
as per the book of L&DO, the property stood in the name of Nahar Theatres Pvt. Ltd.   
Information related to changing hands of the premises was not available in the records 
of L&DO.  Audit obtained the information from the Sub-Registrar office and it was 
confirmed that the said building was demolished by Nahar Theatres and a new 
Shopping mall had been constructed.  Nahar Theatres sold (January 2001) a shop 
comprising of 921 square feet to one Mr. Gurmeet Singh.  Mr. Gurmeet Singh further 
sold the said shop to Mr. Raj Chopra (Director of Competent Films Private Ltd) in April 
2007 vide an agreement to sell for `1.30 crore. Unearned increase was recoverable by 
L&DO on this sale. 
Further, as per the website of Delhi Online Registration Information System, Mr. Raj 
Chopra entered into sale agreement with Ms. Kavita Ahuja, Whole-Time Director at 
Competent Automobiles Co Ltd in September 2011.  It was further noticed that parts of 
the premises changed hands 17 times between March 2003 and September 2011. 
Thus, the building was demolished, and a new shopping mall was constructed.  
However, L&DO acted like a silent spectator and did not act in accordance with the 
terms of the lease deed.  The property changed hands many times without intimation to 
L&DO.  L&DO did not take any action to get complete information about the current 
occupant of the property and continued to serve notices to Nahar Theatres Pvt. Ltd.  
L&DO neither took any action to get the property vacated from unauthorized occupants 
nor initiated action for re-entry.  L&DO also did not conduct any inspection of the 
property despite receiving communication from Competent Films Private Ltd regarding 
purchase of the property.  
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the said plot was sold out to Nahar Theatres Pvt. Ltd. 
with the permission of L&DO and mutation was carried out on 30 March 1972.  
The reply of L&DO is not tenable.  If the property had already been sold to Nahar 
Theatres in March 1972 then there was no reason for L&DO replying to Competent 
Films Private Ltd in April 2007 that they were not the lessee of the said property.  If it 
was the lease rights that were sold and not the plot as such, then its records must have 
been updated subsequent to the transfer of rights from Nahar Theatres to Competent 
Films.  No comment/ reply was given by L&DO in this regard. This issue needs further 
investigation. 
4.4.2 Frequent changes in allotments  
L&DO was allotting plots to various entities for construction of their building and 
running their activities. It was seen that in three cases 23, L&DO had to cancel the 
                                                           
23   All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), Sukhdeep Coal Depot, and All India Trinamool Congress 
(AITMC) 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
33 
allotment of plot and allot another plot in lieu of the same for reasons such as allotment of 
encroached plot, allotment of smaller plot, etc., which shows that L&DO was not aware 
of the actual status of the properties vested under its control. 
While the details of all the three cases are given in Annexure-I, two cases have been 
highlighted as case studies below: 
Case Study 9 
In case of All India Trinamool Congress (AITMC), the land was allotted in 
March 2011. The possession of land could not be handed over to AITMC due to 
encroachment. Thereafter, another plot was allotted on “as is where is basis” to AITMC 
at DDU Marg in December 2013.  Before handing over of the land, AITMC inspected 
the plot and found that it was also not free from encroachment and refused to take 
possession of the encroached plot. Thereafter, L&DO conducted the inspection of the 
plot in April 2019 and two temples (unauthorized) were found at the site.  
L&DO replied (December 2020) that the plot at Rouse Avenue initially allotted to 
AITMC could not be handed over as the Delhi Wakf Board did not allow demarcation 
of the land claiming that the land in question belongs to the Delhi Wakf Board.  
Therefore, two other plots at DDU Marg were allotted to AITMC on “as is where is 
basis” on 20 December 2013 subject to amalgamation of the two plots.  AITMC refused 
to take over the possession as two temples were situated on the site. The requisite action 
for removal of encroachment from the allotted land had already been initiated and land 
would be offered for allotment to AITMC.  Even then if AITMC refuses the offer, 
allotment will be cancelled and earmarked land will be put to alternate use. L&DO 
further replied (April 2021) that temples in Delhi can be removed by the Religious 
Committee of Delhi Government. 
It is evident from the reply that L&DO was not aware of the encroachment before 
allotment.  Further, L&DO could not get the encroachment removed even after seven 
years of allotment. 
Case Study 10 
The plot for All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) was allotted seven times.  
Allotments of plots made on three occasions (May 2002, July 2002 and October 2002) 
were cancelled as these were occupied by some persons, who could not be evicted.  
AITUC had requested for allotment of two plots of the same size or at least a plot 
measuring 750 square meters. However, L&DO allotted smaller plots on three 
occasions (August 2001, January 2002 and July 2003).  The allottee refused to accept 
the allotments as the size of the plots was small.  L&DO finally allotted plots to AITUC 
in May 2005 at DDU Marg. Thus, L&DO was not aware of fact that the plots were 
encroached and was unable to evict the unauthorized occupants. 
Thus, there was inefficient disposal of lease applications; irregular inspection of the 
leased properties, inadequate documentation, deficient upkeep and updation of records; 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
34 
ineffective implementation of the computerization process; allotment of encroached land; 
delayed revision/non-revision of ground rent; breaches of lease conditions; non-recovery 
of the Government dues, possession of land by unauthorized persons etc.  It is, therefore, 
evident that L&DO did not have adequate control over its properties and was not able to 
manage the lease administration efficiently and effectively.  
4.5 Non-availability of sanctioned building plans and non-execution of lease 
deeds 
After allotment of land, an agreement for lease/ memorandum of agreement is signed 
between L&DO (on behalf of the President of India) and the allottee, governing the terms 
of allotment.  As per the agreement/ L&DO Manual, it is the responsibility of the lessee to 
get the plan sanctioned from the municipal authority/ local body and submit it to the 
L&DO.  L&DO shall ensure that the plans sanctioned are not in contravention of the 
zonal/ master plan, and in case there is any contravention the same will be treated as 
unauthorized.  After the construction is completed, the lessee shall submit the completion 
certificate issued by the concerned local body to the L&DO.  
4.5.1 Non-availability of sanctioned building plan 
Audit found that there was no sanctioned building plan in eight
24 properties out of the 
sampled 29 properties and L&DO had been demanding the same from the lessee.  It was 
not clear how L&DO conducted inspections25 without the sanctioned building plans.  
L&DO did not offer any comments on non-availability of sanctioned building plans in 
respect of the eight properties. 
Case Study 11  
A joint inspection of the Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath was carried out by NDMC, L&DO 
and CPWD in July 2010 and it was found 26 that the hotel premises were not free from 
breaches of unauthorized construction and misuse.  NDMC did not furnish complete set 
of sanctioned building plan, and therefore it was not clear how L&DO conducted the 
inspections to locate deviations from the building plan without having the approved 
sanctioned building plan.  A series of meetings between NDMC and the Ministry were 
held on 01 August 2011, 26 August 2011 and 14 November 2011 to sort out the issue.  
In these meetings, it was decided that NDMC would supply the copies of sanctioned 
building plans.  However, despite this, sanctioned building plan in respect of Hotel Le 
Meridien was not provided to L&DO by NDMC.  In the meeting held by the Secretary 
of the Ministry on 10 November 2014, NDMC agreed to provide the complete and 
                                                           
24  Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj; Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Hotel Le Meridien, 
Janpath; Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road; All India Trade Union Congress, Deen Dayal 
Upadhyaya Marg; Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai Veer Singh Marg; M/s Kayson 
Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg; and Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
25  The Inspection Reports were not provided by L&DO to Audit. However, the dates of inspection were 
filled in the e-Dharti portal in respect of the eight properties and the fact regarding conduct of 
inspection was also mentioned in the office notes of the respective property files 
26  As mentioned in the office note dated 27 June 2014 of L&DO 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
35 
legible sanctioned building plan in respect of Hotel Le Meridien. However, the 
Ministry/ L&DO could not obtain the sanctioned building plan from NDMC. 
L&DO stated (April 2021) that the dispute is between the Central Government (land 
owning agency) and the local body i.e. NDMC. The only thing L&DO can do is to 
cancel the allotment and take possession of the plot.  Updated demand is under process 
in consultation with the Technical Wing. 
This issue was also brought out in the CAG Report No. 6 of 2009-10 and the last 
demand was issued to the lessee in January 2012.  However, even after lapse of nine 
years, the updated demand has not been issued to the lessee.  Further, even after the 
assurance given to the PAC by the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
L&DO has not taken recourse to legal remedy despite non-realisation of dues. 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Through a suitable working mechanism, L&DO should ensure that all the approved 
building plans for all of its properties are collected from concerned local bodies. These 
should be digitised and placed in the e-Dharti portal for use. There should be an 
arrangement to communicate the deviations from the Building plan observed by L&DO 
to the concerned local body for follow-up action. 
4.5.2 Non-execution of perpetual lease deed/ license deed 
The L&DO inspects the site and compares the construction with the building plans and if 
no breaches are noticed, the L&DO issues completion certificate accordingly and under 
the terms of lease/ agreement, the lease deed is executed. 
Scrutiny of 29 properties revealed that in case of 11 properties 27, the perpetual lease 
deeds/ license deeds were not executed, which is irregular.  The allottees were enjoying 
all the rights over the property without any lease agreement.  In the absence of lease deed, 
necessary clauses relating to misuse/ unauthorized construction, revision of ground rent, 
transfer of lease rights and re-entering upon the property cannot be enforced.  
L&DO did not offer any reply to the audit observation. 
Recommendation No. 8  
L&DO should ensure that lease documents for each of its leased out property are 
traced, verified and registered.  In the event of the original lessee not being found, 
L&DO should re-enter the property.  
                                                           
27  Bal Bharati School, Pusa Road; Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg; Hotel Le Meridien, 
Janpath; Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road; VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar; All India 
Trade Union Congress, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg; Indian National Trade Union Congress, Bhai 
Veer Singh Marg; M/s Kayson Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg; Krishna Filling Service Station, 
Minto Road;  Prem Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg; and Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
36 
4.6 Non-renewal of temporary allotment 
Temporary allotment of land is made for a period of five years at a stretch or till the 
expiry of the period for which prescribed rates are available whichever period is less in 
case of petrol pumps, fuel depots, shops, temporary shops, offices, bathing ghats, parks 
and playgrounds etc.  
Audit examined three
28 cases related to temporary allotment and it was observed that the 
allotment was not renewed in any of these temporary allotments on completion of initial 
allotment period.  
In the absence of the renewal of temporary allotment, the occupation of the premises by 
the allottees was unauthorized.  L&DO did not take any action to get the land vacated 
from allottees after completion of initial allotment period, nor any efforts were made to 
convert it into regular lease. 
Case Study 12 
L&DO allotted a piece of land measuring 524 square meters in September 1983 for 
LPG Gas Godown of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd (M/s. Kayson Enterprises) 
for licence fee at the rate of `10 per square yard per annum for covered area and 
`5 per square yard per annum for open area and demanded `3,634 towards licence fee 
for one year.  The allotment was made on temporary basis, but the period of allotment 
was not indicated in the allotment letter.  The temporary allotment was never renewed. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that the matter was pending due to non-submission of 
sanctioned building plan.  The action for recovery of government dues was being taken. 
The fact remains that even after a lapse of more than 37 years, the temporary allotment 
made to Kayson Enterprises in September 1983 was yet to be renewed.  
4.7 Non-correspondence with the allottees 
L&DO was responsible for administration and management of leases granted by it and for 
recovery of all dues of the Government arising out of the lands under its control.  
Therefore, continuous correspondence with the lessees was of utmost importance and 
L&DO was required to take action to safeguard the properties managed by it. 
During the follow-up Audit, it was observed that in five
29 out of 29 cases, L&DO did not 
attend to the files for years (8 years to 15 years) on important issues and had no 
correspondence with the lessees despite noticing breaches.  The efficacy of the 
functioning of the organisation, thus, becomes questionable. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that it had been decided that once the section issues a 
breach notice, if no reply is received from the intended lessee within stipulated time 
                                                           
28   Prem Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg; Krishna Filling Service Station, Minto Road; and M/s Kayson 
Enterprises, Sardar Patel Marg 
29   Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar; Prem Service Station, J.B. Tito Marg; Sen Nursing Home, Bahadur 
Shah Zafar Marg; M/s Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithvi Raj Lane; and F-2, 
Connaught Place  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
37 
period, straight away the demand notice may be issued. After the lapse of 30 days of 
issuance of demand notice, if the amount demanded is not paid, the concerned section 
may give show-cause notice to intended lessee as to why the property should not be 
re-entered if the payment is not received within 15 days of issuance of show-cause notice.  
Thereafter, if still no response is received, a final show-cause notice will be issued to the 
intended lessee informing him/ her that the process to re-enter the property will be 
initiated within 15 days of issuance of final show-cause notice.  
The reply of L&DO is not relevant to the Audit observation, as Audit has pointed out that 
the files remained unattended in the above cases for a long period.  No specific reply/ 
reasons were given by L&DO for the same. Further, though the timelines framed by 
L&DO have been stipulated in the various documents viz., demand letter, show-cause 
notice, etc. issued by L&DO, these have not been adhered to by L&DO.   
Case Study 13 
In case of Prem Service Station, L&DO was denied inspection in May 2006 on the 
grounds that inspections were being done by DDA.  However, it was mentioned in the 
records by L&DO that ‘on being observed from the outside of the premises, part of the 
area was misused as convenience store, ATM, money transfer’.  In July 2006, L&DO 
asked DDA about the records of allotment and receipt of payments from M/s Burmah 
Shell (now BPCL). No correspondence was available in the records beyond that.  Thus, 
despite being in the knowledge of L&DO that there were breaches, the file was left 
unattended. 
L&DO stated (April 2021) that it was reported by Petrol Pump owners that inspection is 
done by DDA and they are paying ground rent to DDA.  Thus, it is clear that the land is 
under administrative control of DDA. 
The reply indicates that L&DO did not verify from its own records or from DDA about 
the ownership of the land even though both L&DO and DDA come under the 
administrative control of the same Ministry. 
4.8 Non-follow up on actions to be taken after conversion of leasehold properties 
into freehold 
For conversion of leasehold properties into freehold, the allottees were required to give an 
undertaking along with the application for conversion, which inter-alia stated that the 
executants will pay the difference of conversion charges etc., if the land rates were 
revised with effect from 1 April 2000. Further, as per the letter issued for execution of 
conveyance deed, the allottee was required to furnish photocopy of registered conveyance 
deed duly attested by Gazetted Officer/ Notary containing the registration particulars to 
L&DO within 15 days of receipt of documents from the Sub-Registrar office. 
Audit examined three properties from the list of freehold properties provided by L&DO.  
It was seen that apart from these three, two more properties in the selected 29 cases were 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
38 
converted into freehold.  In this regard, in three 30 cases, difference of dues on account of 
conversion charges alone worked out to `52.88 lakh, the dues in one 31 case could not be 
worked out as the relevant documents could not be found in the files, and in one32 case the 
revised conversion rate was not applicable due to court decision.  Despite revision of land 
rates in May 2017 with effect from 1 April 2000, L&DO did not calculate the difference 
of conversion charges in any of these cases. 
L&DO replied (January 2021) that they have initiated a process to substitute or mutate the 
property in the name of present legal heirs or buyers post conversion of tenure of the 
property from leasehold to freehold.  Thereafter, the records of property whose tenure of 
land has been changed from leasehold to freehold will be updated.  
The reply of the L&DO is not relevant to the Audit observations as L&DO did not offer 
any comments in respect of non-realization of government dues on account of revision of 
land rates post-conversion into freehold and establishing the mechanism for compliance 
of the conditions stipulated in the undertaking given by the lessee. L&DO failed to 
monitor the conditions for conversion of properties into freehold thereby defeating the 
purpose of submission of the undertaking. 
Case Study 14  
A perpetual lease deed was signed between lessor and lessee for 12, Golf Links New 
Delhi, measuring 1,814.6 square yards in April 1966.  The lessee applied for conversion 
of the property from leasehold to freehold in January 2016 with an undertaking that he 
would pay the difference of conversion charges if the land rates were revised. The 
conversion to freehold was approved in May 2016 and conveyance deed was issued.  
The land rates were revised in May 2017 with retrospective effect from 1 April 2000.  
However, L&DO did not demand `42.29 lakh on account of conversion charges due to 
revision of land rate from the erstwhile lessee.  
L&DO stated (April 2021) that they have started a drive to update records/ demand of 
each and every property including raising demands for the difference of conversion/ 
misuse/ damage charges in respect of freehold property. This is being carried out area-
wise.  As such, demands shall be issued in due course. 
The reply is not convincing as almost four years have elapsed since the revision of land 
rates in May 2017, and L&DO was still in the process of issuing demand letters.  This 
shows that the L&DO did not make concerted efforts for recovery of Government dues.  
 
Recommendation No. 9 
L&DO should identify the revised rent collectable from all freehold conversions and 
verify if land rates were revised for these. In case of revision in land rates, the amount 
that needs to be recovered from these buyers may be assessed and followed up with 
demand notices in a time-bound manner. 
                                                           
30   12, Golf Links; 3, Kautilya Marg; and Sukhdeep Coal Depot, Rouse Avenue 
31   1, Hailey Road 
32  19, Prithvi Raj Road 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
39 
4.9 Summing Up 
L&DO did not calculate and review dues from leases, nor did it enforce them on 
defaulters in a timely manner. Despite the allottees' failure to deposit the dues, no action 
was taken.  The allottees were reaping all the benefits of their assets while failing to meet 
their obligations in terms of charges for misuse and unauthorised constructions. 
In cases where the lessee had sold the properties, unearned increase was not claimed after 
it came to the notice of L&DO.  Further, there were instances where lessee sold/ 
transferred the lease rights to other person without prior permission of L&DO in 
contravention of the conditions of lease deed and provisions of L&DO Manual.  
However, L&DO neither took any action to get the property vacated from the 
unauthorized occupants nor initiated action for re-entry 
L&DO's lease management was ineffective and inefficient. The lease deeds, the 
fundamental document that formed the relationship between L&DO and the property 
allottees, had not been completed. The temporary leases were not extended.  Further, 
there was no system in place in Sub-registrar offices to demarcate/ identify L&DO land, 
resulting in its sale without the knowledge of L&DO.  Despite the land/ plots being under 
encroachment, L&DO kept allotting these to lessees and did little to secure those.  Also, 
L&DO did not recover dues arising from land rate revisions from the lessees upon 
conversion of leasehold lands into freehold.   
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
40 
Chapter V 
Conclusion 
The L&DO, which is an attached office of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs is 
responsible for the administration of leasehold properties of the Government of India.  These 
properties include Nazul Lands (i.e., lands acquired in the year 1911 for the formation of 
capital of India at Delhi) and Rehabilitation Lands (i.e., lands acquired by the Government of 
India for the speedy rehabilitation of displaced persons from Pakistan).  
Functioning of L&DO was previously reviewed and reported in the CAG’s Audit Report No. 
6 of 2009-10.  During the follow-up audit, it was observed that despite Ministry’s assurances 
given in the Action Taken Notes submitted to the Public Accounts Committee, most of the 
deficiencies pointed out in the Audit Report continued to persist and in certain areas (such as 
time taken in disposal of lease applications) the situation has even deteriorated as compared 
to what was observed during previous audit. Most of the documents/ information sought 
during the follow-up audit were not provided by L&DO. 
In the previous Audit Report, it was mentioned that the authenticity of the number of 
properties administered by L&DO could not be verified.  The follow-up Audit revealed that 
L&DO still did not have the authentic figures of its leased properties. 
L&DO did not calculate and review dues from leases, nor did it enforce them on defaulters in 
a timely manner.  Despite the allottees' failure to deposit the dues, no action was taken. Also, 
L&DO did not recover dues arising from land rate revisions from the lessees upon conversion 
of leasehold lands into freehold. The allottees were reaping all the benefits of their assets 
while failing to meet their obligations in terms of ground rent and charges for misuse and 
unauthorised constructions. 
The year-wise inspections conducted by L&DO during the years 2016-17 to 2020-21 ranged 
between five per cent  and eight per cent  of the mandatory inspection required to be 
conducted annually. Further, wherever inspections were done, show-cause notices/ breach 
notices for violations were not issued on time and efforts to re-enter the property were found 
lacking, thereby rendering the inspections ineffective.  There was no system in place to 
monitor compliance with the condition of offering free medical care by hospitals to poor and 
indigent patients and free education by schools to children from economically weaker 
sections. 
Citizens’ Charter of L&DO stipulates that the L&DO would ensure good quality of service 
by disposal of applications on conversion, sale permission, mutation, and substitution etc. 
within a period of three months from the date of receipt of information and documents from 
the lessee. L&DO's administration of lease applications was, however, found to be ineffective 
and inefficient, with excessive delays in the disposal of applications. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
41 
L&DO's lease management was ineffective and inefficient. The lease deeds, the fundamental 
document that formed the relationship between L&DO and the property allottees, had not 
been completed.  The temporary leases were not extended.  
The objective of computerization of records was defeated by incomplete information in 
e-Dharti. Further, there was no system in place in Sub-registrar offices to demarcate/ identify 
L&DO land, resulting in its sale without the knowledge of L&DO. Despite the land/ plots 
being under encroachment, L&DO kept allotting these to lessees and did little to secure those. 
Thus, the valuable land under the control of L&DO was being mismanaged due to poor 
administration and neglect. 
 
 
 
 (R G Viswanathan) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: and Chairman, Audit Board 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated:                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
43 
Annexure-I 
(Referred to in introductory para of Chapter III) 
Audit findings in respect of 29 sampled properties 
1. Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj 
Category Schools 
Property ID 24501 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 17,417.67 square meters (4.304 acres) 
Date of Allotment September 1968 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `1076 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Inspections 
1. Inspection was done without the sanctioned building plan. 
2. No inspection was carried out after July 2011 
Other issues  
3. Audit had pointed out in previous report (2009-10) that subdivision of plot 
was done in 2004 and a portion of the plot was given to a private party without 
intimation to L&DO.  A building, providing facilities for swimming, gymnasium, 
taekwondo and judo was constructed.  L&DO was not aware that the 
unauthorized sports complex was being run by a private party as the last 
inspection of the premises was conducted in 1998.  L&DO carried out the 
inspection of the premises in July 2011 and found that there was a sport complex, 
swimming pool etc. on the leased land.  A letter was issued (July 2018) to the 
lessee requesting to send the complete set of sanctioned building plan along with 
completion certificate.  The lessee did not respond on the request of L&DO.  
L&DO did not take any action till April 2019.  However, when Audit called for 
(April 2019) the records related to Kendriya Vidyalaya, L&DO issued (May 
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that the school 
authorities had so far not 
submitted sanctioned building 
plan to this office, hence, 
exact quantum of the 
breaches could not be 
ascertained.  A letter had 
been issued on 9 December 
2020 to the school authorities 
giving them final opportunity 
to submit the desired 
documents.  If no reply is 
received, L&DO will prepare 
demand note by treating the 
entire structure as an 
The replies indicate that 
though the L&DO has 
accepted the Audit 
observation and initiated 
action, but the approach is 
lackadaisical as a number of 
opportunities are being 
given to the school 
authorities to respond.  The 
fact remains that initially 
L&DO did not make any 
efforts to obtain the 
sanctioned building plan 
from the local body.  Due to 
inaction on the part of the 
L&DO, the property 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
44 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
2019) a reminder.  L&DO did not make any effort to obtain the sanctioned 
building plan from the local body. 
4. No information related to recovery of ground rent was found in the 
records provided to Audit.  Data related to ground rent recoverable, date of issue 
of demand notice, amount recovered was not filled in the Ground Rent Register of 
e-Dharti. 
5. Most of the columns were also left blank in property proforma of e-Dharti. 
6. L&DO neither made any effective efforts for removal of breaches nor did 
it issue any demand letter for misuse and damage charges from the lessee. 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `2.04 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent and interest 
on ground rent.  Other dues on account of damages and misuse charges could not 
be worked out from the records.  
unauthorized structure. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that the School 
authorities are not able to 
provid
e documents.  
However, a final opportunity 
will be given to school 
authorities to submit the 
sanctioned building plan. If 
the same is not submitted, 
then it will be decided to 
work out the charges and will 
be communicated to them. 
 
situated at a prime location 
was being used by a private 
party which was earmarked 
for use of educational 
purposes.  L&DO failed to 
enforce the condition of the 
lease for re-entering the 
property. 
  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
45 
2. Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary School (VBGHSS), Karol Bagh 
Category Schools 
Property ID 25181 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 5,956.972 square meters (1.472 acres) 
Date of Allotment September 1959 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `368 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent 
1. Ground rent has not been received after July 1982.  
No action for realization of ground rent was taken after 
April 1984. 
2. Revision of ground rent was due in January 1989, 
however, it was revised in November 2003. 
3. `1.02 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent and 
interest on ground rent. 
Inspection 
4. Inspection of the premises was not carried out after 
June 2008. 
Other issues 
5. Demand for ground rent, interest, penalty, etc. was 
issued in April 1984 for `825. 
6. Unauthorized constructions were found during the 
inspection, however, breach notice/ demand notice was not 
issued to VBGHSS.  
L&DO replied (December 2020) that VBGHSS 
was requested in January 2020 to furnish the 
required sanctioned building plan duly issued 
by the local body.  VBGHSS was asked to remit 
the ground rent and other dues along-with 
belated payment, etc., and furnish action taken 
report on the breach notices issued.  Again, 
VBGHSS was requested on 20.07.2020 to 
submit the documents related to the school.  
VBGHSS has been given final opportunity on 
11.12.2020 to furnish the documents.  In case of 
failure to provide the same, L&DO would 
proceed with the issuance of demand notice to 
VBGHSS.  If the demand is not remitted to 
Government account within the stipulated time 
frame, L&DO would take punitive action as per 
Agreement to Lease. 
L&DO further replied (April 2021) that due to 
Covid-
19 pandemic, schools were closed.  
The replies indicate that 
though the L&DO has 
accepted the Audit observation 
and initiated action, but the 
approach is lackadaisical as a 
number of opportunities are 
being given to the school 
authorities to respond.  The 
fact remains that L&DO did 
not make any effort to obtain 
the sanctioned building plan.
  
Due to this, L&DO was not 
carrying out the inspection. 
Further, L&DO did not recover 
the dues from the lessee. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
46 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
7. There were discrepancies in data filled in e-Dharti as 
compared to the information given in the original records. 
Outstanding dues 
8. Outstanding dues on account of damages and misuse 
charges could not be worked out from the records.  
Hence, it seems school authorities are not able 
to produce the documents.  The School 
authorities have been reminded to submit the 
relevant documents vide letter dated 
26.02.2021.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
47 
3. Bal Bharti School, Pusa Road 
Category Schools 
Property ID 29207 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 4,370.60 square meters (1.08 acres) 
Date of Allotment February 1963 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `270 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The revision of ground rent was due in January 
1992 and thereafter at the end of each successive period of 
not less than 30 years, however, the ground rent was not 
enhanced.  
Inspection 
2. L&DO conducted inspections at irregular intervals 
i.e. February 1999, July 2003, May 2005, February 2012, 
October 2016, and February 2019 and breach notice was 
issued in November 2016 and March 2019. 
Other issues  
3. A demand letter seeking payment of `7.97 crore 
was issued to the lessee in June 2015, thereafter neither 
any demand notice was issued nor action taken to re-enter 
the property.  LDO took 16 years to issue demand of `7.97 
crore to the lessee in June 2015 after observing 
unauthorized construction for the first time in February 
1999.  A show cause notice was issued in August 2018. 
L&DO replied (December 2020) that after the 
demand was issued to the School, the land rates 
of L&DO were revised on 17.05.2017 which 
were effective from April 2000.  Accordingly, 
the demand issued to the school was being 
updated on revised land rates and the same was 
under process.  At the same time, the issue 
regarding revision of ground rent was also 
being taken up and approval was being taken 
from competent authority.  After approval of 
competent authority, the ground rent would be 
revised and would be realized as per policy and 
practice of L&DO.  The L&DO was pursuing 
the case with vigor but some delay was 
inevitable due to codal formalities.  L&DO 
would finalize the case in as short time as 
possible and strive to realize the demand. 
L&DO further replied (April 2021) that due to 
Covid-19 pandemic and as per DOPT order, the 
The reply of the L&DO is to be 
viewed in light of the fact that 
the recovery of government dues 
has been pending much before 
the outbreak of Covid and 
L&DO did not take effective 
action for recovery of the dues 
even before the outbreak. 
After the revision of land rates in 
May 2017, the revised demand 
letter had still not been issued 
even after a lapse of more than 
four years.  The revision of 
ground rent which had already 
been badly delayed (due in 
January 1992) was still under 
review.  L&DO has not revised 
the ground rent even after lapse 
of 29 years since it became due.  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
48 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
4. Lease deed was not executed even after the 
building plan was sanctioned by MCD in 1978. 
Outstanding dues 
5. An amount of `10.89 crore was outstanding on 
account of damages and misuse charges.  
country was under lockdown since March 26, 
2020 and the office was not functioning 
regularly.  As the office has started working 
regularly, necessary action will be taken at the 
earliest.  Action has already been initiated for 
raising updated demand for recovery of 
Government dues. 
This shows that L&DO was not 
pursuing the case efficiently for 
recovery of Government dues. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
49 
4. Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg 
Category Presses 
Property ID 20860 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 1,019.81 square meters (0.252 acre) 
Date of Allotment August 1964 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `787.50 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
Ground rent 
1. Ground rent was to be revised at the option of lessor on or after 01 January 
1994 and thereafter at the end of each successive period of not less than 30 years.  
The Ground rent was, however, revised in December 2004 to `4,725.00.  
2. Ground rent not received after June 1980 (except in January 2005).  
3. No action for realization of ground rent was taken during the period from 
April 2016 to March 2019. 
Other dues 
4. The last demand letter was issued in December 2011 for `42.11 crore. 
Thereafter, L&DO revised land rates in 2017 effective from 2000. L&DO did not 
work out the revised charges after issuance of the demand. 
Inspection 
5. After October 2013, the inspection of the property was done in June 2018 
and breaches/ misuse including subletting were found.  A breach notice was issued 
in July 2018.  Thereafter, no action was taken to get the breaches removed or to  
re-enter the property. 
Other issues 
6. In October 2011, a policy was framed for streamlining/ rationalizing the 
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that before calculating 
the Government dues pending 
on the part of the lessee, the 
Competent Authority has 
directed to inspect the 
property to ascertain whether 
the property was being used 
for the Press purpose or not. 
 
The file was under 
submission.  Once the dues 
were finalized and in case of 
non-compliance of the same 
by the lessee, action in terms 
of lease terms would be 
taken. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that due to Covid 19 
L&DO issued demand 
letter for regularizing 
breaches for the first 
time in June 1986. 
 
After 34 years i.e., in 
2020, file was under 
submission for 
conducting another 
inspection to ascertain 
whether the property 
was being used for the 
press purpose or not. 
 
Inspections of the 
property time and again 
without taking 
appropriate action as per 
terms of lease defeated 
the purpose of 
inspections as neither 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
50 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
criteria/ principles for determining misuse and unauthorized constructions in respect 
of Press/ media plots situated at Bahadurshah Zafar Marg New Delhi.  The policy 
stipulated the conditions for granting permanent change of purpose and regulating 
misuse etc.  Accordingly, L&DO offered the terms for temporary regularization of 
breaches in December 2011 and a demand notice for `42.11 crore was issued. 
 
Though lessee contested this demand, L&DO did not accept the same. 
7. After issue of breach notice in December 2013, no action was taken for 
nearly four years till November 2017 when L&DO decided to conduct inspection of 
the property. 
8. Despite there being clause in Agreement to lease that the lessee was not to 
sublet or give on rent a part of the land or building that may be constructed on the 
premises without the prior permission of the lessor, the property was sublet for 
commercial purpose without permission of L&DO.  
9. The copy of perpetual lease available in the file was not signed. 
10. The complete details of payments made by Daily Milap were not available. 
e-Dharti data showed that ground rent was paid only in January 1995 and current 
dues were showed only for `20.20 lakh for the period July 1980 to July 1986. 
Further, the data in e-Dharti was not complete as most of the columns were blank.  
11. Joint inspection by Audit with technical staff of L&DO in February 2020 
revealed fresh breaches and misuse of the property.  
Outstanding dues 
12. An amount of `56.07 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, interest on 
ground rent and damages/ misuse charges.  
pandemic and as per DOPT 
order, the country was under 
lockdown since 26.03.2020 
and the office was not 
functioning regularly.  The 
staff of L&DO and their 
family members were also 
affected by the Covid, and 
due to protocol of covid, the 
staff had to be on leave.  As 
the office has started working 
regularly, necessary action 
will be taken at the earliest. 
 
Moreover to take action to re-
enter the property, a Press 
plot case is already pending 
in Hon’ble Supreme court 
and the Court has stayed the 
re-entry.  
 
breaches were remedied 
nor the dues on account 
of breaches could be 
recovered.  Further, 
despite non-recovery of 
dues and non-removal 
of breaches, L&DO has 
not initiated action for 
re-entry.  By citing the 
reasons that Court had 
stayed the re-entry 
orders in some other 
cases, L&DO is only 
refraining from 
discharging its duties.  
The recovery of 
government dues has 
been pending much 
before the outbreak of 
Covid and L&DO did 
not take effective action 
for recovery of the dues 
even before the 
outbreak. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
51 
5. Daily Tej 
Category Presses 
Property ID 21719 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 1,015.76 square meters (0.251 acre) 
Date of Allotment August 1964 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `784.40 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. Revision of ground rent was due in January 1994, how ever it 
was revised in November 2004 
2. Ground rent has not been received after December 199 7.  No 
action for realization of ground rent was taken during the period from 
July 2012 to March 2019 
Inspection 
3.  I nspection was done in February 2019 after May 2013 and 
breach notice issued in March 2019.  Inspection was conducted 
without the sanctioned building plan. 
Other issues 
4. Demand notice for `1
 .01 crore was issued by L&DO in 
November 2011.  Only 10 lakh was received against the demand. 
5. In violation of the agreement, the Daily Tej sub-let  the 
premises to various private firms from time to time.  Instead of taking 
stringent action against Daily Tej, L&DO only issued demand notices 
and show cause notices from time to time. 
L&DO replied (December 2020) 
that the matter was recently 
examined and the Land & 
Development Officer had directed 
to find out how much area of the 
premises was being used for the 
Press purpose and whether the 
policy for Press allotment was 
followed or not.  Accordingly, the 
matter had been referred to 
Technical Section to expeditiously 
conduct inspection and submit the 
report. 
L&DO further replied (April 2021) 
that due to Covid 19 pandemic and 
as per DOPT order, the country 
was under lockdown since 
26.03.2020 and the office was not 
functioning regularly.  As the 
L&DO noticed various misuses 
and unauthorized construction 
since December 1972. After 48 
years i.e., in December 2020, file 
was still under submission for 
conducting another inspection to 
ascertain whether the property was 
being used for the Press purpose or 
not.  L&DO has neither recovered 
the dues nor initiated action for re-
entry.  By citing the reasons that 
Court had stayed the re-entry 
orders in some other cases, L&DO 
is only refraining from discharging 
its duties. 
The recovery of government dues 
has been pending much before the 
outbreak of Covid and L&DO did 
not take effective action for 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
52 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
6. Demand notice (with reference to O.M dated 30.06.201 7) for 
payment of revised charges against the misuse/ unauthorized 
construction on the land w.e.f, 01.04.2000 was not issued. 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `1 .68 crore was outstanding towards ground 
rent, interest on ground rent and damages/ misuse charges.  
office has started working 
regularly, necessary action will be 
taken at the earliest.  Moreover to 
take action to re-enter the property, 
a press plot case is already pending 
in Hon’ble Supreme court and the 
court has stayed the re-entry.  
recovery of the dues even before 
the outbreak. 
The reply of April 2021 was also 
silent on whether inspection had 
been carried out by the Technical 
Section. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
53 
6. Gulab Singh & Sons 
Category Presses 
Property ID 21590 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 2,731.68 square meters (0.675 acre) 
Date of Allotment 23 February 1953 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `2,109.06 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The ground rent was to be revised on 1 January 1983; however, the 
ground rent was revised on 10.08.2004 i.e., after a lapse of 21 years. 
Inspection 
2. Inspection was done in August 2018 after September 2012, and breach 
notice was issued in October 2018. 
3. Various breaches were noticed and last demand letter was issued in 
December 2019.  However, neither recovery of dues was made nor action for 
re-entry was initiated.  
4. Inspections of the premises were conducted between May 1975 and 
August 2018 and breaches were observed, but it took more than 30 years (from 
May 1975) to issue the demand notice. 
5. Agreement to lease was signed in September 1953 but lease deed was 
not executed. 
Other issues 
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that after taking into 
account the guidelines on 
press plots, demand of `17.06 
crore was issued to the lessee 
on 20.03.2020. In response to 
this demand letter, the lessee 
had requested to provide the 
actual calculations along with 
entire details in accordance 
with proper inspection report. 
After getting the same, lessee 
had submitted their 
representation which was 
under examination. If the 
lessee fails to deposit the 
demanded amount, punitive 
action will be taken as per 
The reply of the L&DO is to 
be viewed in light of the fact 
that the recovery of 
government dues has been 
pending much before the 
outbreak of Covid and 
L&DO did not take effective 
action for recovery of the 
dues even before the 
outbreak. 
Further, by citing the reasons 
that Court had stayed the
 
re-entry orders in some other 
cases, L&DO is only 
refraining from discharging 
its duties. 
The facts remains that the 
demand for `8.27 crore 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
54 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
6. In October 2011, a policy was framed for streamlining/ rationalizing the 
criteria/ principles for determining misuse and unauthorized constructions in 
respect of Press/ media plots situated at Bahadurshah Zafar Marg New Delhi.  
The policy stipulated the conditions for granting permanent change of purpose 
and regulating misuse etc.  Accordingly, L&DO offered the terms for 
temporary regularization of breaches in November 2011 and a demand notice 
for `8.27 crore was issued.  Though lessee contested this demand, L&DO did 
not accept the same. 
7. The demand notice for damages, misuse and unauthorized construction 
etc. amounting to `8.78 crore was issued on 31.12.2019 on the basis of revised 
land rates, However, the amount of earlier demand of `8.27 crore issued in 
November 2011 was not included in this demand notice. These dues were yet 
to be realized. 
8. Various details relating to property were not found filled in e-Dharti 
portal of L&DO. 
Outstanding dues 
9. An amount of `18.72 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent and damages/misuse charges etc. as on 14.01.2020. 
terms & conditions of the 
lease. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that due to Covid 19 
pandemic and as per DOPT 
order, the country was under 
lockdown since March 26, 
2020 and the office was not 
functioning regularly. As the 
office has started working 
regularly, necessary action will 
be taken at the earliest. 
Moreover to take action to re-
enter the property, a press plot 
case is already pending in 
Hon’ble Supreme court and 
the court has stayed the
 
re-entry. 
raised in November 2011, 
which has risen to `17.06 
crore as of March 2020, has 
not yet been recovered by 
L&DO. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
55 
7. Hotel Le Meridian, Janpath 
Category Hotels 
Property ID 21703 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 17,361.39 square meters (4.29 acres) 
Date of Allotment 30 July 1983 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `24,91,632 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1.  The records relating to the realization of ground rent for the 
period 15.07.2012 to 14.07.2018 was not found in the concerned files 
provided to Audit. 
2.  After completion of 30 years from the date of allotment i.e. 
July 1983, the ground rent was to be revised in July 2013, however, the 
same was yet to be revised.  
Other dues 
3.  The premises were inspected from time to time and during 
inspection L&DO noticed that part of the property was being used for 
the purpose other than those for which allotment was done.  The Hotel 
had carried out the construction beyond Sanctioned Building Plan. 
 
The last demand letter towards damage charges and misuse charges 
etc., was issued in January 2012 for `124.84 crore. No updated 
demand had been issued after January 2012 and the amount to be 
recovered was not found calculated in view of revision of land rates in 
May/ June 2017 effective from the year 2000.  Due to not pursuing the 
L&DO replied (December 2020) that 
after issue of demand letter, several 
reminders were issued to NDMC for 
recovery of Government dues.  In 
this connection, a Show Cause 
Notice was issued on 08.02.2019 to 
the Secretary, NDMC with the 
request that reply/ clarification in this 
regard may be sent within 30 days 
from the date of issue of the letter, 
failing which the action would be 
taken against NDMC, but no reply 
has been received till date.  The 
complete details of the property have 
been filled in e-Dharti portal of 
L&DO.  The lease agreement or 
Perpetual Lease in respect of land 
under Hotel Le Meridian could not 
This issue was also brought out 
in the CAG Report No.6 of 
2009-10, hence, it is pending 
for a very long time.  The last 
demand was issued to the 
lessee in January 2012, 
however, even after lapse of 
more than nine years, the 
updated demand has not been 
issued to the lessee.  Thus, 
L&DO’s plea that action could 
not be taken due to Covid-19 
pandemic is not acceptable. 
Even after nine years of the 
assurance given to the PAC by 
the Secretary, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, 
L&DO has not taken recourse 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
56 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
case effectively for recovery of outstanding Government dues from 
NDMC, L&DO did not take suitable action/ recovery of dues of 
`124.84 crore despite lapse of more than eight years after issue of the 
demand (January 2012). 
4.  This issue was also brought out in CAG Report No. 6 of 2009-
10 on Functioning of Land and Development Office and as per 59 th 
Report of the PAC (April 2012), while replying to the question of 
PAC, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs submitted 
that if the NDMC did not agree to pay the charges raised against them, 
then the Ministry would take recourse to legal remedies to realize the 
dues.  However, no such action was taken despite L&DO failing to 
recover the outstanding dues.  
Inspection 
5.   The last inspection of the premises was conducted in July 2010 
and no inspection was conducted after that. 
Other Issues 
6.  No perpetual lease has been executed. 
7.  Sanctioned Building Plan was not submitted by NDMC. 
8.  The complete details of the property were not found filled in
 
e-Dharti Portal of L&DO. 
Outstanding dues 
9. An amount of `191.20 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent and damages/ misuse charges.  
be executed due to non-fulfilment of 
terms of allotment letter. 
L&DO further stated (April 2021) 
due to Covid 19 pandemic and as per 
DOPT order, the country was under 
lockdown since 26.03.2020 and the 
office was not functioning regularly. 
 
As the office has now started 
working regularly, necessary action 
will be taken at the earliest. 
 
Moreover, the dispute is between the 
Central Government i.e., land 
owning agency and local body i.e., 
NDMC.  Hence, action can be taken 
as per the terms of allotment or lease 
deed.  The only thing that L&DO can 
do is to cancel the allotment and take 
possession of the plot.  Updated 
demand is under process in 
consultation with the Technical 
Wing. 
 
to legal remedies despite non-
realization of dues.  Further, 
the reply of L&DO that 
complete details of the 
property have been filled in e-
Dharti portal is not correct 
since the details such as ground 
rent, dues demanded by L&DO 
and dues paid by the lessee 
were not filled in. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
57 
8. Hotel Taj Man Singh 
Category Hotels 
Property ID 24615 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 15,297.45 square meters (3.78 acres) 
Date of Allotment 13 July 1976 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `2,28,700 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. After completion of 30 years from the date of allotment i.e. July 1976, 
the ground rent was to be revised in July 2006, however, the same was yet to be 
revised. 
Other dues 
2. The premises was inspected from time to time and during inspection, 
L&DO noticed that the part of the property was being used for the purpose other 
than those for which allotment was done.  The Hotel had carried out the 
construction beyond Sanctioned Building Plan.  The last demand letter towards 
damage charges, misuse charges etc., was issued in February 2018 for  
`132.83 crore.  Due to non-persuasion of the case effectively for recovery of 
outstanding Government dues from NDMC, L&DO did not take suitable 
action/recovery of dues of `132.83 crore despite lapse of more than two years 
after issue of demand in February 2018.  This issue was also brought out in 
CAG Report No. 06 of 2009-10 on Functioning of Land and Development 
Office and as per 59 th report of the PAC, while replying to the question of the 
PAC, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs had submitted that 
if the NDMC did not agree to pay the charges raised against them, then the 
Ministry would take recourse to legal remedies to realize the dues. However, no 
It was stated in its reply 
(December 2020) that L&DO 
was striving hard and 
impressing upon NDMC to 
sort out the matter at the 
earliest.  In the last resort, 
L&DO would be constrained 
to take punitive action and 
cancel the allotment. 
L&DO further stated (April 
2021) due to Covid 19 
pandemic and as per DOPT 
order, the country was under 
lockdown since 26.03.2020 
and the office was not 
functioning regularly.  As the 
office has started working 
regularly, necessary action 
will be taken at the earliest. 
 
This issue was also brought 
out in the CAG Report No.6 
of 2009-10, hence, it is 
pending for a very long time. 
 
Thus, L&DO’s plea that 
action could not be taken due 
to Covid-19 pandemic is not 
acceptable.  The updated 
demand has not been issued 
to the lessee.  Further, even 
after nine years of the 
assurance given to PAC by 
the Secretary, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs, 
L&DO has not taken recourse 
to legal remedies despite non-
realization of dues. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
58 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
such action was taken despite L&DO failing to recover the outstanding dues.  
Inspection 
3. No inspection was conducted after July 2010.  
Other Issues 
4. No perpetual lease has been executed. 
5. Sanctioned Building Plan was not submitted by NDMC.  In the absence 
of the approved Sanctioned Building Plan, it is not clear how L&DO was raising 
the issues of misuse and unauthorized construction. 
6. The details of the ground rent/ additional ground rent, date when it 
became due and rates/ amount of ground rent, additional ground rent and 
amount received by the L&DO were not found entered in the ground rent 
register. 
7. The complete details of the property were not filled in e-Dharti portal of 
L&DO. 
Outstanding dues 
8. An amount of `159.65 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent and damages/misuse charges.  
Moreover, the dispute is 
between the Central 
Government i.e., land owning 
agency and local body i.e., 
NDMC.  Hence, action can 
be taken as per the terms of 
allotment or lease deed.  The 
only thing that L&DO can do 
is to cancel the allotment and 
take possession of the plot. 
 
Updated demand is under 
process in consultation with 
the Technical Wing. 
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
59 
9. Vidya Sagar Institute for Mental Health and Neuro-Sciences, Nehru Nagar 
Category Hospitals 
Property ID 30284 and 21508 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 14,164 square meters (3.5 acres) 
Date of Allotment May 1984 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `1,769 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The due date of revision of ground rent was taken as 30 
years from date of allotment (May 2014) as lease deed was not 
signed.  The ground rent was not revised.  
2. L&DO did not take any action to realize the ground rent.  
Other dues 
3. Demand for `6.14 crore was issued to the lessee in January 
2014.  After that, L&DO did not demand the complete outstanding 
dues from the allottee, though it had assured Audit in August 2018 
that dues pending against the allottee would be calculated at revised 
rates. 
4. L&DO worked out (July 2016) dues of `9.74 crore on 
account of misuse/ damages (excluding penalty) but did not 
communicate the same to the lessee. 
Inspection 
5. No inspection was conducted after August 2011.  
Other issues 
6. Lease deed was not signed.  
LDO replied (December 2020) that the 
Government dues were calculated in July 
2016 amounting to `9.74 crore on account 
of misuse/ damages but the same was not 
communicated to the lessee as it was 
observed by the then L&DO that demand 
cannot be sent to a re- entered property.  
Regarding monitoring of free treatment to 
EWS category, reports in this regard was 
received from the Directorate of Health 
Services, Government of NCT of Delhi 
from time to time.  The Directorate of 
Health Services, Government of NCT of 
Delhi vide their letter dated 17.01.2019 
informed that the hospital was not 
violating the conditions of free treatment 
to EWS.  The matter was re-examined and 
with the approval of the Competent 
Authority, it was decided to withdraw the 
order of re-entry issued to the hospital. 
 
Reply of L&DO is not 
acceptable as Audit did not 
find any document which 
stated that re-entry orders 
had been issued to the 
lessee.  Also, L&DO did not 
enclose any documentary 
evidence in support of re-
entry orders.  Reports 
regarding free treatment to 
EWS category received from 
the Directorate of Health 
services, Government of 
NCT of Delhi were not 
found in the records 
provided to Audit. The 
provisions regarding 
nomination of Government 
nominee on the Executive 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
60 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
7. L&DO did not have copy of revised sanctioned building 
plan. 
8. In view of not providing 70 per cent  free beds to EWS 
patients as per the terms of allotment, and large number of misuses/ 
unauthorized constructions, the allotment of land was cancelled in 
May 2004. 
9. However, based on a representation from Chairman, 
VIMHANS, the decision of cancellation of allotment of land was 
kept in abeyance till the views of Health Department, Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) on the issue of 
providing free treatment to EWS were obtained.  
10. No mechanism or its implementation could be found in 
L&DO which indicated that hospital was following the condition 
for providing free treatment to EWS patients. 
11. L&DO also did not enforce the condition of including two 
nominees of the Government on the Executive Committee of the 
hospital to look after Government interest with regard to land 
management/ utilization thereof and also to ensure that it is utilized 
for the purpose laid down in the Memorandum of Agreement. 
12. There were two IDs of the property in e-Dharti, both of 
which were incomplete.  
Outstanding dues 
13. An amount of `12.34 crore was outstanding towards ground 
rent, interest on ground rent and damages/ misuse charges.  
Accordingly, terms, which included 
updated Government dues, for withdrawal 
of re-entry order had been issued to the 
hospital on 07.12.2020.  So far as 
nomination of Government nominee is 
concerned, it is mentioned that the 
available records do not state as to why no 
Government nominee was nominated till 
2003.  This matter was first examined in 
2003-04 and since then, the property was 
under re-entered condition.  Discrepancies 
in the property ID have been corrected. 
L&DO further replied (April 2021) that the 
land allotted to the hospital was cancelled 
on 18.05.2004 with the direction to hand 
over the possession of land on 28.05.2004 
to the Lessor.  However, the same was 
kept in abeyance as per the decision of the 
then Secretary (Urban Development) dated 
24.05.2004. A demand letter dated 
07.12.2020 for withdrawal of re-entry was 
issued to the hospital. However, the 
payment has not been made by them till 
date.  
Committee of the hospital 
were laid down in the 
Memorandum of 
Agreement, which should 
have been adhered to. 
Though the Directorate of 
Health Services had 
informed (January 2019) 
that the hospital was not 
violating the conditions of 
free treatment to EWS, the 
demand letter for 
outstanding dues was issued 
by L&DO after around two 
years i.e., on 07.12.2020. 
Further, L&DO did not 
furnish a copy of the 
demand letter dated 
07.12.2020 to Audit for 
verification and also did not 
inform about further action 
taken after non-payment of 
the demanded amount.  
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
61 
10. St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari 
Category Hospitals 
Property ID 21482 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot (i) 5,544.19 square meters (1.37 acres), (ii) 1,942.49 square meters (0.48 acre), 
(iii) 5,256.87 square meters (1.299 acres) 
Date of Allotment (i) June 1970, (ii) February 1972, (iii) January 1976 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) (i) `342.50, (ii) `120, (iii) `325 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent  
1. The revision of ground rent was due in four multiples of the rate w.e.f., 
01.01.2000, February 2002 and January 2006 respectively and thereafter at the 
end of each successive period of not less than 30 years.  Ground rent was 
enhanced in respect of the plot measuring 1.37 acres only with effect from 
15.12.2003 at the rate of `1,370 per annum. 
2. Ground rent was not revised in respect of the plots measuring 1,942.49 
square meters and 5,256.87 square meters. 
3. In respect of the plot of 1.37 acres, the payment of `6,850 in August 
2010 and `5,922 in August 2012 only was made and shown in the e-Dharti 
portal.  The ground rent for all the three plots was paid by the hospital upto 
December 2012. 
Inspection 
4. Even after a lapse of 49 years from the allotment (1970), only five 
inspections were conducted. No inspection was done after January 2008. 
Breaches and misuse/ re-entry 
5. During the inspection of the St. Stephen’s Hospital, a number of 
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that the Supreme Court 
of India in July 2018 directed 
the hospital to strictly follow 
the policy of free treatment to 
the EWS patients to the extent 
of 25 per cent  OPD and
 
10 per cent IPD.  The matter 
was under litigation till 2018.  
Thereafter, inspection of the 
property was carried out on 
15.10.2020 and accordingly, a 
breach notice had been issued 
to the Hospital.  The response 
of the Hospital was awaited. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that the matter was 
under litigation till 2018. The 
The reply is not acceptable as 
there was no restriction on 
taking action against the 
lessee for violating the 
conditions of lease.  Further, 
L&DO is silent on the issue of 
providing free treatment to 
EWS category patients. 
 
L&DO carried out the 
inspection of the premises in 
October 2020 i.e., after lapse 
of more than two years of 
Court’s order and that too 
after being pointed by Audit. 
 
However, no demand letter 
has been issued to the lessee. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
62 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
breaches related to misuse and unauthorized constructions were reported.  
However, neither breaches were remedied nor demand notice was issued.  No 
action taken to re-enter the property. 
Other issues 
6. The hospital did not adhere to the condition to provide free treatment to 
EWS patients. 
7. St. Stephen’s Hospital did not submit the completion plan  
8. Data in e-Dharti was incomplete and did not indicate the payment 
details. 
Outstanding dues 
9. An amount of `0.23 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent and 
interest on ground rent.  Other dues on account of damages/misuse charges 
could not be worked out.  
response of hospital is 
awaited.  The Government 
dues shall be calculated in 
due course after receipt of 
response of the hospital on 
the breach notice issued to 
them.  If the hospital fails to 
deposit the demanded 
amount, necessary punitive 
action may be taken as per 
terms & conditions of 
Agreement of Lease. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
63 
11. F-2, Connaught Place 
Category Business Premises 
Property ID 35711 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 1,132.67 square meters (12,192.02 square feet) 
Date of Allotment 28 March 1925 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `330 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The revision of ground rent was due in January 1947, January 1977 and 
January 2007, however the ground rent was not revised. 
2. Ground rent at the rate of `330 per annum was not paid after January 1981, 
and `12,609 on account of ground rent and `24,402 on account interest was due 
from January 1981 to March 2019. 
3. Additional ground rent (for additional construction) of `22.27 lakh and 
interest thereon of `40.34 lakh have not been paid from January 1984 to March 
2019 and the revision of the same was due in January 2014 i.e., after 30 years from 
January 1984, however, the same was not revised. 
Other dues 
4. The additional premium amounting to `45.74 lakh (balance premium of 
`9.49 lakh + interest at 10 per cent per annum from 8 January 1981 to 31 March 
2019 i.e. `36.25 lakh) was not paid. 
Inspection 
5. No inspection was conducted after April 2005.  
 
 
L&DO stated (December 
2020) in its reply that the 
file has been sent to 
Technical Section for 
carrying out inspection and 
thereafter demand for 
revised ground rent, 
additional ground rent, etc. 
will be updated.  
L&DO further stated (April 
2021) that before 
demanding Government 
dues from the lessee, all the 
aspects are to be finalized 
in consultation with various 
sections of the office.  In 
the instant case, before 
finalization of additional/ 
revised ground rent, 
The reply is not tenable as 
the matter has remained 
unattended since 2005 and 
no inspection has been 
conducted after 2005.  Mere 
sending the file to Technical 
Section is not sufficient as 
the file had been sent to 
Technical Section earlier 
also (viz., June 2004) but no 
action was initiated for 
recovery/ revision of ground 
rent and additional ground 
rent, and the proposal for re-
entry was dropped without 
any reasons.  Further, no 
reply has been furnished 
regarding other issues 
pointed out by audit viz., 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
64 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Other Issues 
6. Breaches relating to unauthorized construction and misuse were noticed on 
the premises time to time.  These breaches were not regularized and no recovery 
was made till date.  No demand on account of breaches was issued despite request 
of the lessee.  The case was processed for re-entry, but the same was dropped for 
no reasons.  
7. The perpetual lease was signed in March 1925, however, no 
correspondences were found in the concerned files before July 1962 (except 
records relating to transfer of property in March 1930).  Further, file remained 
unattended after April 2005 despite existence of breaches/ misuse and outstanding 
dues. 
8. Sale of part property without permission of the lessor. 
9. It was observed from the data in e-Dharti that most of the columns of the 
property proforma were left blank which defeated the purpose of computerization 
of the records. 
Outstanding dues 
10. An amount of `1.17 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, interest on 
ground rent and damages/misuse charges.  
inspection of the property 
is essential for which 
sanctioned building plan 
has been requested from 
the lessee.  However, the 
same is still awaited. 
 
Consequent upon receipt of 
the same, all the dues shall 
be updated. 
 
sale of land without 
permission of L&DO, action 
for removal of huge breaches 
and recovery of additional 
premium, etc.   
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
65 
12. Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar 
Category Cinema Halls 
Property ID 21520 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 4,217.70 square meters (5,044.333 square yards) 
Date of Allotment November 1954 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `51 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
1. Although it was a cinema plot, the lease deed was executed (May 1961) on Appendix XI 
which was meant for residential purposes. 
2. Supplementary deed was executed in May 1980 correcting the user clause as commercial for 
cinema/ theatres.  
Ground Rent 
3. The ground rent was fixed to `2.02 lakh w.e.f. March 1987 (change of user of land and 
premises from cinema to cinema cum commercial). 
4. No action for realization of ground rent was taken during the period from April 2016 to 
March 2019. 
5. Revised ground rent was fixed, but provision for further revision was not made. 
6. As per clarification vide L&DO letter dated 02.02.1999, second revision would fall due at 
the end of each successive period of not less than 30 years.  More than 32 years have elapsed since 
the revision of ground rent was done in March 1987, but the ground rent has not been revised so far. 
7. Up to March 1987, yearly ground rent remained `51 at the rate of `1 per annum per 100 
square yards which is for rehabilitation property. 
 
 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) 
that the premises 
were inspected in 
April 2005 and 
August 2007 and 
breach notices were 
also issued 
accordingly.  The 
property had 
recently been 
inspected on 
10.09.2020 and a 
breach notice had 
been issued on 
23.11.2020.  Reply 
of the lessee was 
awaited.  
The reply is not 
acceptable since 
L&DO did not 
take effective 
action to recover 
the Government 
dues or re-enter the 
property.  There 
was nothing in the 
file after October 
2007, although it 
was in the 
knowledge of 
L&DO that there 
was an outstanding 
balance to be 
recovered from the 
lessee and there 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
66 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
Inspection 
8. Inspection of the property was conducted in April 2005 and misuse and unauthorised 
constructions were found. 
9. The last breach notice was issued in October 2007 to pay the outstanding amount.  The 
lessee neither requested for temporary regularization of breaches nor made any payment. 
Other issues 
10. The balance payment of `13.41 lakh ( `106.34 lakh - `92.93 lakh) along with interest @10 
per cent per annum demanded in October 2005 was yet to be realized. 
11. L&DO neither took action to evict Competent Films (unauthorised occupants) from the 
property nor imposed any penalty on Nahar Theatres (lessee) for selling the property without 
intimation to L&DO. 
12. In spite of the fact that there was an outstanding balance to be recovered from the lessee and 
there was misuse and unauthorised construction, L&DO neither made any correspondence with the 
lessee nor did take any action to recover the Government dues or re-enter in the property after 
October 2007.  A notice was served in October 2007 to the lessee to remedy the breaches before 
exercising re-entry powers, after that there was nothing in the file.  
13. Surveyor of L&DO had visited the Lajpat Nagar area in July 2001 and came to know that 
Alankar Cinema building was demolished and a new building was under construction. 
14. Without intimation of L&DO, lessee demolished the premises and constructed a new 
building.  L&DO was aware that a new building was being constructed but L&DO neither stopped 
the lessee from constructing the new building nor took action to re-enter the property.  Unearned 
increase could not be recovered from the lessee due to signing of lease deed on Appendix XI.  
15. After being informed by Competent Films Private Ltd that they had bought the property, 
L&DO did not take any action to get complete information about current occupant of the property 
and continued to serve notices to Nahar Theatres (original lessee). 
L&DO further 
replied (April 2021) 
that a show-cause 
notice had been 
issued to the lessee. 
 
In response to the 
show-cause notice, 
lessee has requested 
for payment of 
Government dues. 
 
Accordingly, file has 
been referred to 
Technical Section in 
March 2021 for 
calculation of 
Government dues. 
 
 
was misuse and 
unauthorised 
construction. Only 
after being pointed 
out by Audit, 
L&DO carried out 
inspection in 
September 2020. 
 
However, the dues 
to be recovered 
from the lessee 
have not been 
calculated so far. 
 
Further, L&DO 
also did not take 
action to get the 
property vacated 
from the 
unauthorised 
occupants. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
67 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
16. Nahar Theatres sold (January 2001) a shop comprising of 921 square feet to one  
Mr. Gurmeet Singh, who further sold it to Mr. Raj Chopra (Director of Competent Films Private 
Ltd) in April 2007 vide an agreement to sell. The sale was registered in the O/o Sub-Registrar at a 
value of `1.30 crore. Unearned increase was recoverable by L&DO on this sale. 
17. As per lease deed, lessor is entitled to claim and recover the unearned increase in case of the 
subsequent sale after the first sale and the lessor has also the right to revise the ground rent. 
However, L&DO could not claim the unearned increase or revise the ground rent due to sale of the 
lease rights of property without intimation. 
18. Columns of property proforma in e-Dharti were either left blank or not updated. 
Outstanding dues 
19. An amount of `2.66 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, interest on ground rent and 
damages/misuse charges.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
68 
13. 17, Jor Bagh 
Category Other Nazul Properties 
Property ID 33682 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 1,073.00 square meters (1,283.3 square yards) 
Date of Allotment December 1954 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `705 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further audit comments 
Ground rent  
1. The revision of ground rent was due with effect from 01.01.1982, at the rate of 
`5,680 per annum, and thereafter at the end of each successive period of not less than 30 
years, however, it could not be ascertained from the records up to which period ground 
rent had been paid.  
2. The revision of ground rent, though due with effect from 01.01.1982, was 
communicated to the lessee in September 2008. 
Other dues 
3. Unearned increase was also required to be paid by the lessee, however, the same 
was also not raised.   
 
Inspection 
4. The perpetual lease was executed in December 1954, and first inspection was 
conducted in October 2003 i.e., after a lapse of 49 years of the lease execution.  Last 
inspection was carried out in December 2017 and breach notice was also issued to lessee 
in December 2017.  However, demand of government dues was not raised.  
5. Neither any demand notice was issued nor action taken to re-enter the property. 
6. Joint inspection of the premises was conducted by Audit along with the staff of 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) 
that the requisite 
action was being 
taken as per policy. 
L&DO further 
replied (April 2021) 
that the property still 
stands in the name 
of Sh. Chunni Lal 
Katyal. The property 
is presently under 
occupation of Sh. 
K.P.Sahi.  
Accordingly, he has 
been requested vide 
letter dated 
01.04.2021 to 
submit an online 
The reply is not tenable 
since L&DO does not seem 
to be aware of the actual 
legal heirs of Shri Chunni 
Lal Katyal and they had 
issued letter to Shri K.P. 
Sahi, the so-called occupier 
of the premises.  Instead of 
initiating action for recovery 
of Government dues, L&DO 
is waiting for the reply of 
the so-called occupier of the 
premises. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
69 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further audit comments 
L&DO in January 2020.  Some of the previous unauthorized constructions as reported in 
inspection report of L&DO dated 12.11.2017 still existed. 
Other findings 
7. L&DO did not take any action on the request made (February 2002) by Maharani 
Durgeshwari Sahi to transfer the lease rights in the name of her grandson Mr. K.P. Sahi 
given to him as per gift deed.  Subsequently, the property was taken (August 2002) on 
lease by one Ms. Suman Kapoor from Mr. K.P. Sahi.  Ms Suman Kapoor made a request 
(June 2003) to L&DO for change of use of the property from residential to non-domestic 
as the property was being used by her as residence-cum-creche. 
8. L&DO was not aware of the change of use of the property from residential to
 
non-domestic as the property was being used as residence-cum-crèche.  The property was 
still in the name of Maharani Durgeshwari Sahi in the records of L&DO. 
9. Data in e-Dharti was incomplete and did not indicate the payment details. 
Outstanding dues 
10. An amount of `1.47 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, interest on ground 
rent and damages/misuse charges.  
application of 
substitution with the 
documentary proof 
regarding stake in 
the property. 
onsequent upon 
receipt of ownership 
documents, demands 
shall be raised on 
the actual legal heirs 
of the lessee. 
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
70 
14. Sen Nursing Home 
Category Other Nazul Properties 
Property ID 33981 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 5,058.68 square meters (1.25 acres) 
Date of Allotment 19 July 1952 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `4,687.50 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The records provided to Audit did not reveal the complete details of payment and 
revision of ground rent in terms of provision of the lease deed. 
Inspection 
2. Inspections were done without sanctioned building plan. 
3. No inspection was done after February 2013. 
Other issues 
4. The property changed hands many times after leasing to the original lessee 
without knowledge of the L&DO. The original lessee had transferred (June 1974) 
the lease rights to Ansal Saigal Properties Ltd, who constructed flats in the leased 
space and sold these the flats to individuals. Though it came into the notice of the 
L&DO in January 2010, however, no action was initiated by L&DO. From the Sub-
Registrar’s office, Audit could obtain the details of three purchasers of flats, 
wherein it was seen that two of the flats had been given on rent by the purchasers 
and an agreement to sell had been executed for one flat in September 2011. This flat 
was registered at a value of `1.21 crore. Unearned increase was also recoverable by 
L&DO on this sale. 
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that the matter had 
recently been examined in 
detail and it was found that 
the premises were under 
occupation of various 
unauthorized occupants/ 
squatter.  As such, with the 
approval of L&DO, it had 
been decided to cancel the 
allotment.  Accordingly, a 
show cause notice was 
issued on 09.12.2020. 
L&DO reiterated (April 
2021) that a show cause 
notice dated 09.12.2020 
has been issued. The copy 
of the same has been
 
 
L&DO did not provide copy 
of the show cause notice.  
L&DO also did not mention 
about action taken for 
recovery of Government 
dues. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
71 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
5. Breach notice was issued to the lessee in March 2012 and the reply to this notice 
was given by the Hans Bhawan Flat Owners Association on 28.06.2012 stating that 
after 10.02.2010 the maintenance and upkeep of the building had been handed over 
to Flat Owners Association of Hans Bhawan. 
6. No demand letter was issued to the lessee despite issuance of breach notice 
between the period of March 2012 and March 2013. 
7. Although there were breaches and outstanding dues, there was nothing in the file 
after December 2013. 
8. No action was initiated by L&DO for recovery of unearned increase in violation 
of the clause 2 (18) of Lease Deed. 
9. No action for re-entry was initiated by L&DO. 
enclosed for ready 
reference 
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
72 
15. 29, Aurangzeb Road 
Category Other Nazul Properties 
Property ID 24686 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 9,886.47 square meter (2.443 acres) 
Date of Allotment September 1930 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `410 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent 
1. Ground rent revision was due in January 1957, January 1987 and 
January 2017 but was never revised. 
2. Ground rent was not paid after July 1977.  L&DO did not issue any 
demand letter for payment of ground rent after July 1977.  
Inspections 
3. The inspection of the property was carried out in June 1990, December 
1994 and December 2017 and breach notice was issued in March 2018. 
4. Although there were continuous breaches/ misuse since June 1990, no 
demand was raised by the L&DO. 
Other issues 
5. Most of the data in e-Dharti was not filled. 
6. In spite of breaches found during the inspections, L&DO did not take 
effective action for removal of breaches or re-enter the property. 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `33.80 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent. Dues on account of damages/ misuse charges could not 
be worked out.  
L&DO replied (December 
2020) that the case had been 
referred to Technical Section 
to carry out inspection and 
calculate up-to-date charges. 
 
Thereafter, the demand would 
be served on the lessee and if 
the lessee fails to deposit the 
same, necessary punitive 
action would be taken as per 
terms of lease deed. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that after issue of breach 
notice, action for recovery of 
Government dues will be 
considered. 
 
L&DO did not issue any 
demand letter for payment of 
ground rent after July 1977. 
 
Although there were 
continuous breaches/ misuse 
since June 1990, no amount 
towards misuse/ damage 
charges was paid by lessee 
due to non-issue of demand 
letter by the L&DO.  All
 
that L&DO has done after  
30 years is that they have 
referred the case to Technical 
Section.  Inspections of the 
property time and again 
without issuing demand 
notices defeated the purpose 
of inspections as neither 
breaches were remedied nor 
the dues on account of 
breaches could be recovered. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
73 
16. 3, Kautilya Marg 
Category Other Nazul Properties 
Property ID 22509 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 1,132.62 square meters (1,354.60 square yards) 
Date of Allotment 14 October 1957 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `415 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Other issues 
1. As per the terms of the conveyance deed, the property shall be used strictly as per 
lease terms/ master plan norms and in the condition of any encroachment upon the 
Government land or property being put to any use other than stipulated in the lease term, the 
conveyance deed shall be revoked without any notice.  Audit, however, noted that L&DO has 
not exercised any control to ascertain the present status of use of property, after conversion 
of property to freehold. 
2. L&DO has not taken any steps to calculate and raise demand for claiming dues on 
account of balance of conversion fees that became payable in view of revision of land rates 
from retrospective effect (i.e., with effect from 01.04.2000).  
Outstanding dues 
3. An amount of `10.52 lakh was not recovered towards other dues on account of non-
revision of charges after conversion of property into freehold. 
4. L&DO neither furnished any reply to the audit observation issued in June 2020 nor 
provided any information sought therein. 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) 
that the required 
action in the 
matter was being 
taken shortly. 
L&DO further 
replied (April 
2021) that a 
demand in the 
instant case was 
issued on 
01.04.2021. 
 
After around four years 
from the revision of land 
rates in May 2017, L&DO 
has issued a demand letter 
to the lessee, copy of which 
has not been provided to 
Audit.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
74 
17. Garage, Plot No. 7, Block-91, Gole Market 
Category Other Nazul Properties 
Property ID 33338 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 24.30 square meters (261.63 square feet) 
Date of Allotment September 1941 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `31 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. Recovery of ground rent for the period January 1940 to July 1964 (more than 24 
years) at the rate of `31 per annum was not made. 
2. Ground rent at the rate of `124 per annum and additional ground rent at the rate 
`129.85 per annum for the period July 2001 to March 2019 was also not recovered from 
the lessee. 
3. The revision of the ground rent was due on 01.01.1969 and thereafter on 01.01.1999 
but the same was revised by the L&DO in May 2001 after a lapse of more than 32 years 
(from the due date of revision) from `31 to `124 i.e., four times of the previous ground 
rent which was irregular because as per order of Ministry of Works and Housing dated 
24.12.1983, the ground rent if not revised from 31 to 40 years since the revision falls 
due, the ground rent was to be enhanced 10 times of the existing ground rent.  Hence, 
ground rent of `310 per annum should have been charged. 
Inspection 
4. The property was allotted in 1941 and the first inspection was conducted in April 
1971 i.e., 30 years after the execution of perpetual lease.  After the inspection in October 
1998, another inspection was done in May 2018 and breach notice issued in June 2018. 
L&DO stated in its 
reply (December 
2020) that the file has 
been sent to 
Technical Section for 
carrying out 
inspection and 
thereafter demand for 
revised ground rent, 
additional ground 
rent, etc. would be 
updated.  
L&DO further stated 
(April 2021) that they 
have already started a 
drive to update 
records/ demand of 
each and every 
property.  To update 
The reply of the L&DO is 
not tenable as no action in 
respect of revision/ recovery 
of ground rent and demand of 
additional ground rent has 
been taken till now.  Mere 
sending the file to Technical 
Section is not sufficient.  A 
conclusive action needs to be 
taken by L&DO.  Further, no 
action has been initiated 
regarding sale/ transfer of 
land without permission of 
L&DO. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
75 
5. The last inspection was carried out in November 2018 and breaches found during 
the inspection of May 2018 were found removed. 
Other issues 
6. The property had changed hands after leasing to the original lessee without 
knowledge of the L&DO.  However, no action was initiated by L&DO after it came into 
its knowledge. 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `0.18 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent and interest on 
ground rent.   
the records and to 
raise updated 
demands, inspection 
of the property is 
essential.  Matter is 
under examination in 
consultation with 
Technical Wing. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
76 
18. Plot No. 12, Block 10, Golf Links 
Category Freehold Properties 
Property ID 22003 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 1,517.24 square meters (1,814.6 square yards) 
Date of Allotment April 1966 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `927.50 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The revision of ground rent was due from January 1983, however, the same 
was revised in October 2004. 
Inspection  
2. The last inspection was conducted in February 2016, breach notice was 
issued in March 2016 and demand notice issued in April 2016. 
Other dues 
3. The conversion of the property into freehold was approved in May 2016. 
 
An undertaking was given by allottee that he would pay the difference of misuse, 
damage and conversion charges etc., if the land rates were revised with effect from 
01.04.2000.  However, no such dues were demanded by L&DO despite revision of 
land rates in 2017.  
Other findings 
4. The allottee gave an undertaking that the property shall be used strictly as 
per lease terms/ master plan norms and for no other purpose or any non-conforming 
use whatsoever even after conversion of the same into freehold.  No such control 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) that 
the demand was under 
preparation and would 
be served on allottee 
shortly. 
L&DO further replied 
(April 2021) that they 
have started a drive to 
update records/ demand 
of each and every 
property including 
raising of demand for the 
difference of conversion/ 
misuse/ damages charges 
in respect of freehold 
property.  This is being 
carried out area-wise. 
 
Around four years have elapsed 
since the revision of land rates 
in May 2017, but L&DO was 
still in the process of issuing 
demand letter.  This shows that 
L&DO did not make concerted 
efforts for recovery of 
Government dues. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
77 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
was exercised by L&DO to ascertain present use of the property. 
5. The allottee was required to submit an attested copy of registered 
conveyance deed to L&DO within 15 days of its receipt.  However, no such copy 
was furnished by the allottee.  
Outstanding dues 
6. An amount of `42.29 lakh was not recovered towards other dues on account 
of non-revision of charges after conversion of property into freehold. 
As such, demand shall 
be issued in due course. 
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
78 
19. 19, Prithviraj Road 
Category Freehold Properties 
Property ID 35269 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 6,110.753 square meters (1.51 acres) 
Date of Allotment March 1923 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `358 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent 
1. L&DO did not demand the arrears of ground rent with 
effect from 15 January 2013 to 19 July 2017.  
Inspection 
2. Inspection was done in September 2017 after October 2012. 
Audit observed that an inspection was also conducted in 
July 2014, however, L&DO did not accept the same as the 
main file was missing. 
Other issues 
1. L&DO did not claim damage charges beyond 14 July 1995 
on unauthorized construction though the lessee removed all 
encroachment only in July 2014. Conveyance deed was 
issued by L&DO in July 2017.  
2. Correspondences pertaining to the period 1923 to February 
1967, November 1984 to September 2004 were not 
available in the files. Correspondences pertaining to the 
period September 2012 to June 2017 were also missing. 
L&DO stated in its reply (December 2020) that 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi directed that 
L&DO can claim payment towards 
unauthorized construction till 14.07.1995.  The 
matter was agitated before Hon’ble Supreme 
Court and Hon’ble Court had declined to 
entertain the plea of L&DO.  The review 
petition filed by L&DO in Hon’ble Supreme 
Court was also dismissed.  Therefore, in 
pursuance of directions of Hon’ble High Court, 
L&DO could only charge payment upto 
14.07.1995 and the same had been accounted 
for. 
L&DO further stated (April 2021) that in view 
of the Court’s order, no demand was 
recoverable beyond July 1995.  At the time of 
conversion of the property in 2017, all the 
Government dues had already been realized. 
In view of the Court’s 
decision, no further 
comments.  
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
79 
20. 1, Hailey Road 
Category Freehold Properties 
Property ID 18254 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 6,839.19 square meters (1.69 acres) 
Date of Allotment July 1932 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `200 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
Ground rent 
1. Details of ground rent demanded by L&DO from January 1928 to June 
1984 were neither available on e-Dharti portal nor found in the records.  
2. Amount of ground rent deposited from July 2011 to March 2019 varied 
from year to year.  Year-wise details on account of ground rent and revised 
ground rent from 2011 onwards could not be verified. 
Inspection 
3. Last inspection was carried out in October 2015. 
Other dues 
4. Dues payable on account of damage charges were not re-calculated and 
claimed at revised rates with effect from the year 2000, after the revision of 
rates in May 2017.  
Other issues 
5. There was no clause relating to ‘unearned increase’ in the perpetual 
lease deed.  Although the lease rights of the property were transferred to 
L&DO replied (December 2020) 
that the case had been referred to 
Technical Section to carry out 
inspection and calculate up-to-date 
charges.  Thereafter, the demand 
would be served on the lessee and 
if the lessee fails to deposit the 
same, necessary punitive action 
will be taken as per terms of lease 
deed. 
L&DO further replied (April 2021) 
that the matter is already under 
process to prepare the demand for 
the whole premises and 
proportionately raise demands in 
respect of each flat. 
 
The action taken by 
L&DO is not yet 
complete.  The details of 
the demand issued in 
each case would be 
watched in Audit. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
80 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
multiple hands, the unearned increase was not demanded by L&DO.  
6. A multi-storey building (Group Housing) was constructed comprising 
55 flats. Out of 55, only 8 flats had been converted into freehold. 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `40.47 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent and damages. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
81 
21. Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) 
Category Trade Unions 
Property ID 21466 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 504 square meters 
Date of Allotment February 2009 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `27,399 (provisional) 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent: 
1. L&DO did not take any initiative to raise demand for payment of dues 
owing to revision in land rates and to communicate the lessee regarding revision 
in ground rent.  
2. The ground rent for the years 2015-16 to 2017-18 has not been paid by 
the lessee.  However, L&DO only accepted the ground rent as and when received 
without ascertaining whether the ground rent for previous years was paid or not. 
Inspection: 
3. No inspection of the premises had been conducted after the allotment of 
land in February 2009 and construction of the building had not been completed 
yet. 
Other dues: 
4. L&DO did not take any steps to impose penalty of `26.05 lakh on the 
lessee as the construction had not been completed till date. 
5. L&DO had not raised any demand for payment of difference of premium 
of `1.05 crore that became due to be paid by CITU. 
L&DO replied (December 
2020 and April 2021) that the 
file was sent to Technical 
Section on 26.12.2017 for 
inspection.  In response to 
inspection notice, CITU had 
requested to postpone the 
inspection for some months 
as their building was in the 
last stage of construction. 
 
The file was again sent on 
31.01.2019 to Technical 
Section for calculation of the 
charges of revised premium 
and ground rent.  However, it 
was returned with some 
observation.  Further, it has 
now been decided that before 
updation of Government 
CITU had requested to 
postpone the inspection for 
three months in January 
2018 but L&DO has not yet 
conducted inspection of 
premises even after lapse of 
four years.  This shows that 
L&DO is not making 
concerted efforts for 
recovery of Government 
dues. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
82 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
6. L&DO has not raised demand in time causing approximately `1.64 crore 
(`104.82 lakh balance of premium + `32.82 lakh balance of ground rent + `0.49 
lakh on account of interest on ground rent + `26.05 lakh penalty for belated 
construction) remaining outstanding. 
Other issues: 
7. There is discrepancy in information regarding rate of ground rent and 
payment of ground rent, available in file and that available in e-Dharti portal. 
dues, inspection of the 
premises may be carried so as 
to find out the latest status of 
the premises.  Accordingly, 
the file is under submission 
for getting the premises 
inspected.  
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
83 
22. All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC) 
Category Trade Unions 
Property ID 21368 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 952 square meters 
Date of Allotment May 2005 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `51,754 (provisional) 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent  
1. Allottee was to pay ground rent and premium at enhanced rate 
when revised.  However, despite revision of rates, premium and ground 
rent was not revised.  The allottee did not pay any ground rent to L&DO. 
2. The allottee itself intimated in June 2019 that it had not paid any 
ground rent and asked to intimate the dues payable by it.  L&DO did not 
intimate the dues payable by the allottee. 
Inspection 
3. After October 2007, no inspection was done as of March 2019. 
Other issues 
4. The lease deed had not been executed for the plot.  Neither 
L&DO had asked the lessee to do the same. 
5. Copy of sanctioned building plan was not available with L&DO.  
6. The plot for AITUC was allotted seven times (finally in May 
2005).  Allotments for plots made on three occasions (in May 2002, July 
2002 and October 2002) were cancelled as these were occupied by some 
L&DO replied (December 2020) that 
the file was referred to Internal Audit 
Cell (IAC) for updating the 
Government dues including revised 
premium and Ground Rent on 
15.7.2019.  However, IAC advised to 
check status of construction before 
calculating the Government dues.  As 
such, the premises were inspected on 
26.08.2019 and accordingly breach 
notice was sent on 20.09.2019.  In 
response to above, the lessee had 
submitted the photocopy of the 
completion plan and requested to 
condone the breach.  The same was 
examined and the AITUC had been 
requested to furnish the plans in 
original vide letter dated 12.03.2020, 
The land was allotted in 
May 2005 to AITUC. 
However, after October 
2007, L&DO did not 
conduct any inspection or 
took any action for recovery 
of ground rent till July 2019 
when lessee himself 
intimated in June 2019 that 
it had not paid any ground 
rent and asked to intimate 
the dues payable by it. 
Thereafter, all that L&DO 
did was to forward the file 
to IAC for updating dues. 
However, it did not intimate 
the lessee about the dues 
payable. This shows that 
L&DO did not make 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
84 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
other persons who could not be evicted.  In three instances (August 2001, 
January 2002 and July 2003), the allottee refused to accept the allotment 
as the size of the plots was small. 
Outstanding dues 
7.  L&DO has not raised any demand on AITUC for payment of 
difference of premium of `84.52 lakh that became due to be paid by 
AITUC. 
8. A total of `1.35 crore was outstanding towards ground rent, 
interest on ground rent and premium.  
which was still awaited.  
L&DO further stated (April 2021) 
that the premises of the AITUC had 
already been inspected and the 
Government dues shall be calculated 
once the lessee furnished the original 
completion plan and completion 
certificate. 
concerted efforts for 
recovery of dues. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
85 
23. Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC) 
Category Trade Unions 
Property ID 20584 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 370.566 square meters 
Date of Allotment June 1984 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `24,319 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent 
1. The due date of revision of ground rent (June 2014) taken as 
30 years from date of allotment as lease deed was not signed.  The 
ground rent was not revised.  
2. Ground rent was paid till July 1997.   
3. L&DO did not take any action to realize the dues.  
Other dues 
4. L&DO did not calculate or demand the outstanding dues 
from the allottee. 
Inspection 
5. After September 2005, the inspection of the property was 
done only in April 2018 and a breach notice was issued in the same 
month. 
6. No action was taken thereafter to either re-enter the property 
or demand dues from the allottee. 
Other findings 
7. Lease deed was not signed.  
L&DO replied (December 2020) that it 
conducted inspections from time to time 
and accordingly, breach notices were 
also issued to lessee.  To know the 
present status of the premises, 
inspection of the premises was carried 
out and accordingly, a breach notice was 
issued to INTUC on 23.04.2018.  In 
response, INTUC had requested for 
some more time to remedy the breaches 
and assured that they would dismantle 
the temporary structure very soon, once 
they could make an alternate 
arrangement.  Thereafter, file was sent 
to Technical Section for calculation of 
Government dues.  In the meantime, 
INTUC had furnished the plan.  The 
plan was examined in consultation with 
Technical Section and it was observed 
that the plan submitted by the lessee was 
Reply of L&DO that they were 
conducting inspections from 
time to time is not correct as 
after September 2005, the next 
inspection was conducted in 
April 2018 i.e., after around 13 
years.  From the reply of the 
L&DO, it was not clear how 
the L&DO conducted the 
inspection and issued breach 
notice without the sanctioned 
building plan as lessee was 
requested for providing 
complete set of plan only in 
April 2019.  It took 20 months 
for issuance of reminder for 
complete set of plan.  L&DO 
did not take action for recovery 
of ground rent from the lessee 
which had not been paid since 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
86 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
8. L&DO did not possess the sanctioned building plan.  The 
plans submitted by allottee in February 2019 were considered 
incomplete by L&DO.  The inspections were conducted without 
sanctioned building plan. 
9. The data in e-Dharti property proforma indicated inspections 
of July 2003 and September 2005 only.  The current dues and 
amount paid were shown as zero.  Most of the columns of the 
proforma were not filled up. 
Outstanding dues 
10. An amount of `11.69 lakh was outstanding towards ground 
rent and interest on ground rent.  Other dues on account of 
damages/misuse charges could not be worked out.  
incomplete. The lessee had been 
requested to submit the complete set of 
plan vide letter dated 26.04.2019. A 
reminder is regard had also been sent on 
08.12.2020. 
L&DO further stated (April 2021) that 
because of non-finalisation of the plan 
by local body, the allottee is not able to 
submit the plan in time.  The party has 
been asked to submit the plan. 
July 1997.
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
87 
24. Kishan Bhag Chand (Capital Coal Company), Prithviraj Lane 
Category Coal Depots/ Gas Godowns 
Property ID 36100 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 161.62 square meters (193.3 square yards) 
Date of Allotment July 1967 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `1,461.60 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
Ground rent 
1. The allottee, Sh. Kishan Bhag Chand, was offered temporary allotment which it did 
not accept and did not pay any ground rent to L&DO.  
 
Other dues 
2. L&DO worked out the dues outstanding against the coal depot for `99.47 lakh and 
issued a demand notice in March 2012.  The amount was not paid by the allottee. 
Other issues 
3. L&DO treated the original allottee as unauthorized occupant due to non-payment of 
monthly rent after September 1969.  In June 1981, one Shri Jagdish Chander intimated 
L&DO that he was in occupation of the Depot for the last 10 years and requested to 
transfer the lease in his name.  He also intimated in November 1984 that clear title to the 
business being run in the name of Capital Coal Company now being run in the name of 
Cee Coal Company was with him due to an arbitration award.  Despite knowing this, 
L&DO did not try to ascertain actual status of the occupant of the property and to evict 
him. 
 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) that the 
action for recovery of 
Government dues was 
being taken. 
L&DO further replied 
(April 2021) that after 
passing of eviction order 
by Estate Officer, the 
possession of the site 
was handed over to 
CPWD on 15.11.2018. 
 
Letter is being issued to 
Capital Coal Company 
for recovery of 
outstanding dues.  Also 
matter will be taken up 
with the Department of 
The reply is not 
acceptable as L&DO is 
now contemplating to 
issue letter to Capital 
Coal Company whose 
whereabouts are not 
known as it was not in 
the possession of the 
premises since 1971. 
 
The fact remains that 
L&DO failed to take 
timely remedial 
measures resulting in 
non-realization of 
Government dues of 
`99.47 lakh. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
88 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
4. No action was taken in the matter for more than eight years between 10.04.2000 to 
19.10.2004 and 06.02.2006 to May 2010 as the file was lying unattended.  
5. L&DO filed a plaint for eviction in April 2015. The Estate Officer, in May 2018, 
ordered eviction of unauthorized occupant and also ordered recovery of `99.47 lakh as 
damage charges for using and occupying the premises in unauthorised manner. The 
possession of land was taken over in November 2018, but no action was taken to initiate 
recovery of `99.47 lakh. 
Outstanding dues 
6. An amount of `99.47 lakh was outstanding towards other dues on account of 
unauthorized occupation of the property. 
Revenue, GNCT Delhi. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
89 
25. Sukhdeep Coal Depot 
Category Coal Depots/ Gas Godowns 
Property ID 33811 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 139.63 square meters (167 square yards) 
Date of Allotment N.A. 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) N.A. 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit 
comments 
Findings:  
1. Sukhdeep Coal Depot was in unauthorized occupation of land at Rouse Avenue. As per 
policy, he was allotted alternate site at Mirdard Road in June 2000. However, local residents 
objected to the allotment of this site. He was then allotted plot at Malviya Nagar in June 2002. 
The plot had an encroachment of public urinals on it and the land was handed over to him in 
January 2009. The lessee applied for conversion from leasehold to free hold in August 2009. 
Letter for execution of conveyance deed was sent to the lessee in May 2010 but the copy of the 
conveyance deed was not found in the records. 
2. The lessee at the time for applying for conversion to freehold had given an undertaking 
that after the revision of land rates, he would pay the difference. However in May 2017 after 
revision of land rates, no recovery had been effected from the lessee by the L&DO for the 
difference amount of `6,316. 
3. As per the undertaking given by the lessee, the freehold property would be used as per 
the terms of the lease/master plan norms, but there was no correspondence in the file showing 
that L&DO had ensured that the lease terms were being followed by the lessee after the 
conversion into freehold. 
Outstanding dues 
4. An amount of `0.06 lakh was outstanding towards other dues on account of
 
non-recovery of charges at revised rates after conversion.                                                                      
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) that 
action for the recovery 
of difference was 
being taken. 
L&DO further stated 
(April 2021) that the 
difference, if any, 
recoverable will be 
communicated at the 
earliest. 
The fact remains that 
action for recovery of 
difference amount of 
conversion charge 
due to revision in the 
land rates is yet not 
completed. 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
90 
26. M/s Kayson Enterprises, Gas Godown site allotted to BPCL, Site No.2, Sardar Patel Marg 
Category Coal Depots/ Gas Godowns 
Property ID 20990 
Jurisdictional Local Body New Delhi Municipal Council 
Size of Plot 524 square meters 
Date of Allotment September 1983 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `3,604 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground rent  
1. Ground rent was to be revised every five years up to December 2006, 
thereafter enhancement by eight percent annually.  It was retrospectively revised in 
April 2013.  Ground rent after April 2013 was not calculated and communicated to 
the allottee. 
2. Against the demand of `3.52 lakh issued in April 2013, only `2.00 lakh was 
paid in October 2015. Notice was issued in February 2018 by L&DO to pay the 
dues, but these were not paid. 
Other dues 
3. Dues were calculated only up to December 2013.  Updated demand was not 
issued. 
Inspection 
4. After February 2012, the inspection was done only in July 2018 and breach 
notice issued in October 2018. 
Other findings 
5. No action was taken to re-enter the property despite non-remedy of breaches. 
L&DO replied 
(December 2020) that the 
inspection was carried 
out on 31.07.2018 and 
breach notice was issued 
on 01.10.2018.  Once the 
examination is over, the 
demand will be drawn up 
and served on the lessee. 
L&DO further replied 
(April 2021) that till the 
submission of sanction 
plan, no action can be 
taken in respect of 
demand.  Against the 
demand of `3.52 lakh,
 
`3 lakh was paid by the 
BPCL.  A breach notice 
The reply of April 2021 is 
contradictory in itself as on 
one hand it says that till 
submission of sanctioned plan 
action cannot be taken against 
the lessee in respect of 
demand, but on the other hand 
it says that action for revised 
demand is under process. 
 
Besides, Audit noticed from 
the records that BPCL had 
paid only `2 lakh against the 
demand of `3.52 lakh 
whereas L&DO has stated 
that `3 lakh had been paid by 
the lessee.  L&DO has not 
furnished any documentary 
evidence in support of its 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
91 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
6. License deed was not signed.  
7. Copy of sanctioned building plan was not available with L&DO.  
8. Allotment of plot was temporary.  However, the period of temporary 
allotment was not found.  The temporary allotment was never renewed. 
9. Data in e-Dharti was incomplete and did not indicate the payment details. 
Outstanding dues 
10. An amount of `8.73 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent, interest on 
ground rent and other dues on account of damages/ misuse charges.  
was issued in 2018. 
 
Action for revised 
demand is under process 
in consultation with the 
Technical wing. 
 
reply.
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
92 
27. M/s Prem Service Station, BPCL, J.B. Tito Marg, Behind Andrews Ganj Police Station 
Category Petrol Pumps 
Property ID 20250 
Jurisdictional Local Body South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 1,532.62 square meters (1,833 square yards) 
Date of Allotment 23 May 1961 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `5,499 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent 
1. Ground rent beyond the period 31.03.1974 was unpaid despite 
misuse and damage charges. 
2. Payments made by M/s Burmah Shell (now BPCL) beyond 
31.03.1974 were not accepted by L&DO on the plea that breaches were 
found during the inspections and were yet to be regularized.   
Inspection: 
3. The land was transferred to L&DO in 1963.  First inspection was 
conducted in September 1974 after a long period of 11 years.  Last 
inspection has been conducted in 1995.  Inspections were not held and 
breach notices were not issued by L&DO on regular basis.  
Other issues: 
4. It was not clear from the records whether the lease was renewed or 
not. 
5. BPCL repeatedly asked for the charges payable for regularizing the 
breaches found during inspections, however, L&DO did not issue any 
demand notice.  
L&DO replied (December 2020) 
that possession of alternative site 
on Joseph Broz Tito Marg was 
handed over to BPCL on 
07.03.1977 by the DDA.  The 
inspection was denied by the 
BPCL on the ground that 
inspection was being done by 
DDA regularly and ground rent 
was being regularly paid to the 
DDA.  Accordingly, DDA was 
requested vide letter dated 
21.07.2006 to forward the record 
of allotment to BPCL.  However, 
no reply was received from them.  
Action was being taken to get the 
record of allotment from DDA.  
The question of outstanding dues 
does not arise as the ownership of 
Even after lapse of more than 
43 years, L&DO could not 
confirm whether the 
ownership of land is vested 
with L&DO or DDA.  This 
may be seen in light of the 
fact that both L&DO and 
DDA are under the 
administrative control of the 
same Ministry i.e., Ministry 
of Housing and Urban 
Affairs.  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
93 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
6. L&DO was denied inspection in May 2006 on the grounds that 
inspections were being done by DDA.  However, it was mentioned in the 
records that on being observed from the outside of the premises, part of the 
area was being misused as Convenience store, ATM, Money transfer.  In 
July 2006, L&DO asked DDA about the records of allotment and receipt of 
payments from BPCL.  No correspondence was available in the records 
beyond that. 
7. Information on e-Dharti was incomplete which defeated the 
purpose of computerization of records.  
Outstanding dues 
8. An amount of `10.07 lakh was outstanding towards ground rent 
and interest on ground rent.  Other dues on account of damages/ misuse 
charges could not be worked out.  
land was vested with DDA and 
this fact was yet to be verified 
from DDA. 
L&DO further replied (April 
2021) that during the inspection of 
the premises, it was reported by 
the Petrol Pump owners that 
inspection is done by DDA and 
they are paying ground rent to 
DDA.  It is clear that land is under 
the administrative control of 
DDA. 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
94 
28. M/s Krishna Filling Service Station, BPCL, Minto Road 
Category Petrol Pumps 
Property ID 47832 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 1,080 square meters 
Date of Allotment 18 June 2008 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `10,00,000 (license fee) 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Ground Rent  
1. License fee and interest thereon was due from 
BPCL till date. No demand has been raised for the dues. 
Inspection 
2. No inspection has been carried out since the 
allotment of site. 
Other Findings: 
3. The allotment was made on purely temporary 
basis for a period of two years. Despite lapse of 10 years, 
renewal of the allotment was not made. 
4.  License from the Chief Controller of Explosive 
Safety for putting up filling station was not found in the 
records. 
5. No lease deed was found in the records. 
6. No information has been uploaded on e-Dharti 
regarding this petro pump. 
L&DO replied (December 2020 and April 
2021) that land was allotted to M/s. BPCL on 
18.6.2008 at DDU Marg, for the initial period 
of 2 years.  A letter dated 6.11.2009 was 
received from BPCL wherein they stated that a 
team of North DMC had raised objections on 
construction at site as it fell in Right of Way 
(ROW) and requested for joint inspection. 
 
BPCL vide letter dated 21.10.2018 informed 
that North MCD has put on hold approval of 
building plan of BPCL.  The issue was taken up 
by Technical Section.  As the site was under 
dispute, there was no question of ground rent. 
 
As advised by Estate Officer, the matter was 
taken up with CPWD for its comments.  As 
advised by ADG (Arch.), CPWD, a letter was 
sent on 29.11.2018 to DDA to incorporate the 
BPCL Petrol Pump in their record i.e., MPD-
2021.  After allotment in 2008, the petrol pump 
L&DO’s reply that after allotment 
in 2008, the petrol pump was not 
functional due to land use and 
other issues is not acceptable as 
L&DO has never inspected the 
site.  During the examination of 
records, it was found by Audit 
that L&DO is receiving part 
payments from BPCL from time 
to time and last payment was 
received in January 2017.  Also, 
during the physical visit by Audit 
(January 2021), it was found that 
the said petrol pump was 
functional on the site.  Despite 
receipt of part payments from 
BPCL, L&DO did not bother to 
inspect the site to know exact 
status of the site.  Without 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
95 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Outstanding dues 
7. An amount of `2.10 crore was outstanding 
towards ground rent and interest on ground rent.  Other 
dues on account of damages/ misuse charges could not be 
worked out.  
is not functional due to land use and other 
issues.  Therefore, the demand to M/s BPCL 
will be issued after the approval of Competent 
Authority. 
inspecting the site, there was no 
basis for L&DO to arrive at a 
conclusion that the petrol pump 
was not functional. 
 
 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
96 
29. All India Trinamool Congress 
Category Political Parties 
Property ID 21483 
Jurisdictional Local Body North Delhi Municipal Corporation 
Size of Plot 1,008 square meters 
Date of Allotment 20 December 2013 
Ground rent at the time of allotment (per annum) `54,798 
 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
Findings 
1. The land was allotted to All India Trinamool 
Congress (AITMC) in March 2011, however, the 
possession of land could not be handed over to the 
AITMC due to encroachment.  Alternate plot was allotted 
to AITMC but this land was also encroached.  
2. As per the Office Manual of L&DO, the land in 
question was to be demarcated in the presence of the 
purchaser and a certificate was to be obtained that land 
has been demarcated and was to be handed over in vacant 
position.  However, the same was not followed in this 
case.  No action for removal of the encroachment was 
initiated by the L&DO. 
3. It is evident from the above that time to time 
survey of the vacant land in possession of the L&DO was 
not undertaken to ensure that the land was free from 
encroachment. 
L&DO replied (December 2020) that the plot at 
Rouse Avenue was allotted to AI Trinamool 
Congress on 01.03.2011.  However, the same 
could not be handed over to AITMC as the Delhi 
Wakf Board did not allow demarcation of the land 
claiming that the land in question belongs to Delhi 
Wakf Board.  Therefore, another two plots at DDU 
Marg were allotted to AITMC on ‘as is where is 
basis’ on 20.12.2013 subject to amalgamation of 
two plots. AITMC refused to take over the 
possession as two temples were situated on the 
site.  AITMC vide letter dated 16.02.2019 had 
requested to hand over vacant possession of the 
aforesaid plot and not on ‘as is where is basis’. 
 
The allotment to AITMC was made on the usual 
terms and conditions inter-alia on ‘as is where is 
basis’. The terms of allotment were accepted by 
them. The requisite action for removal of 
encroachment from the allotted land had already 
It is evident from the reply 
that L&DO was not aware of 
the encroachment before 
allotment of the plots.  The 
said plots were allotted in 
December 2013, however, 
L&DO could not get the 
encroachment removed even 
after more than seven years.  
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
97 
Audit observations Reply of L&DO Further Audit comments 
4. The present allotment was not updated in the e-
Dharti portal. 
 
 
been initiated and land would be offered for 
allotment to AITMC.  Even then if AITMC refuses 
the offer, allotment would be cancelled and the 
earmarked land would be put to alternate use. 
L&DO further added (April 2021) that temples in 
Delhi can be removed by the Religious Committee 
of Delhi Government. 
  

Report No. 17 of 2021 
98 
Annexure-II 
(Referred to in introductory para of Chapter III) 
 
Status of the Action Taken on Recommendations made in the 78th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on 
‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’ 
 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
Para 8: 
Authenticity of 
the Figures of 
the Leased 
Properties and 
Computerisation 
of Land Records 
 
The Committee noted that pursuant to their 
Recommendations, the Ministry/ L&DO had started 
making surveys/ inspections and verifying/ cross-
checking the records inherited to arrive at an authentic 
figure of all the leased properties. But the Committee 
found that the position was still far from satisfactory. 
For example, 46 files pertaining to the Nazul 
properties were yet to be traced and 68 inputs still to 
be completed. Similarly, for Rehabilitation properties, 
as many as 12,188 inputs were still pending 
completion. The Committee, therefore, impressed 
upon the Ministry/ L&DO to intensify the measures 
initiated and make more vigorous and concerted 
efforts to locate the missing files and complete the 
data input of all the leased properties in a definite time 
line so that the entrusted responsibility of the overall 
lease administration including substitution and 
mutation of title of prime Government properties in 
Delhi was carried out in a smooth and seamless 
manner. 
Nazul Properties: 
1. Total number of properties: 3,373 
2. Number of Freehold properties out of total 
number of properties: 901 
3. Number of inputs completed: 2,455 
4. Files sent to National Achieves: 17 
Rehabilitation Properties: 
1. Total number of properties: 49,523 
2. Number of Freehold properties out of total 
number of properties: 26,246 
3. Number of inputs completed: 20,004 
4. Number of remaining inputs: 3,273 
Further reply of the Ministry as submitted to 
the PAC in October 2013 
Number of inputs completed in respect of 
Rehabilitation properties is 20,334. Hence, number 
of remaining inputs as on 30 August 2013 is 2,943. 
It was seen during present 
Audit that L&DO still 
does not have the 
authentic figures of leased 
properties as different 
figures were reported in 
different documents. 
(Refer para 3.2) 
 
Para 12: 
Denial of 
The Committee took due cognizance of the reply of 
the Ministry that there was no deliberate attempt or 
The Ministry has taken note of the observation of 
the Committee and makes a firm commitment that, 
The Ministry did not 
fulfill commitment to the 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
99 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
Records and 
Documents to 
Audit 
decision at any level not to supply the records to 
Audit. The contention that some records could not be 
furnished to the Audit on the plea of a shortage of 
staff, an overload of work and non-maintenance of 
Registers was not acceptable to the Committee. They 
cautioned the Ministry that denial of records, 
documents and information to the Audit, regardless of 
the ground of inability to furnish the documents or 
information sought, brings avoidable mistrust and the 
inference that there was something awry with the 
functioning of the Department. The Committee, 
therefore, desired to have a firm commitment from the 
Ministry that under no circumstance, should the Audit 
be denied access to any records/information in future. 
in future, there shall be no occasion of denial of 
records to audit. 
PAC as L&DO did not 
provide most of the 
information/ records 
requisitioned by Audit.  
(Refer para 3.1) 
Para 16: 
Contractual 
Breach on the 
Part of NIC 
 
The Committee was not satisfied with the reply of the 
Ministry as their concerns had not been appropriately 
attended to. What the Committee tried to emphasise in 
their earlier Report was that as NIC could not fulfil 
the contractual obligations in properly scanning the 
layout plans and documents relating to the markets 
transferred to the NDMC/ MCD by the stipulated 
target of 2006, the Ministry of Urban Development 
should take up the matter with the Department of 
Information Technology for failure of the NIC to 
discharge its contractual obligations and to be careful 
and responsible enough. Surprisingly, the Ministry of 
Urban Development had remained silent on the issue. 
Deprecating such an unwarranted response, the 
It is submitted that all the markets except INA, 
Indira Chowk and Rajiv Chowk (Connaught Place) 
were transferred to the local bodies concerned vide 
notification dated 24 March 2006. Now the local 
bodies function as the lessor for these markets. 
The observations of the Committee have been 
conveyed to Ministry of Communication & 
Information Technology.  
Further reply of the Ministry as submitted to 
PAC in October 2013 
Scanned copy of the layout plan has been uploaded 
in the website of L&DO for reference in public 
domain. 
Relevant records were not 
provided and hence no 
comments. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
100 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
Committee exhorted the MoUD to urgently take up 
the matter with the DoT so that NIC's inability to 
fulfil Contractual Obligations was brought to the 
notice of the Departmental Head and necessary 
corrective action taken. The Committee also desired 
that now that a decision for uploading the layout plan 
had been taken, immediate requisite steps be taken to 
regularly update and monitor the uploads so that 
authentic information was available for reference in 
public domain. 
Para 19: 
Strict adherence 
to the revised 
guidelines for 
allotment of 
land for every 
purpose 
 
The Committee was concerned to note that though 
land measuring 400 sq.mt. was allotted to one 
religious institution in the year 2000, subsequent 
additional land under the unauthorised occupation of 
the institution was unlawfully regularised. In another 
case, a demolished unauthorised structure on land 
measuring 541.7 sq.mt. was restored to the 
Organisation reportedly to mollify the hurt religious 
sentiments of a certain section of the people. The 
Committee further noted that though 1500 sq.yds. of 
the land was allotted to another religious institution, 
an additional 500 sq.yds. of land was encroached 
upon and allotted to it and the proposal for 
cancellation of the additional land had not yet been 
finalised. The Committee was of the considered view 
that any encroachment and grabbing of precious land 
in the guise of religion was unacceptable and all such 
encroachments must be removed with firmness and 
The Yogesh Chandra Committee recommended 32 
cases of cancellation. It was decided by the 
Competent Authority to cancel the allotment in 29 
cases. 
The Competent Authority had decided not to 
cancel the following allotments: 
1. Ayyapa Sewa Samiti, R.K.Puram (400 sq.mtr.) 
2. Sarvadeshik Arya Pratinidhi Sabha (Arya Samaj 
Mandir) (541.7 sq.mtr.) 
However, in so far as cancelling the allotment to 
Guru Singh Sabha is concerned, a decision is yet to 
be taken by the Competent Authority. 
The Ministry has taken up with the respective civic 
agencies for disconnection of electricity/ water 
connection to these unauthorized religious/ 
charitable institutions, which were being misused 
for residential and commercial purposes. 
Relevant records were not 
provided and hence no 
comments. 
However, L&DO replied 
(April 2021) that the 
matter was under 
examination and action 
would be taken as per 
decision taken by the 
competent authority. If 
required, the issue will be 
taken up with the 
Religious Committee of 
Government of NCT of 
Delhi. 
This shows that L&DO 
has not yet taken 
necessary corrective 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
101 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
necessary persuasion. The Committee, therefore, 
impressed upon the Ministry to strictly adhere to the 
Revised Guidelines, as prescribed by the Yogesh 
Chandra Committee, for allotment of land for every 
purpose, including religious/ charitable activities and 
take stringent measures, wherever warranted, to deter 
encroachment on Government land. The Committee 
would also like the Ministry to contemplate 
disconnection of electricity and water connections to 
those religious/ charitable structures which were being 
misused as residential and commercial purposes. 
Further reply of the Ministry as submitted to 
PAC in October 2013 
Matter is under examination. 
action even after seven 
years from the Ministry’s 
reply (October 2013) to 
the PAC. 
Para 23: 
Temporary 
closure of the 
Revision of 
Ground Rent 
(RGR) Cell 
 
The Ministry's contention that the work relating to 
revision of Ground Rent had never ceased although 
the Revision of Ground Rent (RGR) Cell was closed 
for more than two years was not tenable since the 
ground rent had been revised in 1516 cases as on 
June, 2012 after revival of RGR Cell in February 
2010. Therefore, there was no denying the fact that 
the work relating to the Ground Rent revision of the 
pending cases got severely affected due to the non-
functioning of the Cell, staff crunch notwithstanding. 
Now that the RGR Cell had started functioning, the 
Committee impressed upon the Ministry/ L&DO to 
complete the revision of the remaining cases of 
Ground Rent in a time-bound manner and ensure that 
the Cell operated till the mission is accomplished. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the exact 
dues of the Ground Rent of the Nazul properties vis-a-
Steps have been initiated to recover the pending 
Ground Rent. During 2008-09 to 2012-13 (upto 
December 2012) the Ground rent of `290.66 crores 
has been collected from Nazul properties. Notices 
have been issued to concerned lessees for 
depositing of ground rent with interest. As and 
when any applicant makes a request for Mutation, 
Substitution, Conversion etc., all outstanding dues 
including ground rent is recovered.   
Further reply of the Ministry as submitted to 
PAC in October 2013 
The total ground rent collected from 2008-09 to 
December 2012 was `341.36 crores, whereas 
`290.66 crores pertain only to Nazul properties. 
L&DO replied (April 
2021) that constitution of 
Revised Ground Rent cell 
will require additional 
infrastructure including 
manpower. Accordingly, 
corresponding approval of 
competent authority need 
to be obtained. It may take 
some time. 
During the follow-up 
Audit, it was seen that out 
of 29 sampled properties 
the ground rent was not 
revised in 10 cases since 
allotment and in 7 cases, 
ground rent was revised 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
102 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
vis the collection of `341.36 crore during the years 
2008-09 to 2012-13 (upto December 2012) and the 
specific and additional steps taken to recover all the 
outstanding Ground Rent dues in definite time-frame. 
belatedly. 
(Para 3.3.2.2) 
Para 27: 
Breaches of the 
Lease 
Conditions by 
the Presses, 
Petrol Pumps 
and Schools 
 
The Committee were satisfied to note that pursuant to 
their Recommendations, 19 inspections of the Petrol 
Pumps were done in the year 2011-12 and action had 
been taken under the terms of lease allotment letter 
against those Petrol Pumps which did not comply with 
the terms/ letter of damages/ misuse charges as 
demanded from time to time. Besides, a sum of  `5.11 
crore (approx.) had been received from the Oil 
Companies towards ground rent. The Committee 
desired that the measures initiated against the 
defaulting Petrol Pumps must reach a conclusive end. 
They also desired that similar periodic inspections be 
conducted against the Presses and Schools so as to 
detect breaches of terms and conditions, if any, and 
initiate requisite penal and legal action against the 
defaulters. 
 
In deference to the Committee’s advice, this office 
has taken action as per the terms & conditions of 
the lease. As a consequence, the number of Petrol 
Pumps inspected by L&DO during 2012-13 has 
increased to 26 from 19 in 2011-12 resulting in 
recovery of `7.43 crore as misuse/damage charges. 
Further, inspection of 24 Schools/Colleges was 
also conducted in 2012-13. As a sequel, 12 
demand notices were issued and out of these 9, 
have already paid the dues resulting in recovery of 
`5.05 crore as misuse/damage charges. Action as 
per terms & conditions of lease has also been 
initiated in respect of Press plots. 
Further reply of the Ministry as submitted to 
PAC in October 2013 
Inspections have been initiated in respect of 5 
press plots out of the total 9 press plots. 
Following were the 
findings during the 
follow-up audit:  
Presses:  
Daily Milap : After 
October 2013, inspection 
was done only in June 
2018. Final up to date 
dues payable were not 
calculated and recovered 
from the allottee. 
Gulab Singh & Sons: 
After September 2012, 
inspection was done only 
in August 2018. The 
demand notice issued did 
not include the previous 
dues, neither L&DO could 
recover any of those dues. 
Daily Tej 
Inspection was done in 
February 2019 after May 
2013. The inspection was 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
103 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
done without having 
sanctioned building plan. 
Final up to date dues 
payable were not 
calculated and recovered 
from the allottee. 
(Refer Annexure-I) 
Petrol pumps: 
M/s Prem Service 
Station:  Last inspection 
was done in 1995. Final 
updated dues payable 
were not calculated and 
recovered from the 
allottee. 
M/s Krishna Filling 
Service Station - No 
inspection has been done 
since allotment in June 
2008. Final updated dues 
payable were not 
calculated and recovered 
from the allottee. 
(Refer Annexure-I) 
Schools: 
Kendriya Vidyalaya, 
Andrews Ganj: No 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
104 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
inspection was done after 
July 2011. Final updated 
dues payable were not 
calculated and recovered 
from the allottee. 
Vidya Bhawan Girls 
Higher Secondary 
School, Karol Bagh – No 
inspection was done after 
June 2008. Final updated 
dues payable were not 
calculated and recovered 
from the allottee. 
Bal Bharati School, Pusa 
Road 
Inspections were 
conducted in February 
1999, July 2003, May 
2005, February 2012, 
October 2016 and 
February 2019. Final 
updated dues payable 
were not calculated and 
recovered from the 
allottee. 
(Refer Annexure-I) 
Thus, L&DO did not 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
105 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
fulfill its promises made 
to the PAC. It neither 
conducted inspections at 
prescribed intervals nor 
calculated and recovered 
updated dues from these 
allottees. 
Recommendation 
No. 14 of 59th 
Report  
The Committee appreciate the Government's concern 
and commitment in allotting land at a comparatively 
lower premium to social, charitable, religious and 
education institutions as well as to Hospitals, Public 
Service Agencies etc. with the intention of deploying 
public resource for greater public good. At the same 
time, the Committee are of the considered view that it 
is the duty and responsibility of the Ministries 
concerned to ensure through constant monitoring that 
all such allottees fulfil scrupulously the terms and 
conditions of allotment for greater public good as 
stipulated by the Government. So far as allotment of 
land for commercial purposes is concerned, the true 
value of the land commensurate with the extant 
market rate must be realized without exception. The 
auction of three acres of land by the L&DO for 
construction of a hotel in the run-up to the 
Commonwealth Games, 2010 which fetched the 
Government an amount of `611 crore reflects the true 
value of land in the National Capital. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry/ L&DO to fully explore 
A proposal for revision of land rates based on 
DDA’s land rates is under consideration of the 
Government 
The land rates were 
revised in May/ June 2017 
retrospectively with effect 
from 1 April 2000. 
Further, L&DO stated 
(April 2021) that it has 
been decided that L&DO 
rates will synchronized 
with DDA rates. As and 
when DDA issues the 
rates, proposal for 
applying same rates in 
L&DO will be considered. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
106 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
and exploit the potential for higher revenue in a 
transparent manner so as to extract maximum value of 
land in all cases of renewals and fresh allotments, 
especially in cases of commercial leases. The 
Committee further desire that the feasibility of linking 
the premium and ground rent for the commercial 
properties to the Zonal average auction rates 
determined by the DDA be taken into consideration, 
as assured to the Committee.  
Recommendation 
No. 15 of 59th 
R
eport 
The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ground 
Rent receipts, which constitute one of the major 
receipts of the L&DO, are relatively paltry despite 
thousands of acres of land leased in prime locations 
with potential value ranging from `1,18,000 crore to 
`3,44,000 crore. Further, the Ministry last revised the 
premium rates for allotment of land in 1998 which 
was valid till the year 2000. The Committee find that 
the abysmally low receipts on account of Ground Rent 
and premiums are primarily due to the continuation 
and adoption of the formula for enhancement of 
Ground Rent for Nazul leases evolved in the year 
1984, which has now no relationship with the current 
letting/ market value of these properties. The 
Ministry's reasoning that they are adhering to the 1984 
formula as approved by the Cabinet is specious since 
it is not the duty of the Cabinet to remind the Ministry 
to put up a note for its consideration, but the 
responsibility lies with the nodal Ministry to approach 
An inbuilt formula is provided in the Ministry of 
Works & Housing letter no. J22011/1/70-LI 
(Vol.IV) dated 24.12.1983 for enhancement of 
Ground Rent if revision is to be carried out after a 
lapse of 10 years/ 20years/ 30years/ 40 years. 
Further, Ground Rent is a percentage of the land 
rates. A proposal for revision of land rates based 
on DDA’s land rates is under consideration of the 
Govt. 
The land rates were 
revised in May/ June 2017 
retrospectively with effect 
from 1 April 2000. 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
107 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
the Cabinet for appropriate policy decisions from time 
to time. The Committee demand an explanation from 
the Ministry as to what prevented them from 
approaching the Cabinet after 1984 for enhancement 
of ground rent and how the loss to the public 
exchequer can be made good. Further, the Committee 
recommend that the matter may be taken up to the 
Cabinet with a sense of urgency for appropriate 
revision in land rates/ ground rent. The Committee 
also recommend that after the Cabinet approval, the 
specific multiples for the enhancement of the Ground 
Rent depending on the number of years elapsed since 
the due date of revision, as contained in the Office 
Order of February, 1984, be suitably modified and the 
dues recovered retrospectively. Needless to 
emphasize, the schedule of area-wise letting values 
should also be considered for upward revision at 
regular intervals, in line with the fluctuations in the 
land market so as to generate reasonable revenue from 
the L&DO's vast land holdings in prime locations.  
Recommendation 
No. 26 of 59th 
Report 
The Committee note that as of December 2010, 13 
cases are pending in the Supreme Court, 323 cases in 
the High Courts and 273 cases in the lower Courts. 
Similarly, 303 cases were pending in the Court of 
Estate Officer. The Committee are informed that 
pendency of so many Court cases is beyond L&DO's 
control as it has neither any legal section nor any 
panel of Advocates of its own for which it has to 
Taking into account the recommendation of the 
Committee, necessary action for constituting a 
Legal Cell has been initiated which, inter alia, 
include the following: 
(i) Approval of the Competent Authority has been 
obtained for constituting the Legal Cell. The 
Selection process for filling up of the posts has 
also been initiated. The post of Legal Advisor has 
During the follow-up 
audit, Legal Cell was not 
found existing in L&DO. 
L&DO stated (April 2021) 
that a Legal Cell does 
exist in L&DO. However, 
presently, no staff is 
working in the Cell as no 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
108 
Para No. and 
subject 
Recommendation Reply furnished by L&DO on the 78th Report of 
PAC in July 2013 
Current Status 
depend on the Government Counsels appointed by the 
Ministry of Law. To worsen the matter, no regular 
Estate Officer is available in the L&DO since long 
and the charge is being dealt with on temporary basis 
by one or other Branch Officer. The Committee find 
that in order to address the above constraints, a 
proposal to constitute a separate cell in the L&DO to 
deal with matters relating to Court cases, RTI 
applications etc. is under process. However, the 
Ministry's contention that a definite time frame is not 
possible to be indicated for the constitution of the 
Legal Cell is not acceptable. The Committee 
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to initiate urgent 
necessary measures for constitution of the Legal Cell 
and appointment of a permanent Estate Officer in 
L&DO so that the pendency of large number of Court 
cases is decreased to the barest minimum and 
recovery of outstanding dues, removal of 
encroachments etc. which are impeded by litigations, 
are effectively addressed. 
been filled up. 
(ii) The issue of filling up of the post of an Estate 
Officer by an Under Secretary Level officer has 
been taken up by the Ministry of Urban 
Development with the Department of Personnel 
and Training. 
recruitment could be done 
due to Covid pandemic. 
Recruitment process for 
engagement of personnel 
in the Legal Cell will be 
initiated shortly.  
 
 

Report No. 17 of 2021 
109 
Annexure-III 
(Referred to in para 3.3.2.1) 
 
Statement showing outstanding ground rent and interest thereon  
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Identity of the property Ground Rent (including 
revised ground rent & 
additional ground rent) 
Interest on ground 
rent 
1 Kendriya Vidyalaya, Andrews Ganj  0.56 1.48 
2 Vidya Bhawan Girls Higher Secondary 
School, New Rajinder Nagar  
0.47 0.55 
3 Daily Milap, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg  164.32 134.93 
4 Daily Tej, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg  61.03 1.64 
5 Gulab Singh and Sons, Bahadur Shah 
Zafar Marg  
45.73 9.16 
6 Hotel Le Meridien, Janpath  199.41 488.20 
7 Hotel Taj Man Singh, Man Singh Road   15.83 45.06 
8 VIMHANS Hospital, Nehru Nagar 0.59 0.27 
9 St. Stephen’s Hospital, Tis Hazari  0.15 0.08 
10 F-2, Connaught Place  23.67  45.25 
11 Alankar Cinema, Lajpat Nagar  95.29 41.00 
12 Centre of Indian Trade Unions, Rouse 
Avenue 
32.82 0.49 
13 All India Trade Union Congress, Deen 
Dayal Upadhyaya Marg  
41.32 6.59 
14 Indian National Trade Union Congress, 
Bhai Veer Singh Marg 
5.64
 6.04 
15 M/s Kayson Enterprises (Gas 
Godown), Sardar Patel Marg   
2.94 1.10 
16 BPCL, M/s Prem Service Station, J.B. 
Tito Marg 
2.96
 7.11 
17 BPCL, Krishna Filling Service Station, 
Minto Road 
145.85 64.41 
18 17, Jor Bagh  0.90 0.97 
19 29, Aurangzeb Road  8.21 18.13 
20 7, Garage, Gole Market  0.09  0.09 
21 1, Hailey Road  19.70 19.51 
 Total 867.48 892.06 
 