Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit  
on  
Efficacy of implementation of  
74th Constitutional Amendment Act  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
 
         Report No. 5 of the year 2021 

(i) 
Table of Contents 
 
Paragraph Number Contents Page Number 
 Preface (iii) 
Executive Summery (v) 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 74 th Constitutional Amendment 1 
1.2 Trend of Urbanization in Rajasthan 2 
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies 2 
1.4 Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in 
Rajasthan 
2 
Chapter II Audit Framework 
2.1 Audit objectives 5 
2.2 Audit criteria 5 
2.3 Audit scope and Methodology  5 
2.4 Acknowledgement 6 
2.5 Organization of Audit Findings 7 
Chapter III Compliance with Provisions of 74th CAA 
3.1 Comparison of State Level Legislations with 74th 
CAA 
9 
Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their 
functioning 
4.1 Devolution of Functions under Rajasthan 
Municipalities Act, 2009 
11 
4.2 Institutional mechanism for empowerment of 
urban local bodies 
15 
4.3 Powers of the State Government over ULBs 26 
4.4 Parastatals, their Functions and Impact on ULBs 27 
Chapter V Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
5.1 Sources of Revenue  33 
5.2 Grants  34 
5.3 Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 35 
5.4 Tapping of various sources of revenue by ULBs 42 
5.5 Budget Planning and Expenditure 43 
5.6 Under Utilisation of Grants 46 
5.7 Financial Powers of Urban Local Bodies 
 
47 
 

Table of Contents 
(ii) 
Paragraph Number Contents Page Number 
Chapter VI Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
6.1 Limited Powers Over Manpower 49 
6.2 Capacity Building  52 
6.3 Performance Management 53 
Chapter VII Conclusion 55 
 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
Number 
Details Page 
Number 
Appendix-I List of parastatals and their functions 59 
Appendix-II A. Details of less recovery of UD tax from commercial 
complexes due to application of incorrect DLC rate/area. 
60 
B. Details of less recovery of UD tax from starred hotels 
at the rate of Industrial DLC rate instead of Commercial 
DLC rate 
61 
C. Details of marriage gardens in which area were less 
taken for calculation of UD Tax 
62 
D. Recoveries/correction in demand ledger made at the 
instance of audit 
63 
Appendix-III Details of user charges not recovered by the 13 ULBs 64 
Appendix-IV Short recovery of fire cess from high rise buildings 65 
Appendix-V Statement showing the details of revenue sources 
identified by 4th and 5th SFC, status of levy and statutory 
provisions 
68 
Appendix-VI Statement showing variation in budget in each category 
of ULBs 
69 
 Glossary 71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(iii) 
 
Preface 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Rajasthan under CAG’s DPC Act, 1971.  
 
Audit of Urban Local Bodies in Rajasthan is conducted under provisions of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General (Duties, Power and Conditions of service) Act, 
1971 and section 99-A of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009, as amended on 
31 March 2011, which empowers the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to 
conduct audit of the accounts of Urban Local Bodies and submit such Audit Report 
to the State Government for its placement in the State Legislature. 
 
The Report covering the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 contains the results of 
performance audit of ‘Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional 
Amendment Act’. 
 
Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
 

(v) 
Executive Summery 
Intent of the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act (74th CAA)  
The Constitution of India provided a clear mandate for democratic decentralisation 
through the 74th Amendment which sought to create an institutional framework for 
ushering in democracy at the grass root level through self-governing local bodies 
in urban areas of the country. The 74th Constitutional Amendment came into effect 
on 1 June 1993 and empowered Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to perform 18 
functions listed in the 12th Schedule.  
Why this Performance Audit?  
To ascertain whether the State Government empowered ULBs through the creation 
of a robust institutional framework as well as transfer of functions, funds and 
functionaries.  
Period of audit:   2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sample:    Three functions, one major revenue source 
(Property tax) and 14 ULBs across all tiers.  
 
What Audit found?  
Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA 
Statutory amendments, though enacted, were not implemented in letter and spirit. 
Principal findings and recommendations of the performance audit 
The chapter wise audit findings that led to audit conclusions and recommendations 
are as follows: 
Chapter IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
Devolution of functions under Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 
 The State classified the functions as core and others, though all functions were 
to be devolved mandatorily. Two functions i.e. Urban forestry, protection of 
the environment & promotion of ecological aspects and safeguarding the 
interest of weaker sections of society were not notified as core functions. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
 Out of the 18 functions to be transferred all except Slum Improvement & 
Upgradation and Urban Poverty alleviation were transferred.  
(Paragraph 4.1.1) 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
(vi) 
 Actual status of implementation of functions was found as follows: 
 Full jurisdiction of ULBs   - 2 functions 
 No role of ULBs                 - 1 function 
 ULBs as mere implementing agencies  - 4 functions 
 Minimal role or overlap with State Departments/ parastatals - 11 functions 
(Paragraph 4.1.1) 
Institutional mechanism for empowerment of urban local bodies 
 Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the Municipal Corporations 
leading to absence of community participation in local governance.  
(Paragraph 4.2.6(ii)) 
 District Planning Committees (DPC) though formed in all districts, did not 
function as required, as comprehensive District Development Plans were not 
prepared as envisaged.  
(Paragraph 4.2.7) 
 Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) was not formed for integrated 
development of the metro cities.  
(Paragraph 4.2.8) 
 Delays in constitution of State Finance Commissions (SFC), non-acceptance 
of many recommendations and delay in implementation of the 
recommendations led to delays in fiscal transfers by State, impacting ULBs 
revenues.  
(Paragraph 4.2.9.1) 
 The State Government deducted an amount of ₹ 726.74 crore during 2017-20 
from the SFC grants to be given to ULBs and transferred such amount to other 
agencies/ parastatals.  
(Paragraph 4.2.9.2) 
Recommendations: 
 The State Government should initiate action to devolve all functions with full 
jurisdiction to ULBs in accordance with the 74th CAA and endeavour to 
minimise overlapping jurisdictions for devolution in true spirit.  
 The State Government should ensure timely constitution of the Statutory 
Committees and Ward Committees. The Government should also ensure that 
regular meetings of Statutory Committees are held for effective monitoring of 
functions of ULBs. 

Executive Summery 
 
(vii) 
 The State Government should ensure constitution and effective functioning of 
Metropolitan Planning Committees for integrated development of the area.   
Chapter V: Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Sources of Revenue 
 ULBs could generate only 17 per cent revenue of its own and remained 
significantly dependent on the grants for delivery of services. 
(Paragraph 5.1) 
Grants 
 During the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 the State Government disbursed a sum 
of ₹ 17,059.77 crore to ULBs against SFC grants. There was a shortfall of  
₹ 52.58 crore in fiscal transfers during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 due to 
non-acceptance of recommendations of the SFC.  
(Paragraph 5.1 and 5.2.1) 
 Entire allocation of performance grants of ₹ 525.32 crore for the year  
2018-19 and 2019-20 was yet to be received from GoI. 
(Paragraph 5.2.2) 
Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 
 None of the test checked ULBs had a reliable data base of tax demanded, 
collected and outstanding at the end of financial year 
(Paragraph 5.3.1) 
 No survey was conducted by revenue branch of ULBs to enlist sites of 
advertisement attracting tax, which deprived ULBs of this potential revenue 
source. 
(Paragraph 5.3.2) 
 Test check of records of two Municipal Corporations, i.e., Jaipur and Ajmer 
revealed that PHED Jaipur recovered sewerage charges but did not transfer 
full amount to M Corp Jaipur while PHED Ajmer did not remit any amount 
to M Corp Ajmer during the period 2015-16 to 2019-2020. 
(Paragraph 5.3.4) 
Budget Planning and Expenditure 
 Budget exercise was flawed and resulted in preparation of unrealistic and 
unscientific budgets. 
(Paragraph 5.5.1) 
Recommendations:  
 ULBs should have more autonomy in raising revenues and for augmentation 
of its own resources. Efforts should be made for enhancing tax collection 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
(viii) 
capacity of ULBs through provision and training of staff, provision of 
electronic tax payment and improved assessment processes. PHED and other 
parastatals should pass on all the revenue collected on behalf of ULBs for 
strengthening their financial position.   
 The State Government should work on enhancing the capacity of ULBs by 
direct devolution even through separate budgeting for ULBs. Efforts should 
also be made to form finance committees in ULBs and to revise the delegation 
of powers for greater autonomy. 
Chapter VI: Human resources of ULBs  
Limited Powers over Manpower 
 ULBs neither had the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to recruit the 
required staff. These powers are vested with the State Government. 
(Paragraph 6.1) 
 Population alone was considered as a criterion for determining the sanctioned 
strength; geographical area, quantum of functions and number of properties 
existing were not considered. 
(Paragraph 6.1) 
 The sanctioned strength varied from 2.15 to 11.36 employees per 1,000 
population (2011) and working strength from 0.26 to 6.30 employees per 1,000 
population (Projected 2020) in the test-checked ULBs.  
(Paragraph 6.1.1) 
 Almost 61 per cent post of Executive Officers, Revenue Officers, 
Revenue/Sanitary Inspectors were lying vacant which was affecting the 
important functions such as revenue/tax collection and sanitation. 
(Paragraph 6.1.1) 
Recommendations:   
 ULBs should have adequate powers over manpower resources regarding 
assessment, requirement and recruitment of skilled staff to effectively 
discharge devolved functions and efficiently collect revenue. Sanctioned 
strength of manpower in ULBs should commensurate with the functions (Tax 
collection load/Accounting/regulatory role etc) in consultation with the State 
Government. Administrative costs should be passed on to the ULBs where they 
are implementing agencies. 
 Officers of Municipal Services should be posted in municipality as Executive 
Officers and capacity building/training needs of municipal staff should be 
ensured by regular training programme/fixed training period for enhancing 
the efficiency. 

1 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1  74 th Constitutional Amendment 
The Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74th CAA) which 
came into effect on 1 June 1993, introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities). The 
Act provided a constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Article 
243W of the CAA authorized the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local 
bodies with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to 
function as institutions of self-government and make provisions for devolution 
of powers and responsibilities.  
The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions to 
be devolved to ULBs as given below: 
(i) Urban planning including town planning. 
(ii) Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings. 
(iii) Planning for economic and social development. 
(iv) Roads and bridges. 
(v) Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes. 
(vi) Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste management. 
(vii) Fire services. 
(viii) Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects. 
(ix) Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of the society, including 
the handicapped and mentally retarded. 
(x) Slum improvement and upgradation. 
(xi) Urban poverty alleviation.  
(xii) Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds. 
(xiii) Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects. 
(xiv) Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and electric 
crematoriums. 
(xv) Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals. 
(xvi) Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths. 
(xvii) Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and 
public conveniences. 
(xviii)  Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries. 
Chapter I 
Introduction 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
2 
1.2  Trend of Urbanization in Rajasthan 
Rajasthan is the largest state in the country with a total area of 3.42 lakh Square 
Kilo Meter (Sqkm).  As per census 2011, 1.70 crore (24.87 per cent) out of the 
total population of 6.85 crore reside in urban areas. The growth rate of urban 
population in the decade 2001-11 was 29 per cent. Further, as per projected 
population of Rajasthan by 2021, 2.36 crore population will reside in urban area 
which will constitute almost 29.24 per cent of the total projected population of 
8.07 crore. This shows a significant growth in urbanization in Rajasthan.  
Urban Rajasthan faces multiple challenges relating to public health issues, 
poverty, waste management, reduction of natural resources and other urban 
basic amenities. In these circumstances, ULBs have an important role to play, 
as most of these issues could be handled effectively at the local level. 
1.3  Profile of Urban Local Bodies 
In Rajasthan, ULBs are classified into five categories based on population1, 
location and per capita income by the State Government. There are 196 ULBs 
as shown in Table below: 
Table 1.1: Category-wise ULBs in Rajasthan  
Type of ULB Number of ULBs 
Municipal Corporations (M Corp)2 10 
Municipal Councils (M Council) 34 
Municipal Boards (M Board) Category II 13 
Municipal Boards (M Board) Category III 58 
Municipal Boards (M Board) Category IV 81 
Total 196 
Source: Annual Administration Report 2019-20 of DLB 
All the ULBs are governed by Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 (RMA). For 
every ULB, area has been divided into wards, which are determined and notified 
by the State Government for the purpose of election of Councilors. All ULBs 
have an elected body comprising Corporates/Councilors. 
1.4  Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Rajasthan 
The Local Self Government Department (LSGD), headed by the Principal 
Secretary/Secretary to the Government, is the nodal department for the 
governance of all ULBs. The Directorate of Local Bodies (DLB) functions as 
an interface between the State Government and ULBs. The DLB has seven 
Deputy Directors (Regional) at Divisional Headquarters i.e., Ajmer, Bharatpur, 
 
1 Municipal Corporation for population more than 5 lakh; Municipal Council for population 
between one to five lakh; Municipal Board (Category II) for population between 50,000 to 
99,999; M.Board (Category III) for population between 25,000 and 49,999 and M.Board 
(Category IV) having population less than 25,000. 
2 Municipal Corporations, Jaipur, Jodhpur and Kota were bifurcated into two Corporations 
w.e.f. 18.10.2019.  

Introduction 
 
3 
Bikaner, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur, which reports to the DLB on  
day-to-day basis. The organization structure with respect to functioning of 
ULBs in the State is indicated as under: 
Elected members Level 
 
Executive Level 
 


Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
4 
In addition to ULBs, the Urban Development and Housing Department (UDH) 
has parastatal agencies that also deliver or facilitate urban infrastructure and 
services such as Rajasthan Urban Drinking Water, Sewerage and Infrastructure 
Corporation (RUDSICO), Rajasthan State Industrial Development and 
Investment Corporation (RIICO), Urban Development Authorities (UDAs), 
Urban Improvement Trusts (UITs), Town Planning Department (TPD), 
Rajasthan Housing Board (RHB).  
The details of parastatals and their functions are given in Appendix I. 
 

5 
 
 
 
 
2.1  Audit Objectives 
The objectives for Performance Audit were to assess whether:  
(i) provisions of 74th CAA have been adequately covered in the State 
legislations. 
(ii) the ULBs have been empowered by the State Government to discharge 
their functions/responsibilities effectively through creation of 
appropriately designed institutions/institutional mechanism and their 
functions. 
(iii) the functions stated to have been devolved have actually been devolved 
effectively; and 
(iv) the ULBs have been empowered to access adequate resources for 
discharge of functions devolved to them. 
2.2  Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the following: 
(i) 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992. 
(ii) Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009  
(iii) Laws and By-laws framed by Urban Local Bodies. 
(iv) General Financial and Accounts Rules. 
(v) Various notifications, orders, and circulars issued by LSGD and 
Government of Rajasthan  
(vi) Central and State Finance Commissions Reports. 
2.3  Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covering the period April 2015 to March 2020 was 
carried out in two stages. Stage-I from June to December 2020, comprised audit 
of implementation of CAA by the State Government and parastatals and  
Stage-II comprised test-check of 14 ULBs across all tiers and selected five1 
 
1  Three functions (one major function “Public Health, sanitation conservancy and solid 
waste management” has been bifurcated in two functions due to extensiveness + Fire 
Services + Provision of urban amenities and facilities) and one major revenue source 
‘Property Tax’. 
Chapter II 
Audit Framework 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
6 
functions. Due to Corona pandemic, the selection of ULBs had to be restricted 
to Jaipur and nearby area. ULBs were selected through simple random sampling 
using IDEA software. The details of ULBs selected for test check, are as under: 
Table 2.1: Details of selected units 
 
S. 
No.  
Types of ULBs Population 
wise 
category 
Total 
number of 
units  
Selected 
units  
Name of units  
1. Municipal 
Corporation  
I 2 2 Jaipur & Ajmer 
2. Municipal 
Council 
I 11 2 Sikar & Kishangarh 
3. Municipal Board II 5 1 Nawalgarh 
III 22 3 Chaksu, Chomu and 
Niwai 
IV 38 6 Jobner, Thanagaji, 
Shahpura, Phulera, 
Bagru and Lalsot 
Total 78 14  
During audit, activities relating to following five focus areas were selected for 
detailed test-check: 
(i) Fire Services; 
(ii) Public Health and Sanitation; 
(iii) Solid Waste Management; 
(iv) Property Tax; and 
(v) Provisions of Urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds 
An Entry Conference was held on 23 December 2020 with the Secretary, LSGD, 
in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were explained. 
An Exit Conference was held on 22 July 2021 with the Secretary, LSGD, in 
which the points raised in the Draft Paragraph were discussed. The replies 
received from State Government (July 2021) have also been incorporated in the 
Report.  
2.4  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State 
Government, Directorate of Local Bodies, RIICO, UDAs/UITs, RHB, 
RUDSICO, and all selected urban local bodies in conducting the performance 
audit.  
 

Audit Framework 
 
7 
2.5  Organization of Audit Findings 
The audit observations relating to status of devolution of functions, funds and 
functionaries are presented in the following chapters.  
Chapter III:  Compliance with provisions of 74th CAA 
Chapter IV:  Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning  
Chapter V:  Financial resources of ULBs  
Chapter VI:  Human resources of ULBs  
Chapter VII: Conclusions 
 

9 
3.1  Comparison of State LeveLegislations with 74th CAA 
 
 
 
3.1 Comparison of State Level Legislations with 74th CAA 
The 74th CAA introduced certain provisions relating to municipalities vide 
Articles 243Q to 243ZG. The State Government enacted Rajasthan 
Municipalities Act 2009 (RMA) and repealed the then existing Rajasthan 
Municipalities Act 1959.  The provisions corresponding to the CAA provisions 
are indicated in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the  
provisions of 74th CAA 
Provision of 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India Provision 
of RMA 
Article 243Q Constitution of Municipalities: It provides for 
constitution of three types of municipalities namely a 
Municipal Board for transitional area, a Municipal Council 
for a smaller urban town and a Municipal Corporation for 
larger urban area. 
Section 5 
of RMA 
Article 243R Composition of Municipalities: All the seats in a 
Municipality shall be filled by direct elections and by 
persons with special knowledge in municipal 
administration. The Legislature of a State may by law, 
provide for representation to the Municipality Member of 
Legislative Assembly, Parliament of the constituencies lie 
within the municipal area and members of the Council of 
State and State Legislative Council who are registered as 
electors within the city.  
Section 6 
of RMA  
Article 243S Constitution and composition of Wards Committee: 
This provides for constitution of Wards Committees in all 
municipalities with a population of 3 lakh or more  
Section 54 
of RMA 
Article 243T Reservation of seats: The seats to be reserved for 
Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled Tribe (ST), Women and 
Backward classes for direct election.  
Section 6 
(3-5,8) 21 
and 43 of 
RMA 
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities: The municipality has a fixed 
tenure of 5 years from the date of its first meeting and re-
election to be held within the six months of end of tenure.  
Section 7 
of RMA 
Article 243V Disqualifications for membership: A person shall be 
disqualified for a member of a Municipality: 
 If he/she is so disqualified by or under any law for the 
time being in force for the purposes of elections of 
the Legislature of the State concerned. 
 If he/she is so disqualified by or under any law made 
by the Legislature of the State. 
Section 24 
and 35 of 
RMA 
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of 
municipalities: All municipalities would be empowered 
with such powers as may be necessary to enable them to 
Section 89, 
103, 104 
Chapter III 
Compliance with 
Provisions of 74th CAA 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
10 
Provision of 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of Constitution of India Provision 
of RMA 
function as effective institutions of self- government. The 
State Government shall entrust them with such powers and 
authority to enable them to carry out the responsibilities in 
relation to the 12th Schedule.  
257 of 
RMA 
Article 243X Power to impose taxes by, and funds of the 
Municipalities: 
 Municipalities would be empowered to levy and 
collect the taxes, fees, duties etc. 
 Grant-in-aid would be given to the Municipalities 
from the State  
 Constitution of funds for crediting and withdrawal of 
moneys by the Municipality 
Section 
101 to 106 
of RMA  
Article 243Y 
read with Article 
243I 
Finance Commission: State Government shall constitute 
Finance Commission for  
 Reviewing the financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such steps that help in 
boosting the financial condition of the Municipal 
bodies  
 Distributing between the State and the Municipalities 
the net proceeds of the taxes, fess, tolls and duties that 
are charged by the State Government.  
 Allotting the funds to the municipal bodies in the 
state from the consolidated fund of the State.  
Section 76 
and 77 of 
RMA 
Article 243Z Audit of accounts of Municipalities: This provides for 
maintenance of accounts by the Municipalities and the 
auditing of such accounts. 
Section 90 
and 94 of 
RMA  
Article 243ZA 
read with Article 
243K 
Elections to the Municipalities: The Superintendence, 
direction and control of all procedure of election of the 
Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election 
Commission (SEC)   
Section 11 
of RMA 
Article 243 ZD Committee for District Planning:  
 Constitution of District Planning Committee at 
district level. 
 Composition of District Planning Committee. 
 Preparation of draft development plan and 
submission to the government  
Section 
158 of 
RMA  
Article 243ZE Committee for Metropolitan Planning: Provision for 
constitution of Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) 
in every Metropolitan area with a population of 10 lakhs or 
more to prepare a draft development plan for the 
metropolitan area as a whole. 
Section 
157 of 
RMA  
Source: Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 & 74th CAA 
The State Government had complied with the provisions of the 74th CAA and 
made legal provisions in Rajasthan Municipalities Act 2009. However, the 
implementation did not result in effective decentralization at the ground level. 
These legal provisions were not supported by conclusive actions as per essence 
of the 74th CAA. The shortcomings pertaining to the devolution of functions 
and creation of appropriate institutional mechanisms for effective 
decentralization are discussed in the subsequent chapter. 

11 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1  Devolution of Functions under Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 
2009 
The 74th CAA intends to enable and empower ULBs to perform functions and 
implement schemes in relation to 18 subjects specified in the 12th Schedule 
and mandated each State to enact a legislation to devolve these functions to 
ULBs. The State Government made provisions in RMA and through a Gazette 
notification (2013), 16 out of 18 functions were to be transferred to ULBs. 
Two functions i.e. Slum Improvement & Upgradation and Urban Poverty 
alleviation were not transferred to ULBs in the RMA.  However, these two 
functions were carried out by ULBs under various schemes as an 
implementing agency. Two functions i.e. Urban forestry, protection of the 
environment & promotion of ecological aspects and safeguarding the interest 
of weaker sections of society were not notified as core functions. However, the 
RMA provided that these functions may be performed by the ULBs subject to 
their managerial, technical and financial capacity.  
4.1.1 Actual status of Devolution of Functions  
Audit observed several overlaps in discharge of the functions between ULBs 
and parastatals or the State Government departments. Out of the 18 functions, 
ULBs had full jurisdiction only in respect of two functions; it was merely an 
implementing agency in four functions; it had minimal role/overlapping 
jurisdiction along with other State Government Departments and parastatals in 
eleven functions and one function has not been devolved to ULB by the State 
Government yet.  
The function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 1. 
Chart 1: Role of Urban Local Bodies in devolved functions  
 
Chapter IV 
Empowerment of Urban Local 
Bodies and their functioning 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
12 
Status showing the extent of autonomy over discharge of functions by the 
ULBs (Table 4.1): 
Table 4.1: Status of autonomy over discharge of function by ULBs  
SI. 
No 
Functions 
(Obligatory(O)/
Discretionary(D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions where ULB has full jurisdiction 
1 Fire Services(O) Establishing and 
maintaining fire 
brigades 
Providing fire NOC/ 
approval certificate in 
respect of high-rise 
buildings 
This function had been fully devolved and 
the ULBs are responsible for establishing 
and maintaining fire brigades and issuance 
of fire NOC to multistoried buildings across 
the State. 
2 Regulation of 
slaughter houses 
and tanneries(O)  
Ensuring quality of 
animals and meat 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. However, they 
actually perform this function only in metro 
cities while in other places they only issue 
trade license to meat shops. 
Disposal of waste 
O&M of slaughter 
houses 
ULBs as mere implementing agencies 
3 Slum 
improvement and 
upgradation  
Identifying 
beneficiaries 
This function was not devolved by the 
Government in RMA but ULBs are 
performing the function under the specific 
schemes such as Slum Development 
Scheme, CM Urban BPL Awas Yojana etc. 
Affordable Housing 
Upgradation 
4 Urban poverty 
alleviation  
 
Identifying 
beneficiaries  
The function was not devolved through 
RMA but ULBs are only entrusted with the 
work of identification of beneficiaries and 
act merely as implementing agency in 
Centrally/State Sponsored schemes such as 
National Urban Livelihood Mission 
(NULM) 
Livelihood and 
employment  
Street vendors 
5 Planning for 
economic and 
social 
development (O) 
Program 
implementation for 
economic activities 
ULBs are merely implementing agencies 
under various centrally sponsored scheme 
such as NULM, etc. Social welfare 
Department is another entity which has been 
entrusted with implementation of various 
schemes e.g. distribution of scholarships to 
weaker sections of the Students, family 
pension, etc. DLB in its reply also admitted 
that this function has still not been 
devolved. 
Policies for social 
development 
6 Safeguarding the 
interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded 
(D)  
 
Identifying 
beneficiaries  
This function was categorized by the RMA 
as other function with certain conditions. 
State departments such as Social welfare, 
Tribal welfare, Empowerment of Differently 
abled and senior citizens and parastatal such 
as Rajiv Gandhi Rural Housing Corporation 
were responsible for performing these 
functions. ULBs were only an implementing 
arm for central and state government 
schemes. 
 
 
 
Providing 
tools/benefits such as 
tricycles 
Housing programs  
Scholarships 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
13 
SI. 
No 
Functions 
(Obligatory(O)/
Discretionary(D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions with minimal role or having overlapping jurisdictions with state departments and 
/or parastatals 
7. Cattle pounds; 
prevention of 
cruelty to 
animals(O) 
Catching and keeping 
strays 
ULBs were merely catching and keeping 
stray animals. Sterilization and anti-rabies 
vaccination are being done by the Animal 
Husbandry Department. Sterilization and anti-
rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
8 Vital statistics 
including birth 
and death 
registration (O) 
 
Coordinating with 
hospitals/ 
crematoriums etc. for 
obtaining information 
Both ULBs and the Department of Health 
and Family Welfare maintained database of 
births and deaths. ULBs register and issue 
certificates of birth and death. 
Maintaining and 
updating database 
9 Water supply for 
domestic 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes(O)   
Distribution of water In Rajasthan, only 81 of 196 ULBs have 
been entrusted with the work of distributing 
water, providing connection, O&M and 
collection of revenue. In the rest of the 
State, Public Health and Engineering 
Department is handling the function. 
Providing connections 
Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) 
Collection of charges 
10 Urban planning 
including town 
planning (O) 
Master Planning/ 
Development 
plans/Zonal plans 
Master plans are prepared by UDAs/TPD. 
ULBs has no role in preparation of these 
master plans. 
Enforcing master 
planning regulations 
 
After preparation of Master Plan 
ULBs/UDAs/UITs enforced it in their 
jurisdiction. 
Enforcing building 
bye-laws and licenses 
Prior to September 2017, ULBs except 
Jaipur were preparing their own building 
bye laws. However, from September 2017 
onwards, the State Government issued 
Unified building bye laws for the whole 
State. 
ULBs are issuing permission in their 
jurisdiction while other parastatals such as 
UDAs/UITs/ RIICO are doing this in their 
jurisdiction 
Group Housing  
 
 
Group housing was being done by the 
respective UDAs/UITs and where such 
parastatals do not exist, some ULBs were 
engaged in Group Housing under Chief 
Minister Jan Awas Yojana. 
Development of 
Industrial areas 
The work of development of Industrial areas 
is solely entrusted to RIICO. 
11 Burials and burial 
grounds; 
cremations, 
cremation  
grounds (O) 
Construction and 
O&M of crematoriums, 
burial grounds and 
electric crematoriums 
 
 
 
 
ULBs were merely undertaking construction 
of shed, boundaries etc. in their jurisdiction 
and UITs/UDAs were also executing 
construction works in their areas. 
 
1 Bundi, Chomu, Ganganagar, Jaisalmer, Karauli, Nagaur, Nathdwara and Nokha. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
14 
SI. 
No 
Functions 
(Obligatory(O)/
Discretionary(D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
12 Roads and bridges 
(O) 
Construction and 
maintenance of roads  
ULBs were mainly engaged in construction 
of roads and drains in their jurisdiction 
while UDAs/UITs/HBs/RIICO were 
executing roads works in their 
areas/colonies. PWD/RSRDC were two 
other parastatals which perform construction 
works relating to National Highways/State 
Highways/ Bridges/ROBs under various 
schemes. 
  Construction and 
maintenance of 
bridges, drains, 
flyovers and footpaths  
13 Regulation of 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings (O) 
 
Regulating land use ULBs along with other parastatal agencies 
were implementing the function in their 
respective jurisdictions.  In smaller towns, 
where no other parastatals exist, ULBs were 
performing these functions. 
Approving building 
plans/high rises 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
14 Public health, 
sanitation 
conservancy and 
solid waste 
management (O) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
Department of Health and Family Welfare 
played a significant role in maintaining 
hospitals & dispensaries and immunization/ 
vaccination programs.  ULBs were also 
responsible for cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by infectious disease.  
ULBs were solely responsible for solid 
waste management and control and 
supervision of public markets. 
Immunization/ 
vaccination 
Registration of births 
and deaths  
Cleaning and 
disinfection of 
localities affected by 
infectious disease  
Solid waste 
management  
Control and 
supervision of public 
markets 
15 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities such 
as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds (O) 
 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
ULBs were creating/ maintaining 
/developing parks and gardens and also 
operating and maintaining these 
gardens/parks/ play grounds in their 
jurisdiction while other parastatal agencies 
were maintaining parks and gardens in their 
respective colonies which were still not 
handed over to ULBs. 
16 Promotion of 
cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects 
(O) 
 
Schools and education  Schools and education were handled by 
Education Department. ULBs were 
organizing fairs and festivals. Some of 
ULBs have been allotted funds for 
maintenance and safeguarding of Heritage 
buildings under Heritage Conservation 
Scheme. The UDAs/UITs undertook 
activities allied with public space 
beautification, organizing fairs and festivals. 
However, DLB in its reply stated that this 
function has still not been devolved.  
Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings/ 
institutions 
Heritage 
Public space 
beautification  
17 Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops and 
public 
conveniences (O) 
 
Installation and 
maintenance of street 
lights  
ULBs were in-charge of creation and 
maintenance of parking lots and public 
toilets and maintenance of street lighting in 
their wards. Other parastatals such as 
RIICO, HB, UDAs, UITs were maintaining 
these amenities in their jurisdiction. Bus 
Route were decided by City Transport 
Creation and 
maintenance of parking 
lots 
 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
15 
SI. 
No 
Functions 
(Obligatory(O)/
Discretionary(D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Creation and 
maintenance of public 
toilets  
Service Companies/Regional Transport 
Offices. 
Deciding and operating 
bus routes 
Function not devolved as Core functions 
18 Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological 
aspects(D)   
Afforestation  The RMA had categorized this function as 
other function subject to certain conditions 
such as availability of managerial, technical 
and financial capacities. The DLB has also 
accepted that the function is not devolved as 
yet. The Forest Department was executing 
these functions. 
 
Greenification 
Awareness drives  
Protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water 
bodies etc. 
Source: RMA, Information provided by the DLB 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that 16 out of 18 functions have been 
devolved. Rest of the functions were being carried out partially by the ULBs 
because of lack of technical expertise and financial resources with the ULBs. 
The State Government departments implement and execute schemes as per 
suggestions and in coordination with ULBs. The fact, however, remains that 
the functions have not been devolved in accordance with the 74th CAA. 
 
Recommendation 1: The State Government should initiate action to devolve 
all functions with full jurisdiction to ULBs in accordance with the 74th CAA 
and endeavour to minimise overlapping jurisdictions for devolution in true 
spirit.  
 
4.2   Institutional mechanism for empowerment of urban local 
bodies 
As already discussed above, the State Government transferred 16 functions to 
ULBs. The discharge of these functions can be effective only when 
appropriate institutions are established and adequately empowered. The 74th 
CAA provided for establishment of such institutional mechanisms as can be 
seen from Table 3.1 (refer para 3.1). 
This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanism. 
4.2.1   State Election Commission 
As per Section 11 of RMA, the State Election Commission (SEC) was 
entrusted with supervision, direction and control of the preparation of electoral 
rolls, and the conduct of all elections to ULBs. However, under Section 3 of 
RMA, the power of delimitation of wards, reservation of seats for the 
councilors and rotation policy for the posts of Mayor/President, Deputy-
Mayor/Vice-Presidents and wards were vested with the State Government. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
16 
This was not in consonance with the recommendation (October 2007) of the 
2nd Administrative Reforms Commission, accepted by the Government of 
India, which required entrustment of the task of delimitation and reservation of 
constituencies to the SEC.   
The State Government accepted (July 2021) that division/delimitation of 
wards, and reservation of seats were being done as per provisions of RMA. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government should consider the 
recommendations of Administrative Reforms Commission and entrust the 
work of ward delimitations and reservations of the constituencies to SEC.   
4.2.2    Composition of Municipalities 
Article 243R stipulates the composition of Municipalities. Accordingly, RMA 
(Section 6) stipulates the composition of municipalities. The Corporations and 
Municipalities consist of elected Corporates/councilors, nominated 
Corporates/councilors, Member of Legislative Assembly and Member of 
Parliament representing the constituencies which comprise wholly or partly 
the Municipal area. The nominated members do not have voting power.  
The Mayor/President/Chairman is elected from amongst the Corporates/ 
Councilors and is assisted by seven Standing Committees viz. Executive 
Committee, Finance Committee, Health and Sanitation Committee, Building 
Works and Construction Committee, Slum Improvement Committee, Rules 
and Byelaws Committee and Compounding and Compromise of Offences 
Committee. These Committees may exercise, perform and discharge such 
powers as may be prescribed. 
4.2.3    Reservation of seats 
Article 243T stipulated reservation of seats for SC/ST, Women and Backward 
classes in direct election. The RMA also provide for allotment of reserved 
seats to different constituencies as per the rotation policy adopted by the 
Government. As regards reservation for women, not more than 50 percent of 
the seats reserved for each category of persons belonging to SC/ST and 
backward classes and those of the non-reserved seats shall be reserved for 
women. 
LSG Department order (25 February 2015) prescribed seats reserved for SC, 
ST, OBC and Women as 17.65, 2.27, 19.92 and 31.66 per cent respectively. 
Subsequently, the order dated 29 July 2019 prescribed seats reserved for SC, 
ST, OBC and Women as 16.64, 3.17, 20.04, and 33 per cent respectively. As 
per prescribed norms, the State Government rotates the seats of Corporates/ 
Councilors as per reservation policy for each election. 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) the facts. 
 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
17 
4.2.4   Status of Elections and Formation of Councils 
As per section 11 of RMA, the State Election Commission had to supervise, 
control and prepare the electoral rolls and conduct elections for municipalities. 
Further, as per Section 7, election should be held within six months from the 
date of dissolution. Article 243 U(3)(a) of Constitution of India and provisions 
of the RMA stipulate a fixed tenure of five years for the Corporators/ 
Councilors of ULBs from the date of first meeting. The status of elections and 
formation of councils in the ULBs of the State as on March 2021 is depicted in 
Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2:  Status of Elections 
Total No. of ULBs 196 
No. of Municipal Corporations  102 
Newly formed ULBs  063 
Elections held during 2014-15 and councils formed  46 
Elections held during 2015-16 and councils formed 141 
Elections held during 2019-20 and councils formed  49 
Elections held during 2020-21 and councils formed 1474 
Source: Information gathered from DLB, State Election Commission 
As per Section 320 of RMA, when a new municipality is created, general 
election should be held within six months of its establishment, as in absence of 
elected body, no authority shall impose tax and approve bye laws.  
It was observed that out of 196 ULBs, six ULBs (Nasirabad, Pratapgarhi, 
Mahuwa, Thanagaji, Khatushyamji and Rupwas) were formed between 12 
August 2014 and 14 September 2018 and their elections were due between 12 
February 2015 and 13 March 2019 but the elections of these ULBs were 
actually held in November 2019 resulting in delay of eight months to 56 
months. In the absence of elected governing body, no essential functions could 
be performed during the intervening period. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the elections were normally 
conducted in time and delayed election did not affect the developmental work 
adversely as the functions of ULBs were carried out effectively by the 
Administrator. The delay was due to inclusion of panchayat area and its 
jurisdiction into municipal area and circumstances arising due to COVID 19. 
The reply is not acceptable because the elections were held in November 
2019, before onset of the COVID. The fact remains that public participation in 
the effective implementation of the developmental works could not be ensured 
during the period when no elected representatives were in place.  
 
 
2 Jaipur, Jodhpur and Kota Municipal Corporations were bifurcated in two Corporations 
with effect from 18 October 2019 and elections could only be held only during 2020-21 
due to COVID pandemic related delays.  
3 MBoard Mahuwa (May 2018), Thanagaji (September 2018), Rupwas (August 2014), 
Pratap Garhi (May 2018), Nasirabad (November 2016), and Khatushyamji (May 2018).  
4 As per information posted at website of SEC, the election of Vidhyavihar MBoard was 
not held. However, the MBoard, Vidhyavihar informed that the election was held on 20 
February 2021. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
18 
4.2.5  Mayor/President/Chairman 
The Mayor/President/Chairman (Chairperson) is the first citizen of the city. As 
per Section 43 of the RMA, there shall be a Mayor for every Municipal 
Corporation, a President for every Municipal Council and a Chairman for 
every Municipal Board who shall be elected in a prescribed manner. As per 
Section 78 of Rajasthan Municipalities (Election) Rules 1994, the office of the 
Chairperson shall be filled by a person chosen by the elected members of the 
Municipality. The Chairperson is empowered to convene meetings of the 
Board, preside over every meeting of the Board. Chairperson also regulates 
the conduct of business of such meetings, watch over the financial and 
executive administration of the municipality. 
The term of office of Chairperson and Vice Chairperson is five years from the 
date appointed for first meeting. This is in line with the provision of the 
Constitution. 
4.2.6   Statutory Committees 
(i)  As per Section 55 of RMA, there should be an Executive Committee 
under the Chairmanship of the Mayor/President and include the Vice 
Chairman, Leader of the Opposition and seven other members including two 
women members. In addition, the ULBs have six other Committees. These 
committees are to be constituted within 90 days from the constitution of the 
Municipalities failing which the State Government had to form these 
committees.  
Scrutiny of records of test checked 14 ULBs revealed that 11 ULBs5 did not 
form these statutory committees (March 2021). In respect of the remaining 
ULBs, following was noticed: 
 The M Council Sikar, Board was constituted in February 2015 and as per 
provision, the Board was to constitute the committees by  
May 2015. However, the Board passed (September 2015) a resolution 
for formation of statutory committees after a delay of almost four 
months. Directorate of Local Bodies (DLB) approved (July 2016) the 
formation of these committees after lapse of almost 10 months. Thus, 
these committees could be constituted with a delay of 14 months, due to 
delayed submission of proposals to DLB and inordinate time taken by 
DLB in approval. 
 In Municipal Board, Chomu, Board was constituted in August 2015 and 
as per provision, the Board was to constitute the committees by 
November 2015, but these committees were approved (January 2017) by 
the DLB, resulting in delay of over 13 months in constitution of 
committees. 
 
5 M Corp Ajmer, M Council Kishangarh M Board Chaksu, Niwai, Jobner, Thanagaji, 
Shahpura, Phulera, Lalsot, Bagru, Nawalgarh. 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
19 
 The board of MCorp, Jaipur was constituted on November 2014 and as 
per provision, the Board was to constitute the committees by February 
2015, but formation of these committees were approved by DLB in June 
2015. Thus, committees were constituted with a delay of four months.  
Thus, in these ULBs, the statutory committees were formed with a delay 
ranging between four months and 14 months, which deprived the elected 
corporators from effectively participating in the development, sanitation, 
building construction and other allied function of these ULBs.  
In order to assess participation of these committees in working of ULBs where 
formed, minutes of the meeting were called. Only MCorp, Jaipur made 
available minutes of two committees i.e., Executive and Building & 
Construction Committee. In absence of minutes of meeting, it could not be 
verified in audit as to whether these committees were holding regular meeting 
and assisted in effective implementation and monitoring of various schemes 
and functions of the concerned ULBs. 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) the facts and stated that the ULBs 
are instructed to form these committees within stipulated time.  
(ii)  The Constitution provides for Wards committees in all Municipalities 
with a population of three lakh or more. Further, section 54 of the RMA also 
provided constitution of Wards Committees comprising of ward members of 
terrestrial areas of the committee and not exceeding five other members, who 
have special knowledge or experience of the municipal administration, to be 
nominated by the State Government.  The term of these committees was to be 
co-terminus with the Municipal Corporation. The Ward committees were to 
act as a bridge between the municipal government and citizens and function as 
institutions of neighborhood governance and increase proximity between 
elected representatives and citizens and provide a space for citizen 
participation in local level planning. They were to perform duties such as 
preparation and submission of ward development schemes for allotment of 
funds, ensure proper utilization of allotted funds, and maintenance of public 
utilities and safeguarding the assets of the Corporation. 
Scrutiny of test checked ULBs revealed that M Corp Jaipur and Ajmer had not 
constituted the Ward Committees, which defeated the very purpose of 
facilitating active public participation in local governance in prioritization of 
development works, monitoring of execution of works, effective utilization 
and maintenance of assets created etc. 
Recommendation 3: The State Government should ensure timely 
constitution of the Statutory Committees and Ward Committees. The 
Government should also ensure that regular meetings of Statutory 
Committees are held for effective monitoring of functions of ULBs. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
20 
4.2.7  District Planning Committee 
As per Article 243ZD of the Constitution, a District Planning Committee 
(DPC) at the district level was to be constituted. The DPC was to prepare a 
comprehensive District Development Plan (DDP) with regard to matters of 
common interest between the panchayats and the municipalities; including 
spatial planning; sharing of water and other physical and natural resources; 
integrated development of infrastructure and environment conservation and 
the extent and type of available resources financial or otherwise. The DPCs 
should prepare the draft development plan for onward submission to the State 
Government. The Committee would meet once in a quarter for review of 
allotted works and thus a minimum four times a year.  
All the districts in Rajasthan constituted the DPC, but these committees did 
not meet regularly as: 
 Meetings of the DPC in seven6 districts covering the test checked 14 
ULBs, were not held regularly. There was a shortfall ranging from one to 
four numbers of meetings every year. 
 It was also noticed in five out of seven test checked districts that even 
when DPCs did meet, they did not take up matters of common interests 
between Panchayats and Municipalities like spatial planning, integrated 
development of infrastructure based on available resource etc.  
 DPCs did not prepare the draft development plans in accordance with the 
codal provisions in respect of ULBs in five out of seven test checked 
districts and merely included the data from the allotment under various 
Centrally/State sponsored schemes. In the remaining two districts 
minutes were not made available to audit. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that DPCs were formed at district 
level and were functional. The reply is not acceptable as DPCs were neither 
meeting regularly nor functioning as per prescribed norms. 
Thus, irregular meetings and non-preparation of draft development plan in 
accordance with the codal provisions defeated the very purpose of the 
integrated development of the area through these DPCs.  
4.2.8  Metropolitan Planning Committee 
Article 243ZE mandates that a Metropolitan Planning Committee (MPC) shall 
be constituted in every Metropolitan area7.The chairperson of the Committee 
was to be nominated by the State Government. Section 157 of RMA also 
required the formation of a Metropolitan Committee for preparing a draft 
 
6 Ajmer, Alwar, Dausa, Jaipur, Jhunjhunu, Sikar and Tonk. 
7 Metropolitan city having a population of 10 lakh and above. 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
21 
development plan, which was to be known as Metropolitan Region 
Development Plan. The Committee was to consist of such number of members 
as may be fixed by the State Government from time to time by notification in 
Official gazette. The State Government was also to specify the numbers of 
elected and nominated members. At least two thirds of members shall be 
elected by, and from amongst the elected members of municipality and 
chairperson of panchayats.  
As per statute, Metropolitan Committee shall consider the plan prepared by the 
ULBs and Panchayats, matter of common interest between the ULBs and the 
Panchayats, overall objectives and priorities set by Government of India and 
Government of Rajasthan and sharing of water, physical & natural resources 
in preparing Draft Metro Regional Development Plan. The Chairperson of the 
committee had to send the plan to the Government.  
Audit observed that as per definition of the metropolitan area, MPC was to be 
constituted in Jaipur, Jodhpur and Kota but was not constituted (March 2021). 
MPCs are envisioned to ensure integrated planning for the entire metropolitan 
area, and are responsible for the preparation of draft development plans and 
synthesising priorities set by local authorities, State and Central Governments. 
The development works were examined on the recommendations of the 
Executive Committee of the ULB concerned. Thus, in absence of MPCs the 
people of the metropolitan cities were deprived of the benefits of integrated 
development of the area. 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) that the committees were yet to be 
constituted as per constitutional provisions. 
Recommendations 4:  The State Government should ensure constitution and 
effective functioning of MPCs for integrated development of the area.   
4.2.9 State Finance Commission 
Article 243-I of the Constitution of India makes it mandatory for the State 
Government to constitute a Finance Commission within one year of the 
commencement of the 74th CAA and thereafter on expiry of every five years. 
The mandate of the State Finance Commission (SFC) is to review the financial 
position of the local bodies and to make recommendations to the Governor for 
devolution of funds. State Government through amendments in RMA provided 
for constitution of SFC. 
4.2.9.1 Delay in Constitution of the SFC and Implementation of 
Recommendations 
Audit noticed delays in constitution of SFCs ranging between 365 and 723 
days and recommendations of the 5th SFC were implemented with a delay upto 
237 days as detailed in Table 4.3. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
22 
Table 4.3: Details of constitution of SFC 
SFC To be 
constituted 
as per 
constitution 
Date of 
actual 
constitution 
Delay 
in 
days 
Submission 
date of 
recommend
-ations 
Date of 
acceptance 
by 
Government 
Delay on the 
part of 
Government 
(days) 
Period 
covered 
First 31.5.1994 23.04.1994 0 30.12.1995 16.03.1996 77 1995-2000 
Second 30.5.1999 07.05.1999 0 30.08.2001 26.03.2002 208 2000-2005 
Third  30.5.2004 15.09.2005 472 27.02.2008 17.03.2008 19 2005-2010 
Fourth 30.5.2009 13.04.2011 723 26.09.2013 20.02.2014 147 2010-2015 
Fifth 30.5.2014 30.05.2015 365 28.11.2018 23.07.2019 237 2015-2020 
Sixth 30.5.2019 Formation of VIth SFC is under consideration of State Government 
Source: Information provided by the Finance Department (SFC and Economic Affairs) 
The delays resulted in transfer of funds to the ULBs with delay putting further 
stress on their fund availability.   
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the formation of SFC is being 
done by the State Government. The Commission presents interim reports, if 
constitution of SFC is delayed due to unavoidable reasons. The reply is not 
convincing as the delays resulted in transfer of grants to ULBs with delays. 
Audit noticed that even the interim reports were delayed8. The Commission 
submitted only one interim report during 2015-20 and State Government 
submitted (July 2019) Action Taken Report (ATR) after eight months from its 
final report.   
4.2.9.2      Transfer of  SFC Grants to agencies other than ULBs 
According to Section 76 of RMA, the State Finance Commission shall review 
the financial position of the municipalities and make recommendations for 
distribution of the net proceeds of the tax, duties, toll and fees leviable by the 
State.  
The Vth SFC in its recommendations fixed 75 per cent amount of grant for 
basic and development functions, 20 per cent for National/State priority 
schemes and 5 per cent incentive grants for performance. The State 
Government issued (December 2016) circular endorsing the said formula but 
earmarked overall 20 per cent for only State sponsored schemes such as 
Mukhyamantri Jal Swavlamban Abhiyan and Annapurna Rasoi. The matching 
share for Central sponsored schemes such as Atal Mission for Rejuvenation 
and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart City was met out from the 
SFC grant for development functions. This resulted in transfer of 37 per cent 
of the total grant to various agencies/schemes during the period 2017 to 2020, 
which was against the spirit of recommendations of the SFC. 
It was observed in audit that the State Government deducted an amount of  
₹ 726.74 crore during 2017-20 on this account from the Grants to be given to 
ULBs and this amount was transferred to various other agencies/parastatals 
against various projects9 as per the details given in Table 4.4. 
 
8  Provisional report, interim report and final report were submitted in September 2015, 
September 2016 and November 2018 respectively by the Vth SFC.  
9 RUDF/RUDSICO contribution/loan; IHSDP/UIDSMMT/Sewerage project/ CMAR etc. 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
23 
Table 4.4: Details showing deduction from grants of ULBs and transferred 
to parastatals 
(₹ in crore)  
Year Sanctioned amount Amount transferred 
to ULBs 
Deduction 
2017-18 795.50 554.83 240.67 
2018-19 737.37 430.49 306.88 
2019-20 430.70 251.51 179.19 
Total 726.74 
Source: Information provided by DLB 
Thus, due to deduction of ₹ 726.74 crore from grants of ULBs, these ULBs 
were deprived of the amount to that extent. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that these agencies utilised the 
amount for developmental works and basic infrastructure projects, for 
repayment of loans and implementation of Indira Rasoi (erstwhile Annapurna 
Rasoi). The reply is not convincing as the State Government diverted the 
money earmarked for ULBs. 
4.2.9.3    Response of the State Government to SFC Recommendations 
As per Section 77 of RMA, after taking into consideration the 
recommendations of the SFC, the State Government shall determine (a) 
devolution of net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees to the 
Municipalities, (b) the assignment of taxes, duties, tolls and fees to the 
Municipalities, (c) the sanction of the Grants-in-aids to the Municipalities 
from the Consolidated Fund of the State; (d) the other measures required to 
improve the financial position of the Municipalities. Audit observed that the 
State Government accepted some of the recommendations with modifications, 
and action was yet to be initiated on some recommendations. The SFC-wise 
important recommendations and their modification with reference to transfer 
of funds are given in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5 details of Action Taken by the GoR on recommendations of SFC 
SFC Recommendations Modifications Risk /Impact  
First The amount due against 
matching share of ULBs 
under different schemes 
should be made available 
by the State Government. 
The State Government 
would make available the 
matching share to only 
those ULBs which are 
unable to generate 
matching share from their 
own revenue. 
ULBs had to bear an 
additional financial 
burden which impacted 
other developmental 
works.  
 
 
Second It was recommended that 
after expiry of award 
period of incentive fund, 
the unspent balance was to 
be disbursed to the ULBs.  
The unspent balance 
would be deposited in the 
Consolidated Fund of the 
State Government. 
ULBs were deprived of 
the incentive fund. 
Third Grant for general purpose 
may be disbursed on the 
basis of census 2001 
instead of 1991. 
The State Government did 
not accept this.  
This would have 
increased resources of 
ULBs. 
Fourth (i) SFC recommended 
levy of 2 per cent cess on 
country made liquor to be 
The State Government did 
not accept the 
recommendation.  
This would have 
increased resources of 
ULBs. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
24 
SFC Recommendations Modifications Risk /Impact  
distributed between ULBs 
and PRIs 
(ii) The amount of 
difference between the 
interim recommendations 
and final 
recommendations for the 
period 2013-15 should be 
disbursed to ULBs 
(iii) the SFC 
recommended grant of  
₹ 586.76 crore under 
Untied Grant to ULBs 
which were to be utilized 
for developmental works 
not covered under any 
State/Central Scheme 
(iv) The Commission 
recommended grant of 10 
per cent share from State 
Renewal Fund for repairs 
of urban road.   
 
 
 
The State Government did 
not accept the 
recommendation; 
 
 
 
 
The State Government did 
not accept the 
recommendation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The State Government did 
not accept the 
recommendation. 
 
 
 
This would have 
increased resources of 
ULBs. 
 
 
 
 
Untied grants give 
flexibility to meet local 
requirements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
This would have 
increased resources 
with ULBs.  
 
Fifth  The Commission 
recommended transfer of 
8.5 per cent of net 
proceeds of the Own tax 
of the State to the ULBs  
The State Government 
accepted the interim 
recommendation for 
transfer of 7.182 per cent. 
This would have 
increased resources 
with ULBs. 
Source: Complied form Action Take Note prepared by the GoR 
In addition to recommendations regarding transfer of funds, the SFCs had also 
recommended several measures to strengthen and empower the ULBs. Some 
of recommendations on which action was yet to be taken by the State 
Government are given below:  
(i) Impose liability to pay license fee for using rights to the ULBs in 
respect of land under and along the pavements, streets and roads; 
(ii) Widen the tax base of Urban Development (UD) tax by including 
those that are not covered at present; 
(iii) Review the properties that are currently exempted from UD Tax and 
reduce the number of exemptions to bare minimum.  
(iv) Development Authorities and UITs should enhance the share of ULBs 
in the sale proceeds of land from 15 per cent to 20 per cent. 
(v) Amnesty should not be granted to defaulters as these schemes 
discourage the bona fide tax payers 
(vi) A tax under Section 103 of RMA on vehicle plying in municipal area 
should be levied. 
The State Government did not accept the aforesaid recommendations, which 
could have enhanced the revenue of the ULBs. Thus, not accepting these 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
25 
recommendations resulted in setback to the process of decentralization and 
empowerment of ULBs to discharge their duties as envisaged under 74th CAA. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that SFCs recommendations were 
accepted to the extent possible keeping in view the financial position of the 
state and the objective of integrated development of the State. Government 
had also issued instructions for strengthening of fiscal position of the ULBs. 
However, the fact remains that action on some key recommendations such as 
widening of tax base, reduction in UD tax exemptions, review of properties 
etc. was yet to be taken by the State Government.    
Recommendations 5: The State Government should constitute the SFC 
within stipulated time frame and implement the recommendations made by 
the SFC expeditiously. This would enable the ULBs to get grants in time. 
Further, the State Government should consider the recommendations made 
by the SFC for strengthening the ULBs favourably to ensure 
implementation of 74th CAA in true spirit.  
 
 
4.2.10      Property Tax Board 
The 13th Finance Commission stipulated constitution of a Property Tax Board 
(Board) to assist all ULBs in the State to put in place an independent and 
transparent procedure for assessing property tax. Rajasthan was eligible for a 
performance grant of ₹ 413 crore in respect of ULBs for four years 
commencing from 2011-12 on constitution of such Board.  Government of 
Rajasthan constituted (February 2011) the Board comprising of Secretary, 
LSGD as Chairperson, and the Chief Executive Officers/Municipal 
Corporations, Jaipur and Jodhpur as Members. The Board was entrusted, inter-
alia following functions:  
(i) Preparation of data base of property tax on all lands and buildings 
situated in the ULBs. 
(ii) Assessment books should be completely revised once in five years. 
(iii) Audit of the property tax assessments done by the ULBs and give 
advisories to the State Government. 
(iv) Assessment of property tax in respect of newly constructed/improved 
buildings within thirty days from the date of completion of the 
buildings. 
(v) Assessment/revision of property tax relating to at least 25 per cent of 
the aggregate number of estimated properties across all ULBs by  
31st  March 2015. 
(vi) Training of Officers and staff of the ULBs in the assessment and 
revision of property tax, directly or through institutions.  
 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
26 
Audit observed that the State Government constituted the Board in February 
2011. However, only one meeting of the Board was conducted in April 2011 
and thereafter no meeting was held till completion of its tenure in April 2017. 
Thereafter, the State Government did not reconstitute the Board. Thus, due to 
non-functioning of board during its tenure up to April 2017 and non-
constituting new Board thereafter, ULBs, particularly small ULBs, were 
deprived of technical guidance for assessment and revision of property tax 
(UD Tax). State Government could also not effectively monitor the 
assessment, demand and collection of Tax. Consequently, huge amount in 
respect of property tax remained outstanding as elaborated in paragraph 5.3.1. 
Audit is of the view that the State Government issued orders for constitution 
of the Board merely to fulfill the condition for getting the performance grant 
of ₹ 413 crore as envisaged by the XIII Finance Commission. In essence the 
goal of establishing independent, transparent and strong system for assessment 
of property tax by ULBs remains unaccomplished. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that Administrative Department have 
issued instructions, technical information and guidance through circulars in 
respect of UD Tax. The reply is not convincing as the State Government 
constituted the Board merely for getting performance grants of Central 
Finance Commission (CFC) and in absence of the Board, assessment, 
collection and revision of Property Tax was affected adversely, thereby 
depriving additional revenues to ULBs. 
Recommendations 6:  The State Government should reconstitute Property 
Tax Board and make it functional to enable the ULBs to collect property tax 
efficiently. 
4.3     Powers of the State Government over ULBs 
Audit observed that the State Government had over-riding powers over ULBs. 
A few illustrative provisions are indicated in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6 Details showing power of GoR over ULBs 
S. No. Subject Provision 
1 Power to frame 
Rules 
The State Government may make rules and regulations and to have 
them placed before the House of State Legislature (Section 338 and 
339 of RMA). 
2 Power to cancel 
and suspend a 
resolution or 
decision taken by 
ULBs 
As per Section 111 of RMA, if the State Government finds any tax 
levied by the ULBs contrary, obnoxious to the interest of general 
public, it may suspend levy and collection of tax until the 
defect/objection is removed. It can also abolish or reduce the tax. 
3 Power to dissolve 
ULBs 
In case the State Government is satisfied that any municipality is not 
competent to perform the duties, exceeds/abuses the power, it may by 
notification in the Gazette, dissolve the ULB.  An order of 
dissolution made by the Government together with the reasons 
thereof should be laid down before the State Legislature. (Section 
322 of RMA) 
4 Power to amend 
provisions of bye-
laws by 
Government 
The State Government may, at any time, by notification in official 
gazette, repeal wholly or in part and modify any rule or bye laws 
made by any municipality. Section 340 of RMA empowers the ULBs 
to make bye-laws. Further, prior to August 2017, the ULBs were 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
27 
S. No. Subject Provision 
framing building bye laws according to local conditions, but the State 
Government framed Unified Building Bye Laws 2017 for the whole 
state which affected the revenue of Corporations and Councils 
adversely as the provisions of the Unified Bye Laws were not based 
on a particular geographical area and were applicable for metro cities 
and small towns in same way.   
Besides, the UDH Department also amended the provision of Mobile 
Towers Bye Laws made by the ULBs vide notification dated  
06 February, 2017 which also reflects overriding powers.  
The UDH Department also amended (June 2017) the provision of 
building byelaws regarding betterment levy which was to be 
recovered in lump sum before granting construction permission. The 
Addl. Chief Secretary issued instruction for recovery of betterment 
levy in four equal instalments.  
5 Sanction to 
deposit and invest 
surplus funds 
Section 86 of RMA permits ULBs to deposit and invest surplus funds 
but only after prior sanction from the Government. 
Source: Information compiled from RMA and orders/circular issued by UDH/GoR 
 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the administrative decisions 
were being taken by the State Government and the State Government issued 
sanctions promptly and there were no delays on part of the Government.  
 
4.4  Parastatals, their Functions and Impact on ULBs 
The objective of the 74th CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functions 
to ULBs. However, functions such as urban/town planning, regulation of land 
use, water supply and sanitation, and slum development continued to be 
delivered by parastatals also as already indicated in Table 4.1.  
These parastatals were controlled by the State Government and they have their 
own governing bodies which do not include elected representatives of ULBs. 
However, the Government continued to form parastatals even after 74th CAA. 
Instead of amending the Acts to comply with the constitutional amendment, 
the State Government formed (April 2013) five Urban Improvement Trusts 
(UITs) namely Sikar, Pali, Sawai Madhopur, Barmer and Chittorgarh and 
entrusted them with the functions which ought to have been devolved to 
ULBs.  This action shows that the Government was not keen to comply with 
the provision of the 74th CAA in true spirit. SFC in its recommendations, had 
also emphasized on bringing all the parastatals under the umbrella of elected 
local bodies. The Government instead of accepting the recommendations of 
the SFC formed new UITs. 
The role of parastatals and their impact on the devolved functions in the test-
checked ULBs is discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
4.4.1  Urban Development Authorities/Urban Improvement Trusts- Urban 
Planning and Regulation of Land Use 
(A) The functions of urban planning and regulation of land use including 
conversion of agriculture land into non-agricultural use were discharged by the 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
28 
Urban Development Authorities (UDAs), UITs and Town Planning 
Department (TPD). The State Government established three UDAs10 for 
planned development of major and important urban areas in the State under 
the respective Acts and 14 UITs under Section 8-10 of the Rajasthan Urban 
Improvement Trust Act, 1962 for preparation of Master Plan for cities not 
covered under UDAs. TPD was also responsible for zoning of land use for 
residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, educational and 
other purposes together with zoning regulations.  
It was provided in section 159 of RMA that ULB shall carry out a detailed 
survey of the city and prepare a Master Development Plan for 20-year period. 
Further, as per Section 160 the Municipality should prepare a draft plan and 
publish it by making a copy thereof available for inspection and publishing a 
notice inviting objection and suggestions from any person with respect to the 
draft plan. 
Further, as per section 3 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Trust (General) 
Rules 1962, the Authority appointed under this section was to finalise the 
master plan in consultation with the Advisory Council and submit it to the 
State Government. The plans so prepared shall be sent to the respective ULBs 
both at the draft stage and final stage for vetting and comments. 
The UDAs/UITs/RIICO are regulating the land use and approving the lay out 
plan in their respective areas, while the ULBs are regulating the land use in the 
area in its jurisdiction. In accordance with the State level mandatory reforms 
under Jawahar Lal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM), which 
stipulated implementation of decentralization measures as envisaged in the 
74th CAA, the following were to be complied with: 
(a) the State should ensure meaningful association and engagement of 
ULBs in planning the functions of parastatal agencies as well as the 
delivery of services to citizens and  
(b) assigning or associating elected members of ULBs with 'city planning 
function'.  
At the same time, UDAs/UITs/TPD were allowed to continue to prepare 
master plans and other functions which were exclusively devolved to the 
ULBs. For example, Jaipur Development Authority prepared master plan for 
Jaipur. However, it is being implemented by M Corp Jaipur in its jurisdiction, 
which was against the provision of RMA and the spirit of 74th Amendment. 
Further, finalisation of the master plan by the Authority in consultation with 
the Advisory Council and onward submission to the State Government was 
not consistent with the spirit of devolution.  
Thus, the ULBs either had no role/or had limited role in discharging urban 
planning and regulation of land use functions. The 4th SFC had in fact 
recommended (September 2013) that the existing UDAs should be brought 
 
10  Jaipur Development Authority, Ajmer Development Authority and the Jodhpur 
Development Authority. 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
29 
under the respective elected municipal bodies, but the recommendation was 
not implemented.  
(B) In respect of public amenities including street lighting, the ULBs and 
Parastatals have overlapping role. It was found in audit that in Bikaner city the 
UIT Bikaner installed street lights in the areas under jurisdiction of MCorp, 
Bikaner where the MCorp had already installed LED lights under power 
saving scheme. When the UIT approached the MCorp, Bikaner for taking over 
the lights installed by them for maintenance, the MCorp refused to accept the 
same as the area was in their jurisdiction and they had already installed LED 
lights. The matter is now disputed and the public had to bear the consequences 
of non-maintenance of lights installed by the UIT. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that UIT had representative from 
ULB. However, the fact remains that despite having representative of ULB in 
UIT, the matter could not be resolved. 
4.4.1.2     Retention of Fire cess by Parastatals  
Fire service is one of the functions which is fully devolved to ULBs. ULBs are 
responsible for establishing and maintaining fire brigades and issuance of fire 
NOCs to high rise buildings. The service requires a huge fund for 
establishment, maintenance and upkeep of the fleet of vehicles, manpower and 
other ancillary expenditure.  
It was observed that the parastatal agencies while sanctioning lay out plan for 
high rise buildings, collected fire cess but did not pass the same to the 
concerned ULB despite the fact that the concerned ULB was maintaining the 
firefighting services in the area. The State Government issued (October, 2013) 
orders to retain the fire cess by the respective parastatal agencies. Thus, the 
inconsistent order of the State Government deprived the ULBs from getting 
the Fire Cess collected by the other parastatal agencies. In addition, the  
Addl. Chief Secretary, UDH Department, Government of Rajasthan exempted 
(June 2017) levy of fire cess under CM Jan Awas Yojana. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that amount of fire cess were 
recovered by the concerned department/agencies and used for firefighting 
system. It was stated during exit conference that now an escrow account has 
also been opened and all departments would be bound to deposit the amount in 
the said account. However, the details of funds deposited by various agencies 
were not furnished. 
4.4.2  Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment 
Corporation: Land Use and Development of Industrial Area 
As per provision of the 74th CAA, development of industrial area was to be 
transferred to ULBs but the State Government did not devolve the function to 
the respective ULBs. Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment 
Corporation (RIICO) was entrusted with setting up of industrial areas and 
developing other infrastructure such as roads, street lights and drainage etc. 
RIICO had notified its own zonal regulations, prepared byelaws for 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
30 
construction of industrial buildings in its areas. RIICO had established 347 
industrial areas in the State. RIICO also sanctioned building site plans, land 
use changes in its area.   
4.4.3  Public Health and Engineering Department (PHED): Urban Water 
Supply 
As per 12th Schedule, Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial 
purposes was one of the functions to be devolved to ULBs. This should have 
included distribution of water, providing connections, operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and collection of water charges. 
However, Public Health and Engineering Department (PHED) is entrusted 
with the work to provide potable water to all citizen of Rajasthan. The PHED 
is also responsible for collecting water charges, distribution of water, 
providing water connection and operation & maintenance of water supply 
schemes. Though water supply for domestic, commercial and industrial 
purpose was an obligatory function of ULBs, this function has been devolved 
to only eight ULBs11 with effect from February 2013 with following 
conditions:  
 All dedicated plants and machineries would be transferred to these eight 
ULBs and the ownership would be of State Government and these ULBs 
would act as licensee for these properties; 
 All staff engaged for these water supply schemes would be transferred to 
these ULBs on deputation basis; 
 Financial assistance would be provided for at least five years from 
devolution of the function; 
 Technical knowhow would be made available through Rajasthan Water 
Supply and Sewerage Management Board/PHED; 
Audit observed that the water supply function was not devolved by the State 
Government and PHED was executing the function. Issues related to water 
charges have also been discussed in detail in paragraph 5.3.3. 
4.4.4  Rajasthan State Road Development and Construction Corporation 
Limited (RSRDC) 
Rajasthan State Road Development and Construction Corporation Limited 
(RSRDC) was incorporated for promotion of specialized construction agencies 
for construction of roads, bridges and other important projects to save cost and 
time. The main function of RSRDC was to construct highways, bridges. It also 
acts as nodal agency in large infrastructure projects such as buildings, bridges, 
ROBs, roads and infrastructure project financed by institutions.  
 
11 Bundi, Chomu, Ganganagar, Jaisalmer, Karauli, Nagaur, Nathdwara and Nokha. 

Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
31 
The 12th Schedule of Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions to be 
devolved to ULBs and according to which, construction of roads and bridges 
were to be carried out by ULBs. However, LSGD sanctioned the work  
(2015-19) of construction of 10 ROBs and two roads with an estimated cost of 
₹ 446.22 crore to RSRDC.  
 4.4.5    Rajasthan Housing Board (RHB) 
Rajasthan Housing Board (RHB) was constituted in 1970 for solution of 
housing problem due to increasing industrialization and urbanization. RHB 
develops colonies and provides housing for all sections of the community. 
After developing their housing projects/colonies, the same are to be handed 
over to ULB concerned and after the transfer of the colonies, all public 
amenities such as street lights, parks, garden and roads are to be maintained by 
the respective ULBs. 
During 2015-20, RHB constructed 14,980 houses in 67 cities, out of which 
10,005 houses have been allotted and 4,975 houses are yet to be allotted. Audit 
noticed that Mansarover scheme in Jaipur has not been handed over to MCorp, 
Jaipur. However, MCorp, Jaipur is providing all municipal services. 
4.4.6 Rajasthan Urban Drinking Water Sewerage and Infrastructure 
Corporation (RUDSICO)  
RUDSICO was incorporated in December 2004 with the objective of giving 
financial assistance, subsidy and aid to ULBs/Government agencies/NGOs; to 
provide consultancy services to ULBs; and to distribute on behalf of 
Government grants-in-aid and financial assistance to ULBs/ parastatals; etc.  
Audit observed that while releasing SFC grants to ULBs, the State 
Government deducted a sum of ₹ 33.35 crore during 2017-20 for payment of 
interest towards HUDCO loan taken by RUDSICO for road repairing/ 
development works. Further, 2.5 per cent agency charges payable to 
RUDSICO was also deducted from the SFC grant payable to ULBs as 
discussed in paragraph number 4.2.9.2. It was further noticed that 20 ULBs 
did not submit their proposal to RUDSICO and RUDSICO allowed them to 
execute the work on their own. Thus, the ULBs have minimal role or 
overlapping jurisdiction with State departments or parastatals. 
4.4.7  Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB) 
Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB) was established under 
Section 4 of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. It 
enforces, inter alia, prevention and control of water/air pollution, Municipal 
Solid Waste Management Rules, Plastic Waste (Management & Handling) 
Rules 2011 and Bio Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules.  

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
32 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the parastatals were constituted 
for technical expertise in infrastructure projects for financing and execution. 
All these projects, schemes were implemented in ULBs. Further, provisions 
for representation of ULBs in these parastatals were also ensured. The reply is 
factually incorrect as in most of these parastatals (except UITs/UDAs), there is 
no provision for representation of ULBs.  
Recommendations 7: State Government should ensure involvement of ULBs 
in planning, regulation, development of industrial area and water supply 
and all the parastatals should be brought under one umbrella as intended in 
74th CAA. 
 

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The devolved functions can be carried out effectively by ULBs only when they 
are supported with sufficient financial resources. The main sources of finance 
of ULBs comprise of grants from Central/State Government and own revenue 
generated from various taxes, fees, user charges etc. ULBs are dependent on 
grants heavily as the ULBs are unable to increase their own sources of revenue 
as elaborated in the ensuing paragraphs.  
 
5.1  Sources of Revenue 
 
In Rajasthan, the sources of funds of ULBs were (i) Central and State 
Government grants and (ii) ULBs own revenue. 
 
The details of revenues of ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is 
indicated in Table 5.1. 
 
Table 5.1:  Details showing source of revenue 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Grants Own 
Revenue 
Total Revenue Percentage of own 
revenue w.r.t. total 
financial resources  
2015-16 2468.31 557.24 3025.55 18.42 
2016-17 4225.49 624.93 4850.42 12.88 
2017-18 3751.13 809.49 4560.62 17.75 
2018-19 4376.70 591.30 4968.00 11.90 
2019-20 2238.14 798.37 3036.51 26.29 
Total 17059.77 3381.33 20441.10 16.54 (17) 
Source: Information made available by DLB 
It can be seen from the table above that during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20, 
ULBs could generate only 16.54 (17) per cent revenue of its own and remained 
significantly dependent on the grants for delivery of services. As such, for 
effective discharge of the devolved functions, augmentation of revenue through 
own sources is a first and foremost requirement. All the State/Central Finance 
Commissions also emphasized on ULBs generating own resources. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the ULBs are continuously 
making efforts in raising their own income. Several concessions were also 
extended for lump sum deposit of taxes by the people. In Jaipur MCorp, the 
recovery of tax is also outsourced. The database was also being digitized and 
action for increase in own revenue is also being taken. 
Chapter V 
Financial Resources of 
Urban Local Bodies 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
34 
The reply is not convincing as the share of own revenue in total revenue is still 
very low and huge amount of UD tax is in arrears. Further, there were instances 
wherein taxes/charges were collected by parastatals and not transmitted to the 
ULBs resulting in lower quantum of revenue of ULBs. 
5.2  Grants 
The major share of financial resources of ULBs comprised of grants 
recommended by SFCs/CFCs. Timely constitution of SFC and acceptance of its 
recommendations have a bearing on the assured transfer of funds to ULBs. 
There were delays in constitution of SFCs and acceptance of recommendations 
by the State Government as discussed in paragraphs 4.2.9 and 5.2.2. 
5.2.1     Short release of Grant under SFC Recommendations  
As per recommendations number 3(iii) of the Fourth SFC, the State Government 
was to levy 2 per cent excise cess on country made liquor and the amount 
realised from cess was to be distributed between the ULBs and PRIs in the ratio 
of 24.9 per cent and 75.1 per cent respectively. The State Government did not 
accept the recommendation which deprived the ULBs of a considerable grant. 
The details of loss of grants due to non-accepting the recommendation are as 
under: 
Table 5.2: Non-receipt of grants due to non-acceptance of recommendations of SFC 
(₹ in crore)   
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Net receipt from country made 
liquor 
1627.00 1926.40 2110.23 2388.97 2511.09 
2 per cent cess to be levied by 
the State Government as per 
recommendations of the SFC 
32.54 38.53 42.20 47.78 50.22 
Loss of grants (24.9 per cent 
of cess) 
8.10 9.59 10.50 11.89 12.50 
Source: Information compiled from SFC Reports and Finance Accounts 
Thus, due to non-acceptance of SFC’s recommendation, the ULBs were 
deprived of ₹ 52.58 crore, which could help the ULBs to serve the community 
in a better way. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that grants were made available 
considering the financial position and availability of resources.  
5.2.2  Short release of Grant under CFC Recommendations 
The 13th and 14th Finance Commission recommended basic grants and 
performance grants to ULBs as a percentage of divisible pool account. The 
position of recommendations and release there against are detailed in Table 5.3. 
 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
35 
Table 5.3: Non-receipt of Performance Grant from CFC 
(₹ in crore) 
Year CFC (Basic) CFC (Performance) 
Allocation  Release  Short 
Release 
Allocation Release Short 
Release 
2015-16 433.12 433.12 - - - - 
2016-17 599.73 599.73 - 177.00 177.00 - 
2017-18 692.93 692.93 - 200.30 200.30  
2018-19 801.60 801.60 - 227.47 - 227.47 
2019-20 1083.13 1083.13 - 297.85 - 297.85 
Total 3610.51 3610.51  902.62 377.30 525.32 
Source: Information provided by DLB 
It is evident from the above table that a sum of ₹ 525.32 crore in respect of 
performance grant was short released under 14th Finance Commission during 
2018-19 and 2019-20. CFC recommended a total allotment of ₹ 3,610.51 crore 
under basic grants and ₹ 902.62 crore under performance grant for the period  
2015-20. The State Government received the complete allotment under basic 
grant but under performance grant, a sum of ₹ 525.32 crore for the period  
2018-19 to 2019-20 was not released. The matter was taken up by the Director 
Local Bodies with Government of India and it was stated by the Government of 
India that the amount could not be released due to financial constraints.  
The State Government accepted (July 2021) that the amount was not received 
by the GoR as the GoI did not release the amount to any State.  
5.3  Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 
 
AAAs per Section 101 to 105 of RMA, internal revenue of a municipality shall 
consist of its receipts from the following sources: - 
i. Taxes; 
ii. User charges for civic services; 
iii. Fees and fines for performance of regulatory and other statutory 
functions; 
iv. Tax on professions, trades, and employments 
v. Tax on advertisement on public places, etc. 
Position in respect of own revenue of ULBs is discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs:  
5.3.1  Property Tax (Urban Development Tax) 
Government of Rajasthan issued Notification (August 2007 and August 2016) 
under section 104 of the RMA, vide which all the local bodies were to impose 
an urban development tax on land (except agriculture land) under their 
jurisdiction. The tax was to be recovered as per classification of the property 
such as commercial, residential and industrial.  

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
36 
The owner of the land has to self-assess the tax and deposit the same along with 
relevant documents in the local body. The local body concerned would make 
survey for those assessees who did not submit self-assessed return. The officer 
concerned of the local body would also scrutinize at least 5 per cent cases of 
self-assessment and if the tax is assessed more than the self-assessed amount, 
the difference including penalties under section 115 of the Act would be 
recoverable. 
During the scrutiny of records of test checked ULBs it was revealed that:  
a. None of the test checked ULBs had a reliable data base of tax demanded, 
collected and outstanding at the end of financial year; 
b. In MCorp, Ajmer, an amount of ₹ 85.89 lakh was shown as outstanding 
against ten assessees. Scrutiny of record in audit revealed that verification 
in respect of two properties could not be made, one property was residential 
but classified as commercial and in one case the account was closed but 
shown as outstanding.  
c. The State Government issued notification (March 2017) for revising the rate 
of UD tax for starred hotels vide which commercial District Level 
Committee (DLC) rate was to be applied on the following categories of 
hotels: 
(i) which are registered as 4/5 starred as per website of the Tourism 
Department, Government of India; 
(ii) which are not included in (i) above but having more than 50 rooms 
and area of 1,500 square meters; 
(iii) hotels/resorts which are not included in (i) and (ii) above but 
charging room rent of ₹ 5000/- or more per day. 
d. During the test check of records of 14 hotels (MCorp, Jaipur), it was noticed 
that in case of hotels which are falling under above categories, M Corp, 
Jaipur continued to recover the UD Tax at industrial DLC Rate instead of 
Commercial DLC rate which resulted in under recovery of a sum of ₹ 1.59 
crore from six hotels. 
e. Further, as per notification issued (2007) by the State Government, UD tax 
from marriage garden was to be recovered on the entire area of the marriage 
garden. During the test check of 179 cases it was noticed that the MCorp, 
Jaipur under recovered UD tax of ₹ 3.47 crore from 10 marriage places by 
taking less area than notified while applying for registration of marriage 
place. 
f. It was also observed that the MCorp Jaipur under recovered ₹ 1.79 crore 
from nine commercial complex by taking less area of these complexes 
which resulted in loss of revenue to that extent. 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
37 
Thus, the MCorp, Jaipur under recovered a sum of ₹ 6.85 crore.  It was also 
observed that MCorp, Jaipur raised lesser demand of ₹ 85.70 lakh for the year 
2019-20 from four assesses.  After being pointed out by audit, MCorp, Jaipur 
admitted the error and revised the ledger of these assesses upto the year  
2020-21 and raised the demand of ₹ 1.19 crore which includes ₹ 85.70 lakh for 
the year 2019-20 [Appendix-II (A to D)]. This is indicative of a weak internal 
control. 
LSGD, Government of Rajasthan vide circular dated 21 December 2015 
directed all the Commissioner/Chief/ Executive Officer to examine and 
personally monitor 50 cases in which the highest amount of tax was due and 
directed that survey should be completed by February 2016. Despite these 
instructions, none of the 14 test checked ULBs conducted/updated the survey, 
in absence of which huge amount of the UD Tax was in arrears. Two test 
checked M Corp, Jaipur and Ajmer had online data base and it showed that an 
amount of ₹ 791.48 crore was outstanding as of 31 March 2020 (Table 5.4). 
Percentage of recovery of outstanding amount ranged between 8.88 per cent to 
9.88 per cent only. This is indicative of system inefficiencies in the recovery of 
Tax.      
Table 5.4: Details showing outstanding demand of UD Tax 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of ULB Opening 
Balance 
Demand Total 
Demand 
Recovery Outstanding 
Amount 
Municipal 
Corporation Jaipur 
687.31 123.51 810.82 72.04 738.78 
Municipal 
Corporation Ajmer 
50.06 8.42 58.48 5.78 52.70 
Total 791.48 
Source: Information provided by MCorps Jaipur & Ajmer 
The State Government intimated (July 2021) that the various services of ULBs 
have been digitized and some are under process, which had made these services 
more transparent and provision for deposit of fees have also now been made 
online.  
The reply is not acceptable as the test check of ledgers of UD Tax of MCorp, 
Jaipur reflected ineffective monitoring of calculation of tax at proper rates, 
specification of Tax Notifications etc. which resulted in less recovery of tax 
revenue. 
5.3.2    Advertisement Tax 
Sections 102 and 105 of RMA empowered the ULBs to levy tax on 
advertisement. ULBs could also levy tax on land or building used for erecting 
hoardings or any other structures for advertisement and issue licenses for 
advertisement sites. 
Scrutiny of records of test checked ULBs revealed that no survey was conducted 
by revenue branch of ULBs to enlist sites of advertisement attracting tax, which 
deprived ULBs of this potential revenue source. Further, M Corp Jaipur notified 
Advertisement Bye Laws on 4th June 2008, according to which no commercial 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
38 
establishment can display advertisement without obtaining permission from  
MCorp Jaipur. However, several commercial institutions installed 
advertisement boards without obtaining licenses. MCorp Jaipur issued notices 
to 36 commercial concerns for depositing ₹ 68.75 lakh, but could not recover 
the same which resulted in loss of revenue. The matter was brought to notice 
(May 2020) of the Commissioner, MCorp Jaipur by Audit, but no reply was 
furnished (September 2021). The State Government also did not assign specific 
reasons for non-recovery. 
Further, MCouncil Kishangarh had 65 sites and anticipated (July 2017) a 
revenue of ₹ 26.28 lakh at minimum reserve price. However, it could not 
auction these sites since 2013-14 although it invited bids from time to time1 but 
with long intervals and did not adopt any strategy for early handing over of these 
sites. This led to potential loss of revenue.  
5.3.3   Water Charges 
As mentioned in para 4.1, the Government of Rajasthan devolved the function 
of water supply to eight ULBs2 during 2013-14. Out of eight ULBs, M Council, 
Ganganagar was self-reliant and operated the function from its own revenue 
resources while the remaining seven ULBs were getting grants from GoR under 
Plan and Non-Plan head for discharging this function for only five years ending 
with 2017-18. Grants for the years 2018-20 were released late on 31.3.2021. 
This put further stress on the resources of ULBs. 
The analysis of water charges demanded and collected by the remaining seven 
ULBs is given in Table 5.5, which shows that the total collection of water 
charges ranged only between 8 to 36 per cent of the O&M cost and at the end 
of 2019-20, total water charges amounting of ₹ 21.61 crore was outstanding. 
Table 5.5: Details showing outstanding revenue and receipt of grants 
                                                                             (₹ in crore) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Opening Balance of 
outstanding revenue  
1.68 3.05 6.50 9.87 13.58 
Demand raised during 
the year  
6.29 11.64 12.51 11.87 17.12 
Total Demand 7.97 14.69 19.01 21.74 30.70 
Total Collection during 
the year  
4.92 8.19 9.14 8.16 9.09 
Closing Balance at the 
end of the year  
3.05 6.50 9.87 13.58 21.61 
Grant received under 
Plan and Non-Plan head 
from the State 
Government 
26.06 26.33 26.13 21.03 22.15 
O&M expenditure 60.28 32.55 33.78 22.28 25.32 
Collection Against 
O&M Cost Percentage 
8 25 27 37 36 
Source: Information provided by DLB 
 
1         November 2016, July 2017, February 2019, March 2020 and September 2020. 
2 Bundi, Chomu, Ganganagar, Jaisalmer, Karauli, Nagaur, Nathdwara and Nokha. 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
39 
As per Notification issued (November 2015) by the GoR, the water tariff and 
all other charges on all categories of consumers were to be revised every year 
with reference to tariff of preceding year. It was, however, observed that the 
Government had revised tariff during 2018-19 but soon after issuance of 
notification, the implementation of the said notification was stayed by GoR and 
as such even these eight ULBs could not revise/increase water charges in 
accordance with the operational costs.  
Further, the State Government also withheld the grant from 2018-19 and  
2019-20 till March 2021 which caused further stress on the resources of the 
ULBs. Reasons for withholding of grants was sought (April 2021) in audit, but 
the same has not been furnished (September 2021). 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) the facts. 
5.3.4        Non-receipt of Sewerage Tax Recovered by PHED 
As per Notification issued (March 2017) by the Government of Rajasthan, 
PHED should recover sewerage charges (20 per cent of water charges) and 
sewerage treatment plant charges (13 per cent of water charges) and amount 
recovered should be transferred to the ULBs concerned so that better sewerage 
facilities can be provided to the habitants. 
Test check of records of two Municipal Corporations, i.e. Jaipur and Ajmer 
revealed that PHED Jaipur recovered sewerage charges but did not transfer full 
amount to M Corp Jaipur while PHED Ajmer did not remit any amount to  
MCorp Ajmer during the period 2015-16 to 2019-2020 as detailed in Table 5.6. 
 
Table 5.6: Details of outstanding amount of sewerage tax from PHED 
(₹ in crore)  
Name of ULB Amount recovered 
by the PHED 
Amount 
transferred  
Amount still to be 
transferred  
M Corp Jaipur  31.19 1.12 30.07 
M Corp Ajmer 2.42 - 2.42 
Total   32.49 
Source: Information provided by MCorp, Jaipur & Ajmer 
Thus, PHED did not transfer ₹ 32.49 crore recovered from the users despite the 
fact that these ULBs are incurring huge expenditure on sewerage system of 
these cities. This resulted in further stress on the inadequate resources of ULBs. 
Allowing another State Department to collect the tax due to ULBs, thus, 
hindered their financial empowerment as envisaged in 74th CAA. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that efforts for recovery of outstanding 
amount from PHED were being made at the appropriate level. 
5.3.5   Solid Waste Management Cess 
Government of Rajasthan, DLB, issued (March 2015) gazette notification for 
levy and collection of user charges for door-to-door garbage collection. Scrutiny 
of records in 14 test checked ULBs revealed that in 13 ULBs though the ULBs 
started door to door collection of garbage, they did not collect the user charges. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
40 
On being pointed out by audit it was intimated by MCorp, Ajmer, M Council 
Kishangarh, M Board Bagaru that these charges could not be recovered due to 
protest by the elected representatives of the people. MCouncil Sikar and  
M Board Chomu did not specify the reason for non-collection of user charges. 
In MCouncil, Kishangarh the Board also passed resolutions against the gazette 
notification. The issue was not taken up with State Government. MBoard, Lalsot 
replied (April 2021) that only an amount of ₹ 0.20 crore was recovered and 
complete recovery could not be made due to shortage of staff and resources and 
now the committee has been constituted and amount would be recovered. The 
reply is not convincing as the amount recovered relates to carrying charges and 
not the user charges which were to be collected from households.  
Since the delivery of municipal services involve cost, it was necessary to 
estimate the cost of each municipal service and effect recovery in appropriate 
manner. It is also pertinent to mention here that these 13 test checked ULBs 
incurred a sum of ₹ 429.54 crore on solid waste management.  However, they 
did not recover an estimated amount of ₹ 329.82 crore (Appendix-III) against 
the user charges under the Government Notification.  
The State Government intimated (July 2021) that the bye laws were notified in 
2019 for recovery of user charges. ULBs were in the process of passing the 
resolution. However, the same could not be imposed on citizens due to 
pandemic. The reply is not tenable as the Notification of levying user charges 
was issued in 2015 and despite elapse of long time, ULBs were not recovering 
the charges which resulted in extra burden on the ULBs in delivery of the 
service. 
5.3.6   Rent from Shops 
The ULBs were empowered to collect rent from the buildings let out to private 
agencies and the rent was to be revised periodically. Scrutiny of records of two 
test checked ULBs (Ajmer and Kishangarh) showed that rent from shops 
amounting to ₹ 0.24 crore was in arrears as at the end of March 2020. In other 
test checked ULBs, no records regarding demand, collection and balance 
registers were made available, in absence of which audit could not ascertain the 
amount demanded, collected and outstanding. 
It was also observed that Government of Rajasthan, DLB issued (October 2018) 
orders for letting out all the shops on 99 years lease basis. The amount of lease 
was based on the tenancy period i.e. shops let out prior to 1950; between 
26.01.1950 to 10.08.1983, 11.08.1983 to 17.06.1999 for which lease amount 
was to be recovered at the rate of 25 per cent; 50 per cent and 75 per cent of 
reserve price of the area. The MCorp Ajmer and MCouncil Kishangarh did not 
take any action for recovery of rent/regularization of shops. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that development of software in this 
regard is in process.  
 
 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
41 
5.3.7   Trade License  
As per provisions of Trade License Bye Laws (2008), no person can commence 
business activity without obtaining a trade license from the ULBs. The State 
Government also issued (January 2017) orders for fixing of license fees for 
hotels and other commercial concerns. As per condition numbers 5 and 6, 
Health Officer or Dy. Commissioner have to issue/renew the license. On  
non-compliance with these bye laws or not depositing the prescribed license fee, 
the Health Officer would take action for closure of commercial activities.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that ULBs did not have demand, collection and 
balance register of licensees nor produced any report of survey conducted by 
these ULBs to audit, in absence of which audit could not verify the actual 
demand, collection and balance amount to be recovered from these licensees. 
However, it was observed that MCorp Jaipur had online process of 
applying/issuing licenses to commercial establishments and issued/renewed 
1,025 licenses to those concerns which applied online. Audit is of the view that 
this figure is quite low, considering the increasing trend of business activity in 
the city.   
The State Government stated (July 2021) that various services of ULBs have 
been digitized or under process of digitization which would make these services 
more transparent. The reply is not convincing as ULBs did not survey the 
properties falling under license regime and without survey, the digitization 
would not serve any purpose. 
5.3.8   Fire Services 
The ULBs have been entrusted the fire service function with main objective to 
prevent fire, extinguish fire and protect life and properties on occurrence of fire 
incidents across all the area including that beyond the municipal area. Further, 
ULBs had also been conferred powers under RMA and its bye-laws to levy fire 
tax in form of fire cess and No Objection Certificate (NOC) charges. 
Maintenance and Operation of Fire service require huge capital expenditure in 
form of fire vehicles, fuel, manpower, etc. and during the years 2015-20, the 
test checked ULBs incurred ₹ 45.82 crore on Fire Services. For rejuvenation of 
fire services, Government of Rajasthan levied fire cess for high rise buildings 
vide order dated 4 October 2013. It was observed in audit that parastatals are 
issuing building construction permission and the Urban Development and 
Housing Department issued orders for obtaining fire NOC from the concerned 
ULB but the fire cess was being recovered by the permission granting 
parastatals agencies i.e. UDAs/UITs/RIICO/RHB, etc. Thus, the fire cess 
recovered by these parastatal agencies were not being passed on to the 
concerned ULBs, though they provide fire services.  
It was further observed that after fixing rate of fire cess in 2013 at ₹ 100 per 
square meter, the Government reduced the rate to ₹ 50 per square meter through 
Unified Building Bye Laws, 2017 despite the fact that the cost to deliver the fire 
services depicted an increasing trend, which also hampered the revenue of these 
ULBs. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
42 
During the test check of records of MCorp, Jaipur it was noticed that the Board 
in its meeting dated 27 December 2017 increased the rate of fire NOC charges 
from ₹ 2/- sq feet to ₹ 50/- sq meter, but the Fire Branch of the MCorp, Jaipur 
did not recover the fire NOC charges at enhanced rate and defied the resolution 
of the Board, which deprived the MCorp, Jaipur of revenue amounting to ₹ 2.55 
crore in 79 test checked cases (Appendix IV). It was worthwhile to mention here 
that the Commissioner, MCorp, Jaipur circulated the above decision of the 
Board after eight months.  
Further, DLB recruited (December 2016) 610 firemen and posted them in 
various ULBs but the DLB issued orders for deployment of these firemen, who 
are technical staff, for other administrative works and hired firemen on contract 
basis. MBoard, Chomu, Chaksu and MCouncil, Kishangarh deputed four 
firemen in DLB and Regional Offices for clerical works and hired firemen 
through private agencies. Thus, on the one hand these ULBs are facing acute 
shortage of manpower while on the other, firemen were being deputed for 
routine official work. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that the fire cess amount is being 
recovered by various agencies and are deposited in Escrow account opened at 
DLB office under which all departments would deposit the fire cess collected, 
which is being used for strengthening of firefighting system. The reply is not 
acceptable as no details of utilisation of fire cess amount (deposited in escrow 
account) was provided. Further, the reply is silent on the issue of fire NOC 
charges not being recovered at prescribed rates.  
Recommendations 8: ULBs should have more autonomy in raising revenues 
and for augmentation of its own resources. Efforts should be made for 
enhancing tax collection capacity of ULBs through provision and training of 
staff, provision of electronic tax payment and improved assessment processes. 
PHED and other parastatals should pass on all the revenue collected on 
behalf of ULBs for strengthening their financial position. 
5.4  Tapping of various sources of revenue by ULBs 
The 4th and 5th SFCs had identified three sources of tax revenue and 14 sources 
of non-tax revenue such as building plan/license approval fees, trade license fee 
etc., that could be levied by ULBs to augment their own resources. Audit 
observed that out of 17 identified sources of tax, the ULBs were tapping only 
eleven sources and for these too the recovery was partial or in some cases was 
very negligible. The details of remaining six sources that were not tapped are 
indicated in Table 5.7. 
Table 5.7: Details of sources of taxes not tapped by ULBs 
Sr. 
No. 
Source Statutory 
Provision  
Levied  
1 Tax on profession, trade, callings and employment Yes No 
2 Toll on roads and bridges Yes No 
3 Tax for pollution control Yes No 
4 Lighting tax Yes No 
5 Tax on congregation Yes No 
6 Surcharge on Stamp duty   Yes No 
Source: Information compiled from RMA and database of ULBs 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
43 
It can be seen from the table above that tax on aforesaid activities could be a 
good source of revenue which the ULBs failed to materialize. The details of 
revenue sources, status of levy and statutory provisions are indicated in 
Appendix-V. 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) that ULBs are levying taxes only 
on eleven sources and bye laws were being prepared for getting other services 
under tax regime.  
5.5      Budget Planning and Expenditure 
As per Section 87 of RMA, Chief Municipal Officer shall prepare the budget 
estimates before 15th of January of each year. The Chairperson shall present 
the budget estimates to Municipality not later than 31st January of each year 
and it shall be passed by the Municipality prior to 15th February of each year. 
Budget proposals duly approved by the Municipality, sent to Government. 
Findings on the budget estimates are as follows: 
5.5.1  Unrealistic Preparation of Budget Estimates  
Budget estimates play vital role in the process of Budgetary Control. Scrutiny 
of records of test checked ULBs revealed that the budget estimates were 
prepared by the ULBs without considering the actual income and expenditure 
in the preceding year and the expected trend. The State Government also failed 
to review these budget proposals after submission in a proper way. The major 
deficiencies noticed are detailed below: 
(i) Budged estimates of receipts and expenditure were not based on the 
actual receipts/expenditure in the previous years but prepared by increasing a 
certain percentage in the estimates of previous year irrespective of the actual 
figures.  
(ii) The budget estimates were forwarded to the State Government and the 
GoR approved these budget estimates without ascertaining actual receipt and 
expenditure of previous year.  Further, prior to December 2010, budget 
estimates were to be submitted to Finance Committee of the Municipality 
concerned before approval of Municipal Board. The State Government 
amended (December 2010) Section 87(1) of RMA according to which the above 
provision was deleted. As a result, the budget proposals were not being checked 
by the Finance Committee. Thus, due to removal of provision 87(1) and non-
checking at DLB level, the budget estimates were not realistic. 
Due to non-preparation of budget estimates on sound footings, the actual receipt 
varied from 13.30 per cent to 155 per cent3, whereas the actual expenditure 
varied from 9 per cent to 137 per cent4 of the budget estimates as per details 
given in Appendix-VI.  
 
3 M Council Sikar, MBoard Nawalgarh, Bagru, Jobner, Lalsot recorded variation exceeding 
100 per cent. 
4 M Board Bagru, Jobner, Shahpura, and Lalsot recorded variation exceeding 100 per cent. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
44 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that ULBs were being directed to 
prepare budget estimates on actual receipt basis. 
5.5.2   Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 
The main categories of expenditure of ULBs can broadly be classified under 
five major categories i.e. General Expenditure, Public health and sanitation, 
Maintenance of civic amenities, Expenditure on development works, and 
Miscellaneous non-recurring expenditure. The details of expenditure incurred 
by ULBs in the State during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are given in  
Table 5.8. 
Table 5.8: Details of Expenditure incurred by ULBs under various heads 
(₹ in crore) 
Year General 
Expenditure 
Public 
health 
and 
sanitation 
Maintenance 
of civic 
amenities 
Expenditure 
on 
development 
works 
Miscellaneous 
non-
recurring 
expenditure 
Total 
expenditure 
2015-16 1020.77 103.79 485.27 1280.47 183.29 3073.59 
2016-17 1496.88 255.15 419.09 1521.30 383.96 4076.38 
2017-18 1588.41 355.23 424.66 2193.18 330.32 4891.80 
2018-19 2052.40 456.74 497.91 3217.04 363.39 6587.48 
2019-20 1112.76 197.88 179.87 1733.04 225.68 3449.23 
 7271.22 
(32.93) 
1368.79 
(6.2) 
2006.80 
(9.08) 
9945.03 
(45.04) 
1486.64 
(6.73) 
22078.48 
Source: Information provided by DLB 
It was observed that general expenditure and miscellaneous non-recurring 
expenditure constitute 39.66 (32.93 plus 6.73) per cent of the total expenditure 
while only 45.04 per cent of the expenditure was incurred on various 
development works including those under various grants received from 
government. This indicates that the basic work of development was not being 
given due importance. 
The State Government accepted (July 2021) the fact that the expenditure was 
mainly incurred on essential services and after spending funds on essential 
services, salaries and contractual obligations, remaining funds were used for 
developmental work. The fact remains that development works were not given 
due importance by ULBs due to higher administrative expenditures.   
5.5.3 Resource-Expenditure Gap 
The ULBs were able to generate own resources only to the extent of 32.07  
per cent of the revenue expenditure during the period 2016-17 to 2019-20. A 
comparison of the own revenue to revenue expenditure showed large gaps as 
depicted in Chart 2, which needs to be addressed by ULBs. 
 

Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
45 
Chart 2: Resource-expenditure gap in ULBs (₹in crore) 
 
The above chart indicates that ULBs were still largely dependent on Central/ 
State grants and were unable to generate their own revenue to be financially 
independent.   
5.5.4     Analysis of  Resources-Expenditure Gap 
CFC and SFC continuously emphasized on increasing own resources of ULBs. 
In the recommendation number 2.9 of fifth SFC, it was emphasized that ULBs 
should endeavor to become self-reliant, increase own revenue and recover the 
operation and maintenance cost of basic services in their respective jurisdiction.  
ULBs should also engineer an efficient system of financial management to 
transform them into self-reliant and accountable governance center. 
In respect of finances of ULBs, DLB provided the database to audit for the 
period 2018-19 in respect of 167 ULBs, which was analyzed for study of fiscal 
autonomy and quality of expenditure in the ULBs. The three ratios, as detailed 
below, were considered in the analysis. 
(i) Local fiscal autonomy: This is the share of own revenue to the total 
revenue of the ULB. 
(ii) Quality of expenditure: This is the share of O&M expenditure in total 
revenue expenditure. If this ratio is high, the quality of expenditure is 
considered better. 
(iii) Coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue sources (self-
reliance): This is the proportion of revenue expenditures that are 
covered through the own revenue sources.  
 


Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
46 
Chart 3: Ratio wise performance of ULBs 
 Source: Data provided by the DLB 
It can be seen from the above chart that: 
 None of the ULBs had share of own revenue in the total revenue exceeding 
75 per cent while 83 ULBs were having this share below 25 per cent. Thus, 
most of the ULBs are too far from becoming self-reliant. 
 None of the ULBs had share of O&M expenditure in the total revenue 
expenditure exceeding 75 per cent while 136 ULBs were having this share 
below 25 per cent. Thus, the quality of expenditure was not satisfactory. 
 In only 24 ULBs, the coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue 
sources was in excess of 75 per cent. In 86 ULBs, this was between 50 to 
75 per cent and in 51 ULBs, the coverage was between 25 to 50 per cent 
and in 06 ULBs, the coverage was below 25 per cent.  
The State Government intimated (July 2021) that efforts are being made to 
enhance own resources of revenue for ULBs.  
5.6 Under Utilisation of Grants  
Government of India and Government of Rajasthan allocated funds under 
various schemes for betterment and upliftment of the common people. The State 
Finance Commission in its recommendations also emphasized on timely 
utilization of these funds. During the scrutiny of records relating to utilization 
of various grants received by the test checked ULBs, it was observed that huge 
amount of grants received during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 remained 
unutilized as per details given in Table 5.9. 


Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
47 
Table 5.9: Detail of utilization of grants 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of local 
bodies  
Name of 
scheme  
Allotment Expenditure Unspent 
balance 
M Board Bagru 5th SFC 13.56 7.58 5.98 
M Board Chomu 5th SFC 25.77 7.65 18.12 
M Corp Ajmer SBM  21.76 14.07 7.69 
M Council Sikar  5th SFC 36.13 24.06 12.07 
14 CFC 34.65 28.83 5.82 
M Corp Jaipur SBM 105.63 104.14 1.49 
M Board Chaksu NULM 0.80 0.03 0.77 
M Board Shahpura Vth SFC 12.87 8.56 4.31 
14th CFC 11.68 7.52 4.16 
M Board Lalsot SFC 12.95 12.37 0.58 
SBM 3.03 2.37 0.66 
M Board Thanagaji CFC 1.87 0.26 1.61 
SFC 1.37 0.36 1.01 
SBM 0.20 0.08 0.12 
Total 64.39 
Source: Information provided by the concerned ULBs 
It is evident from the above table that despite repeated concerns expressed by 
the SFCs, the test checked ULBs could not utilise the allotted grants of ₹ 64.39 
crore which remained unspent at the end of 2019-20. It also shows the lack of 
monitoring at the level of State Government.  
The State Government stated (July 2021) that instructions were issued for 
expenditure and utilisation certificates. The unspent balance represents 
liabilities to be discharged against various works. The reply is not acceptable as 
the amounts were lying unspent for a long time and delayed the desired benefits. 
5.7 Financial Powers of Urban Local Bodies 
Fiscal autonomy can be complete only when supported by decentralization of 
financial and administrative powers. For efficient discharge of devolved 
functions, following was also necessary: 
 an efficient and reliable administration; 
 improved local governance with delegation of sufficient powers;  
 enhanced accountability and responsiveness; 
 improved capacity of the local people to participate in the decision-making 
process, especially with regard to service delivery; and  
 increased motivation etc. 
 
 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
48 
5.7.1   Powers Relating to Works 
The State Government revised (February 2015) the administrative, technical 
and tender approval powers relating to ULBs for undertaking basic 
infrastructure works. The administrative approval powers as per the above 
orders is given in Table 5.10. 
Table 5.10: Details of delegation of powers to ULBs. 
(₹ in crore) 
Category 
of ULB 
Board Finance 
Commi-
ttee 
Commissioner/ 
Chief Officer 
Zone 
Commissioner  
Mayor/ 
chairman 
Government 
M Corp Up to budget 
provision  
5.00 1.00 0.10 2.00 Full power 
M Council -do-  1.00 0.02 - 0.50 - 
M Board -do- 0.50 0.01 - 0.25 - 
Source: Government of Rajasthan order 
Thus, the State Government had conferred only limited financial powers to the 
local governance and full power vested with Government itself. Further, most 
of ULBs did not form the Finance Committee and resultantly it deprived the 
elected representatives of the local population from participating in decision 
making process. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that financial powers have been 
delegated to ULBs under RMA but due to lack of expertise and financial 
resources, the State Government issued sanctions and there was no delay in 
granting sanctions. The fact remains that ULBs could not be made financially 
empowered. 
Recommendations 9: The State Government should work on enhancing the 
capacity of ULBs by direct devolution even through separate budgeting for 
ULBs. Efforts should also be made to form finance committees in ULBs and 
to revise the delegation of powers for greater autonomy.  
 

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adequate and skilled manpower is a pre-requisite for efficient and effective 
discharge of various functions by the ULBs. This is also necessary for 
empowerment of ULBs. GoR promulgated (November 2011) Rajasthan 
Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services Act, 2011 (RGDPS Act) with the 
objectives of providing responsible, accountable, transparent and corruption 
free services to the people. GoR framed RGDPS Rules, 2011 under the Act and 
11 services1 were required to be provided by ULBs but in absence of adequate 
and well-trained staff, it is very difficult to provide these 11 services in 
stipulated time to the common people. The position of manpower, recruitment 
and training programmes imparted by the DLB are detailed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
6.1  Limited Powers Over Manpower 
The broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs depending upon the 
availability of manpower, number of schemes being implemented and category 
of the ULBs, are depicted in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Broad framework of functions 
S. 
No. 
Wing/sections Functions 
1. Administration General administration, including meetings of council and 
committees 
2. Revenue  Assessment and collection of various taxes, rent, advertisements 
and other property related activities 
3. Accounts Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparation of budget 
etc. 
4. Public health Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management and other 
public health related activities 
5. Engineering  Construction /O&M of roads, drains, buildings, parks, play 
grounds, water supply and street lighting etc.  
6. Building  Issuance of building construction permission, land use change, 
conversion of agriculture land, sale of strip of land, etc. 
7. Development   Implementation of Centrally/State sponsored schemes  
8.  Birth and 
Death 
Certificate 
Compilation of data of birth and death and issue of certificates 
Source: Administrative Report of DLB and website of ULBs 
 
 
1    (i) Approval of layout plan of building, (ii)Issue of marriage certificate, (iii) Issue of name 
transfer certificate, (iv) Works related to public health, (v) Booking of community centre, 
(vi) Refund of security deposit money (vii) NOC for firefighting, (viii) Birth/Death 
certificate, (ix) Issue of license other than food license, (x) To receive copy of 
documents/building maps, and (xi) Issue of lease exemption certificate. 
Chapter VI 
Human Resources of 
Urban Local Bodies 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
50 
The assessment of manpower should be based on the functions undertaken by 
ULBs with a view that majority of the functions which are service oriented have 
to be discharged within a reasonable time period. This assessment could be done 
best by ULBs themselves considering various criteria such as the extent of 
geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, the number 
of properties existing etc. Audit observed that ULBs neither had the powers to 
assess the staff requirement nor to recruit the required staff. These powers are 
vested with the State Government. The State Government assessed the 
requirement of staff based on population alone, as discussed in paragraph 6.1.1, 
and without seeking the actual requirement from ULBs. 
As per Section 336 of RMA, any officer or servant of a corporation/municipal 
council who is a member of subordinate services, ministerial service or  
Class IV service may be transferred from the service of one municipality to 
another municipality or any other parastatals agencies such as Jaipur 
Development Authority, UIT, Housing Board, etc. Further, as per Section 
330(4), it shall be not lawful for the municipality to take any officer or employee 
on deputation from any department of the State Government without obtaining 
prior approval of the State Government. DLB stated (January 2021) that there 
is no employee on deputation while during the test check of records of MCorp, 
Jaipur it was observed that 97 officers/officials from different department of 
State Government were posted on deputation basis which indicated that no prior 
monitoring was done.   
6.1.1   Insufficient Staff in Urban Local Bodies 
As per rule 6(ka) of Rajasthan Municipality Service (Administrative and 
Technical) Rules, the State Government would fill up the posts through direct 
recruitment for which a state level commission was to be constituted. Similarly, 
as per Rule 8(ka) of Rajasthan Municipality (Subordinate and Clerical services) 
Rules 1963, a commission would also be set up for filling up of vacancies. 
During the period from 4/2015 to 3/2020, the Commission recruited 1747 
officers/ officials despite which a number of posts were lying vacant. 
For effective discharge of devolved functions, sufficient and well-equipped staff 
is a primary condition. At State level, at the end of March 2020, position of 
posts of officers sanctioned and working is given in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Details showing position of vacant post 
Post Sanctioned strength Working strength Vacant (percentage) 
Officers2 596 233 363 (60.91) 
Technical officer 1112 743 369 (33.18) 
Source: Administrative report of DLB for 2019-20 
 
 
2 Officers include posts of Executive Officers, Revenue Officers, Sanitary/Revenue 
Inspectors, etc. 

Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
51 
It is evident from the above table that almost 61 per cent post of Executive 
Officers, Revenue Officers, Revenue/Sanitary Inspectors were lying vacant 
which was affecting important functions such as revenue/tax collection and 
sanitation etc. drastically. Posts of Technical officers, such as Executive 
Engineer/Asstt. Engineers etc. were also lying vacant which hampered the 
desired progress of various Centrally/State Sponsored Schemes. In respect of 
ministerial staff as against total sanction strength of 45,831, 14,276 posts were 
lying vacant which implies that 31 per cent posts were lying vacant which 
affected the efficient functioning of the ULBs. 
Scrutiny of staff position of test checked ULBs showed that working strength 
was 15.38 per cent to 73.98 per cent against the sanctioned strength. These 
vacancies had affected sanitation, revenue collection and other functions badly 
and services as devolved could not be delivered in an efficient and effective 
manner.  
Further, it was also noticed that there were no uniform criteria for sanctioned 
strength of these test checked ULBs. The staff position in ULBs is given in  
Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Sanctioned and Working Strength in ULBs 
S. 
No. 
Name of the 
unit 
Population 
as per 
2011 
census 
Projected 
population 
for the 
year 2020 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Working 
strength 
(Per cent) 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Per 1000 
population 
(census 
2011) 
Working 
Strength) 
Per 1000 
population 
(census 
2020 
projected) 
1 M Corp Jaipur 34,71,847 39,09,000 9,761 6048 
(62.69) 
2.81 1.55 
2 M Board 
Phulera 
23,284 25,049 87 62 
(71.26) 
3.74 2.48 
3 M Board 
Jobner 
11,354 12,215 129 77 
(59.69) 
11.36 6.30 
4 M Board 
Chaksu 
33,432 35,969 182 104 
(57.14) 
5.44 2.89 
5 M Board Niwai 37,751 40,613 234 155 
(66.23) 
6.20 3.82 
6 M Board 
Shahpura 
33,895 36,465 73 54 
(73.98) 
2.15 1.48 
7 M Board 
Thanagazi 
21,742 23,391 39 06 
(15.38) 
Constituted 
in 2018 
0.26 
8 M Board Lalsot 34,363 36,968 119 83 
(69.74) 
3.46 2.25 
9 M Board 
Nawalgarh 
63,948 72,389 179 108 
(60.33) 
2.80. 1.49 
10 M Council 
Kishangarh 
1,54,886 2,06,401 534 332 
(62.17) 
3.44 1.60 
11 M Board 
Chomu 
64,413 81,817 193 139 
(72.02) 
2.99 1.69 
12 M Council Sikar 2,37,532 3,03,447 739 508 
(68.74) 
3.11 1.67 
13 M Board Bagru 31,229 44,142 77 42 
(54.54) 
2.46 0.95 
14 M Corp Ajmer  5,42,321 5,99,590 2662 1787 
(67.12) 
4.90 2.98 
Source: Information provided by the concerned ULBs 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
52 
The 4th SFC had identified that day to day development works were affected by 
vacancies and recommended filling up all vacant posts. No action was taken to 
fill the vacancies though the status of manpower was furnished to the DLB by 
ULBs at regular intervals.  
Recommendations 10: ULBs should have adequate powers over manpower 
resources regarding assessment, requirement and recruitment of skilled staff 
to effectively discharge devolved functions and efficiently collect revenue. 
Sanctioned strength of manpower in ULBs should be commensurate with the 
functions (Tax collection load/Accounting/regulatory role etc.) in 
consultation with the State Government. Administrative costs should be 
passed on to the ULBs where they are implementing agencies.  
6.1.2  Functioning of the Municipal Commissioner/Chief Officer 
As per Section 49 of RMA, the Commissioner or Chief Municipal Officer was 
responsible for the custody and maintenance of all the records of municipality. 
Further, Section 332 provides that the State Government shall appoint one Chief 
Executive Officer for MCorp, Commissioner for MCorp and MCouncils and 
Executive Officers for MBoards. It was observed that 111 post of Executive 
Officers (Gr II to IV) were lying vacant and personnel of lower levels were 
holding the charge which affected the municipal administration adversely. 
MCorp officers/officials are responsible for execution of development plans in 
ULBs, ensuring preparation of schemes as per master plan/zonal development 
plan, agriculture land conversion, approval of building maps and suitable action 
to enhance/collect the revenue. Hence, absence of competent staff is bound to 
affect their working adversely.     
6.2  Capacity Building 
For strengthening the capacities of the personnel and preparing them with 
advanced skill to perform in a better way, training play an important role. LSGD 
issued office order dated 5.11.2015 for establishment of a training institute 
namely Institute of Urban Development and Governance which is now known 
as Rajasthan Shahri Vikas Kendra (RSVK) in Centre for Management Studies, 
Harish Chand Mathur Public Administration Institute. RUIDP under Rajasthan 
Urban Infrastructure Development Project (IIIrd Phase) allotted a sum of  3.55 
crore to the Centre for Management Studies for undertaking training programme 
for ULBs’ personnel. The annual training calendar is prepared by RSVK and 
approved by the Centre for Management Studies, Harish Chand Mathur Public 
Administration Institute. Nomination of trainees was being done by the DLB. 
During the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 following training programmes 
were conducted: 
 
 

Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
53 
Table 6.4: Details showing position of year wise training programme 
Year  No. of total 
training 
programme 
Nominated 
participants  
Attended 
participants  
Attended  
per cent  
2015-16 NIL NIL NIL NIL 
2016-17 21 1109 831 75 
2017-18 23 3323 3065 92 
2018-19 21 1987 1206 61 
2019-20 20 1499 763 51 
Total 853 7918 5865 74 
Source: Information provided by the DLB 
It was observed that only 74 per cent of the nominated participants attended 
these training programmes, and consequently optimum benefits could not be 
derived. Further, out of total 33,731 employees of ULBs, only 5,865 employees 
(17 per cent) were imparted training despite incurring an expenditure of ₹ 3.55 
crore during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20. This also hindered timely 
delivery of qualitative services to the urban habitants. Further, no performance 
evaluation of these trainees was found made to ascertain as to how these training 
programmes helped the participants in performing their function in a better way. 
Hence, the efforts for capacity building of staff were not up to the requisite 
levels. 
6.3  Performance Management 
Performance management is an essential tool of management and plays an 
important role in developing the competence of employees involved in service 
delivery. It involves classification of duties, defining performance standards, 
deployment of right personnel at right place and the capacity of staff to achieve 
their targets. The DLB intimated that no such departmental/continuous 
professional development examinations are organized. 
The State Government stated (July 2021) that recruitment of various posts was 
under process which would enable the ULBs to work more efficiently. The 
department was also organizing workshops for staff from time to time and 
efforts were being made to enhance trainings. 
Recommendations 11: Officers of Municipal Services should be posted in 
municipality as Executive Officers and capacity building/training needs of 
municipal staff should be ensured by regular training programme/fixed 
training period for enhancing the efficiency.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 Include orientation programme for elected representatives of various ULBs; newly 
recruited AEns; RIs; ARIs, Town Planning Asstt; Jr Accountants, RUIDP projects, etc. 

55 
 
 
 
 
The 74th Amendment introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities) containing 
Articles 243P to 243ZG in the Constitution. This amendment (June 1993) 
authorized State Legislatures to enact laws to bestow ULBs with powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government and to make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities in relation to 18 functions listed out in the 12th Schedule. 
Audit Objective 1 
Whether provisions of 74th CAA have been adequately covered in State 
legislations? 
Each State had to enact a legislation to implement the provisions of the Act. The 
ULBs in the State were governed by the RMA, 2009. The State Government 
carried out necessary amendments to the Act to comply with the provisions of 
74th CAA. These amendments were however not supported by firm action to 
minimize overlapping in respect of many functions, defeating the very purpose 
of the constitutional amendment for devolution of functions and creation of 
appropriate institutional mechanism. 
Audit Objective 2 
Whether ULBs have been empowered by the State Government to 
discharge their functions/responsibilities effectively through creation of 
appropriately designed institutions/institutional mechanism and their 
functions? 
Transfer of functions - The State Government devolved 16 functions out of 18 
functions. Further, out of these 16 devolved functions two functions were 
categorized as other functions instead of core functions. ULBs has full 
jurisdiction in two functions, was merely an implementing agency in four 
functions, had minimal/overlapping role with other agencies in eleven functions 
and one function has still not been devolved. Thus, the actual devolution of 
functions is far less than that envisioned in the 74th CAA. 
Committees - Ward Committees were not constituted in any of the ULBs which 
deprived community participation in local governance. District Planning 
Committees (DPCs) were constituted in all 33 districts, but DPC meetings were 
not found held regularly in test checked seven districts. This resulted in non-
preparation of the consolidated District Development Plan involving matters of 
common interest between the panchayats and the municipalities. Metropolitan 
Planning Committee was also not constituted and as such a comprehensive 
development plan could not be prepared in Metro cities. 
Chapter VII 
Conclusions 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
56 
State Finance Commission - There were delays in constitution of SFCs 
ranging from 472 days to 723 days (3rd to 5th SFC). The 6th SFC was also not 
constituted upto 31 March 2021 although it was due to be constituted by 30 May 
2019. Further, the State Government accepted and implemented partially the 
recommendations of the SFCs with delays ranging between 19 days to 237 days. 
This affected the financial position of the ULBs adversely. 
Status of Elections and Formation of Councils- Elections in six ULBs were 
delayed by eight months to fifty six months.  
Statutory and Ward Committees- Out of 14 test checked ULBs, 11 ULBs did 
not form statutory committees and in remaining three the committees were 
constituted with delay.  
Audit Objective 3 
The functions stated to have been devolved have actually been devolved 
effectively 
Impact of parastatals on ULBs - Eleven functions such as urban/town 
planning, regulation of land use, water supply, urban forestry and slum 
development, etc. were being performed by other parastatals also in the State. 
These parastatals had their own governing bodies which did not include elected 
representative of ULBs. This overlapping arrangement infringed on the ability 
of ULBs to discharge their mandated functions and undermined the objective of 
accountability to the people.  
Audit Objective 4 
The ULBs have been empowered to access adequate resources for 
discharge of functions devolved to them 
The 74th CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the Central and State 
Government besides empowering them to raise their own revenue.  
Various grants/ transfers from Central/State Government constituted about  
83 per cent of the total revenue of ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
ULBs were also deprived of transfer of grant amounting to ₹ 52.58 crore due to 
non-acceptance of recommendations of the SFC. The State Government 
deducted a sum of  ₹ 726.74 crore from the Grants to be released to ULBs and 
transferred it to various parastatals, which affected the financial position of 
ULBs badly.  
ULBs are responsible for collection of various taxes such as UD Tax, 
advertisement tax etc. However, the authority to approve the procedure, 
methods, assessment, exemption and concession vested with the State 
Government thereby constraining the ULBs. Further, the State Government also 
failed to monitor the efficiency in maintaining reliable, updated and complete 
data base of taxable properties and rectify deficiencies in maintenance of 

Conclusions 
 
57 
demand, collection and balance registers. Survey of taxable properties had also 
not been conducted in several ULBs since the imposition of UD Tax. 
Budget estimation process of the ULBs was not based on sound footings 
resulting in huge variations between estimates and actuals. The actual receipts 
varied from 13.30 per cent to 155 per cent while the actual expenditure varied 
from 9 per cent to 137 per cent. 
The ULBs lacked adequate manpower as there were huge vacancies across all 
cadres affecting efficient delivery of services. The State Government had not 
taken action to fill up the vacancies though it was aware of the status of 
manpower. 
In brief, various deficiencies in implementation of 74th CAA and RMA, coupled 
with role of ULBs overlapping with parastatals and State Government 
departments undermined the effective functioning of the ULBs. The ULBs were 
neither financially self-reliant nor had required manpower for delivery of 
efficient services. Thus, the objectives of the 74th CAA as envisaged have not 
been fulfilled even after 30 years of enactment since 1992 in absence of 
adequate devolution of political, financial and other powers to the ULBs. 
 
 
       (ATOORVA SINHA) 
JAIPUR,                                                         Accountant General 
The 7th December 2021                                (Audit-II), Rajasthan 
 
 
                                        Countersigned 
 
 
 (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
NEW DELHI,                          Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
The 10th December 2021 


59 
Appendix I  
(Refer Paragraph 1.4) 
List of parastatals and their functions 
 
Sl No. Name of parastatal Functions 
1. Development Authority 
(DA)  
Construction/Renewal/Strengthening of roads; 
Construction of bridges/elevated roads/ROBs 
Housing Schemes 
Rehabilitation of slums 
Allotment of land 
Beautification of city, plantation and development of tourist and 
entertainment places; 
Maintenance of parks 
Approval of site plan/building construction 
Preparation of Master Development Plan  
2.  Urban Improvement 
Trust 
(UIT) 
Construction/Renewal/Strengthening of roads; 
Construction of bridges/elevated roads/ROBs 
Housing Schemes 
Rehabilitation of slums 
Allotment of land 
Beautification of city, plantation   and development of tourist and 
entertainment places; 
Maintenance of parks 
Approval of site plan/building construction 
Preparation of Master Development Plan  
3.  Rajasthan Industrial 
Development and 
Investment Corporation 
Limited (RIICO) 
Development and Management of Industrial Area 
Approval of building construction/site plan in its area 
Maintenance and developmental works such as construction of 
roads/street lights and other infrastructural works 
4. Public Health and 
Engineering Department 
(PHED) 
Distribution of water 
Providing connections 
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) 
Collection of water charges 
5.  Rajasthan Housing 
Board 
Group Housing 
Housing Schemes 
Maintenance of parks 
Approval of site plan/building construction 
Maintenance and construction of roads and other infrastructure 
facilities 
6.  Rajasthan State Road 
Development and 
Construction 
Corporation Limited  
Road Construction 
ROB construction 
7.  Jaipur City Bus Service 
Limited  
Operation and deciding of City bus routes 
 
 
 
 
   

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
60 
Appendix-II 
(Refer Paragraph 5.3.1) 
A.  Details of less recovery of UD tax from commercial complexes due to 
application of incorrect DLC rate/area. 
                                                                                                     (in lakh) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name  Period  Constructed 
area i sq 
yards  
Area 
taken for 
calculation 
of UD Tax 
Area less 
taken for 
UD tax 
Amount 
recovered 
Amount 
actually 
to be 
recovered  
Less 
recovered 
amount  
Shri Sandeep 
(Motisons Jewellers 
Tonk Road) 
2013-21 5184 3033 
 
2151 17.26 32.53 15.27 
Gold Souk Malls, 
Jawahar Circle 
2009-21 28673.34 11500 17173.34 31.10 91.92 60.82 
Hotel the Lalit 2016-21 57544 
(Const.) 
9172 (Land) 
Incorrect 
application 
of DLC 
rate 
- 66.97 99.06 32.09 
Hotel Red Fox JLN 
Marg 
2016-21 19749.19  
(Const.) 
3464 (Land) 
14115.67 
(Const.) 
3464 
(Land) 
5633.52 36.52 52.33 15.81 
Gambhir Towers (M/s 
Shakun Hotel and 
Resorts) 
2013-21 12927.79 
(Const.) 
871.98 
(Land) 
9254.33-
(Const.) 
1449  
(land)  
3673.46 -
(Const.) 
577.01 
(land) 
36.96 58.77 21.81 
Hotel Man Singh 
Palace 
2016-21 7559.22 -
(Const.) 
1405 (Land) 
Incorrect 
application 
of DLC 
rate 
- 11.14 23.27 12.13 
Kamal Kunj Farm 
House 
2007-21 36300 Assessee 
was 
exempted 
 - 10.68 10.68 
Kanha Restaurant 2012-21 2042.71 1502 540.71 8.08 10.67 2.59 
G T Square 2010-21 1807.5 
7075(Const.) 
Incorrect 
application 
of DLC 
rate 
 8.59 16.01 7.42 
Total       216.62 395.24 178.62 

Appendices 
 
61 
B.  Details of less recovery of UD tax from starred hotels at the rate of Industrial 
DLC rate instead of Commercial DLC rate. 
 
( in lakh) 
Name  Period  Area in sq 
yards 
Recoverable 
amount  
Demand 
raised by 
the MCorp 
Amount 
deposited  
Recoverable 
amount  
Hotel Jaipur Ashok 2016-21 8355.78 
(Land) 
17462.00 
(Land) 
69.01 2.90 0.68 68.33 
Hotel Leisure in Grand 
Chankya 
2016-21 4868.056 30.73 0.33 0.33 30.40 
Hotel Maharani Palace 2016-21 9483.33 33.26 1.50 0.61 32.65 
Hotel Super Fine 
(Souvenir Premier) 
2016-21 5955-56 
(Const) 
975 (Land) 
12.67 10.25 1.77 10.90 
Hotel Nirbana Palace 2016-21 2597.77 
(Const) 
1040.01 
(Land) 
12.61 1.99 1.34  11.27 
Southern Grand hotels 
private limited 
2016-21 2366 5.81  0.38 0.38 5.43 
Total   164.09 17.35 5.11 158.98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
62 
C.  Details of marriage gardens in which area were less taken for calculation of UD 
Tax 
 
( in lakh) 
Name Period Area in sq 
yards 
Amount 
recoverable 
Amount 
deposited 
Less 
recovery 
Raj Mahal Palace 2012-21 25,394 164.20 7.61 156.59 
Ram Bagh Palace Hotel 2012-21 2,48,898 1,176.39 1,072.76 103.63 
M/s Mahavir Paradise 2014-21 5,223 10.15 1.48 8.67 
Isharda Marriage Garden 2014-21 14,113 51.46 22.58 28.88 
Sukham Marriage Garden 2014-21 6,877 25.07 13.14 11.94 
Shivam Marriage Garden 2014-21 5,312.57 19.37 8.50 10.87 
Havens Garden : 2016-21 23,595 25.08 11.85 13.23 
K K Paradise 2016-21 6,240 6.63 2.27  4.36 
Golden Garden 2014-21 4,991 4.23 1.05 3.17 
Dadu Dayal Marriage Garden 2017-21 3,600 5.24 - 5.24 
Total   1,487.82 1,141.24 346.58 
 
Details of marriage gardens in which area were less taken for calculation of UD Tax 
  

Appendices 
 
63 
D.  Recoveries/correction in demand ledger made at the instance of audit 
 
( in lakh) 
Subject Amount 
objected 
in audit  
Amount 
of 
revised 
ledger 
Remarks 
Short recovery 
of UD Tax from 
Gold Sukh Mall, 
Jagatpura Road 
51.68 64.25  The MCorp was recovering the UD tax from the Malls for only 
11500 sq yards for BG+2 floors while the Malls had BG+4 
floors and total constructed area of 28673.34 sq yards. After 
raising the audit objection, the MCorp accepted the fact and 
revised the ledger with a difference of whooping amount of  
 64.25 lakh 
Short recovery 
of UD Tax from 
Hotel the Lalit, 
Jagatpura Road 
11.23 30.33  The MCorp all of sudden reduced the DLC rate during  
2017-19 and extended undue benefit of  32.08 lakh to the 
hotel. On issuance of audit memo the MCorp accepted the fact 
and revised the ledger. 
Sandip Chabra 
(Moti Sons 
Jewellers) 
14.31 16.17  The MCorp was recovering the UD Tax for only 27300 sq feet 
while the building was constructed in 50000 sq feet of area. 
The MCorp has since been accepted the audit objection and 
revised the ledger of assessee from  (-) 300 to 16.17 lakh 
Super Fine Hotel 
Ridhi Siddhi 
Chouraha 
8.48 8.06  MCorp was recovering UD tax at industrial rate while it should 
be commercial DLC rate. Now MCorp accepted the fact and 
revised the Ledger 
Total 85.70 118.81  
( 1.19 
crore) 
 
 
  

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
64 
Appendix-III 
(Refer Paragraph 5.3.5) 
Details of user charges not recovered by the 13 ULBs 
(  in crore) 
Sl. No. Name of ULBs Category of  the 
consumer/ 
households  
Number 
of units 
Rate fixed 
per month 
(in ) 
Months 
4/2015 to 
3/2020 
User 
charges 
recoverable 
1. M Corp Jaipur Residential  1,35,019 20-1501 60 86.04 
Commercial 1,23,109 250-2000 60 192.46 
Institutional 8,180 500-3000 60 37.88 
2 M Corp Ajmer Residential  10,315 20 60 1.24 
Commercial 2,923 250 60 4.38 
Institutional 318 250 60 0.48 
3 M Council 
Sikar 
Residential  2,098 15 60 0.19 
Commercial 639 200 60 0.77 
Institutional 298 200 60 0.36 
4 M Council 
Kishangarh 
Residential 28,054 15 60 2.52 
5 M Board 
Chomu 
Residential  43,422 10 12 0.52 
Commercial 921 150 60 0.83 
Institutional 155 150 12 0.03 
6 M Board 
Bagru (4/16 to 
3/20) 
Residential 20,453 10 12 0.25 
7 M Board 
Thanagazi 
Residential 4,000 10 12 0.05 
8 M Board 
Shahpura 
Residential 6,120 10 60 0.37 
9 
  
M Board Niwai Residential  6,200 10 60 0.37 
Commercial 26 150 60 0.02 
10 M Board 
Jobner 
Residential 1,864 10 60 0.11 
11 M Board 
Chaksu 
Residential 5,399 10 60 0.32 
12 M Board Lalsot Residential 5,756 10 60 0.35 
13 M Board 
Phulera 
Residential 4,640 10 60 0.28 
Total 329.82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Ranged between  20 and 150 according to area of plot. 

Appendices 
 
65 
Appendix-IV 
(Refer Paragraph 5.3.8) 
Short recovery of fire cess from high rise buildings 
 
( in lakh) 
Sl 
No   
Name of Applicants  Total area 
in Sqm 
Recoverable  
amount  50 per 
Sqm 
Amount 
recovered 
by the 
MCorp 
Amount 
less 
recovered 
1 Jai Kumar Maheshwari 784.19,2   39.1  0.60 790.  
2 RKM International  004.94,3  50.1  560.  850.  
3 Dr. Somesh Gupta 381.71,1  690.  0.30 0.39 
4 Sandeep Kulhari 818.11,1  0.91 390.  0.52 
5 Madhusudan Bihani 643.20,12  32.6  72.2  .603  
6 Sita Ram Sharma  225.68,3  61.1  690.  920.  
7 Elizabeth Zakariya 624.77,7  81.3  64.1  17.2  
8 Baldev Rathi 216.28,5  61.2  12.1  94.1  
9 Ashish Raniwala 537.13,10  27.5  72.2  00.3  
10 Vivek Jaisawal 816.10,5  19.2  25.1  66.1  
11 Prashant Sharma  780,1  890.  380.  0.51 
12 Mohit Rana  679.62,10  43.5  2.30 3.04 
13 Gopal RamYadav 531.71,1  770.  330.  440.  
14 Kanhaiya Lal Meena 120,1  560.  240.  230.  
15 Purushotam Lata 994.14,7  4.00 72.1  82.2  
16 Vijendra Mamodia 744,2  37.1  590.  780.  
17 Vikash  Yadav 48.550,3  75.1  670.  990.  
18 Nand Kishor Mawaliya 09.322,2  11.1  840.  0.63 
19 Kanchanjanga Housing 
Board 
.36885,19  9.94 32.8  1.62 
20 Sanjay Singh Meel, Hotel 
Nirbana Palace  
183,2  09.1  740.  620.  
21 Lalit Parikh Hotel & Bar 263.11,1  0.63 270.  0.36 
22 Ummed Bhawan Palace 
Bihari Marg  
421.40,1  0.71 230.  0.39 
23 King Avenue Ranjit Singh 
Bhamu 
049.17,4  02.2  870.  15.1  
24 Mahendra Kastiya, OK Plus 
Chandra Mahal  
348.32,7  67.3  64.1  30.2  
25 Shivam Plaza Gopalpura 
Bye Pass  
731.38,1  780.  300.  560.  
26 Nand Kishore Gupta 
Signature Tower  
20,553.88 0.281  4.18 6.10 
27 Yogesh Dhanuka Sun Shine 
Prime  
885.34,19  94.9  29.4  56.5  
28 Vrinda Gardens Sanganer 1,46,492 73.25 32.38 40.87 
29 Ravi Mathur Anand Prime 
Sanganer 
209.05,17  60.8  08.4  25.4  
30 Ashok Kumar Khandaka 
Khandaka Hospital  
898,2 .57  1.45 0.62 0.83 
31 Normet India VKI Road  462.66,7  73.3  16.1  12.2  
32 Dr Rishi Sethi Novel Prime 
Sanganer 
824.69,4  41.2  53.1  06.1  
33 Park Osian Hotel  891.20,1  0.95 410.  0.54 
34 Mahima Ballevista 118.88,26  60.13  .905  16.7  

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
66 
Sl 
No   
Name of Applicants  Total area 
in Sqm 
Recoverable  
amount  50 per 
Sqm 
Amount 
recovered 
by the 
MCorp 
Amount 
less 
recovered 
35 Mahima Elinza 472.47 ,77  74.38  4.514  24.19 
36 Vardhman International 
School Mansarovar 
6,010.99 3.00 1.29 1.71 
37 Central Academy Amba 
Bari  
083.10,2  04.1  450.  590.  
38 Ashok Kanoujia Hotel Raj 
Plaza  
519.81,3  67.1  670.  00.1  
39 Hotel Hill View Malviya 
Nagar  
416.85,1  170.  310.  400.  
40 MD Heights Suraj Sharma  334.07,4  17.2  930.  23.1  
41 Vista Housing Vrinda 
Green  
096.91,56,1  50.78  04.29  10.49  
42 Vivek Chaturvedi Virat 
Eligant 
060.71,6  03.3  30.1  37.1  
43 Defence Public School 
Amrapali Circle  
002.26,4  00.2  92.1  710.  
44 Manipal Hospital Sikar 
Road  
205.92,36  10.18  978.5  13.12  
45 SMS School Narayan Singh 
Circle  
450.65,9  73.4  03.2  69.2  
46 Avenue super mart Malviya 
Nagar  
121,10  06.5  18.2  88.2  
47 Hotel Raj Plaza  3,519.81 1.76 0.76 1.00 
48 Narayan Das Gurnani  the 
Verve  
736.57,6  73.3  1.41 69.1  
49 Vishnu Kumar Sharma 
UpasanaVed 
036.67,10  20.5  17.1  31.3  
50 Vishnu Kumar Sharma 
Upasana Kasablanka 
593.75,3  .801  1.09 710.  
51 Hotel Ras Mahal  739.52,1  870.  370.  00.5 
52 Birju Singh  
Drimex Plaza  
798,5  90.2  1.35 1.55 
53 Kunj Bihari Iscon Hights 34,193.03 17.10 8.10 9.00 
54 Shika Hotel  C Scheme  1,539.94 0.77 0.33 0.44 
55 Royal Polovictory Hotel  4,099.86 2.05 0.88 1.17 
56 Bhavin Kanha Restaurant  1,081.48 0.54 0.23 0.31 
57 Grand Chankya Hotel  4,090.8 2.05 0.88 1.17 
58 Kanha Restaurant C 
scheme  
1,716.57 0.86 0.37 0.49 
59 Hotel Lee Amour  1,618.41 0.81 0.35 0.46 
60 Mayanksoni 1,897.38 0.95 0.41 0.54 
61 Chandar Mohan Singh 8,098.65 4.05 1.74 2.31 
62 Arvind Asopa 1,888 0.94 0.41 0.54 
63 Aman Exports 6,210.38 3.11 1.34 1.77 
64 Pawan creations  4,730 2.37 1.02 1.35 
65 Emarald Garden Club 5,081 2.54 1.09 1.45 
66 Bhagwati Hotels and 
Resorts 
16,126.24 8.06 3.47 4.59 
67 Gajanand Chinpa 2,180.18 1.09 0.47 0.62 
68 Padamchand Jain  4,677 2.34 1.01 1.33 
69 Vinod Badgoti 3,900.15 1.95 0.84 1.11 

Appendices 
 
67 
Sl 
No   
Name of Applicants  Total area 
in Sqm 
Recoverable  
amount  50 per 
Sqm 
Amount 
recovered 
by the 
MCorp 
Amount 
less 
recovered 
70 Munni Devi  9,325.06 4.66 2.19 2.47 
71 Shankar Eye Hospital  6,582.30 3.29 1.42 1.87 
72 Allen Carrier Institute  3,228.18 1.61 0.69 0.92 
73 Narayan Techno E school  7,080.54 3.54 1.52 2.02 
74 Jaipur School  4,759.75 2.38 1.02 1.36 
75 Berger Paints  4,605 2.30 0.99 1.31 
76 Sardar Patel Public School  4,344 2.17 0.93 1.24 
77 Anup Aroda 15,803.23 7.90 3.40 4.50 
78 Gajanand Chinpa Shiv 
Colony 
3,182.32 1.59 0.69 0.91 
79  Rishabh Goyal 7,426.53 3.71 1.60 2.11 
 Total  254.80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
68 
Appendix-V 
(Refer Paragraph 5.4) 
Statement showing the details of revenue sources identified by 4th and 5th SFC, status 
of levy and statutory provisions 
 
Sl. No. Revenue Sources Status of Levy Provisions as per Act & Rules 
RMA 2009 GoR Order & 
Circular 
Tax Revenue 
1 Property Tax Levied - LSGD  
Notification no. 
F(8)C(327)LSG/9
5/5573dated: 
29.08.2007 
2 Tax on Pilgrims and Tourists  Levied 
(Collected only by Ajmer, 
Pushkar & Sarwar 
Municipalities) 
103 (v)  
3 Tax on non-motorized Vehicles Levied 
(Collected only by 4  
M. Boards & 1 M. 
Council) 
103(i)  
Non-Tax Revenue 
4 Sanitation Tax/ User charges  Levied 101(b) LSGD 
Notification no. 
6625 dated 
11.03.15 
 
5 Building Plan/License 
approval fee 
Levied 105 (a,b) Building Bye 
Laws 
6 Trade License Levied 102(b)  
7 Tax on lands and buildings Levied 102 (a)  
8 Tax on profession, trade, 
callings and employment 
Not Levied  
 
102 (b)  
9 Toll on roads and bridges Not Levied 102 (c)  
10 Tax for pollution control Not Levied 102 (d)  
11 Lighting tax Not Levied  103 (iii)  
12 Tax on congregation Not Levied  103 (iv)  
13 Advertisement Tax Levied 102(e)  
14 Fire Tax Levied 103(vii)  
15 Tax on boat moored Levied 103 (ii)  
16 Tax on deficit in parking spaces 
in non-residential building  
Levied  103 
viii) 
 
17 Surcharge on Stamp duty  Not Levied  103(ix)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
69 
Appendix-VI 
(Refer Paragraph 5.5.1) 
Statement showing variation in budget in each category of ULBs 
(  in crore) 
 
 
Name of the 
ULB 
Year Budget  Receipts 
Actuals 
Percentage 
of actual 
budget  
Budget  Expenditure 
Actuals 
Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
M Corp Ajmer 2015-16 209.94 124.40 59.25 207.83 94.49 45.46. 
2016-17 285.11 188.33 66.05 275.33 137.03 49.77 
2017-18 322.38 173.82 53.91 325.41 156.91 48.22 
2018-19 417.84 204.88 49.03 421.13 197.10 46.80 
2019-20 202.52 179.55 88.65 246.23 177.45 72.06 
M Council, 
Kishangarh 
2015-16 106.44 41.53 39.01 102.95 67.98 66.03 
2016-17 193.14 48.30 25.00  191.81 47.17 24.59 
2017-18 273.64 77.16 28.19 265.57 50.03 18.83 
2018-19 231.33 113.11 48.89 218.12 110.19 50.52 
2019-20 184.55 87.97 47.67 180.92 89.86 49.67 
M Council, 
Sikar 
2015-16 40.58 52.16 128.55 50.22 49.13 97.82 
2016-17 87.78 91.20 103.90 70.60 55.88 79.14 
2017-18 98.50 102.21 103.77 108.04 98.52 91.18 
2018-19 112.17 108.44 96.67 110.31 106.24 96.30 
2019-20 120.02 102.73 85.59 140.55 115.14 81.92 
Nawalgarh 
MBoard 
 
2015-16 26.30 15.18 57.7 27.57 11.16 40.47 
2016-17 38.55 49.36 128.04 38.56 17.20 44.58 
2017-18 69.69 20.19 28.97 68.01 38.56 56.70 
2018-19 76.15 26.84 35.25 76.33 33.41 43.78 
2019-20 75.84 10.09 13.30 76.53 10.36 13.54 
Chomu M 
Board 
 
2015-16 20.79 19.86 95.51 23.31 19.55 83.87 
2016-17 23.77 23.52 98.96 21.93 12.46 56.83 
2017-18 32.40 22.38 69.08 26.81 9.78 36.48 
2018-19 21.73 21.65 99.60 27.10 15.39 56.78 
2019-20 23.93 20.32 84.91 21.63 14.96 69.16 
Bagru M Board 
 
2015-16 8.00 4.58 57.27 7.58 7.97 105.05 
2016-17 10.23 12.81 125.22 10.05 5.10 50.73 
2017-18 12.89 9.34 72.44 12.84 6.05 47.12 
2018-19 18.18 14.40 79.16 23.42 13.61 58.14 
2019-20 24.78 12.32 49.73 25.25 10.39 41.14 
Phulera  
M Board 
2015-16 10.01 8.44 84 10.06 7.31 73 
2016-17 11.02 9.53 87 11.88 9.93 84 
2017-18 14.50 9.26 64 14.35 9.57 67 
2018-19 19.43 14.10 73 17.87 10.57 59 
2019-20 21.39 10.84 51 21.97 13.29 61 
Jobner MBoard 2015-16 6.73 7.16 106 6.43 6.42 100 
2016-17 1.82 2.81 155 2.65 3.62 137 
2017-18 11.04 2.64 24 11.26 1.54 14 
2018-19 12.93 7.73 60 12.99 8.56 66 
2019-20 13.52 5.43 40 14.22 5.97 42 
Chaksu M 
Board 
2015-16 24.44 17.28 71 24.69 18.72 76 
2016-17 27.61 16.63 60 26.14 11.05 42 
2017-18 28.20 13.04 46 32.66 14.92 46 
2018-19 34.88 21.29 61 33.69 14.50 43 
2019-20 
 
37.40 18.60 50 37.59 20.46 54 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
70 
Name of the 
ULB 
Year Budget  Receipts 
Actuals 
Percentage 
of actual 
budget  
Budget  Expenditure 
Actuals 
Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Newai MBoard 2015-16 44.01 23.03 52 40.60 24.26 60 
2016-17 47.15 12.38 26 46.54 15.37 33 
2017-18 50.00 10.63 21 53.16 12.32 23 
2018-19 56.31 18.48 33 57.45 18.30 32 
2019-20 55.51 17.71 32 53.67 17.54 33 
Shahpura 
MBoard 
2015-16 9.41 7.92 84 8.43 8.58 102 
2016-17 12.04 9.14 76 11.11 4.42 40 
2017-18 14.50 11.00 76 15.14 11.06 73 
2018-19 19.51 13.73 70 20.01 13.12 66 
2019-20 23.89 11.14 47 18.58 14.92 80 
Lalsot M Board 2015-16 9.41 9.81 104 9.61 9.12 95 
2016-17 8.41    12.91 154 8.90 7.80 88 
2017-18 9.38 11.95 127 10.26 10.11 98 
2018-19 14.63 13.98 96 14.22 18.99 134 
2019-20 19.42 15.29 79 21.42 18.02 84 
Jaipur M Corp 2015-16 1,052.12 697.97 66 1,052.12 629.05 60 
2016-17 1,367.65 730.08 53 1,367.65 606.43 44 
2017-18 1,427.44 655.11 46 1,451.52 671.47 46 
2018-19 1,852.86 855.16 46 1,852.86 958.36 52 
2019-20 1,790.07 763.59 43 1,870.07 943.25 50 
Thanagaji 
MBoard 
2019-202 21.36 7.09 33 23.88 2.06.50 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Thanagaji MB was constituted on 14.09.2018 as such data for previous years were not available. 

Report No. 5 of 2021 
 
71 
Glossary 
AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
CFC Central Finance Commission 
DDP District Development Plan 
DLB Directorate of Local Bodies 
DPC District Planning Committee 
JnNURM Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
LSGD Local Self Government Department 
MPC Metropolitan Planning Committee 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NULM National Urban Livelihood Mission 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
PHED Public Health Engineering Department 
RGDPS Act Rajasthan Guaranteed Delivery of Public Services Act, 2011 
RHB Rajasthan Housing Board 
RIICO Rajasthan State Industrial Development and Investment 
Corporation 
RMA Rajasthan Municipal Act, 2009 
RSPCB Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
RSRDC Rajasthan State Road Development and Construction Corporation 
Limited 
RSVK Rajasthan Shahri Vikas Kendra 
RUDSICO Rajasthan Urban Drinking Water, Sewerage and Infrastructure 
Corporation 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SEC State Election Commission 
SFC State Finance Commissions 
ST Scheduled Tribe 
TPD Town Planning Department 
UD Urban Development 
UDA Urban Development Authorities 
UDH Urban Development and Housing Department 
UITs Urban Improvement Trusts 
ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
 