  
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit  
of Efficacy of  
Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional  
Amendment Act  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Haryana 
Report No. 1 of the year 2022 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

i 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Paragraphs  Page(s)  
Preface  v 
Highlights  vii-xi 
Chapter–I 
Introduction 
74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 1.1 1 
Trend in Urbanisation in Haryana 1.2 1 
Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1.3 1-2 
Organisational structure of Urban Governance in 
Haryana 1.4 2 
Chapter–II 
Audit Framework 
Audit Objective 2.1 3 
Audit Criteria 2.2 3-4 
Audit scope and methodology  2.3 4 
Organisation of audit findings 2.4 4 
Chapter–III 
Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA 
Comparison of State level Legislations with 74 th  CAA 3.1 5-7 
Chapter–IV 
Devolution of functions and institutional mechanism for empowerment of 
Urban Local Bodies 
Actual status of devolution of functions to ULBs 4.1 9-16 
Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urban 
Local Bodies 4.2 16-25 
Powers of the State Government over ULBs 4.3 25-26 
Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urban 
Local bodies 4.4 26-34 
Chapter–V 
Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Limited powers over manpower 5.1 35-39 
Sufficiency and functioning of staff 5.2 39-42 
Capacity building for human resources of ULBs 5.3 42-43 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
ii 
 Paragraphs  Page(s)  
Chapter–VI 
Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Source of revenue 6.1 45-54 
Estimation of requirement of funds/expenditure 6.2 54-56 
Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 6.3 56-58 
Financial power of Urban Local Bodies 6.4 58-59 
Accounting arrangement of ULBs 6.5 59-60 
Chapter–VII  
Devolution in discharge of selected areas  
Water Supply 7.1 61-63 
Public Health and Sanitation 7.2 63-65 
Solid Waste Management 7.3 65-66 
Property Tax 7.4 66-70 
Water Charges 7.5 70-72 
Chapter–VIII 
Conclusions 
Audit Objectives 8.1 73-75 
 
  

Table of Contents 
iii 
APPENDICES 
Appendix  Description Reference to 
Paragraph  Page 
1.1 Organisational structure with respect to 
functioning of ULBs in the State 
1.4 77-78  
1.2 Details of parastatals and their functions 1.4 79-80  
2.1 The list of ULBs selected for test check 2.3 81 
4.1 Status of the devolution of functions in test-
checked Urban Local Bodies 
4.1 82 
4.2 Statement showing the numbers of House 
Meetings held and shortfall in the meetings 
held in test-checked ULBs during 2015-20 
4.2.1.5 83 
4.3 Detail of the subject committees constituted 
and number of meeting in test-checked 
ULBs held during the period April 2015 to 
March 2020 
4.2.1.6 84 
4.4 Statement showing the delay in constitution of 
SFC and implementation of recommendations  
4.2.5.1 85 
4.5 List of 5 th  SFC recommendations which are 
yet to be implemented 
4.2.5.2 86 
5.1 Statement of events for recruitment to the 
post of Accountant in ULBs during 2015-20 
5.1.2 87 
5.2 Statement showing the specialised 
manpower in ULBs in the State 
5.2.2 88 
5.3 Status of Human Resources in Test 
Checked ULBs as on January 2020 
5.2.3 89 
6.1 Details of revenue sources, status of levy 
and statutory provisions in Test Checked 
ULBs during 2015-20 
6.1.3 90-92  
6.2 Budget making process from preparation to 
approval 
6.2.1.2 93 
6.3 Statement showing variation in budget in 
each category of ULBs 
6.2.2 94 
 
 

v 
PREFACE 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the  Government of Haryana 
in terms of Technical Guidance and Support to audit  of Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) under Section 20 (1) of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s 
(Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  
The Report covering the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 c ontains the results of 
Performance Audit of ‘Efficacy of Implementation of  the 74 th  Constitutional 
Amendment Act’.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with Aud iting Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

HIGHLIGHTS 

vii 
HIGHLIGHTS 
Intent of the 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
The Constitution of India provided a clear mandate for democratic 
decentralisation through the 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act (74 th  CAA), 
which sought to create an institutional framework f or ushering in democracy 
at the grass root level through self-governing local bodies in urban areas of the 
country. The 74 th  CAA came into effect on 1 June 1993 and empowered Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) to perform 18 functions listed in the 12 th  Schedule. 
Why this Performance Audit?  
To ascertain whether the State Government empowered  ULBs through the 
creation of a robust Institutional framework as wel l as transfer of functions, 
funds and functionaries.  
Period of audit:  2015-16 to 2019-20  
Sample:  5 areas and 15 ULBs across all tiers.  
What Audit found?  
Compliance to provisions of 74th CAA  
Statutory amendments, though enacted, were not impl emented in letter and 
spirit of the 74 
th  CAA. 
Devolution of functions and institutional mechanism for Empowerment of 
Urban Local Bodies 
• All Functions were transferred to ULBs. 
• Actual status of implementation of 18 functions. 
Role of ULB No. of Functions 
Full Jurisdiction 4 
Major role with overlapping jurisdictions of State 
departments/parastatals 
3 
Functions where ULBs are mere implementing agencies 4 
Limited role with overlapping jurisdictions of state 
departments/parastatals 
5 
Have insignificant role 2 
 
 
 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
viii 
• Status of elections and formation of councils in ULBs  
Newly formed ULBs (Municipal Council): 1 
Newly Up-graded ULBs (Municipal Committee 
to Municipal Council): 
1 
Elections held during 2015-16 to 2019-20 and 
councils formed: 
73 
Elections due during 2018-20 but not held due 
to delayed delimitation of wards: 
12 
• State Government delayed delimitation process, whic h in turn delayed 
council elections of 50 municipalities for seven to  29 months during  
2015-16 to 2019-20. As a result, the people of thes e municipalities were 
deprived of their representatives. 
• Meeting of the House:  In 15 test-checked ULBs, only 226 house meetings 
were held as against the stipulated 710 meetings during the period 2015-20. 
• Formation of ad-hoc Committees:  Only three ULBs out of 15 test 
checked ULBs, constituted ad-hoc committees (rangin g between four and 
eight), which were not also functional as very few meetings were held by 
these committees.  
• Wards Committees: Although Sections 10 and 34 regarding constitution 
of Wards Committees were incorporated in Haryana Mu nicipal 
Corporation Act and Haryana Municipal Act respectiv ely, enabling rules 
were not framed under these Acts by the State Gover nment. Resultantly, 
no Wards Committee in any of the eight ULBs could b e constituted where 
population was more than three lakh as per Census 2011.  
• Area Sabha and Ward Committee:  State Government has not framed 
rules for nomination of Area Sabha representatives.  None of the test 
checked 15 ULBs formed Area Sabha/Ward Committee.  
• District Planning Committee (DPC)/Metropolitan Plan ning 
Committee (MPC) : District Development Plans for urban areas were n ot 
being prepared by the respective ULBs and were bein g prepared by Town 
and Country Planning Department/Urban Local Bodies Department.  
• There was delay ranging from two to 15 months in co nstitution of State 
Finance Commissions (SFCs). 
• The existence of parastatals significantly eroded t he autonomy of the 
ULBs in the implementation of functions such as urban planning. 

Highlights 
ix 
Human resources of ULBs  
• Powers to assess staff requirement and recruitment of personnel was 
vested with the State Government.  
• The State Government also vested with itself the po wers to regulate 
classification, method of recruitment, conditions o f service, pay and 
allowances, initiate disciplinary action on staff o f ULBs, transfer staff 
across ULBs or to other Government departments.  
• No manpower assessment for ULBs had been conducted and implemented 
except fixation of standard of posts to be provided  at the time of 
constitution of a new ULB or up-gradation of existed ULB.  
• Significant vacancies existed in crucial technical posts which resulted in 
absence of adequate manpower affecting delivery of citizen services. The 
percentage of overall vacancy in 15 test-checked UL Bs ranged between 
 
21.79 to 93.54 percent as on 1 January 2020. 
• DULB has neither adopted any mechanism to prepare training need analysis 
to assess training requirement for various cadre/em ployees of ULBs nor 
drawn up any plan as an aid to capacity building of elected members except 
‘Training plan for elected women councillors” during 2015-20. 
Financial Resources of ULB 
• ULBs were largely dependent on fiscal transfers, which constituted about -
50.22 per cent of their total revenue.  
• There was short release of 
` 102.53 crore of basic grants by Government 
of India (GoI) to the State Government during 2015- 20 due to  
non-formation of elected body in the ULBs.  
• Entire allocation of performance grants of ` 242 crore for the year 2018-20 
was yet to be received.  
• Own revenue of ULBs constituted only 30.04 per cent of their total 
revenue.  
• ULBs were not getting their due share of stamp duty  due to short release 
against the allotted budget to Municipalities. 
• Budget exercise was flawed and resulted in preparat ion of unrealistic and 
unscientific budgets.  
• ULBs had spent on an average about 57 per cent of the funds available 
with them. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
x 
Empowerment of ULBs in discharging selected activit ies and have access 
adequate resources 
• Water Supply and Sewerage activities were performed  by only four ULBs 
and in rest of 83 ULBs, this function was performed  by Public Health and 
Engineering Department. 
• Director, Urban Local Bodies Department (DULBs) has  major role in 
Solid Waste Management policy and strategy formulat ion, tendering and 
technology selection and ULBs are just implementing the various activities 
under the overall supervision of DULB. 
• Though the authority to collect property tax vested  with ULBs, powers 
pertaining to the rates and revision thereof, proce dure of collection, 
exemptions, concessions, etc., were vested with the State Government. Thus, 
ULBs in the State lacked complete autonomy in generating own revenue. 
• As property tax was based on area based fixed rates , which tends to be 
relatively stagnant therefore, property tax in the State was non-buoyant 
with respect to market value of the property. Resul tantly, ULBs were not 
allowed to generate additional revenue due to incre ase in market value of 
the properties in their jurisdiction. 
• During 2019-20, ULBs had to forgo 
` 14.64 crore due to rebate on 
property tax given by State Government against tota l amount due of  
` 47.02 crore in 14 1 test-checked ULBs which constitutes 31.14 per cent of 
total amount due for 2019-20. Further, the State Go vernment issued 15 
rebate schemes during the period 2015-20. However, the State 
Government did not set up any mechanism to compensa te such loss of 
property tax due to rebate/waiver.  
• The State Government last decided the water charges  in March 2011 and 
the same had not been revised since then. Further, the water charges were 
not fixed in a manner, which could ensure efficient  use and reward 
conservation of water.  Audit observed that the Sta te Government notified 
State Urban Water Policy in March 2012. However, th e same did not 
provide for periodic revision of water charges in o rder to compensate rise 
in cost of operation and maintenance of water supply.  
What Audit recommends? 
• The State Government needs to take decisive action in order to translate 
the vision of achieving decentralisation into reality.  Steps need to be taken 
to ensure that the ULBs enjoy an adequate degree of  autonomy in respect 
of the functions assigned to them. 
                                                           
1  Information not provided by Municipal Committee, Naraingarh. 

Highlights 
xi 
• In view of the fact that the delimitation has been delayed time and again by 
the State Government, the task of delimitation shou ld be entrusted to the 
State Election Commission in order to ensure timely  elections as 
recommended by Second Administrative Reform Commission. 
• State Government should frame the enabling rules fo r constitution of 
Wards Committees and nominations of Area Sabha repr esentative so that 
the priorities of citizens are factored into the decisions of the ULB. 
• The full potential of the District Planning Committ ee and Metropolitan 
Planning Committee mechanism should be tapped by im plementing the 
Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation an d Implementation 
guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development, GoI. 
• The State Government should constitute SFC and impl ement its 
recommendations in timely manner. Further, the reco mmendations of SFC 
relating to devolution as well as institutional mat ters should be 
implemented in toto to the extent possible, taking into account the final 
purpose of creating genuine institutions of local governance. 
• Adequate powers over manpower resources should be d elegated to ULBs 
in matters such as assessment and recruitment of re quired staff to ensure 
availability of qualified manpower for discharging functions.  
• Special efforts need to be made to motivate the ULB s to prepare their 
budgets in a scientific manner taking into account realistic projection of 
funds expected to be mobilised.  
• Feasibility of transferring the water supply and se werage activities to 
respective ULBs may be explored. Adequate Technical  manpower, proper 
planning required for running the function should b e provided by the State 
Government. 
• The ULBs should be given full freedom in policy and strategy formation in 
all activities of Solid Waste Management. 
• The Property Tax Board needs to be constituted in o rder to provide 
technical expertise to ULBs in compliance with 13 th  Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) recommendations.  
• The Property Tax survey should be conducted at regu lar intervals in order 
to ascertain the number of taxable property.  
• The system of property tax should be reviewed in or der to induce 
buoyancy in the Property Tax.  
• The recommendation of 14 th  CFC should be strictly followed in case of 
rebate/exemption in property tax.  
• State Government should create a mechanism to avoid accumulation arrear 
of property tax against properties of various State  Governments and 
immediately clear existing arrears.  

Chapter I  
Introduction 

1 
CHAPTER-I 
Introduction 
1.1 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
The 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 (74th CAA) came  into effect 
on 1 June 1993, introduced Part IX A (the Municipal ities) which deals with 
the issues relating to municipalities. The Act prov ided constitutional status to 
the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Article 243W of the 74 th  CAA authorised the 
State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bod ies with powers and 
authority as necessary to enable them to function a s institutions of 
Self-Government and make provisions for devolution of powers and 
responsibilities.  
The 12 
th  Schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 specifi c functions to be 
devolved to ULBs as listed in Table 4.1 . 
1.2 Trend in Urbanisation in Haryana 
As per census 2011, 88.42 lakh (34.88 per cent ) out of the total population of 
253.51 lakh reside in urban areas. The growth rate of urban population in the 
decades 2001-2011 and 2011-2020 was 44.59 per cent 1 and 29.41 per cent 2 
respectively.  
Urban Haryana faces multiple challenges, ranging fr om public health issues, 
poverty alleviation, waste management, depletion of  natural resources, 
increasing pressure of urban population and inadequ ate infrastructure. In this 
scenario, ULBs have an important role to play, as m ost of these issues are 
handled best at the local level. 
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies 
In Haryana, ULBs are categorised on the basis of po pulation 3 in accordance 
with Section 2(a) of the Haryana Municipal Act, 197 3. This Section also 
authorises the State Government to define municipal bodies on other factors in 
addition to population such as density of the popul ation, local revenue 
generation and level of employment in non-agricultu re activities within their 
jurisdiction. There are 87 ULBs as on August 2020 as detailed in Table 1.1 .  
 
                                                           
1 Statistical Abstract of Haryana 2019-20. 
2 Report of the Technical Group on Population Projec tions constituted by the National 
Commission on Population (May 2006). 
3 Population of 3,00,000 or more is Municipal Corpor ation, Population of 50,000 or 
more but less than 3,00,000 is Municipal Council, P opulation of not more than 
50,000 is Municipal Committee. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
2 
Table1.1 Category-wise ULBs in Haryana 
Type of ULB Number of ULBs 
Municipal Corporations 10 
Municipal Councils 20 
Municipal Committees 57 
Total 87 4 
Source: Information provided by DULB 
The Municipal Corporations are governed by the Hary ana Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1994 (HMC Act) and Municipal Counc ils & Municipal 
Committees are governed by the Haryana Municipal Ac t, 1973 (HM Act). 
Each Corporation/Council/Committee area has been di vided into territorial 
constituencies i.e. wards, which are determined and  notified by the State 
Government for the purpose of election of members. All ULBs consist of 
elected members from each ward and members nominate d by the State 
Government. 
1.4 Organisational structure of Urban Governance in  Haryana 
The Urban Local Bodies Department, headed by the Ad ditional Chief 
Secretary to the Government of Haryana (GoH), is th e nodal department for 
the governance of all ULBs. The Directorate of Urba n Local Bodies (DULB) 
functions as an interface between the State Governm ent and ULBs. In 
accordance with the powers conferred under the HM A ct, 1973 and HMC Act, 
1994, the DULB administers, facilitates, co-ordinat es and monitors the ULBs. 
The organisational structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State is 
indicated in Appendix 1.1 . 
In addition to ULBs, the DULB has a number of key p arastatal agencies for 
undertaking part of the functions expected to be pe rformed by the municipal 
bodies under the 74 th  CAA.  The key parastatal entities under its contro l are 
Haryana Urban Infrastructure Development Board (HUI DB), Haryana Slum 
Clearance Board (HSCB), State Urban Development Aut hority Haryana 
(SUDA) and Kurukshetra Development Board (KDB).  Besides there are other 
parastatals like Haryana Shehari Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP), Gurugram 
Metropolitan Development Authority (GMDA) and Farid abad Metropolitan 
Development Authority (FMDA), which are under Town and Country 
Planning Department and also perform a part of func tions required to be 
performed by the municipal bodies under 74 th  CAA.  These parastatals deliver 
urban services like urban planning, development of slum areas, urban 
development, promotion of cultural events and urban  poverty alleviation. The 
details of parastatals and their functions are in Appendix 1.2 .  
                                                           
4  As on August 2021, there were 92 ULBs (Municipal Corporations: 11, Municipal 
Councils: 22 and Municipal Committees: 59). 

Chapter II  
Audit Framework 

3 
CHAPTER-II 
Audit Framework 
2.1 Audit Objective 
The principal purpose of this audit is to understan d whether Urban Local 
Bodies have been empowered in terms of funds, funct ions and functionaries to 
establish themselves as effective institutions of l ocal self-government and 
whether the 74 th  CAA has been effectively implemented in the State.  
Accordingly, the following objectives were framed to assess: 
• Whether provisions of the 74 th  CAA have been adequately covered in the 
State Legislation. 
• Whether ULBs have been empowered by the State Gover nment to 
discharge their functions/responsibilities effectiv ely through creation of 
appropriately designed institutions/institutional m echanisms and their 
function. 
• Effectiveness of the functions stated to have been devolved. 
• Whether ULBs have been empowered to access adequate  resources 
including sufficient resources for discharge of fun ctions stated to be 
devolved to them. 
2.2 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria for the Performance Audit (PA) w ere derived from the 
following: 
• 74 
th  Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992;  
• Haryana Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 ;  
• Haryana Municipal Act, 1973;  
• Haryana Urban Development Authority Act, 1977; 
• Gurugram Metropolitan Development Authority Act, 2017; 
• Faridabad Metropolitan Development Authority Act, 2018; 
• Punjab Scheduled Roads and Controlled Areas Restric tion of Unregulated 
Development Act, 1963; 
• Haryana Development and Regulation of Urban Areas Act, 1975; 
• Municipal Accounts Code, 1930; 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
4 
• Central/State Finance Commission Reports;  
• Report of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission of Government 
of India (GoI); and  
• State Government orders, notifications, circulars a nd instructions issued 
from time to time.  
2.3 Audit scope and methodology 
The Performance Audit covering the period April 201 5 to March 2020 was 
carried out in two stages from September 2020 to Ap ril 2021. Stage–I 
comprised audit of implementation of 74 th  CAA by the State Government and 
parastatals and Stage–II comprised test-check of 15  ULBs across all tiers in 
respect of five selected areas i.e. (i) Water Suppl y, (ii) Public Health and 
Sanitation, (iii) Solid Waste Management, (iv) Prop erty Tax and (v) Water 
Tax/Charges. The list of ULBs selected for test che ck is indicated in 
Appendix 2.1 .  
An Entry Conference was held on 11 November 2020 wi th the Director, 
ULBs, in which the audit methodology, scope, object ives and criteria were 
discussed and finalised. The audit methodology invo lved analysis of 
provisions of relevant Acts, Rules, Bye-laws and Re gulation, examination of 
records of Director ULBs and selected ULBs.  Report  on PA has been 
prepared on the basis of questionnaires, examinatio n of records, audit 
observations and responses to audit observations in  the Report. An exit 
conference was held on 2 November 2021 with the Dir ector, Urban Local 
Bodies wherein audit findings were discussed and de liberations of conference 
have been appropriately incorporated in the report. 
2.4 Organisation of audit findings 
The audit observations relating to status of devolu tion of functions, funds and 
functionaries are presented in the following chapters: 
Chapter III – Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA. 
Chapter IV – Devolution of functions and institutio nal mechanism for 
empowerment of Urban Local Bodies.  
Chapter V – Human resources of Urban Local Bodies.  
Chapter VI – Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies. 
Chapter VII – Devolution in discharge of selected areas. 
Chapter VIII – Conclusions. 

Chapter III  
Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA 

5 
CHAPTER-III 
Compliance with provisions of 74 th  CAA 
3.1 Comparison of State level Legislations with 74 th  CAA 
The 74 th  CAA introduced certain provisions relating to muni cipal bodies as 
incorporated in Articles 243Q to 243ZG. The State G overnment vide 
amendments to HM Act and enactment of the HMC Act, introduced 
provisions corresponding to the 74 th CAA provisions as indicated in Table 3.1 . 
Table 3.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 74 th  CAA 
Provisions of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provisions of Constitution of 
India 
Provision of State 
Act/Acts 
(Section-wise) 
Article 243Q Constitution of Municipalities : It provides for 
constitution of three types of municipalities namel y 
a Nagar Panchayat for transitional area, a Municipa l 
Council for a smaller urban area and a Municipal 
Corporation for a larger urban area. 
Section 2 (A) of HM 
Act and Section 3 of 
HMC Act 
Article 243R Composition of Municipalities: All the seats in a 
Municipality shall be filled by direct elections an d 
by persons with special knowledge in municipal 
administration nominated by Government. The 
Legislature of a State may by law, provide for 
representation to the Municipality, Members of 
Parliament and Legislative Assembly whose 
constituencies lie within the municipal area and 
Members of the Council of States and State 
Legislative Council who are registered as electors 
within the city. 
Section 9 of HM Act 
and Section 4 of 
HMC Act 
Article 243S Constitution and composition of Wards 
Committee : This provides for constitution of Wards 
Committees in all municipalities with a population 
of three lakh or more 
Section 34 of HM 
Act and Section 10 
of HMC Act 
Article 243T Reservation of seats: The seats to be reserved for 
Scheduled Caste (SC)/Scheduled Tribe (ST), 
Women and Backward Classes for direct election. 
Section 10 of HM 
Act and Section 11 
of HMC Act 
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities: The municipality has a 
fixed tenure of five years from the date of its fir st 
meeting and re-election to be held within the six 
months of end of tenure. 
Section 12 of HM 
Act and Section 5 of 
HMC Act 
Article 243V Disqualifications for membership: A Person shall 
be disqualified for a member of a Municipality:- 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law for 
the time being in force for the purposes of 
elections of the Legislature of the State 
concerned. 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law 
made by the Legislature of the State. 
Section 13 (A) of 
HM Act and Section 
8 of HMC Act 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
6 
Provisions of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provisions of Constitution of 
India 
Provision of State 
Act/Acts 
(Section-wise) 
Article 243W Powers, authority and responsibilities of the 
Municipalities: All municipalities would be 
empowered with such powers as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as effective institutions o f 
Self-Government. The State Government shall 
entrust with such powers and authority to enable 
them to carry out the responsibilities in relation to 
the 12 th  Schedule. 
Section 66A of HM 
Act and Section  
41 to 42 of HMC 
Act 
Article 243X Power to impose taxes by, and funds of the 
Municipalities: 
• Municipalities would be empowered to levy and 
collect the taxes, fees, duties, etc. 
• Grant-in-aid would be given to the 
Municipalities from the State 
• Constitution of funds for crediting and 
withdrawal of moneys by the Municipality 
Section 56, 57, 69 
and 70 of HM Act 
and Section 72, 78, 
87 and 88 of HMC 
Act 
Article 243Y 
read with 
Article 243I 
Finance Commission: State Government shall 
constitute Finance Commission for 
• Reviewing the financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such steps that help in 
boosting the financial condition of the 
Municipal bodies 
• Distributing between the State and the 
Municipalities the net proceeds of the taxes, 
fees, tolls and duties that are charged by the 
State Government.  
• Allotting the funds to the municipal bodies in the 
State from the Consolidated Fund of the State. 
Section 68A of HM 
Act and Section 82 
of HMC Act 
Article 243Z Audit of accounts of Municipalities : This provides 
provision for maintenance of accounts by the 
Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts. 
Section 203N of HM 
Act read with Para 
1.7 of the Municipal 
Account Code, 1930 
and Sections 168 of 
HMC Act  
Article 243ZA 
read with 
Article 243K 
Elections to the Municipalities: The 
Superintendence, direction and control of all 
procedure of election of the Municipalities shall b e 
vested in the State Election Commission (SEC) 
Section 3A of HM 
Act and Section 9 of 
HMC Act 
Article 243 ZD Committee for District Planning: 
• Constitution of District Planning Committee at 
district level. 
• Composition of District Planning Committee. 
• Preparation of draft development plan and 
forwarded to the Government. 
Section 203-B of 
HM Act  

Chapter III Compliance with provisions of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
7 
Provisions of 
Constitution 
of India 
Requirement as per provisions of Constitution of 
India 
Provision of State 
Act/Acts 
(Section-wise) 
Article 243ZE Committee for Metropolitan Planning: Provision 
for constitution of Metropolitan Planning Committee  
(MPC) in every Metropolitan area with a population 
of 10 lakhs or more to prepare a draft development 
plan for the metropolitan area as a whole. 
Section 417 of HMC 
Act 
The above table shows that the enacted statutes com plied with the provisions 
of the 74 th  CAA. However, compliance with the constitutional p rovisions by 
law does not guarantee effective decentralisation o n ground unless followed 
by effective implementation. Audit observed that the legal provisions were not 
backed by decisive actions resulting in a situation  in which the spirit of the 
74 th  CAA has not fructified. This was especially true i n case of provisions 
pertaining to the devolution of functions and creat ion of appropriate 
institutional mechanisms for effective decentralisa tion, which are discussed in 
the subsequent chapters. 
During exit conference, the Department confirmed th e facts about the 
compliance of the statutes enacted (Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 and Haryana 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1994) with the provision s of the 74 
th  CAA 
mentioned in Table 3.1 of the report. 
 

Chapter IV  
Devolution of functions and institutional 
mechanism for empowerment of  
Urban     Local Bodies 

9 
CHAPTER-IV 
Devolution of functions and institutional mechanism for empowerment of 
Urban Local Bodies 
4.1 Actual status of devolution of functions to ULB s 
The 74 th  CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions an d implement 
schemes in relation to 18 functions specified in th e 12 th  Schedule. Each State 
was expected to enact a legislation to implement th e amendment. The State 
Government through amendments to HM Act and enactme nt of HMC Act 
transferred 18 functions to ULBs. 
Audit observed several overlaps in discharge of the  functions between ULBs 
and parastatals/Government departments. Out of 18 f unctions, ULBs were 
solely responsible for four functions; had virtuall y no role in two functions; 
had limited role in five functions; were mere imple menting agencies in four 
functions; and in respect of three functions, ULBs have important role to play 
with overlapping role of parastatals/Government dep artments. Thus, only 
22.2 per cent  functions (four out of 18 functions) have been ful ly devolved. 
The function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Table 4.1 . 
 
Table 4.1: Statement showing the actual status of implementation of functions 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
Functions where ULBs has full jurisdiction 
1 Burials and 
burial grounds; 
cremations, 
cremation 
grounds 
Construction and O&M 
of crematoriums and 
electric crematoriums 
ULBs ULBs are wholly responsible for 
discharging  this function. 
Construction and O&M 
of Burial grounds   
2 Cattle pounds; 
prevention of 
cruelty to 
animals 
Catching and keeping 
strays 
ULBs  ULBs are wholly responsible for 
discharging  this function. 
Sterilisation and anti-
rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
3 Regulation of 
slaughter houses 
and tanneries 
Ensuring quality of 
animals and meat 
ULBs ULBs are wholly responsible for 
discharging  this function. 
Disposal of waste 
Operation and 
maintenance of 
slaughter houses 
4 Vital statistics 
including 
registration of 
births and deaths  
Coordinating with 
hospitals/crematoriums, 
etc. for obtaining 
information 
ULBs and 
Health 
Department 
ULBs maintains database of births 
and deaths and issue certificate of 
birth and death in Urban Area. 
Health Department performs this 
function for non-ULB areas. At State 
level, Health Department is a nodal 
entity. 
Maintaining and 
updating database 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
10 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
Functions where ULBs have     major role with overlapping jurisdictions of State Departments/ 
parastatals  
5 Roads and 
Bridges 
Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
ULBs and 
Haryana 
Shehri Vikas 
Pradhikaran 
(HSVP) 
ULBs are constructing and maintaining 
roads, bridges, and footpaths within the 
jurisdiction of ULBs. However, they 
lacked autonomy in execution of 
developmental works as estimates and 
finalisation of tender upto ` 2.50 crore,  
` 0.25 crore and ` 0.15 crore in case of 
Municipal Corporation, Municipal 
Council and Municipal Committee 
respectively are approved by House of 
municipal bodies. While estimates and 
finalisation of tender having value more 
than above mentioned limits are 
approved by administrative authorities 
of ULB Department i.e. Administrative 
Secretary/Director, ULBs/District 
Municipal Commissioner. 
HSVP is constructing and 
maintaining these infrastructures in 
urban estates developed by it within 
jurisdiction of Municipal Bodies 
contrary to provisions of Section 
66A of HM Act and provisions of 
Section 41 and Section 42 of HMC 
Act. 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths  
6 Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking 
lots, bus stops 
and public 
conveniences. 
Installation and 
maintenance of street 
lights 
ULBs, HSVP 
and Haryana 
Roadways 
ULBs are responsible for 
development and maintenance of 
civic amenities such as street lights, 
public toilets, etc. in municipal area. 
However, they lacked autonomy in 
execution of developmental works 
as they have limited power as per 
remarks given in Sr. No. 5 above. 
HSVP is responsible to provide  
these civic amenities in Urban 
Estates developed by it. City bus 
routes are decided and operated by 
Haryana Roadways. Only in Karnal, 
city bus services (six buses) are 
operated by Municipal Corporation 
Karnal while in Gurugram, it is 
operated by GMDA, which is 
parastatal body created in 2017. 
This is not only against the 
provisions of Section 66A of HM 
Act and provisions of Section 41 
and Section 42 of HMC Act but 
creation of GMDA and assigning 
functions of Municipal Bodies to 
GMDA is assessed as weakening of 
the objectives of 74 th CAA. 
Creation and 
maintenance of public 
toilets  
Creation and 
maintenance of parking 
lots 
Deciding and operating 
bus routes 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
11 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
7 Provision of 
urban amenities 
and facilities 
such as parks, 
gardens, 
playgrounds 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
ULBs and 
HSVP 
ULBs are developing and 
maintaining parks and gardens 
within their jurisdiction. However, 
they lacked autonomy in execution 
of development works as they have 
limited power as per remarks given 
in Sr. No. 5 above. HSVP is 
responsible for providing these 
urban amenities in Urban Estates 
developed by it. Part compliance to 
the provisions of relevant Acts is 
similar to the position indicated 
against function at Sr. No. 5. 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
Functions where ULBs are mere implementing agencies  
8 Planning for 
economic and 
social 
development 
Program 
implementation for 
economic activities 
State 
Government 
Departments 
and ULBs 
Industry Department and other State 
Government Departments performs 
the various activities relating to 
program implementation for 
economic activities and social 
development.  
ULBs are implementing Central 
Government Schemes in Housing 
and Employment i.e. Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) and 
National Urban Livelihood Mission 
(NULM). Implementation of PMAY 
scheme was transferred to State 
Government Department (Housing 
for All department) w.e.f. January 
2021. 
Policies for social 
development 
9 Safeguarding the 
interests of 
weaker sections 
of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally 
retarded 
Identifying 
beneficiaries 
State 
Government 
Departments 
and  ULBs 
State Departments such as Welfare 
of SC and BC Department and 
Social Justice and Empowerment 
Department are responsible for 
safeguarding the interest of weaker 
section of society through schemes. 
However, ULBs are merely an 
implementing agency for Central 
and State Government schemes such 
as NULM, PMAY and Development 
of SC Basties Schemes which are 
meant for housing and weaker 
section and it identifies the 
beneficiaries under these schemes. 
Self-employment and 
skill wage employment 
to urban poor 
households 
Housing programs 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
12 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
10 Slum 
improvement 
and upgradation 
Identifying 
beneficiaries 
ULBs ULBs identify beneficiaries under 
PMAY and Individual Household 
Laterines component under SBM 
and are implementing these 
schemes. SUDA is nodal agency for 
PMAY whereas HSCB is nodal 
agency for SBM. 
Affordable Housing ULBs and  
State Urban 
Development 
Authority 
(SUDA) 
Upgradation Haryana 
Slum 
Clearance 
Board 
(HSCB) 
11 Urban poverty 
alleviation 
Identifying 
beneficiaries 
ULBs and 
SUDA 
ULBs identify the beneficiaries 
under NULM scheme which is 
meant for reducing poverty and 
vulnerability of the urban poor 
households by enabling them to 
access self-employment and skilled 
wage employment opportunities. 
SUDA as nodal agency for NULM 
scheme is responsible for fixation of 
targets, release of funds and 
monitoring of the scheme. 
Livelihood and 
employment 
Street vendors 
Functions where ULBs have limited role with overlapping jurisdictions of State Departments/ 
parastatals  
12 Urban planning 
including town 
planning 
Master 
Planning/Development 
Plans/Zonal Plans 
Town and 
Country 
Department 
(TCPD)/ 
ULBs 
Department, 
HSVP 
Development plans with respect to 
areas within the limits of 
municipality are prepared by 
Director, ULBs whereas 
Development plans for control area 
falling outside the limits of 
municipality are prepared by 
Director, TCPD.  
Enforcing master 
planning regulations 
TCPD, ULBs 
and HSVP 
Enforcement functions related to 
master plan, building bye-laws in 
respect of control area outside the 
municipal limit are performed by 
Director, TCPD whereas these 
functions are performed by ULBs in 
their areas. HSVP is responsible for 
enforcing building bye-laws in 
urban estates developed by it. 
Enforcement functions with respect 
to licenses are performed by TCPD. 
Enforcing building bye-
laws and licenses 
Group Housing TCPD, HSVP 
and ULBs 
Department 
Group housing scheme are approved 
by Director, TCPD, whereas HSVP 
approves the group housing scheme 
situated in  its Urban Estate. 
Development of 
Industrial areas 
TCPD Permission for setting up Industrial 
Area is given by Director, TCPD. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
13 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
13 Regulation of 
land-use and 
construction of 
buildings 
Regulating land use ULBs 
Department 
and TCPD 
Permission for change in land use 
(CLU) within the area of municipal 
limits is granted by ULBs 
Department and in case of license to 
developer TCPD grants permission 
for CLU. 
Approving building 
plans/high rises 
ULBs 
Department, 
TCPD, ULBs 
and HSVP 
ULBs can approve building plans in 
the municipal limits for users and 
sizes except commercial/ 
institutional users for the sites of 
1000 sqm and above. In case of 
license to developer, building plans 
are approved by Director, TCPD 
whereas HSVP approves building 
plans in urban estates developed by 
it. 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
ULBs 
Department, 
TCPD, ULBs 
and HSVP 
In municipal area this function is 
discharged by ULBs. However, 
TCPD perform this function in case 
of license to developer. HSVP 
discharge this function in the urban 
estates developed by it. 
14 Public Health, 
Sanitation 
Conservancy 
and Solid Waste 
Management 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
Health 
Department 
Health Department maintains 
hospitals and dispensaries in the 
State and carries out immunisation 
and vaccination. Immunisation/ 
Vaccination 
Cleaning and 
disinfection of localities 
affected by infectious 
disease  
ULBs Disinfection of localities affected 
infectious disease and control and 
supervision of public markets is 
done by respective ULBs. 
Control and supervision 
of public markets 
Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) 
DULB and 
ULBs  
Policy and strategy formulation for 
SWM projects are done by ULBs 
Department whereas execution of 
SWM is carried out by respective 
ULBs. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
14 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
15 Fire Services Establishing and 
maintaining fire 
brigades 
Director, Fire 
Services/ULBs  
ULBs are establishing and 
maintaining the fire brigades under 
the direction of Director Fire 
Services 1. 
Approval for firefighting scheme 
and issuance/renewal of NOC for 
building with height more than 15 
meter is given by Commissioner in 
case of Municipal Corporation and 
District Municipal Commissioner in 
case of Municipal Council/ 
Committee where as NOC for 
building less than 15 meter height is 
given by Assistant Divisional Fire 
Officer/Fire Station Officer who 
works under Director Fire Services.  
Providing fire NOC  ULBs/ 
Director Fire 
Services  Approval certificate in 
respect of high rise 
buildings 
16 Water supply for 
domestic, 
industrial and 
commercial 
purposes 
Distribution of water Public Health 
and 
Engineering 
Department 
(PHED), 
ULBs, HSVP 
and GMDA 
All activities relating to water 
supply are performed by PHED 
except in four Municipal 
Corporations (i.e. Gurugram, 
Faridabad, Karnal and Sonepat) 
where it is performed by concerned 
MCs. 
HSVP is providing water supply in 
urban estates developed by it. 
Providing connections 
Operation & 
Maintenance (O&M) 
Collection of charges 
Functions where ULBs have insignificant role 
17 Urban forestry, 
protection of 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological 
aspects 
Afforestation Forest 
Department, 
Haryana Pond 
and Waste 
Water 
Management 
Authority 
(HPWWMA) 
and ULBs 
Forest Department plays a 
significant role in discharge of this 
function. Protection of environment 
and promotion of ecological aspects 
was solely vested with the Forest 
Department. 
Natural resources like water bodies 
in the State is maintained by 
HPWWMA. ULBs are involved in 
Greenification and awareness drive. 
Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water 
bodies, etc. 
                                                           
1  Earlier, Director, ULBs was Ex-officio Director o f Fire Services however, w.e.f. 
1 August 2021, separate post of Director Fire Servi ce has been created and separate 
budget for 2021-22 allottted for maintenance of fire stations in the State. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
15 
Sr. 
No.  
Functions Activities  Authorities 
discharging 
the function  
Remarks 
18 Promotion of 
cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects 
Schools and education DSE and 
DHE 
The Department of School 
Education (DSE) and Department of 
Higher Education (DHE) is 
discharging the main responsibility 
regarding school and higher 
education.  
Fair and festivals are organised by 
Art & Cultural Affair Department 
and Kurukshetra Development 
Board (KDB) in association with 
ULBs. KDB has also role in 
development and maintenance of 
cultural buildings. 
Directorate of Archaeology and 
Museum maintains 
heritage/monuments sites. ULBs are 
performing activities relating to 
public space beautification. 
Fairs and festivals Art & 
Cultural 
Affair 
Department, 
KDB and 
ULBs  
Cultural buildings/ 
institutions 
Art & 
Cultural 
Affair 
Department  
Heritage Directorate of 
Archaeology 
& Museum  
Public space 
beautification 
ULBs 
The actual status of devolution of functions in the  test checked ULBs in terms 
of fully/partial devolved functions  is given in the Appendix 4.1  and as per the 
actual status only four  functions (Sr. No. 1, 2, 3  and 4 of the above table) had 
been fully devolved and remaining functions were pa rtially devolved which is 
in contravention of Section 66A of HM Act, 1973 and  Sections 41 and 42 of 
HMC Act, 1994. 
It could be seen from the above table that, ULBs in  the State play significant 
role in providing urban infrastructure, public and urban amenities within its 
jurisdiction, which require huge financial resource s due to growing 
urbanisation. The own financial resources of the UL Bs in the State were not 
sufficient to meet their revenue expenditure, as di scussed in Paragraph 6.3.1 
and they were totally dependent on grants from the Government for the 
mandated activities. Therefore, there is a dire nee d to augment own resources 
of the ULBs to carry out their core responsibilitie s. Land is a powerful 
instrument for mobilisation of resources to meet th e growing needs for urban 
infrastructure and amenities. Further, the land being finite resource and lack of 
planning as per local requirements may restrict pro visioning of urban 
infrastructure and amenities by ULBs. 
Given the backdrop, devolution of functions like ur ban planning including 
town planning and regulation of land use to ULBs as sumes prominence not 
only for raising own financial resources but also f or overall planning purposes 
to meet the needs for growing urbanisation by ULBs.
 However, it is evident 
from the above table that the State Government had not fully devolved these 
functions relating to land to ULBs. The TCPD alongw ith HSVP play a major 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
16 
role in these functions thereby restricting the aut onomy of ULBs despite 
adequate provisions in the Constitution.  
During exit conference, the department stated that four functions had been 
fully devolved and remaining functions were partial ly devolved by ULBs. 
Further, the department assured that the effort wou ld be made to provide more 
autonomy in respect of functions enumerated in the Constitutional 
Amendment. 
Recommendation: The State Government needs to take decisive action in 
order to translate the vision of achieving decentra lisation into reality.  Steps 
need to be taken to ensure that the ULBs enjoy an a dequate degree of 
autonomy in respect of the functions assigned to them. 
4.2 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urb an Local 
Bodies 
 
4.2.1 State Election Commission 
As per article 243ZA(1) of 74 th  CAA, the powers of the State Election 
Commission (SEC) include superintendence, direction  and control of the 
preparation of electoral rolls for and the conduct of all elections to 
municipalities. However, the power of delimitation of wards, reservation of 
seats for the council and rotation policy of seats for the posts of 
Mayor/President and wards were vested with the Stat e Government as per 
Haryana Municipal (Delimitation of ward) Rules, 197 7. This was not in 
accordance with the recommendation of the Second Ad ministrative Reforms 
Commission (SARC), which recommended to entrust the  task of delimitation 
and reservation of constituencies to SEC, which was accepted by the GoI.  
Further, the State Government delayed delimitation process, which in turn 
delayed council elections of 50 municipalities for 7 to 29 months during  
2015-16 to 2019-20. As a result, the people of thes e municipalities could not 
get their elected representatives in time. 
During exit conference, the department stated that the efforts would be made 
to avoid the delay in future. 
4.2.1.1 Composition of Municipalities 
Article 243R of 74 
th  CAA stipulates the composition of Municipalities. As per 
the HMC and HM Acts, the Corporations and Municipal ities consist of 
Elected Members as well as Nominated Members in acc ordance with Article 
243R of 74 th  CAA. The nominated members do not have voting power.  
The Commissioner/Executive Officer/Secretary are th e executive head of the 
Municipal Bodies. The Commissioner in the case of M unicipal Corporation, 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
17 
the Executive Officer in the case of a Municipal Co uncil and the Secretary in the 
case of Municipal Committee, shall have the right t o attend all the meeting of the 
municipality and to take part in discussion but sha ll not have the right to vote 
therein.   
Audit observed that the composition of municipaliti es were as per the 
prescribed norms. 
4.2.1.2 Reservation of seats 
Article 243T of 74 
th  CAA stipulated reservation of seats for SC/ST, Wom en 
and Backward Classes in every municipality for dire ct election. The Article 
provides for reservation of seats for SC/ST in prop ortion to SC/ST population 
to the total population of that municipality and re servation of minimum  
one-third of the total number of seats for women be longing to the SC/ST. The 
Article also provides for reservation of minimum on e-third of the total seats 
for women (including the number of seats reserved f or women belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes). The  Article further 
empowers the State Legislature to provide reservati on for Backward Class and 
rotation of reserved seats. 
The HM Act and HMC Act also provide for reservation  of seats for SC and 
women in all Municipalities and rotation of seats a s per the requirement of 
constitution. Both the Acts provides for reservatio n of two seats in each 
municipality for Backward Classes.  
Audit observed that the seats reserved for SC/Women  and rotation of the 
reserved seats were as per the prescribed norms. 
4.2.1.3 Status of elections and formation of councils 
The election shall be conducted by SEC as stipulate d in HMC (Election) 
Rules, 1994 and HM (Election) Rules, 1978. Election s of ULBs shall be 
completed before the expiry of their duration or in  case of dissolution before 
the expiry of a period of six months.  Further, as per Article 243U(3)(a) of 
Constitution of India and provisions of the HMC/HM Acts, a fixed tenure of 
five years for the members of ULBs from the date of  first meeting has been 
prescribed.  The status of elections and formation of councils i n the ULBs of 
the State as of September 2020 is depicted in Table 4.2 . 
Table 4.2: Status of elections and formation of councils in ULBs 
Total No. of ULBs 87 
Newly formed ULBs (Municipal Council) 1 
Newly Up-graded ULBs (Municipal Committee to Municipal Council) 1 
Elections held during 2015-16 to 2019-20 and councils formed 73 
Elections due during 2018-20 but not held due to delayed delimitation of wards 12 
Source: Information furnished by DULB 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
18 
As evident from the above that there were no counci ls in 12 2 ULBs. In the 
absence of an elected council, the involvement of e lected representatives in 
decision making and implementation, which is an ess ential element of 
democracy is missing.  
Recommendation: In view of the fact that the delimi tation has been delayed 
time and again by the State Government, the task of  delimitation should be 
entrusted to the State Election Commission in order  to ensure timely 
elections  as recommended by Second Administrative Reforms Commission. 
4.2.1.4 Mayor/President 
In Haryana, the post of Mayor as well as President is filled by direct election 
from November 2018 to December 2019 onwards amongst  the persons 
belonging to the General Category, Scheduled Castes , Backward Classes and 
Women by rotation. The number of offices of the May or and President is 
reserved for SCs and BCs in proportion to the population of these categories in 
the State. The term of office of Mayor in the Corpo rations is five year or 
residue of the term of his office while the term of  President is five year from 
the date of first meeting of the municipality. Mayo r is empowered to preside 
over every meeting of the Corporation, enjoys the p ower of inspection, may 
give direction to the Commissioner (Executive Head)  with regard to 
implementation of any resolution of the Corporation  and may call for any 
record of the Corporation from the Commissioner. Th e President has the 
power of general control over all the works of muni cipality. President is also 
empowered to pass orders on all matters that may be  referred to him through 
the Executive Officer or the Secretary. The Preside nt also has extraordinary 
powers in cases of emergency. On the occurrence or threatened occurrence of 
any event/involving/likely to involve extensive dam age to property/danger to 
human life/grave inconvenience to the public, the P resident, may, direct the 
execution of any such work which the committee is e mpowered to execute, 
and may direct that the expense of executing such w ork be paid from the 
municipal fund. 
4.2.1.5 Meeting of House 
As per Section 52(1) of the HMC Act and Section 25 of the HM Act, 
Corporation/Council/Committee shall ordinarily hold  at least one meeting in 
every month for the transaction of its business. Sc rutiny of records of selected 
ULBs revealed that only 226 meetings were held duri ng April 2015 to 
March 2020 as against the stipulated 710 meetings. Thus, adequate numbers of 
                                                           
2  Municipal Corporation: Ambala, Panchkula and Sone pat, Municipal Council: 
Rewari, Municipal Committee: Bass, Dharuhera, Ismai labad, Kundli, Sadhaura, 
Sampla, Sisai and Ukalana. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
19 
meetings were not held in compliance of the State m unicipal laws. The detail 
of meetings held by each test checked ULBs is given in Appendix 4.2 . 
4.2.1.6 Formation of ad-hoc committees 
Section 40 of HMC Act provides that Corporation may  constitute ad-hoc 
committees for discharge of its functions. Bye-law 22 of Haryana Municipal 
Corporation Business bye-laws, 2009 provides for fo rmation of 14 ad-hoc 
committees (Appendix 4.3)  in Municipal Corporation to conduct the business 
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of H MC Act.  Bye-law 17 of 
HM Business Bye Laws, 1981 provides that a Municipa l Council/Committee 
may appoint three Sub-Committees (i.e. Finance, Pub lic Works & Building 
and Sanitation & Water Supply) to assist the Counci l/Committee in its 
administration. 
 These bye-laws further provide that all such functi ons shall be 
transacted in the respective committees before its resolution in the house and 
approval of Commissioner/Government and meeting of these committees shall 
be convened once in a month and such shorter period  as the Committee or Sub 
Committee may decide. 
Audit observed that out of 15 test-checked ULBs, on ly three 
3 ULBs 
constituted ad-hoc committees (ranging between four  and eight), which were 
not also functional as very few meetings were held by these committees as 
detailed in Appendix 4.3 .  
During exit conference, the department stated that instructions would be given 
to the concerned ULBs to hold adequate numbers of m eetings as well as 
ensure formation and functioning of ad-hoc committe es as may be relevant to 
the status in the concerned Municipal Body. 
4.2.2 Wards Committees 
Article 243S (1) of the Constitution provides for W ards Committees 
(consisting of one or more wards) in all Municipali ties with a population of 
three lakh or more. It further requires State Legis lature to make provisions 
with respect to (a) the composition and the territo rial area of a wards 
committee (b) manner in which seats in a Wards Committee shall be filled.  
Audit observed that Sections 10 and 34 regarding co nstitution of Wards 
Committees were incorporated in HMC Act and HM Act respectively. 
However, enabling Rules specifying composition, ter ritorial area, term, power 
and functions of Wards Committees were not framed u nder these Acts by the 
State Government for implementation of related prov isions of the Acts. Audit 
further observed that out of 87 ULBs, eight 4 ULBs were having population of 
                                                           
3  (i) Panchkula, (ii) Ambala and (iii) Yamunnagar. 
4  (i) Faridabad, (ii) Gurugram, (iii) Hisar, (iv) K arnal, (v) Panipat, (vi) Rohtak, 
(vii) Sonepat and (viii) Yamunanagar. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
20 
three lakh or more as per censes 2011. However, no Wards Committee were 
constituted in these ULBs as prescribed under the A rticle 243 S (1) of the 
Constitution.  
Thus, due to non-framing of Rules by the State Gove rnment, the crucial 
constitutional provision for Wards Committees remai ned unimplemented 
which hampered the decentralisation in local governance.  
4.2.3 Area Sabha and Ward Committee 
Article 243S (5) of 74 th  CAA empowers the State Government for making any 
provision for constitution of committees in additio n to Wards Committees. In 
this regard, the State Legislature enacted Haryana Municipal Citizen’s 
Participation Act, 2008 to institutionalise citizen  participation in municipal 
functions by setting up of Area Sabha and Ward Committee. As per provisions 
of the ibid  Act, Area Sabha shall consist of all the person re gistered in the 
electoral rolls pertaining to every polling booth a nd person nominated by Area 
Sabha will acts as an Area Sabha representative, wh o shall be the Ex-officio 
member of the Ward Committee. Further, a Ward Commi ttee for each ward in 
a municipality shall be constituted consisting of n ot less than three and not 
more than 10 persons representing the civic society  as Area Sabha 
representatives, from the ward, to be nominated by municipality 
The main functions of the Area Sabha is to (a) dete rmine priority of scheme/ 
developmental programmes to be implemented in the a rea, (b) identify most 
eligible beneficiaries and (c) identify deficiencie s in the civic amenities, etc. 
The main functions of ward committee is to (a) assi st in preparation of wards 
plans in a manner consistent with the district plan s, ward budget, (b) to map 
the ward infrastructure index of ward and (c) condu ct supervision of sanitation 
work in the ward, etc. 
Audit observed that the State Government has not framed rules for nomination 
of Area Sabha representatives. Further, Area Sabha/Ward Committee were not 
formed in 15 test checked ULBs. Resultantly, citize n participation in local 
governance through Area Sabha and Ward Committee co uld not be ensured 
which 
defeated the objective of facilitating community pa rticipation in local 
governance.  
During exit conference, the department assured that  necessary steps would be 
taken in this regard.  
Recommendation: State Government should frame the e nabling rules for 
constitution of Wards Committees and nominations of  Area Sabha 
representative so that the priorities of citizens a re factored into the decisions 
of the ULB. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
21 
4.2.4 District Planning Committee and Metropolitan Planning 
Committee  
Article 243ZD of 74 th  CAA provides for the constitution of a District Planning 
Committee (DPC) for consolidation of plans prepared  by the Panchayats and 
the municipalities. The DPC was to prepare a Draft Development Plan (DDP) 
with regard to matters of common interest between t he Panchayats and the 
municipalities including spatial planning; sharing of water and other physical 
and natural resources; integrated development of in frastructure and 
environment conservation and extent and type of ava ilable resources, whether 
financial or otherwise. State Government framed DPC Rules, 1997 with regard 
to composition, functions and role of DPC under Sec tion 203B of HM Act. 
The DPCs were constituted in all districts. 
Article 243ZE of 74 
th  CAA provides for Constitution of a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee (MPC) in every Metropolitan area 5, to prepare a draft 
development plan for the Metropolitan area as a who le on matters of common 
interest between municipalities and the panchayats.  State Government has 
framed Rules with regard to composition, functions and role of MPC under 
Section 417 of HMC Act and constituted (June 2017) MPC for metropolitan 
area, Faridabad, which had population of more than 10 lakh as per 2011 
census. 
DPCs/MPC formed in the State did not prepare Draft Development Plan as per 
the constitutional provisions, however, they were i nvolved in finalisation of 
Draft Development Plan of the respective urban area s in the State which is 
statutory plan prepared under Section 5 of Punjab S cheduled Roads and 
Controlled Areas Restriction of Unregulated Develop ment Act, 1963. Its 
purpose is to allocate land for various uses and pl an infrastructure within a 
particular area or city for future. Urban Developme nt Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines, 1996 issued by Ministry of Urban Development 
(MOUD), GoI recommended that DPC/MPC should be constituted under State 
Urban and Regional Planning Act in order to institu tionalise the planning 
process at district level as envisaged in 74 
th  CAA. Further, URDPFI 6 
Guidelines, 2015 issued by MOUD pointed out that th e Area Planning and 
Development Authorities constituted to prepare and enforce development 
plans of urban centres under the State Town and Cou ntry Planning Act or 
other Acts may have a conflict of role and function s with the Urban Local 
Authorities constituted under modified State Munici palities Act and therefore,  
it suggested that taking into consideration the spi rit of 74 th  CAA, these bodies 
                                                           
5  Metropolitan area” means an area having a populat ion of 10 lakhs or more comprised 
in one or more districts and consisting of two or m ore Municipalities or Panchayats 
or other contiguous areas, specified by the Governo r by public notification to be a 
Metropolitan area for the purposes of this Part. 
6  Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and Implementation. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
22 
should be merged or work as technical wings of the MPC and DPC wherever 
the case may be and administrative amalgamation pro cess should be 
effectively decided by the State Governments. 
Audit observed that DDPs for urban areas were not b eing prepared by the 
respective ULBs and were being prepared by TCPD/DUL B after consultation 
with ULBs. The same were then forwarded to DPC/MPC for their 
recommendations. State Level Committee (SLC) of TCP D approved the same 
after considering the recommendations of DPC/MPC. T he above procedure of 
approval of development plans is not as per the spi rit of 74 th  CAA as State 
Government had not taken any action as per the guid elines of 
UDPFI/URDPFI. 
Audit further observed that during 2015-16 to 2019- 20, DPC was not involved 
in approval of Annual District Plan which includes various developmental 
works relating to Panchyats and Municipalities as t he State Government had 
formed (October 2012) another committee i.e. Distri ct Development and 
Monitoring Committee 
7 (DDMC) for approval of Annual District Plans in 
place of DPC in all the districts. 
As per Rule 12 of DPC Rules, DPC was required to me et for transaction of 
business at least once in three months. Audit in th is regard observed that in six 
test checked districts 
8, only 11 meetings of DPC were held during April 20 15 
to August 2020.  
During exit conference, the department stated that the matter would be taken 
with State Government to provide greater autonomy to the DPC & MPC. 
Recommendation: The full potential of the District Planning Committee and 
Metropolitan Planning Committee mechanism should be  tapped by 
implementing the Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development, GoI. 
4.2.5 State Finance Commission  
Article 243-I read with Article 243-Y of the Consti tution of India makes it 
mandatory for the State Government to constitute a Finance Commission 
within one year of the commencement of the 74 th  CAA and thereafter on 
expiry of every five years. The mandate of the Stat e Finance Commission 
(SFC) is to review the financial position of the lo cal bodies and to make 
                                                           
7  Committee is chaired by Minister-in-charge of Dis trict Grievance Redressal  
Committee  and other members consisting of Deputy Commissioner , Additional 
Deputy Commissioner, MP and MLA of district concern ed, Commissioner and 
Mayor/Deputy Mayor of Municipal Corporation, all Pr esident of Municipal 
Council/Committee, President and Vice President of Zila Prishad and all Chairman of 
Panchyat Samiti . 
8  Ambala, Karnal, Kurukshetra, Kaithal, Panchkula a nd Yamunanagar. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
23 
recommendations to the Governor for devolution of f unds. State Government 
through amendments in HM and HMC Acts provided for constitution of SFC.  
4.2.5.1 Delay in constitution of the SFC and implem entation of 
recommendations  
State Government were required to constitute a SFC within one year of the 
commencement of the 74 th  CAA and thereafter on expiry of every five years 
as mandatory in Article 243-I read with Article 243 -Y of the Constitution of 
India.  
In Haryana, Six SFCs were constituted between May 1 994 and September 
2020 with delay ranging from two months to 15 month s. The details of 
constitution, acceptance and implementation of reco mmendations of these 
Five SFCs Reports were given in Appendix 4.4.  
Five SFCs (1 
st  to 5 th  SFC) could not finalise their report in the allott ed time of 
one year and accordingly, the time had to be extend ed due to various reasons 
such as delay in providing of office accommodation,  allocation in budgetary 
provision, appointment of technical staff, difficul ties in getting reliable 
information from local bodies, non-availability of database relating to previous 
SFC and non-appointment/delay in appointment of ful l time member 
secretary. 
As per 5
th  SFC recommendations, sixth SFC should be establish ed by 
September 2019 and finalisation of its report by De cember 2020 to facilitate 
adoption of the Sixth SFC proposals from the 2021-2 2 fiscal year. However, 
the State Government constituted Sixth SFC in Septe mber 2020 after delay of 
one year.  
 
4.2.5.2 Response of the State Government to SFC recommendations  
The State Government may accept the recommendations  of the SFC in totality 
or with certain modifications. Audit observed that the State Government 
accepted few of the recommendations with modificati ons. The SFC-wise 
recommendations and their acceptance/modifications with reference to 
transfer of funds are given in the Table 4.3. 
 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
24 
Table 4.3: SFC-wise important recommendations and their acceptance/modifications  
SFC Recommendations Modifications 
First Devolution of 50 per cent  of the net proceeds from 
entertainment duty and entire net income from show tax of 
State Government. 
25 per cent  of the net proceeds from 
entertainment duty and entire net 
income from show tax only. 
Devolution of 20 per cent  of the royalty on minor minerals 
of State Government. 
Not accepted 
Grant-in-aid of ` 50 per capita for Municipal Corporation/ 
Council/ Committee. 
Not accepted 
Second Devolution of 50 per cent  of entertainment duty and show 
tax (estimated at ` 8.78 crore for the year 2005-06). 
` five crore (lump-sum) from 
entertainment duty and show tax for 
2005-06. 
Devolution of 20 per cent  of the vehicle tax (estimated at  
` 30.34 crore for the year 2005-06) of State Government. 
` 16 crore (lump-sum) from 
vehicle tax for 2005-06. 
Devolution of 20 per cent  of the royalty on minor minerals 
of State Government ( ` 17.57 crore for the year 2005-06). 
` 10 crore (lump-sum) from the 
royalty on minor minerals 
Grant-in -aid of ` 25 per capita for Municipal Corporation/ 
Council/ Committee ( ` 21.25 crore for the year 2005-06). 
` 19 crore (lump-sum) as Grant-
in-aid 
Waive of loan liability of ` 5.92 crore as one time measure Not accepted 
Third Devolution of four per cent  of the net own tax revenue of 
the State in addition to Excise and Local Area 
Development Tax (LADT) 
Two per cent  of the net own tax 
revenue of the State in 2006-07, 
2007-08, 2010-11 and at Three per 
cent  in 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
Fourth Devolution of 2.5 per cent  of the net own tax revenue of 
the State in addition to surcharge on VAT and excise. 
The State Government did not 
constitute the Cabinet Sub-
Committee to examine the 
recommendations of the SFC. 
Therefore, no recommendation was 
accepted. 
Fifth Devolution of seven per cent  of the State own tax revenue 
(SOTR) and Stamp duty of two per cent  over and above 
the recommended  devolution 
No modification. 
Besides the above recommendations relating to devol ution, the SFCs 
recommended several institutional and other measure s that would strengthen 
ULBs in the long term. An illustrative list of reco mmendations, which are not 
implemented are indicated below: 
• Creation of an incentive fund with 10 per cent  of annual entitlement of 
ULBs to reward better performing local bodies in their resource raising 
efforts (3 
rd  SFC Para 11.53). 
• To transfer water supply to ULBs in gradual manner covering 
operations and maintenance (O&M) initially followed by capital works 
subsequently (3 rd  SFC Para 13.50). 
• ULBs should be given full freedom  to levy taxes, d uties, fee, etc. 
within the limits prescribed by law subject to floo r or ceiling rates 
fixed by the State Government (4 th  SFC Para 15.34). 
• Setting up of separate institution to address the capacity building for all 
stakeholders relating to functioning of ULBs (4 th  SFC Para 15.145). 
• To rationalise revenue raising powers of the Munici palities. In 
reviewing the revenue raising powers of the municipalities, it would be 
appropriate to ensure that they are also authorised  to levy and collect 
all taxes, fees and toll, which can be collected by  the Municipal 
Committees and Councils and vice-versa (5 th  SFC Para 4.7.9). 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
25 
• To put in place a mechanism to prepare monthly Mana gement 
Information System (MIS) of the feedback received f rom the local 
residents (be it complaints or suggestions), analys e and classify these 
to identify the problem areas and the areas where i mprovement may be 
made (5 th  SFC Para 4.5.18). 
• To establish a State Level Urban Shared Services Ce nter (USSC) to 
provide technological support and expertise to ULBs  to improve their 
delivery of public amenities and services (5 th  SFC Para 4.2.17). 
• To conduct professional assessment of staff require d for ULBs to 
perform in a manner for desired outcomes (5 th  SFC Para 4.11.8). 
Implementation of the above recommendations would h ave contributed 
significantly to the realisation of the objectives of the 74 th  CAA. Non-
implementation was a setback to the process of achi eving envisaged 
decentralisation. The detailed list of other Fifth SFC recommendations which 
had not been implemented yet is given in Appendix 4.5. 
During exit conference, the department stated that matter would be taken up  
with the State Government in this regard.  
Recommendation: The State Government should constit ute SFC and 
implement its recommendations in timely manner. Fur ther, the 
recommendations of SFC relating to devolution as we ll as institutional 
matters should be implemented in toto to the extent  possible, taking into 
account the final purpose of creating genuine insti tutions of local 
governance. 
4.3 Powers of the State Government over ULBs 
Audit observed that the State Government had overri ding powers over ULBs, 
which was against the spirit of the 74 th  CAA. Illustrative list of provisions are 
indicated in the Table 4.4. 
Table 4.4: Statement showing the overriding powers of State Government over ULBs 
Sr. 
No. 
Subject Provision 
1  Power to frame 
Rules  
The State Government may by notification in the Gazet te make 
rules consistent with the HMC/HM Act. HMC Act also requir es 
approval of State Legislature in this regard (Secti on 257 of HM Act 
and Section 390 (2) of HMC Act). 
2  Power to cancel 
and suspend a 
resolution or 
decision taken by 
ULBs  
Deputy Commissioner/State Government may suspend the 
execution of any a resolution or order of ULBs, if i n their  opinion it 
is in excess of the powers conferred under HM/HMC Acts or any 
other law, or contrary to the interest of public or is likely to lead to 
breach of the peace or cause injury and/or annoyanc e to the public 
or any class or body of persons (Section 246 of HM Ac t and Section 
414 of HMC Act). 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
26 
Sr. 
No. 
Subject Provision 
3  Power to dissolve 
ULBs  
The State Government may, by notification, in which the reasons for 
so doing shall be stated, dissolve an ULB, in case ULB remain 
incompetent to perform, or persistently makes defau lt in the 
performance of the duties imposed on it by or under  this or any 
other Act, or exceed or abuse its power after conduct ing an enquiry 
by an officer, not below the rank of an Extra Assista nt 
Commissioner, appointed by the State Government and the ULB 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity o f being heard. 
(Section 254 of HM Act and Section 400 of HMC Act). 
4  Power to sanction 
Bye-laws  
Section 392 of HMC Act empowers the Municipal Corporat ion to 
make bye-laws. However, the bye-laws made by Municipal 
Corporation are not valid unless and until approved  by the State 
Government. Further, the State Government has power to  change 
and to cancel the bye-law (Section 394 of HMC Act).  
In case of Municipal Council and Committee, power to  make bye-
laws rest with the State Government. (Section 200 of HM Act). 
5 Power to sanction 
for borrowing 
money  
Section 150 of HMC Act allows Municipal Corporation to  borrow 
money, but only after prior sanction from the Govern ment. 
However, there is no specific provision with regard to  borrowing 
power of Municipal Council and Committee in HM Act. 
6 Power for lease/ 
sale of property  
As per Section 164 of HMC Act prior approval of the St ate 
Government is required for disposal of movable/immov able 
property exceeding in value of ` 20,000. Similarly, the State 
Government approval is required for lease of immovab le property 
for lease period exceeding 10 years or for lease in  perpetuity of any 
immovable property exceeding ` 20,000 in value or the annual rent 
of which exceeds ` 10,000. 
Prior approval of the State Government is required f or sale/lease of 
property by Municipal Council and Committee (Rule 6  and 7 of 
Haryana Management of Municipal Properties and State  Properties 
Rules, 2007). 
7 Power in respect 
of taxation 
Section 149 of HMC Act allows the State Government to  exempt in 
whole or part of the payment of any tax any person o r class of 
persons or any property. Further, the State Governme nt may 
suspend the levy of any tax if in their opinion it is unfair in its 
incidence. As per Section 75 of HM Act, the State Gover nment may 
modify the rate of any tax imposed by Municipal Cou ncil and 
Committee. 
8 Approval of 
Budget Estimates 
As Section 83 (3) of HMC Act, budgets estimates of mun icipal 
corporation are approved by State Government. As per Section 257 
(3) of HM Act read with Para II.8 of Municipal Account Code, 
1930, Divisional Commissioner/Deputy Commissioner app roves the 
budget for municipal councils/committees. 
During exit conference, the department stated that matter would be taken up 
with the State Government in this regard. 
4.4 Parastatals, their functions and impact on Urba n Local bodies 
The objective of the 74 th  CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functio ns 
to ULBs.  On one hand, the various departments of t he State Government are 
delivering core civic functions such as urban plann ing, regulation of land use, 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
27 
water supply and sewerage (except in four 9 Municipal Corporations) and 
public health and on other hand, functions such as development of urban 
infrastructure/amenities, urban planning for metrop olitan, poverty alleviation, 
affordable housing, slum improvement and promotion of cultural activities are 
being delivered by parastatals constituted before 7 4 th  CAA as well as newly 
created parastatals constituted after 74 th  CAA. The role of parastatals and their 
impact on the devolved functions is discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
4.4.1 Haryana Shehri Vikas Pradhikaran 
Haryana Shehari Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP) (erstwhile  Haryana Urban 
Development Authority) was constituted under the Ha ryana Urban 
Development Authority Act, 1977 (HUDA Act 
10 ). The members of HSVP 
consist of Chief Minister as Chairman and Chief Sec retary as Vice-Chairman, 
other members appointed by the State Government inc luding Chief 
Administrator who shall be responsible for general supervision of 
operations of the HSVP. The governing body of HSVP does not have any 
representation from ULBs. The main functions of the  HSVP are to promote 
and secure development of urban areas (including mu nicipal areas) by 
acquiring undeveloped land.  It carries out physical infrastructure development 
works like roads and bridges, water supply and sewerage systems, storm water 
drainage systems and horticulture works on undevelo ped land and disposes of 
the developed land for residential, industrial, ins titutional and commercial 
purposes after making zonal/sector plan in accordan ce with the development 
plan of the area. 
The State Government, at the request of the HSVP, a cquires land and on 
payment of the compensation awarded for the land by  the HSVP, the land is 
owned by HSVP.  HUDA Act empowers State Government to suspend the 
powers of municipalities relating to the control on  development and use of 
land/building and transfer such power to HSVP in re spect of land acquired. 
Consequent upon transfer of such power, HSVP shall be deemed to be 
municipality concerned and the Chief Administrator of HSVP shall be deemed 
to be the committee of the municipality. HSVP is al so empowered to levy 
additional stamp duty at the rate of one to three per cent (in addition to stamp 
duty payable under Indian Stamp Act, 1899) on regis tration of independent 
floors in the Urban Estates/Sectors developed by HS VP subject to approval of 
the same by the State Government. Consequently, HSV P has been approving 
building plans and enforcing building bye-laws in the area developed by it.  
HUDA Act also empowers HSVP to transfer the respons ibility for 
maintenance of amenities of developed sectors to UL Bs concerned in whose 
                                                           
9  Municipal Corporation: Faridabad, Gurugram, Karna l and Sonepat.  
10   HUDA Act, 1977 was renamed as Haryana Shehri Vika s Pradhikaran Act, 1977 vide 
Gazette Notification No. 15-HLA of 2018/15/4102 dated 10 March 2018 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
28 
limit, developed sector is situated as per the terms and conditions agreed upon. 
In this regard, the State Government decided (March /April 2016) to transfer 
207 developed sectors in various parts of the State  to respective ULBs for 
maintenance of water supply, sewerage, storm water,  street-lights and roads, 
etc. Audit observed that only 166 sectors could be transferred to respective 
ULBs till October 2020. 
As per terms and conditions of the transfer, HSVP w as required to share 
75 per cent  of receipts (i.e. extension fee, building applicat ion fee and 
composition charges) with respective ULBs on monthl y basis. Further, HSVP 
had to transfer 50 per cent  of profit margin of the sale/auction receipt of th e 
unsold sites to the concerned ULBs.
  
Audit observed that HSVP did not release any amount  on account of 75 per 
cent  share of ULBs in the said fee/charges to ULBs upto  April 2018.  HSVP 
proposed (April 2018) that it might release ` 265.57 crore as one time measure 
for repair/maintenance roads of transferred sectors  with the condition that no 
further payment in lieu of the 75 per cent  share shall be made to ULBs in 
future. The State Government approved (May 2018) th e proposal in view of 
financial crunch being faced by HSVP. Accordingly, HSVP released 
(May 2018) ` 265.57 crore for ULBs. No mechanism was evolved (up to 
September 2020) either to ascertain the amount due on account of 50 per cent  
profit margin and regular transfer of the due amoun t to respective ULBs. In 
absence of any mechanism, the amount due for recovery from HSVP could not 
be ascertained.  Resultantly, ULBs were deprived of their due share of revenue 
required for maintenance of civic amenities in these sectors.  
It was observed that the State Government did not t ransfer functions relating 
to building regulations, disposal landfills site fo r solid waste management and 
sewerage treatment plants to the respective ULBs an d HSVP continued to 
discharge these functions in these sectors despite the fact that these functions 
have been devolved to ULBs under HMC and HM Acts co nsequent to 
implementation of 74 th  CAA.  
Thus, the ULBs were not allowed to discharge their constitutionally mandated 
role in urban planning, regulation of land use, provision of urban infrastructure 
and civic amenities in urban estate/sectors develop ed by HSVP. Further, the 
role assigned to ULBs in the transferred urban esta tes/sectors is only in letter 
and not in spirit of 74 th  CAA. 
4.4.2 Gurugram Metropolitan Development Authority a nd Faridabad 
Metropolitan Development Authority 
The Government established (December 2017) Gurugram  Metropolitan 
Development Authority (GMDA) under Gurugram Metropolitan Development 
Authority Act, 2017 for development of municipal ar ea of Municipal 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
29 
Corporation, Gurugram, Municipal Council, Sohna, th ree Municipal 
Committees, Farukhnagar, Hailey Mandi and Pataudi a nd abadideh 11  of any 
Panchayat in Gurugram District. The governing body of the GMDA consist 
Chief Minister of the State as Chairperson and othe r members including TCP 
Minister, Urban Development Minister, Transport Min ister, MPs/MLAs 
falling within notified area, Mayor and Deputy Mayo r, Commissioner, 
Deputy Commissioner of Municipal Corporation, Gurug ram, Zila Parishad 
Chairman, senior officials of TCPD and DULB.  
The mandate of GMDA is to prepare integrated and co ordinated plans for 
infrastructure development including urban amenitie s, mobility management, 
sustainable management of the urban environment and  take measures for 
social, economic and industrial development for met ropolitan area in 
coordination with local authorities (i.e. ULBs, Gra m Panchayat, Panchayat 
Samiti and Zila Parishad) and GoI and other Governm ent agencies and to 
establish a modern geospatial-based system for plan ning purposes. The Act 
empowered GMDA to carry out function relating to ur ban planning and 
regulation of land use and to acquire land for impl ementation of 
infrastructure development works 
 and sustainable management of the urban 
environment. The GMDA has the power to direct the l ocal authority to 
remove any obstruction or encroachment on roads inc luding cycling tracks, 
open spaces, pedestrian footpaths or properties and  call for report, return or 
information from local authorities. GMDA is also op erating the city bus 
service through Gurugram Metropolitan City Bus Serv ices i.e. a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 for the metropolitan area. 
The Act empowers GMDA to levy duty (not more than t wo per cent ) on 
transfer of immovable properties situated within th e limits of notified area in 
addition to duty imposed under Indian Stamp Act, 18 99 and on sale and 
consumption of liquor in notified area with prior a pproval of the State 
Government.  
The State Government has imposed (April 2021) one per cent  stamp duty to 
be collected by  GMDA as discussed in Paragraph 6.1.2.1. GMDA is als o 
providing bulk water supply to bulk consumers in Gu rugram and it had 
recovered ` 183.95 crore from consumers/users during 2017-20 fo r various 
types of user charges (e.g. water sewerage bill cha rges, water tanker and new 
water connections sewerage charges, etc). 
As per Section 32 (1)(c) of the GMDA Act, it shall maintain its own fund 
which shall consist all money received by GMDA as a  grant, loans and 
advances received from the GoI/State Government and  Municipal 
Corporation, Gurugram. The State Government approve d (October 2017) 
grant of ` 500 crore to GMDA from the income of Municipal Cor poration, 
Gurugram as per the above mentioned provision under  GMDA Act subject to 
                                                           
11   In inhabitant site of village. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
30 
condition that the said sum of money can be utilise d only for the purpose of 
infrastructure development and provision of urban a menities within the limits 
of Municipal Corporation, Gurugram. Audit observed that out of ` 500 crore, 
` 46.94 crore was diverted and incurred on external development works 
relating to licenses provided to developers for whi ch developers were required 
to deposit external development charges (EDC) to GM DA. Further, GMDA 
initiated development works of only ` 282.16 crore against ` 500 crore upto 
June 2021 in Municipal Corporation, Gurugram area. 
The objective of 74 th  CAA was that the State Government should devolve 
planning powers to the third tier of Government and  desist from making plans 
for them. As recommended in the URDPFI Guidelines (discussed in Paragraph 
4.2.5), this type of body should serve as technical  arm of the MPC. Further, 
overall structure of GMDA and financial powers assi gned to it undermines the 
role of ULBs in local governance. 
On similar lines, the State Government established (February 2019) Faridabad 
Metropolitan Development Authority (FMDA) for Munic ipal Corporation, 
Faridabad and abadideh  of any Panchayat in Faridabad District by enactment  
of Faridabad Metropolitan Development Authority Act, 2018. 
4.4.3 Haryana Urban Infrastructure Development Boar d 
The Haryana Urban Infrastructure Development Board (HUIDB) was 
constituted (April 2002) by amending HM Act to rais e resources for provision 
and upgradation of urban infrastructure; town plann ing implementation 
techniques; providing training facilities/human res ources development in 
urban management and coordination, planning and imp lementation of the 
approved schemes/projects of the municipalities. Th e governing body of 
HUIDB consists of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Chief Administrator, 
Secretary and nine other ex-officio members appoint ed by the State 
Government and there was no representation from ULBs.   
As per Section 203L of HM Act, HUIDB constituted a fund 12  consisting of 
receipt on account of license fee, scrutiny fee, la nd use conversion charges, 
composition fee for granting license to private dev elopers and permission for 
change in land use by the DULB Department under Sta te Municipal Acts, 
grants, loans and financial assistance provided by GoI/State Government and 
any other fee/charges specified by the Government.  
Audit noticed that DULB deposited ` 158.11 crore on account of external 
development charges collected from developers/insti tutions with the HUIDB 
upto November 2020. This amount was required to be transferred to concerned 
ULBs for carrying out development works. However. t he same is lying 
unspent with HUIDB. 
                                                           
12   Haryana Urban Infrastructural Development Fund. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
31 
HUIDB also received ` 129.88 crore on account of license fee, composition  
fee, scrutiny fee, etc. during 2015-16 to 2019-20. Audit observed that out of 
` 129.88 crore, ` 88.97 crore was lying unspent with HUIDB as of 
December 2020.  
The State Government declared (July 2015) HUIDB as nodal agency for 
implementation of “Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation” 
(AMRUT), a Centrally sponsored scheme with a missio n period of five years 
(2015-20) with a aim of strengthening Urban infrast ructure and improvement 
of slums. The AMRUT was being implemented through 1 8 13  ULBs of the 
State in association with project consultants. Fund s for implementation of the 
scheme are shared between Centre and State Governme nt. The respective 
ULBs prepared Service Level Improvement Plans (SLIP s) after assessing 
service level gaps in the areas of water supply, se werage, drainage and parks. 
On the basis of SLIPs, the State Annual Action Plan  (SAAP) was prepared 
(November 2015) by the Board. HUIDB receives the fu nds from the GoI and 
State Government to implement the SAAP. Further, th e funds are released to 
the concerned ULBs for the implementation of variou s projects as approved in 
SAAP. HUIDB has appointed consultants for preparati on of detailed project 
reports/tender documents, bidding process, award of  contract, supervision and 
contract management. 
4.4.4 Kurukshetra Development Board 
The Kurukshetra Development Board (The Board) was c onstituted  
(August 1968) by the State Government under the Soc ieties Registration Act, 
1860. The governing body of the Board consists of G overnor as Chairman, 
Chief Minister as Vice-Chairman and 18 other member s including Urban 
Development Minister, Revenue Minister, Finance Min ister, etc. There is no 
representation from the elected representatives of the concerned ULBs. 
The objectives of the Board are overall comprehensive development of various 
tiraths 14  in Kurukshetra and other Area of the State includi ng its landscaping, 
renovation of historical buildings and tanks, provi ding civic amenities to the 
visiting pilgrims and tourists as well as upkeeping  and maintenance of the 
tirthas . The Board has preserved and developed various tiraths  in the State 
and also allotted land to various voluntary organisations for the construction of 
dharamshalas to provide cheaper accommodation to th e visiting pilgrims and 
tourists. As part of fair and festivals, the Board organises Suryagrahan  and 
Gita Mahotasav as international events and various local events like somvati 
                                                           
13   (i) Gurugram, (ii) Panchkula, (iii) Ambala, (iv) Yamunanagar, (v) Karnal, (vi) Hisar, 
(vii) Rohtak, (viii) Faridabad, (ix) Panipat, (x) K aithal, (xi) Rewari, (xii) Bhiwani, 
(xiii) Thanesar, (xiv) Sonepat, (xv) Bahadurgarh, ( xvi) Palwal, (xvii) Sirsa and 
(xviii) Jind. 
14   Religious/pilgrimages places. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
32 
Amavasya mela, sarsawati puja, etc. State Government released grant-in-aid of 
` 114.79 crore to the Board for various development works during 2015-20.  
Thus, the role of KDB is inconsistent with the spirit of 74 th  CAA as both HMC 
and HM Act stipulate cultural promotion as one of t he function of ULBs as 
mentioned in 12 th  schedule of the Constitution. 
4.4.5 State Urban Development Authority 
The State Urban Development Authority (SUDA) is nod al agency for 
implementation of Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana-Nation al Urban Livelihood 
Mission (DAY-NULM) which is a centrally sponsored m ission to reduce 
poverty and vulnerability of urban poor households by enabling them to access 
self-employment and skilled wage opportunity.  SUDA performs its function 
as per DAY-NULM guidelines issued from time to time  by the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA).  In Haryana, SUD A works as State 
Urban Livelihood Mission (State Mission) which is s upported by a State 
Mission Management Unit (SMMU) headed by State Miss ion Director. 
SMMU looks after the implementation of the Mission.  At the city level, a City 
Mission Management Unit (CMMU) has been established  in all DAY-NULM 
Cities 15  to work under the overall guidance of the SMMU. Th e ULBs are 
implementing the DAY-NULM activities through CMMUs.  The CMMUs 
have technical specialists having expertise in vari ous fields like social 
mobilisation, institution and capacity building, li velihood/micro enterprises, 
micro finance, etc. which are funded under Capacity  Building  and Training 
component of DAY-NULM and such support under the Mi ssion is limited to 
five years. Within the stipulated period, ULBs are required to build their 
internal capacities for effective implementation of  urban poverty alleviation 
programmes. SUDA prepares the Annual Action Plan (A AP) on the basis of 
budgetary allocation received from the MoHUA and on  the basis of AAP the 
MoHUA approve the targets for the States under the Mission. The SUDA 
further allocates the targets for the ULBs accordin gly. SUDA has been 
receiving grants sanctioned by GoI/State Government  and releasing the same 
to ULBs/CMMU. 
Further, the SUDA was nodal agency for the monitori ng of Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojana (Urban) Mission, (PMAY-U). The targeted population under the 
schemes (NULM and PMAY) was identified through a de mand survey 
conducted by SUDA in association with ULBs through private agency.  
Audit observed that though 74 
th  CAA empowers ULBs to discharge 
responsibility with respect to Urban Poverty Allevi ation, however, ULBs in 
                                                           
15   All District Headquarter Towns and all other citi es with a population of 1,00,000 or 
more as per 2011 census. 

Chapter IV Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
33 
the State were only implementing the schemes prepar ed by GoI that to under 
the overall supervision of SUDA. 
4.4.6 Haryana Slum Clearance Board 
Haryana Slum Clearance Board (HSCB) was constituted  (April 1990) under 
the provisions of Punjab Slum Areas (Improvement an d Clearance) Act, 1961. 
The objective of the Board is to undertake the deve lopment or re-development 
of slum areas, rehabilitation of slum dwellers in t he State of Haryana 
(including municipal areas). All the powers related  to improvement of the 
slum area, clearance of a slum area and re-developm ent of a slum clearance 
are vested with the Board. The governing body of th e HSCB does not have 
any representation from ULBs.  
Audit observed that though HMC Act empowers Municip al Corporation to 
prepare a scheme in the slum improvement and upgrad ation of the slum area 
as provided in the Punjab Slum Areas (Improvement a nd Clearance) Act, 
1961, all the powers of improvement/clearance of a slum area and  
re-development of the area vest with the HSCB. HSCB  has not implemented/ 
executed any scheme related to slums during 2015-16  to 2019-20. Resultantly, 
existence of the HSCB undermines the role of ULBs a nd its accountability to 
the people in the devolved function of slum improvement and upgradation. 
HSCB was declared (February 2015) as nodal agency f or implementation of 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in urban areas of the  State. HSCB receives 
the funds from GoI and State Government. Thereafter , the funds are released 
by HSCB to the concerned ULBs for the implementatio n of various 
components 
16  as envisaged in SBM guidelines. A Project Manageme nt Unit 
(PMU) at directorate level and 21 Project Implement ing Units at ULBs level 
have been established by HSCB through an outsourced  agency to assist HSCB 
and ULBs for implementation of the Mission as envis aged in Mission 
guidelines. Thus, the role of HSCB as nodal agency for SBM is inconsistent 
with the spirit of 74 th  CAA as sanitation is core function of the municipa l 
bodies. 
4.4.7 Role of ULBs in Smart City Mission 
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI launched (June 2015) Smart 
City Mission (SCM) with aim to cover 100 cities during five years (2015-16 to 
2019-20). As per the mission guidelines, each poten tial city will prepare smart 
city proposals (SCPs) with the help of consulting f irm selected by the State 
Government from a panel prepared by MoUD. 
 Final selection of cities was 
done by MoUD, on the basis of SCPs approved by the State Government. The 
implementation of the Mission at city level is to b e done by Special Purpose 
                                                           
16   (i) Household Toilets, (ii) Community Toilets, (i ii) Public Toilets and Urinals,  
(iv) Solid Waste Management and (v) IEC and Public Awareness. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
34 
Vehicle (SPV) created by State Government and the c oncerned ULB with 
equity participation of 50:50. Two cities in the St ate were declared as Smart 
City and accordingly, two SPVs i.e. Faridabad Smart City Limited (FSCL) and 
Karnal Smart City Limited (KSCL) were formed. As pe r the mission 
guidelines, projects of smart city will be financed  through grants received 
from GoI funds and matching contribution by the Sta te Government. In 
addition to this KSCL will also raise funds (either  debt or equity) from public, 
institutional-investor, banks, financial institutio n and other sources such as 
user charges, tax and surcharge as determined by the State Government. 
During the examination of the records of selected u nit (MCK), audit observed 
that the House of the Municipal Corporation approve d (April 2017) the SCPs 
containing projects of ` 1,295.81 crore to be executed by SPV. Accordingly, 
Karnal Smart City Limited (KSCL) under the Companie s Act, 2013 was 
formed (December 2017) with paid capital of ` 10 lakh with equal 
contribution from the State Government and MCK. The  main objective of the 
KSCL was to implement the projects of SCP and exerc ise such power, rights 
and obligations of MCK with respect to SCPs as may be delegated by the State 
Government/the Municipal Corporation under HMC Act,  1994 from time to 
time.  The management of KSCL is vested in the Board of Directors 17 . 
Audit observed that MCK has no role in execution of smart city projects as the 
same is within the purview of Board of Directors of  KSCL. Further, there was 
no representation from elected members of MCK in th e Board of Directors. 
The State Government has formed a city advisory for um at the city level 
which inter alia  includes Mayor, MCK (as a member) for advising and  
monitoring of projects of smart city as per mission  guidelines. The State 
Government released ` 120 crore (including ` 60 crore share of GoI) to KSCL 
upto October 2020.  
During exit conference, the department confirmed th e facts about substantial 
role of the parastatals like Haryana Shehari Vikas Pradhikaran (HSVP), 
Gurugram Metropolitan Development Authority (GMDA),  the Kurukshetra 
Development Board, etc. and other Government Depart ments in carrying out 
some functions enumerated in the Constitutional Ame ndment for the Urban 
Local Bodies. It was further stated that State Urba n Development Authority 
(SUDA), Haryana Slum Clearance Board (HSCB) and Har yana Urban 
Infrastructure Development Board (HUIDB) are ancillaries of the Urban Local 
Bodies Department. 
                                                           
17   Consisting of  Additional Chief Secretary, ULBs Department (as Cha irman),  
Director, ULBs Department,  Deputy Commissioner, Karnal (as Chief Executive 
Officer), Municipal Commissioner, MCK,  Chief Administrator, HSVP and Deputy 
Secretary, MoHUA, GoI. 

Chapter V 
Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 

35 
CHAPTER-V 
Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
5.1 Limited powers over manpower 
The status of exercising power in respect of execut ive functionaries provided 
to the ULBs in the State is given in the Table 5.1 . The details in respect of the 
powers of executive functionaries are discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
Table 5.1: Status of exercising power in respect of executive functionaries provided to 
the ULBs in the State 
Activities relating to 
functionaries 
Authorities 
exercising the 
power in respect 
of functionaries 
Remarks 
Creation of municipal 
services 
State Government The Haryana Municipal Corporation Employees 
(Recruitment and Conditions) Services Rules, 1998 
and the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, 
Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2010 
list out the municipal services created for the 
municipalities and provisions regulating thereof. 
Making rules relating to 
recruitment, pay, 
transfer and other 
conditions of service of 
persons appointed to the 
municipal Services and 
revision thereof 
Grouping of municipal 
services in order to 
define rank and 
responsibilities 
State Government No clear classification of the post of municipal 
services as Group A, B and C except that the 
employees working in municipal corporations having 
grade pay of ` 6,000 (Pay band 15,600-39,100) or 
above as group ‘A’.  
Providing sanctioned 
strength to the posts of 
municipal services 
Administrative 
Secretary, ULB 
Department 
Sanctioned strength for the newly/upgraded 
municipalities as well as already existed is decide d 
by Administrative Secretary, ULB Department. 
Selection and 
Recruitment to the posts 
of municipal services 
Haryana Public 
Service 
Commission 
(HPSC) and  
Haryana Staff 
Selection 
Commission 
(HSSC) 
Municipalities send vacancies positions to the ULB 
Department who makes requisition to HSSC and 
HPSC for selection. 
Appointing authorities make recruitment on the basi s 
of recommendation by HPSC and HSSC. 
Deployment of 
executive head and 
staffs including 
engaging through 
outsourcing 
State Government, 
Administrative 
Secretary and 
DULB 
Municipalities are required to get prior sanction f or 
engagement and extension of staff on outsourcing from 
the DULB. This power has been delegated to District  
Municipal Commissioner for engaging lower level 
staff against the vacancies from September 2020. 
Power to impose 
penalty and an appeal 
against any order 
imposing penalty on 
any officer or employee 
State Government, 
Administrative 
Secretary, 
Director, 
Commissioner, 
District Municipal 
Commissioner 
The concerned appointing authorities to the posts o f 
municipal services are empowered to impose penalty. 
Appointing authorities for some important posts are  
discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
Power to transfer any 
officer or employee 
within/outside 
municipalities 
State Government 
and Appointing 
authorities 
Appointing Authority to the posts of municipal 
services are State Government, Administrative 
Secretary, Director, ULB Department, Municipal 
Commissioner and District Municipal Commissioner. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
36 
Activities relating to 
functionaries 
Authorities 
exercising the 
power in respect 
of functionaries 
Remarks 
Annual Performance 
Appraisal Report 
(APAR) of Executive 
Head of Municipalities 
Administrative 
Secretary, ULB 
Department and 
District Municipal 
Commissioner  
APAR of the Commissioner of the Municipal 
Corporation is reported by Administrative Secretary 
in consultation with Mayor of Municipal 
Corporation. 
APAR of the District Municipal Commissioner 
(Newly created post with delegation of some powers 
of Deputy Commissioner of District in respect of 
affairs of Councils & Committee from August 2020) 
is reported by Administrative Secretary in 
consultation with DULB. 
APAR of the Executive Officer/Secretary of the 
Municipal Council/Committee is reported by District 
Municipal Commissioner in consultation with Sub-
Divisional Officer of the District. 
Provisions for capacity 
building in Acts/Rules 
State Government Both the State Municipal Acts and Rules mentioned 
above are silent about Capacity Building. 
Budgetary provisions 
for capacity building 
DULB and ULBs No such budgetary provision except for elected 
women councilors during 2015-20. State Government 
has issued instruction for making budgetary provision 
of 2.5 per cent  of salary budget from 2021-22 in 
compliance of Haryana State Training Policy 2020, 
which was in process till completion of audit. 
Training policy and 
modules 
DULB and ULBs No training policy and modules have been framed. 
Induction Training/ 
Job-oriented Training 
DULB and ULBs No such system exists. 
Adequate and qualified manpower is a pre-requisite for the empowerment of 
ULBs. The broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs is depicted in 
Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2: Broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs 
Sr. 
No.  
Wing/sections  Functions  
1.  Administration  General administration, including meetings of counc il and 
committees  
2.  Taxation  Assessment and collection of various taxes, rent, 
advertisements and other property related activities  
3.  Accounts  Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparatio n of 
budget, etc.  
4.  Sanitation  Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management  and 
other public health related activities  
5.  Engineering/Technical  Construction/O & M of roads, drains, buildings, parks, play 
grounds, water supply and street lighting, etc.  
6.  Town Planning  Town planning activities such as issue of building licences, 
etc.  
The constitution of municipal services and assessme nt of manpower should be 
based on the functions undertaken by ULBs with a vi ew that majority of the 
functions which are service oriented have to be dis charged within a reasonable 
time period. This assessment could be done best by ULBs themselves 
considering various criteria such as the extent of geographical area to be 

Chapter V Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
37 
covered, the extent of population, the number of pr operties existing, etc. As 
per recommendation of Second Administrative Reform Commission, Local 
Government should have the power to appoint all off icials and to hold them 
accountable. 
Audit observed that ULBs did not have powers to con stitute municipal 
services, to determine the strength of the Municipa l Services so constituted or 
to recruit the required staff. These powers are ves ted with the State 
Government under Sections 38, 39 and 40 of the HM A ct and Section 67 of 
the HMC Act. The State Government has the power to make rules relating to 
recruitment, pay, transfer and other conditions of service of persons appointed 
to the said Services. Further, Rules 
1 framed under State Municipal Acts allow 
the State Government/appointing authority to transf er any officer of a 
municipality to another municipality or local autho rity or any Government 
department.  Performance appraisal of key functiona ries of Municipal Bodies 
is vested with the State Level administrative authorities. 
5.1.1 Recruitment of staff 
In accordance with the Acts and the Rules governing  municipal services, the 
State Government regulates the method of recruitmen t, conditions of service, 
pay and allowance, discipline and conduct of staff and officers of ULBs. The 
Haryana Municipal Corporation Employees (Recruitmen t and Conditions) 
Services Rules, 1998 and the Haryana Municipal Serv ices (Integration, 
Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2010,  list out the Appointing 
Authorities for various municipal posts as indicated in Table 5.3 .  
Table 5.3: Statement showing the appointing authorities for recruitment 
Various posts Authority  
Executive Officer, Secretary, Chief Engineer. Superi ntending 
Engineer, Executive Engineer, Municipal Engineer/As sistant 
Engineer, Senior Town Planner, Dy. Town Planner, As sistant 
Town Planner, Chief Accounts Officer, Accounts Offic er, 
Assistant Account Officer, Senior Architect, Medica l Officer, 
Zonal Taxation Officer, Circle Heads Draftsman, Tehsildar. 
Government of 
Haryana/Administrative 
Secretary of Urban Local Bodies 
Department 
Office Superintendent, Tax Superintendent, Accounta nt, Chief 
Sanitary Inspector, Head Draftsman, Junior Engineer, Accountant 
Director of Urban Local Bodies 
(DULB)  
Fire Station Officer, Assistant Fire Station Office r, Building 
Inspector, Naib Tehsildar, Patwari, Land Officer, D raftsman, 
Light/Tax/Sanitary Inspector, Assistant, Stenograph er, Clerk, 
Electricians, Garden Supervisor, Librarian, Mali, Ch owkidar, 
Driver, Peon, etc. 
Commissioner of Municipal 
Corporation and DC of the 
concerned District in case of 
Municipal Councils and 
Committees 
There was no classification of the post of municipa l services as Group A, B 
and C which broadly corresponded to the rank, statu s and the degree of the 
level of responsibility attached to the posts.  
                                                           
1  Haryana Municipal Corporation Employees (Recruitm ent and Conditions) Services 
Rules, 1998 and Haryana Municipal Services (Integra tion, Recruitment and 
Conditions of Service) Rules, 2010. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
38 
5.1.2 Recruitment process for Human resources of UL Bs 
The recruitment to various posts of ULBs was done t hrough the Haryana 
Public Service Commission (HPSC) and Haryana Staff Selection Commission 
(HSSC). The various stages of recruitment through H SSC are depicted in 
Chart 5.1 . 
Chart 5.1: Flow chart of recruitment process through HSSC 
 
 
 
 
Analysis of the records of recruitment made by DULB  for Class IV- post (i.e. 
peon, mali, chowkidar, etc.) and accountants during  the period 2015-20 
showed the following: 
• The total time taken commencing from forwarding the  proposals to 
HSSC till final appointment of persons was 1905 day s in case of 822 
posts of peon, mali, chowkidar, etc. and 2471 days in case of 35 posts 
of accountant as detailed in Appendix 5.1. 
• DULB sent proposal to HSSC for recruitment of 822 p osts of peon, 
mali, chowkidar, etc. while need for 967 posts was sent by various 
ULBs. The reason for not sending proposal of 145 po sts was not 
available on records. 
• DULB took 1,720 days in case of posts of peon, mali , chowkidar, etc. 
and 1,520 days in case of post of accountant in mak ing need 
assessment, sending proposal, attending queries of HSSC in respect of 
proposals and deciding recruitment agency. The State Government also 
put on hold the recruitment process for 155 days. 
• HSSC took 161 days in case of posts of peon, mali, chowkidar, etc. 
and 930 days in case of posts of accountant for com pletion of selection 
process from receiving proposal to sending final li st of selected 
candidates. 
Thus, it is evident from above that the time taken by State Government/HSSC 
for recruitment of staff for ULBs was two to six ye ars in the above case which 
is abnormally high and affected the proper functioning of ULBs. 
HSSC 
Advertise the 
need & 
recommend the 
candidates after 
selection for 
appointment 
DULB 
Issue offer of 
appointment to the 
posts of which 
Director is 
appointing 
authority & make 
allotment to ULBs 
Commissioner/ Dy. 
Commissioner 
Issue offer of 
appointment to the 
posts of which they 
are appointing 
authority  
DULB 
Need assessment 
by collecting 
information from 
ULBs and sending 
proposal to HSSC 
after approval of 
Director 

Chapter V Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
39 
5.1.3 Administrative powers over staff 
ULBs have no power to impose penalty or to appeal a gainst any order 
imposing penalty on any officer or employee and the  same rests with the State 
Government/Administrative Secretary/Director/Dy. Co mmissioner/Municipal 
Commissioner. Municipal Councils and Committees are  required to get prior 
sanction for engagement of staff on outsourcing from the DULB.  
During exit conference, the department stated the n ecessary steps would be 
taken to avoid unnecessary delay in recruitment of staff in future. Further,  
necessary action would be taken for deciding groupi ng of the staff as category 
‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ with defined role and responsibilities attached to the posts. 
Recommendation: Adequate powers over manpower resou rces should be 
delegated to ULBs in matters such as assessment and  recruitment of 
required staff to ensure availability of qualified manpower for discharging 
functions. 
5.2 Sufficiency and functioning of staff 
State Government fixed (February 2018) standard san ctioned strength for 
different posts to be provided for newly constitute d/upgraded municipality 
based on the type of municipalities (Municipal Corp oration/Council/ 
Committee). The basis for determining the standard sanctioned strength for 
each type of municipality was not furnished to audit.  
Audit observed that not only sanctioned strength of  various posts in the ULBs 
in the State was not in consonance with standard sa nctioned strength decided 
by the State Government also there was shortage in availability of manpower 
with respect to the sanctioned posts among the vari ous categories leading to 
vacancy position ranging from 31.58 to 65.87 per cent  as shown in Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Statement showing the staff position in ULBs in the State. 
Particulars No. of 
ULBs 
Human Resource (as on January 2020) 
Sanctioned Vacant Vacancy position 
(per cent ) 
Outsourced 
staff  
M. Corporations 10 14,323 4,523 31.58 2,608 
M. Councils 19  2,772 1,343 48.45 642 
M. Committees 53  2,312 1,523 65.87 995 
Source: Information provided by DULB, out of 87, data for 82 ULBs were provided. 
Audit observed that the State Government took more than two years in 
sanctioning (December 2020) the various posts for f our 2 newly  created 
municipal committees since constitution (October to  December 2018) of these 
ULBs.  Functions of these municipalities were being perfor med with 
outsourced staff and by giving additional charge to  the officials of nearby 
municipalities.  
                                                           
2  (i) Kundli, (ii) Sadhaura, (iii) Ismailabad and ( iv) Bass. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
40 
Non-provision of adequate specialised manpower requ ired for delivery of the 
selected functions and other core functions is disc ussed in the following 
paragraph: 
5.2.1 Executive head of ULBs 
Audit observed that there was no sanctioned post fo r Executive Officer  in 
Municipal Council, Jhajjar. Further, post of Munici pal Commissioner  was 
vacant in two Municipal Corporations 3 and post of Executive Officer was 
vacant in 23 ULBs (four 4 Municipal Councils and 19 5 Municipal Committees). 
Functions of these municipalities were being superv ised by additional charge 
held given to executive head of nearby municipaliti es. However, no 
information in respect of the additional charges he ld during the audit period 
was available with the DULB. The State Government i ntroduced  
(February 2020) a system of link officers of execut ive head of ULBs where 
the post is vacant to ensure smooth functioning of the ULBs. 
5.2.2 Specialised Manpower 
Adequate specialised manpower especially in the fie ld of Taxation, Public 
Health, Engineering, Accounting and Sanitation is p re-requisite for providing 
better urban services to the citizen.  
Specialised manpower for Taxation, Public Health, E ngineering, Accounting 
and Sanitation across all types of municipalities w ere inadequate. The overall 
shortage of specialised manpower, as on January 202 0, across the above 
mentioned cadres with respect to the standard fixed  by the State Government 
in February 2018 was 199 (79 per cent ) in Taxation; 95 (98 per cent ) in Public 
Health; 422 (83 per cent ) in Sanitation; 178 (38 per cent ) in Engineering; and 
167 (67 per cent ) in Accounting in all the ULBs of the State. The s hortages of 
specialised manpower were acute in municipal counci ls and committees of the 
State. The details are indicated in Appendix 5.2. 
5.2.3 Safai Karamchari 
The State Government decided (June 2014) norm of on e Safai Karamchari for 
every 400 inhabitants. As per the norm, shortage in  sanctioned post of Safai 
Karamchari was 4,712 (36 per cent ) in Municipal Corporations, 3,150 (64 per 
cent ) in Municipal Councils and 1,546 (50 per cent ) in Municipal Committees 
based on 2011 census. Further, shortage of available manpower with respect to 
                                                           
3  (i) Panipat and (ii) Sonepat. 
4  (i) Narnul, (ii) Gohana Mandi, (iii) Dabwali and (iv) Palwal. 
5  (i) Naraingarh, (ii) Nilokheri, (iii) Assandh, (i v) Kalayat, (v) Gannaur, (vi) Siwani, 
(vii) Bawani Khera, (viii) Hathin, (ix) Nuh, (x) Ha ily Mandi, (xi) Mohindergarh, 
(xii) Kanina, (xiii) Ateli Mandi, (xiv) Barwala, (x v) Sisai, (xvi) Bhuna, (xvii) Rania, 
(xviii) Jakhal Mandi and (xix) Julana. 

Chapter V Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
41 
sanctioned post was 489 (six per cent ) in Corporations, 342 (19 per cent ) in 
Council and 458 (30 per cent ) in Committees. The overall shortage of 
Safaikaramcharis with respect to norm was 10,697 (5 0 per cent ) in all the 
ULBs of the State. The shortage will further increa se with respect to 
population in 2020. 
Audit observed that percentage of vacancy in 15 tes t-checked ULBs ranged 
between 21.79 and 93.54  per cent , as detailed in Appendix 5.3 .  Further, 
analysis of the working strength in the test-checke d ULBs, in terms of the 
number of employees per 1,000 population as per 202 0 projected population, 
showed that it ranged between 0.27 and 2.19 as indicated in Chart 5.2. 
Chart 5.2: Working strength of ULBs in terms of employees per 1,000 population in test-
checked ULBs 
 
Nine ULBs (indicated in red colour) had less than o ne employee for every 
1,000 people, five ULBs (yellow colour) had between  one and two employees 
and only one ULB (Green colour) had between two and three employees.  
5th  SFC in their report observed (September 2017) that  the sanctioned staffs in 
the ULBs at all levels are based on 2001 census and  since then size and 
distribution of populations, the context of policy making, technology and other 
instruments available, and state priorities have changed. Thus, it recommended 
that a professional assessment of the staff require d for the DULB and for the 
ULBs to perform in a manner, which produces desired outcomes be undertaken 
in order to focus on functions (and not individual activities) including the 
function of coordination and planning. It further r ecommended to conduct an 
analysis as to what kind of functions can be outsou rced and to what extent for 
guiding the ULBs in outsourcing activities and hiring contractual staff.  
Audit observed that no such assessment had been con ducted and implemented 
except fixation of Standard Sanctioned posts to be provided at the time of 
constitution of a new ULB or upgradation of existin g ULBs. Further, number 
of various sanctioned posts had not been reviewed a nd provided as per the 
standard mentioned in above paragraph.  
1.99 
0.61 0.61 0.29 0.32 
0.68 
0.27 
1.61 1.88 
0.92 0.72 
0.34 
1.02 
1.55 
2.19 
0.00 
0.50 
1.00 
1.50 
2.00 
2.50 
3.00 
3.50 
4.00 
Panchkula 
Ambala 
Karnal 
Yamuna nagar 
Kaithal 
Thanesar 
Naraingarh 
Taraori 
Asandh 
Gharaunda 
Radaur 
Pheowa 
Pundri 
Cheeka 
Shahabad 
Per 1000 population 2020 projections (working strength) 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
42 
During exit conference, the department assured that  it would take necessary 
steps for the newly created ULBs and avoid delay in  sanctioning of the posts. 
Further, the department stated that assessment of r equirement of manpower at 
Directorate level had been made recently and the assessment of requirement of 
manpower for the ULBs would be carried out as recommended by the 5 th  SFC. 
Recommendation: A professional assessment of the st aff required for the 
ULBs to perform in a manner, which produces desired  outcomes may be 
undertaken in order to focus on functions including  the function of 
coordination and planning as recommended by 5 th  SFC. Accordingly, 
manpower needs to be provided to the ULBs so that U LBs are enabled to 
provide urban services to the citizen. 
5.3 Capacity building for human resources of ULBs 
Second Administrative Reform Commission recommended (October 2007) that 
the capacity building efforts in rural and urban lo cal self-governing institutions 
must attend to the professional and skills up-gradation of individuals associated 
with these bodies, whether elected or appointed. Re levant Panchayat and 
Municipal Legislations and manuals framed thereunde r must contain clear 
enabling provisions in this respect. Training of el ected representatives and 
personnel should be regarded as a continuing activi ty. There should be special 
capacity building programmes for women members. As an aid to capacity 
building, suitable schemes need to be drawn up under State Plans for Rural and 
Urban Development for documentations of case studie s, best practices and 
evaluation with reference to the performance of the  prescribed duties and 
responsibilities of such bodies. The 5 th  SFC suggested that a more outcome and 
effectiveness-oriented system of training of ULB of ficials, both administrative 
and elected, merits serious considerations.  
GoI while realising the need for development of hum an resources in view of 
the changed environment in all spheres of governance, which inter alia include 
73 
rd  and 74 th  CAA, issued National Training Policy in January 20 12.  The 
policy inter alia  recommended that each state would formulate a trai ning 
policy based on National Training Policy. The State  Government framed its 
Training Policy in July 2020. The following shortco mings in respect of 
capacity building for human resources of ULBs were noticed: 
• Both the State Municipal Acts are silent about the Capacity Building 
for Human Resources of ULBs. There is no enabling p rovision 
available in this respect in the Haryana Municipal Services 
(Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service ) Rules, 2010 and 
the Haryana Municipal Corporation Employees (Recrui tment and 
Conditions) Services Rules, 1998 made there under. 

Chapter V Human Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
43 
• The State Government did not draw any plan as an ai d to capacity 
building except ‘Training plan for elected women co uncillors during 
2015-20. An amount of ` 32.30 lakh was incurred on elected women 
members during 2016-19. 
• DULB has not adopted any mechanism to prepare train ing need 
analysis to assess training requirement for various  cadre/employees of 
ULBs. During 2015-2020, DULB nominated only 31 pers onnel  
(six from ULBs and 25 from DULB) for attending the training under 
seven training programmes (relating to accounts, pa y fixation and 
elimination of bonded labour). Audit observed that DULB did not 
arrange any training programme relating to urban go vernance for 
employees of ULBs during 2015-20.  
During exit conference, the department stated that the ULBs have been 
instructed for making budgetary provision of 2.5 per cent of salary budget 
from 2021-22 for capacity building in compliance of  Haryana State Training 
Policy, 2020. Further, guidance from the Haryana In stitute of Public 
Administration has been sought in order to develop a sound training system 
for staff and elected members of the ULBs. 

Chapter VI  
Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 

45 
CHAPTER-VI 
Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discha rge of any function. The 
devolved functions can be carried out effectively b y ULBs only when they are 
supported with sufficient financial resources. Such  financial resources could 
take the form of predictable fiscal transfers or ac cess to own revenue streams 
that are buoyant and commensurate with the expendit ure obligations, 
accompanied by appropriate expenditure powers. Predictable fiscal transfers to 
ULBs need to be ensured through a robust State Fina nce Commission 
mechanism and compliance with State and Central Fin ance Commission 
recommendations. Access to own sources of revenue w ould include both the 
power to levy and collect from specific revenue str eams. Expenditure powers 
refer to reasonable delegation limits that allow th e ULB to utilise their 
financial resources. 
6.1 Source of revenue 
The details of various sources of revenues of ULBs in the State during the 
period from 2015-16 to 2019-20 are indicated in Table 6.1 . 
Table 6.1: Details of revenues of ULBs during the period 2015-20 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Year Grants Own 
Revenue 
Assigned 
Revenue 1 
Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of own 
revenue to total 
revenue 
2015-16 1,122.65 1,100.55 492.25 2,715.45 40.53 
2016-17 2,120.04 1,096.72 602.98 3,819.74 28.71 
2017-18 3,130.02 1,247.11 1,371.20 5,748.33 21.70 
2018-19 1,348.91 1,661.83 761.83 3,772.57 44.05 
2019-20 2,279.77 876.36 703.68 3,859.81 22.70 
Total 10,001.39 5,982.57 3,931.94 19,915.90 30.04 
Source: Information provided by DULBs 
Funds were devolved to ULBs through transfer by the  Central and State 
Government in the form of grants. As can be seen fr om the above table, the 
fiscal transfers from Government in form of grants formed the major portion, 
i.e. 50.22 per cent  of the total revenue for the period 2015-20. Own a nd 
assigned revenue constituted 30.04 and 19.74 per cent  of total revenue 
respectively during the period 2015-20.  
In addition to the above, ULBs received grant of 
` 364.73 crore under SBM 
(IHHL), PMAY and DAY-NULM for transfer of funds to beneficiaries during 
                                                           
1  Tax/Duty/Cess/Surcharge/Levy, etc. which are coll ected by State Government on 
behalf of Local Bodies. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
46 
2015-20. Audit observed certain shortcomings under fiscal tr ansfer in form of 
grants, which are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
During exit conference, the Department confirmed th e facts and figures and 
replied that the efforts would be made for increasi ng own revenue of the 
ULBs. 
6.1.1 Fiscal transfer to urban local bodies 
6.1.1.1 State Finance Commission’s Grants 
The year-wise recommended devolution by SFCs and al located devolution 
made by the State Government to the ULBs is given in the Table 6.2 . 
Table 6.2: Detail of recommended devolution by SFCs and allocated devolution made by 
the State Government to the ULBs 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Sr. 
No. 
Particulars 2015-16 
(4 th  SFC) 
2016-17 
(5 th  SFC) 
2017-18  
(5 th  SFC) 
2018-19 
(5 th  SFC) 
2019-20 
(5 th  SFC)  
Total 
1 Net State own tax revenue 
(SOTR) 2 
32,584.41  39,604.40  42,689.64  48,394.76  50,338.43  2,13,611.64  
2 Recommended devolution 3  814.61  2,772.31  2,988.27  3,387.63  3,523.69  13,486.51  
3 Recommended share of ULBs 4  285.11  1,247.54  1,344.72  1,524.43  1,585.66  5,987.46  
4 Budgeted devolution for ULBs 
w.r.t Sr. No. 3 
189.96 5 1425.65 6 2604.00 6 1,394.78 6 840.00 6 6,454.39  
5 Short (-)/excess (+) allocation 
of grants (3-4) 
(-) 95.15  (+) 178.11  (+) 1,259.28  (-) 129.65  (-) 745.66  (+) 466.93  
6 Funds actually released to ULBs 189.96 5 1,585.44 6 2,211.29 6 1,011.18 6 936.42 6 5,934.29  
7 Short (-)/excess (+) release 
from recommended allocation 
(3-6) 
(-) 95.15  (+) 337.90  (+) 866.57  (-) 513.25  (-) 649.24  (-) 53.17  
Source: Budget Document of the State and SFC’s Report 
The delay in constitution of SFC and acceptance of its recommendations has a 
bearing on the assured transfer of funds to ULBs. A s already discussed in 
Paragraph 4.2.6.1, there was considerable delay bot h in constitution of SFCs 
and implementation of SFC’s recommendations. The lo ss of grant to ULBs 
due to delayed acceptance of report of 4 th  SFC was ` 95.15 crore during the 
period 2015-16. Though there was short release of ` 53.17 crore vis-à-vis 
recommended share and ` 520.10 crore against the budgeted devolution for 
2015-20, however, there was excess release of grant  of ` 41.98 crore to ULBs 
vis-à-vis recommendation of 5th  SFC for the period 2016-20. 
                                                           
2  SOTR did not include share from Central Taxes, ne t of collection cost of two per 
cent and 1.5 per cent respectively in 2015-16 and during 2016-20. 
3  As per 4 th and 5 th  SFCs recommended devolution 2.5 per cent  and 7 per cent of 
SOTR respectively. 
4  As per 4 th and 5 th  SFCs recommended share of ULBs 35 per cent  and 45 per cent of 
total recommended devolution respectively. 
5  VAT and Excise Tax not included. 
6  Includes Surcharge on VAT and Excise Duty on liqu or in budget and actual released 
which was discontinued after acceptance of recommendations of 5 th  SFC. 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
47 
During exit conference, the department stated that matter would be taken up 
with the State Government for timely constitution o f the State Finance 
Commissions and acceptance of its recommendations s o that ULBs could get 
its due share of grants in time. 
6.1.1.2 Central Finance Commission grants 
Article 280(3)(C) of the Constitution mandates the Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) to recommend measures to augment t he Consolidated 
Fund of a State to supplement the resource of Munic ipalities based on the 
recommendations of the respective SFCs.  14 
th  Finance Commission (14 th  FC) 
recommended basic grant (80 per cent ) and performance grant (20 per cent ) to 
ULBs as a percentage of divisible pool account. Det ails of the allocation and 
release of Basic and Performance Grants to ULBs as per 14 th FC 
recommendations during the period 2015-16 to 2019-2 0 is depicted in  
Table 6.3 . 
Table 6.3: Details of the allocation and release of Basic and Performance Grants to ULBs 
as per 14 th  FC recommendations 
(` (` (` (`  in crore) 
Period Basic Grants Performance Grants 
Allocation Released 
by GoI 
Short 
released 
Allocation Released 
by GoI 
Short 
released 
2015-16 199.61 184.64 14.97 - - - 
2016-17 276.39 255.66 20.73 81.57 75.45 6.12 
2017-18 319.35 305.45 13.90 92.31 92.31 0.00 
2018-19 369.42 353.47 15.95 104.83 0.00 104.83 
2019-20 499.18 462.20 36.98 137.27 0.00 137.27 
Total 1,663.95 1,561.42 102.53 415.99 167.76 248.22 
As per guidelines for implementation of recommendat ions of 14 th  FC issued 
(October 2015) by Ministry of Finance, GoI grants s hall be released to State 
Government for duly constituted 7 ULBs in two instalments in June  
(50 per cent  of basic grants) and October (remaining portion of  basic grants 
and full performance grants) in each year. Release of second and subsequent 
instalments of grants (both basic and performance) will be subject to receipt of 
utilisation certificate for the previous instalment . The Audit observed 
following shortcoming in the release of grant: 
Basic Grants 
• There was short release of 
` 102.53 crore of basic grants by GoI to the 
State Government during 2015-20 due to non-formatio n of elected body in 
all the ULBs of the State as discussed in Paragraph  4.2.1 and 4.2.1.3. 
Further, GoI had to withhold Basic Grants of ` 97.92 crore (relating to 
                                                           
7  Either an elected body is in place or is under th e process of being in place as per law. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
48 
2015-16) for more than 15 months due to delay in fo rmation of elected 
body in 44 ULBs. 
• There was delay ranging from 13 to 559 days in rele ase of basic grant by 
GoI to State Government during 2015-20 due to delay  in submission of 
utilisation certificates by the State Government.  
• As per GoI guidelines, State Government are require d to release the grants 
to ULBs within 15 days of credit to their account b y GoI. In case of delay, 
the State Governments are required to release the s ame alongwith interest 
(i.e. bank rate of RBI) from its own funds. Audit o bserved that there were 
delays of 19 and 26 days at two instances in releas e of funds to ULBs by 
the State Government during 2015-17. However, the State Government did 
not release the interest amounting to ` 1.16 crore 8 for delay in release of 
funds to ULBs in compliance with directions of GoI.  
During exit conference, the department stated that matter would be taken up 
with the State Election Commission for timely elect ion of the ULBs. Further, 
the efforts would be made for timely submission of the Utilisation Certificates 
to the Government of India. 
Performance grants 
14 
th  FC recommended performance grant to ensure account ability of ULBs by 
specifying three performance criteria i.e. timely a vailability of audited 
accounts, improvement in own revenues and publicati on of service level 
benchmarks for basic services. These grants were to  be disbursed from  
2016-17, so as to give sufficient time and enable t he State Government and 
ULBs to put in place a scheme and mechanism for imp lementation of the 
guidelines.  
• The State Government devised (October 2016) a schem e regarding 
release of performance grants as recommended parame ters by14 
th  FC. 
GoI approved (November 2016) and released performan ce grants of 
` 75.45 crore for the period 2016-17. Audit observed that the State 
Government distributed the amount among all the 80 ULBs. From the 
records produced to the Audit it could not be exami ned as to whether 
the State Government had ensured that ULBs complied  with the 
performance criteria for receipt of the grant or not.  The main objective 
of performance grant was to incentivise the better performing ULBs. 
However, distribution of the same to all the ULBs, defeated the 
objective.  
It is pertinent to mention that GoI devised new sch eme for release of 
performance grant from 2017-18 and onwards assignin g maximum 
                                                           
8  Worked out at RBI’s bank rate of 6.75 per cent  per annum. 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
49 
score of 100 to the three performance criteria.  UL Bs which got score 
of 40 during 2017-18 and 60 during 2018-19 and 2019 -20 were 
eligible for performance grant. Resultantly, only 4 0, 47 and 46 ULBs 
could qualify for the performance grant for the yea r 2017-18, 2018-19 
and 2019-20 respectively. 
• There was short receipt of performance grant of ` 6.12 crore for the 
year 2016-17 and the entire allocation of ` 242.10 crore for the year 
2018-19 and 2019-20 was not released by GoI to Stat e Government. 
The reasons for short receipt/non-receipt were not found on record. 
During exit conference, the department stated that the reasons for short 
receipt/non-receipt of performance grants for the year 2018-19 and 2019-20 by 
the Government of India would be ascertained and intimated to audit. 
6.1.2 Assigned revenue of Urban Local Bodies 
Assigned revenue of ULBs includes collection on acc ount of additional stamp 
duty and municipal tax on consumption of electricit y. The shortcomings with 
regard to additional stamp duty and municipal tax o n consumption of 
electricity are discussed below: 
6.1.2.1 Additional Stamp Duty 
As per Section 69(c) of HM Act and Section 87(c) of  HMC Act a duty 
(presently two per cent  of transaction value) on transfer of immovable 
property is levied in addition to duty imposed unde r the Indian Stamp Act, 
1899 on instruments of sale, gift, mortgage, exchan ge and lease in perpetuity 
of immovable property situated within the limits of  municipal area. The said 
duty is collected by the Registrar or Sub-Registrar  in the shape of non-judicial 
stamp paper at the time of registration of the docu ment and intimation thereof 
is sent to the ULBs concerned immediately. The Stat e Municipal Acts further 
provides that the amount of the duty collected shal l be paid to ULBs 
concerned. 
Prior to April 2012, the share of municipalities in  the stamp duty collections 
was paid to them at the point of registration and d id not form part of the State 
budget. However, this amount is routed through the State’s budget as per the 
revised mechanism (April 2012). Director, ULBs dist ributes the budget to 
Deputy Commissioner on the basis of sale of non-jud icial stamp papers during 
the last financial year and Deputy Commissioner rel eases the amount to ULBs 
on the basis of actual sale of non-judicial stamp papers.  
Audit observed that ULBs were not getting their due  share of stamp duty due 
to short release of funds against the allotted budg et to municipalities. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
50 
Consequently, there was short release of ` 1,364.03 9 crore in nine Municipal 
Corporations (MCs), out of 10 MCs (except MC, Yamun anagar) during the 
period 2014-20. The State Government sanctioned bud get (Supplementary 
Estimates for the year 2020-21) of ` 1,074 crore against the arrear of 
` 1,364.03 crore.  Further, MCs could withdraw ` 135.06 crore against the 
sanctioned budget of ` 1,074 crore. Thus, leaving an arrear of ` 938.94 crore.  
4th  SFC and 5 th  SFC recommended that a system of direct transfer o f stamp 
duty collection in real time to the ULBs must be pu t in place.  4th  SFC further 
recommended to increase the rate of stamp duty from  two to three per cent  
The State Government vide its notifications dated 5  March 2021 amended the 
procedure for transfer of amount of stamp duty coll ection to ULBs.  As per the 
amended procedure, the stamp duty shall be paid equ ally into (a) account of 
respective ULBs on monthly basis and (b) consolidat ed account for all the 
ULBs of the State maintained and managed by the DUL B for this purpose. 
Resultantly, only one per cent  of stamp duty would be directly transferred to 
the respective ULBs. Therefore, the recommendation of SFCs was not 
implemented by the State Government.  
The State Government vide its notifications dated 8  April 2021/15 July 2021 
revised the rate of stamp duty from two per cent  to one per cent  in case of 
MC, Gurugram and Faridabad. The State Government further imposed one per 
cent  duty to be paid to GMDA/FMDA within the limits of the Area of 
GMDA/FMDA, thereby undermining the importance of Lo cal Government  
vis-à-vis parastatal. 
Consequently, revenue on account of stamp duty rema ins unpredictable on the 
part of ULBs and they could not depend upon this re venue for the purpose of 
any expenditure planning, affecting their smooth fu nctioning. Further, due to 
not increasing the rate of stamp duty from two to t hree per cent as per 
recommendation of 4 
th  SFC, the State Government deprived the ULBs from 
additional revenue generation. 
During exit conference, the department stated that detailed reasons for not 
withdrawing the arrears of Stamp Duty would be asce rtained from the 
concerned ULBs and intimated to audit. 
6.1.2.2  Municipal tax on consumption of electricit y  
Section 70 of HM Act and Section 87 of HMC Act provide for levy of two per 
cent  municipal tax on consumption of electricity, which  is collected by 
Electricity Distribution Companies (DISCOMs) from t he consumers.  5 th  SFC 
                                                           
9  (i) Ambala: ` 7.86 crore, (ii) Faridabad: ` 134.22 crore, (iii) Gurugram: ` 978.02 
crore, (iv) Hisar: ` 14.45 crore, (v) Karnal: ` 5.76 crore, (vi) Panchkula: ` 71.01 
crore, (vii) Panipat: ` 24.38 crore, (viii) Rohtak: ` 54.53 crore and (ix) Sonepat: 
` 73.80 crore. 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
51 
in this regard observed that the ULBs were not rece iving any tax in this regard 
as DISCOMs claimed that the ULBs had not paid elect ricity bills and tax 
amount payable to them gets adjusted with the bill amount. Therefore, 5 th SFC 
recommended (September 2017) to resolve this issue at the State level. 
Resultantly, ULB-wise reconciliation of amount rece ivable on account of tax 
after adjusting of electricity bills was done.  As per information provided by 
DULB, as on December 2020, ` 234.71 crore was recoverable from 
DISCOMs by 53 ULBs and ` 155.16 crore was payable to DISCOMs by 
29 ULBs after adjusting amount relating to electric ity bills. Accordingly, net 
amount of ` 79.55 crore was payable by DISCOMs. Audit observed that the 
State Government directed (May 2021) nine ULBs 10  to pay ` 20.83 crore to 
DISCOMs as per the claim of DISCOMs (31 December 20 20) despite the fact 
that as on 31 December 2020, the receivables of ULB s works out to ` 79.55 
crore. As per the State Government directions, nine  ULBs paid (June 2021)  
` 20.83 crore  to DISCOMs pending internal liabilities amongst ULB s arising 
after this settlement. Resultantly, dues of the ULB s could not be settled. Each 
Municipal Body(ies) is a separate legal entity and receivables and payables of 
any municipal entity cannot be adjusted against receivable and/payables of any 
other body. 
During exit conference, the department stated that amount payable/recoverable 
from DISCOMs by the ULBs as on 31 
st  December 2020 would be obtained 
and final position intimated to audit. 
6.1.3 Own revenue of Urban Local Bodies  
HM Act and HMC Act empowers ULBs in the State to ta p various sources of 
own revenue. The detail of the revenue sources, sta tus of levy and statutory 
provisions are indicated in Appendix 6.1 . 
The property tax on land and buildings is the mainstay of ULB’s own revenue. 
The own non-tax revenue of ULBs comprises  advertisement fee, water 
charges, rent from commercial establishments, trade  licences, fee for sanction 
of plans/mutations, etc. The constraints/deficienci es in realisation of property 
tax and water charges in the test-checked ULBs (bei ng selected areas) are 
discussed in Chapter-VII and some other sources of own revenue such as solid 
waste management charges, advertisement permission fee and trade licence 
fee are discussed below:  
6.1.3.1 Solid Waste Management charges 
As per SWM Rule 2016, ULBs are authorised to collect user fee as determined 
by it from time to time on its own or through its a uthorised agency from all 
                                                           
10   Municpal Corporation: Gurugram, Faridabad, Manesa r, Karnal, Panchkula, 
Yamunnagar, Sonipat, Municipal Council: Bhadurgarh and Thanesar. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
52 
waste generators for solid waste management to cove r its operating cost fully 
or partly. The State Government notified (October 2 011) indicative monthly 
user charges for various categories of waste genera tors and ULBs are 
authorised to levy their own user charges and revis e the same from time to 
time. Audit observed that five 11  ULBs, out of 15 test checked, did not notify 
the user charges. Remaining 10 ULBs notified (March 2019 to February 2021) 
the user charges. It was also observed that 13 test  checked ULBs incurred 
expenditure of ` 183.55 12  crore during 2015-20 on various works relating to 
SWM, whereas only four ULBs 13  collected ` 1.39 crore during 2015-20 which 
works out to 0.73 per cent  of cost of carrying out SWM operations. The 
remaining 11 ULBs did not collect the user charges. 
During exit conference, the department stated that the concerned ULBs would 
be instructed to recover the Solid Waste Management  charges from the users 
as well as intimate to audit. 
6.1.3.2 Advertisement permission fee 
Entry 55 in List II of Schedule VII to the Constitu tion of India empowering 
States to levy tax/fee on advertisements other than advertisements published in 
the newspapers and advertisements broadcast by radi o or television was 
omitted (8 September 2016) by the Constitution (One  Hundred and first 
Amendment) Act, 2016. Section 88 (1) and Section 12 1 of HMC Act under 
which advertisement tax/fee could be levied was subsumed into the Goods and 
Services Tax.  
Despite omission of the Entry 55 in list II of Sche dule VII, the State 
Government notified (28 September 2016) advertiseme nt bye-laws for 
Municipal Corporations. However, the same was kept in abeyance in 
compliance with the directions (October 2016) of Pu njab and Haryana High 
Court and the State Government issued (March 2018) revised Haryana 
Municipal Corporation Advertisement Bye-laws, 2018.  
The ibid  bye-laws prescribe advertisement permission fee inter-alia  on 
advertising structures on public land which shall b e fixed through tendering/ 
e-auction under Section 122 of HMC Act.  Subsequently, Section 122 of HMC 
Act, 1994 has been amended (March 2021) for levy of  advertisement 
permission fee by State Government.  
Audit observed that four test checked Municipal Cor porations could not 
finalise tender process to earn advertisement permi ssion fee for public space 
under Haryana Municipal Corporation Advertisement B ye-laws, 2018 due to 
                                                           
11   (i) Naraingarh, (ii) Radaur, (iii) Pehowa, (iv) C heeka and (v) Shahabad. 
12   13 ULBs incurred an expenditure of ` 183.55 crore whereas two ULBs (Panchkula 
and Naraingarh) did not provide information for the same. 
13   Municipal Corporation: Ambala, Municipal Comittee : Naraingarh, Radour and 
Pehowa. 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
53 
delay in start of tendering process, incorrect appl ication of rates for fixation of 
reserve price and inadequate response from the bidd ers. Resultantly, these 
Municipal Corporations could not earn advertisement  permission fee during 
2018-20. 
In case of test checked Municipal Committees, it wa s observed that none of 
the test checked Municipal Committees conducted sur vey for identifying the 
locations for advertisement on public land and did not invite any tender for 
giving permission for advertisement. Resultantly, t hese ULBs could not earn 
advertisement permission fee from auction of advert isement locations on 
public lands. 
During exit conference, the department stated that the comments of the 
concerned ULBs would be obtained and necessary actions taken. 
6.1.3.3 Trade License Fee 
The Chapter XVIII of the Haryana Municipal Corporation Act, 1994 read with 
the Section 352 (2) of the Act provide that various  trades, commercial 
activities, etc. can only be performed in the munic ipal corporation area after 
getting permission/license for these purposes and p ayment of requisite fee. 
Section 128 of Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 provides  for regulation of 
offensive and dangerous trades and various Bye-laws
14 ; provide for levy of fee 
to get permission in this respect by Municipal Coun cil and Municipal 
Committee. 
Further, Chapter IX of the Municipal Account Code, 1930 provides that issue 
of license for the period not more than a year as w ell as prosecution in case of 
not taking license and renewal.  
Audit observed that out of 15 test checked ULBs, only Municipal Corporation, 
Yamuna Nagar conducted survey to identify business activities for the purpose 
of levying trade license fee during 2015-20. However, the survey was not used 
for assessing and collecting trade license fees.  T he 15 test-checked ULBs 
collected trade license fee as and when the applica nt applied and could only 
collect trade license fee amounting to 
` 6.96 crore during 2015-20. Further, 
record in respect of invoking penal provisions unde r Municipal Account Code 
against the business owner for non-obtaining/non-re newal of trade licenses 
were not available in test checked ULBs.  
During exit conference, the department stated that all ULBs would be 
instructed to conduct a survey for trade Licence Fe es and recover the amount 
of Trade Licence fee. 
 
                                                           
14  Haryana Municipal (Sale of Fruits, Vegetable, Pota toes & Sugarcane) Bye-laws, 
1976, Haryana Municipal (Regulation & Control of sa le of Ice & Aerated water) 
Bye-Laws, 1976, etc. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
54 
6.1.3.4 Entertainment Duty 
The State Government notified (August 2019) Haryana  Municipal 
Entertainment Duty Act, 2019, which provides for levy of duty on payment for 
admission to entertainment. The Act was amended (Se ptember 2020) for 
imposing duty on Cable operators, Video Parlours and IPTV service providers, 
which were previously not covered under the Act. Ho wever, the rates of the 
duty could not be notified till (May 2021) Resultan tly, ULBs could not earn 
revenue from this source. 
During exit conference, the Department stated that matter would be taken up 
with the State Government for notification of the r ules for Entertainment Duty 
so that revenue loss could be avoided. 
6.2 Estimation of requirement of funds/expenditure 
6.2.1 Budget making process 
Each ULB prepares the budget estimates indicating t he estimated receipt of 
funds from various sources and allocates the resour ces to various activities 
undertaken by it. The process for approval of budge t as per provisions of the 
State Municipal Acts is discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
6.2.1.1 Municipal Corporations 
As per Section 83 of HMC Act, budgets estimates pre pared by Municipal 
Corporation are approved by the State Government. A ll functions relating to 
budget is performed by Finance and Contract Committ ee. The Municipal 
Corporation may alter the approved budget estimates  (i.e. increase in any 
budget grant or additional budget grant) on the rec ommendation of the 
Commissioner with the prior approval of the State Government.  
6.2.1.2 Municipal Council/Committee 
Section 257 (3) of Haryana Municipal Act, 1973 and Chapter II of the 
Municipal Account Code, 1930 provide provisions in respect of Budget. 
Budgets estimates prepared by Municipal Council/Com mittee are approved by 
Divisional Commissioner/Deputy Commissioner. All fu nctions relating to 
budget is performed by President or Finance Sub-Com mittee (in case  
sub-committee is formed) in association with Executive Officer/Secretary. The 
Municipal Council/Committee may alter the approved budget with the prior 
approval of Divisional Commissioner/Deputy Commissioner. 
The authorities involved in budget making process a s well as details of per 
capita budget in test checked ULBs are given in the  Appendix 6.2 . The 
appendix shows that ULBs did not have budget approv ing power in the State, 
which undermine role of local governance and its accountability to the people.  
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures.  

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
55 
6.2.2 Unrealistic budget exercise  
Expenditure estimation depends on services to be pr ovided by the Local 
Government and the costs associated with the provis ion of these services. It 
should include both the capital and O&M expenditure  that the local body will 
have to incur to achieve appropriate service levels. 
During the early 1960s, the Zakaria Committee formu lated minimum 
standards of services for different levels of ULBs and estimated the annual 
recurring requirements for each municipal service to be provided by the ULBs. 
The Committee also felt that it was possible to mai ntain various services if 
adequate taxes and charges were levied for the serv ices provided. Since the 
delivery of municipal services comes with a cost, i t was necessary to 
scientifically estimate the cost of each municipal service to assess the 
requirement and source of funds for efficient deliv ery. Such an exercise was 
not undertaken by any of test checked ULBs or the S tate Government. Thus, 
the budget exercise by ULBs was not based on a scie ntific assessment of the 
cost that would be incurred in delivery of various municipal services. 
Audit observed that the method of budget preparatio n suffered from a basic 
flaw as the stipulated date for approval of the bud get for ULBs was 
15 th  January of the preceding financial year whereas th e State Budget was 
usually placed before the Legislature in the month of February/March. 
Resultantly, all the test checked ULBs were prepari ng budget without 
considering actual/ expected allocation of funds by the Government in form of 
grants (i.e. SFC/ CFC grant and other grants). 
Illustrative examples of preparation of unrealistic  budget in each category of 
ULBs is shown in Appendix 6.3. 
As evident there from, the variation in actual inco me vis-à-vis the budget 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 ranged between  (-) 23 and (-) 59 per 
cent  in MC Panchkula; (-)8 and (-)65 per cent  in Municipal Council, Kaithal 
and (-) 46 and (-) 55 per cent  Municipal Committee, Cheeka. 
 On the other 
hand, revenue expenditure was over estimated in all  the years except 2018-19 
in case of Municipal Corporation, Panchkula, Munici pal Council, Kaithal and 
Municipal Committee, Cheeka.     Further due to non-consideration of any 
receipt on account of grant from State Budget, vari ation in actual development 
expenditure vis-à-vis the budget was ranging between (-) 54 and 63 per cent  in 
Panchkula, between 8 and 868 per cent  in Kaithal and between (-) 18  and 
176 per cent  in Cheeka indicating poor planning in execution of  development 
works. 
During exit conference, the department stated that ULBs would be instructed 
to consider actual/expected allocation of funds by the Government in form of 
grants (i.e. SFC/CFC grant and other grants) at the time of preparing budget. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
56 
Recommendation: Efforts need to be made to motivate  the ULBs to prepare 
their budgets in a scientific manner taking into ac count realistic projection 
of funds expected to be mobilised. 
6.3 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 
The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into fou r major categories such 
as human resources expenses, general expenses, deve lopment/programme 
expenses and other expenses.  The details of expenditure incurred by ULBs in 
the State for the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is given in Table 6.4. 
Table 6.4: Details of major categories expenditure incurred by ULBs 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Year Human Resources 
Expenses 
General 
Expenses 
Development/ 
Programme Expenses 
Others 
Expenses 
Total 
Expenses  
2015-16 637.37 196.14 252.10 336.95 1,422.56 
2016-17 783.68 182.62 915.00 202.81 2,084.11 
2017-18 899.88 163.24 1,483.53 309.61 2,856.26 
2018-19 980.43 335.72 521.79 881.87 2,719.81 
2019-20 1,072.99 239.55 716.67 251.83 2,281.04 
Total 4,374.35 1,117.27 3,889.09 1,983.07 11,363.78 
Expenditure  
(in per cent ) 
38.49 9.83 34.22 17.46 100.00 
 
The Human resource expenses constituted about 38 per cent  of the total 
expenditure followed by programme/development expen ses at 34 per cent. 
Further analysis of the expenditure is discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
6.3.1 Resource-expenditure gap  
The gap between own revenue and revenue expenditure  of ULBs in the State 
is presented in the following chart.  
 
Audit observed that the ULBs in the State were not able to generate own 
revenue resources to meet their revenue expenditure during 2015-20.  
0
400 
800 
1,200 
1,600 
2,000 
2,400 
2,800 
3,200 
3,600 
4,000 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
1,101 1,097 1,247 
1,662 
876 
1,170 1,169 1,373 
2,198 
1,564 
```` in Crore 
Own Revenue Vs Revenue Expenditure 
Own Revenue Revenue Expenditure 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
57 
During exit conference, the department stated that efforts would be made for 
increasing own revenues of the ULBs. 
6.3.2 Analysis of financial data of urban local bod ies 
The Audit analysed data in respect of all ULBs for the year 2019-20 to study 
the fiscal autonomy, self-reliance and their depend ence on various grants by 
following three ratios: 
• Local fiscal autonomy : This is the share of own revenue to the total 
revenue of the ULBs. 
• Coverage of revenue expenditure from own revenue so urces (self-
reliance) : This is the proportion of revenue expenditures th at are 
covered through the own revenue sources. 
• Local dependence on fiscal transfer : This is the share of CFC and 
SFC grants to the total fiscal revenue of the ULBs.  
Local fiscal autonomy and local dependence on fisca l transfer are inversely 
proportional to each other. Higher the fiscal auton omy lesser is the 
dependence on fiscal transfer. The ratio-wise perfo rmance of ULBs for the 
year 2019-20 is depicted in the table below: 
• Sixty six out of 87 ULBs were dependent on fiscal t ransfers in excess 
of 75 per cent  of their total revenue and no ULB was able to scor e the 
ratio of own revenue to total revenue higher than 75 per cent . 
• In 24 ULBs, the coverage of revenue expenditure fro m own revenue 
sources was more than 75 per cent , of which eight ULBs had coverage 
more than 100 per cent  and only 10 ULBs coverage of revenue 
expenditure from own revenue sources was less than 25 per cent . 
• In 26 out of 87 ULBs, local dependence on fiscal tr ansfer were in 
excess of 75 per cent  of their total revenue and in 55 ULBs 
, 
dependency on fiscal transfer were more than 50 per cent but equal or 
less than 75 per cent . 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
6.3.3 Extent of utilisation of funds 
A comparison of the total expenditure with total re venue for the period  
2015-16 to 2019-20 showed that ULBs were able to ut ilise on an average 
about 57 per cent  of the available funds each year as depicted in Chart . 
Percentage of expenditure ≤ 25 > 25 ≤ 50 > 50 ≤ 75 > 75 ≤ 100 or 
more 
Fiscal Autonomy 66 19 02 0 
Coverage of Expenditure /self-reliance 10 23 30 24  
Local dependence on fiscal transfer 0 06 55 26 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
58 
 
The constraints in utilisation of funds could inclu de the restriction/limitations 
on financial and administrative powers of ULBs as d iscussed in succeeding 
Paragraph 6.4 and shortage of manpower as discussed in Paragraph 5.2. 
During exit conference, the department stated that efforts would be made to 
overcome the shortage of manpower by recruitment. 
6.4 Financial power of Urban Local Bodies 
Fiscal autonomy can be complete only when supported  by decentralisation of 
financial and administrative powers. The decentrali sation provides for (i) 
creating an efficient and reliable administration; (ii) intensify and improve 
local governance; (iii) enhance accountability and responsiveness; (iv) 
improved capacity of the local people to participat e in the decision making 
process, especially with regard to service delivery ; and (v) increased 
motivation etc. 
6.4.1 Power related to development works- 
State Government revised (May 2018) financial power s of various authorities 
for according the administrative approval of the es timates and approval of 
tenders for developmental works in municipalities, which are given in the 
Table 6.5. 
Table 6.5: Details of financial powers of various authorities 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Category of 
Municipalities 
Commissioner Municipal 
Corporation/District Municipal 
Commissioner 15  
Corporation/ 
Council/ 
Committee 
Director, 
ULB 
Administrative 
Secretary, 
ULB 
Corporation ≤ 100 >100  ≤ 250 >250  ≤ 300 >300 
Council >25  ≤ 50 ≤ 25 >50  ≤ 300 >300 
Committee >15  ≤ 50 ≤ 15 >50  ≤ 300 >300 
                                                           
15   District Municipal Commissioner w.e.f 1 st  August 2020. 
2,715 
3,820 
5,748 
3,773 3,860 
1,423 2,084 2,856 2,720 2,281 
52 55 
50 
72 
59 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
0
1000 
2000 
3000 
4000 
5000 
6000 
7000 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Percentage 
```` in Crore 
Total Revenue Total expenditure Percentage of expenditure 

Chapter VI Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
59 
It was observed that elected body of Municipal Corp oration had more power 
than Commissioner of Municipal Corporation whereas elected body of 
Municipal Council/Committee had less power than Dis trict Municipal 
Commissioner.  
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
6.4.2 Power related to other expenditure 
As per Section 37D of Haryana Municipal Corporation  Business Bye-laws, 
2009, power in respect of purchase of value or amount exceeding ` 20,000 but 
less than ` 50,000 are delegated to Municipal Corporation (more  than five 
members including Mayor/Dy. Mayor) and if purchase of value or amount 
exceeds the limit of ` 50,000 powers are vested in Commissioner provided 
provision exist in the budget. 
As per Section 49 of Haryana Municipal Business Bye -laws, 1981, Council/ 
Committee has powers to incur non-contingent expend iture up to limits 
specified below: 
President    Upto ` 5,000 in any case  
Executive Officer   Upto ` 3,000 in any one case  
Secretary    Upto ` 1,000 in any one case 
The power of ULBs is thus insignificant for proper day-to-day functioning of 
the municipalities. 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
6.5 Accounting arrangement of ULBs 
Based on the Eleventh Central Finance Commission re commendations and the 
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance, GoI, CAG constituted a task 
force to recommend budget and accounting formats fo r ULBs in India. The 
CAG Task Force suggested accrual basis of accountin g, budget and 
accounting formats for ULBs.  Based on the task force report, MoUD, GoI 
prepared (November 2004) National Municipal Account s Manual (NMAM). The 
manual is to be adopted by the State Government in order to draft state specific 
municipal accounting manual. 
The maintenance of accounts of ULBs in the State is  governed by Municipal 
Account Code, 1930 which is outdated as role of ULB  in Urban Governance 
has changed completely and amendment in the Municip al Account Code in 
line with NMAM is under progress since 2011. Presen tly, ULBs in the State 
are following cash based accounting system. No uniform codification structure 
of different heads of income and expenditure and un iform accounting format 
for ULB have been prescribed. Though Municipal Acco unt Code, 1930 
prescribe format for annual accounts, however, the same is outdated and in 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
60 
absence of any uniform accounting format and coding  structure, test checked 
ULBs were preparing income and expenditure statemen t on cash basis in 
different accounting formats.  
During scrutiny of audit and inspection report for the year 2019-20 of the 
Director, Local Audit Funds it was noticed that even the prescribed accounting 
system of Municipal Account Code, 1930 was not bein g followed in test 
checked 13 ULBs (Audit and Inspection Reports of Mu nicipal Corporation, 
Karnal and Municipal Committee, Gharaunda was not f ound in office of 
Director, Local Audit Funds).  Audit further observ ed that monthly/annual 
accounts have not been maintained by the 13 ULBs as  required under 
Municipal Account Code, 1930. Irregularities like reconciliations of main cash 
book with other cash book not done, cash book not v erified by AO indicate 
that cash book/bank reconciliations system are weak  and do not provide 
assurance with respect to the accounting records.  
Further, DULB does not maintain consolidated accoun ting data at State level. 
In the absence of any uniform accounting format, Di rectorate of Local Audit, 
Haryana who is primary auditor of ULBs was not cert ifying the accounts of 
ULBs.  
During exit conference, the department stated that amendment in the 
Municipal Account Code in line with NMAM is under process. 
 

Chapter VII  
Devolution in discharge of selected areas 

61 
CHAPTER-VII 
Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
Audit selected five areas (Water supply, Public Hea lth and Sanitation, Solid 
Waste Management, Property Tax and Water Charges) i n order to assess 
whether ULBs were adequately empowered to discharge  these functions 
effectively. The audit finding in this regard are d iscussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
7.1 Water Supply 
(i) Empowerment of ULBs for delivery of water suppl y activities 
Section 277-A of HM Act provides that the State Gov ernment may entrust the 
duties and responsibility relating to water supply and sewerage to PHED. 
Accordingly, the State Government transferred (April 1993) the core functions 
of municipalities to PHED except Municipal Corporat ion, Faridabad.  
Subsequently, the State Government transferred the core functions back to 
three other Municipal Corporations i.e. Gurugram (w .e.f. 2013), Karnal and 
Sonepat (w.e.f. 2018). Thus, presently only four, o ut of 87 ULBs are 
performing the water supply and sewerage activities  in their respective 
municipal area and in the rest of the municipalitie s, these activities including 
collection of water and sewerage charges are performed by PHED.  
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
(ii) Assignment of water supply activity to Municip al Corporation, 
Karnal 
(a) Non-providing of adequate technical manpower 
The State Government while transferring the activit y to Municipal 
Corporation, Karnal (MCK) decided (September 2018) to send nine 
1 technical 
officers who were looking after the water and sewer age services and 167 
regular mechanical establishment (RME) staff deploy ed on operation and 
maintenance of these services from PHED to MCK on deputation for one year.  
During the examination of records of MCK, it was ob served that PHED 
transferred only six 2 technical officers  and 144 RME staff against above 
mentioned officers and RME staff.  It was further observed that as of 
December 2020, there were only two Junior Engineers  and 11 RME staff  
looking after the activity of water supply and sewe rage in the Municipal 
Corporation and rest of technical manpower alongwit h RME staff had been 
                                                           
1  Executive Engineer: 1, Sub-Divisional Engineers: 2 and Junior Engineers: 6. 
2  Executive Engineer: 1, Sub-Divisional Engineers: 2 and Junior Engineers: 3. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
62 
repatriated to PHED. The existing technical manpowe r of the MC was given 
additional work responsibilities to look after this  function also. Further, MCK 
has hired additional manpower on outsourcing basis against the RME staff. 
During exit conference, the department stated that efforts would be made to 
overcome the shortage of manpower by recruitment. 
(b) Non-formation of Subject Committee 
Section 40 of HMC Act read with bye-law 22 of Harya na Municipal 
Corporation Business Bye-laws, 2009 provide for for mation of ad-hoc  
committee on water supply and sewerage for framing schemes/proposals for 
water supply, sewerage and drainage and connected a ffairs and carry out 
survey for existing consumption and demand of water  and prepare estimates 
for future water supply requirements, ascertaining wholesomeness of water 
supply and keeping regular check up in water supply sewerage staff, etc. Audit 
observed that MCK had neither formed any ad-hoc  committee nor 
prepared/conducted any plan/survey to prepare estim ates for future water 
supply requirements. There are 1.40 lakh households  and 0.41 lakh 
connections for water supply within the municipalit y limits of MCK as on 
March 2020.  
During exit conference, the department stated that reasons for non-formation 
of Subject Committee by MC Karnal has been called for. 
(c) Non-coverage of entire municipal area 
As per directions (March 2016) of the State Government, HSVP transferred 14 
developed sectors to MCK falling within its municipal area 
 for maintenance of 
water supply, sewerage, storm water, street lights and roads, etc. However, the 
MCK expressed (October 2016) its inability to take over the water supply and 
sewerage works in these sectors. It was further obs erved that water supply and 
sewerage in these sectors continues to be discharge d by HSVP even after 
transfer of the function by PHED to MCK for entire municipal area in 
September 2018. 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
(d) Non-providing of Budgetary Support 
As discussed in succeeding paragraph 7.5, the MCK i s not able to recover its 
operation and maintenance (O&M) cost incurred on wa ter supply as rates of 
water charges are fixed by the State Government. Fu rther, the State 
Government did not provide any budgetary support to  MCK despite the fact 
that the same was provided to PHED through State Bu dget before transfer of 
the function. 

Chapter VII Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
63 
Thus, it is evident that though the State Governmen t transferred the core 
function of water supply to the MC belatedly in com pliance of 74 th CAA but 
the Municipal Corporation was not adequately empowe red in terms of 
functionaries and funds to discharge the function o f water supply in an 
effective manner. Besides, the transfer of function  itself stands curtailed in 
view of limited coverage of municipal area for this function. 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
Recommendation: Feasibility of transferring the wat er supply and sewerage 
activities to respective ULBs may be explored. Adeq uate Technical 
manpower, proper planning required for running the function should be 
provided by the State Government. 
7.2 Public Health and Sanitation 
(i) Empowerment of ULBs in delivery of Public Healt h and 
Sanitation activities 
Section 132 to 143 of HM Act and Section 193 to 215  of HMC Act deals with 
provision of sewerage and storm water drainage. Sec tion 144 to 149 of the 
HM Act and Section 287 to 302 of the HMC Act and Ha ryana Municipal 
(Sanitation and Public Health) Bye-laws, 1976 deals  with various measures 
taken by a municipality to safeguard residents from  dangerous/infectious 
disease. The Rules 3 framed under HM Act and Section 275 to 279 of HMC 
Act provide for provision of public latrines and ur inals and keeping the same 
clean and in proper condition.  Further, Haryana Municipal Business Bye-laws, 
1981 framed under HM Act provides that Municipal Me dical Officer shall be 
in-charge of the Sanitation, Public Health and Heal th Departments of a 
Committee. He shall supervise the sanitary conditio ns within the municipal 
area and shall be responsible for making arrangemen ts for the disinfection in 
connection with the occurrence of an infectious dis ease or a threatened 
outbreak of such disease.  
As discussed in the paragraph 7.1 (i) only four 
4 ULBs were performing the 
water supply and sewerage activities in their respe ctive municipal area and in 
the rest of the municipalities the function of sewe rage is performed by PHED 
on behalf of ULBs. Further, Health Department maint ains hospitals and 
dispensaries in the State and carries out immunisat ion and vaccination.  
However, sanitation including construction of publi c latrines, maintenance 
thereof and disinfection of localities affected by infectious disease is done by 
respective ULBs. 
                                                           
3  Haryana Constructions and Maintenance of Municipa l Latrines and Urinals Rules, 1976. 
4  Municipal Corporation: Faridabad, Gurugram, Karnal and Sonepat. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
64 
Audit observed that there were 10 sanctioned posts for Medical Officer in 
10 Municipal Corporations of the State against whic h only one Medical 
Officer (Municipal Corporation, Gurugram) was avail able as of January 2020. 
There was no sanctioned post for Medical Officer or  any para-medical staff in 
the Municipal Council/Committee. Similarly, there w as acute shortage of 
specialist/expert in sanitation and Safai Karmacharis  in all the ULBs of the 
State as discussed in paragraphs 5.2.2 and 5.2.3.  
Audit further observed that out of all the test che cked ULBs, only one ULB 
i.e. MCK was running a dispensary under its adminis trative control and had 
deployed one pharmacist and one sweeper in it, wher eas technical manpower 
i.e. one doctor, one lab technician one staff nurse  and six Auxiliary Nursing 
Midwifes were deputed by Health Department. The MCK  had not incurred 
any expenditure for operation of this dispensary ex cept salary of two staff 
members. 
(ii) National Urban Sanitation Policy  
National Urban Sanitation Policy-2008 (NUSP-2008) r equires State 
Government to prepare State Urban Sanitation Strate gies to ensure assigning 
of responsibility to ULBs as envisaged in 74 
th CAA and where the assignment 
is partial or incomplete, States are required to ma ke concerted efforts to 
devolve powers, roles and responsibilities along wi th financial and personnel 
resources necessary for ULBs to discharge their fun ctions. The policy also 
suggested that the ULBs will also have to be accord ed wide-ranging powers 
over agencies that currently carry out sanitation r elated activities in the city 
which are not directly accountable to them, e.g. parastatals and PHED.  
Further, GoI launched (October 2014) Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM). SBM 
guidelines prescribe that without a proper City Sanitation Plan 5 (CSP) for each 
city and State Sanitation Strategy as indicated in NUSP-2008  objectives of 
SBM can not be achieved.  
Audit observed that the State Government did not pr epare any State Sanitation 
Strategy to devolve full powers, roles and responsi bilities along with financial 
and personnel resources necessary for ULBs to disch arge this core municipal 
function as per NUSP-2008 and SBM guidelines. Furth er, only two 
6 cities 
prepared their CSP. It was also observed that State  had got eighth rank among 
the State Ranking in Sanitation Survey (i.e. Swachh  Survekshan 2020) 
                                                           
5  City sanitation plan include all the aspects such  as plan for development of 
institutions/organisations responsible for sanitati on with their roles and 
responsibilities, plan for ensuring 100 per cent  sanitation access to different  
socio-economic groups with related O&M systems, pla n for safe collection, 
conveyance, treatment of sanitary wastes and plans for other significant local aspects. 
6  Panchkula and Rohtak. 

Chapter VII Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
65 
conducted by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,  GoI and got 
1,678.7 marks 7 out total 6,000 marks. 
Thus, the State Government failed to devolve powers , roles and 
responsibilities along with personnel resources nec essary for ULBs to 
discharge their functions to full extent. Majority of functions related to public 
health and sanitation were being discharged by the State Government 
Departments. Further, comprehensive planning throug h CSPs at ULBs level 
and State Sanitation Strategy at the State Governme nt level was not 
formulated as envisaged in NUSP-2008 and SBM guidelines.  
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
7.3 Solid Waste Management 
(i) Empowerment of ULBs in delivery of Solid Waste Management  
As per Rule 11 of Solid Waste Management Rules, 201 6 issued by GoI, the 
State Government was required to prepare a State Po licy and Solid Waste 
Management Strategy for the State through the DULB within one year from 
the notification of SWM Rules, 2016. Further, as pe r Rule 15 of SWM Rules, 
2016, ULBs were required to prepare a SWM plan with in six months from the 
date of notification of State Policy and Strategy o n Solid Waste Management 
and submit a copy of the same to the DULB.  
In compliance with this, the DULB formulated (July 2018) a State Policy and 
Solid Waste Management Strategy (the Policy) as req uired under Rule 11 of 
SWM Rules, 2016. DULB also prepared ULBs level plan s as required under 
Rule 15 of SWM Rules, 2016. Cluster-wise plan was f ormulated by DULB 
and not by individual ULB, which undermines the rol e of the ULBs in 
formulation of SWM plans. The policy prescribed Sta te Level Integrated Solid 
Waste Management (SLISWM) action plan on cluster ba sed approach under 
PPP mode. Accordingly, the entire State was divided into 14 clusters.  
Out of 14 clusters, in four 
8 clusters, State Level Integrated Solid Waste 
Management on waste to Energy based technology were  planned, while 
remaining 10 clusters 9 were planned on technology based on Waste to 
Compost and Refused Derived Fuel 10 . Out of these 14 clusters, only two 
                                                           
7  Performance in support to cities: 978.3 of 1800 m arks, performance in Garbage free 
star (GFS) rating open deification free (ODF): 500 out of 1,800 marks and 
Performance in Swachh Survekshan 2020: 280.4 out of 2,400 marks. 
8  (i) Gurugram-Faridabad, (ii) Ambala-Karnal , (iii) Rohtak and  (iv)  Sonepat-Panipat 
9  (i) Jind, (ii) Hisar, (iii) Dabwali-Sirsa, (iv) Rew ari, (v) Panchkula, (vi) Bhiwani, 
(vii) Yamunanagar, (viii) Punhana, (ix) Farukhnagar and (x) Fatehabad. 
10   Means fuel derived from combustible waste fractio n of solid waste like plastic, wood, 
pulp or organic waste, other than chlorinated mater ials, in the form of pellets or fluff 
produced by drying, shredding, dehydrating and compacting of solid waste. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
66 
clusters namely Gurugram-Faridabad and Sonepat-Pani pat had been awarded 
(April 2017) under PPP mode by DULB and was under p rogress  
(October 2020). The remaining clusters could not be  awarded due to lack of 
adequate response from the private bidders. The Sta te Government 
reorganised (July 2020) the remaining 12 clusters i nto 11 clusters and decided 
to retender these clusters on open technology (wast e to compost, Refused 
Derived Fuel, Bio-methanation, waste to energy or a ny other suitable 
technology) under PPP mode.  
As per annual report for the year 2019-20, all ULBs  in the State generated 
solid waste averaging 5,232 ton per day (TPD). Out of which, ULBs could 
collect 4,809 TPD (92 per cent ) and process/treat 1,621 TPD solid waste  
(34 per cent ) of collected solid waste. The remaining solid was te of 3,188 
TPD was dumped at various dump sites without follow ing the system of 
sanitary landfilling 
11 . Door to door collection was being done in 1,439  
(93 per cent ) out of 1540 wards and source segregation of solid  waste was 
achieved in 988 wards (64 per cent ). There were four common sanitary 
landfills sites for disposal of solid waste by all the ULBs in the State, however, 
the same were not operational. 
Thus, it was evident from the aforesaid that the St ate Government/DULB has 
major role in policy and strategy formulation, tend ering and technology 
selection in core ULBs function of Solid Waste Mana gement and ULBs are 
just implementing the various activities under the overall supervision of State 
Government/DULB. This arrangement undermines the ro le of ULBs in the 
Local Self Governance. 
During exit conference, the department confirmed the facts and figures. 
Recommendation: The ULBs should be given full freed om in policy and 
strategy formation in all activities of Solid Waste Management Function. 
7.4 Property Tax 
The property tax on land and buildings is the main source of ULB’s own 
revenue and the same constitute 39.60 per cent  of own revenue during the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20. The ULBs in the State, w ere empowered to levy 
property tax on buildings or vacant lands situated within their jurisdiction 
under Section 69 (read with Section 84) of the HM A ct and Section 87 (read 
with Section 149) of the HMC Act. The State Governm ent amended (2012) 
HM and HMC Acts with effect from April 2010 and acc ordingly, assessment 
                                                           
11   Means the final and safe disposal of residual solid  waste and inert wastes on land in a 
facility designed with protective measures against pollution of ground water, surface 
water and fugitive air dust, wind-blown litter, bad  odour, fire hazard, animal menace, 
bird menace, pests or rodents, greenhouse gas emissions, persistent organic pollutants 
slope instability and erosion. 

Chapter VII Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
67 
of property tax based on annual value was completel y abolished and the same 
was leviable based on various fixed rates as specif ied for different plot sizes, 
city in which the building or land is situated (fou r categories i.e. A1, A2, B 
and C cities) and purpose of its utilisation (i.e. residential, industrial and 
commercial, etc.). Audit observed following shortco mings in property tax 
system in the State: 
• Though the authority to collect property tax is ves ted with ULBs, 
powers pertaining to the rates and revision thereof , procedure of 
collection, exemptions, concessions, etc., were ves ted with the State 
Government. Thus, ULBs in the State lacked complete  autonomy in 
generating own revenue. 
• 13 
th  Finance Commission (TFC) recommended (December 200 9) 
constitution of a Property Tax Board (PTB) to put i n place an 
independent and transparent procedure for assessing  property tax, 
enumerating all the properties of ULBs and review/revision of property 
tax system. However, the State Government has not e stablished any 
PTB in compliance with the recommendations of TFC. Consequently, 
ULBs in the State lacked independent and transparen t mechanism for 
assessment, revision of property tax and technical guidance in this 
regard. 
• Second Administrative Reform Commission (SARC) reco mmended 
(October 2007) that all ULBs should switch over to the Unit Area 
Method 12  or Capital Value Method 13  for assessment of property tax in 
time bound manner in order to make the property tax  buoyant. The 
State Government had not adopted any of the method recommended by 
SARC and ULBs were collecting property tax on vario us fixed rate 
specified for different plot sizes, its purpose and  city as decided by the 
State Government in October 2013. Area-based proper ty tax tends to 
be relatively stagnant as it is unresponsive to cha nges in property 
prices pending revisions in tax rate and only sourc e of increase in 
property tax is the increase in the number of prope rties. Therefore, 
property tax in the State was non-buoyant with resp ect to market value 
of the property. Resultantly, ULBs were unable to g enerate additional 
revenue due to increase in market value of the prop erties in their 
jurisdiction. 
                                                           
12   The Unit Area Method captures various parameters/ factors of property (i.e. Location 
factor, Structural factor, Age factors, Occupancy f actor and Usage factors, etc.) for 
assessment of property tax and solve the problem of  tax buoyancy to some extent by 
periodic revision of parameters/factors without revision of tax rate. 
13   Under capital value method property tax is assess ed based on the market value 
prescribed for the property. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
68 
• Section 97 to 100 of HMC Act and Section 76 to 81 of HM Act require 
ULBs to prepare property list of all land and build ings in their 
jurisdiction and amend, update and alter the detail  of the same from 
time to time for the purpose of levying property ta x. In this regard, 
ULBs were required to get property survey done for a period of five 
years and supplementary survey every year. SARC rec ommended 
(October 2007) that a computerised database of all the properties using 
GIS mapping should be prepared for ULBs. The State Government 
allotted (October 2018) work relating to preparatio n of computerised 
database of all the properties using GIS mapping to  a private agency 
for all the ULBs in the State.  The work was scheduled to be completed 
by December 2019, however, the same has not be comp leted till 
November 2020. Audit noticed that in the absence of  GIS based 
survey, 49 ULBs were assessing the property tax for  the year 2019-20 
based on property survey conducted prior to 2014-15 . Further, only 
one test checked ULB (MC, Karnal) was conducting su pplementary 
survey every year for inclusion of new property. It  was also observed 
that none of the test checked ULBs were using other  sources of 
information like water and electricity connection d ata, building plan 
approvals,  etc.  to arrive at the correct number of properties that are 
taxable. Consequently, the property tax base could not be increased to 
its maximum potential for want of proper data perta ining to potential 
assessees. 
• SARC also recommended that categories of exemptions  from property 
tax need to be reviewed and minimised. Further, 14 th  FC recommended 
for not providing such exemption in normal course a nd wherever it is 
necessary the loss may be compensated by State Gove rnment. Audit in 
this regard observed that properties which were exe mpted from paying 
property tax in 15 test-checked ULBs constituted 19.68 per cent  in four 
corporations, 16.97 per cent  in two councils and 0.69 per cent  in nine 
committees of total properties in area of the ULBs during 2015-20. 
Further, 14 test-checked 14  ULBs had to forgo ` 14.64 crore against 
total amount due of ` 47.02 crore under two rebate schemes 
implemented during 2019-20 which constitutes 31.14 per cent  of total 
amount due. During the period 2015-20, the State Go vernment issued 
15 rebate schemes. However, the State Government di d not set up any 
mechanism to compensate ULBs of such loss of proper ty tax due to 
rebate/exemptions. Resultantly, significant portion  of own revenue of 
ULBs on accounts of exemption/waiver was foregone. 
                                                           
14   Information not provided by MC, Naraingarh. 

Chapter VII Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
69 
• The accumulated arrears of property tax in the 14 15  test-checked ULBs, 
as on 31 March 2020 was ` 615.92 crore. Out of which ` 180.29 crore 
was pending against various State Government proper ties which 
constituted 29.27 per cent  of total arrear. This was despite the fact that 
the State Government was already paying property ta x at half of 
normal rate. Audit observed that the pendency of ar rear of property tax 
in respect of five 16  test-checked ULBs was more than ten years while 
one ULB (i.e. MC, Karnal) had arrear since 2010-11.  The test-checked 
Municipal Committees did not maintain records in th is respect. It was 
also observed that all test-checked ULBs were issui ng show-cause 
notices under Section 104 of HMC Act/94 of Section of HM Act. 
However, only four 17  test checked ULBs were exercising the power 
under Section 130 of the HMC Act/Section 94 of the HM Act to 
recover the dues by attachment of rent, as arrear o f land revenue, by 
attachment and sale of immovable properties, by suit, etc. 
The average collection efficiency in respect of tes t checked four 
Municipal Corporations, two Municipal Councils and eight Municipal 
Committees during the period 2015-20 works out to b e 36.50 per cent , 
42.03 per cent  and 61.28 per cent  respectively.  
• As per Section 92 of HMC Act, Central Government pr operties are 
exempted from payment of property tax. It is mentio ned in the section 
ibid  that section does not prevent the Municipal Corpor ation from 
levying service charges in lieu of services provide d. SARC, 11 th  FC 
and 13 th  FC also recommended collection of services charges  from all 
Central and State Government properties which are e xempted from 
payment of property tax.  Audit observed that all the test checked ULBs 
had not levied service charges on Central Governmen t properties. 
Further, none of the test-checked ULBs was collecti ng the service 
charge from the State Government properties which w ere exempted 
from property tax.  
• There was shortage of specialised manpower for taxation in all types of 
ULBs. As per the standard fixed (February 2018) by the State 
Government, there should be 30 post for Zonal Taxat ion Officers, 92 
post for Taxation Superintendents and 131 post for Taxation 
Inspectors. However, there were shortages of 24 (80  per cent ) Zonal 
Taxation Officer, 88 (96 per cent ) Taxation Superintendents and  
                                                           
15   Information not provided by MC, Assandh. 
16   Municipal Corporation: Ambala, Panchkula and Yamu nnagar; Municipal Council: 
Thanesar and Kaithal. 
17   Municipal Corporation: Ambala, Karnal, Yamunnagar  and Municipal Council, 
Thanesar. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
70 
84 (64 per cent ) Taxation Inspectors as on January 2020 with respe ct 
to the standard. 
Thus, power in respect of rates and revision of pro perty tax, exemption, etc. 
retained with State Government contrary to the prov isions of Article 243 X of 
the Constitution and forfeit the sole purpose of em powering ULBs to levy and 
collect taxes so that the devolved functions can be  carried out effectively by 
ULBs. 
During exit conference, the department stated that the State Government has 
retained such powers in order to enforce a uniform rate of property tax in the 
State. The Government has constituted a committee f or recommendation of 
rate of Property Tax and the necessary actions woul d be taken after receiving 
of recommendations of the committee. State Governme nt provided 
rebate/exemption in property tax in order to expedi te collection of outstanding 
property tax. However, alternative measures as ment ioned under Section 130 
of the HMC Act/Section 94 of the HM Act to recover the dues by attachment 
of rent, as arrear of land revenue, by attachment a nd sale of 
movable/immovable properties, etc. would be taken i n order to collect the 
outstanding property tax. State Government Departme nts would be instructed 
to make payment of outstanding property tax. The UL Bs have been instructed 
to take necessary actions for charging service charge. 
Recommendations:  
• The Property Tax Board needs to be constituted in o rder to provide 
technical expertise to ULBs in compliance with 13 th  Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) recommendations.  
• The Property Tax survey should be conducted at regu lar intervals in 
order to ascertain the number of taxable property.  
• The system of property tax should be reviewed in or der to induce 
buoyancy in the Property Tax.  
• The recommendation of 14 th  CFC should be followed in case of 
rebate/exemption in property tax.  
• State Government should create a mechanism to avoid  accumulation 
arrear of property tax against properties of variou s State 
Governments and immediately clear existing arrears.  
7.5 Water Charges 
National Water Policy, 2012 stipulates that pricing  of water should ensure its 
efficient use and reward conservation and the same should be determined on 
volumetric basis and be reviewed periodically. Sect ion 70 (1) (xv) of HM Act 

Chapter VII Devolution in discharge of selected areas 
71 
and Section 89 (1) (A) of HMC Act provides ULB to c ollect water charges at 
rates decided by the State Government from time to time for supply of water 
in municipal area. Thus, ULBs in the State lack aut onomy in deciding the 
water charges and even the power of giving exemptio ns/concessions is vested 
with the State Government.  
The State Government had decided/fixed the water charges in March 2011 and 
the same had not been revised since then. Further, the water charges were not 
fixed in a manner which could ensure efficient use and reward conservation of 
water as there were only two rates for water charge s i.e. one for domestic 
usage (
` one per kilo litre) and other for industrial/commer cial/institutional 
usage ( ` four per kilo litre).  Consequently, the existing water charges 
remained unrevised since March 2011 and structure o f the rates did not 
incentivise conservation of water as envisaged in N ational Water Policy 2012. 
It was further observed that the State Government n otified State Urban Water 
Policy in March 2012, which however does not provid e for periodic revision 
of water charges in order to compensate rise in cos t of operation and 
maintenance of water supply. Examination of records  of MC, Karnal revealed 
following deficiencies with regard to collection of water charges: 
• Recovery of water charges:  Ministry of Urban Development, GOI, 
prescribed (2008) user charges should be designed i n such a manner 
that they are equivalent to the cost of operation a nd maintenance 
(O&M) of the service. Audit observed that the Corpo ration was not 
able to meet the cost of O&M of supplying water wit hin its municipal 
area through levy of water/user charges as the same  are determined by 
the State Government. Audit observed that MC, Karna l assessed water 
charges amounting to ` 2.32 18  crore during 2019-20 which works out 
to 12.41 per cent  of the cost of operation and maintenance (O&M) of 
the water service, ` 18.70 crore during 2019-20. No budgetary support 
for performing this activity was provided by State Government to 
MCK whereas, the same was being provided to PHED.  Audit further 
observed that the Corporation could recover only ` 1.72 crore  
(23 per cent ) against total demand of ` 7.43 crore (including arrear of 
` 5.11 crore) during 2019-20. There was no system of issuing notices 
or other measures to recover the default amount from the users. 
• Unmetered water connection:  Metered connections are pre-requisite 
for recording actual consumption of water by the us ers, collection of 
user charges and reward water conservation.  Audit observed that there 
were 40,574 water connections (domestic: 39,360, co mmercial:  
                                                           
18   On the basis of water charges fixed by the State Government in March 2011. 
Demand of ` 2.90 crore to water charges for the year 2019-20 in cludes sewerage 
charges at the rate of 25 per cent of water charges. Thus, demand for water charges 
worked out of ` 2.32 crore for the year 2019-20. 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
72 
839, Industrial: 353 and Institutional: 22) in the municipal area. Out of 
which 11,000 domestic connections (28 per cent ) were unmetered. 
Further, no prescribed mechanism existed at MC, Kar nal to ascertain 
whether water meters have been  fixed for all households, commercial 
and non-commercial properties. 
• Unauthorised connection/leakages:  Audit observed that MC, Karnal 
had not evolved any mechanism/system to watch over any illegal/ 
unauthorised connections and to prevent loss of wat er due to leakages, 
etc. and necessary action to disconnect unauthorise d connections and 
prevent loss of water due to leakages was taken on receipt of 
complaints in this regard. 
• Raising of bills : The Municipal Corporation issues water bills on s ix 
monthly basis (i.e. January to June and July to Dec ember).  However, 
water bills for the period from July 2018 to June 2 019 were issued in 
August 2019, July 2019 to December 2019 in March 20 20 and water 
bills from period January 2020 to June 2020 were no t issued till 
January 2021 which indicates that water bills were not being issued 
regularly and timely. 
• Meter reading: There was no system of taking water reading to work  
out actual consumption of water for domestic connec tions and issue of 
water bills accordingly. Audit observed that water bills to users of 
domestic category were issued on the basis of minim um amount of  
` 48 per month instead of actual consumption. Further , there was no 
mechanism/system to identify faulty meter and repla ce the same as the 
billing software did not have any provision for rec ording fresh meter 
reading.  
During exit conference, the department stated that Municipal Corporation,  
Karnal would be instructed to take necessary actions in this regard.  

Chapter VIII  
Conclusions 

 
73 
CHAPTER-VIII 
Conclusions 
The 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act (74 th  CAA) introduced Part IX A  
(the Municipalities) containing Articles 243P to 24 3ZG in the Constitution. 
74 th  CAA, which came into effect on 1 June 1993, author ised the State 
Legislature to enact laws to endow Local Bodies wit h powers and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of Self-Government 
and make provisions for devolution of powers and re sponsibilities (Article 
243W). The 12 th  Schedule lists out the 18 functions to be carried out by ULBs.  
8.1 Audit Objectives 
Whether provisions of the 74 th  CAA have been adequately covered in the 
State Legislation? 
Each State had to enact a legislation to implement the 74 
th  CAA. The ULBs in 
the State were governed by the HM Act, 1973. The St ate Government vide 
amendments to HM Act and enactment of the HMC Act, 1994 introduced 
provisions corresponding to the 74 th CAA. These amendments were, however, 
not supported by firm action. Thus, defeating the s pirit of the constitutional 
amendment especially with reference to devolution o f areas and creation of 
appropriate institutional mechanisms. 
Whether ULBs have been empowered by the State Gover nment to discharge 
their functions/responsibilities effectively throug h creation of appropriately 
designed institutions/institutional mechanisms and their function? 
Transfer of functions: The State Government transferred all the 18 functio ns. 
Out of 18 functions, ULBs were solely responsible f or four functions; had 
insignificant role in two functions; had limited role in five functions; were mere 
implementing agencies in four functions; and in respect of three functions ULBs 
have important role to play with overlapping role o f parastatals/Government 
Departments. Thus, the discharge of devolved functions was highly restricted.  
Meeting of the House:  In 15 test checked ULBs, only 226 house meetings 
were held as against the stipulated 710 meetings during the period 2015-20. 
Formation of ad-hoc Committees: Only three ULBs out of 15 test checked 
ULBs, constituted ad-hoc  committees (ranging between four and eight), which 
were not also functional as very few meetings were held by these committees.  
Wards Committees: Although Section 10 and 34 regarding constitution o f 
Wards Committees were incorporated in HMC Act and H M Act respectively, 
enabling rules were not framed under these Acts by the State Government. 
Resultantly, no Wards Committee in any of the eight  ULBs could be 
constituted where population was more than three lakh as per Census 2011.  
Area Sabha and Ward Committee:  State Government has not framed rules 
for nomination of Area Sabha representatives. None of the 15 test checked 
ULBs formed Area Sabha/Ward Committee.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
74 
District Planning Committee (DPC)/Metropolitan Plan ning Committee 
(MPC) - District Development Plans for urban areas were n ot being prepared 
by the respective ULBs and were being prepared by T own and Country 
Planning Department/Urban Local Bodies Department.  
State Finance Commission:  Six SFCs were constituted between May 1994 
and September 2020 with delay ranging from two to 15 months. 
Impact of parastatals on ULBs:  The functions of urban/town planning, 
regulation of land use were delivered by parastatal s as well as State 
Government Departments. These parastatals had their  own governing bodies, 
which did not include elected representative of ULB s. This arrangement 
infringed on the ability of ULBs to discharge their  mandated functions and 
undermined the objective of accountability to the people. 
Whether effectiveness of the functions stated to have been devolved? 
Water Supply and Sewerage:  These activities were performed by only four 
ULBs and in rest of 83 ULBs, these function was performed by PHED.  
Solid Waste Management : DULB had major role in Solid Waste 
Management policy and strategy formulation, tenderi ng and technology 
selection and ULBs are just implementing various ac tivities under the overall 
supervision of DULB. 
Whether ULBs have been empowered to access adequate resources including 
sufficient resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them? 
Fiscal Transfer to ULBs: The 74 th  CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the 
Central and State Governments besides empowering th em to raise their own 
revenue. The fiscal transfers constituted about 50.22 per cent of the revenue of 
ULBs during the period 2015-20. 
Share of own and assigned revenue: Own and assigned revenue constituted 
30.04 and 19.74 per cent  of total revenue respectively during the period 2015-20. 
SFCs Grants: The loss of grant to ULBs due to delayed constituti on and 
acceptance of report of 4 
th SFC was ` 95.15 crore during the period 2015-16. 
However, there was excess release of grant of ` 41.98 crore to ULBs vis-à-vis 
recommendation of 5 th SFC during 2016-20.  
Additional Stamp Duty: ULBs were not getting their due share of Additional  
Stamp Duty due to short release of funds against th e allotted budget through 
Supplementary Estimates. 
Autonomy in generating own revenue: The ULBs lacked autonomy in 
generating their own revenue. While the authority t o collect certain taxes/fee 
like property tax and water charges vested with ULBs, powers pertaining to the 
rates and revision thereof, procedure of collection  (property tax), method of 
assessment, exemptions, concessions, etc., is vested with the State Government. 
The intervention of the State Government constrained the ULBs.  
Buoyancy of property tax system:  Property tax system was non-buoyant and 
non-revision of rates periodically affected the revenue generation of ULBs.  

Chapter VII Conclusions 
75 
Budget making process: Budget making process was flawed and unrealistic. 
Scientific estimation of cost of each municipal service was not carried out, leading 
to huge variations between estimates and actuals. ULBs were able to generate 
own resources to the extent of only 80 per cent of revenue expenditure and had 
utilised on an average about 57 per cent of the available funds.  
Financial and Administrative process: The expenditure constraints included 
limited financial and administrative powers to ULBs and shortage of manpower. 
Power to assess requirement and recruitment of Staff:  ULBs were not 
vested with the powers to assess staff requirement and recruit staff. These 
were vested with the State Government. The State Government had the powers 
regarding method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances, 
initiate disciplinary action on staff of ULBs, transfer staff across ULBs or to 
other Government Departments.  
Adequacy of Manpower: The ULBs lacked adequate manpower as there 
were huge vacancies across all cadres affecting efficient delivery of services. 
This impacts the efficacy of service delivery by ULBs. 
The above points have been referred (September 2021) to the Government of 
Haryana for comments and replies. Response from the Government was 
awaited (November 2021). 
 
 
 
Chandigarh 
Dated: 
(VISHAL BANSAL) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit) Haryana 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendices  

Appendices 
77 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4; Page 2) 
Organisational structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State 
Source: Website of Directorate, Urban Local Bodies.  
  
Chief Accounts 
Officer 
Accounts and 
Pension Wing  
Asstt. Director 
(Election)  
Election Wing 
Hon’ble Minister 
Urban Local Bodies, Haryana 
Additional Chief Secretary to Govt. of Haryana,  
Urban Local Bodies Department 
Dy. Secretary to Govt. of Haryana,  
Urban Local Bodies Department 
Director,  
Urban Local Bodies Department, Haryana 
Under Secretary to  
Government of Haryana, 
Urban Local Bodies, Haryana 
Deputy 
Director 
Admin and 
Estt. Wing  
Senior 
Town 
Planner 
Chief 
Town 
Planner 
Chief 
Engineer 
(IT) 
Chief Town 
Planner (2) 
Chief 
Engineers 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Branch-wise Standard for Sanctioned Strengths in Municipalities fixed by GoH in 2018.  
  
Executive 
Engineer  
Accounts 
Officer   
Tax 
Superintendent  
Chief Sanitary 
Inspector 
Asstt. Town 
Planner   
Junior Engineer 
(E)   
Legal 
Assistant J.E./ Horticulture 
Network Assistant, 
IT  
Chief/ 
Supt. 
 Engineer  
Chief/ Sr. 
Accounts 
Officer  
Zonal & 
Taxation 
Officer  
Medical 
Officer 
District 
Town 
Planner 
Executive 
Engineer (E) 
Asstt. 
District 
Attorney  
Asstt. 
Engineer/ 
Horticulture 
Manager, IT  
Executive Officer 
Municipal Council 
Secretary  
Municipal Committee 
Joint Commissioner 
Additional Chief/Principal Secretary to Govt. of 
Haryana, Urban Local Bodies Department 
Director 
Urban Local Bodies Department, Haryana 
Commissioner 
Municipal Corporation  District Municipal Commissioner 
Additional Commissioner 
Dy. Municipal Commissioner 
Legal 
Assistant 
Assistant 
Engineer  
Section 
Officer   
Tax 
Superintendent 
Sanitary 
Inspector 
Patwari Junior 
Engineer (E)   
Gardeners/ 
Horticulture 
Network Assistant, 
IT  

Appendices 
79 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.4; Page 2) 
Details of parastatals and their functions 
Sr. 
No. 
Parastatal Functions 
1 Haryana 
Shehri Vikas 
Pradhikaran 
(HSVP) 
Formed in January 1977.  Its main functions are: 
• To promote and secure development of urban areas (i ncluding 
municipal areas) by acquiring undeveloped land.  
• To carry out physical infrastructure development wo rks like roads 
& bridges, water supply and sewerage systems, storm  water 
drainage systems and horticulture works on undevelo ped land and 
disposes of the developed land for residential, ind ustrial, 
institutional and commercial purposes after making zonal/sector 
plan in accordance with the development plan of the area. 
2 Gurugram 
Metropolitan 
Development 
Authority 
(GMDA) 
Established in December 2017 for development of Gur ugram 
Metropolitan Area.  The mandate of GMDA is to prepa re integrated 
and coordinated plans for infrastructure developmen t including 
urban amenities, mobility management, sustainable m anagement of 
the urban environment and take measures for social,  economic and 
industrial development for metropolitan area in coo rdination with 
local authorities, Central Government and other Gov ernment 
agencies and to establish a modern geospatial-based  system for 
planning purposes.  
3 Faridabad 
Metropolitan 
Development 
Authority 
(FMDA) 
Established in February 2019 for development of Far idabad 
Metropolitan Area.   
The mandate of FMDA is to prepare integrated and co ordinated 
plans for infrastructure development including urba n amenities, 
mobility management, sustainable management of the urban 
environment and take measures for social, economic and industrial 
development for metropolitan area in coordination w ith local 
authorities, Central Government and other Governmen t agencies and 
to establish a modern geospatial-based system for p lanning 
purposes. 
4 Kurukshetra 
Development 
Board 
(KDB) 
Established in August 1968. The broad functions for  which the 
Board was constituted are as under: 
• To undertake the overall comprehensive development of various 
tiraths  in Kurukshetra including its landscaping, renovati on of 
historical building and tanks. 
• Provision of sheds and huts, etc. for pilgrims. 
• Provision of civic amenities for pilgrims. 
• Provision of suitable accommodation arrangement for tourists. 
• Maintenance of cleanliness at all the sacred places  throughout 
the year. 
5 Haryana 
Slum 
Clearance 
Board 
(HSCB) 
Constituted in April 1990 with the objective to und ertake the 
development or re-development of slum areas, rehabi litation of slum 
dweller in the State of Haryana (including municipa l areas). HSCB 
is also declared (February 2015) as the nodal agenc y for 
implementation of Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in urban areas of 
the State.  

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
80 
Sr. 
No. 
Parastatal Functions 
6 Haryana 
Urban 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Board 
(HUIDB) 
Constituted in April 2002 to raise resources for pr ovision and 
upgradation of Urban Infrastructure in all municipa lities, 
upgradation and modernisation of Town Planning and its 
implementation techniques, training facilities in U rban Management 
and Human resources Development of Municipalities a nd Urban 
Development Department by organising seminars, work shops and 
conferences on Urban Management, coordinating, plan ning and 
implementing the approved schemes/projects of the m unicipalities 
and for other such purposes.  In July 2015, HUIDB a s nodal agency 
for implementation of ‘Atal Mission for Rejuvenatio n and Urban 
Transformation’ (AMRUT) 
7 State Urban 
Development 
Authority 
Haryana 
(SUDA) 
Constituted in October 1991 and further re-constitu ted in March 
2014 for implementation of Deendayal Antyodaya Yoja na-National 
Urban Livelihood Mission (DAY-NULM) which is a cent rally 
sponsored mission.  It was also declared (July 2015 ) as nodal agency 
for monitoring of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban ) Mission 
(PMAY).  

Appendices 
81 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3; Page 4) 
The list of ULBs selected for test check 
ULBs’ Type Sr. No. ULBs’ Name 
Municipal Corporation 1 Panchkula 
2 Ambala 
3 Karnal 
4 Yamunanagar 
Municipal Council 5 Kaithal 
6 Thanesar 
Municipal Committee 7 Naraingarh 
8 Taraori 
9 Asandh 
10 Gharaunda 
11 Radaur 
12 Pehowa 
13 Pundri 
14 Cheeka 
15 Shahabad 

 
 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.1; Page 15) 
Status of the devolution of functions in test-checked Urban Local Bodies 
Function number and description 
Panchkula 
Ambala 
Karnal 
Yamunanagar 
Kaithal 
Thanesar 
Naraingarh 
Taraori 
Asandh 
Gharaunda 
Radaur 
Pheowa 
Pundri 
Cheeka 
Shahabad 
1 Urban Planning including town planning                 
2 Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.                 
3 Planning for economic and social developments                 
4 Roads and Bridges                 
5 Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes                 
6 Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste 
management  
               
7 Fire services                 
8 Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects  
               
9 Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, 
including the handicapped and mentally retarded  
               
10 Slum improvement and upgradation                 
11 Urban poverty alleviation                 
12 Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, 
gardens, playgrounds  
               
13 Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects                 
14 Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds and 
electric crematoriums  
               
15 Cattle pounds, prevention of cruelty to animals                 
16 Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths                 
17 Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus 
stops and public conveniences  
               
18 Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries                 
Devolved: Where all the sub-activities 
relating to the function are devolved  
Partially Devolved: Where some but not all sub-activities relating to t he 
function are devolved  
Not Devolved: Where no sub-activity relating to the function 
is devolved  
 
82 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 

Appendices 
83 
Appendix 4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.1.5; Page 19) 
Statement showing the numbers of House Meetings held and shortfall in 
the meetings held in test checked ULBs during 2015-20 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of ULBs Meetings 
required*  
Meetings 
held 
Shortfall in 
meetings  
Shortfall  
of 
meetings 
(In numbers) In per cent  
1 Municipal Corporation, Panchkula 39 5 34 87.18 
2 Municipal Corporation, Ambala 39 9 30 76.92 
3 Municipal Corporation, Karnal 55 21 34 61.82 
4 Municipal Corporation, 
Yamunanagar 55 18 37 67.27 
5 Municipal Council, Kaithal 56 20 36 64.29 
6 Municipal Council, Thanesar 49 16 33 67.35 
7 Municipal Committee, Naraingarh 47 16 31 65.96 
8 Municipal Committee, Taraori 47 20 27 57.45 
9 Municipal Committee, Assandh 47 15 32 68.09 
10 Municipal Committee, Gharaunda 47 12 35 74.47 
11 Municipal Committee, Radaur 31 14 17 54.84 
12 Municipal Committee, Pehowa 47 20 27 57.45 
13 Municipal Committee, Pundri 57 16 41 71.93 
14 Municipal Committee, Cheeka 47 12 35 74.47 
15 Municipal Committee, Shahabad 47 12 35 74.47 
    710 226 484 68.17 
* Excluding the period when House was dissolved. 
 

 
 
Appendix 4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.1.6; Page 19) 
Detail of the Subject Committees constituted and number of meeting in test checked ULBs held during the period April 2015 to March 2020 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Subject Committee MC, Panchkula MC, Ambala MC, Yamunanagar 
Whether 
constituted or not 
If Yes, no. of 
Meeting held  
Whether 
constituted or not 
If Yes, no. of 
Meeting held  
Whether 
constituted or not 
If Yes, no. of 
Meeting held  
1 Finance and Contract Committee Yes - Yes 1 Yes - 
2 Accounts and Audit Committee No - No - No - 
3 Building Regulation Committee Yes 1 Yes - Yes - 
4 Water Supply, Drainage and Disposal 
Committee 
Yes 2 Yes - No - 
5 Assessment of various Taxes and Fees 
Committee 
Yes 1 Yes 1 Yes - 
6 Extension and Prevention of Fire Committee No - No - No - 
7 Education and Social Welfare Committee No - Yes 1 No - 
8 Planning Improvement and Resource 
Committee 
No - No - No - 
9 Beautification, Sanitation and Public Health 
Committee 
No - Yes 1 Yes - 
10 Rural and Slum Development Committee No - Yes - No - 
11 Market. Slaughterhouse and Trade 
Committee 
No - No - No - 
12 Vigilance Committee No - No 1 No - 
13 Implementation Committee No - Yes - No - 
14 Any other Committee so constituted by the 
Corporation 
No - No - Yes - 
 Total number of meetings held of  all 
Subject Committees 
- 4 - 5 - - 
 
  
84 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 

 
 
Appendix 4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.5.1; Page 23) 
Statement showing the delay in constitution of SFC and implementation of recommendations  
SFC To be 
constituted as 
per the 
Constitution 
To be 
constituted with 
reference to 
previous SFCs 
Actually 
constituted 
Delay in 
constitution 
w.r.t 
previous 
SFC (in 
months) 
Month of 
submission 
Month of 
acceptance 
Delay in 
acceptances # 
(in months) 
Period 
covered as 
per Report 
of SFC 
Period for which 
recommendations 
on devolution 
were accepted 
1st   By May 1994 @ Not applicable May 1994 - March 1997 September 2000 35 1997-98 to 
2000-01 
2000-01 
2nd   1999-2000 May 1999 September 2000 15 September 2004 December 2005 8 2001-02 to 
2005-06 
2005-06 
3rd   2004-05 September 2005 December 2005 2 February 2008 August 2008 - 2006-07 to 
2010-11 
2006-07 to 2010-11 
4th   2009-10 December 2010 April 2010 - June 2014 March 2015 2 2011-12 to 
2015-16 
- 
5th   2014-15 April 2015 May 2016 12 September 2017 September 2018 5 2016-17 to 
2020-21 
2018-19 to 2020-21 
@  Within one year from the commencement of the 74 th  CAA. 
#  After adjusting six months period for acceptance  of report as recommended by SFCs. 
 
85 
Appendices 

Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74 th  Constitutional Amendment Act 
86 
Appendix 4.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.5.2; Page 25) 
List of 5 th  SFC recommendations which are yet to be implemented 
Sr. 
No. 
Recommendations 
1 To consider Ambala Cantonment in the list of beneficiaries of SFC. 
2 To strengthen the Directorate of ULBs of the State based on the scientific 
assessment of the human resource requirements for v arious functional 
responsibilities entrusted to it by clearly defined  roles and responsibilities of 
various administrative verticals in the Directorate. 
3 A ‘Standard Operating Procedure’ for (how to start levying or collect a new 
tax or a toll or a fee), be prepared at the State L evel and be circulated in all 
ULBs so that the ULBs wanting to take such initiative have clarity on what is 
permissible, how rate can be determined and what is the procedure. 
4 A clear ‘Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)’ for co llection of taxes should 
be circulated to all municipalities and internal co ntrol mechanisms should be 
prescribed for adoption thereby, and the municipali ties may be instructed to 
adhere to that SOP. 
5 To adapt Water Policy, 2013 of the Government of In dia for its context, 
including measures to recover cost of supply throug h differentiated user 
charges from the beneficiaries. The user charges sh ould be structured not in 
nominal terms, where real value declines with time.  A formula based user 
charges which help preserve real value merits serious consideration. 
6 Research on augmentation of revenue should be a con tinuous exercise where 
the potential may be explored for newer ways of ear ning revenue and for 
exploiting the existing ways to the optimum. A prof essional institution 
suggests Swarna Jayanti Haryana Institute for Fisca l Management may be 
helpful in this regard. 
7 A uniform form of accounting with uniform coding should be adopted and 
used in all ULBs in Haryana. 
8 To adopt application ‘National Asset Directory’ developed by Government 
of India to record the assets of ULBs for ULBs in the State. 
9 Internal control mechanisms be established for the ULBs at the State Level in 
the form of statements in specified formats to be f illed and transmitted to the 
appropriate officer of the Directorate of ULBs in the form of MIS and a small 
software programme may be made to identify larger deviations and risk areas 
so that corrective actions can be taken accordingly. 
10 Role mapping for the work positions in ULBs and SOP s for such roles 
including the reporting and MIS and responsibility factor may be done and 
the information be placed at a defined and known me dium which can be 
accessed easily, but with appropriate checks and balances. 
11 Budget Document of the ULBs should be based on a un iform format. This 
would include the function wise estimation of expen diture and revenue 
attributed to the function. Also, appropriate expla nations should be given for 
the differences between budget estimates and actual realisation. 
  
 

 
 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.1.2; Page 38) 
Statement of events for recruitment to the post of Accountant in ULBs during 2015-20 
Sr. 
No. 
Description of events Date Time taken Total time 
taken 
1. Need assessment at DULB after collecting information in respect of vacancies in ULBs 19.12.2011   
2. Forwarding proposal for recruitment to 39 posts to HSSC by DULB 18.01.2012 By State 
Government, 
1,520 days 
2471 days 
3. HSSC returned back the proposal on instruction of S tate Government (Order dated 28.10.2014) to hold th e recruitment process till 
future order  
24.11.2014 
4. State Government issued instruction to send revised proposal to HSSC 29.04.2015 
5. Forwarding proposal for recruitment to 40 posts to HSSC by DULB 02.07.2015 
6. Forwarding proposal for recruitment to 35 posts to HSSC by DULB after attending queries on the proposal received from HSSC 18.03.2016 
7. Advertisement for recruitment by HSSC vide advertisement no. 06/2016 02.12.2016 By HSSC, 930 
days 8. DULB received a list of 35 candidates from HSSC after selection 08.10.2018 
9. DULB issued offer of appointment to 32 candidates after document verification 29.10.2018  
Note: The number of days are calculated considering one month=30 days & one year=365 days. 
Statement of events for recruitment to the post of Various Class-IV posts in ULBs during 2015-20 
Sr. 
No. 
Description of events Date Time taken Total time 
taken 
1. State Government issued instruction to send  propos al to General Administration Department (General Se rvices-I Branch) in the O/o 
Chief Secretary (CS), GoH 
21.06.2013   
2. Forwarding proposal for recruitment of class vi staff to CS, GoH by PS, ULB 21.11.2013 By State 
Government, 
1720 days 
1905 days 
3. Advertisement for recruitment by CS, GoH 22.02.2014 
4. State Government issued instruction to send revised  proposal to CS, GoH as advertisement dated 22.02.2 014 was to be re-advertised 
due to increase in upper age from 40 years to 42 years 
06.07.2015 
5. Forwarding proposal for recruitment of 130 posts to CS, GoH by DULB after need assessment 29.12.2016 
6. State Government issued instruction to send revised proposal to HSSC and proposal sent earlier to CS, GoH treated as withdrawn 22.12.2017 
7. Forwarding proposal for recruitment of 822 posts to  HSSC by DULB after need assessment out of 967 rece ived from ULBs (reasons 
for sending 145 less is not available on records) 
11.08.2018 
7. Advertisement for recruitment by HSSC vide advertisement no. 04/2018 26.08.2018 By HSSC, 161 
days 8. DULB received a list of 822 candidates from HSSC after selection 22.01.2019 
9. DULB make allotment to ULBs to issue offer of appointment to candidates after document verification 23.01.2019  
10. ULBs issued offer of appointment to  candidates after document verification 11.02.2019  
Note: The number of days are calculated considering one month=30 days & one year=365 days. 
  
87 
Appendices 

 
 
Appendix 5.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.2; Page 40) 
Statement showing the specilised manpower in ULBs in the State 
(Figures in bracket in percentage) 
Post 10 Corporations 19 Councils 53 Committees 
Standard for 
an ULB 
Shortage in SS 
w.r.t. Standard 
Vacancy 
w.r.t. SS 
Standard for 
an ULB 
Shortage in SS 
w.r.t. Standard 
Vacancy 
w.r.t. SS 
Standard for 
an ULB 
Shortage in SS 
w.r.t. to 
Standard 
Vacancy 
w.r.t. SS 
Taxation 
ZTO 3 5 (17) 19 (76) - - - - - - 
TS 2 4 (20) 16 (100) 1 8 (42) 8 (73) 1 52 (98) 1 (100) 
TI 4 +36 (90) 31 (41) 2 31 (82) 7 (100) 1 51 (96) 2 (100) 
Engineering 
SE 1 0 2 (20) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
EE 3 1 (3) +2(6) 1 0 6 (32) 0 0 0 
AE 6 0 5 (8) 2 2 (5) 18 (50) 1 3 (6) 32 (64) 
JE 8 +38 (47) 53 (45) 4 3 (4) 34 (47) 2 52 (49) 9 (17) 
Sanitation 
CSI 2 +4 (20) 15 (62) 1 5 (26) 10 (71) 0 0 0 
SI 6 23 (38) 15 (41) 2 14 (37) 6 (25) 1 33 (62) 4 (20) 
ASI 10 43 (43) 38 (67) 6 114 (100) 0 2 106 (100) 0 
Public Health 
MO 1 +1 (10) 9 (82) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
VS 1 2 (20) 8 (100) 1 19 (100) 0 0 0 0 
AVS 2 13 (65) 7 (100) 2 38 (100) 0 0 0 0 
Accounting 
SAO 1 2 (20) 2 (25) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
AO 0 + 8 (0) 2 (25) 1 9 (47) 5 (50) 0 0 0 
SO 2 +3 (15) 6 (26) 2 32 (84) 6 (100) 1 53 (100) 0 
Acct. 2 +17 (85) 31 (84) 2 9 (24) 12 (41) 1 1 (2) 25 (48) 
SS: Sanctioned Strength, ZTO: Zonal Taxation Office r, TS: Tax Superintendent, TI: Tax Inspector, SE: S uperintendent Engineer, EE: Executive Engineer, AE:  Assistant 
Engineer, JE: Junior Engineer, CSI: Chief Sanitary Inspector, SI: Sanitary Inspector, ASI: Assistant S anitary Inspector, MO: Medical Officer, VS: Veterin ary Surgeon, AVS: 
Assistant Veterinary Surgeon, SAO: Senior Accounts Officer, AO: Accounts officer, SO: Section Officer and Acct: Accountant. 
 
88 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 

Appendices 
89 
Appendix 5.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.3; Page 41) 
Status of Human Resources in test checked ULBs as on January 2020 
Sr. 
No. 
ULBs No. of 
Sanctioned 
Post  
Vacant 
Post 
Vacancy 
Position 
(in per 
cent ) 
Outsourced 
Staff 
No. of 
Employees 
per 1000 
population 
Municipal Corporations  
1 Panchkula 1,021 955 93.54 917 1.99 
2 Ambala 816 752 92.16 121 0.61 
3 Karnal 335 73 21.79 18 0.61 
4 Yamunanagar 306 115 37.58 18 0.29 
Municipal Councils  
5 Kaithal 74 27 36.49 13 0.32 
6 Thanesar 227 108 47.58 18 0.68 
Municipal Committees  
7 Naraingarh 15 9 60.00 2 0.27 
8 Sahabad 107 60 56.07 74 2.19 
9 Pehowa 23 10 43.48 4 0.34 
10 Taraori 79 51 64.56 26 1.61 
11 Radaur 17 6 35.29 4 0.72 
12 Gharaunda 113 90 79.65 22 0.92 
13 Assandh 81 65 80.25 50 1.88 
14 Cheeka 56 27 48.21 49 1.55 
15 Pundari 38 26 68.42 13 1.02 
Total 3,308 2,374 71.77 1,349 0.84 
 

Appendix 6.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.1.3; Page 51) 
Details of revenue sources, status of levy and statutory provisions in Test Checked ULBs during 2015-20 
Sr. 
No. 
Revenue sources Status of levy in 
test checked ULBs 
Whether the ULB is 
empowered to fix 
the rate of 
Tax/Fee/charge 
Independently (Yes 
or No) 
HMC Act, 
1994 
State Government Order & Circular Reference 
1 Property Tax Levied No Section- 87 
(1) 
85/HA16/1994/S87/2013 and 
86/HA24/1973/S69/2013 dt. 11.10.2013 
2 Fire Tax/Fire Event 
Charges 
Levied No Section-87 
(2f) 
Section- 35, Haryana Fire Service Act, 2009 
3 Entertainment Duty Not levied No - Notified by the Government, however, rates for 
entertainment duty to be collected not notified. 
Haryana Municipal Entertainment Duty Act, 2019 
4 Tax on Profession Not levied No Section- 87 
(2a) 
Not notified by the Government 
5 Development Tax Not levied No Section- 87 
(2c) 
Section- 70 (1) 
(viiid) 
Not notified by the Government 
6 Tax on Vehicle and 
Animal 
Not levied No Section-87 
(2b) 
Section- 70 (1) (ii & 
iii) 
Not notified by the Government 
7 Show Tax Not levied No Section- 87 
(2d) 
Section- 70 (1) (v) Not notified by the Government 
8 Toll Tax Not levied No Section-87 
(2f) 
Section- 70 (1)(vi) Not notified by the Government 
9 Sanitation Tax Not levied No Section-87 
(2f) 
Section- 70 
(1)(viiib) 
Not notified by the Government 
10 Tax on boat Not levied No Section-87 
(2f) 
Section- 70 (1)(vii) Not notified by the Government 
Non-Tax Revenue 
1 Rent/Lease Money of 
Land 
Levied Yes Section-327 
(a-i)&(b) 
-
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act  
90 

Sr. 
No. 
Revenue sources Status of levy in 
test checked ULBs 
Whether the ULB is 
empowered to fix 
the rate of 
Tax/Fee/charge 
Independently (Yes 
or No) 
HMC Act, 
1994 
State Government Order & Circular Reference 
2 Advertisement 
permission fee 
Partially levied in 
Municipal 
Corporations and 
Councils. Not levied 
in Municipal 
Committees 
No Section-122 Section 200 (p) and 
Haryana 
Municipalities 
Outdoor Advertising 
Policy, 2010 
HMC Advertisement Bye-laws-2018 
3 Trade License Fees Levied in the 
Municipal 
Corporations 
Yes Section-330, 
331, 335 & 
336 
- 
4 Trade License Fees 
(Dangerous and 
Offensive Trade) 
Levied in the 
Municipal Councils 
and committees 
No - Section-128 HM (dangerous and offensive trade) Bye-laws, 1982 
and Bye-laws Amendment, 1997 
5 Scrutiny/Building 
Application Fee 
Levied No Haryana Building Code, 2017 
6 Development 
Fee/Charge 
Levied No - - Haryana Management of Civic Amenities & 
Infrastructure Deficient Municipal Areas Act, 2016 
7 Mobile Tower Fee Levied in Municipal 
Corporations and 
Councils. Not levied 
in Municipal 
Committees 
No - - HMC (Communication & Connectivity Bye-laws, 
2013 and HM (Communication & Connectivity 
Infrastructure Amendment Bye-laws, 2013 
8 Cable lying fee (Road 
Cut Charge/Road 
Damage Recovery Fee) 
Levied in Municipal 
Corporations and 
Councils. Not levied 
in Municipal 
Committees 
No - - HMC (Communication & Connectivity Bye-laws, 
2013 and HM (Communication & Connectivity 
Infrastructure Amendment Bye-laws, 2013 
9 Dog Registration 
Charge 
Levied in Panchkula 
& Thanesar 
No Section-311 - HMC Bye-laws, 2008 (Registration & Proper 
Control of Dogs) and HM Bye-laws, 2005 
(Registration & Proper Control of Dogs) 
10 Birth & Death 
Registration Charge 
Levied No - - As per Haryana Compulsory Registration of Births 
and Deaths Act, 1969 & Haryana Registration of 
Births and Deaths Rules, 2002 
11 Marriage 
Form/Certificate Fee 
Levied No - - As per Haryana Compulsory Reg. of Marriages, 
2008 
91 
Appendices

Sr. 
No. 
Revenue sources Status of levy in 
test checked ULBs 
Whether the ULB is 
empowered to fix 
the rate of 
Tax/Fee/charge 
Independently (Yes 
or No) 
HMC Act, 
1994 
State Government Order & Circular Reference 
12 Tehbazari fee/fare fee Five test checked 
ULBs. Except MC 
Panchkula and nine 
Municipal 
Committees 
Yes Section-327 
(a-i & ii) 
Haryana Municipal (Licensing of the Tent Owners) 
Bye-laws, 1999 
13 Parking fee Not levied Section-
327(a-i) & 
(b) 
- 
14 Slaughtering Fee Not levied Section-327 
(a-iv) 
Haryana Municipal (Regulation of Slaughter house) 
Bye-laws, 1977 
15 Charges for 
unauthorised 
construction 
Levied No Section 203-A State Government notification 19/4/2012--6C-1 
dated 26 June 2018 
Haryana Municipal (Charging of Composition Fees 
for Regularisation of Unauthorised Construction) 
Rules, 2003 
16 Lightening fee Not levied No Section-
88(iv) 
Section-70 (1) (xi) 
17 Service Charges in lieu 
of property tax 
No Section-92 - Hon’ble Supreme Court’s decision dated 
19 November 2009 & Instructions vide O.M. dated 
15/17 December 2009 of Ministry of Urban 
Development, GOI 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act  
92 

Appendices 
93 
Appendix 6.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2.1.2; Page 54) 
Budget making process from preparation to approval 
City Budget proposed by Budget 
approved by 
Budget per 
capita (`` ``) 
Panchkula House of the Corporation State 
Government 2,617 
Ambala Finance and Contract Committee 
House of the Corporation 
State 
Government 3,580 
Karnal House of the Corporation State 
Government 3,569 
Yamunanagar House of the Corporation State 
Government 1,527 
Kaithal House of the Council 
Deputy Commissioner 
Divisional 
Commissioner 1,730 
Thanesar House of the Council 
Deputy Commissioner 
Divisional 
Commissioner 1,581 
Naraingarh House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,987 
Taraori House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 2,380 
Asandh House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,931 
Gharaunda House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 2,321 
Radaur House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,390 
Pheowa House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,794 
Pundri House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,081 
Cheeka House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 2,422 
Shahabad House of the Committee Divisional 
Commissioner 1,658 

Appendix 6.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 6.2.2; Page 55) 
Statement showing variation in budget in each category of ULBs 
Amount: `` `` in crore 
Municipal Corporation, Panchkula 
Year Budgeted Actual Variation (per cent) 
Income RE DE Grants Income RE DE# Income RE DE 
A B C D E F G H= (E-A)/E *100 I = (F-B)/F *100 J =(G-C)/C *100 
2015-16 76.81 31.80 44.00 27.46 44.97 26.15 20.36 -41.45 -17.77 -53.73
2016-17 85.77 34.88 48.80 37.49 52.54 29.64 48.16 -38.74 -15.02 -1.31
2017-18 89.42 45.56 56.67 68.24 61.85 41.11 73.04 -30.83 -9.77 28.89 
2018-19 98.92 48.56 61.67 36.79 75.95 58.55 100.40 -23.22 20.57 62.80 
2019-20 123.15 64.48 64.91 56.81 50.42 61.33 40.83 -59.06 -4.89 -37.10
Municipal Council, Kaithal 
Year Budgeted Actual Variation (per cent) 
Income RE DE Grants Income RE DE Income RE DE 
2015-16 36.98 19.42 15.05 15.62 12.80 12.29 16.32 -65.39 -36.71 8.44 
2016-17 29.99 20.46 8.90 24.59 13.81 12.34 19.60 -53.95 -39.69 120.22 
2017-18 37.12 27.65 8.90 63.47 14.57 14.04 15.80 -60.75 -49.22 77.53 
2018-19 37.12 30.22 6.90 35.25 34.16 18.05 29.24 -7.97 -40.27 323.77 
2019-20 31.91 26.44 6.00 63.85 14.16 24.20 58.05 -55.63 -8.47 867.50 
Municipal Committee, Cheeka 
Year Budgeted Actual Variation (per cent) 
Income RE DE Grants Income RE DE Income RE DE 
2015-16 11.41 6.06 5.31 5.74 5.83 4.05 6.13 -48.90 -33.17 15.44 
2016-17 11.65 6.84 4.80 14.97 5.25 3.82 11.61 -54.94 -44.15 141.88 
2017-18 11.96 7.86 3.74 10.34 6.49 5.29 10.31 -45.74 -32.70 175.67 
2018-19 12.15 9.29 2.80 4.97 6.08 4.27 2.30 -49.96 -54.04 -17.86
2019-20 11.85 9.41 2.80 10.66 5.54 5.69 4.93 -53.25 -39.53 76.07 
RE: Revenue Expenditure, DE: Development Expenditure 
#: Development Expenditure includes Capital Expenditure 
Performance Audit of Efficacy of Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
94 