Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Performance Audit of 
Implementation of Flood Control Measures in 
West Bengal
(Economic Sector)
Government of West Bengal
Report No. 2 of the year 2019

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUBJECT Reference to
Paragraph (s) Page (s)
Preface iii
Executive Summary v-x
Chapter 1: Introduction
Floods: A national perspective 1.1 1-3
Flood Scenario of the State 1.2 3-7
Organisational structure 1.3 7-8
Audit Objectives 1.4 8
Audit Criteria 1.5 8-9
Scope and Methodology 1.6 9
Acknowledgment 1.7 9
Chapter  2: Planning
Non-preparation of Comprehensive Plan 2.1 11-12
Non-adoption of various structural and  
non-structural measures
2.2 12-14
Chapter 3: Implementation
Formulation of Project Proposals/Detailed 
Estimates
3.1 15-16
Execution of Projects 3.2 16-36
Kandi Master Plan 3.2.1 16-25
Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Project 3.2.2 25-34
Implementation of other embankment protection 
and anti-river erosion works
3.2.3 34-36
Chapter 4: Financial Management 
Allotment and expenditure 4.1 37-38
Financial Irregularities 4.2 38-39
Chapter 5: Quality Control and Monitoring
Quality Control 5.1 41-42
Monitoring 5.2 42-44
Flood Forecasting 5.3 44-45
Chapter 6: Conclusion 47-49
APPENDIX
Division-wise Expenditure Details 1.1 51-52
GLOSSARY 53

iii
PREFACE
Floods have been a recurrent phenomenon, causing loss of lives, public 
property and bringing untold misery to the people, especially those 
in rural areas. There is also a larger economic impact, as they derail 
economic activities, thus affecting growth.  Indian sub-continent has 
peculiar climatic conditions, which cause floods in some parts whereas 
drought in other parts.  West Bengal is one of the prime flood prone 
States in the country with 42 per cent (37660 sq. km.) of its total 
geographical area (88752 sq. km.) being susceptible to floods.
During the period from 2013 to 2017, there was loss of 1012 human 
lives and properties worth ` 43997.27 crore (that included cost of crops, 
houses, cattle and public utilities lost) due to floods, as reported by the 
West Bengal Government to Central Water Commission.
The Performance Audit on “Implementation of Flood Control Measures 
in West Bengal” was conducted to assess the implementation and 
effectiveness of the flood control measures. The Performance Audit 
covers the period from 2013-14 to 2017-18 and examines various 
aspects of the Programme such as Planning, Implementation, Financial 
Management, Quality Control and Monitoring.
This Report for the year ended March 2018 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of West Bengal under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India for being laid before the Legislature of the State.
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

v
Executive Summary
Flood damages - how bad is the situation? 
A national perspective
The Indian sub-continent has peculiar climatic conditions, which cause floods in 
some parts whereas drought in other parts.  Based upon the statistics provided 
by the States and compiled by Central Water Commission for the period 1953-
2017, it has been reported that damages by floods in the country are more than 
` 5800 crore per annum besides the loss of precious human lives and cattle.
In West Bengal
West Bengal is one of the prime flood prone States in the country with  
42 per cent of its total geographical area (88752 sq. km.) being susceptible to 
floods. The State has three distinct drainage basins namely Brahmaputra, Ganga 
and Subarnarekha having 37660 sq. km. flood prone area.
During the period 2013-17, value of the flood damages to crops, houses and 
public utilities was ` 43997.27 crore.  As such the average annual damages 
during these five years was ` 8799.45 crore, which was much higher than the all 
India average of last 60 years.
Who is responsible to take action? 
Flood control programme/schemes are planned, funded and implemented by 
the West Bengal Government through the Irrigation and Waterways Department 
(I&WD). Besides, Government of India (GoI) also renders technical, advisory 
and financial assistance to the State Government. Central Assistance is provided to 
flood prone States to take up flood control and river management works in critical 
areas under Flood Management Programme (FMP). GoI set up Central Water 
Commission (CWC), Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC), Brahmaputra 
Board (BB) and National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) to enable 
State Governments to address flood problems in a comprehensive manner. 
Apart from these, the Working Group for 12 th Five Year Plan of the Planning 
Commission (PC) of India made (October 2011) various recommendations and 
suggestions for the management of flood.  CWC plays a direct role in collection 
of flood data, flood forecasting and dissemination of flood forecasts to the local 
administration for planning suitable administrative measures. 
What did we expect from this Performance Audit? 
The Performance Audit was undertaken to get a reasonable assurance that:
 •	The Department had prepared a comprehensive long-term plan, prioritising 
flood control measures necessary to combat recurrent floods in the State.
 •	Schemes/projects related to flood control measures were implemented as 
planned and were effective in minimising damage of life and property.
 •	Necessary funds were made available and were utilised judiciously.
 •	An effective system for ensuring quality control in construction and 
monitoring was in place.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
vi
 •	Flood Forecasting was used as a tool to predict, warn and minimise damage 
from floods.
How did we do it? 
Selection for detailed examination was done as follows: Out of 45 Divisions 
engaged in flood control measures during the years 2013-18, six Divisions 
executing two ongoing projects under Flood Management Programme (FMP)1, 
and eight other Divisions on the basis of volume of expenditure and ensuring 
that these were located in different flood prone zones of the State.
The methodology adopted for achieving audit objectives with reference to audit 
criteria consisted of scrutiny of records, analysis of data, issue of audit queries, 
joint site visits etc.
How is this Performance Audit Report organised? 
The report consists of six chapters, starting with introduction to the flood 
conditions in India and in West Bengal, extent of damages caused due to 
floods, statutory provisions to deal with the floods etc. Other chapters cover 
the planning, implementation, financial management and quality control and 
monitoring.
What did we observe in Audit? 
As per the Annual Flood Report - 2017 of Irrigation and Waterways Department, 
all the blocks under KMP and KKB were inundated by flood waters in July 
2017. The flood damage reports of the Department of Disaster Management and 
Civil Defence, GoWB reflected loss of life, devastating damage to property and 
its adverse economic and environmental impacts. 
Flood damage data of 2017
Population 
affected 
(Million)
Cropped 
area 
affected 
 (M ha)
Damage 
to crops 
(` in cr.)
Houses 
damaged 
(No.)
Damage 
to houses 
(` in cr.)
Human 
lives lost 
(No.)
Cattle 
lost 
(No.)
Damage 
to public 
utilities 
(` in cr.)
Total 
damages 
(` in cr.)
8.723 1.033 6914.50 8,26,982 9158.28 217 2,857 1655.16 17727.94
Chapter 2: Planning
In the absence of holistic basin-wise/river-wise Master Plan, flood management 
projects were taken up at different locations depending on priority and 
availability of funds without being linked to a comprehensive plan. 
 (Paragraph 2.1)
Irrigation and Waterways Department (I&WD) failed to adopt appropriate 
combination of structural and non-structural measures for effective management 
of floods. I&WD adopted only some of the structural measures.  Non-structural 
/administrative measures like Flood Plain Zoning and Flood Proofing were not 
adopted.
 (Paragraph 2.2)
1 Kandi Master Plan and Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Basin Drainage Project.

Executive Summary
vii
Chapter 3: Implementation
Kandi Master Plan 2 was taken up in June 2012 to ameliorate the critical and 
perpetual flood situation in an area of about 510 sq. km. in Murshidabad district.  
Against the approved project cost of ` 438.94 crore, an amount of ` 209.32 crore 
was released and spent during the years 2013-18. Out of the total amount spent 
on this project so far, GoI has contributed only ` 24.98 crore (12 per cent) 
instead of ` 157 crore (75 per cent), mainly due to delay in submission of UCs 
by the State Government.  
The project was still ongoing as only six out of 12 phases were completed as on 
March 2018 against the stipulated date of completion by March 2017.
Defects in Detailed Project Reports and various deviations from the Detailed 
Project Report like non-execution of embankment protection work in vulnerable 
stretches, less country side slope, less height of the embankment than the actual 
requirement, non-creation of additional waterway, less thickness of boulder 
pitching work etc. were noticed in execution of embankment protection work. 
Due to these deviations, risk of the infirmities of embankments cannot be ruled 
out, which could adversely impact the flood control arrangements.
Cases of non-compliance to the relevant Indian Standards Codes and 
recommendations of GFCC on providing sand cushion layer and sausage crate3 
were also noticed which impacted stability of the embankments.
Further, Annual Flood Report of 2017 of I&WD reflected that all the blocks 
under KMP were inundated by flood water in July 2017, a clear indication of 
lack of effectiveness of flood protection measures taken by I&WD until now. 
The inundation maps from ISRO Bhuvan portal also clearly demonstrated the 
lack of efficacy of the flood control plan of the KMP project. 
 (Paragraph 3.2.1)
With a view to provide relief to the flood prone low lying terrain of seven blocks 
in Paschim and Purba Midnapore districts, which historically suffer from flood 
and tidal inundation, the KKB Drainage Scheme was initiated in March 2010. 
Investment clearance of ` 650.38 crore for KKB project was accorded by the 
Planning Commission, GoI in March 2010 with target date of completion by 
March 2015. 
The project was commenced in March 2011 and ` 347.78 crore was released 
against which expenditure of ` 340.24 crore was incurred upto March 2018. The 
project was still (December 2018) ongoing. The project could not be completed 
within stipulated period mainly due to delay in land acquisition. Only 35 per cent 
of the estimated land was acquired up to March 2018. 
Commencement of the project without ensuring acquisition of land grossly 
hampered execution of works leading to delay in completion of the project. 
Rivers/khals were not widened/excavated up to design bed width, which 
implied that with the limited carrying capacity, they would not be able to control 
frequent flooding in the areas. Inclusion of non-feasible items, non-construction 
of regulator at the confluence of river Kapaleswari and Kaliaghai and 
non-maintenance of already resuscitated rivers/khals caused heavy siltation 
2 Consisting of entire Bharatpur-I, parts of Khargram, Burwan and Kandi blocks.
3 Wire net filled with boulders, used for embankment protection.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
viii
affecting the overall drainage system of the project. It was observed in the Annual 
Flood Report of I&WD for 2017 that all the seven blocks4 included under KKB 
were inundated in 2017, which was indicative of the lack of effectiveness of 
flood protection measures taken by I&WD.
 (Paragraph 3.2.2)
Apart from the two FMP projects, I&WD executed embankment protection as 
well as anti-erosion of river bank works under State Plan, Rural Infrastructure 
Development Fund (RIDF), Common Border Rivers Fund, One Time Additional 
Central Assistance (OTACA) etc.  A sample of 145 such works having estimated 
cost more than ` one crore each were selected for detailed examination. It was 
seen that in flood protection measures taken up by the Divisions, the standards 
prescribed in CWC guidelines, Indian Standard Code and I&WD Code (V ol.I) 
were not complied with. Further, few financial deficiencies in implementation 
of the flood protection works were also noticed. 
Required thickness of graded filter layer as per the Indian Standards Code was 
not provided in total 28 cases valuing ` 61.83 crore resulting in exposure of 
those embankments to force of water making them vulnerable to erosion.
In nine embankment protection and anti-erosion works valuing ` 58.36 crore, 
laying of sand cushion was not envisaged in the estimates and works were 
executed without providing any cushion of sand layer.
Extra expenditure of ` 10.44 crore was incurred in 10 embankment protection/
anti-river erosion works where the thickness of stone boulder in launching apron 
was provided 33 to 56 per cent more than the actual requirement. 
It was also observed that, in 2017, the area under flood inundation of the State 
was more than that in the last four years.
 (Paragraph 3.2.3)
Chapter 4: Financial Management
During 2013-14 to 2017-18, Budget Estimates of ` 7309.59 crore were provided 
for Flood Control, which was subsequently reduced to ` 4520.53 crore in Revised 
Estimates. The actual expenditure was even less than the Revised Estimates of 
each year. Savings with respect to Budget Estimates as well as Revised Estimates 
ranged from 26 to 68 per cent and 14 to 34 per cent, respectively.
Yearly budgets were prepared by I&WD without taking any inputs from the 
Divisional level, which resulted in such savings. As per the Budget Publications, 
I&WD could not spend ` 1099.45 crore during 2013-14 to 2017-18, though 
provision of the fund was made through REs by the State Government.
Despite availability of funds, 2162 sq. km. of the total flood prone area of the 
State remained unprotected as per the Annual Flood Report 2017 of I&WD.
 (Paragraph 4.1)
Some financial irregularities like executing maintenance work from FMP fund, 
non-deduction of Royalty and early refund of Security Deposit of  contractors 
were also noticed and have been commented upon.
 (Paragraph 4.2)
4 Narayangar, Datan-I, Sabong, Pingla, Bhagabanpur-I, Patashpur-I and Moyna.

Executive Summary
ix
Chapter 5: Quality Control and Monitoring
Three test checked Divisions5 did not ensure the quality of cement used in works 
valuing ` 13.52 crore, putting the strength of embankment protection works at 
stake. 
I&WD failed to check the quality of materials used in the construction of the 
flood control works. This could impact the structural design causing defects 
leading to failure of the works impacting flood control measures. 
 (Paragraph 5.1)
Progress of the work was not monitored effectively. It was observed that both 
the projects (KMP and KKB) were delayed and vulnerable areas remained 
prone to floods.
Monitoring mechanism through remote sensing techniques was not adopted for 
any schemes of Flood Control.
None of the test checked Divisions maintained any inventory of assets. Land 
register was maintained only by KKB project division. As a result, I&WD had 
no database containing details of the assets created under FMP. 
Inadequate monitoring system impacted field performance, also leading to 
failure to take corrective action while work was in progress.
 (Paragraph 5.2)
There is no system of real time compilation and dissemination of flood data in 
I&WD. Though the river water level is collected on hourly basis in monsoon 
period by the river gauge stations, the data is uploaded only once during the day 
on the web-site of I&WD. As such, if there is a sudden surge of flood waters, it 
remains unreported. 
There are only two river gauge station over River Bhagirathi-Hooghly though 
it passes through seven districts 6 in the State. Further, there is only one gauge 
station for the entire 129 km length of the Mahananda river within Malda 
district. There is also no river gauge station for Tangon, Kalindri, Punarbhaba 
and Pagla river in Malda district. Thus, water level recording mechanism in 
these sub-basins is weak which would affect rescue measures, leaving people at 
the mercy of the flood waters. 
 (Paragraph 5.3)
What do we recommend?
Department may consider to :
 i. Prepare state-centric comprehensive plan taking into account all 
existing developments with latest updated data, including the strategies 
recommended by various technical bodies such as scientific assessment of 
flood prone areas, integrated basin management approach etc.
 ii. Adopt Engineering/Structural measures like detention basins, diversion of 
flood water, etc. which will not only reduce spilling but also bring relief to 
the flood prone areas by reducing flood flows and thereby the flood levels. 
5 Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division and Howrah Irrigation Division.
6 Murshidabad, Burdwan, Nadia, Hooghly, Howrah, Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
x
 iii. Adopt Administrative/Non-structural measures like enactment of Model 
Flood Plain Zoning Bill which aim at demarcating zones or areas likely 
to be affected by floods of different magnitudes, frequencies, probability 
levels and specify the types of permissible developments in these zones, so 
that whenever floods actually occur, the damage can be minimized. 
 iv. Prepare defect-free DPRs and adhere strictly to the approved DPR and 
recommendations of GFCC while implementing the flood control measures 
without delay and avoiding wasteful expenditure.
 v. Take inputs from individual Divisions with respect to annual requirement 
of funds for flood control measures to ensure optimum utilisation of funds.
 vi. Introduction of Remote Sensing techniques for monitoring of physical 
progress of the schemes in Flood Management Works.
 vii. To ensure real time compilation and dissemination of flood data, provide 
more river gauge stations to measure the level of water at different locations 
and warning mechanism which will provide timely flood warnings with 
adequate lead time for the public to minimise the flood damages.

Chapter 1
Introduction

1
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Floods - A national perspective
Floods7 have been a recurrent phenomenon in many parts of India, causing loss 
of lives, public property and bringing untold misery to the people, especially 
those in rural areas. There is also a larger economic impact, as they derail 
economic activities, thus affecting growth.  Indian sub-continent has peculiar 
climatic conditions, which cause floods in some parts whereas drought in other 
parts. The main causes of floods are as under:
 (i)  High intensity rainfall in short duration,
 (ii)  Poor or inadequate drainage/channel capacity,
 (iii)  Unplanned reservoir regulation,
 (iv)  Failure of flood management structures.
The flood damage data is collected by the State Governments in terms of affected 
area, crops, cattle, properties, population etc. Based upon the statistics provided 
by the States and compiled by Central Water Commission for the period 
1953-2017, it has been reported that damages by floods in the country are more 
than ` 5800 crore per annum besides the loss of precious human lives and cattle. 
The flood damages in India during the aforesaid period are given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1 : Flood Damages in India during 1953-2017
Sl 
No Item Average Annual 
Damage
Maximum Damage
Extent Year
 1 Area affected 7.17 M ha 17.50 1978
 2 Population affected 32.12 Million 70.45 1978
 3 Human lives lost 1654 11316 1977
 4 Cattle lost 93067 618248 1979
 5 Cropped area affected 3.46 M ha 10.15 1988
 6 Damage to crops 
` 1711.16 Cr.* 17043.95 2015
 7 Houses damaged 1241815 3959191 2015
 8 Damage to houses ` 827.30 Cr.* 10809.80 2009
 9 Damage to public utilities ` 3262.46 Cr.* 38937.84 2013
Total ` 5800.92 Cr.*
(Source :  Information disseminated by CWC vide No.3/38/2012-FFM/1067-1164 Dt 17 May 
2019)
For the study of flood problem, the rivers in India can be broadly divided into 
the following four regions.
 (1) Brahmaputra Region;
 (2) Ganga Region;
 (3) North West Region; and
 (4) Central India and Deccan region.
7 Flooding occurs when the capacity of the river channel to carry the discharge is exceeded.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
2
1.1.1 Statutory Provisions for Flood Management
The subject of flood control, unlike irrigation, does not figure as such in any of 
the three legislative lists included in the Constitution (State list, Union list and 
Concurrent list) of India. Drainage and Embankments, however, are two of the 
flood control measures specifically mentioned in entry 17 of List II (State List), 
reproduced below:
“Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provision of entry 
56 of List I (Union List).”
Entry 56 of List I (Union List) reads as follows:-
“Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent 
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.”
For implementation of any flood control programme, it is necessary to acquire 
private land for execution of engineering measures such as Reservoirs, Detention 
basins, Embankments, Channelization of rivers, Channel improvement, 
Drainage improvement, Diversion of flood waters and Watershed Management. 
Since there is provision for “acquisition and requisitioning of property” in the 
Concurrent List under entry 42, both Centre and the States can enact laws for 
this purpose. The Land Acquisition Act of 1894 under which land could be 
acquired both by the Centre and the States is the basic Act in this regard. Further, 
if legislation for reducing flood damages is to be resorted to by Flood Plain 
Zoning, it involves restriction of land use and this power though not included 
under entry 17 of List II (State List) mentioned above, is covered under entry 
18 of List II (State List) which provides “land that is to say, rights in and over 
land”. Besides, Flood Plain Zoning being essentially a local problem and since 
local conditions differ from area to area, it needs, therefore, to be dealt with by 
the State Government. The subject of “Flood Management” including erosion 
control therefore falls within the purview of the States.
The schemes for flood control are planned, investigated and implemented by 
the States as per priorities within the State with their own resources and the 
role of Central Government is technical, advisory, catalytic and promotional in 
nature. A number of States have already enacted laws with provisions to deal 
with matters connected with flood control works. West Bengal has not enacted 
any law in this regard, so far.
1.1.2 Existing Flood Management Mechanisms in India
In India, a two tier system of flood management exists, as described below:
State Level Mechanism - The State Level Mechanism includes the Water 
Resources Departments, State Technical Advisory Committee and Flood 
Control Board. In some States, the Irrigation Departments and Public Works 
Departments look after flood matters.
Central Government Level Mechanism – The Union Government has set up 
following organizations and various expert committees to provide guidance and 
assist the State Governments in addressing flood problems in a comprehensive 
manner:

Chapter 1: Introduction
3
Central Water Commission (CWC) – The Government of India set up 
Central Water Commission, as presently named, in 1945 for achieving the 
goal of furthering and promoting measures of flood control, conservation and 
utilization of water resources throughout the country in the areas of beneficial 
uses, irrigation and hydropower generation, flood management and river 
conservation.
Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) – The Ganga Flood Control 
Commission (GFCC) was set up by Government of India in 1972 for 
preparation of comprehensive plan of flood control for Ganga Basin and to 
draw out a phased coordinated programme for implementation of works and 
monitoring & appraisal of flood management schemes of Ganga Basin States. 
The GFCC has prepared comprehensive plans of flood management of the 
23 sub-basins in the Ganga Basin besides drawing up a phased programme 
for implementation of these works to proper standards as well as examination 
and monitoring of various flood management schemes implemented in the 
Ganga Basin States.
Brahmaputra Board (BB) – The Government of India set up Brahmaputra 
Board under Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 (46 of 1980) under the then 
Ministry of Irrigation (now Ministry of Water Resources).  The jurisdiction of 
Brahmaputra Board includes all NE States (including Sikkim) and North Bengal 
in Brahmaputra and Barak Basin.
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) – For prevention and 
mitigation effects of disasters including flood disasters and for undertaking 
a holistic, coordinated and prompt response to any disaster situation, the 
Government of India has set up a National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA) in 2005, an Apex body under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister 
of India as per the provision contained in the NDM Act, 2005. 
As per the Act, NDMA was to lay down guidelines to be followed by the State 
Authorities in drawing up the State Plan (Clause No 6(2) (d)). Accordingly,  
NDMA has issued guidelines in January 2008 for management of floods and the 
roles of various Central and State agencies have been specified for preparation 
of flood mitigation plans and taking relief measures during flood disasters.
1.2 Flood Scenario of the State
West Bengal falls mainly in the Ganga Region as the southern and central parts 
of the State are covered by the river Ganga and its tributaries.  Some of the 
northern parts are covered under the Brahmaputra Region through its tributaries 
like Teesta, Raidak, Torsa etc. The State has three distinct drainage basins 
namely Brahmaputra, Ganga and Subarnarekha.
West Bengal is one of the prime flood prone States in the country with 42 per cent 
(37660 sq. km.) of its total geographical area (88752 sq. km.) being susceptible 
to floods.  West Bengal, being located at the tail-end of the Ganga Basin, is a 
hydrologically subsidised State, which receives huge volume of transboundary 
water. However, the supply of this water is so skewed that West Bengal bears 
the brunt of flood during monsoon and faces shortage of water during the lean 
months.  The floods of West Bengal have special characteristics. Heavy rainfall 
at origin or catchment areas of main flooding rivers of this State cause flood, but 

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
4
these catchment areas are mainly lying outside the State. West Bengal is flooded 
by water from adjoining states or countries.
Table 1.2 : Flood damages in West Bengal
Sl 
No. Kinds of damage
Flood damages occurred in West Bengal All India
During the years Maximum during  
(1953-2017)
Average 
Damage
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Year Damage (1953-2017)
 1 Area affected  
(M ha) 0.182 0.051 1.300 Not 
reported 1.033 1978 3.080 7.17
 2 Population 
affected (Million) 3.112 0.448 10.840 1.94 8.723 2000 21.800 32.12
 3 Human lives lost 
(nos.) 41 169 338 247 217 1968 2730 1654
 4 Cattle lost (nos.) 28311 145 22774 2020 2857 1978 221826 93067
 5 Cropped area 
affected (M ha.) 0.182 0.051 1.300 0.11 1.033 2007 2.490 3.46
 6 Damage to crops  
(
` crore) 533.95 6.13 11433.68 83.92 6914.50 2015 11433.68 1711.16
 7 Houses damaged 
(nos.) 233336 33621 830245 87704 826982 2000 2194858 1241815
 8 Damage to houses  
(
` crore) 178.97 17.275 7895.63 47.00 9158.28 2017 9158.28 827.30
 9 Damage to public 
utilities (
` crore) 13.58 2.67 6023.96 32.56 1655.16 2015 6023.96 3262.46
Total value  of 
Damages (6+8+9) 
(
` crore)
726.50 26.075 25353.27 163.48 17727.94 ` 5800.92 
croreAverage Damages : ` 8799.45 crore
(Source :  Information as disseminated by CWC vide No.3/38/2012-FFM/1067-1164 Dated 17 May 
2019 and as provided by WB Disaster Management and Civil Defence Department)
From the Table 1.2, it is observed that during the period 2013-17, flood damages 
to crops, houses and public utilities in West Bengal was ` 43997.27 crore.  As such 
the average annual damages during these five years was ` 8799.45 crore, which 
was much higher than the all India average of last 60 years (` 5800.92 crore).
Along with flooding, various allied problems like bank erosion, drainage 
congestion and cyclonic disaster exacerbate the flood situation. Major 
contributing factors to floods in North Bengal region are heavy local 
rainfall, discharge from upper basin areas and also outfall condition
8 in 
the neighbouring countries. In South Bengal, floods become voluminous 
because of the shape of the catchment area
9, its steep slope starting from 
a high plateau area and sloping sharply down to a flood terrain 10 near the 
outfall of limited capacity.
Flood in deltaic region is a disaster, which can destroy the total environmental 
set up of the area. It causes river bank erosion, depression of land, shifting of 
river course, river channel widening etc., due to its high discharge, elevation, 
8 Narrowed and silted end of river where it falls into the sea.
9 Surrounding area of a river from where accumulated rain water falls into the river.
10 Flood affected area.

Chapter 1: Introduction
5
volume and duration. When flood water recedes, affected areas are often 
blanketed in silt and mud. The water and landscape can be contaminated with 
hazardous materials, such as sharp debris, pesticides, fuel and untreated sewage. 
Residents of flooded areas can be left without power and clean drinking water, 
leading to outbreaks of deadly waterborne diseases like typhoid, hepatitis A 
and cholera.
Flood North Bengal South Bengal
Districts 
Affected by 
Flood
Cooch Behar, 
Jalpaiguri, 
Uttar Dinajpur, 
Dakshin 
Dinajpur, 
Malda
Nadia, Howrah, 
Murshidabad, 
North 24 Parganas, 
South 24 Parganas, 
Hooghly, Burdwan, 
Birbhum, Paschim 
Midnapore, Purba 
Midnapore
Relatively 
scarce Districts 
affected by 
Flood
Darjeeling Purulia & Bankura
Figure 1.1: Blue area depicts the flood prone districts of West Bengal
Flood damage reports for the years 2015 and 2017 prepared by the Disaster 
Management and Civil Defence Department, GoWB, as included in the CWC 
data, reflect loss of human lives of 338 and 217 along with damages of crops, 
houses and public utilities valuing ` 25353.27 crore and ` 17727.94 crore, 
respectively.
The major river basins and sub-basins of West Bengal are depicted in Figure 1.2 
below:
River Basins of North Bengal River Basins of South Bengal
Figure 1.2: River Basins in West Bengal

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
6
River Basins and Sub-Basins
BRAHMAPUTRA
1. Sankosh
2. Raidak
3. Torsa
4. Jaldhaka
5. Teesta
GANGA-PADMA
6. Mahananda 7. Punarbhaba 8. Atrai
GANGA-BHAGIRATHI
9. Pagla-Bansloi
10. Dwarka-Brahamani
11. Mayurakshi
12. Ajay
13. Damodar
14. Darakeswar
15. Shilabati
16. Kangsabati
17. Kaliaghai
18. Jalangi
19. Churni
20. Bhagirathi-Hooghly
21. Rupnarayan
SUBARNAREKHA DRAINAGE
22. Subarnarekha
23. 24-Parganas & Calcutta Port Area
24. Pichabani
25. Rasulpur
26. Haldi
Flood control programme/schemes are planned, funded and implemented by 
the West Bengal Government through the Irrigation and Waterways Department 
(I&WD). 
Besides, Government of India (GoI) also renders technical, advisory and 
financial assistance to the State Government. Central Assistance is provided 
to flood prone States to take up flood control and river management works in 
critical areas under Flood Management Programme (FMP).
The Government of India had decided to provide financial assistance 
through various Plan schemes because flood damages had increased due 
to non-completion of flood control works and their poor maintenance 
on account of funds constraints. A plan scheme “Flood Management 
Programme” for providing Central Assistance to the State Governments 
was taken up at an estimated cost of ` 8000.00 crore during 11
th Five 
Year Plan for river management, flood control, anti-erosion, drainage 
development, flood proofing, restoration of damaged flood management 
works and anti-sea erosion works; which were considered critical in 
nature. This programme was continued in the 12
th Five Year  Plan period 
also.  Some of the salient features of FMP include:
 •	To avail the Central Assistance, the States have been advised to prepare 
the schemes of flood management works in an integrated manner covering 
the entire river/tributary or a major segment. However, in case of emergent 
situation arising due to high floods, the works in critical reaches are taken 
up immediately after flood season.
 •	While submitting a proposal, the State Governments have to ensure 
acquisition of land required under the scheme and submit a certificate to 
this effect.
 •	The State Governments have to ensure inclusion of the scheme in the State 
Plan and make requisite budget provision towards Central as well as State 
share on annual basis.

Chapter 1: Introduction
7
GoI set up Central Water Commission (CWC), Ganga Flood Control Commission 
(GFCC), Brahmaputra Board (BB) and National Disaster Management 
Authority (NDMA) to enable State Governments to address flood problems in a 
comprehensive manner. Apart from these, the Working Group for 12
th Five Year 
Plan of the Planning Commission (PC) of India made (October 2011) various 
recommendations and suggestions for the management of flood.
These included following strategies to be effectively implemented:
 •	Scientific assessment of flood prone area. 
 •	Integrated basin management approach. 
 •	Construction of dams and reservoirs with adequate flood cushion. 
 •	Development of detention basins. 
 •	Drainage improvement. 
 •	Strengthening of organizations. 
 •	Public-Private Partnership concept. 
 •	Inventory of works completed by State. 
 •	Provision for adequate funds for maintenance of existing works. 
 •	Procedural reforms. 
 •	Application of new technologies. 
 •	Emergency action plans.
CWC plays a direct role in collection of flood data, flood forecasting and 
dissemination of flood forecasts to the local administration for planning suitable 
administrative measures. Apart from approving the projects (particularly 
those receiving Central Assistance) forwarded by the Departmental Screening 
Committee
11 of the State, GFCC monitors the progress of the schemes/projects, 
prepares comprehensive plans for the river system for management of flood in 
a focussed manner. As part of its mandate, the GFCC has prepared a number of 
guidelines from time to time on various flood related subjects in consultation 
with the States for formulation and execution of flood management schemes 
for ensuring quality in construction and meeting material specifications as per 
standards. These guidelines were also approved in meetings of the GFCC in 
which representatives of Ganga river basin States are members.
In order to assess the implementation and effectiveness of flood control measures 
a “Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in 
West Bengal” was conducted during February to December 2018 covering the 
period from 2013-14 to 2017-18.
1.3 Organisational structure
Additional Chief Secretary (ACS), I&WD has the overall responsibility for 
implementation of flood control projects.  The organisational set up is depicted 
in Chart 1.1.
11 A committee comprising the Secretary, I&WD as Chairman, Financial Adviser, Joint Secretary 
(Works), all Chief Engineers and Deputy Secretary – II (Works).

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
8
Chart 1.1: Organisational set up
Additional Chief Secretary, I&WD  
Secretary, I&WD  
Five Zonal Chief Engineers  
17 Superintending Engineers in charge of 17 
Circles  
62 Executive Engineers in implementing Divisions  
1.4 Audit Objectives
The Performance Audit was undertaken to get a reasonable assurance that: 
 (i) The Department had prepared a comprehensive long-term plan, prioritising 
flood control measures necessary to combat recurrent floods in the State.
 (ii) Schemes/projects related to flood control measures were implemented as 
planned and were effective in minimising damage of life and property.
 (iii) Necessary funds were made available and were utilised judiciously.
 (iv) An effective system for ensuring quality control in construction and 
monitoring was in place.
 (v) Flood forecasting was used as a tool to predict, warn and minimise damage 
from floods.
1.5 Audit Criteria
Performance was assessed against the following criteria:
 (i) National Disaster Management Guidelines (January 2008),
 (ii) Handbook for Flood Protection, Anti Erosion and River Training Works of 
Central Water Commission (CWC Guidelines 2012),
 (iii) Report of Working Group on Flood Management and Region Specific 
Issues for 12
th Five Year  Plan of Planning Commission, Government of 
India,
 (iv) Revised guidelines for providing Central Assistance to State Governments 
for the schemes/proposals of flood control and river management works 
under Flood Management Programme (2007-12), Ministry of Water 
Resources, Government of India,
 (v) Technical Memoranda on General Flood Management Structures, Ganga 
Flood Control Commission, Government of India,
 (vi) Indian Standards Codes,

Chapter 1: Introduction
9
 (vii) West Bengal Financial Rules (V olume-I & II),
 (viii) Irrigation & Waterways Department Code, GoWB (V olume-I),
 (ix) Schedule of Rates of I &WD, GoWB,
 (x) GoWB orders, including departmental policies.
1.6 Scope and Methodology
The Performance Audit covered the period from 2013-14 to 2017-18 and 
commenced with an Entry Conference on 23 February 2018 where the 
audit objectives of this Performance Audit were discussed in detail with the 
Department. 
The methodology adopted for achieving audit objectives with reference to audit 
criteria consisted of scrutiny of records, analysis of data, issue of audit queries, 
joint site visits etc. 
Selection for detailed examination was done as follows: Out of 45 Divisions 
(Appendix 1.1) engaged in flood control measures during the years 2013-18, six 
Divisions
12 executing two ongoing projects under Flood Management Programme 
(FMP)13 and eight other Divisions 14 were selected on the basis of volume of 
expenditure and ensuring that these were located in different flood prone zones 
of the State.  The Exit Conference was held on 13 December 2018 to discuss the 
audit observations. Department’s replies have been considered, while finalising 
the report and suitably incorporated.
1.7 Acknowledgement
The co-operation extended by the Department of Irrigation and Waterways, 
Government of West Bengal in providing the necessary records and information 
in connection with the conduct of this Performance Audit is acknowledged. 
12 Berhampore Irrigation Division, Mayurakshi North Canal Division, Mayurakshi South Canal 
Division, East Midnapore Division, KKB Project Division and Contai Irrigation Division.
13 Kandi Master Plan and Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage Basin Project (in which 
124 out of 142 tenders were test checked).
14 Howrah Irrigation Division, Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, 
Coochbehar Irrigation Division, Canals Division, Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division (in which 145 out of 357 tenders were 
test checked).

Chapter 2
Planning

11
Chapter 2: Planning
The effectiveness of measures taken to address flood risk and mitigation is 
dependent on coherent planning. In particular, long term strategic planning is 
required to ensure maximum benefit from limited resources. Flood management 
in a State calls for a long term and comprehensive approach. Preparation of 
an integrated plan to address flooding, erosion and drainage problems in flood 
prone basins and its implementation in a phased and coordinated manner is 
essential. The deficiencies noted in planning are detailed below: 
2.1 Non-preparation of Comprehensive Plan
While the State Governments are responsible for flood control as per priorities 
within the State with their own resources, Government of India has been rendering 
technical, advisory and financial assistance to the State Governments through the 
various Plan schemes. Government of India decided to provide financial assistance 
because it found flood damages had increased due to non-completion of flood 
control works and their poor maintenance on account of funds constraints. A plan 
scheme “Flood Management Programme” (FMP) for providing Central Assistance 
to the State Governments was taken up at an estimated cost of ` 8000.00 crore 
during 11
th Five Year Plan for river management, flood control, anti-erosion, 
drainage development, flood proofing, restoration of damaged flood management 
works and anti-sea erosion works; which were considered critical in nature. This 
programme was appreciated by all the States and 12
th Five Year  Plan Working 
Group on “Flood Management and Region Specific Issues” recommended to 
continue with it in the 12
th Five Year  Plan period also. 
Salient features of FMP
	 •	 To avail the Central Assistance, the States have been advised to prepare 
the schemes of flood management works in an integrated manner covering 
the entire river/tributary or a major segment. However, in case of emergent 
situation arising due to high floods, the works in critical reaches are taken 
up immediately after flood season. 
	 •	 While submitting a proposal, the State Governments have to ensure 
acquisition of land required under the scheme and submit a certificate to 
this effect. 
	 •	 The State Governments have to ensure inclusion of the scheme in the State 
Plan and make requisite budget provision towards Central as well as State 
share on annual basis. 
	 •	 Subsequent installments of Central Assistance are released on receipt of 
the Utilization Certificate in FORM GFR-19A submitted by the concerned 
Chief Engineer and the financial authority; and countersigned by the 
concerned Secretary of the implementing Department/Finance Secretary 
of the State Government.
	 •	 Actual expenditure incurred by the State Governments from their own 
resources in the financial year (in which the scheme is approved by the 
Empowered Committee under FMP) would be reimbursed in the same 
financial year or, if the Central Assistance is not released in that financial 

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
12
year, in the next financial year, in which case requirement of budget 
provision may not be necessary.
Further, Para 1.2 of National Disaster Management Guidelines (January 2008) of 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), GoI provide for preparation 
of basin-wise and region-wise comprehensive plans, taking into account all 
existing developments. This was to  also indicate areas prone to floods, which 
could be provided reasonable protection, broad feasibility study of different 
methods of flood control and priorities identified etc. The Report of the Working 
Group on Flood Management and Region Specific Issues for 12
th Five Year 
Plan also emphasised the need for an “integrated basin management approach” 
(Section 7.0).
I&WD stated that GoWB did not prepare any basin-wise/river-wise Master 
Plan. In the absence of a holistic plan, the Divisions proposed schemes as and 
when required, considering the vulnerability of specific areas. The Departmental 
Screening Committee
15 prioritised the works proposed by the Divisions. Further, 
schemes/projects planned for execution in a particular year mainly depended 
upon the availability of funds.
As such, flood management projects were taken up at different locations 
depending on priority and availability of funds without being linked to a 
comprehensive plan for the management of floods. The impact of the flood 
protection measures may, thus, have been limited to that extent.
In their reply, I&WD stated that considering the wide variation in 
hydro-meteorological conditions in different parts of the State, preparation of 
any long-term flood management plan applicable to the whole State may not be 
an appropriate solution. Basin-wise comprehensive flood management schemes 
had, however, been prepared for some critically flood prone areas such as 
Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai (KKB) Basin Project, Sundarban Embankment 
Re-construction Project, Kandi Master Plan (KMP), Lower Damodar Scheme 
and Ghatal Master Plan. 
While I&WD, West Bengal, has prepared plans for the critically flood prone 
areas it requires to prepare the schemes of flood management works in an 
integrated manner covering the entire river/tributary or major segment, which it 
has not prepared as per the salient feature of the FMP.
2.2  Non-adoption of various structural and non-structural measures
Para 2.2 of the Report of Working Group stipulates that providing absolute 
protection to all flood prone areas against all magnitude of floods is neither 
practically possible nor economically viable. It further provides that such an 
attempt would involve high cost of construction as well as expenditure for 
maintenance. Hence, a pragmatic approach in flood management is required to 
provide a reasonable degree of protection against flood damages at economic 
cost through a combination of structural and non-structural measures. GFCC
16, 
15 Is a committee comprising the Secretary, I&WD as Chairman, Financial Adviser, Joint 
Secretary (Works), all Chief Engineers and Deputy Secretary – II (Works).
16 Para 5.4.1 of Guidelines on Flood Management (January 2004) of Ganga Flood Control 
Commission.

Chapter 2: Planning
13
CWC17 and Planning Commission recommended for adoption of a combination 
of structural and non-structural measures for effective management of floods.
Depending upon the manner in which the work is required for flood protection, 
flood management measures are broadly classified as under:
 (a) Engineering/Structural Measures,
 (b) Administrative/Non-Structural Measures.
Engineering/Structural Measures:
The engineering measures for flood control which bring relief to the flood prone 
areas by reducing flood flows and thereby the flood levels are :
 (i) Reservoirs: An artificially created reservoir behind a dam across a river.
 (ii) Detention basins: A natural depression suitably improved and regulated, if 
necessary.
 (iii) Diversion of flood waters by diversion of a part of the peak flow to another 
river or basin, where such diversion would not cause appreciable damage.
 (iv) Channelization of rivers by constructing a parallel channel by-passing a 
particular town/reach of the river prone to flooding.
 (v) Watershed Management: The watershed management measures include 
developing and conserving the vegetative and soil covers and also to 
undertake structural works like check-dams, detention basins, diversion 
channels, etc.
The engineering methods of flood protection, which do not reduce the flood 
flow but reduce spilling, are:
 (vi) Embankments: Embankments which artificially raise the effective river 
bank and thereby prevent spilling.
 (vii) Channel and Drainage improvement: Channel and drainage improvement 
works, which artificially reduce the flood water level so as to keep the 
same, confined within the river banks and thus prevent spilling.
Administrative/Non-Structural Measures:
The administrative methods endeavour to mitigate the flood damages by:
 (i) Flood Forecasting: Facilitating timely evacuation of the people and shifting 
of their movable property to safer grounds by having advance warning of 
incoming flood i.e. flood warning in case of threatened inundation
 (ii) Flood Plain Zoning: Discouraging creation of valuable assets/settlement 
of the people in the areas subject to frequent flooding i.e. enforcing flood 
plain zoning regulation.
 (iii) Flood Proofing: Consisted in raising a few villages above pre-determined 
flood levels and connecting them to nearby roads or high lands.
It was, however, observed that I&WD adopted only some of the structural 
measures related to raising and strengthening of embankments, construction of 
structures to protect the river banks/embankments from erosion, re-excavation 
17 Para 1.6.1 and 1.6.2 of CWC Hand book for Flood Protection Anti-erosion and River Training 
Works.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
14
of drainage channels and maintenance of existing embankments etc. as discussed 
in subsequent observations. Other structural/engineering measures for flood 
control which bring relief to the flood prone areas by reducing flood flows and 
thereby the flood levels were not implemented. Non-structural/administrative 
measures like Flood Plain Zoning, Flood Proofing were also not adopted. Thus, 
in the absence of any comprehensive long-term plan, execution of flood control 
measures with combination of various structural and non-structural measures as 
recommended by GFCC, CWC as well as Planning Commission were not taken 
up by I&WD.
In their reply, I&WD stated that the adopted structural methods included 
construction of new embankment, raising and strengthening of existing 
embankments, construction of sluices and other regulating structures, 
construction of dams, barrages etc.  and non-structural measures like Flood 
Forecasting was also adopted. I&WD, however, accepted that other structural 
measures like detention basins, diversion of flood water and non-structural 
measures like Flood Plain Zoning and Flood Proofing were not adopted.

Chapter 3
Implementation

15
Chapter 3: Implementation
3.1 Formulation of Project Proposals/Detailed Estimates
Rule 164 of West Bengal Financial Rules (V olume-I & II) stipulates that before 
execution of any work, a Detailed Estimate is prepared and approved by the 
competent authority. Technical viability as well as cost of the work is assessed 
through the Estimates. Test check of 105 estimates of works (comprising of 
145 selected tenders) other than FMP works relating to eight divisions revealed 
the following deficiencies:
3.1.1 Source of data not mentioned in the estimates
As per Indian Standard No. 14262:1995 of Planning and Design of Revetment, 
silt factor and river velocity data were required to be considered for designing 
the embankment protection and anti-bank erosion works.  This also required to 
assess the weight and size of stone boulders to be used in the work as well as to 
calculate the required thickness of the protection work.
It was observed that source and age of data on silt factor and river velocity 
were not mentioned in 52 estimates prepared by seven test checked Divisions
18. 
Further, in 39 estimates of five test-checked Divisions 19 prepared during the 
years 2013-18 where the source of the silt factor data was mentioned as River 
Research Institute under I&WD, the data taken into consideration was even 
upto 30 years old.
Strength and design of protection work is to be based on the silt factor and river 
velocity data, which vary from time to time. Therefore, updated data should 
have been considered instead of historical data. Thus, consideration of old data 
may undermine design of the embankment.
3.1.2 Inconsistency in approval process of Estimates
I&WD did not prescribe any criteria regarding timelines for approval of 
estimates. Audit observed that time taken for completion of the approval 
process of estimates from Sub-division level to Chief Engineer level ranged 
from 103 to 863 days in case of 21 estimates prepared in five test checked 
Divisions
20.  On the other hand, however, in case of 26 estimates prepared by 
five Divisions21, the entire approval process was completed within one month 
and, in case of three estimates prepared by two Divisions 22, approvals from 
three different levels (from Division to CE office) were obtained in a single day. 
The exemplary promptness shown in these three estimates did not, however, 
18 Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, Coochbehar Irrigation 
Division, Canals Division, Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and 
Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
19 Coochbehar Irrigation Division, Canals Division, Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
20 Howrah Irrigation Division, Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, 
Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
21 Mahananda Embankment Division, Canals Division, Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
22 Howrah Irrigation Division and Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
16
help in quick execution. Only one work was completed within the scheduled 
date of completion, another work was completed with a delay of 54 days and 
the remaining work was on-going as of May 2018 even after the scheduled date 
of completion in April 2018.
Thus, irrespective of the time taken in approval process, there were delays in 
execution of works under Flood Control Programme.
3.2 Execution of Projects
I&WD executed (1) embankment protection, (2) anti-river erosion, (3) drainage 
improvement works for flood control during the years 2013-18. It also 
included two major projects namely Kandi Master Plan (KMP) and Kaliaghai-
Kapaleswari-Baghai (KKB) under Flood Management Programme (FMP) with 
shared funding by the Centre and the State. As per Para 4.2 of the “Revised 
guidelines for providing Central Assistance to State Governments for the 
Schemes/Proposals of Flood Control and River Management Works under FMP 
(2007-12)”, Central and State share was to be in the ratio of 75:25. The DPRs of 
both KMP
23 and KKB24 were stated to have been prepared as per the guidelines 
of GFCC/CWC and relevant IS codes.
3.2.1 Kandi Master Plan
An area of about 510 sq. km. 25 in Murshidabad district is critically prone to 
perpetual flooding and drainage congestion and remains totally cut-off for 
several days at a time during floods.  Most of the embankments, constructed 
decades ago, are in dilapidated condition. I&WD prepared (June 2012) the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the Kandi Master Plan to ameliorate the 
flood situation. The project primarily comprised of structural measures like :
 (i) raising/strengthening of a total of 223 km embankments of five different 
rivers
26, 
 (ii) protection work of different river embankments of a total length of 
38.72 km, 
 (iii) resuscitation of four khals
27, 
 (iv) renovation of 57 existing sluices, 
 (v) creation of additional capacity of waterways by renovating 12 existing 
rail/road bridges and culverts and 
 (vi) construction of three double lane River Bridges.
Investment clearance of ` 438.94 crore was accorded by the erstwhile Planning 
Commission, GoI in June 2012 under Flood Management Programme (FMP) 
with target date of completion by March 2017. 
23 Page 7 of Chapter 7 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in Kandi 
and other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.
24 Page IV-16, X-2, X-10, XI-8 and XIII-1 of Final Report Volume-I and Page 2 of Supplementary 
Volume-II (Revised) of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage Basin.
25 Consisting of entire Bharatpur-I, parts of Khargram, Burwan and Kandi blocks.
26 Mayurakshi, Bele, Dwarka, Kuye-Babla and Kana Mayurakshi.
27 Small drainage channels namely Jibanti Khal, Jhumjhum Khali Khal, Banki Khal and Swarup 
Khali Khal.

Chapter 3: Implementation
17
First instalment of the Central Fund was released in March 2014.  Approval of 
State Planning Board was accorded in May 2014.  Administrative Approval was 
given by I&WD to Chief Engineer (North) in December 2014 and the project 
work commenced in January 2015.  As per the approved DPR, the project was 
to be completed by March 2017, but it was executed in different phases and 
only six out of 12 phases were completed as on March 2018.  I&WD proposed 
(October 2017) to complete the project by March 2019, which was yet to be 
approved by GoI (December 2018).
Figure 3.1 : Index Map of Kandi Basin Project
3.2.1.1 Financial arrangements
Against the approved project cost of ` 438.94 crore, an amount of ` 209.32 crore 
(Central Share ` 24.98 crore and State Share ` 184.34 crore) was released and 
spent during the years 2013-18.
Out of the total amount spent on this project so far, GoI has contributed only 
` 24.98 crore (12 per cent) instead of ` 157 crore (75 per cent), mainly due to 
delay in submission of UCs by the State Government. 
3.2.1.2 Physical progress
As on 31 March 2018, physical progress of the project was as depicted in the 
Table 3.1. 

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
18
Table 3.1: Physical progress of the Kandi Master Plan (KMP)
Sl. 
No.
Components Provision 
as per DPR
Executed as on 
March 2018
Progress in 
percentage
1 Raising and Strengthening of 
embankment
223 km Completed: 130 km
Ongoing: 64 km
58
2 Embankment protection work 38.72 km 32.71 km completed 84
3 Resuscitation of drainage 
channels (four khals)
40.50 km Completed: 24.90 km
Ongoing: 6 km
61
4 Renovation of existing sluices 57 nos. 47 nos. 82
5 Creation of  additional 
waterway by renovating 12 
existing rail/road bridges and 
culverts
635 m Nil Nil
6 Construction of double lane 
river bridge
3 nos. Ongoing: 3 nos 80
(Source: Divisional records)
3.2.1.3 Defective Detailed Project Report
Scrutiny of execution of the project works under 12 different phases revealed 
following defects in the approved Detailed Project Report (DPR), as discussed 
below:
Schematic diagram of embankment protection work is shown in figure below:
 
Hydraulic Gradient Line (HGL) 
Figure 3.2: Cross section of river embankment
Non-execution of embankment protection work28 in vulnerable stretches
DPR29 of the KMP stipulated that protection work should be provided only 
in those reaches where the embankment is within 50 m of the existing bank 
line. Accordingly, provision for embankment protection work for a length of 
38.72 km. was provided in the DPR for the entire KMP. During preparation of 
28 Boulder pitching with launching apron (Figure-3.2).
29 Page 3 and 4, Chapter 8 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in 
Kandi and other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.

Chapter 3: Implementation
19
estimates in 2015-16, I&WD noticed that rivers Mayurakshi and Kuye-Babla 
under KMP came very close (within 50 m) of their embankments in several 
reaches where protection work was urgently required. Protection work was, 
however, not undertaken for those reaches as the same was not included in 
the DPR though actually required. Thus, the embankment protection work was 
not executed as per the present condition of the rivers, leaving those portions 
vulnerable to erosion.
In reply, I&WD stated (October 2018) that all the vulnerable reaches under 
KMP had been covered/protected as on date.
It was, however, noted in the estimates of Left Bank of river Mayurakshi 
(23.59 km to 39.30 km) and Right Bank of river Kuye-Babla (14.00 km to 
29.00 km) under KMP that provision of protection for such vulnerable reaches 
was not incorporated though required as the same was not included in the 
original DPR of KMP. Thus, estimates were incomplete and did not account for 
the dynamic ground realities.
3.2.1.4 Deviations from approved DPR 
Scrutiny of execution of the project works under 12 different phases revealed 
following deviations from the approved Detailed Project Report (DPR), as 
detailed below:
(a) Required Country Side Slope as per DPR not provided 
In the DPR
30 of KMP, the country side slope was considered 3H:1V or as 
required to cover the Hydraulic Gradient Line (HGL) 31 for which 277.38 ha 
land was to be acquired at a cost of ` 96.47 crore. The Embankment Manual, 
CW&PC, 1960 also stipulates that the slope of the embankment should not be 
steeper than 3H:1V , for embankment higher than 4.5 m.
It was noticed that the country side slope of embankment of entire KMP was 
restricted to 2H:1V without any berm
32, though height of embankment was more 
than 4.5 m.  Additional land acquisition was required in country side to make 
the slope 3H: 1V with execution of required berm. The slope was restricted due 
to non-acquisition of land.
Thus, by constructing embankments with countryside slope of 2H:1V , it was not 
possible to cover the HGL for the entire reach, making embankments vulnerable 
to seepage in those reaches. 
In reply I&WD stated that by constructing the embankment slope 2H:1V 
sufficient cover of HGL was provided. 
30 Page 48, Chapter 5 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in Kandi and 
other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.
31 A line of 4H:1V (for clayey soil) from High Flood Level (HFL) to the country side indicates the 
line of seepage through the embankments.
32 A horizontal shelf built into the embankment to strengthen its stability or to catch and arrest 
slide material.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
20
Figure 3.3: Schematic design of a river embankment
The cross sectional drawing of the embankment attached with the DPR of 
Phase II of KMP, however, reflected that it was not possible to cover the HGL 
for the entire length of the embankment with the actually executed slope of 
2H:1V . Also, the reply was in contradiction to the guidelines for preparation of 
DPR for flood management projects, 2018.
(b) Height of embankment constructed less than the actual requirement
In the DPR33 of KMP, minimum free board34  of 1.80 m on river Mayurakshi having 
design discharge more than 3000 cumecs and 1.50 m on rivers Dwarka, Kuye and 
Babla having design discharge less than 3000 cumecs was provided. Accordingly, 
height of embankments proposed to be constructed was to cover the free boards.
It was observed that as against the free board of 1.50 m on the Kuye and Babla 
rivers, the height of embankment was short by 0.91m to 1.41 m in the stretches 
between 3.60 kmp and 6.00 kmp under Phase-IV and 20.30 kmp and 20.60 kmp 
under Phase-IX.
Thus, construction of embankments under Phase-IV and IX at a cost of 
` 21.76 crore (upto March 2018) was still vulnerable to overflow during floods 
as the embankments constructed were below the height of the proposed free 
boards at different locations.
In reply, I&WD stated that during test check of audit the work was in progress 
and as on date the construction of embankment has been completed with the 
required free board.
The reply is not based on facts as the audit observation was made as per the 
level books
35 submitted with the final bills of the works. Thus, constructed 
embankment was neither as per approved DPR nor according to the GFCC 
guidelines relating to Design of Embankments.
(c) Non-creation of additional waterway
The existing bridges and culverts over the canals were hindering the smooth 
flow of canal water and creating upstream impounding of water specially during 
rainy season. As such, the work was taken up for reconstruction/renovation of 
bridges to clear the hindrances to the flow of water. Hence, a provision for 
33 Page 48, Chapter 5 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in Kandi and 
other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.
34 Additional height of embankment provided over HFL to protect overtopping even with the 
intense wave wash or any other unexpected rise in water level (Figure-3.3).
35 Book containing cross section-wise graphical representation of pre and post level of earth work.

Chapter 3: Implementation
21
creation of additional waterway width of 635.58 m by renovating 12 existing 
bridges and culverts at a cost of ` 25.42 crore was made in the DPR for proper 
drainage of the basin water. National Commission on Floods had recommended 
(1976) that closer coordination amongst concerned agencies like the Railways, 
National Highways etc., was needed to ensure that structures like bridges, roads 
and railways do not cause flood problems. 
Although the work of KMP commenced in January 2015, such linear waterways 
could not be provided by re-construction/renovation of the existing bridges as 
I&WD failed to co-ordinate with the concerned Departments (Railway and 
PWD) for necessary approvals to commence such works. Without providing the 
linear waterway, the draining of the entire basin water would not be possible. 
This would lead to water logging and stagnation of flood water. In reply, I&WD 
stated that it had already persuaded concerned Railway and PWD authorities 
several times. The fact, however, remains that the matter is yet to be resolved 
even after a lapse of more than three years.
(d) Non-execution of embankment
Provision was made in the DPR
36 of KMP for raising and strengthening of 
embankments from 0.00 km to 14.00 km of right bank of river Kuye. The 
raising and strengthening of embankment from 3.00 km to 14.00 km was, 
however, only considered. There was no existing right bank embankment from 
0.00 km to 3.00 km and construction of embankment was not taken up due to 
non-acquisition of required land. Owing to non-construction of embankment 
from 0.00 to 3.00 km, safety of the three km stretch was compromised and 
protection of agricultural land of that area could not be ensured.
In reply, I&WD stated that raising and strengthening work for the initial reach 
of 0.00 km to 3.00 km was not considered as it flows through high land. It was 
noted, however, that the DPR of KMP had made the provision considering the 
actual site condition. 
(e) Execution of less thickness of boulder pitching work
As per DPR
37, Dwarka right embankment from Indradangapara to Barpari sluice 
for a length of about 17 km was to be protected with 60 cm thick boulder pitching 
over Geo-synthetic filter. As against the planned length of 17 km and thickness 
of 60 cm, provision for 45 cm thick boulder pitching over Geo-synthetic filter 
for a length of only 13.27 km between Indradangapara and Barpari sluice was 
made at a total estimated cost of ` 28.89 crore under Phase-II and III.
Figure 3.4: Diagram of location of Boulder pitching and Geo-synthetic filter
36 Page 21, Chapter 9 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in Kandi and 
other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.
37 Page 26, Chapter 7 of DPR for Improvement of embankment and ancillary works in Kandi and 
other adjoining areas of district of Murshidabad.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
22
Thus, due to execution of inadequate thickness of the boulder pitching, the 
length of 13.27 km of embankment remained vulnerable to erosion even after 
incurring expenditure of ` 20.84 crore (upto March 2018). Further, boulder 
pitching for the remaining length of 3.73 km was yet to be initiated for 
execution.
In all these cases, deviations from the approved DPRs were noticed because 
of which risk of the infirmities adversely impacting the arrangements of flood 
management cannot be ruled out.
3.2.1.5  Non-compliance to Indian Standards Code and GFCC/ 
Technical Expert Committee recommendations
(a) Non-execution of sand cushion layer38
Para 3.7 of the IS Code 14262:1995 provided 150 mm thick sand layer over 
the filter fabric to prevent mechanical rupture of the fabric by revetment stones. 
Therefore, a cushion of 100-150 mm of locally available river bed materials/
sand was to be provided over Geo-textile filter.
39
Boulder revetment work with Geo-textile filter for 25.11 km embankments of 
rivers Mayurakshi, Bele and Dwarka were taken up under Phase-II and III of 
KMP after May 2016. Sand layer over Geo-textile filter as recommended in IS 
code was, however, not included in the DPR and hence not executed.  While 
conducting monitoring visit in May 2016, GFCC also observed that during 
boulder revetment works
40 on slope of embankment non-laying of sand cushion 
layer, may lead to puncture of the filter.
Therefore, non-execution of sand cushion layer compromised the quality of 
works executed at a cost of ` 21.81 crore upto March 2018 and may also lead to 
failure of the protection work on the embankments.
Accepting the audit observation, I&WD stated that there were some difficulties 
in bearing the extra expenditure within the tender provision.  Extra care had, 
however, been taken during execution of works to minimise the possibility of 
puncture of Geo-textile filter.
(b) Non-execution of sausage crate
41 in step
As per 5 th Technical Expert Committee meeting of I&WD, GoWB on 
implementation of river bank erosion in February 2015, in the reaches where 
there is no scope to set back the bank line, the required slope is to be generated 
by dumping boulder in crates over sand filled bags. GFCC also recommended 
(May 2016) that in case of steeper slope towards river side, where there was 
land constraint, sausage crate had to be provided i.e. at Sundarpur, Bhatkhanda 
or places where necessary over the right bank of Dwarka and left bank of river 
Bele.
38 A sand layer over Geo-textile filter.
39 A filter layer made with Geo-jute laid over the earthen embankment in protection work with 
boulder pitching to protect the erosion of earthen embankment by river water.
40 Sloping structures with boulders placed on embankment.
41 Wire net filled with boulders, used for embankment protection.

Chapter 3: Implementation
23
Figure 3.5 : Image of Boulder Pitching in sausage crate
Figure 3.6 : Image of Loose Boulder Pitching
It was observed from the estimates and contractor’s bills that the protection 
work of right bank of river Dwarka and left bank of river Bele were taken up 
under Phase-II and III of KMP respectively with the provision of loose boulder 
pitching in the estimates. Provision for boulder pitching in sausage crate was 
not made in DPR and the work was being executed with loose boulder pitching 
as on March 2018. As a result, stability of the steeper river side slopes over the 
right bank of Dwarka and left bank of river Bele was not ensured, endangering 
the stability of the embankments. 
In reply, I&WD stated that boulder pitching in sausage crate was provided in 
those locations after approving the excess-savings statements. No such document 
in support of execution of such item was, however, produced to Audit.
(c) Avoidable extra expenditure in embankment protection work 
IS code 14262:1995 on Planning and Design of Revetment and Handbook of 
Central Water Commission (CWC), GoI, on Flood Protection, Anti-Erosion and 
River Training Works-2012 stipulates that the width of the launching apron
42 
42 A launching apron is a flexible stone cover placed on the bed of the river which settles into 
the scouring area as scouring takes place and covers the base and side of the scour hole, 
preventing it from developing further scouring.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
24
depends upon the scour 43 depth below High Flood Level (HFL). Average 
thickness of launching apron should be 1.5 times of the thickness of boulder 
pitching.
It was observed that the average thickness of launching apron was provided 
1.88 times of the thickness of boulder pitching (0.45 m) in the estimates instead 
of 1.5 times and executed subsequently for 18.14 km embankment protection 
works on the rivers of Dwarka and Bele under Phase-II and Phase-III of 
KMP. Thus, due to execution of excess thickness of launching apron, extra 
expenditure of `  3.53 crore was incurred by I&WD which could have been 
avoided.
In reply, I&WD stated that considering the criteria laid down in clause 5.6.2 of 
Indian Standard 10751:1994 (design of Guide banks), such thickness was 
provided for launching apron. The fact, however, is that this code is applicable 
for designing Guide banks
44 and not for embankment protection. 
Thus, the intended benefits of the KMP project could not be assured only 
by the raising and strengthening of embankments of different rivers, 
without creating additional waterways by renovating the existing bridges 
and culverts. The already executed improvement works of different 
embankments were also not in conformity with the approved DPR or 
guidelines of GFCC. 
The inundation maps below show the comparison between the water available in 
the catchment area of KMP and the floods that had taken place in the catchment 
area in the years 2011 (before the commencement of the project), 2015 and 
2017. 
Flood Report of 2017 reflects that all the four blocks (Bharatpur-I, Khargram, 
Burwan and Kandi) included under KMP were inundated by flood water in 
July 2017. The flood protection measures taken by I&WD may, therefore, not 
have been adequate.
Figure 3.7: Inundation map of Kandi Basin 
on 16.08.2011
Figure 3.8: Inundation map of Kandi Basin 
in dry season
43 ‘Scouring’ is the name given to the removal of the bed or bank of a water course by the action 
of flowing.
44 Guide Bank is defined as the site of a barrage to guide the river flow through the confined   
waterway without causing damage to the structure and its approaches.

Chapter 3: Implementation
25
Figure 3.9: Inundation map of Kandi Basin 
on 07.08.2015
Figure 3.10: Inundation map of Kandi 
Basin during 23-25.08.2016
I&WD stated that though the blocks were inundated, the extent of inundation 
was less compared to previous years. 
3.2.2 Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Project 
The entire KKB (Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai) basin covers an area of 
2145 sq. km. spread over the districts of Paschim and Purba Midnapore. The 
southern portion of the basin, having low lying terrain, historically suffers from 
flood and tidal inundation. 
The project primarily comprised of structural measures like: 
 (i) Excavation/re-sectioning of a total of 186 km embankments of five rivers/
tributaries
45,
 (ii) Realignment of the flood protective embankments of Kaliaghai, 
Kapaleswari and Baghai and construction of embankments as per standard 
specification, 
 (iii) Construction of Rubber dam type regulator on river Kaliaghai at Chabukia 
downstream of outfall of Kapaleswari,
 (iv) Construction of three bridges across river Chandia at Sridharpur, Ejmali 
Chak and Chandipur etc.
Figure 3.11 : Index Map of KKB Drainage Basin Project
45 Kaliaghai, Kapaleswari, Baghai, Deuli, Chandia and Kalimandap, Amrakhali.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
26
The KKB Drainage Scheme was initiated to provide relief to seven flood prone 
blocks in Paschim and Purba Medinipur districts. The scheme was envisaged to 
benefit a total area of 621 sq. km. with population of four lakh.
Investment clearance of ` 650.38 crore for KKB project was accorded by the 
Planning Commission, GoI in March 2010 with target date of completion by 
March 2015. The project was included under FMP with a funding ratio of 
75:25 (Central:State) in July 2010.  The project was commenced in March 
2011 and ` 347.78 crore (Central Share ` 165.73 crore and State Share 
` 182.05 crore) was released against which expenditure of ` 340.24 crore was 
incurred up to March 2018. Release of Central Share was 36.46 per cent
46 less 
as the project could not be completed within the stipulated time. Meanwhile, 
the State Government released funds in anticipation of receipt of Central fund. 
I&WD proposed (August 2017) to complete the project by March 2019 which 
was yet to be approved by GoI.  The project was still (December 2018) ongoing. 
The project could not be completed within stipulated period mainly due to delay 
in land acquisition. Only 35 per cent of the estimated land was acquired up to 
March 2018. The main rivers were excavated with reduced design bed width 
due to non-availability of required land. The length of the rivers/channels were 
resuscitated only on the available Government land (i.e. river course) and to 
the extent of land acquired for the purpose. Besides, resuscitation works were 
executed in khals not in the original scope of the DPR. 
Physical progress under different components of KKB is shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Physical progress of different components of the KKB project
Sl. No. Name of the 
Component
Unit Estimated 
quantity
Completed upto 
March 2018
Progress in 
Percentage
1. Land Acquisition Ha 500.00 173 35
2. Resuscitation of main 
rivers
Km 141.00 128.85 91
3. Resuscitation of small 
drainage channels
Km 170.00 170.46 100
4. Earth work Lakh 
Cum
484.47 414.12 85
5. Concrete work Cum 6000.37 5490.00 91
(Source: Divisional records)
3.2.2.1 Land acquisition
Clause-4.6 of the FMP Guidelines (2009) stipulates that while submitting a 
new proposal, the State Government should ensure acquisition of land required 
under the scheme and submit a certificate to this effect. Failing this, no fund 
would be released to the State Government.
Approximately 500 ha of land was targeted for acquisition by I&WD involving 
223 mouzas in seven blocks for the project. While obtaining techno-economical 
clearance, I&WD replied to MoWR (GoI) that only small stretch of land would 
need to be acquired for this project which would not be a problem as the local 
affected people were urging for the project.
46 ` 165.73 crore against ` 260.84 crore (75 percent of ` 347.78 crore).

Chapter 3: Implementation
27
I&WD published (December 2010)  a notification for acquisition of land on 
emergency basis so that the land acquisition could be made before the monsoon 
period of 2011 for timely completion of the project. It was, however, observed 
that I&WD did not initiate any land acquisition proposal prior to May 2011. 
Against the target of 500 ha, only 173 ha of land (35 per cent) was acquired till 
March 2018. It was observed that the resuscitation of rivers through excavation 
and/or widening of bed width were made only within available land. As a result, 
design bed width
47 as per DPR had to be compromised.
As I&WD failed to acquire requisite land the bed width of rivers stipulated in 
the DPRs for smooth drainage of flood waters could not be achieved.
3.2.2.2 Execution of the project
(a) Non-completion of works due to defective DPR
Para-195 of Irrigation Code of I&WD stipulates that preliminary investigations 
should be conducted and feasibility assessed before undertaking a project. In the 
DPR48 of the project, entire stretch of 63 km49 of the Kaliaghai river was included for 
re-excavation work50, i.e., construction of cross bund (required for dry excavation) 
for de-siltation. Accordingly, NITs were invited (during March 2012 to December 
2015) for the entire stretch at an estimated cost of ` 236.37 crore.  During execution, 
however, it was reported by the implementing agency that dry excavation was not 
feasible in a 500 m stretch as it was at the confluence point of river Kaliaghai with 
river Haldi, which ultimately discharges water to the Bay of Bengal. 
It was observed that the river was excavated for a length of 62.50 km at a cost of 
` 206.04 crore leaving 500 m from 62.50 km to 63 km un-excavated.  
Non-excavation of silt at the confluence point at downstream would hinder 
smooth drainage of water from the excavated upstream portion of the river 
and would lead to siltation at upstream again. GFCC in its monitoring visit 
(September 2017) also witnessed siltation at upstream reaches and confluence 
point. In reply, the concerned Division stated (March 2018) that the siltation 
was due to non-completion of the remaining 500 m. 
Thus, expenditure of ` 206.04 crore incurred on resuscitation of the river in the 
upstream remained ineffective due to defective DPR as no feasibility study was 
conducted before taking up of the work.
(b) Selective implementation of DPR
•	 Existence of Fishing Barriers in rivers
As per DPR
51 of the project, about 150 families of the KKB basin used to catch 
fish using fishing barriers 52 with nylon net across the rivers. Such structures 
47 Horizontal width of river bed.
48 Page 3, Chapter VIII of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage 
Basin (Final Report-Volume I).
49 From Poktapol (46 km) to Dheubhanga (109 km) i.e. 63 km was included for re-sectioning 
work in the DPR.
50 Excavation for de-siltation.
51 Page 2, Chapter VIII of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage 
Basin (Final Report-Volume I).
52 Barriers with polythene sheets in flowing rivers for fishing.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
28
reduce the velocity of river flow as well as augment silt deposition. Therefore, 
the DPR proposed for removal of fishing barriers across main rivers.
Figure 3.12: Fishing nets across river Kaliaghai at ch 39.00 km
During joint inspection (April 2018), however, existence of numerous fishing 
barriers were noticed in all the major rivers, i.e., Kaliaghai, Kapaleswari and 
Baghai. 
In reply, test checked Divisions related with the project stated (April 2018) that 
they had no data regarding the numbers and ownership of such fishing barriers 
and there was also no plan for eviction of such structures. It was also observed 
that there was no monitoring mechanism to control placing of fishing nets across 
the rivers.
This indicated that the actual implementation of the project by I&WD was in 
variance with that of DPR. Continued existence of such structures may lead 
to reduced discharge of rivers and augmentation of silt deposition, thereby 
exacerbating floods. 
•	 Removal of Brick Manufacturing Units
In the DPR
53 of KKB Project, removal of brick or tile manufacturing units 
from river embankments was identified as one of the absolutely unavoidable 
measures for meaningful flood management. Indiscriminate cutting of land 
and lifting of sand from the river bed leads to several hydro morphological 
changes in the river channel. Provision of ` 50 lakh was made in the DPR 
for rehabilitation of these units. It was observed (March to May 2018) that no 
rehabilitation programme was carried out by I&WD. During joint inspection 
(March to May 2018) of seven spots, six brick manufacturing units were noticed 
on the embankments
54 of Kaliaghai river. 
53 Page 2, 3 and 6, Chapter XI of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai 
Drainage Basin (Final Report-Volume I).
54 Haorar Khea (at Ch. 55.00 km of River Kaliaghai), at Ch.42.70 km of River Kaliaghai, 
Chabukia (at Ch.49.20 km of River Kaliaghai).

Chapter 3: Implementation
29
Figure 3.13: Brick Kilns alongside river Kaliaghai at ch. 42.70 km
Thus, I&WD failed to achieve the targets set in the DPR for removal of 
brick units.  Existence of such manufacturing units hampered effective flood 
management. 
(c) Non-compliance with approved DPR
•	 Design Bed Width not achieved
The resuscitation work of rivers and khals
55 under KKB was taken up to 
increase their carrying capacity by widening and removing silted soil up to the 
depth as specified in the DPR
56 to deal with the problem of frequent floods.  
It was observed that the design bed width as envisaged in the approved DPR 
could not be achieved as requisite land was not acquired. I&WD could acquire 
only 35 per cent of the estimated land up to March 2018. Design bed width 
was compromised in several cases due to non-availability of adequate land as  
shown in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: River stretches where design bed width was compromised
Name of the River with chainage 
(km)
Effected stretch
(km)
Bed width as per 
DPR (m)
Executed Bed 
width (m)
Kaliaghai
(0.00 to 15.00) 15 50 to 70 35
Kaliaghai
(15.00 to 34.00) 19 80 to 140 50
Kapaleswari
(2.00 to 6.50) 4.50 40 to 45 30 to 44
Deuli
(0.00 to 9.487) 9.487 40 15
Kaliaghai
(34.00 to 49.20) 15.20 135 to 160 50 to 110
Baghai
(15.60 to 7.50) 8.10 45 to 50 18 to 22
(Source: Divisional records)
55 Khal means a narrow water channel.
56 Page 14 and 15, Table 10.4B, 10.4C, 10.4D of Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage 
Basin Scheme – Gradient Statement.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
30
The executing Divisions replied that resuscitation of rivers was carried out 
only on available Government land (river course) as the required land was not 
acquired.  Due to non-resuscitation of rivers up to the design bed width specified 
in the DPR, the problem of frequent flooding and drainage congestion in the 
basin remained unresolved.
•	 Construction of Rubber Dam yet to be taken up
In the DPR
57 of KKB Project, non-monsoon tidal ingress was identified as one 
of the major causes of faster siltation of the river beds. Accordingly, it was 
planned to construct a regulator structure 58 having one-way flow system at the 
confluence of river Kapaleswari with river Kaliaghai. Provision for construction 
of the regulating structure on river Kaliaghai was also made to store upstream 
water for irrigation purposes during non-monsoon period. In order to construct 
the regulating structure over river Kaliaghai, a cost effective Rubber Dam was 
incorporated (2010) in the DPR
59 with a stipulation to complete the work within 
three years of commencement, i.e., by 2012-13.
I&WD, however, failed to construct the regulator at the designated site.  Scrutiny 
of related records revealed that revised target was set by I&WD to complete 
the same by March 2019. I&WD was still (December 2018) in the process 
of preparation of modified Expression of Interest (EoI) for this work. On the 
issue of revised expected date of completion, the Department stated (January 
2019) that due to complexity of technical know-how, no positive response was 
received from bidders in the past. 
Figure 3.14: Image of a typical Rubber Dam
It was also observed from the report prepared by the concerned Divisional 
office that even after resuscitation of river Kaliaghai at a cost of ` 201.79 crore, 
huge amount of silt was carried and deposited in the upstream of the river 
during high-tide. The existence of heavy siltation in the portion already 
re-excavated in upstream of Kaliaghai river was also witnessed during the 
joint inspection of site (April 2018). As a result, due to non-construction of 
the regulator, siltation due to tidal ingress could not be prevented in the re-
excavated areas and the carrying capacity of the river was reduced. The aim 
57 Page 3, Chapter VIII of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage 
Basin (Final Report-Volume I).
58 Structure which regulates water flow.
59 Page 2, Supplementary Volume II (Revised) of Master Plan and DPR for Kaliaghai-
Kapaleswari-Baghai Drainage Basin.

Chapter 3: Implementation
31
of storing upstream water for irrigation purposes during non-monsoon period 
was also not achieved.
(d) Violation of conditions of DPRs/agreement/WBFR
The Planning Commission in the investment clearance of the scheme imposed 
conditions (March 2010) 60 that various components under the project shall be 
designed and executed as per various relevant Indian Standards and designs 
vetted by GFCC. Para 5.13 of the FMP guidelines also stipulates that the State 
Governments should ensure that the works are executed in a well-planned 
manner and completed within the scheduled period. The project was, however, 
still in progress and deviations of following conditions/guidelines was also 
noticed.
•	 Execution beyond the scope of the DPR 
While giving Investment Clearance, Planning Commission recommended that 
the State Government should restrict the expenditure within approved cost and 
no additional expenditure would be permitted unless revised estimates were 
approved. Besides, designs of all works were to be vetted by the GFCC.
Audit, however, observed that total 40 works
61 were executed on public demand 
beyond the scope of the DPR at an expenditure of ` 41.94 crore. Designs of these 
new works were also not vetted by GFCC.  Execution of works not included in 
the DPR without vetting by the competent authority was not permissible. Thus, 
execution of these works led to unauthorised expenditure from project outlay.
In reply, I&WD admitted that some works had been executed beyond the scope 
of the DPR due to demand of the local public. I&WD, however, remained silent 
about non-vetting of the design by the GFCC. 
•	 	Extension of time on grounds other than those mentioned in the tender 
clause
As per conditions of contract, time extension beyond stipulated period could be 
allowed only on grounds of unavoidable hindrance
62 as specified in the tender.
It was seen that in three test checked Divisions 63 under KKB, out of 87 test 
checked  works, 79 works (90.8 per cent) valuing ` 268.67 crore got delayed for 
periods ranging from  nine to  2113 days (nearly six years). Records relating to 
extension of time were not made available in 51 works. In remaining 28 works, 
it was observed that time-extension was allowed in eight works on the grounds
64 
other than those mentioned in the tender. 
Thus, granting of extension beyond stipulated time and for reasons not specified 
in the tender conditions resulted in delay in completion of project works.
•	 Execution of work without Technical Sanction
Rule-164 of West Bengal Financial Rules provides that technical sanction from 
the competent authority must be obtained before commencement of any work. 
60 No. 12(1)/25/2010-WR dated 9 March 2010.
61 Resuscitation of 31 Khals, construction of five bridges and improvement of four roads works.
62 Non receipt of departmental materials, land, injunction, public interference.
63 East Medinipur Division, Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Basin Project Division, Contai 
Irrigation Division.
64 Labour problem, Boro cultivation, crisis of machinery, monsoon.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
32
It was observed that during 2012-13 to 2016-17, four works65 were executed at 
a cost of ` 8.68 crore without obtaining technical sanction from the competent 
authority and was also not vetted by the GFCC as per stipulation.  Violation of 
provisions of WBFR not only rendered the execution of works unauthorised 
but also led to a risk that the works did not adhere to the prescribed technical 
standards. 
In reply, I&WD stated that all works were duly sanctioned by the competent 
authority as per departmental norms. Reply of I&WD was, however, not specific 
to the four cases pointed out by Audit. 
(e)  Non-compliance of recommendation of the Independent Agency 
engaged by I&WD
Clause 5.8 of FMP Guidelines (2009) required performance evaluation of the 
project by independent professional agencies having expertise in related field. 
Accordingly, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kharagpur was nominated 
by I&WD for performance evaluation of the project. IIT Kharagpur in its 
report recommended (April 2014) that proper maintenance of the channels be 
undertaken once in a year to maintain its geometry, otherwise problem may 
reappear due to siltation. GFCC in the Monitoring Report of January 2018 also 
recommended for periodical maintenance of the channels to assure the safety of 
the excavated channels. 
Figure 3.15: Heavy siltation observed at Ch.55.00 km (approx) of River Kaliaghai
It was observed that 266.03 km of excavation works were completed in different 
rivers/khals during March 2011 to May 2018. The concerned Divisions, however, 
stated that no maintenance work was ever carried out on any of those channels. 
In its reply, the Department stated the project was still ongoing and for cleaning 
the bed siltation periodically, the Department needs to observe the situation 
for at least four to five years as it involves huge amount of funds.  The fact 
remains that the excavation of canals commenced from 2011 and eight years 
has already elapsed without any maintenance works. Thus, non-compliance 
65 (1) Resuscitation by excavation of Debi Khal from ch.0.00 km to ch.3.30 km, (2) Improvement 
of riding quality of Narghat - Gokhuri Road from 0.00 km to 11.00 km, (3) Urgent maintenance 
and repair of Tyaparpara More to Singlai More Sluice for a length of 6100 m, (4) Urgent 
maintenance and repair of Bhagabanpur More to Goalapukur for a length of 6000 m.

Chapter 3: Implementation
33
of recommendations of Independent Agency/GFCC made the previous efforts 
in respect of excavation of rivers/ channels ineffective. During joint site visits 
(March to May 2018), heavy siltation in different rivers/khals
66 was also  noticed.
Encroachment of embankments hampered essential maintenance and repair 
work. The IIT Kharagpur recommended (in its report of 2012-13 and 2015-16) 
that unauthorised encroachment should be strictly avoided. From the records of 
the Division it was noticed that there were encroachments on 955 structures 67 
at different locations 68 on the embankments hampering the maintenance and 
repair works. The Divisional Officer requested (September 2017) the District 
Magistrate, Paschim Medinipur for removal of those encroachments, but 
without any positive result. During 31 joint site visits (March to May 2018), 
seven number encroachments were noticed at different locations of rivers/khals.
Figure 3.16: Encroachment over Abhoy Giri Khal 
Thus, commencement of the project without ensuring land, grossly hampered 
execution of works leading to delay in completion of the project. Rivers/khals 
were not widened/excavated upto design bed width, which implied that with the 
limited carrying capacity, they would not be able to control frequent flooding 
in the areas. Inclusion of non-feasible items, non-construction of regulator at 
the confluence of river Kapaleswari and Kaliaghai and non-maintenance of 
already resuscitated rivers/khals caused heavy siltation affecting the overall 
drainage system of the project. 
66 Chabukia (at Ch.49.35 km of River Kaliaghai), Haorar Khea (at Ch.55.00 km of River 
Kaliaghai), Dheubhanga (at Ch.62.50 km of River Kaliaghai), Chandibenia (at Ch.22.00 km of 
River Chandia), Asnan Ghat (at Ch.24.00 km of River Chandia), Dheubhanga (at Ch.6.80 km of 
Moyna New Cut Channel), at Ch.42.70 km of River Kaliaghai and outfall of river Kapaleswari, 
Chabukia at Ch.49.20 km of River Kaliaghai, Birjiban (at Ch.2.00 km of Kapaleswari).
67 House, shops, cattle sheds, clubs, primary school, machine sheds, party offices, etc.
68 River Kapaleswari left embankment (2.00 kmp to 14.70 kmp), Kalimondop Khal left 
embankment (0.142 kmp to 0.950 kmp, 2.00 kmp to 2.50 kmp, 5.40 kmp to 6.60 kmp), 
Kalimondop Khal right embankment (4.60 kmp to 6.80 kmp), Kalimondop Khal both left and 
right at Mohanbazar, River Kaliaghai (13 kmp to 34 kmp), Ganapatkhal, Banskona khal and 
Amrakhali khal.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
34
The Annual Flood Report of 2017 of I&WD reflected that all the seven blocks69 
included under KKB were inundated in 2017.  The flood protection measures 
taken by I&WD may, therefore, not have been adequate.
3.2.3  Implementation of other Embankment protection and 
anti-river erosion works
Apart from the two FMP projects as discussed above, I&WD executed 
embankment protection as well as anti-erosion of river bank works under State 
Plan, Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), Common Border Rivers 
Fund, One Time Additional Central Assistance (OTACA) etc .  In eight test 
checked Divisions
70 (other than project Divisions of KKB and KMP), 145 out 
of 357 tenders having estimated cost more than ` one crore each, which were 
executed during 2013-14 to 2017-18 under flood control measures, were selected 
for detailed examination. 
Scrutiny of selected embankment protection and anti-erosion works revealed 
the following deviations which would have an adverse impact on the flood 
control measures:
3.2.3.1  Work done without obtaining clearance from the Forest 
Department
As per Forest Conservation Act, 1980, clearance from Forest Department is 
required for construction of embankment on forest land. Alipurduar Irrigation 
Division took up (December 2016) the work of ‘Extension of Subhasini 
embankment along the left bank of river Torsa’ at a cost of ` 5.78 crore without 
obtaining forest clearance. Subsequently, the work was proposed for termination 
by the Chief Engineer, I&WD in April 2018 due to objection raised by the 
Forest Department for not obtaining clearance; no reply was received from the 
Department in this regard.
Thus, commencement of work without obtaining forest clearance made the partially 
executed work worth ` 0.70 crore (only earth work without protection) wasteful.
3.2.3.2 Required thickness of graded filter not provided in the revetment
Para 3.7 of IS code-14262:1995 as well as Para 4.5.4 of CWC Guidelines- 
2012 stipulate that graded filter of size 150 mm to 300 mm thickness should be 
provided below the revetment
71 to prevent water from removing the underlying 
soil of embankments through voids in the boulder pitching.
It was noticed that in 28 estimates prepared by three test checked Divisions 72 
valuing ` 61.83 crore, provision for only 100 mm thick filter layer of shingles 
under the slope pitching was made and executed in violation of the existing 
norms. Thus, construction of embankments with less thickness of filter layer  
made them vulnerable to erosion.
69 Narayangar, Datan-I, Sabong, Pingla, Bhagabanpur-I, Patashpur-I and Moyna.
70 Howrah Irrigation Division, Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, 
Coochbehar Irrigation Division, Canals Division, Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
71 Embankment protection work with boulders placed along the slope of the embankments.
72 Coochbehar Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation 
Division.

Chapter 3: Implementation
35
In reply, I&WD stated that 100 mm thickness shingles filter is normally provided 
where discharge is less than 4500 cumec73.
The reply was, however, not in consonance with the fact that neither the IS code 
nor the CWC guidelines recommend graded filter layer of 100 mm thickness.
3.2.3.3 Non-execution of sand cushion layer in embankment
Para 3.7 of Indian Standards code-14262:1995 stipulates that a 150 mm thick 
sand cushion layer should be provided over the filter fabric to prevent mechanical 
rupture of the fabric by revetment stones.
Mahananda Embankment Division executed nine embankment protection and 
anti-erosion works valuing ` 58.36 crore where boulder pitching on top and 
slope was executed over Geo-textile filter. It was, however, observed that laying 
of sand cushion was not envisaged in the estimates and works were executed 
without providing such layer.
As a result, possibility of rupture of filter layer and failure of the protection 
works could not be ruled out. In reply, the concerned Division stated (June 
2018) that in future sand cushion layer will be included in this type of work.
3.2.3.4 Delay in execution of works
Clause-2 of standard tender agreement stipulates that time is the essence of 
the contract. NIT clause further stipulates that time extension may be granted 
only on the ground of non-receipt of departmental materials, land injunction or 
public interference, etc.
It was observed that completion of 42 works taken up by the six test checked 
Divisions
74 were delayed by nearly four months to four years. Further, scrutiny 
revealed that time extension was granted by the competent authority on grounds 
other than those specified in the contract agreements in all cases. This resulted 
in delay in achievement of the intended benefits from the projects. Moreover, 
delay in execution of works kept the river embankments in vulnerable condition.
3.2.3.5  Use of lower specification Galvanised Iron wires in boulder 
crates for construction of embankment
Para 3.6 of Indian Standard 14262:1995 on Planning and Design of Revetment 
stipulates that Galvanised Iron (GI) wire of minimum four mm diameter should 
be used for crates in revetment in the area where velocity of river is high.  It 
was observed that in five test checked Divisions
75 crated boulder with GI wire 
of less than four mm diameter (ø) was used in all 48 test checked embankment 
protection/anti-erosion works valuing ` 219.79 crore during 2013-18 in violation 
of the norms. The works remained vulnerable due to use of below specification 
GI wire for boulder crates in embankment and anti-erosion works. During joint 
site visit (April 2018) of left bank of river Mahananda in Adampur Block of 
Malda District it was also noticed that the crates used in protection works were 
in broken condition.
73 Cubic metre per second.
74 Howrah Irrigation Division, Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, 
Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.
75 Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division, Coochbehar Irrigation 
Division, Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
36
 
Figure 3.17: Damaged revetment constructed with below specification GI wire 
3.2.3.6 Avoidable extra expenditure
 (a) Para 5.6 of IS Code 14262:1995 on Planning and Design of Revetment and 
Para- 4.9.4 of Guidelines of Central Water Commission (CWC), GoI, on 
Flood Protection, Anti Erosion and River Training Works-2012 stipulate 
that the thickness of launching apron be 1.5 times the thickness of pitching. 
Test checked Malda Irrigation Division, however, executed 10 embankment 
protection/anti-river erosion works where the thickness of stone boulder 
in launching apron was provided 33 to 56 per cent more than the actual 
requirement. Thus, execution of excess thickness of apron resulted in extra 
expenditure of ` 10.44 crore which could have been avoided.
  In reply, I&WD stated that as the works were executed in restricted zone of 
border area having rare scope of maintenance, such excess thickness was 
provided.
  No such justification was, however, provided in the DPR. Besides, the 
reply appears to be an afterthought.
 (b) IRC-SP-72-2007, the guidelines for the design of Flexible Pavements for 
low volume rural roads do not recommend laying of any bituminous base 
course for rural road/village road of low traffic intensity. It was observed 
that 50 to 75 mm Bituminous Macadam (BM) was provided on three 
roads
76 over earthen embankment by three test checked Divisions77 where 
the roads were either of village road category or the traffic intensity was 
very low. Execution of unnecessary BM layer resulted in extra expenditure 
of ` 2.10 crore, which could have been avoided.
Flood protection measures taken up by the Divisions were not as per prescribed 
standards.  It was also observed from the Annual Flood Reports of I&WD 
that, in 2017, the area under flood inundation of the State was more than that 
in the last four years, despite the flood control measures. 
76 Malior embankment 0.00 to 10.00 kmp, Improvement of inspection road of distributary 5 of 
DBMC, bituminous inspection path at Bibigunj and Jhar Singhersar embankment.
77 Mahananda Embankment Division, Mayurakshi North Canal Division and Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation Division.

Chapter 4
Financial  
Management

37
Chapter 4: Financial Management
4.1 Allotment and expenditure 
During 2013-14 to 2017-18, I&WD received funds from State Plan, RIDF, and 
funds from GoI requiring corresponding State share for Flood Control. Details 
of fund allocation and expenditure incurred under Flood Control during this 
period are shown in the Chart No. 4.1.
Chart 4.1: Expenditure vis-à-vis Budget Estimates on Flood Control
 
1524.71 
1101.02 
1522.91 
1655.61 
1505.34 
742.95 
948.45 
838.27 
1007.76 983.1 
490.7 
811.57 
622.28 
718.45 778.08 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Budget Estimate  Revised Budget Estimate  Actual Expenditure  
 ` in Crore  
 
(Source: Departmental data and Budget Publication)
During 2013-14 to 2017-18, total Budget Estimates of ` 7309.59 crore was 
made under Flood Control. This  was subsequently reduced to ` 4520.53 crore 
in the Revised Estimates,  which  was  62 per cent of Budget Estimates. The 
actual expenditure each year during 2013-14 to 2017-18 was, however, less than 
the Revised Estimates of the respective year. Savings with respect to Budget 
Estimates as well as Revised Estimates ranged from 26 to 68 per cent and 14 to 
34 per cent, respectively.
Rule 333 along with Appendix-20 of West Bengal Financial Rules (WBFR) 
stipulates that Executive Engineers are responsible for preparation of Budget 
Estimates (BE for the next year and RE for the current year), which are required 
to be sent to their Superintending Engineers (SE) by 15
th September of each 
year. In the test checked Divisions, Audit noticed that the provision of sending 
yearly budget proposals was not complied with during 2013-14 to 2017-18 as 
the selected Divisions could not furnish any document of budget proposals 
made by them. As a result, yearly budgets were prepared by I&WD without 
taking any inputs from the divisional level, which resulted in savings. As per the 
Budget Publications, I&WD could not spend ` 1099.45 crore during 2013-14 to 
2017-18, though provision of the fund was made through REs by the State 
Government.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
38
It was observed that despite availability of funds, 2162 sq. km. of the total flood 
prone area of the State remained unprotected as per the Annual Flood Report 
2017 of I&WD.
4.2 Financial Irregularities
4.2.1 Maintenance work with FMP fund
Para 4.3 of FMP Guidelines (2009) stipulates that Central Assistance will not 
be provided for regular maintenance of flood management works but only for 
restoration of damaged works for their completion before next monsoon season, 
provided such works were earlier constructed with Central Assistance and not 
covered under Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)/National Calamity Contingency 
Fund (NCCF).
While submitting fund release proposal to the MoWR in August 2017, I&WD 
stated that KKB project could not be completed within stipulated time due to 
lack of Central funding. It was, however, observed that urgent maintenance and 
repair works of three roads were executed by test checked Contai Irrigation 
Division under KKB project at a cost of ` 6.87 crore with the fund of FMP 
during the years 2013-17. Confirming the fact, the Division stated (June 2018) 
that the works were executed due to extreme demand and in public interest. 
Execution of maintenance works with Central fund was in deviation of the 
scheme guidelines and would reduce the availability of funds for completion 
of the project.
4.2.2 Non-deduction of Royalty
As per standard tender clause and work orders, royalty payment certificates 
in original from the concerned authority were to be submitted along with the 
bills by the contractors for the stone boulders/earth used. In the absence of the 
certificates, royalty amount should be deducted from the bills submitted by the 
contractors.
It was observed that royalty amounting to ` 69.05 lakh for 19314 m
3 of boulder 
and 487794 m3 of carried earth was not deducted from the bills in respect of three 
contractors by Mayurakshi North Canal Division up to March 2018, though the 
contractors did not submit the requisite royalty certificates. Non-deduction of 
royalty resulted in loss to the exchequer and undue favour of ` 69.05 lakh to the 
agencies.
In reply, the Divisional Officer stated (July 2018) that the royalty would be 
deducted from the pending bills of the contractors.
4.2.3 Early refund of Security Deposit
Tender Clause 17 of the agreement stipulates that Security Deposit 
(SD) deducted from contractor’s bill shall be refundable after expiry of 
three months from the actual date of completion of the work. It further 
stipulates that the contractor shall be responsible for rectifying defects in 
asphaltic work within a year from completion of work and the portion of 
the SD relating to asphaltic work shall be refundable after the expiry of 
that period.

Chapter 4: Financial Management
39
It was, however, observed that Security Deposit amounting to ` 53.72 lakh 
was refunded in three works 78 in two test checked Divisions 79 even before 
completion of the works; Mahananda Embankment Division released the entire 
amount of Security Deposit of ` 54.90 lakh in respect of five tenders of two 
road works
80 having asphaltic works within six to eight months instead of one 
year of completion of the works in violation of the tender agreements, thereby 
extending undue favour to the contractors.
78 (i) Protection to the eroding left bank of the River Hooghly from Babughat to Nathupal Ghat,  
(ii) Protection to the eroding left bank of the River Hooghly from Mangal Pandey Ghat to 
Latbagan, (iii) Protection to the eroding right bank of the River Mundeswari in Arambagh. 
79 Canals Division and Hooghly Irrigation Division.
80 (i) Improvement of inspection path over Mahananda embankment from 0.00 to 36.00 kmp.  
(ii) Improvement of inspection path over Fulhara embankment 0.00 kmp to 18.00 kmp.

Chapter 5
Quality Control and 
Monitoring

41
Chapter 5: Quality Control and Monitoring
5.1 Quality Control
The ultimate health of a project during the life span of its operational phase will 
depend largely on the quality achieved during its construction. It is also necessary 
that the materials and standard of execution fully satisfy the specifications to 
have a safe and durable structure. For this purpose, a strong quality control 
mechanism is required in flood control sector. It was, however, noticed in Audit 
that works were executed without ensuring the quality of materials as discussed 
below:
5.1.1 Testing of Cement not conducted
IS Code 4031:1988 (reaffirmed 2005) stipulates that the quality of cement is 
ensured with tests like Fineness Modulus test, Soundness test, Initial and Final 
setting time, Compressive Strength test etc.
It was noticed that three test checked Divisions
81 used 8398.34 MT cement 
in 10 embankment protection works during the years 2014-17.  Out of this 
quantity, samples of 6217.11 MT cement were tested from Malda Polytechnic 
and remaining 2181.23 MT (26 per cent) cement was used without conducting 
any tests. The agencies purchased the cement from the local markets. Quality 
of material purchased from local market was to be ensured before use in flood 
protective works. The Divisions, however, did not ensure the quality of cement 
used in works valuing ` 13.52 crore, putting the strength of embankment 
protection works at stake. 
5.1.2 Testing of Geo-textile not conducted
Clause 20 of additional terms and conditions attached to NIT stipulated that for 
special type of materials like Geo Synthetic Bags, High Density Polyethylene 
(HDPE) Bags, Geo-textile Filter, Geo Jute Filter etc., test reports had to be 
submitted by the supplying agency along with bills. Engineer-in-Charge 
(EIC) might conduct independent test on the samples drawn randomly before 
according approval for using the materials at site.
Test reports of Geo-textile valuing ` 1.61 crore used by two Divisions
82 in 
16 works as filter layer during 2013-14 and 2014-15 were neither attached to 
the bills nor could be produced to Audit by the concerned Divisions.
In the absence of such records, it could not be ascertained if the necessary 
tests had been done and the quality of materials used ensured by the executing 
Divisions before their use in the flood protection works.
5.1.3 Soil test not conducted for earthen embankment in KMP
As per IS code 1498:1970 and SP 36 (Part 1) 1987, construction of earthen 
embankment for flood control requires quality tests to assess permeability, 
compressibility as well as compaction of soil.  Provision for raising of earthen 
embankment of 223 km was made in the DPR of KMP at a cost of ` 166.29 crore, 
81 Malda Irrigation Division, Mahananda Embankment Division and Howrah Irrigation Division.
82 Mahananda Embankment Division and Hooghly Irrigation Division.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
42
out of which 130 km has already been completed (March 2018) and the work 
for 64 km was in progress. No test report of soil used in the embankments under 
KMP was, however, available in any of the executing Divisions.
I&WD appeared to have not taken the onus to ensure the quality of the earthen 
embankments constructed.
5.1.4	 Specific	Gravity	of	stone	boulder 	not	determined
As per Para 3.2 of IS code 14262:1995, Specific Gravity of stone is required 
to be determined for calculating the weight, size of boulder/stone to be used as 
well as thickness of protection layer while designing and preparing estimates of 
revetment used for embankments and bank protection works. The thickness of 
the boulders to be used in the revetment works depends on the Specific Gravity 
of the boulders.
It was observed that in violation of the above provision, two Divisions
83, while 
preparing design of 22 bank protection works, did not conduct any tests for 
determining Specific Gravity of the boulders used as detailed in Table 5.1:
Table	5.1:	Details	of	boulders	used	in	works	where	Specific	Gravity	not	
assessed while preparing estimates
Name 
of the 
Division
Source of 
quarry
Specific	
Gravity 
considered
No. of 
estimates
Estimated 
quantity of 
boulders (in cum)
Estimated 
amount involved 
(` in crore)
Jalpaiguri 
Irrigation 
Jaldhaka 2.40, 2.65, 
2.70
03 32847 3.33
Patharjhora 2.65 10 223393 23.35
Alipurduar 
Irrigation
Torsa 2.40, 2.60 05 216918 14.32
Diana 2.65 01 71522 7.05
Bhutan 
Ghat
2.40 02 32773 2.90
Jayanti 2.40 01 11284 0.78
Total 22 588737 51.73
From the above, it is also evident that different values of Specific Gravity 
of boulders were considered even for boulders mined from the same quarry. 
Further, Specific Gravity of the boulders were not tested even during execution 
of works.
Thus, I&WD failed to check the quality of materials used in the construction of 
the flood control works. This could impact the structural design causing defects 
and leading to failure of the works impacting flood control measures. 
5.2 Monitoring
5.2.1 Monitoring of FMP projects
5.2.1.1 Monitoring of progress through CPM/PERT Charts
Para 5.13 of FMP Guidelines (2013) stipulate that the State Governments shall 
ensure that the works are executed in a well-planned manner and completed 
within the scheduled period. The progress shall be monitored through Critical 
83 Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division and Alipurduar Irrigation Division.

Chapter 5: Quality Control and Monitoring
43
Path Method (CPM)/Programme Evaluation Review Technique (PERT) Charts 
which shall be submitted within three months of release of first instalment of 
Central Assistance.
None of the test checked Divisions executing either of the FMP projects prepared 
CPM/PERT Chart to monitor the progress of the projects. As a result, progress 
of the work was not monitored efficiently. It was observed that both the projects 
(KMP and KKB) were delayed as detailed in paragraphs 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 above, 
and vulnerable areas remained prone to floods.
Further, as specified in Annexure-III attached to the RIDF loan requirement 
format, a certificate for monitoring the physical progress as per CPM/PERT 
chart is required to be sent to NABARD. It was noted in Audit that no such 
CPM or PERT chart was maintained by two Divisions
84 in respect of any of the 
four selected RIDF works executed during the period 2013-18.
5.2.1.2 Monitoring through Remote Sensing
Para 5.7 of FMP guidelines (2009) stipulates that the Department of Space/
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) may also be associated with the 
monitoring of physical progress of the schemes through Remote Sensing 
techniques. It was, however, observed that no such monitoring mechanism 
through Remote Sensing techniques was adopted for any schemes of Flood 
Control during the years 2013-18.
5.2.1.3 Monitoring visits of GFCC
Para 4.13 of FMP Guidelines (2009) stipulates that Monitoring Agency (GFCC) 
would inspect the works valuing more than ` 15 crore, at least once in every 
financial year, to monitor overall quality of works, technical specifications and 
progress at site before recommending further fund releases.
It was noticed that four monitoring visits (two each for KMP and KKB) were 
conducted by GFCC during the years 2013-18. Follow-up actions as per 
recommendations of GFCC were, however, not taken up for the KMP and KKB 
projects (paragraphs 3.2.1 and 3.2.2).
5.2.1.4  Preparation and updation of inventories of Flood Management 
schemes
GFCC instructed (July 2012) all the State Governments to prepare and periodically 
update inventory of assets created in a proper format (detailing reach in which 
embankments were constructed, completion year, cost, embankment details, area 
protected, etc.) for flood management schemes executed by the State Government. 
It was observed that none of the test checked Divisions maintained any inventory 
of assets. Land register was maintained only by KKB project division. As a 
result, I&WD has no database containing details of the assets created under FMP. 
Absence of the database affects proper planning for maintenance of the assets.
5.2.1.5 Visit of Departmental Authorities
Para 68 of I&WD Code stipulates that it is the duty of the concerned 
Superintending Engineer to inspect the state of the various works within his 
84 Alipurduar Irrigation Division and Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division.

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
44
Circle and to satisfy himself that the system of management prevailing is efficient 
and economical. It was observed that the departmental higher authorities (Chief 
Engineer, Superintending Engineer) had visited sites of execution of KKB 
project, however, in the absence of Inspection Reports, the outcome of such 
visits could not be assessed. 
5.2.2	 Monitoring	of	other 	flood	control	projects
5.2.2.1 Work Programme and Site Order Book
As per conditions of contract, the agency was required to submit Work Programme 
(detailing the items of works to be completed within stipulated time) within 
seven days from the receipt of work order. The Divisional Officer was also 
required to issue machine-numbered Site Order Books before commencement 
of work for recording instructions at site to the agency by inspecting officers and 
for noting the action taken in that matter by the agency as quickly as possible.
Scrutiny revealed that in four
85 out of six Divisions neither the Work Programmes 
nor the Site Order Books were available. In two Divisions 86 where Site Order 
Books were maintained, it was noticed that the agency did not mention the 
rectification measures taken by them against the instructions issued by the 
officers at the time of site visit.
Lack of proper monitoring by the executing levels was pointed out by the CE, 
North East and SE, NEIC-I in May 2016 and July 2017, respectively.  Information 
on follow-up action taken, if any, was, however, not available on record. 
Thus, the monitoring system was inadequate. This may adversely impact 
implementation of works and also leads to failure of any corrective action being 
taken while work is in progress.
5.3 Flood Forecasting
Flood forecasting is a non-structural measure in flood management by providing 
advance warning to flood prone areas. I&WD is responsible for maintenance, 
collection, compilation and dissemination of hydrological and meteorological 
data for the purpose of monitoring of flood situation for almost all river sub-
basins of the State during monsoon. For this purpose, network of river gauges 
and rain gauges have been established at important locations. During monsoon, 
flood control rooms are set up in each district along with Central Flood Control 
Room at Department level.
The present flood monitoring and management system in the State comprises 
of the preparation of Daily Flood Report by Central Flood Control Room 
of I&WD and transmission of the same to the State Disaster Management 
Department during June to October each year. This report is also shared with 
other organisations like Railways, Defence, Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) etc., 
regularly. During emergency, separate Flood Bulletin is also issued and the 
same is disseminated to the District Disaster Management Cells via e-mail, fax 
or SMS. This Daily Flood Report generally contains rainfall, river gauge and 
discharge, reservoir level/inflow/outflow data of different Stations within and 
85 Hooghly Irrigation Division, Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division, Alipurduar Irrigation Division 
and Coochbehar Irrigation Division.
86 Malda Irrigation Division and Mahananda Embankment Division.

Chapter 5: Quality Control and Monitoring
45
outside the State. Sometimes the location and extent of major damages, the 
status of affected areas under inundation etc., are also included. These data are 
collected from different district control rooms under I&WD along with other 
agencies like Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), CWC and Damodar 
Valley Corporation (DVC) through telephone, e-mail or fax. Daily Flood Report 
is also uploaded in the departmental web site. Deficiencies observed in flood 
forecasting were as follows:
	 •	 There is no system of real time compilation and dissemination of flood 
data in I&WD. Though the information on river water level is collected 
on hourly basis in monsoon period by the river gauge stations, the data is 
uploaded only once during the day on the web-site of I&WD. As such, if 
there is a sudden surge of flood waters, it remains unreported. 
	 •	 Warning levels of a river are different at different locations depending on 
the plinth level of residential and industrial areas. Hence, frequent river 
gauge stations are required to measure the level of water at different 
locations. River Bhagirathi-Hooghly passes through seven districts
87 in the 
State; however, only three river gauge stations are located in two districts88. 
There are no gauge stations in the remaining five districts at the down-
stream of the river. Further, there is only one-gauge station (English Bazar) 
for the entire 129 km length of the Mahananda river within Malda district. 
There were no river gauge stations for 66 km length of Tangon river, 
57.6 km length of Kalindri river, 24 km length of Punarbhaba river and 
23 km length of Pagla river in Malda district. Thus, water level recording 
mechanism in these sub-basins is weak.  In the absence of adequate water 
level recording and warning mechanism the State Government would be 
ill-prepared for rescue measures, leaving people at the mercy of flood 
waters. Although flood risks cannot be completely eliminated, real time 
flood data, as an important and integral part of a flood warning service, can 
help to provide timely flood warnings with an adequate lead time for the 
public and reduce flood damages.
87 Murshidabad, Burdwan, Nadia, Hooghly, Howrah, Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.
88 Murshidabad and Burdwan.

Chapter 6
Conclusion

47
Chapter 6: Conclusion
As per the Annual Flood Report - 2017 of Irrigation and Waterways Department, 
all the blocks under KMP and KKB were inundated by flood waters in July 
2017. The flood damage reports of the Department of Disaster Management and 
Civil Defence, GoWB reflected loss of life, devastating damage to property and 
its adverse economic and environmental impacts. 
Flood damage data of 2017
Population 
affected 
(Million)
Cropped 
area 
affected 
(M ha)
Damage 
to crops 
(` in 
crore)
Houses 
damaged 
(No.)
Damage 
to houses 
(` in 
crore)
Human 
lives 
lost 
(No.)
Cattle 
lost 
(No.)
Damage 
to public 
utilities 
(` in crore)
Total 
damages 
(` in crore)
8.723 1.033 6914.50 8,26,982 9158.28 217 2,857 1655.16 17727.94
(Source : Information disseminated by CWC vide No.3/38/2012-FFM/1067-1164 Dt 17 May 2019)
Planning 
	 •	 In the absence of basin-wise/river-wise holistic Master Plan, flood management 
projects were taken up at different locations depending on priority and 
availability of funds without being linked to a comprehensive plan. 
	 •	 I&WD failed to adopt appropriate combination of structural and non-
structural measures for effective management of floods. It only adopted 
some structural measures, which may not have been adequate to mitigate 
the impact of floods. 
In this context the Department may need to:
	 	Prepare comprehensive plan taking into account all existing 
developments with latest updated data, including the strategies 
recommended by various technical bodies, such as scientific assessment 
of flood prone areas, integrated basin management approach, etc. 
	 	Adopt Engineering/Structural measures like detention basins, diversion of 
flood water, etc. which will not only reduce spilling but also bring relief to 
the flood prone areas by reducing flood flows and thereby the flood levels. 
	 	Adopt Administrative/Non-structural measures like enactment of Model 
Flood Plain Zoning Bill which aim at demarcating zones or areas likely 
to be affected by floods of different magnitudes, frequencies, probability 
levels and specify the types of permissible developments in these zones, 
so that whenever floods actually occur, the damage can be minimized.
Implementation 
	 •	 The two Flood Management Programmes (FMP) :- Kandi Master Plan (KMP) 
and Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Plan (KKB) executed by I&WD during the 
years 2013-18 suffered from various deficiencies such as defective DPRs with 
incomplete estimates. There were also deviations from the approved DPR and 
non-compliance with Indian Standard Codes and GFCC recommendations.
	 •	 KMP, which as per the DPR was to be completed by March 2017 was 
delayed and is still ongoing (August 2019). Only raising and strengthening 
of embankments of different rivers was carried out by I&WD, while it 
failed to create the additional waterways by reconstructing/renovating 
bridges and culverts to ensure proper drainage of the basin water. As per 
the Flood Report of 2017, all the four blocks included under KMP were 

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
48
inundated by flood waters in July 2017.  The flood protection measures 
taken by I&WD may, therefore, not have been adequate.
	 •	 Commencement of the KKB project without ensuring acquisition of land, 
grossly hampered execution of works leading to delay in completion of 
the project, which is still ongoing (August 2019). Rivers/khals were not 
widened/excavated up to design bed width, which implied that with the 
limited carrying capacity, they would not be able to control frequent flooding 
in the areas. Inclusion of non-feasible items, non-construction of regulator at 
the confluence of river Kapaleswari and Kaliaghai and non-maintenance of 
already resuscitated rivers/khals caused heavy siltation affecting the overall 
drainage system of the project. According to the Flood Report of 2017 all 
the seven blocks included under KKB were inundated in 2017.  The flood 
protection measures taken by I&WD may, therefore, not have been adequate.
	 •	 In addition to the above two projects, the various embankment protection 
and anti-erosion of river bank works undertaken during the period did not 
meet the prescribed standards. Failure to provide the required thickness 
of graded filter below the revetment, non-provision of the required sand 
cushion layer in the embankment and use of below specification GI wires 
in boulder crates for construction of embankment resulted in not providing 
the required relief from flood problem in the areas. Besides, there was 
wasteful, avoidable extra expenditure and delay in execution of works.
In view of these deficiencies in implementation the Department needs to:
	 	Prepare DPRs in accordance with prescribed standards and guidelines 
and adhere strictly to the approved DPR while implementing the flood 
control programmes.
Financial Management
	 •	 Savings with respect to Budget Estimates as well as Revised Estimates 
ranged from 26 to 68 per cent  and 14 to 34 per cent,  respectively. Yearly 
budgets were prepared by I&WD without inputs from the divisional level, 
which resulted in such savings. 
	 •	 As per the Budget Publications, I&WD could not spend ` 1099.45 crore 
during 2013-14 to 2017-18, though provision of funds were made through 
REs by the State Government. Despite availability of funds, 2162 sq. km. 
of the total flood prone area of the State remained unprotected as per the 
Annual Flood Report 2017 of I&WD.
	 •	 There were irregularities in the use of the FMP funds. Under KKB project, Central 
funds of Rs 6.87 crore were used for urgent maintenance and repair of three 
roads contrary to scheme, guidelines, royalty amount of Rs 69.05 lakh was not 
deducted from contractors bills for failure to submit royalty payment certificates 
and security deposits were refunded to contractors in violation of tender clauses.
In view of such deficient financial management, the Department may:
	 	Take inputs from  all Divisions for preparation of budget and  ensure 
optimum utilisation of allotted funds.
Quality Control and Monitoring
	 •	 I&WD did not ensure the quality of cement used in works. The onus of I&WD 
in ensuring the quality of the earthen embankments constructed appeared to 

Chapter 6: Conclusion
49
be lacking. Tests for determining Specific Gravity of the boulders used were 
not done. These could impact the structural design causing defects leading 
to failure of the works impacting flood control measures. 
	 •	 Progress of the work was not monitored effectively. Both the projects, 
KMP and KKB were delayed and vulnerable areas remained prone to 
floods. Monitoring physical progress of the schemes through remote 
sensing techniques stipulated by the FMP guidelines was not adopted 
for any schemes of Flood Control during the years 2013-18. Inadequate 
monitoring system also  negated the scope to take corrective action while 
work was in progress.
	 •	 Due to inadequate number of gauge stations, the water level recording 
mechanism in the sub-basins of Tangon river, Kalindri river, Punarbhaba 
river and Pagla river was weak.  
There is no system of real time compilation and dissemination of flood data by 
I&WD.  This is an important and integral part of a flood warning service, which 
can help to provide adequate lead time for the public and reduce flood damages. 
In view of these the Department may consider:
	 	Introduction of Remote Sensing techniques for monitoring of physical 
progress of the schemes in Flood Management Works.
	 	To ensure real time compilation and dissemination of flood data, provide 
more river gauge stations to measure the level of water at different locations 
and warning mechanism which will provide timely flood warnings with 
adequate lead time for the public to minimise the flood damages. 
KOLKATA
The 27 Jan 2020
(REENA SAHA)
Principal Accountant General 
(Economic & Revenue Sector Audit)
West Bengal
Countersigned
NEW DELHI
The 29 Jan 2020
(RAJIV MEHRISHI)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India


Appendix

Appendix
51
Appendix
Appendix-1.1
(Refer paragraph No 1.6, page - 9) 
Division-wise Expenditure Details
Sl. No. Name of the Division Total Expenditure 
(in `)
1. Howrah Irrigation Division 1,28,72,65,441
2. Contai Irrigation Division 1,21,47,99,534
3. Mahananda Embankment Division 78,62,22,600
4. Hooghly Irrigation Division 77,53,08,313
5. Jalpaiguri Irrigation Division 75,20,99,255
6. Cooch Behar Irrigation Division 66,06,93,431
7. Alipurduar Irrigation Division 57,65,79,387
8. Malda Irrigation Division 50,18,89,294
9. East Midnapore Division 49,91,49,023
10. Canals Division 48,51,49,869
11. Berhampore Irrigation Division 47,98,32,676
12. Ganga Anti-Erosion Division I 46,44,49,536
13. West Midnapore Division 45,58,52,307
14. South Dinajpur Irrigation Division 37,14,74,063
15. Nadia Irrigation Division 35,67,09,334
16. Bidyadhari Drainage Division 32,33,14,985
17. Metropolitan Drainage Division I 30,90,96,336
18. Ganga Anti-Erosion Division II 28,25,28,318
19. Siliguri Irrigation Division 25,76,28,365
20. Lower Damodar Construction Division 22,30,91,696
21. Damodar Canal Division 21,85,03,094
22. Kakdwip Irrigation Division 21,59,16,146
23. North Dinajpur Irrigation Division 21,49,00,059
24. Basirhat Irrigation Division 16,29,24,156
25. Damodar Headworks Division 15,42,91,209
26. Urban Drainage Division 15,18,41,309
27. Lower Damodar Irrigation Division 13,33,83,785
28. Mayurakshi South Canal Division 12,75,23,478
29. Jaynagar Irrigation Division 12,50,59,973
30. Burdwan Irrigation Division 12,45,49,654
31. Bankura Irrigatioin Division 10,42,42,381
32. Kangsabati Canals Division II 7,86,56,146
33. Subarnarekha Head Quarters Division 6,55,37,195
34. Right Bank Irrigation Division 6,45,16,809

Performance Audit of Implementation of Flood Control Measures in West Bengal
52
Sl. No. Name of the Division Total Expenditure 
(in `)
35. Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai Project Division 5,66,19,296
36. Kangsabati Canals Division III 5,32,52,544
37. Metropolitan Drainage Division II 4,73,88,043
38. Subarban Drainage Division 4,15,56,977
39. Mayurakshi North Canal Division 3,99,16,664
40. Mograhat Drainage Division 2,91,80,378
41. Teesta  Barrage  Division 2,36,65,000
42. Metropolitan Drainage Mechanical Division 1,11,38,855
43. Mayurakshi Head Quarters Division 38,66,259
44. Metropolitan Electrical Division 20,11,874
45. Durgapur Mechanical and Electrical Division 14,40,349
Total 13,31,50,15,396

Glossary

Glossary
53
Glossary
Glossary
Abbreviation Full Form
ACS Additional Chief Secretary
BB Brahmaputra Board
BE Budget Estimates
BM Bituminous Macadam
CE Chief Engineer
CPM Critical Path Method
CRF Calamity Relief Fund
CWC Central Water Commission
DPR Detailed Project Report
DVC Damodar Valley Corporation
EE Executive Engineer
EIC Engineer-in-Charge
EoI Expression of Interest
FMP Flood Management Programme
GFCC Ganga Flood Control Commission
GI Galvanised Iron
GoI Government of India
GoWB Government of West Bengal
HDPE High Density Polyethylene
HFL High Flood Level
HGL Hydraulic Gradient Line
I&WD Irrigation and Waterways Department
IMD Indian Meteorological Department
KKB Kaliaghai-Kapaleswari-Baghai
KMP Kandi Master Plan
KoPT Kolkata Port Trust
MoWR Ministry of Water Resources
NCCF National Calamity Contingency Fund
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority
NIT Notice Inviting Tender
NRSA National Remote Sensing Agency
OTACA One Time Additional Central Assistance
PC Planning Commission
PERT Programme Evaluation Review Technique
PWD Public Works Department
RIDF Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
SD Security Deposit
SE Superintending Engineer
UC Utilisation Certificate
WBFR West Bengal Financial Rules