Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
on 
F
unctioning of Unique Identification Authority of 
India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
(
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology) 
(Performance Audit) 
Report No. 24 of 2021 
 


i 
CONTENTS 
Para Title Pages 
 Executive Summary v-x 
 Chapter 1-Introduction 1-6 
1.1 Introduction  1 
1.2 Constitutional validity of Aadhaar 2 
1.3 UIDAI Authority 3 
1.3.1 Powers of the Authority 3 
1.3.2 Organizational Set-up 4 
1.3.3 Registrars 5 
1.3.4 Enrolment Agencies 5 
1.4 Legislation, Rules and Regulations 6 
1.5 Structure of the Report 6 
 Chapter 2-Scope of Audit, Audit Objectives and 
Methodology 
7-10 
2.1 Scope of Audit 7 
2.2 Audit Objectives 7 
2.3 Audit Criteria 7 
2.4 Audit Methodology 8 
2.5 Good Practices 8 
2.6 Acknowledgement and Constraints 9 
 Chapter-3 Enrolment, Update and Authentication 
Ecosystem 
11-34 
3.1 Enrolment and Update Ecosystem 11 
3.1.1 Key Regulations and Amendments 12 
3.1.2 Status of Aadhaar Enrolment and Update 14 
3.1.3 Aadhaar Saturation Status 16 
3.1.4 The Components of Aadhaar Ecosystem 16 
3.1.5 De-duplication process 17 
3.1.6 Bio-metric Device Certification 18 
3.1.7 Managed Service Provider 18 
3.1.8 Governance Risk Compliance and Performance – Service 
Provider 
18 
3.2 Audit Observations on Aadhaar Enrolment Ecosystem  18 
3.2.1 Verification of the ‘Resident’ status of the applicants 18 

ii 
3.2.2 Generation of Multiple Aadhaar 19 
3.2.3 Enrolment for Aadhaar of Minor Children below age of 
five years 
21 
3.2.4 Management of Aadhaar Documents 23 
3.3 Audit Observations on Aadhaar Update Ecosystem 24 
3.3.1 Voluntary Biometric Updates 25 
3.4 Aadhaar Authentication Ecosystem 26 
3.4.1 Aadhaar Authentication Partners 27 
3.4.2 Key Regulations and Amendments 27 
3.4.3 Status of Authentication Transactions 28 
3.5 Audit observations on Monitoring of Ecosystem partners 
on compliance to the provisions of Aadhaar 
(Authentication) Regulations 2016  
29 
3.5.1 Incidences of Authentication Errors 29 
3.5.2 Non verification of the infrastructure and technical support 
of Requesting Entities and Authentication Service 
Agencies 
30 
3.6 Other related Audit Observations 31 
3.6.1 Data Archival Policy  32 
3.6.2 Delivery of Aadhaar Documents 32 
 Chapter-4 Management of Finances and Contracts 35-48 
4.1 Introduction-Budget and Finance 35 
4.2 Audit Observations on Revenue Management 36 
4.2.1 Non-Levy of charges for delivery of authentication 
services  
36 
4.3 Contract Management 38 
4.3.1 Selection of Contracts 38 
4.4 Audit Observations on Contract Management 39 
4.4.1 Liquidated damages (LD) for deficient performance of 
biometric solutions not levied 
40 
4.4.2 Deficiencies in monitoring contracts with NISG 41 
4.4.2.1 State Resource Personnel (SRP) contract with National 
Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) extended beyond 
the period envisaged in the ICT guidelines 
43 
4.4.2.2 Deficiencies in engagement of Field Service Engineers 
(FSE) 
44 
4.4.3 Rebate on Franking Values on dispatch of Aadhaar not 
availed 
45 

iii 
4.4.4 M onitoring of Information & Communication Technology 
(ICT) Assistance to States  
46 
 Chapter-5 Security of Aadhaar Information System 49-54 
5.1 Introduction  49 
5.2 Monitoring of the activities of authentication ecosystem 
partners of UIDAI 
49 
5.2.1 Annual Information System audit of the operations of REs 
and ASAs 
49 
5.2.2 Information System Audit of Client Applications’ Systems 
storing biometric data not ensured  
52 
5.2.3 Security and safety of data in Aadhaar vaults 53 
 Chapter-6 Redressal of Customers Grievances 55-57 
6.1 Introduction  55 
6.2 Audit Observations 56 
6.2.1 Data on complaints and their redressal 56 
6.2.2 Grievances received through CRM 56 
 Chapter-7 Conclusion 59-60 
 Appendix-I 61-68 
 Annexure-I 69-71 
 Abbreviations 72-73 
 

 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President under Article 151 of the 
Cons
titution.  
The Report includes matters arising from Performance Audit of Functioning of the 
Unique Identification Authority of India for the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19. 
Statistical information on generation, update and authentication services of Aadhaar 
and financial information referred to in the Report have been updated upto March 2021, 
to the extent as furnished by UIDAI. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
v 
Executive Summary 
Identification of the right individuals, especially the targeted beneficiaries, was a major 
st
umbling block encountered by the Union and State Governments while rolling out 
various welfare schemes. Absence of a valid and authenticated identity document was 
adversely affecting implementation and delivery of various Government welfare 
Schemes. Citizens were required to furnish multiple documents such as passports, 
driving licenses and ration cards etc. as identity proofs to various Government as well 
as private agencies, making it inconvenient for them and especially those who did not 
have any of these identity documents. To overcome the challenge, the Union 
Government decided to introduce a unique identity (UID) for the residents of India and 
to implement this project, they established Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) in January 2009. The Authority was mandated to lay out plans and policies to 
implement the “Aadhaar” project, which gave UIDAI the mandate to generate and issue 
Aadhaar, to the residents of India.   
The first UID, a 12-digit unique number that can be authenticated digitally, with the 
brand name ‘Aadhaar’ was generated in September 2010. Since then, UIDAI has 
generated more than 129 Crore Aadhaars, till the end of March 2021 and Aadhaar is 
now established as an important identity document for residents. Various 
Ministries/Departments of the Government as well as other entities such as banks, 
mobile operators, rely upon Aadhaar for identity of the applicant.  
However the Aadhaar scheme was challenged from time to time by several petitioners 
in various Courts of law.  The five judges Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in a landmark judgment of 26 September 2018, upheld the constitutional validity 
of the Aadhaar (Targeted delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies and Benefits) Act 
2016 (the Aadhaar Act, 2016). The Court has clearly ruled on the compulsory and 
voluntary requirements of Aadhaar for residents for availing benefits of various 
schemes and services.    
The UIDAI had staff strength of 130 at its Delhi Headquarters and staff strength of 219 
at its Regional Headquarters at the end of March 2021. The work was being carried out 
by officers and staffs mostly either on deputation or from outsourced agencies. Besides 
UIDAI also assisted States with ICT assistance and provided State level personnel 
through the National Institute for Smart Governance (NISG), for creating awareness 
and issue of Aadhaar. The UIDAI’s budget in 2020-21 was `613 Crore with actual 
expe
nditure of `892.67 Crore (excess expenditure met from unspent bala nce of 2018-19 
and 2019-20) whereas revenue earned was `322.40 Crore on account of various license 
fee
s, charges, penalties etc. 
The Performance Audit for the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 examined the functioning of 
UIDAI in supporting the Government’s vision to assign, as good governance, unique 
identity numbers to individuals residing in India. However, statistical information on 
generation, update and authentication services of Aadhaar and financial information 
referred to in the Report have been updated upto March 2021, to the extent as furnished 
by UIDAI. 

vi 
Significant audit findings are given below: 
 The Aadhaar Act stipulates that an individual should reside in India for a period of 
182 da
ys or more in the twelve months immediately preceding the date of application 
for being eligible to obtain an Aadhaar. In September 2019, this condition was 
relaxed for non-resident Indians, holding valid Indian Passport. However, UIDAI 
has not prescribed any specific proof/ document or process for confirming whether 
an applicant has resided in India for the specified period and takes confirmation of 
the residential status through a casual self-declaration from the applicant. There was 
no system in place to check the affirmations of the applicant. As such, there is no 
assurance that all the Aadhaar holders in the country are ‘Residents’ as defined in 
the Aadhaar Act. 
UIDAI may prescribe a procedure and required documentation other than 
self-declaration, in order to confirm and authenticate the residence status of 
applicants, in line with the provisions of the Aadhaar Act. 
(Paragraph 3.2.1) 
 Uniqueness of identity of the Applicant, established through a de-duplication 
proc
ess is the most important feature of Aadhaar. It was seen that UIDAI had to 
cancel more than 4.75 Lakh Aadhaars (November 2019) for being duplicate. There 
were instances of issue of Aadhaars with the same biometric data to different 
residents indicating flaws in the de-duplication process and issue of Aadhaars on 
faulty biometrics and documents. Though UIDAI has taken action to improve the 
quality of the biometrics and has also introduced iris based authentication features 
for enrolment for Aadhaar, the database continued to have faulty Aadhaars which 
were already issued. 
UIDAI may tighten the SLA parameters of Biometric Service Providers (BSPs), 
devise foolproof mechanisms for capturing unique biometric data and improve 
upon their monitoring systems to proactively identify and take action to minimize, 
multiple/ duplicate Aadhaar numbers generated. UIDAI may also review a 
regular updation of technology. UIDAI also needs to strengthen the Automated 
Biometric Identification System so that generation of multiple/duplicate 
Aadhaars can be curbed at the initial stage itself. 
(Paragraph 3.2.2) 
 Issue of Aadhaar numbers to minor children below the age of five, based on the bio 
me
trics of their parents, without confirming uniqueness of biometric identity goes 
against the basic tenet of the Aadhaar Act. Apart from being violative of the 
statutory provisions, the UIDAI has also incurred avoidable expenditure of 
`310 Crore on issue of Bal Aadhaars till 31 March 2019. I
 n Phase- II of ICT 
assistance a further sum of `288.11 Crore was released upto the year 2020-21 to 
sta
tes/ schools primarily for issue of Aadhaars to minor children. The UIDAI needs 
to review the issue of Aadhaar to minor children below five years and find alternate 

 
vii 
ways to establish their unique identity, especially since the Supreme Court has 
st
ated that no benefit will be denied to any child for want of Aadhaar document. 
UIDAI may explore alternate ways to capture uniqueness of biometric identity 
for minor children below five years since uniqueness of identity is the most 
distinctive feature of Aadhaar established through biometrics of the individual. 
 (Paragraph 3.2.3) 
 All Aadhaar numbers were not paired with the documents relating to personal 
inf
ormation of their holders and even after nearly ten years the UIDAI could not 
identify the exact extent of mismatch. Though with the introduction of inline 
scanning (July 2016) the personal information documents were stored in CIDR, 
existence of  unpaired biometric data of earlier period indicated deficient data 
management. 
UIDAI may take proactive steps to identify and fill the missing documents in their 
database at the earliest, in order to avoid any legal complications or 
inconvenience to holders of Aadhaar issued prior to 2016. 
(Paragraph 3.2.4) 
 During 2018-19 more than 73 per
  cent of the total 3.04 Crore biometric updates, 
were voluntary updates done by residents for faulty biometrics after payment of 
charges. Huge volume of voluntary updates indicated that the quality of data 
captured to issue initial Aadhaar was not good enough to establish uniqueness of 
identity. 
UIDAI may review charging of fees for voluntary update of residents’ biometrics, 
since they (UIDAI) were not in a position to identify reasons for biometric failures 
and residents were not at fault for capture of poor quality of biometrics. 
(Paragraph 3.3.1) 
 UIDAI did not have a system to analyze the factors leading to authentication errors. 
UI
DAI may make efforts to improve the success rate of authentication 
transactions by analysing failure cases. 
(Paragraph 3.5.1) 
 UIDAI did not carry out verification of the infrastructure and technical support of 
Re
questing Entities and Authentication Service Agencies before their appointment 
in the Authentication Ecosystem, despite stipulations in Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulations. 
UIDAI may conduct thorough verification of the documents, infrastructure, and 
technological support claimed to be available, before on-boarding the entities 
(Requesting Entities and Authentication Service Agencies) in the Aadhaar 
ecosystem. 
(Paragraph 3.5.2) 

viii 
 UIDAI is maintaining one of the largest biometric databases in the world; but did 
not 
have a data archiving policy, which is considered to be a vital storage 
management best practice. 
UIDAI may frame a suitable data archival policy to mitigate the risk of 
vulnerability to data protection and reduce saturation of valuable data space due 
to redundant and unwanted data, by continuous weeding out of unwanted data 
(Paragraph 3.6.1) 
 UIDAI’s arrangements with the Department of Posts were not adequate to guarantee 
del
ivery of Aadhaar letters to the right addressee, as seen from the large number of 
Aadhaar letters being returned as undelivered. 
UIDAI may address the delivery problems with their logistic partner namely DoP, 
by designing a customized delivery model, which will ensure delivery of Aadhaar 
letters to the correct addressee.  
 (Paragraph 3.6.2) 
 UIDAI provided Authentication services to banks, mobile operators and other 
age
ncies free of charge till March 2019, contrary to the provisions of their own 
Regulations, depriving revenue to the Government. 
UIDAI needs to be alert and cautious in matters concerning charges for delivery 
of services and ensure that decisions for non-levy of charges are taken with due 
process and approvals, which are properly documented and available for 
verification by any stake holder. 
(Paragraph 4.2.1) 
 UIDAI did not penalise the Managed Service Provider for failure to achieve the 
ex
pected service levels in the performance of biometric solutions. 
UIDAI may levy penalties on Biometric Service Providers for deficiencies in their 
performance in respect of biometric de-duplication (FPIR/ FNIR) and biometric 
authentication (FMR/ FNMR). Agreements in this regard should be modified, if 
required 
(Paragraph 4.4.1) 
 The support services to States by way of a State Resource Personnel to be provided 
by
 National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) through the ICT assistance given 
to them, was duly approved by the Cabinet Committee for one year only, but the 
same continued for years together as approved by UIDAI. 
UIDAI have to accept their own responsibility for issue of Aadhaar and 
limit/reduce their continued reliance on other agencies for support. They may 
partner with State Governments to increase the enrolment functions for issue 
ofAadhaar.  
(Paragraph 4.4.2.1) 

 
ix 
 There was deficiency in assessment of the requirements for Field Service Engineers 
(F
SE) resources to be hired from NISG and in monitoring the payments made to 
them. 
UIDAI should strictly follow the standards of financial propriety while procuring 
services and ensure that advances are not paid for in excess of requirements. 
(Paragraph 4.4.2.2) 
 UIDAI could not avail rebate on franking values worth `30.19 Crore offered by the 
Depa
rtment of Posts due to deficiency in their agreements with Print Service 
Providers. 
UIDAI may incorporate suitable clauses in their Agreements with all agencies 
mentioning clearly that the benefits accruing due to UIDAI’s resources need to 
be passed on to them and vendors to indemnify UIDAI towards the loss/ cost 
arising due to their actions. 
(Paragraph 4.4.3) 
 UIDAI had not effectively monitored funds released to States as Grants-in-Aid 
tow
ards ICT assistance for creating infrastructure. 
UIDAI may improve upon its financial management of grants given to State 
Authorities by proper monitoring and ensuring regular and timely receipt of 
Utilization Certificates from them.  It may also discontinue monetary assistance 
given to States/schools and other agencies for enrolment of minor children below 
five for issue of Aadhaar numbers. 
(Paragraph 4.4.4) 
 Monitoring of the information system operations of authentication ecosystem 
par
tners was deficient to the extent that UIDAI could not confirm compliance to its 
own regulations. 
UIDAI may ensure that each of the existing REs and ASAs are audited by them 
or by the Auditor appointed by it within a cycle of three years so as to provide 
adequate assurance about compliance to the Regulations.  
UIDAI may consider suspension of the services of REs and ASAs if they fail to 
conduct annual audit in time as prescribed by the Regulations 2016.   
UIDAI may ensure the implementation of Aadhaar Data Vault process and 
institute/carry out periodic audits independently, to enhance the security of 
Aadhaar number storage data by user organizations. UIDAI may deal the cases of 
non-compliance of directions as per the Act and as per conditions in the agreement 
with AUAs/KUAs (Authentication User Agencies and e-KYC User Agencies) 
 (Paragraphs 5.2.1, 5.2.2 and 5.2.3) 
 
 

x 
 The process of capturing of grievances/complaints has not been streamlined and 
does
 not display a clear picture for analysis. Also the complaints lodged at the RO 
level did not get the attention of UIDAI HQ, compromising the effectiveness of the 
grievance redressal mechanism, besides the delays in settlement of grievances. 
UIDAI may explore the possibility of introducing a single centralized system 
where grievances/complaints lodged even at ROs are also captured so as to 
enhance the quality of customer servicing. 
(Paragraphs 6.2.1 and 6.2.2) 
 
UIDAI, in the Exit Conference held on 14 October 2020, has agreed to the audit 
recommendations. 
 
 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
1 
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1.1 Introduction 
Prior to issue of a nationally accepted identity document for Indian residents, multiple 
documents viz., Driving License, Permanent Account Number (PAN), Voter Identity Card etc., 
were in use as proof of identity and address. The absence of easily verifiable identity documents 
was conducive to identity frauds and for leakages in the system of delivery of benefits from 
Government sponsored schemes and hence there was a need for having one unique identity for 
the residents of the country. 
The concept of unique identification was first discussed and worked upon in 2006, when 
administrative approval for the project "Unique ID for BPL families" was given on 03 March 
2006 by the erstwhile Department of Information Technology (DIT), Ministry of 
Communications and Information Technology. Subsequently, a Process Committee was set up 
(03 July 2006) to suggest processes for updation, modification, addition and deletion of data 
fields from the core database under the Unique ID for BPL families’ project.  
DIT submitted a “Strategic Vision – Unique Identification of Residents" to the Process 
Committee, which appreciated and approved the need of a UID Authority to be created by an 
executive order under the aegis of the then Planning Commission (now NITI Aayog) to ensure 
a pan-departmental and neutral identity for the Authority. The Process Committee decided (30 
August 2007) to furnish a detailed proposal based on the resource model for seeking its "in 
principle" approval to the erstwhile Planning Commission. 
Based on the recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries and decision of the Empowered 
Group of Ministers (EGoM), Unique Identification Authority of India was created on 28 
January 2009 as an attached office of the then Planning Commission (replaced by NITI1 Aayog 
i
n 2015)2. Prime Minister's Council on UIDAI (substituted by a Cabinet Committee on UIDAI 
on 
22 October 2009) was constituted on 30 July 2009 to advise UIDAI on the programme, 
methodology and implementation to ensure coordination between Ministries/Departments, 
stakeholders and partners.  
As per Cabinet’s approvals, the work of Aadhaar enrolment was initially geographically 
divided between UIDAI and Registrar General of India (RGI). Accordingly, UIDAI was 
assigned to do Aadhaar enrolment in 24 States and Union Territories (UTs) and RGI was to do 
enrolment in 12 States and UTs. 
In September 2015, UIDAI was brought under the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) (erstwhile Department of Electronics & Information Technology). For 
giving statutory standing to UIDAI, the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 was introduced in Parliament as Money bill on 
                                                           
1    NITI (National Institution for Transforming India) Aayog is the premier policy ‘Think Tank’ of the 
G
overnment of India, providing both directional and policy inputs. 
2   In September 2015, UIDAI was attached to the Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY) 
o
f the then Ministry of Communications and Inform ation Technology (Mo CIT). 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
2 
03 March 2016, which was notified (26 March 2016) as the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of 
F
inancial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (18 of 2016) . 
UIDAI has responsibility to issue a Unique Identification (UID) to all residents, that was robust 
enough to eliminate duplicate or fake identities and could be verified and authenticated 
anytime, anywhere. The digital identity platform set up by UIDAI with the brand name 
‘Aadhaar’, generated the first UID in September 2010 and the ambitious Aadhaar Scheme was 
launched on 29 September 2010 in Tembhli, a village in Nandurbar district of Maharashtra 
State in India, from where first Aadhaar was issued. The Aadhaar database has si nce reached 
129.04 Crore by March 2021 and is considered as one of the largest biometric based 
identification systems in the world. 
1.2 Constitutional validity of Aadhaar  
After launch of Aadhaar, Government progressively made the Aadhaar Card mandatory for 
numerous welfare schemes. These include subsidised food under the Public Distribution 
System, guaranteed wages to labour under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme, linking of PAN Card, telecom subscriber verification etc. However, the 
Aadhaar scheme was challenged from time to time by several petitioners in various courts of 
law and its constitutional validity was sub- judice since 2010. The five judges Constitution 
Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its landmark judgment of 26 September 2018, upheld 
the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 
2016, to be constitutional3.  
T
he salient points of the judgment4 of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India are as follow: 
a. T
he Aadhaar Act, 2016 does not violate fundamental right of privacy. Section 7 of the 
Act is constitutional.  ‘Benefits’ and ‘services’ should be those which have the colour of 
s
ome kind of subsidies namely welfare schemes of the Government whereby Government 
is doling out such benefits which are targeted at a particular deprived class.  
b. Residents are held entitled to obtain Aadhaar number but such an enrolment was 
voluntary in nature. However, it becomes compulsory for those who seek to receive any 
subsidy, benefit or services under the welfare schemes of the Government, expenditure 
whereof is to be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. As such CBSE, NEET, JEE, 
UGC etc. cannot make the requirement of Aadhaar mandatory for the students. 
c. No deserving persons would be denied the benefit of a scheme on the failure of 
authentication and it would be appropriate to make a suitable provision for establishing an 
identity by alternate means. 
d. No child shall be denied benefit, of any of the welfare schemes covered under Section 
7, if, for some reasons, she/he is not able to produce the Aadhaar number and the benefit 
shall be given by verifying the identity on the basis of any other document. 
                                                           
3  Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India which also considered several 
o
ther writ petitions in its judgment dated 26 September 2018 
4  The Bench delivered its 4:1 verdict:- 
• 
Majority opinion of Chief Justice Dipak Misra, Justice A.K. Sikri and Justice A.M. Khanwilkar  
• Concurring opinion of Justice Ashok Bhushan  
• Dissenting opinion of Justice D.Y. Chandrachud  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
3 
e. Regulation 27 of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 2016 which provides archiving 
a data for five years was struck down. Retention of data beyond six months was made 
impermissible. 
f. Section 57 which enabled body corporate and individuals to seek authentication was held 
unconstitutional and void. 
g. Section 139AA of Income tax Act 1961 (for seeding of PAN with Aadhaar) held 
constitutional. 
h. Rule 9 of the amended PMLA Rules, 2017 which mandates linking of Aadhaar with 
bank accounts was held unconstitutional. 
i. Department of Telecommunications’ Circular dated 23 March 2017 mandating linking of 
mobile numbers with Aadhaar was held unconstitutional.  
Thus, though Aadhaar is a legal document and mandatory for obtaining benefits of Government 
schemes and programmes, residents can furnish it voluntarily for proving identity in case of 
other services also. To implement the judgment of the Supreme Court, Government passed the 
A
adhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Act, 2019 (notified on 23 July 2019)5 in the Parliament to 
i
ncorporate further safeguards to protect privacy of data, foil misuse of personal information 
of its citizens and for averting denial of services and benefits to eligible persons. In addition, 
to facilitate better services through Aadhaar, voluntary use of Aadhaar authentication was 
provided for obtaining SIM cards and for opening bank accounts, with necessary changes in 
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 
respectively. 
1.3 UIDAI Authority  
1.3.1 Powers of the Authority  
UIDAI performs functions as defined by the Section 23 and 23A of Aadhaar (Targeted 
D
elivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016. It has authority 
to develop the policy, procedure and systems for issuing Aadhaar numbers to Individuals and 
perform authentication thereof under this Act.  
The powers and functions of the Authority, inter alia, include 
(a)  Specifying, by regulations, demographic information and biometric information 
required for enrolment and the processes for collection and verification thereof;   
(b)  Collecting demographic information and biometric information from any individual 
seeking an Aadhaar number in such manner as may be specified by regulations;   
(c)  Appointing of one or more entities to operate the Central Identities Data Repository;   
(d)  Generating and assigning Aadhaar numbers to individuals;  
(e)  Performing authentication of Aadhaar numbers;  
                                                           
5    Government of India introduced “The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Ordinance, 2019” on 
0
2 March 2019, notified as an Act on 23 July 2019 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
4 
(f)  Maintaining and updating the information of individuals in the Central Identities Data 
R
epository in such manner as may be specified by regulations; 
(g)  Omitting and deactivating of an Aadhaar number and information relating thereto in 
such manner as may be specified by Regulations;  
(h)  specifying the manner of use of Aadhaar numbers for the purposes of providing or 
availing of various subsidies, benefits, services and other purposes for which Aadhaar 
numbers may be used;  
(i)  Specifying, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars, 
enrolling agencies and service providers and revocation of appointments thereof; 
(j)  Establishing, operating and maintaining of the Central Identities Data Repository;  
(k)  Sharing, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, the information of Aadhaar 
number holders, subject to the provisions of this Act;  
(l)  calling for information and records, conducting inspections, inquiries and audit of the 
operations for the purposes of this Act of the Central Identities Data Repository, 
Registrars, enrolling agencies and other agencies appointed under this Act; 
(m) Specifying, by regulations, various processes relating to data management, security 
protocols and other technology safeguards under this Act;  
(n) levying and collecting the fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling agencies or other 
service providers to collect such fees for the services provided by them under this Act 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations;  
The Authority may 
(a) enter into Memorandum of Understanding or agreement, as the case may be, with the 
Central Government or State Governments or Union territories or other agencies for the 
purpose of performing any of the functions in relation to collecting, storing, securing or 
processing of information or delivery of Aadhaar numbers to individuals or performing 
authentication; 
(b) by notification, appoint such number of Registrars, engage and authorise such 
agencies to collect, store, secure, process information or do authentication or perform 
such other functions in relation thereto, as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
The Authority may engage consultants, advisors and other persons as may be required for 
efficient discharge of its functions under the Act on such allowances or remuneration and terms 
and conditions as may be specified by contract.  
The Authority may, for the discharge of its functions under this Act, or any rules or regulations 
made there under, by order, issue such directions from time to time to any entity in the Aadhaar 
ecosystem, as it may consider necessary.  Every direction issued shall be complied with by the 
entity in the Aadhaar ecosystem to whom such direction is issued. 
1.3.2 Organizational Set-up 
UIDAI has its headquarters (HQ) in New Delhi and has eight (8) Regional Offices (ROs) across 
the country.  The locations of ROs and the States/ UTs under their jurisdiction are illustrated 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
5 
in F igure 1.1. UIDAI also operates two Data Centers (DCs), one at Hebbal, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka and the other at Manesar, Haryana. 
A Chairperson appointed on part-time 
basis heads the Authority with two 
part-time members and a Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO), who is also 
the Member-Secretary of UIDAI.  The 
CEO is the legal representative of the 
Authority and is responsible for its 
day-to-day administration and 
implementation of its work programs 
including drawing up of proposals 
arising out of the discharge of 
functions assigned to UIDAI, 
preparation of accounts etc. At the HQ, 
the CEO is assisted by Deputy 
Directors General (DDGs) who are 
Joint Secretary level Officers of 
Government of India and are in-charge 
of various wings of UIDAI. Each of 
the eight ROs of UIDAI is headed by a 
DDG. As on 31 March 2021, UIDAI 
H
eadquarters had 130 sanctioned 
posts6 in various cadres whereas 
pe
rson-in-position were 95. In the 
eight UIDAI ROs, out of total 
sanctioned posts of 219, person-in position were 148 as on 31 March 2021. The Authority 
functioned mostly with officers on deputation from various Government Departments. 
1.3.3 Registrars 
U
IDAI authorizes entities as Registrars for the purpose of enrolling residents. Their roles and 
responsibilities are defined vide Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) signed by them with 
UIDAI. Central and State Government Departments, banks and other Public Sector 
organizations can be appointed as Registrars. Registrars have the option to carry out enrolment 
either by themselves or through Enrolment Agencies further sub-contracted by them. UIDAI 
had authorised 1777 Registrars as on 31 March 2021.  
1.3.4 
Enrolment Agencies  
UIDAI or the Registrars appoint Enrolment Agencies (EAs) for collecting demographic and 
biometric information of residents as part of the enrolment process. EAs setup Enrolment 
Centers for enrolment of residents and for correction/ updation of resident data. The EAs 
employ operators who are responsible for enrolling residents, capture the demographic and 
                                                           
6    Data source: Information furnished by UIDAI. 
7    Data source: Information furnished by UIDAI. 
Figure 1.1 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
6 
biometric information using the enrolment software, for uploading into the Central Identities 
Data Repository (CIDR)8. The quality of the documents collected by the EAs in respect of the 
demographic information of residents is scrutinized through a back-office Quality Check 
verification process by a quality control team. There were 436 Enrolment Agencies as on 31 
March 2021. 
1.4 Legislation, Rules and Regulations 
The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 
2016 (hereafter referred to as Aadhaar Act ) and the Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) 
Act 2019 provide the statutory basis for the operations of UIDAI. Drawing from the powers 
conferred by the Act of 2016, UIDAI notified various regulations for discharge of its mandated 
responsibilities. Aadhaar (Enrolment & Update) Regulations 2016, Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulations 2016, Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations 2016 and Aadhaar (Sharing of 
Information) Regulations 2016 and amendments thereto regulate the activities related to the 
functioning and activities of UIDAI. The regulations generally cover all the areas of operation 
of UIDAI. Requirements of the Act and corresponding provisions in the various regulations 
are mapped in Appendix-I. The UIDAI Procurement Manual 2014 and GFR 2005/2017 
regulate purchases and procurement in the organization. 
1.5 Structure of the Report 
The Performance Audit Report contains seven Chapters. Chapter 1 gives introduction to the 
topic. Chapter 2 explains the audit scope, audit objectives, audit criteria and audit 
methodology applied along-with the good practices followed by the Authority and the 
constraints faced during audit. Chapter 3 describe the audit findings relating to “Enrolment 
and Update Ecosystem” and “Authentication Ecosystem” whereas Chapter 4 contains audit 
findings on “Management of Finances and Contracts”. Chapter 5 and Chapter 6 are related 
to “Security of Aadhaar information system” and “Redressal of Customer Grievances” 
respectively. Finally, Chapter 7 gives the conclusion of the Audit Report. 
  
                                                           
8    Aadhaar numbers issued along with the demographic and biometric information are secured in the centralized 
d
atabase viz., CIDR of UIDAI at Bengaluru. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
7 
Chapter 2 Scope of Audit, Audit Objectives and Methodology 
2.1 Scope of Audit 
The Performance Audit included assessment of the Enrolment & Update Ecosystems as well 
as the Authentication Ecosystems of the UIDAI for the period from 2014-15 to 2018-19. The 
figures have been updated wherever received upto March 2021. Audit scrutinised the processes 
beginning right from the enrolment, upto delivery of Aadhaar number and subsequent use of 
the authentication services. The systems put in place for maintaining security and 
confidentiality of data were also subject to audit examination. In addition, audit also examined 
selectively, the procurement of infrastructure for the project.  
2.2 Audit Objectives 
The main audit objectives of the Performance Audit were to ascertain whether: 
1. UIDAI has developed comprehensive regulations to comply with the responsibilities 
entrusted under the Aadhaar Act. 
2. Ecosystem put in place for issue of Aadhaar and Authentication services functioned 
efficiently and in compliance with the statutory requirements. 
3. UIDAI has put in a system to monitor the performance of the IT systems associated 
with its operations. 
4. Contract management system in UIDAI for procurement of IT and other services is in 
conformity with government regulations and is executed to achieve economy and 
efficiency in operations. 
5. Complaint redressal mechanism set up by UIDAI for handling Aadhaar related 
grievances was effective. 
2.3 Audit Criteria 
Important criteria adopted for the Performance Audit were: 
a. Cabinet Approval on the formation of UIDAI and decisions of Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). 
b. Provisions of Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, 
 Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 and subsequent Amendments. 
c. Relevant provisions under General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005 and its 
 revised version GFR 2017, which have elaborately stipulated procedures for 
 procurement, maintenance of stock and stores, their disposals, etc. 
d. The Procurement Manual 2014 (effective from 01 April 2014) issued by 
 UIDAI, contains the principles and procedure relating to procurement of 
 goods and services for purposes of UIDAI and is drawn from the Rule 135 of  the 
GFR 2005. 
e. The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016. 
f. The Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
8 
g. The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016. 
h. Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016  
i. Subsequent Amendments to the above regulations and any other 
instructions/notifications/Regulations issued by Government/UIDAI, which have a 
bearing on the project and functioning of UIDAI. 
2.4 Audit Methodology 
The Performance Audit commenced with an entry conference with the top management of 
UIDAI at UIDAI Headquarters at New Delhi in February 2019 where the scope of the audit, 
audit objectives etc. were explained to the Management. Files and records, maintained at 
UIDAI HQ, its ROs9 and at UIDAI Tech Centre at Bengaluru were reviewed in audit. 
W
e selected contracts for scrutiny based on statistical sampling techniques. Besides, 
examination of documents, we obtained information by way of replies to audit questions 
furnished by the auditee and through meetings with key personnel of UIDAI involved in its 
various operations.  
On completion of Audit, we discussed important observations with the UIDAI management in 
an Exit Meeting in October 2020. Auditee’s response given during the Exit Meeting and by 
way of a written reply has been suitably included in this Report. The statistical information has 
been updated to 31 March 2021.   
The reply of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) furnished in 
June 2021 has also been taken into consideration in finalizing the report. 
2.5 Good Practices 
UIDAI has provided an identity document to over 125 crore residents of India within a decade 
of issue of the first Aadhaar (September 2010) in coordination with a large number of agencies/ 
entities spread across the country. UIDAI has established the Information Security 
Management System and obtained the ISO 27001:2013 by STQC and the National Critical 
Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) has declared its CIDR as “Protected 
System” adding another layer of IT security assurance. 
We noted that UIDAI has a system of imposing financial penalties on its enrolment ecosystem 
partners for deficient/ defective quality of work. Complaints of overcharging of residents are 
followed up and financial disincentives are imposed on Registrars. It was observed that 
payments to Registrars are released only after crosschecking with the list of successful 
generation of Aadhaars obtained from UIDAI Tech Center.  
Features like the Virtual ID and Biometric Locking facility provides more leeway to Aadhaar 
holders while availing Aadhaar related services. The Virtual ID is a temporary and revocable 
16-digit random number and is mapped with the Aadhaar so that it can be used in place of 
Aadhaar for authentication The Biometric Locking facility helps an Aadhaar holder to 
lock/unlock his/ her biometrics whenever he/ she wishes. These initiatives help in enhancing 
confidence of Aadhaar holders while using the ID. 
                                                           
9    Except Guwahati RO 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
9 
In 2019, “Aadhaar Seva Kendras” (ASK) were introduced in 41 select locations in the country 
t
o act as a single stop destination for all Aadhaar services for the residents.  These ASKs were 
in addition to 35,000 already available Aadhaar enrolment and Update Centers.   
Image courtesy: UIDAI 
The ASKs 
of
fer 
dedicated 
Aadhaar 
enrolment 
and update 
services to 
residents 
on all seven 
days of the 
week. 
2.6 Acknowledgement and Constraints 
We acknowledge the support and cooperation extended by the Management of UIDAI to the 
audit team during the course of audit. A detailed presentation on the functioning of the 
Authority was given for understating of the Audit Team. The records/ data requisitioned by 
Audit Team were generally furnished but audit witnessed several instances of inordinate delay/ 
non-supply of records which impeded in the audit exercise. Records, which could not be 
accessed included files related to Information Technology-Information System Security, 
Aadhaar Document Management System, destruction of documents collected at the time of 
enrolment, details of authentications and its accounting, fixation of rates/ charges for 
authentication and enrolment & update activities, grievances /complaints of customers, audit 
reports of stake holders (e.g. enrolment centres or ASAs/AUAs) etc. We also appreciate the 
support provided in updating the statistical and other information till March 2021. 
UIDAI expressed difficulties in providing data for period prior to formation of UIDAI 
(July 2016) as an Authority under Aadhaar Act. Intermittent supply of data, delayed submission 
and partial responses to audit queries had hindered the smooth completion of audit process. We 
could not provide reasonable assurances on the selection process of vendors appointed by 
UIDAI for managing the vital services in the roles of Managed Service Providers, Data Centre 
Development agencies and Aadhaar Documents Management System partners or Government 
Risk Compliance and Performance – Service Providers.  However, we relied on the UIDAI 
write ups and the scrutiny of files to arrive at a conclusion that the service partners for providing 
the services 10 were selected in competitive manner by following the prescribed rules, 
procedures and due diligence. The contracts for supply of professional resources entered into 
with NISG were on nomination basis. 
                                                           
10    The services which were selected for audit scrutiny following the decided samples 


Report No. 24 of 2021 
10 
Therefore, in keeping with the scope of the CAG’s Regulations on Audit and Accounts, to the 
extent data and information/files were not produced to the audit, we could not derive our 
assurance on the areas mentioned above. 
  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
11 
Chapter 3 Enrolment, Update and Authentication Ecosystem 
3.1 Enrolment and Update Ecosystem  
Every resident in the country is eligible to obtain an Aadhaar number by submitting his/her 
demographic and biometric information. After verification of this information by UIDAI 
Aadhaar numbers are issued.  UIDAI confirms the uniqueness of the identity of a resident by 
way of a de-duplication process where the information submitted by each new enrollee is 
matched with that of others in the Aadhaar database to ensure that the applicant is not already 
enrolled. After establishing uniqueness of identity, a 12-digit random number is generated and 
issued to the applicant. This unique lifetime number cannot be assigned to any other individual. 
The demographic and biometric details of Aadhaar holders, however, can be updated to ensure 
continued accuracy of the information in the CIDR. 
An Aadhaar number subject to its authentication 11, is accepted as a valid proof of identity of 
t
he Aadhaar number holder for receiving specified benefits, subsidies and services for which 
expenditure is met from the Consolidated Fund of India/Consolidated Fund of State.  However, 
Aadhaar does not confer citizenship or domicile to its holder and is only a proof of identity. 
The definition of “Resident” gains prime importance as it sets the basic eligibility criteria for 
entitlement of Aadhaar number. A “Resident”, as per the Act, is as an individual who has 
resided in India for a period or periods amounting in all to 182 days or more in the 12 months 
immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment. 
The enrolment process begins with a resident submitting his/her demographic and biometric 
information to the Enrolment Agency (EA) along with prescribed supporting documents to 
establish identity, date of birth and address of the enrollee. The information is submitted to the 
CIDR for further processing and generation of Aadhaar number. The UIDAI has adopted a 
tiered model consisting of Registrars and EAs for enrolment and updation of Aadhaar numbers. 
The information to be provided at the time of enrolment are as follows: 
Demographic 
information 
Name, verified date of birth or declared age, gender, address, mobile number 
(optional) and email ID (optional), in case of introducer-based enrolment- 
introducer name and introducer’s Aadhaar number, in case of Head of Family 
based enrolment- name of Head of Family, relationship and Head of Family’s 
Aadhaar number; in case of enrolment of child- enrolment ID or Aadhaar 
number of any one parent, proof of relationship (PoR) document. 
Biometric 
information 
Ten fingerprints, two iris scans, and facial photograph 
                                                           
11    Authentication is the process by which the Aadhaar number along with demographic information or biometric 
i
nformation of an individual is submitted to the Central Identities Data Repository of UIDAI for its verification 
and such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis of information available with it. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
12 
Aadhaar enrolment (and mandatory biometric updates) is done free of cost for residents. 
H
owever, for all enrolments and mandatory biometric updates, UIDAI makes payments to the 
Registrars at rates fixed by them from time to time12. 
T
he enrolment process is illustrated in Figure 3.1. 
Figure 3.1 Enrolment process 
CIDR
ENROLMENT SERVICE
Demo De-
duplication 
(DDC)
Biometric 
De-
Duplication
Letter Delivery 
& VerificationQC UID 
Assignment
REGISTRAR
LOGISTICS 
PARTNER 
(INDIA POST)
CUSTOMER CONTACT 
CENTER 
Information/
Issue resolution
Enrolment Data
to CIDR 
 Aadhaar letter or 
Rejection letter
Enrolment
Agency
Enrolment
Processing
Automatic Synch 
(software/data)
Data Capture
MDD 
Disposition
 
Graphics Courtesy: UIDAI 
3.1.1  Key Regulations and Amendments  
E
nrolment and Update is central to the Aadhaar structure. Registrars and EAs, responsible for 
collecting the demographic and biometric information of individuals for the enrolment process, 
are core components of this ecosystem. EAs are responsible for adherence to processes 
prescribed by UIDAI and to ensure data quality. The Aadhaar (Enrolment & Update) 
Regulations 2016 and amendments thereto govern the activities associated with this 
ecosystem. Key regulations and amendments thereto governing the Aadhaar enrolment and 
update process are given in Table 3.1. 
Being the backbone of the Aadhaar system, it is important that the regulations prescribe the 
processes and procedures in conformity with the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and UIDAI 
establish systems to ensure that Aadhaar numbers generated satisfy all the features and 
qualities envisaged in the Act.  
                                                           
12 Effective from January 2019, the rate for every enrolment that has resulted in successful generation of an 
A
adhaar number is fixed at `100. Similarly, for all mandatory biometric updates U IDAI pays `100 per request 
to
 the Registrar with effect from January 2019. However, for all voluntary updates of demographic or 
biometric information, UIDAI has prescribed a fee of `50 per request (enhanced to `100 per request for 
vo
luntary biometric updates w.e.f. 09 May 2020) and is to be paid by the Aadhaar number holder.  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
13 
Table 3.1: Key Regulations and amendments thereto governing the Aadhaar 
Enrolment and Update ecosystem 
Key Regulations Key features 
Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016)  
Dated 14-Sep-2016  
 Resident Enrolment Process: Biometric & Demographic 
information required, Role of Registrars, Collection of 
Information, Equipment, Software used in enrolment etc. 
 Generation, Rejection & Delivery of Aadhaar numbers. 
 Update of Resident information: Mandatory update, Modes of 
update, Convenience Fee to be charged for update 
 Appointment of Registrars, Enrolling Agencies & other service 
providers 
 Omission or Deactivation of Aadhaar number 
 Grievance Redressal Mechanism. 
 Format of enrolment/ Correction & update form, list of 
Documents (POI, POA, POR, DOB etc.), Code of conduct for 
Service providers 
Aadhaar (E&U)) 
(Second 
Amendment) 
Regulations 2017 
(No. 2 of 2017)  
Dated    07-Jul-2017 
 
 Addition of Regulation 12A: Any Central or State department 
or
 agency requiring authentication or possession of Aadhaar for 
receipt of any subsidy, benefit or services should ensure 
enrolment of such individual who is yet to be enrolled or update 
their Aadhaar details, by setting up enrolment centres at their 
premises 
Aadhaar (E&U)) 
(Fourth 
Amendment) 
Regulations 2017 
(No. 5 of 2017)  
Dated   31-Jul-2017 
 Immediate suspension of activities or imposition of Financial 
Disincentives on Registrar or Enrolment Agency or any 
service provider or any other person or Cancellation of the 
credential, codes or permission issued to them, for violation of 
any regulation, process, standard, guideline or order, by a 
Registrar or Enrolment Agency or any service provider or any 
other person 
Aadhaar (E&U)) 
(Sixth Amendment) 
Regulations 2018.  
(No. 2 of 2018)  
Dated   31-Jul-2018 
 New Definition of Incapacitated Person. 
 Date of Birth of resident can be updated only once. In case the 
D
oB is to be updated more than once, it can only be done 
through an exception handling process which may require the 
resident to visit the Regional Office (RO) of the UIDAI. 
 Amendments in verification of update data, disclosure of 
i
nformation to parents/ form to be signed by parents in case of 
minors. 
 Introduction of Aadhaar Address update PIN Service for 
r
esidents not having acceptable proof of Address. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
14 
Aadhaar (E&U)) 
(Seventh 
Amendment) 
Regulations 2019.  
(No. 3 of 2019) 
Dated   05-Sep-2019 
 Enhancement in list of POI, POA, POR & DOB under 
Schedule II of E&U Regulations, 2016 [Regulation 10(2)] 
3.1.2 Status of Aadhaar Enrolment and Update 
UIDAI had generated 129.04 Crore Aadhaar numbers as of March 2021 for the residents in the 
country, which is approximately 94 per cent  of the projected population. The number of 
Aadhaar generated and updated during 2012-13 to 2020-21 are given in Chart 3.1 and Chart 
3.2 respectively. 
 
(Data Source: UIDAI) 
Chart 3.1 s hows that growth of Aadhaar generated in 2013-14 was 95.67 per cent as compared 
to previous year and gradually it reached the plateau after 2017-18 wherein it grew less than 3 
per cent as compared to previous year. 
15.17
2
9.83
19.46
19.45
13.37
7.42
2.86
2.22
3.25
31.18
61.01
80.47
99.92
113.29
120.71
123.57
125.79
129.04
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
2012-13
2013-14
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
Year
Chart 3.1: Generation of Aadhaar (in Crore)
No. of Cumulative Aadhaar Generated (in Crore) No. of Aadhaar Generated (in Crore)

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
15 
 
(D ata Source: UIDAI)  
Chart 3.2 s hows that growth of Aadhaar update had picked up pace from 2015-16 onwards. 
The total updates at the end of 2014-15 standing at 75.67 Lakh has multiplied around 12 times 
in five years to reach at 901.94 Lakh at the end of 2020-21. 
 
66.97
2
34
416.97
643.82
547.4
540.93
554.33
8.7
59.4
155.4
268.5
296.69
352.35
347.61
75.67
293.4
572.37
912.32
844.09
893.28
901.94
0 200 400 600 800 1000
2014-15
2015-16
2016-17
2017-18
2018-19
2019-20
2020-21
Number of updates
Year
Chart 3.2: Aadhaar Update (in Lakh)
Total Biometric updates Demographic updates

Report No. 24 of 2021 
16 
3.1.3 Aadhaar Saturation Status 
 
Figure 3.2 depicts the 
Aadhaar saturation status 
across the States and Union 
Territories as on 31 March 
2021. UIDAI had issued 
more than 124.67 Crore 
(live) Aadhaar till 31 March 
202113 and in 23 States/ 
U
nion Territories more than 
90 per cent saturation levels 
were achieved whereas 
eight States/ Union 
Territories had saturation of 
around 80 to 90 per cent. In 
two States/ Union 
Territories (Arunachal 
Pradesh and Ladakh) the 
saturation level is between 
70 to 80 per cent whereas in 
other two States (Assam and 
Nagaland) the saturation 
status was above 50 per cent 
but less than 70 per cent. 
However, one State (Meghalaya) has not reached the saturation level of 50 per cent. There was 
overall saturation of 91 per cent in issue of Aadhaar across India.  
Thus, the UIDAI needed to continue with its efforts to enroll Aadhaar eligible residents and 
increase the enrolment in States which have not achieved 90 per cent benchmark. 
3.1.4 The Components of Aadhaar Ecosystem  
T
he various components of the ecosystem, external as well as internal, involved in the 
enrolment to authentication, printing to delivery of Aadhaar card and the customer support is 
depicted in the Figure 3.3. 
                                                           
13   Source: Aadhaar Saturation Report of UIDAI as on 31 March 2021. 
Figure 3.2 Aadhaar Saturation Status 
 (31-03-2021) 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
17 
Figure 3.3: The Aadhaar Ecosystem 
 
3.1.5 De-duplication process 
UIDAI has employed a two-step process for identifying duplicate enrolments. In the first stage, 
demographic data match is done and in the second stage biometric matching of fingerprints 
and iris with the database of all others enrolled in the Aadhaar database is done to identify 
duplicates and establish uniqueness of the enrollee. After successful clearance at the de-
duplication stage, a 12-digit Aadhaar number is generated which is communicated to the 
resident through UIDAI’s logistics partner India Post. Residents who have submitted their 
mobile numbers during enrolment can also download e-Aadhaar14. 
U
IDAI has agreements with three vendors for providing Automatic Biometric Identification 
Systems (ABIS). These vendors were selected by the Managed Service Provider (MSP). If one 
ABIS identifies a duplicate, it will be subject to verification by another ABIS for enhancing 
accuracy. Further, UIDAI has a manual adjudication system also where duplicates identified 
are subject to a further verification before rejection. UIDAI also undertakes demographic 
de-duplication to identify errors in the demographic data submitted by a resident at the time of 
enrolment. 
Details of de-duplication carried out by UIDAI as on 31 March 2019 are given below: 
A. Biometric Residents 
Aadhaar generated through Biometric De-duplication through 
(i) ABIS: 111,11,40,041 
(ii) Manual De-duplication: 89,45,010 
B. Non-Biometric Residents:  
Aadhaar generated without Biometric 
(i) Children below five years: 11,48,27,267 
                                                           
14    An e-Aadhaar is an electronic form of Aadhaar letter downloadable from e-Aadhaar portal of UIDAI’s 
w
ebsite. Resident can download e-Aadhaar in pdf format by visiting https://eaadhaar.uidai.gov.in . They can 
use either 28-digit enrolment no. received at the time of enrolment or 12-digit Aadhaar Number. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
18 
(ii) Residents with 100 per cent Biometric exception category: 5,69,196 
Issues of large member of de-duplications done and Aadhaar issued to minor children are 
commented in Report. 
3.1.6 Bio-metric Device Certification  
Standardization, Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) Directorate, an attached office of 
MeitY, is the nodal agency appointed to carry out specifications as well as certification activity 
for enrolment and authentication devices requirements for the UIDAI.   
3.1.7 Managed Service Provider 
The entire end-to-end technology infrastructure of UIDAI including data center operations, 
management of IT systems of UIDAI ROs, technical helpdesk etc., is managed by the 
Managed Service Provider (MSP) viz M/s HCL Infosystems Ltd. The MSP was appointed in 
August 2012 through Expression of Interest and Request for Proposal method for a period of 
seven years. At present (March 2021), the MSP is functioning under extension period. The total 
value of contract with the MSP was `1,978.62 Crore. 
3.1.8 
Governance Risk Compliance and Performance – Service Provider 
Government Risk Compliance and Performance – Service Provider (GRCP-SP) is an 
independent monitoring agency on behalf of UIDAI, deployed by the Authority to ensure 
compliance and security of the UIDAI ecosystem. The role of GRCP-SP is to facilitate creation 
of a robust, comprehensive, secure environment for UIDAI to operate.  (including external 
a
gencies such as a Registrars, Enrolment Agencies, Aadhaar Seva Kendra’s, ASAs, AUA/ 
KUA/ Sub-KUAs, Contact Center, SMS Service Provider and Logistics Service Providers 
etc.), in terms of Visibility, Effectiveness and Control. 
Service level monitoring of all contracts is one of the important works of the GRCP-SP, which 
helps the UIDAI in having a financial control. All the data pertaining payments is to subjected 
to GRCP Audit and processed for payments on the basis of their reports. 
3.2 Audit Observations on Aadhaar Enrolment Ecosystem  
Audit observations on the Aadhaar Enrolment vis-à-vis provisions of the Aadhaar Act 2016 
are given in succeeding paragraphs:  
3.2.1 Verification of the ‘Resident’ status of the applicants 
UIDAI relied on self-declaration made by the resident s regarding their ‘Resident’ status at 
the time of Aadhaar enrolments and thus status of Resident or non-Resident remained 
unverified. 
As per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act, 2016, every  resident in the country is entitled to 
obtain an Aadhaar number by submitting his demographic and biometric information by 
undergoing the process of enrolment. A “Resident” as per the Act, is as an individual who has 
resided in India for a period or periods amounting in all to 182 days or more in the 12 months 
immediately preceding the date of application for enrolment. The definition of “Resident” sets 
the basic eligibility criteria to be fulfilled by each individual for obtaining Aadhaar. 
The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations 2016 prescribes the nature of documents a 
resident should submit as proof of identity (PoI), proof of address (PoA), date of birth (DoB), 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
19 
proof of relationship (PoR) etc. to the EAs. Whenever a resident applies for enrolment/ 
c
orrection/ updation, a standard form containing demographic details of self along with ticking 
the residential status, has to be filled  
It was however, noted that UIDAI had not specified any proof/document in the regulation for 
confirming the “Resident” condition, to qualify as a resident. No procedure has been prescribed 
to check the veracity of the applicant’s testimony. Thus UIDAI had not put in place a system 
for fulfilling the fundamental requirement of identifying residents. Audit is of the view that 
non-verification of status of residence may lead to issue of Aadhaar to non-bona fide residents. 
UIDAI stated (September 2019) that the validity of the documents provided by individual 
applicants in support of identity, address, date of birth etc., are confirmed during enrolment 
and cases appearing as fraudulent are dealt in accordance with  provisions of Aadhaar 
(Enrolment & Update) Regulations 2016. UIDAI (October 2020) asserted that self-declaration 
in conjunction with the prescribed documents was the only practical means to ascertain the 
resident status of applicants. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
The replies of UIDAI/ MeitY are not tenable as Aadhaar (Enrolment & Update) Regulations 
2016 stipulates actions to be taken against fraudulent cases only after generation of Aadhaar 
numbers, whereas the issue here is of conducting prior checks to ascertain residential status of 
an applicant, as one of the condition for issue of Aadhaar, as provided in the Aadhaar Act 2016. 
UIDAI should explore a workable system of verification of residence status based on the 
criteria prescribed under the Act.  A review of the definition of a resident for this purpose has 
gained more importance in light of the fact that non-resident Indians holding a valid Indian 
passport were also entitled for an Aadhaar number after their arrival in India bypassing the 182 
days residency criteria as per the Gazette notification dated 20 September 2019. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may prescribe a procedure and required documentation other 
than self-declaration, in order to confirm and authenticate the residence status of 
applicants in line with the provisions of the Aadhaar Act. 
3.2.2  Generation of Multiple Aadhaar 
De-duplication process remained vulnerable for generat ing multiple Aadhaar numbers and 
manual interventions had to be done to resolve the problem. 
De-duplication process ensures that the Aadhaar numbe rs generated are unique and no second 
number is assigned to the same resident by comparing the resident’s demographic and 
biometric information collected during the process of enrolment, with the records in the 
UIDAI database. It also ensures that a data with an already assigned Aadhaar number cannot 
be used to generate a new number to another resident. 
As per information provided by UIDAI Tech Centre, nearly 4.75 Lakh duplicate Aadhaar 
numbers were cancelled as of November 2019. This data indicated that on an average no less 
than 145 Aadhaars generated in a day during the period of nine years since 2010 were duplicate 
numbers requiring cancellation. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
20 
Besides this, verification of records at the UIDAI Regional Office Bengaluru showed that 
r
esidents reported 5,388 15 cases of issue of multiple Aadhaars during the period 2015-16 to 
2019-
20 forcing UIDAI to cancel the second Aadhaar issued, based on complaints received. 
We could not ascertain the number of multiple Aadhaars reported at other ROs as access to the 
related documents was not given to us. UIDAI HQ also could not provide RO wise data on the 
number of multiple Aadhaars and stated (September 2019) that such data was not available 
with them. Apart from issue of multiple Aadhaars to the same resident, instances of issue of 
Aadhaars with the same biometric data to different residents were also seen reported in RO 
Bengaluru.  
Further, information like the date of issue of first Aadhaar, the date of issue of subsequent 
Aadhaars and the time taken to identify and cancel them were also not provided to Audit 
limiting our scope for further scrutiny on the issue.  
UIDAI stated (September 2019) that the biometric de-duplication ensures uniqueness with 
accuracy of 99.9 per cent, but in cases where residents with poor biometrics enroll, their 
accuracy could be slightly poor which could lead to generation of multiple Aadhaars.  It was 
also informed that UIDAI has deployed self-cleaning system (an automated process) to identify 
duplicate Aadhaars and for taking corrective actions. However, no details on the frequency of 
the deployment of the self- cleaning system, the number of duplicates detected through the 
process etc., were provided to audit as of July 2020. The fact that residents reported 860 cases 
of multiple Aadhaars in Bengaluru RO alone during 2018-19 suggested that the self- cleaning 
system employed by UIDAI was not effective enough in detecting the leakages and plugging 
them. Though the number of cases reported could be termed as miniscule when compared with 
the total number of Aadhaars generated.  
UIDAI later, (October 2020) explained the “whitelisting process” invoked in case a genuine 
person is denied Aadhaar through the de-duplication process. It claimed significant 
improvements in detecting duplicate and fraudulent enrollment after application of Service 
Level Agreement (SLA) parameters independently for each of the three Biometric Service 
Providers (BSPs) and incorporation of other SLA parameters like FNIRA16, attack presentation 
c
lassification error rate etc. in the new contract. UIDAI also informed that a project with IIIT 
Hyderabad in the field of biometric was going on to develop indigenous technology to achieve 
“atmanirbharta”. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the Audit Observations. 
It is evident that UIDAI was aware of generation of multiple Aadhaar which had remained 
unidentified/detected by it unless brought to their notice. It was also noted that to ensure 
provision of unique identities to residents, UIDAI has even resorted to Manual De-duplication 
(MDD) processes in cases where biometric data was rejected by BSPs. The cancellation of 
duplicate Aadhaars or generation of Aadhaars through MDD indicated flaws in the functioning 
of BSPs appointed by UIDAI. The failure in De-duplication resulting in denial of Aadhaar can 
be negated by invoking the whitelisting process for the aggrieved residents. As a result, 
UIDAI/MeitY needs to devise foolproof mechanisms for capturing unique biometric data. 
                                                           
15   The total 5,388 cases of multiple Aadhaar reported comprises of 1,131, 2,339, 330, 860 & 728 cases during 
t
he years 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19 & 2019-20 respectively.  
16 FNIRA: False Negative Identification Rate for Anomalous matches 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
21 
UIDAI also needs to strengthen the Automated Biometric Identification System so that 
g
eneration of multiple Aadhaars can be curbed at the initial stage itself. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may tighten the SLA parameters of Biometric Service 
Providers (BSPs), devise foolproof mechanisms for capturing unique biometric data and 
improve upon their monitoring systems to proactively identify and take action to minimize, 
multiple/duplicate Aadhaar numbers generated. UIDAI may also review a regular 
updation of technology. UIDAI also needs to strengthen the Automated Biometric 
Identification System so that generation of multiple/duplicate Aadhaars can be curbed at 
the initial stage itself. 
3.2.3 Enrolment for Aadhaar of Minor Children below age of five years 
The uniqueness of identity, one of the distinctive at tributes of Aadhaar, was not ensured 
while issuing Aadhaar to minor children below the age of five years. 
As per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act, 2016, every  resident in the country is entitled to 
obtain an Aadhaar number by submitting his demographic and biometric information by as part 
of the enrolment process.  However, as per Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations 2016, 
biometrics are not captured for Aadhaar generation in respect of minor children below five 
years of age. Their UID is processed as per Section 5 (1) of these Regulations on the basis of 
demographic information and facial photograph by linking with the UID of any one of the 
parents. These children are required subsequently, to update their biometrics (ten fingers, iris 
and facial photograph), when they turn five and then again on attaining fifteen years of age.  
(Image courtesy: UIDAI) 
U
IDAI regulations state that 
if a child having attained the 
age of five or fifteen years 
of age, fails to update his/ 
her biometric information 
within two years of 
attaining such age, his/ her 
Aadhaar number would be 
deactivated. In cases where 
such update had not been 
carried out at the expiry of 
one year after deactivation 
the Aadhaar number would 
be omitted. 
Further, UIDAI notified (September 2018) that if the current age of an Aadhaar holder enrolled 
as a child had crossed 15 years and if his/ her biometrics are not updated such Aadhaar would 
be cancelled. 
Audit observed that since UIDAI does not capture biometrics of minor children below five 
years for generating Aadhaar, the basic condition for issue of Aadhaar i.e. uniqueness of 
identity was not being met. As per information furnished, UIDAI had generated approximately 


Report No. 24 of 2021 
22 
11.48 Crore Aadhaars for children below five years till March 2019.  The assistance provided 
t
o the Registrars/ Enrolment agencies for enrolment @ `27 per child along with related costs 
wor
ked out to `310 Crore. 
UI
DAI informed, that they had deactivated about 40.91 Lakh Aadhaar for want of Biometric 
Update as on 01 November 2019. With the increase in saturation level, there remains always a 
possibility that children whose Aadhaar has been deactivated as mentioned above might have 
enrolled themselves afresh after crossing the age of five, with their biometrics. 
(Image courtesy: UIDAI) 
Based on the Hon’ble 
S
upreme Court’s 
judgment17, that no 
s
ubsidy, benefits, or 
services could be denied to 
a child to whom no Aadhaar 
number was assigned, we 
are of the view that, the 
issue of cards, devoid of 
biometric authentications to 
children below five years 
served limited purpose 
considering the costs 
involved.  
UIDAI stated (June 2020) that it is mandated to issue Aadhaar number to all the residents, 
including children. Even though, biometrics of children are not collected, child Aadhaar is 
issued based on authentication of a parent. It added that the chances of creation of duplicate 
Aadhaar were very low even in the absence of biometric data, and the number of duplicate 
numbers found/ reported was insignificant. They claimed that issuing an identity to a child, led 
to monetary savings for the exchequer as it helped eliminate ineligible beneficiaries, and was 
hence beneficial. They were of the view that the cost incurred was insignificant. 
In its subsequent reply (October 2020), UIDAI accepted that the de-duplication done based on 
the demographic data and photograph may not be as robust as the automated biometric 
identification system (ABIS). They issue SMS and letters to all the parents/ guardians whose 
children were due for mandatory update for bringing them back in the Aadhaar ecosystem. 
MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
We are of the view that the UIDAI’s mandate was to issue Aadhaar number to a resident after 
establishing uniqueness of the applicant through his/her biometrics. Therefore, issue of 
Aadhaar numbers to children without biometric data did not meet the criteria of establishing 
the uniqueness of the holder and could not be justified on the grounds of the mandate to issue 
ID to all residents including children. Moreover, as per judgment of the Supreme Court on 
                                                           
17   Five bench Supreme Court Judgement dated 26 September 2018 on writ petition (civil) No. 494 of 2012 & 
c
onnected matters 


Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
23 
Aadhar, no subsidy, benefits or services cannot be denied to a child for want of an Aadhar 
num
ber.  
Issue of Bal Aadhar to minor children below five years, without capturing their unique identity 
could not be justified on basis of unquantified advantages as suggested by UIDAI.  The fact 
that an individual is required to apply for regular Aadhar cards for at two stages after crossing 
five years, UIDAI requires to review the issue of non- mandatory Aadhar to minor children 
below five years. They may explore alternate ways to capture unique identity of minor children 
below five years, in keeping with its mandate.  
Recommendation: UIDAI may explore  alternate ways to capture uniqueness of 
biometric identity for minor children below five years since uniqueness of identity is the 
most distinctive feature of Aadhaar established through biometrics of the individual. 
3.2.4 Management of Aadhaar Documents 
All the Aadhaar numbers stored in the UIDAI database w ere not supported with documents 
on the demographic information of the resident, causing doubts about the correctness and 
completeness of resident’s data collected and stored by UIDAI prior to 2016. 
Upto July 2016, it was the responsibility of the Aadha ar Document Management System 
(ADMS) (M/s Hewlett Packard Sales India Private Ltd. (HP)) to store the physical sets of 
records provided by individuals at the time of enrolment, both in electronic as well as physical 
form in a secured manner. The documents18 collected by the Enrolment Agencies (EAs) during 
e
nrolment/ update were picked up by the ADMS agency on a regular basis from EAs for 
scanning and uploading into a portal. With effect from July 2016, UIDAI mandated inline 
scanning19 of residents’ documents 20 bringing an end to pick-up of the documents by the 
A
DMS Agency in June 2017.  
As significant gaps were noted in the enrolments done and documents submitted by the 
Registrars/EAs to the DMS Agency, UIDAI issued (December 2015) a set of instructions with 
the aim of minimizing the gaps and to reconstruct missing documents, for compliance by the 
DMS agency, the Tech Centre, ROs and Registrars/ EAs. Accordingly, the Tech Centre was to 
compare the list of Enrolment Identity (EID 21) received from the DMS agency and generate 
S
tate/ Registrar/ EA wise list of such EIDs against which Aadhaar has been generated but data 
prepared by the Agency was missing. The Registrars were to forward the information received 
from Tech Centre to its EAs for collection of missing documents. The ROs in their turn, were 
to guide the Registrars/ EAs for reconstruction of data and monitor this activity. The ROs were 
to furnish monthly progress report (State/ Registrar/ EA wise) to UIDAI HQ showing the 
number of EIDs requiring reconstruction, number of EIDs for which reconstruction completed 
and the number of EIDs for which reconstruction was not completed.  
                                                           
18  Enrolment Identification Documents collected from the residents as their proof of identification, proof of 
a
ddress, proof of date of birth or relationship etc., along with the copy of enrolment/ update form. 
19   Inline scanning is the process where the original documents are scanned and uploaded with the enrolment/ 
u
pdate form to the CIDR at the time of enrolment/ update itself and hence no physical copy is retained/ 
collected by the operators. 
20  Proof of identification, proof of address, proof of date of birth or relationship etc. 
21  EID- means a 28-digit Enrolment Identification Number allocated to residents at the time of enrolment. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
24 
These instructions further suggested that not all the Aadhaar numbers stored in the UIDAI 
da
tabase were supported with documents on the demographic information of the resident, 
raising questions on the correctness and completeness of resident’s data collected and stored 
by UIDAI.  
Data on the number of EIDs against which Aadhaar has been generated but documents were 
missing and the nature of document(s) identified as missing along with the status of their 
reconstruction was sought from UIDAI. UIDAI informed (June 2020) that the MSP (Managed 
Service Provider) had been given the responsibility to map EID-UID linkage for which 
software development was under progress. It was also informed that with effect from 
01 July 2016, inline scanning and upload of Personally Identifiable Information (PII) 
documents along with enrolment and update packets have been made mandatory and hence all 
new Aadhaar numbers generated and updated after 01 July 2016 are presumed to have their PII 
documents. It was further added that since update of Aadhaar numbers by residents is a regular 
activity, the reconstruction of PII documents was a continuous process and the documents 
collected from Registrars and EAs were being uploaded/ reconciled, the exact position of 
deficiency of PII documents had not been worked out. 
The response of UIDAI suggested that the enrolments were carried out without confirming 
availability of all required documents. UIDAI, despite being aware of the fact that not all 
Aadhaar numbers were paired with the personal information of their holders, was yet to identify 
the exact extent of mismatch though nearly ten years have elapsed since the issue of first 
Aadhaar. Non pairing of biometric data in the system with demographic information was not 
in consonance with the instructions issued by UIDAI and non availability of PII documents 
with the Authority, for those already collected from the residents, impacts the reliability of the 
Aadhaar database. Further, any quality check of demographic data by UIDAI post issue of 
Aadhaar will lead to deactivation of these Aadhaar numbers as stipulated by the Regulations.  
As a matter of fact, till 01 November 2019, 37,551 Aadhaar numbers were deactivated due to 
disputed PII documents. 
Therefore, UIDAI may identify and fill the missing documents by taking proactive steps at the 
earliest in order to avoid any legal complications or inconvenience to Aadhaar holder due to 
suspension/ deactivation of Aadhaar for want of paired PII documents. 
UIDAI agreed (October 2020) with the audit recommendation and assured to explore the 
possibility to fill the gaps in documentation without causing avoidable inconvenience to 
Aadhaar holders. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the Audit Observations. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may take proactive steps to identify and fill the missing 
documents in their database at the earliest, in order to avoid any legal complications or 
inconvenience to holders of Aadhaar issued prior to 2016. 
3.3 Audit Observations on Aadhaar Update Ecosystem  
Audit observations on the Aadhaar Update Ecosystem is given below:  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
25 
3.3.1 Voluntary Biometric Updates 
H
igh numbers of voluntary biometric updates indicated deficient capture of biometric during 
enrolments resulting in Authentication failures resulting in residents having to update their 
biometrics. 
Biometric updates fall into two categories viz., manda tory updates and voluntary updates.  
A. Mandatory updates usually arise in the following situations: 
a. A child with age less than five years at the time of initial enrolment should provide 
biometric information on attaining the age of five years and this initial capture is treated 
as a mandatory update of an existing Aadhaar. 
b. Children aged between five and 15 years at the time of enrolment should furnish all 
biometrics for updates when turns 15 years. 
B. Voluntary updates may arise in following situations: 
a. Age more than 15 years at the time of enrolment – Residents are recommended to 
update their biometric data every ten years. 
b. Events like accidents or diseases leading to biometric exception 
c. Biometric updates arising out of authentication failures (False Rejects – where 
authentication attempts of a resident with valid Aadhaar number is rejected) resulting 
from incorrect biometric capture or poor biometric quality captured at the time of 
enrolment. 
While mandatory updates are free for the residents, voluntary updates are chargeable for the 
residents at rates prescribed by UIDAI. 
An analysis of data on biometric updates for the year 2018-19 revealed that during the year, 
UIDAI updated 3.04 Crore biometrics data successfully. Out of the successful updates, 
0.81 Crore (26.55 per cent) were mandatory and the remaining 2.23 Crore (73.45 per cent) 
were voluntary updates. 
According to UIDAI, the need for biometric update could arise on account of authentication 
failures (called “false rejects”- where a correct resident with a valid Aadhaar Number is 
incorrectly rejected) due to incorrect biometric capture or poor biometric quality captured at 
the time of enrollment. Thus, a significantly high percentage of voluntary biometric updates 
indicated occurrence of a high volume of authentication failures, which compel Aadhaar 
number holders to update their biometrics. This was also a reflection on the quality of biometric 
data stored in CIDR for establishing the uniqueness of the Aadhaar number holder. It was 
observed that the UIDAI takes no responsibility for deficient biometric capture and the onus 
of updating biometric is passed on to the Aadhaar number holders and they are also required 
to pay for such updates. 
UIDAI stated (July 2020) that it was not possible to ascertain reasons for authentication failures 
or attribute it to incorrect/poor quality biometrics at the backend. It however, confirmed that 
biometric mismatch could happen due to reasons such as poor quality of biometric capture at 
the time of enrollment, improper placement of finger at the time of authentication, entering of 
incorrect Aadhaar number and device quality issues. UIDAI also stated that as per the approved 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
26 
procedure for enrollment, operators could complete the enrollment even with poor quality 
bi
ometrics through “forced capture” after four unsuccessful attempts to capture biometric data. 
It was reported that this procedure was adopted to improve inclusiveness of residents under the 
Aadhaar programme. 
UIDAI agreed (October 2020) with audit observations and explained that most authentication 
was based on fingerprints which do change in adults with time based on their job profiles. 
Further, the two other modes of authentication viz “Iris” and “Face” could also be utilized but 
the devices for Iris checks were comparatively more expensive than the fingerprint 
authentication devices and efforts were on to introduce more technically certified devices for 
Iris checks. It also added that it was requesting their ecosystem partners to deploy Iris 
authentication devices. UIDAI had also developed a model for face authentication which was 
under trial phase, and that it planned to utilize all the three modes of authentication to overcome 
the lacunae faced in fingerprint authentications.  MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of 
U
IDAI to the Audit Observations. 
While noting the action taken/ proposed by UIDAI to improve upon the capture of biometrics, 
we are of the view that acceptance of poor-quality biometrics at the time of enrolment showed 
that UIDAI had not ensured the quality of biometric data included in the CIDR, adversely 
impacting the programme’s objective of establishing the uniqueness of the Aadhaar number 
holder. Further, acceptance of poor-quality biometrics on the plea of expanding the enrollment 
under the programme and then passing the burden of the updation of biometrics cost to Aadhaar 
holders did not seem appropriate. Since UIDAI is not in a position to identify reasons for 
authentication failures of biometrics, it is felt that charging residents a fee for voluntary update 
of their biometrics was not in order, for no fault of them. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may review charging of fees for voluntary update of residents’ 
biometrics, since they (UIDAI) were not in a position to identify reasons for biometric 
failures and residents were not at fault for capture of poor quality of biometrics. 
3.4 Aadhaar Authentication Ecosystem 
Entities engaged in providing Aadhaar enabled services can avail the authentication services 
of UIDAI. The authentication facility allows verification of the identity information of an 
Aadhaar number holder by providing a Yes/ No response or e-KYC data.  
Authentication services are provided online and in real-time basis through its Data centers and 
are offered through the following modes: 
a. Demographic authentication: Aadhaar number and demographic data submitted for 
authentication is matched with the corresponding data in the CIDR. 
b. One Time Pin (OTP) based authentication : OTP is sent to the mobile number or e-
mail address of the Aadhaar holder registered with the Authority and the Aadhaar 
number and OTP is matched with the OTP sent by UIDAI. 
c. Biometric based authentication : The Aadhaar number and biometric information 
submitted by the Aadhaar holder is matched against the biometric data of said Aadhaar 
number stored in CIDR. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
27 
d. M ulti-factor authentication : A combination of two or more of the above modes. 
3.4.1 Aadhaar Authentication partners 
The main players in authentication eco-system are the Authentication User Agencies22 (AUAs)/ 
e
-KYC User Agency23 (KUA) or the Requesting Entity (RE)24 and the Authentication Service 
A
gencies25 (ASAs). A requesting entity submits the Aadhaar number and demographic 
i
nformation or biometric information of an individual through an ASA, to the CIDR for 
authentication. The ASA provides the infrastructure for connectivity and related services for 
enabling a requesting entity to undertake authentication. There were 164 AUAs, 162 KUAs 
and 22 ASAs entities active as on 31 March 2021. The Aadhaar authentication process is 
illustrated in Figure 3.4. 
Figure 3.4: Aadhaar Authentication Process
 
(Image courtesy: UIDAI) 
3.4.2 Key Regulations and Amendments  
K
ey regulations relating to Aadhaar authentication are given in Table 3.2.  
 
 
 
                                                           
22 UIDAI provides Yes/ No authentication services through requesting entities called Authentication User 
A
gency (AUA). AUA is any government/ public legal entity registered in India that uses Aadhaar 
authentication for providing its services to the residents/customers. An AUA is connected to the UIDAI Data 
Centre/ Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) through an ASA. 
23  KUA is a requesting entity which, in addition to being an AUA, uses e-KYC authentication facility. 
24  Requesting Entities are Authentication User Agencies (AUAs) and e-KYC User Agencies (KUAs).  
25  ASA is an agency that has secured leased line connectivity with CIDR. They play the role of enabling 
i
ntermediaries through secure connection established with the CIDR. ASAs transmit authentication requests 
of AUAs to the CIDR and transmit back the CIDR’s response to the AUAs. 


Report No. 24 of 2021 
28 
Table 3.2: Key regulations and amendments thereto governing Aadhaar Authentication 
Sys
tem  
Key Regulations Key features 
Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016)  
Dated 14-Sep-2016 
 Authentication Framework - Types/ Modes of Authentication, 
capturing of biometric information, Consent of/ Notification to 
holder, Devices, Client applications used, Biometric Locking etc. 
  Appointment of Requesting Entities & Authentication Service 
Agencies- (Procedures, Eligibility Criteria, Roles & 
Responsibilities, Obligations, Code of Conduct, maintenance of 
logs, Audit, Data Security, Surrender, Liabilities & Action in case 
of Default etc.) 
  Use of Yes/No & e-KYC authentication 
 Authentication Transaction Data & its Records - Storage& 
Maintenance of Transaction Data, Duration of Storage, Access by 
Aadhaar holder 
Aadhaar (Pricing 
of Aadhaar 
Authentication 
Services) 
Regulation 2019 
Dated 06-Mar-2019 
 Aadhaar Authentication Services to be charged (including taxes) 
@ `20 for each e-KYC transactions and @ `0.50 for each Yes/No 
authentication transaction by requesting entities. 
 Exemption to Government entities and Department of Posts and 
conditional exemptions to Scheduled Commercial Banks engaged 
in Aadhaar enrolment & update facilities 
3.4.3 Status of Authentication Transactions 
Aadhaar authentication is the process by which the CIDR, based on the information available 
with it, verifies the correctness of the Aadhaar number submitted to it along with the 
demographic and biometric information for verification. UIDAI provides two types of 
authentication services viz. “Yes/ No 26” authentication facility and “e-KYC 27” authentication 
fa
cility using Aadhaar.  
As of March 2021, UIDAI has performed more than 5,400 Crore authentication transactions 
and above 900 Crore e-KYC transactions. The year wise authentication and e-KYC 
transactions are as in Chart 3.3. 
                                                           
26  “Yes/ No” Authentication: UIDAI started Yes/ No Authentication facility in February 2012 under which 
re
questing entity sends Aadhaar and necessary demographic and/ or OTP and/ or biometric information of the 
Aadhaar number holder in an encrypted format. UIDAI validates the input parameters against the data stored 
in CIDR and authenticates in a ‘Yes or No’ response. 
27  e-KYC Authentication: UIDAI started e-KYC Authentication facility in May 2013 under which a requesting 
en
tity sends Aadhaar and necessary biometric information and/ or OTP from the Aadhaar number holder in 
encrypted format. UIDAI validates the input parameters against the data stored in CIDR therein and returns 
authentication response as an encrypted digitally signed e-KYC. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
29 
  
3.5 
Audit observations on Monitoring of Ecosystem partners on compliance to the 
provisions of Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 2016  
Aadhaar authentication framework comprises of REs and ASAs. These entities collect the 
biometric information of the Aadhaar holder for validation purposes. Their interaction with 
Aadhaar number holders and UIDAI is through the digital mode. Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 and other directions of UIDAI notified from time to time, contain instructions 
on the arrangements which all the entities involved in the authentication ecosystem should 
follow for ensuring the security of data of the residents.  The regulation also specifies the 
responsibilities of UIDAI in monitoring e-compliance with its instructions by the ecosystem 
partners’ viz. ASA, AUA, KUA etc. 
Audit observations on compliance with provisions of the Regulation and the processes put in 
place by UIDAI to monitor the activities of the REs and ASAs are given in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
3.5.1 Incidences of Authentication Errors 
Aadhaar was conceived to provide for,  as a good governance, efficient, transparent, and 
t
argeted delivery of subsidies, benefits and services to Aadhaar number holders by means of 
successful authentication. The fingerprint authentication transaction success rate remained 
a cause of dissatisfaction among the users due to biometric authentication failures. 
Authentication services of UIDAI is a tool relied upon b y government departments to confirm 
the genuineness of recipients of various benefits from government schemes and programmes. 
Inaccurate authentication therefore, would lead to errors in identification with consequent 
implications for effective delivery of services and benefits.  In addition, authentication errors 
compel an Aadhaar number holder to update his/her biometric data. As per a Government of 
India Report28 Aadhaar authentication failures in certain States were as high as 49 
 per cent in 
2016-17.  
                                                           
28   The Economic Survey 2016-17 (Refer 9.76) published by the Ministry of Finance:  “While Aadhaar coverage 
speed has been exemplary, with over a billion Aadhaar cards being distributed, some states report 
authentication failures: estimates include 49 per cent failure rates for Jharkhand, six per cent for Gujarat, five 
per cent for Krishna District in Andhra Pradesh and 37 per cent for Rajasthan”  
0.24 6 .45 34.04 109.81
403.64
1261.92
1080.47 1113.54
1413.4
0.01 2.98 5.43
108.6
384.96
205.99
89.41 111.25
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
2012-
13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21
Chart 3.3: Authentication and e-KYC Transactions (in Crore)
Authentication Transactions e-KYC Transactions

Report No. 24 of 2021 
30 
On the subject of authentication errors, UIDAI informed (July 2020) that it does not receive 
loc
ation data during authentication, and in the absence of State-wise information on 
authentication failures reasons for the same have not been analyzed.  
UIDAI further explained (October 2020) that there might be failure of fingerprint 
authentication in the first attempt due to various reasons, but subsequent attempts may succeed. 
It claimed that there had been improvement in transaction wise fingerprint authentication 
success rate from 70-72 per cent in 2016-17 to 74-76 per cent in 2019-20. It mentioned that to 
address connectivity issues, buffer authentication had been allowed to REs and in addition, 
efforts were underway to promote iris authentication and launch face authentication on pilot 
basis. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
 
While there may be various reasons 
for fingerprint authentication 
requiring multiple attempts for 
authentication, this may result in 
dissatisfaction to Aadhaar holders for 
repeated biometric authentication 
failures. The promotion or launch of 
other forms of biometric 
authentication might improve the 
success rate of transactions but their 
performance has not yet been tested 
on large scale.   
Image 3.1: Illustrative image of authentication success. 
Im
age courtesy: www.basunivesh.com  
Al
so Audit has not been provided any basis on which UIDAI has claimed the success rate 
mentioned here as improvement in failure rates.  
Audit is of the view that since Aadhaar as an instrument facilitates good governance through 
authentication, UIDAI may make efforts to improve the success rate of authentication and also 
take action to analyze failure cases. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may make efforts to improve the success rate of authentication 
transactions by analysing failure cases. 
3.5.2 Non verification of the infrastructure and technical support of Requesting Entities 
and Authentication Service Agencies  
UIDAI did not verify the infrastructure and technologic al support claimed by the REs and 
ASAs independently before onboarding the entities in the Aadhaar authentication 
ecosystem. 
The Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations 2016 stipulat e that agencies seeking to become REs 
and ASAs should fulfill the criteria laid down by UIDAI . Regulation 12 of the Aadhaar 
(Authentication) Regulation, details the conditions for appointment of REs and ASAs. The 
regulation authorizes UIDAI to verify the information furnished by the applicants in support 
of their eligibility through physical verification of documents, infrastructure and technological 
support, before approval of the applications. 


Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
31 
In this context, data on systems put in place for physical verification of the infrastructure and 
t
echnological support claimed by the applicants for appointment as REs, and details of audit 
undertaken of infrastructure and technical systems of the REs prior to their appointment were 
sought (July 2019) from UIDAI. In response UIDAI informed (June 2020) that they had not 
felt the need so far for conducting physical verification of the infrastructure and technical 
systems of the applicants prior to signing agreements with them. It was further informed that 
the REs while moving from pre-production to production environment, were required to submit 
an IS Audit Report from a CERT-IN empaneled Auditor which was scrutinized by UIDAI. 
As of March 2021, 326 REs (164 AUAs and 162 KUAs) and 22 ASAs were active in 
production environment of the CIDR. Out of these 326 REs, 43 AUAs and 41 KUAs were 
Government entities whereas out of 22 ASAs, 12 ASAs were Government entities. Further six 
Government REs (three AUAs & three KUAs) and 44 other than Government REs (22 AUAs 
& 22 KUAs) had permission in pre-production environment as of March 2021. UIDAI had not 
ve
rified information furnished by any of the applicants independently (October 2020).  
UIDAI accepted (October 2020) the audit observation and assured that it would conduct 
thorough verification of the documents, infrastructure and technological support before 
on-boarding the entities (REs and ASAs) in Aadhaar ecosystem. It added that such verification 
would however, be conducted at the discretion of UIDAI keeping in view the nature of AUA/ 
KUA and the urgency of implementing authentication service. UIDAI will initiate measures to 
implement it to the extent possible also keeping in view the constraints posed due to the 
ongoing Covid- 19 pandemic.  MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the Audit 
O
bservations. 
Therefore, UIDAI should institute a mechanism for physical verification of the documents, 
infrastructure, and technological support before on-boarding the entities (REs and ASAs) to 
ensure high standards of IS security across the Aadhaar authentication ecosystem. Audit 
appreciates UIDAI’s decision to conduct physical verification of the documents, infrastructure 
and technological support before on boarding the entities (REs and ASAs) in Aadhaar 
ecosystem. However, use of discretionary power to not conduct any verification should be 
governed by a well-defined criteria/ benchmarks and exemptions from physical verification of 
the entities, may be granted in exceptional cases only, in interest of IS concerns. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may conduct thorough verification of the documents, 
infrastructure, and technological support claimed to be available, before on-boarding the 
entities (Requesting Entity and Authentication Service Agencies SAs) in the Aadhaar 
ecosystem. 
3.6 Other related Audit Observations  
Audit observations on compliance with provisions of the Regulation and the processes put in 
place by UIDAI related to the Aadhaar Enrolment, Update and Authentication ecosystem has 
already been discussed in the foregoing paragraphs. The other important and related 
observations are discussed in the following paragraphs: 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
32 
3.6.1 Data Archival Policy  
U
IDAI is maintaining one of the largest biometric dat abases in the world; but did not have 
a data archiving policy, which is considered to be a vital storage management best practice. 
Data archiving is the process of moving data that is no longer actively used to a separate storage 
device for long-term retention. Archive data consists of older data that remains important to 
the organization for future reference or regulatory compliance reasons. It is a storage 
management best practice for efficient use of storage space and performance enhancement. 
UIDAI is maintaining one of the largest biometric databases in the world and hence it is vital 
for the Organization to have a policy on archiving the data collected.  
It was seen in audit that during the Aadhaar enrolment process, data packets containing 
demographic and biometric information of the residents are subjected to various processes like 
Quality Checks (QC), Demographic de-duplication, Biometric de-duplication, Manual 
de-duplication (MDD) etc., to identify and weed out erroneous/ duplicate/ junk packets.  Audit 
observed that packets rejected at QC stage remained present in the UIDAI database along with 
the accepted packets. So even where packets are rejected on account of de-duplication, UIDAI 
apparently will have more than one set of biometric data of the same resident - one with an 
Aadhaar number attached and others with all details except an Aadhaar number (new enrolment 
request) and all the data are retained in the CIDR. Retaining any data requires valuable 
resources, hence valid and necessary data should be only archived.  In absence of a data 
archiving policy, UIDAI retains and preserves large volumes of redundant/ excess data for 
longer periods. 
With a sound data archival policy, an organization like UIDAI, can not only have access to all 
classes of data whenever the need arises but also reduce the size of storage by disposing off 
redundant data regularly. It is therefore vital that UIDAI frames a Data Archival Policy and 
implements it strictly. UIDAI agreed (October 2020) with the audit recommendation and 
assured to work towards framing a suitable Data Archiving Policy. MeitY agreed (June 2021) 
w
ith replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may frame a suitable data archival policy to mitigate the risk 
of vulnerability to data protection and reduce saturation of valuable data space due to 
redundant and unwanted data, by continuous weeding out of unwanted data . 
3.6.2 Delivery of Aadhaar Documents 
UIDAI did not work out a customized delivery solution  with DoP to ensure last mile 
successful delivery of Aadhaar letters. 
Aadhaar cards in laminated form are printed and dispatched by UIDAI in all the cases of 
s
uccessful enrolments and updates.  DoP is the logistic partner for delivery of Aadhaar letters 
as First-Class Mail (Ordinary Post). The ordinary post services of India Post do not provide 
any individual dispatch number or tracking facility. 
As more than 250 welfare schemes of the Government re
 quire identification through Aadhaar, 
possession of Aadhaar assumes importance for residents to avail benefits from these schemes. 
An effective delivery mechanism is thus vital to ensure that Aadhaar letters are delivered to the 
intended individuals. Also as per the Aadhaar Act 2016, UIDAI is responsible for the security 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
33 
of the identity information of the Aadhaar holder. In cases of non-receipt of Aadhaar letters by 
pos
t, an individual can receive the original Aadhaar letter by approaching the Grievance Cell 
of UIDAI or by downloading e-Aadhaar. UIDAI also introduced an “Order Aadhaar Reprint”  
(OAR) service in December 2018. 
   
Audit observed that 
UIDAI received back 
50 Lakh Aadhaar 
letters at its Bengaluru 
Centre till March 2019 
due to non-delivery to 
residents. Residents 
also made complaints 
about non-delivery of 
Aadhaar letters at 
UIDAI Grievance Cell 
and through RTI 
requests. (Image courtesy: UIDAI) 
Further, dumping/ abandoning of Aadhaar letters in bulk without delivering to the residents 
ha
d been highlighted in various news media also.  
As UIDAI has availed Ordinary Post Services from DoP, it was not in a position to track the 
receipt of the physical Aadhaar card by the addressee. In absence of any formal agreement or 
MoU as regards manner of delivery of Aadhaar letters with India Post, UIDAI had not ensured 
the confidentiality aspect of Aadhaar cards issued. 
UIDAI informed (July 2020) that more than 122 Crore Aadhaar letters have been successfully 
delivered and DoP is regularly being addressed to ensure and strengthen the delivery of 
Aadhaar letters. 
UIDAI further informed (October 2020) that it has requested DoP to develop a customized 
tracking system for Aadhaar letters to monitor their delivery and to sensitize their personnel/ 
staff in ensuring proper delivery to the residents. In addition, UIDAI has facilitated residents 
with an option to download their ‘e-Aadhaar’ or use official mobile app ‘m-Aadhaar’. Besides, 
UIDAI started (December 2018) Order Aadhaar Re-print (OAR) Service for residents by using 
which any Aadhaar holder could order online Aadhaar letter by paying `50 per order and get 
it
 through Speed Post service of DoP. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the 
a
udit observations. 
In this regard, Audit noted the action taken by UIDAI but they could have negotiated with India 
Post for a customized delivery solution for delivery of Aadhaar letters. The options like 
‘e-Aadhaar’, ‘m-Aadhaar’ and ‘OAR’ have several limitations requiring the residents to have 
additional resources and efforts, whereas a doorstep delivery of laminated Aadhaar letters has 
its own advantage for residents from all walks. Since a large number of Aadhaar cards/ letters 
were not actually delivered to residents, it raises doubts on the number of Aadhaar cards shown 


Report No. 24 of 2021 
34 
as issued. Thus UIDAI should strengthen its last mile delivery mechanism to ensure effective 
de
livery of the cards issued coupled with security of the identity information. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may address the delivery problems with their logistic partner 
namely DoP, by designing a customized delivery model, which will ensure delivery of 
Aadhaar letters to the correct addressee.  
 
  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
35 
 
Chapter 4 Management of Finances and Contracts 
4.1 Introduction-Budget and Finance  
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 
2016, stipulates that the expenditure of UIDAI is to be met out of the Grants from the Central 
Government. The fees or revenue collected by the Authority is to be credited in the 
Consolidated Fund of India till the creation of separate UIDAI Fund. The expenditure of UIDAI 
is furnished below in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Budget (Revised) Estimates and Expenditure of UIDAI 
(``
 `` in Crore) 
Year Budget (Revised) Estimates Expenditure 
2009-14 4,400.18 4,365.28 
2014-15 1,617.73 1,615.34 
2015-16 1,880.93 1,680.44 
2016-17 1,135.27 1,132.84 
2017-18 1,150.00 1,149.38 
2018-19 1,344.99 1,181.86 
2019-20 836.78 856.1229 
2020-21 613.00 892.6730 
(Data Source: Information Supplied by UIDAI and UIDAI website) 
The expenditure of UIDAI is mainly on establishment and operational expenses. The budget 
a
nd expenditure of UIDAI has reduced from 2009-14 to till date. As per Aadhaar (Amendment) 
Act 2019, a separate UIDAI Fund31 was created to which all grants, fees and charges received 
b
y the Authority were to be credited. The Fund so created was to be applied for meeting salaries 
and allowances and operations. Balance in this fund as on 31 March 2021 was `322.40 Crore. 
Ye
ar-wise revenue earned, deposited in Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) and the balance 
utilised or lying with the UIDAI is shown below in Table 4.2:  
                                                           
29   Excess expenditure met from unspent balance of 2018-19. 
30   Excess expenditure met from unspent balance of 2018-19 & 2019-20 and UIDAI Fund 
31  The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Ordinance 2019 (No.9 of 2019) (dated 02 March 2019) which 
b
ecome the Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Act (dated 23 July 2019) 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
36 
Table 4.2: Statement showing Revenue earned and its utilisation  
(`` `` in Crore) 
Year Revenue earned 
Deposited in 
Consolidated Fund of 
India32 
Balance33 
2009-17 The amount is not separately available as the UIDAI was working under 
Planning Commission and as an attached Office under MeitY. 
2017-18 160.76 160.76 0.00 
2018-19 65.38 22.09 43.30 
2019-20 224.59 21.82 202.77 
2020-21 331.65 9.25 322.40 
(Data Source: Information Supplied by UIDAI) 
All the earnings of UIDAI including the interest and the unspent Grant-in-Aid were deposited 
i
n the CFI till 2017-18. From 2018-19 onwards, the entire revenue was deposited in UIDAI 
Fund and since then, they have deposited only the interest earned on Grants in Aid in the CFI.  
4.2 Audit Observations on Revenue Management  
The major source of Revenue for UIDAI comprises License Fee recoverable from ASAs and 
AUAs, Authentication Charges for biometric verifications in the shape of OTP, eKYC and 
financial disincentives levied on contractors/ partners etc for deficiencies in services. The audit 
observation on Revenue Resources is given below: 
4.2.1 Non-Levy of charges for delivery of authentication services  
UIDAI took three years from the enactment of the Aadh
 aar Act 2016 to decide the applicable 
fees for authentication services and allowed a large number of authentication transactions 
without charging any fees, in violation of their own Regulations, resulting in loss of revenue 
to the Government.  
Section 8(1) of The Aadhaar Act 2016 and Section 12( 7)
  of Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulations 2016 authorizes UIDAI to perform authentication of the Aadhaar number of an 
Aadhaar holder on payment of a fee. The conditions for providing the service and the fee 
applicable should be decided by UIDAI. Accordingly, UIDAI notified (March 2019), the 
Aadhaar (Pricing of Aadhaar Authentication Services) Regulations, 2019 wherein, the charge 
for Aadhaar authentication services was fixed @ `20 (including taxes) for each e-KYC 
t
ransaction and `0.50 (including taxes) for each Yes/ No authentication transaction from 
r
equesting entities. Government entities and the Department of Posts were exempted from 
authentication transaction charges. Levy of authentication transaction charges was to 
commence from 07 March 2019. 
Audit observed that UIDAI took almost three years from the enactment of the Aadhaar Act 
2016 to decide the applicable fees for authentication services. In the meantime, the Department 
of Telecommunication (DoT) permitted (March 2017) Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) to 
                                                           
32  From the year 2018-19 onwards only the amount of interest earned on the Grants-in-Aids received by UIDAI 
h
as been deposited in CFI. 
33  The balance amount includes the amount utilised by the UIDAI as well as the amount deposited in the UIDAI 
F
und 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
37 
re-verify all their mobile subscribers through Aadhaar based e-KYC process and the Central 
G
overnment in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India made (October 2017) linkage of 
Aadhaar number to bank account mandatory under the Prevention of Money-Laundering 
(Maintenance of Records) Second Amendment Rules, 2017. As such, the TSPs and banks 
updated their databases using the e-KYC services of UIDAI. Data on e-KYC and authentication 
showed that UIDAI performed nearly 637 34 Crore e-KYC transactions until March 2019, of 
w
hich 598 Crore transactions (94 per cent ) were for TSPs and banks alone. Besides, the 
increased acceptance of Aadhaar as a valid identity document led to an increase in the 
authentication transactions also and UIDAI performed 2,491 Crore authentication transactions 
(Yes/ No) during the same period. The belated decision of leving Fee for authentication 
services resulted in free services to parties even though the Aadhaar Act stipulated a fee to be 
charged for such services.  
UIDAI stated (October 2019) that Aadhaar authentication was conceived as an enabler of good 
governance and not as a revenue generation measure and charging for authentication services 
would have “stifled government’s good governance efforts”. Further, since writ petitions 
challenging the constitutionality of the Aadhaar Act were being heard in the Apex Court, the 
Authority waited for clarity and stabilization of the policy framework before introducing 
authentication charges. As such, it was a conscious decision to introduce user fees in a 
staggered manner as the priority was to promote the usage of Aadhaar. UIDAI Management 
also took the view that they were the sole competent authority to decide on pricing for services 
and took a considered policy decision on charging of the requisite fees only when the statutory 
and legal landscape was mature enough.  
Explaining the free e-KYC service to TSPs, it was stated that re-verification of mobile 
subscribers was mandated by Government policy and law, UIDAI was expected to enable re-
verification by provisioning of e-KYC services and therefore levying any kind of fee for it 
would have been wrong and not in public interest. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of 
UIDAI to the audit observations. 
Audit does not agree with the views of UIDAI since in terms of the Aadhaar Act, UIDAI was 
mandated to specify fees for the service, and it was never the intention of the Government to 
provide free services for authentication facilities. Holding back levy of fees on the plea of the 
pending matter in the Court is also not acceptable as UIDAI had continued with the enrolment 
process and authentication services and had also prescribed a licence fee for the services 
utilised by REs and ASAs during the pendency of the Court case whereas only fees for 
authentication services were not levied. The response that the Competent Authority exercised 
its discretionary powers to levy the fees, is also not acceptable as it cannot override express 
provisions of an Act passed by Parliament. Besides the UIDAI did not produce any file or 
records to the audit in order to substantiate their statement that it was a “conscious decision” 
of the Organization to defer/not charge any fees for the authentication services rendered to 
TSPs and others. 
                                                           
34 The e-KYC figure of 637 Crore represents the data from 12 September 2016 (date of effect of the Aadhaar 
A
ct 2016) to 06 March 2019 (Prior to the date of effect of Pricing of Aadhaar Authentication Service 
Regulations, 2019) with proportionate data for the respective years. The Authentication (Yes/ No) figures of 
2,491 Crore have similarly been arrived. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
38 
The argument that levy of fee for e-KYC services given to TSPs was not in public interest, is 
not
 sound as verification of the credentials of a subscriber is compulsory for TSPs which in 
any case was incurring expenditure on the same by using other KYC methods. By offering free 
e-KYC service, UIDAI violated their own Regulations by facilitating the TSPs and banks an 
easy access to the Aadhaar database set up by the Government at considerable cost. In the 
process, a delayed decision has also resulted in a loss of revenue to the Government. 
Recommendation: UIDAI needs to be alert and cautious in matters concerning charges 
for delivery of services and ensure that decisions for non-levy of charges are taken with 
due process and approvals, which are properly documented and available for verification 
by any stake holder. 
4.3 Contract Management 
The entire end-to-end technology infrastructure of UIDAI including data center operations, 
management of IT systems of UIDAI ROs, technical helpdesk etc., is managed by the Managed 
Service Provider (MSP) namely M/s HCL Infosystems Ltd.  
Apart from the MSP contract, UIDAI has agreements for Project Management Unit (PMU) 
functions, supply of resources for offering handholding support to State Governments for roll 
out of Aadhaar, technical assignments, document management, printing and dispatch of 
Aadhaar letters etc.  
4.3.1 Selection of Contracts 
The contracts and agreements entered by the UIDAI were selected for scrutiny based on a 
statistical sampling technique. The 25 per cent of contracts valuing less than `100 Crore were 
se
lected by following random sampling. However, all the contracts of `100 Crore and above 
we
re selected for scrutiny. The brief description of the selected Contracts is placed as 
Annexure-I. Major contracts placed in a nutshell are as below: 
Table 4.3: Statement showing brief description of Major Contracts 
Contracts Vendor and 
Cost  of 
Contracts 
Description 
Managed 
Service 
Provider 
(MSP) 
M/s HCL 
Infosystems Ltd 
 (HCLI) 
 
`` ``1,978.62 Crore 
 Expression of Interest (EoI) for selection of MSP was floated in June 
2010 (Twelve Companies submitted EOI) and after evaluation 
Request for Proposal (RFP) was issued on 24 January 2011 to nine 
Companies.  
 Six bidders submitted their bids and finally two bidders qualified on 
Technical Evaluation and Due diligence. M/s HCLI emerged 
successful after all sorts of evaluation35 and a contract with a validity 
of seven years was entered on 07 August 2012. 
 The contract was extended for nine months, from 07 August 2019 to 
06 May 2020. The vendor moved to Arbitration Tribunal and under 
the directions of Tribunal the contract was extended for eleven 
months till 06 April 2021. Both the extensions were with the same 
terms and conditions of original contract. 
                                                           
35  Technical Evaluation, Due Diligence, Commercial Evaluation and Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) 
E
valuation  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
39 
 The Contract extensions were managed from the unspent balance of 
the initial contract 
 The arbitration proceedings were still under progress 
(September 2021) 
Data Centre 
Development 
Agency 
(DCDA) 
M/s Wipro Ltd 
(WIPRO) 
The total cost 
involved, 
including the 
extension was  
`` ``238.11 Crore  
(`118.51 Crore 
for Bengaluru 
DC and `119.61 
Crore for 
Manesar DC). 
 Request for Quotation (RFQ) in respect of Selection of DCDA for 
the Bengaluru and Manesar Data centres was issued on 16 
September 2011. Nine bidders participated and five bidders were 
shortlisted in the Request for Proposal (RFP) floated in April 2012.  
 M/s Wipro Ltd emerged as the lowest bidder (L1) and the contract 
was made effective from 6 December 2012.  
 The Capex contract was valid till 12 August 2014 for Bengaluru DC 
and till 30 September 2014 for Manesar DC.  
 The OPEX contract was valid from 13 August 2014 to 14 August 
2019 for Bengaluru DC and from 01 October 2014 to 30 September 
2019 for Manesar DC.  
 The OPEX contract was extended for six month each and the new 
validity was till 14 February 2020 and 31 March 2020 for the 
Bengaluru and Manesar Data centres respectively.  
Governance 
Risk 
Compliance 
and 
Performance- 
Service 
Provider 
(GRCP) 
M/s Price 
Waterhouse 
Coopers 
 (PwC)  
 
`` ``17.53 Crore 
 RFP was issued on 03 November 2014 to six bidders. After Pre-
qualification/ Technical and Financial Evaluation M/s PwC was 
awarded the contract on 06 October 2015 till 28 February 2018. 
 The Contract was extended four times- 
• 1st extension for one year till 28 February 2019 
• 2nd, 3rd and 4th extension each for three months till 31 May 
2019, 31 August 2019 & 30 November 2019 respectively. 
• 5th extension was for one month and the contract was closed 
on 31 December 2019. 
 The total amount released to the vendor including the extensions was 
`20.59 Crore. 
Aadhaar 
Document 
Management 
System  
(ADMS) 
M/s HP India 
sales Private Ltd 
(HPISP) 
 
The cost of 
services for five 
years for 95.22 
Crore EIDs was 
`` ``278.61 Crore. 
 RFP was issued on 15 January 2011. Pre-bid conference held with 
thirty organisations on 27 January 2011 and seven bids were 
submitted. 
 Six bidders became eligible for opening of commercial bids after 
evaluation of technical Committee and M/s HPISP emerged 
successful after completion of the tender evaluation process. 
 The contract was signed on 07 June 2011 and was valid for five 
years. The cost of services will change annually depending on the 
number of Enrolment IDs (EIDs) to be picked up. 
 The contract was given an extension on 16 September 2016 for 
further EIDs of 15 Crore for `49.37 Crore. Total cost for 110.22 
Crore documents was `327.98 Crore.The contract was successfully 
closed on 07 June 2021. 
4.4 Audit Observations on Contract Management 
Since the complete files relating to award of contract of the above were not made available, 
audit could not provide a reasonable assurance on these contracts. However, audit observations 
on the management of the various contracts by UIDAI are brought out in the succeeding 
paragraphs: 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
40 
4.4.1 Liquidated damages (LD) for deficient performance of biometric solutions not 
l
evied 
UIDAI did not penalize deficient Biometric Service Pr oviders (BSPs) despite shortcomings 
in their services. 
The Service Level Agreement (SLA) conditions of the M SP contract prescribe the expected 
service levels to be provided by the service provider including the performance of the biometric 
solutions. Wrong decisions by the biometric solutions would lead to issue of multiple Aadhaars 
(FNIR36) to the same resident or denial of Aadhaar to a genuine applicant (FPIR)37. Similarly, 
w
rong outcomes of authentication transactions, will result either in a genuine person not getting 
the intended benefit (FNMR)38 or a wrong person is availing the undue benefit (FMR)39. Thus, 
i
t was imperative that the biometric solution related levels are maintained as close to the defined 
threshold levels as possible. Non-compliance with the performance benchmarks would attract 
liquidated damages (LD), as per the Agreements depending on the severity level. The 
cumulative LD i.e. LD applicable of all the SLAs was limited to 20 per cent of the fee payable 
for each quarter and the quarterly payments comprised of the amortized cost of cell 40 payable 
i
n that quarter and the cost of managed services for that quarter. 
As per the contract, the MSP was responsible for selection and evaluation of biometric 
solutions meeting UIDAI’s requirements and implementation of three biometric solutions41.  
A
udit observed that there were regular breaches of FMR and FNMR targets in the 
authentication transactions to levels that attracted LD of two per cent  in every quarter. 
Accordingly, the Technical Centre, Bengaluru had recommended imposition of LD amounting 
to `13.29 Crore on the MSP for the period up to January 2019. However, UIDAI finally did 
not impose any LD on the MSP for deficient performance.  
UIDAI stated (February 2020) that as per the MSP contract, biometric payments do not form 
part of the quarterly payment on which LD could be applied. Further, it was indicated that 
deviations in biometric SLA are factored in the LD computed for a quarter, by including the 
LD per cent for biometric track SLAs in the overall LD per cent calculated for the quarter and 
the maximum rate of 20 per cent is being imposed on the vendor every quarter.  
                                                           
36   FNIR- False negative identification is an incorrect decision of the biometric system that an applicant for a 
U
ID, making no attempt to avoid recognition, has not previously enrolled in the system, when in fact he/ she 
has. FNIR is the ratio of the number of false negative identification decisions to the total number of enrolment 
transactions by enrolled individuals. 
37 FPIR-False positive identification is an incorrect decision of the biometric system that an applicant has already 
e
nrolled in to Aadhaar when he/ she has not. FPIR is the ratio of the number of false positive identification 
decisions to the total number of enrolment transactions by unenrolled individuals. 
38 FNMR-The ratio of the number of authentication transactions conducted by data subjects resulting in a false 
n
on-match to the total number of transactions. 
39  FMR-The ratio of number of authentication transactions conducted by authentication subjects resulting in false 
m
atch to the total number of transactions. 
40  Cell means any set of technology and physical components which collectively hosts the software programs 
t
hat performs/enables the set of UIDAI’s business requirements. As per MSP agreement with M/s HCL, one 
cell denotes two Crore Aadhaar enrolment. ‘Amortized cost of Cell’ has been considered as balance 30 per cent 
cost of cell components which is being paid to MSP in equal installments in every quarter. 
41 The biometric solution is primarily comprised of the multi modal “Automatic Biometric Identification 
S
ubsystem (ABIS) for De-duplication and the software Development Kit (SDK). Multiple multi-modal 
solutions from three vendors (known as BSP-Biometric service Provider) are being used to ensure a vendor 
independent & technology Neutral solution. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
41 
The response was not acceptable, because there was a capping of 20 pe r cent for LD to be 
imposed which had already reached the maximum due to the failure to meet other SLA 
parameters. In fact, the LD recommended by the Tech Center in respect of deviation in 
Biometric SLAs never came to reckoning as evident from the fact that the quantum of LD to 
be applied was only on the sum of Amortised cost of ‘Cell Payable’ & ‘Cost of Managed 
Services’ in a quarter. The Cost of Biometric Solution was never considered for levying the 
LD based on agreement. Success of Aadhaar hinges upon the efficiency of the biometric de-
duplication services and hence it was important to ensure that the biometric service providers 
(BSPs) are accountable for any deficiency in service. When the payments for biometric services 
are kept out of the purview of LD, the shortcomings in the services provided by BSP were not 
adequately covered in the MSP contract. 
We further observed that as per the agreement (June 2013) between the MSP and the BSPs, the 
MSP could levy LD on the BSPs for deficient performance of biometric solutions. However, 
the said condition was amended (November 2016), with the consent of UIDAI to the effect that 
the MSP will waive off all SLAs, if the same were waived off by UIDAI for the MSP under 
the MSP contract. With UIDAI keeping payments for biometric services out of the purview of 
its quarterly payments to the MSP, the MSP waived off the LD due from BSPs for deficiencies 
in the performance of biometric services. Thus, breaches in the performance benchmarks for 
biometric services were never penalized either by UIDAI or by the MSP, which gave undue 
advantages to the MSP/ BSPs. 
UIDAI further intimated (October 2020) that the matter was under arbitration and counter 
claims including the LDs to be recovered from the biometrics’ payments was submitted in 
September 2020 to the Tribunal. UIDAI further submitted that it has engaged three new BSPs 
through exclusive contracts signed directly between UIDAI and BSPs, having provision of 
biometric SLAs and LD which would be levied on BSPs for any breach of these SLAs. MeitY 
agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may levy penalties on Biometric Service Providers for 
deficiencies in their performance in respect of biometric de-duplication (FPIR/ FNIR) 
and biometric authentication (FMR/ FNMR). Agreements in this regard should be 
modified, if required 
4.4.2 Deficiencies in monitoring contracts with NISG 
UIDAI had partnered with the National Institute for Smart Governance (NISG)42 for setting up 
a
 professionally managed team for project management, operations management, technology 
support, handholding support to State Governments for implementation of Aadhaar project etc. 
Details of assignments handled by NISG for UIDAI are in Table 4.4. 
                                                           
42    NISG is a non-profit company setup in PPP in 2002 with 51 p er cent equity contributed by the private sector 
and 49 per cent by the public sector. It assists Central and State Governments in e-governance initiatives to 
improve services to citizens, businesses and all sections of society. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
42 
T
able 4.4: Assignments handled by NISG 
Agreement Date of  
Agreement 
Agreement 
period 
Contract 
value  
(`` `` Crore) 
Amount 
released 
(`` `` Crore) 
Amount 
utilized 
(`` `` Crore) 
1. Establishment 
of Project 
Management 
Unit (PMU)  
30 Nov 2009 Up to Nov 2014 47.91 
110.20 107.74 
Addendum-I  
18 Dec 2013 Up to Mar 2017 40.68 
Addendum-II  
01 Apr 2017 Up to Mar 2020 28.10 
2. Project 
management 
resource (SRP) 
for assisting 
State Registrars 
22 Nov 2010 Up to Nov 2013 
Value of 
contract not 
specified in 
the agreement 
17.23 17.23 
Addendum-I Up to Nov 2016 
Addendum-II Up to Mar 2017 
Addendum-III  
01 Apr 2017 Up to Mar 2020 
3. Aadhaar 
Enabled 
Applications 
Group (AEAG) 
18 Apr 2011 Up to Mar 2016 28.50 
22.71 22.71 
Addendum-I  
08 July 2015 Up to Mar 2017 * 
Addendum-II  
01 Apr 2017 Up to Mar 2020 16.50 
4. Establishment 
of Technology 
Services Unit 
(TSU) for UIDAI 
22 May 2013 Up to May 
2018 62.30 
31.20 30.47 Addendum-I  
01 Apr 2017 Up to Mar 2020 * 
5. Establishment 
of Field Support 
Engineer PMU 
for UIDAI 
31 Aug 2012 Up to Aug 2014 5.43 
23.34 23.34 28 Aug 2014 Up to Mar 2017 19.21 
Addendum-I 
01 Apr 2017 Up to Mar 2020 9.90  
(* The amount of contract of Addendum -I to the original Contract was met from the savings of Original Contract) 
(Data Source: Copies of agreement and fund utilisation statements of UIDAI) 
Thus, till the end of March 2020, UIDAI had released payment amounting to ` 204.68 Crore to 
the
 NISG out of which NISG utilised a sum of `201.49 Crore. 
Thi
s is pertinent to mention here that UIDAI does not has its own personnel resources. While 
it employed Government staff on deputation to manage the works that are mostly 
administrative and financial in nature, the technical support resources were hired from NISG. 
UIDAI has not made any serious attempt to have its own dedicated staff especially in technical 
cadre. A notification for appointment of officers and employees was issued in recent past only 
(January 2020) but no selection of resources could be finalised till March 2021. It is a cause of 
concern that UIDAI has continuously relied on outsourced people at the cost of building their 
own expertise and competence in the designated areas. 
Audit observations on the management of the agreements with NISG by UIDAI are in 
succeeding paragraphs: 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
43 
4.4.2.1 State Resource Personnel (SRP) contract with National Institute of Smart 
G
overnance (NISG) extended beyond the period envisaged in the ICT guidelines 
The support services to States by way of a State Resou rce Personnel to be provided by NISG 
through the ICT assistance given to them, was duly approved by the Cabinet Committee for 
one year only, but the same continued for years together as approved by UIDAI. 
The services from NISG for providing skilled project  management resource persons (SRP) to 
the states seeking for such resources was part of the financial assistance for Information & 
Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure to states. As per the agreement with NISG, 
each SRP would be engaged at a consolidated remuneration of `1 Lakh per month on a one-year 
c
ontract with an option for extension. NISG would be paid 15 per cent of actual manpower 
cost over and above the resource cost as fees for their services. All costs related to the 
recruitment process, such as travel costs of candidates, panel members and cost of 
advertisements, if any required, would be met by UIDAI at actuals. It was seen that indicative 
cost of SRP, which was important for exercising control over expenditure, was not estimated 
for the services provided by NISG. 
The agreement, which was initially for a period of three years, was extended initially for three 
years i.e. up to November 2016 and again up to March 2017 and finally up to March 2020. 
Thus, an assistance that was envisaged for only one year as per the guidelines for ICT 
infrastructure assistance, continued for more than nine years by which time Aadhaar saturation 
had crossed 98 per cent of the adult population in the country or in terms of numbers, more 
than 125 Crore (March 2020) Aadhaar letters were issued. The agreement which was initially 
envisaged for only one year was repeatedly extended for years together. 
UIDAI intimated (October 2020) that SRPs were deployed in the states mainly to assist state 
departments/ agencies for implementing their schemes with Aadhaar authentication. It justified 
the continued engagement of SRP for laisioning with state/ UT departments/ agencies based 
on project requirement as UIDAI did not have its own office in all the states/ UTs. Eventually 
the SRPs were made part of PMU which could not be foreseen. It added that the cost for this 
service depended on progress made by the State Governments in integrating their schemes with 
Aadhaar and the cost of SRP was subsumed in the overall ICT assistance to the state.  MeitY 
a
greed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
The reply is not convincing as the ICT guidelines envisaged this support only for a one-year 
period to be met out of ICT assistance provided to the state. The contract value was not 
mentioned as it depended on the requisitions placed by the respective states/ UTs. No separate 
approval for funding was sought apparently on the plea that the assistance for ICT was 
approved by the Cabinet Committee on UIDAI. It was observed that UIDAI was keen on 
utilizing the resources for various additional works other than the intended handholding and 
now the resources have been made part of PMU which clearly supports the view that SRP 
services were being continued for one reason or another. UIDAI had not even made any 
amendment related to resource persons despite releasing subsequent guidelines on ICT. 
In light of the fact that Aadhaar numbers are nearing saturation limits for the country as a 
whole, continued assistance to the States by way of State Resource Personnel and consequential 
payments to NISG on this count including their service charges needs to be reviewed.  The 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
44 
UIDAI have to accept their own responsibility for issue of Aadhaar and limit their continued 
r
eliance on other agencies for support. 
Recommendation: UIDAI have to accept their own responsibility for issue of Aadhaar 
and limit/reduce their continued reliance on other agencies for support. They may partner 
with State Governments to increase the enrolment functions for issue ofAadhaar. 
4.4.2.2 Deficiencies in engagement of Field Service Engineers (FSE) 
Deficiency in assessment of the requirements for Fiel d Service Engineers (FSE) resources 
to be hired from NISG and in monitoring the payments made to them. 
UIDAI added an addendum to the PMU Agreement (August  2012) for engagement of Field 
Service Engineers (FSEs) team at UIDAI ROs for a period of two years with an additional 
indicative value of `5.43 Crore. On completion of the two years period (August 2014) a fresh 
a
greement was signed for the period up to March 2017 for an indicative cost of `19.21 Crore 
w
hich was further extended up to March 2020 at an additional cost of `9.90 Crore taking the 
t
otal cost to `29.11 Crore.  
W
e noticed that UIDAI released (May 2014) `1.5 Crore to NISG as advance for the last quarter 
of
 the agreement while the utilization for FSE never exceeded `34 Lakh in any of the previous 
qua
rters leading to an unspent balance of `1.28 Crore available with NISG at the end of the 
a
greement period in August 2014. Instead of refunding the unspent balance to the Government, 
NISG was allowed to utilize it against a fresh agreement signed in August 2014. We also 
noticed that the sanctioned cost for FSE agreements was always on the higher side than the 
actual expenditure throughout the period as indicated in the Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Details of utilization for Field Service Engineers 
Agreement type & Effective Period Amount (`` `` in Crore) 
Sanctioned Released Utilised 
Old Addendum 
31 August 2012 to 30 August 2014 5.43 3.02 1.75 
Fresh Agreement 
31 August 2014 to 31 March 2017 19.21 7.43 7.03 
Addendum to fresh agreement 
01 April 2017 to 31 March 2020 9.9043 12.89 14.57 
The above indicated deficiency in assessing the requirements for resources to be hired from 
NISG and in monitoring the payments made to them. 
UIDAI replied (June 2020) that funds were sanctioned to NISG on the basis of estimates 
provided by NISG and are indicative values depicting the maximum allowable expenditure. 
Further, it was added that the actual expenditure depends on the actual deployment of 
resources. The differences in the actual expenditure and amount utilized were on account of 
proactive polices taken by UIDAI for regulating the CTC of outsourced resources. It was 
further stated that UIDAI’s endeavor is to reduce costs and promote propriety in expenditure.  
UIDAI further informed (October 2020) that deficiency pointed out by the audit has already 
been taken into cognizance and accordingly they were in a better position to assess the 
                                                           
43   Cumulative total from 31 August 2014 is `2 9.11 Crore (`29.10- `19.21= `9.90) 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
45 
requirements of PMUs and TSUs. The estimates provided by the NISG at the time of latest 
e
xtension of agreement have already been rationalized. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies 
of
 UIDAI to the audit observations. 
The response was not convincing because there was consistent release of excess funds to a 
service vendor despite being aware of the fact that the actual expenditure was constantly below 
the funds released. This was against financial propriety and tantamount to parking of funds 
with agencies. Moreover, as discussed in para 4.4.2.1 above, there was continuous dependence 
on the outsourced personnel without any corresponding creation of expertise within the 
organization.  
Recommendation: UIDAI should strictly follow the standards of financial propriety 
while procuring services and ensure that advances are not paid for in excess of 
requirements. 
4.4.3 Rebate on Franking Values on dispatch of Aadhaar not availed 
Deficiency in the contract with the DoP for delivery of Aadhaar Letters, deprived UIDAI of 
rebate on postage charges loaded in franking machines, despite UIDAI meeting the cost for 
franking. 
Aadhaar letters, in respect of new enrolments and upda te or modification of resident details are 
dispatched and delivered to the residents in the form of laminated document through the 
Department of Posts (DoP) as First-Class Mail 44. UIDAI has agreements with three Print 
S
ervice Providers 45 (PSPs) located at Manipal, Mumbai and Sangareddy (Telangana) for 
pr
inting Aadhaar documents. As per the agreements, the PSPs were to bundle and bag Aadhaar 
documents on pin code basis after digitally franking them with the required postage. The 
postage charges are borne by UIDAI by loading the franking machines with the required funds. 
The bundled and bagged documents were then to be presented to the DoP for dispatch. For 
franking operations, PSPs were required to hold a valid commercial license issued by DoP. 
DoP allowed a rebate of three per cent on the franked value, whenever the meter is reset i.e. 
credit is uploaded in the machine. Further, an additional two per cent rebate was also available 
on presentation of pin-code wise sorted mails. UIDAI released `648 Crore from the year 
2012-
13 to 2018-19 to Karnataka (Manipal), Maharashtra (Mumbai) and Andhra 
Pradesh/Telangana (Sangareddy) Postal Circles to replenish the postage loaded in franking 
machines for delivery of Aadhaar letters, of which the Circles utilized `603.84 Crore.  
The
 rebate available as refund on the franked value for the above period @ three per cent 
amounted to `18.12 Crore and as Aadhaar documents capture pin-code  and present them sorted 
on pincode wise to DoP, an additional two per cent rebate amounting to `12.08 Crore was also 
ava
ilable. Thus, the total rebate available on the franked value was `30.19 Crore.  
We
 observed that since UIDAI had signed Agreements with the PSPs, which did not contain 
any clause binding the PSPs to pass on the benefits to them, the deficient contracts deprived 
                                                           
44  First class mail is a service offered by DoP with free air transmission within India for letters, post cards and 
l
etter cards.  
45  M/s Manipal Technologies Ltd, Manipal, M/s Seshaasai Business Forms (P) Limited, Mumbai and M/s K.L. 
H
i-tech Secure Print Limited, Sangareddy, Telangana. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
46 
UIDAI of rebate amounting to ` 30.19 Crore during the years 2012-13 to 2018-19 despi te 
meeting the entire franking cost. 
Responding to our observation, UIDAI management stated (March 2020) that the matter was 
referred to the DoP authorities for getting the admissible discount/rebate retrospectively and 
for future. However, DoP has clearly stated (July 2020) that the rebates were given to the PSPs 
as they were the license holder of franking machines.  
UIDAI accepted (October 2020) its ignorance about the rebate being utilized by the print 
partners. The recommendation of audit was noted for compliance in future agreements and the 
matter was being followed up in accordance to the provisions of the existing contract with the 
print partners to pass on the rebates availed by them to UIDAI. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with 
replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may incorporate suitable clauses in their Agreements with all 
agencies mentioning clearly that the benefits accruing due to UIDAI’s resources need to 
be passed on to them and vendors to indemnify UIDAI towards the loss/cost arising due 
to their actions. 
4.4.4 Monitoring of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) Assistance to 
States  
Improper management of Grants-in-Aid and utilizing IC T assistance for creating 
infrastructure. 
The Cabinet Committee on UIDAI approved (September 2010)  ` 350 Crore as assistance to 
t
he Registrars/other departments in the states and union territories for setting up Information & 
Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure for making their systems UID compliant. 
Guidelines for regulating the assistance for ICT infrastructure was developed (September 2010) 
by UIDAI. Initially a normative amount of ` 10 Crore was approved as assistance to each state 
w
hich would be released in five tranches. The quantum of each tranche was linked to the 
deliverables/ milestones to be achieved by states.  
Under Phase-I of the assistance, Grants-in-Aid (GIA) amounting to `147.80 Crore was released 
to 
38 agencies (States/ Departments/ Ministries) for ICT infrastructure during the years from 
2010-11 to 2018-19. Subsequently ten more agencies were granted the ICT assistance 
amounting to `19.50 Crore during the years 2019-20 to 2020-2021. 
It
 was seen in audit that, once the Aadhaar generation crossed the 100-Crore mark and the 
saturation of adult population reached 98 per cent , a new stream of ICT assistance was 
introduced (September 2016) by modifying the existing Phase-I guidelines of September 2010. 
The unspent amount from the normative amount of `10 Crore was given as additional support 
for
 procurement of enrolment kits. These kits were to be primarily used for targeted enrolments 
especially of new born and school going children covering their enrolment and mandatory 
biometric update at age five and 15 years. In addition, the kits were to be used for enrolment 
of adult beneficiaries of direct benefit programs who had not been earlier enrolled into the 
Aadhaar database. The quantum of the ICT assistance was fixed at a maximum 50 per cent of 
the total ICT assistance of the State viz., `5 Crore which were to be released in two tranches 
of
 `2.5 Crore each. Other than procurement of equipment f rom the assistance, the ancillary 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
47 
costs like infrastructure, deployment of personnel, operating expenses, maintenance etc. were 
t
o be borne by the States.  
Subsequently, (August 2018) UIDAI considered that the requirement of enrolment of newborn 
or children between the age 0-5 years and mandatory requirement of biometric updates at ages 
five & 15 years would be continuous. As such new ICT guidelines (Phase-II) were issued 
(September 2018) for providing assistance to State Governments, Kendriya Vidyalaya 
Sangathan (KVS) and Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (NVS) for provisioning of Aadhaar 
Enrolment Kits (AEKs) to be deployed dedicatedly for this category of residents.  These revised 
guidelines also provided for assistance to BSNL to set up two AEKs in each of its Customer 
Service Centers to provide enrolment and update services. The total support on this account 
was estimated at `315 Crore. Financial assistance under the scheme was  `
 1.5 Lakh per kit. 
Ac
cordingly, UIDAI released `280.31 Crore to 33 agencies during 2018-19 for procur ement 
of AEKs. A further sum of `0.3 Crore and `7.5 Crore was released to one more agency in each 
ye
ars of 2019-20 and 2020-21 respectively. These funds were over and above the assistance 
provided to states under Phase-I. The Phase II guidelines envisaged that savings if any, after 
procurement of two kits per block, were to be refunded.  
A review of the release and utilization of the ICT assistance to various entities by UIDAI under 
different phases revealed the following: 
a. General Financial Rules 2005 stipulates that in respect of non-recurring Grants to an 
Institution or Organization, the authority sanctioning the Grants-in-Aid should insist 
upon a certificate in the prescribed form, of actual utilization of the Grants for the 
purpose for which it was sanctioned. The Institution/ Organization should submit the 
Utilization Certificate (UC) within twelve months of the closure of the financial year. 
It was seen that UIDAI had released grants of `147.80 Crore till 2018-19 and an 
addi
tional GIA of `19.50 Crore in 2019-20 under Phase I, of which UCs f or  
`25.34 Crore were pending from States till 31 March 2021.  
b. It was also seen that UCs for grants released as far back as February 2014 were pending 
submission. Seven (7) agencies, out of the 38 agencies had not even submitted partial 
UCs including for assistance released in the years 2013-14 and 2014-15. 
c. As per GFR conditions interest earned on unutilized funds should also be made part of 
the assistance. However, accrued interest earned on the ICT grants were accounted for 
in the UCs only by the States of Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh. The other 
States neither had shown the interest earned nor had UIDAI t
 aken review of the same. 
d. In the Phase–II ICT guidelines the entire fund was released in one lump sum to the 
entities instead of in installments based on submission of UCs. Audit noted that the 
grantee entities were erratic/ inconsistent in furnishing UCs or in refunding unspent 
balances. In this scenario, the possibility of the fund remaining parked or being diverted 
for other use cannot be ruled out. As an example, it is pointed out that the NVS Regional 
Office, Pune had procured 20 AEKs @ `1,19,068 per AEK while the assistance 
pr
ovided to them was @ `1.5 Lakh per AEK. This shows that this entity had uns pent 
balances/ excess funds with it. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
48 
e. T he prime intention of providing ICT assistance under Phase-II guidelines was to 
capture the un-enrolled population belonging to the age group of less than five years. 
The assistance however was issued to the schools or to the State Registrars with an 
instruction to utilize the AEKs in Schools. As the age of school-going children is above 
five years the decision of funding purchase of AEKs in schools for enrolment of 
new-born or children between 0-5 years of age was ab-initio flawed.   
Further, as mentioned in Para 3.2.3 of this Report, the issue of Baal Aadhaar without biometrics 
of the child, itself is not in keeping with the basic conditions of uniqueness of the identity 
envisaged under the Aadhaar Act. Therefore, the expenditure by way of grants for ICT 
assistance (Phase-II) given to States to enroll children below five years was avoidable.  
UIDAI justified the release of Phase II ICT assistance in one tranche on the grounds that this 
was a one- time assistance as also the decision to provide AEKs to schools in view of less 
saturation in age groups 0-5 years and 5-18 years. They further stated (July 2020) in response 
that efforts were underway to obtain UCs from the nodal agencies and the non-submission of 
UCs have been raised with Chief Secretaries of defaulting states. It also stated that it was 
obtaining inputs on interest accrued on funds parked by states /UTs. MeitY agreed (June 2021) 
with replies of UIDAI to the Audit Observations. 
The replies relating to UCs shows that UIDAI has not monitored utilization of the funds 
released as ICT assistance to States regularly and needs to take remedial action in financial 
management issues. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may improve upon its financial management of grants given 
to State Authorities by proper monitoring and ensuring regular and timely receipt of 
Utilization Certificates from them.  It may also discontinue monetary assistance given to 
States/schools and other agencies for enrolment of minor children below five for issue of 
Aadhaar numbers. 
  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
49 
Chapter 5 Security of Aadhaar Information System 
5.1 Introduction 
Aadhaar authentication framework comprises of REs and ASAs. These entities collect the 
biometric information of the Aadhaar holder for validation purposes. Their interaction with 
Aadhaar number holders and UIDAI is through the digital mode. Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 and other directions of UIDAI notified from time to time, contain instructions 
on the arrangements which all the entities involved in the authentication ecosystem should 
follow for ensuring the security of data of the residents. The regulation also specifies the 
responsibilities of UIDAI in monitoring e-compliance with its instructions by the ecosystem 
partners’ viz. ASA, AUA, KUA etc. 
Audit observations on compliance with provisions of the Regulation and the processes put in 
place by UIDAI to monitor the activities of the REs and ASAs are given in the succeeding 
paragraphs.  
5.2 Monitoring of the activities of authentication ecosystem partners of UIDAI 
Aadhaar enabled services are provided to the Aadhaar holders through the Authentication User 
Agencies (AUAs) or the e-KYC User Agencies (KUAs). In addition to AUAs/ KUAs, there 
are sub-AUAs who use Aadhaar authentication to enable their services through an existing 
Requesting Entity (RE). The Aadhaar Act 2016, Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016, 
Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations 2016 and other instructions/ directions issued by UIDAI 
govern the responsibilities and activities of these entities.  Since the authentication facility uses 
the demographic and biometric information of the Aadhaar holder, it was imperative to put in 
place a strong and effective monitoring mechanism to ensure that these entities comply with 
the standards prescribed by UIDAI while operating and maintaining their information systems. 
Audit comments on the monitoring of the activities of the authentication ecosystem partners 
by UIDAI are in the following paragraphs. 
5.2.1 Annual Information System audit of the operations of REs and ASAs 
UIDAI was neither able to derive required assurance t
 hat the entities involved in the 
authentication ecosystem had maintained their information systems which were compliant 
with the prescribed standards nor did it ensure compliance of Information Systems Audit by 
the appointed entities.  
As per UIDAI Regulations on Authentication, REs and A
 SAs should ensure that their 
operations and systems are audited by an Information Systems Auditor duly certified by a 
recognized body, on an annual basis to ensure compliance with UIDAI’s standards and 
specifications. The report of these auditors should be on request, shared with the Authority. 
Further, the REs will be responsible for the authentication operations of their sub-contractors 
and would be responsible for ensuring that the authentication related operations of such third-
party entities comply with standards and specifications set by UIDAI. The operations of all the 
entities are to be regularly audited by approved independent audit agencies.  
Important Information System (IS) audit requirements are summarized in Table 5.1. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
50 
T
able 5.1: Information System Audit requirements 
RE ASA UIDAI 
• Ensure audit of its operations and 
systems by information systems 
auditor certified by a recognized body 
on an annual basis. 
• Share the audit report with the 
Authority upon request. 
• Responsible for the authentication 
operations and results of its sub-
contract by third parties. 
• Ensure the authentication related 
operations of such third-party entities 
comply with Authority standards and 
specifications and they are regularly 
audited by approved independent 
audit agencies. 
• Ensure that an 
information 
systems 
auditor 
certified by a 
recognized 
body audits its 
operations 
annually. 
 
• Audit of the operations, infrastructure, 
systems and procedures of requesting 
entities, including the agencies or 
entities with whom they have shared a 
license key or the entities on whose 
behalf they performed authentication, 
and authentication Service Agencies, 
either by itself or through audit 
agencies appointed by it. 
• The Authority may conduct the above 
either by itself or through an auditor 
appointed by the Authority and the 
cost of audits shall be borne by the 
concerned entity. 
Certified audit reports are to be submitted to the Authority upon request or at time-periods 
specified by the Authority. In addition to the above audits, the Regulation empowers the 
Authority to conduct audits of the operations and systems of such entities or persons, either by 
itself or through an auditor appointed by the Authority.  
Thus, the Regulation mandates all the entities, involved in the authentication ecosystem, to 
keep their information systems in complete compliance with UIDAI standards and UIDAI in 
its turn should monitor the conformity through independent audits. 
Further, Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations stipulates that UIDAI should specify the security 
measures to be adopted by the Registrars, EAs, REs, and ASAs and should monitor compliance 
of security requirements through internal audits or through independent agencies. UIDAI 
empaneled (April 2018) M/s Deloitte Touché Tohmatsu India LLP (DTTILLP) as the agency 
to perform Information Security Assessment of all UIDAI Authentication Ecosystem Partners 
for a period of three years. As per the arrangement, the Authentication Ecosystem Partners 
would reach out to DTTILLP individually to initiate Information Security Assessment 
stipulated in the Aadhaar Authentication Regulations 2016. The agency will perform the 
Information Security Assessment once in a year and submit its Audit Report to the entity 
concerned. DTTILLP was to communicate to UIDAI at the end of every month the names of 
the audited partner. 
Details of the audit of the REs and ASAs conducted during the five years of audit coverage are 
in Table 5.2. 
 
 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
51 
Table 5.2: Details of IS audit of REs and ASAs 
Year Requesting Entities Authentication Service Agencies 
Agencies Agencies 
whose 
audit was 
done by IS 
auditor 
Agencies 
whose 
audit was 
done by 
UIDAI 
Agencies Agencies 
whose 
audit was 
done by IS 
auditor 
Agencies 
whose 
audit was 
done by 
UIDAI 
2014-15 92 NA 46 NA 16 NA NA 
2015-16 223 2 NA 23 NA NA 
2016-17 355 121 8 27 3 1 
2017-18 308 110 29 26 3 3 
2018-19 204 106 8 27 9 1 
Analysis of the above data showed that no REs or ASAs had their operations audited annually 
either by themselves through a certified Information Systems auditor or by UIDAI.  
Thus, it was evident that while UIDAI regulations stipulated annual audit of the operations and 
systems of both REs and ASAs by Information Systems auditor, compliance was very poor. 
UIDAI also failed to invoke its prerogative to audit the operations, infrastructure, systems and 
procedures of the REs and ASAs, either by itself or through audit agencies appointed by it. As 
such it was unable to derive required assurance that the entities involved in the authentication 
ecosystem, are maintaining their information systems in complete compliance with UIDAI 
standards. 
UIDAI informed (January 2020) that the MoUs between UIDAI and Registrars contain 
provisions for periodic audit of enrolment processes. It stated that the ROs carry out audit and 
inspection of enrolment operation of Registrars, EAs and audit of the Self-Service Update 
Portal (SSUP) and back end services rendered by BPO. The reply was not relevant to the 
observation as it deals with MoUs between UIDAI and Registrars and relates to the adherence 
to enrolment processes whereas, the audit observation relate to requirement for IS audits under 
the Authentication Regulations, of authentication related operations of the REs and ASAs. 
UIDAI further intimated (October 2020) that there had been a steady increase in submission of 
IS Audit Reports by AUAs i.e., from about 35 per cent in 2016-17 and 2017-18 to 52 per cent 
in 2018-19 and that it was pursuing this aspect with the REs and sensitizing them about the 
significance of the audits through training sessions. 
UIDAI accepted the recommendation for conducting audit of existing REs and ASAs by the 
auditor appointed by it within a cycle of three years subject to the present constraints posed by 
Covid-19 pandemic. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit observations. 
R
ecommendation: UIDAI may ensure that each of the existing REs & ASAs are audited 
by UIDAI or by the Auditor appointed by it within a cycle of three years so as to provide 
adequate assurance about compliance to its Regulations.  
 
 
                                                           
46   NA means- Data not available at UIDAI. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
52 
5.2.2 Information System Audit of Client Applications’ Systems storing biometric data 
n
ot ensured  
UIDAI could not provide adequate assurance that REs &  ASAs accessing and storing the 
personal information of Aadhaar holders through the Non-Registered Biometric Devices, 
used prior to April 2018, had been addressed by them despite issue of directions (June 2017) 
mandating IS audits of client systems. 
UIDAI directed (January 2017) all AUAs/ASAs that wit h 
 effect from 1 June 2017, 
authentication requests would be accepted only through “Registered Devices 47” certified by 
S
TQC (Standardization Testing and Quality Certification ). An important feature of the 
R
egistered Device was that it could encapsulate activities like biometric capture, signing and 
encryption of biometrics etc. within it. Hence, use of Non-Registered Devices will be putting 
resident’s privacy at risk. UIDAI further instructed (February 2017) that all AUAs/ KUAs 
should ensure that the client applications used by sub-AUAs or other entities providing 
authentication services, are not capable of storing biometric data of the Aadhaar holder and the 
biometrics/PID block is encrypted at the frontend device/client level. The AUAs/ KUAs were 
to ensure that the client application does not replay any authentication request with stored 
biometric data under any circumstance and an information systems auditor(s), certified by 
STQC/ CERT-IN48 should audit the client application. The compliance audit report was to be 
s
ubmitted to UIDAI and the sub-AUAs would access authentication services only through duly 
audited client applications. The AUAs/ KUAs were to ensure compliance to the directions and 
submit audit report along with a certificate duly signed by their Chief Executive Officer to 
UIDAI by 31 March 2017. Ensuring adherence to these directions was critical because use of 
Non-Registered Devices would be putting resident’s privacy at risk.  The timeline to complete 
the upgrade of applications to Registered Device for AUAs/ KUAs was initially up to 
May 2017 and further extensions were granted till April 2018 when all the Non-Registered 
Devices were deactivated. 
Audit was informed (July 2020) that UIDAI had not received any audit reports from any AUAs/ 
ASAs within the stipulated date, in  compliance of their instructions of February 2017 Further, 
to our query on how UIDAI ensured that the front-end devices used for e-KYC were not 
capable of storing biometric/PID, Audit was informed that Aadhaar (Authentication) 
Regulation stipulates that the client application should package and encrypt the input 
parameters (Aadhaar number or any other identifiers provided by the requesting agency), into 
PID block before transmission. Therefore, it was mandatory for the requesting agencies to 
ensure compliance to the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and associated regulations and 
instructions issued by UIDAI.  
                                                           
47   Public devices are biometric capture devices that provide Aadhaar compliant biometric data to the application, 
w
hich, in turn encrypts the data before using for authentication purposes. A registered Device is a public device 
with additional features compared to public device like Device identification, eliminating use of stored 
biometrics and having a standardized RD service. Registered devices MUST ensure that; i.) there should be 
no mechanism for any external program to provide stored biometrics and get it signed and encrypted and ii.) 
There should be no mechanism for external program/probe to obtain device private key used for signing the 
biometrics. 
48  Indian Computer Emergency Response Team is a functional organization of the Ministry of Electronics and 
I
nformation Technology. Apart from the objective of securing the Indian cyber space CERT-In provides 
Security Quality Management service also.  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
53 
UIDAI further stated (October 2020) that implementing a significant technical change across 
t
he country without disrupting ongoing services required a calibrated approach and could take 
longer time than envisaged initially. UIDAI completed implementation of biometric registered 
devices for the authentication system by April 2018 thereby ensuring that the biometrics were 
encrypted at the device itself before sending it to client application. No RE could perform 
authentication using non-registered device. Thus, there was no risk of the client application 
storing biometric data, thereafter. MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the audit 
obs
ervations. 
Audit noted that during the period April 2017 to March 2018, nearly 385 Crore e-KYC 
transactions were undertaken by UIDAI. This was more than 76 per cent of the cumulative 
e-KYC transactions done since the year 2013-14. There is no assurance that many of these 
transactions were done using client applications that were capable of storing biometric data of 
residents.  
Though UIDAI had claimed that it had completed implementation of biometric registered 
devices for the authentication system by April 2018, there was no system to confirm that the 
client applications used by authentication ecosystem partners for providing authentication 
services prior to April 2018, were not capable of storing biometric data of the Aadhaar number 
holders. As such, there was inadequate assurance that the risk of ASA/ AUAs/ sub-AUAs 
accessing and storing the personal information of Aadhaar holders through the earlier 
Non-Registered Devices, was addressed by UIDAI despite issuing directions in June 2017 
mandating IS audits of client systems. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may consider suspension of the services of REs and ASAs if 
they fail to conduct annual audit in time as prescribed by the Regulations 2016.   
5.2.3 Security and safety of data in Aadhaar vaults 
Aadhaar numbers and any connected Aadhaar data were t o be stored mandatorily on a 
separate Aadhaar Data Vault. UIDAI could not provide reasonable assurance that  the 
e
ntities involved adhered to the procedures.  
Security of CIDR information requires highest importance for safeguarding resident data. The 
c
onfidentiality, integrity and availability of the information should be in controlled manner. 
UIDAI has obtained ISO 27001:2013 certification from STQC by establishment of Information 
Security Management System. UIDAI-CIDR has also been declared as “Protected System” by 
N
ational Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) adding another layer 
of IT security assurance. However, safeguarding the Aadhaar data with the same level of 
security measures has to be maintained throughout the Aadhaar Ecosystem, including the 
authentication partners. 
With a view to enhance the security level for storing the Aadhaar numbers, UIDAI mandated 
(July 2017) all AUAs/KUAs/Sub-AUAs and other entities who are collecting and storing the 
Aadhaar numbers for specific purposes, to implement Aadhaar vaults49. UIDAI also prescribed 
                                                           
49  Aadhaar Data Vault is a centralized storage for all the Aadhaar numbers collected by the AUAs/ KUAs/ 
S
ub-AUAs/ or any other agency for specific purposes under Aadhaar Act and Regulations, 2016. It is a secure 
system inside the respective agency’s infrastructure accessible only on need-to-know basis. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
54 
the procedure for implementation of Aadhaar vaults and non-compliance would attract general 
pe
nalty provisions of the Aadhaar Act. In addition, UIDAI could also levy financial 
disincentives as per the conditions provided in the AUA/ KUA agreement. Since the entities 
were permitted to store Aadhaar numbers along with the demographic information and photo 
of the Aadhaar holder, UIDAI had stipulated security and safety measures, which the entities 
were required to comply with while implementing Aadhaar vaults.  
For verification of compliance to the above mentioned requirements and systems put in place 
to monitor compliance with directions by user agencies/ entities on implementing Aadhaar 
Data Vaults, UIDAI informed Audit  (July 2020) that REs were to ensure that the objective of 
secure storage of Aadhaar numbers is met. UIDAI has not specified any encryption algorithm 
or key strength for the encryption of Aadhaar Data Vault. It further mentioned (October 2020) 
that Aadhaar Data Vault (ADV) was not a specific product but a process and a concept for 
storage of Aadhaar numbers in a secure manner and its implementation was monitored through 
Audit Reports submitted by the REs.  MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the 
a
udit observations. 
The above position indicated that UIDAI had not established any measures /systems to confirm 
that the entities involved adhered to procedures and was largely dependent on Audit Reports 
submitted to them. They had not independently conducted any verification of compliance to 
the process to derive a satisfactory assurance. 
Aadhaar number is a lifetime identity for Indians and is used to avail various services involving 
financial transactions, as such unauthorized access to Aadhaar number can be misused in many 
ways. Hence UIDAI may ensure the implementation of Aadhaar Data Vault by instituting 
periodic audit to enhance the security for the data stored by user organizations. It should deal 
with non-compliance strictly as per the Act and as per conditions in the agreement with AUAs/ 
KUAs  
Recommendation: UIDAI may ensure the implementation of Aadhaar Data Vault 
process and institute/carry out periodic audits independently, to enhance the security of 
Aadhaar number storage data by user organizations. UIDAI may deal the cases of non-
compliance of directions as per the Act and as per conditions in the agreement with AUAs/ 
KUAs (Authentication User Agencies and e-KYC User Agencies) 
 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
55 
Chapter 6 Redressal of Customer Grievances 
6.1 Introduction 
UIDAI caters to the entire population of India and hence Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) is an important aspect of its functioning. Aadhaar (Enrolment & Update) Regulation 
2016 provides for setting up of contact centre to act as a central point for resolution of queries 
and grievances of residents. The contract centre should be accessible to residents through toll 
free number(s) and/ or e-mail. Accordingly, UIDAI has set up a grievance redressal mechanism 
centrally to receive grievances through the following channels: 
 
Image courtesy: UIDAI 
a. T
hrough Contact 
Centre: UIDAI has set 
up a contact centre with 
a toll-free number and 
email id being 1947 and 
help@uidai.gov.in 
respectively.  
b.  By Post: Grievances are 
received at the UIDAI 
HQ through Post/ 
hardcopy.  
c. Through Public Grievance Portal of GoI: Grievances which are lodged at 
the Public Grievance Portal of Government of India (pgportal.gov.in) are 
received from Government agencies for redressal.  
d. Other Channels: Sometimes grievances are received by UIDAI officials 
through emails, walk-in residents, phone, website, RTI etc. 
The CRM partners50 handle the grievances received at the Contact Centre (CRM Channel). The 
g
rievances received through other than CRM mode are examined and forwarded to the 
concerned Regional Offices/ Sections for redressal. The Regional Office/ Section concerned 
dispose the grievances by replying directly to the complainants under intimation to the 
grievance cell of UIDAI HQ. Apart from the central CRM system, the Regional Offices of 
UIDAI also have a system of receiving complaints/ grievances directly. 
Total number of complaints registered in CRM channel during the period 2014-15 to 2018-19 
is shown in Table 6.1. 
 
                                                           
50  M/s Tata Business Support Services Ltd and M/s Strategic Marketing Pvt Ltd were the CRM partners till June 
2
018 and M/s CBSL & M/s Tech M are the current CRM partners. 


Report No. 24 of 2021 
56 
Table 6.1: Year-wise and category-wise complaints received by CRM 
Year Complaints received –category wise Complaints resolved-category wise 
Enrolment Update Authentication Enrolment Update Authentication 
OB New OB New OB New Resolved Resolved Resolved 
2014-15 20,315 4,03,014 0 1,94,629 17 1,965 3,05,665 1,93,831 1,133 
2015-16 1,17,664 6,08,553 798 9,79,695 849 20,981 7,24,133 9,79,045 21,710 
2016-17 2,084 5,78,855 1,448 7,82,502 120 20,684 5,79,494 7,71,400 20,525 
2017-18 1,445 10,59,107 12,550 19,51,611 279 48,041 10,57,171 19,54,305 47,002 
2018-19 3,381 9,66,975 9,856 56,66,501 1,318 4,46,269 9,66,975 56,66,501 4,46,269 
(Data Source: Information furnished by UIDAI) 
Audit observation on the complaint redressal mechanism of UIDAI in succeeding paragraphs. 
6.2 
Audit Observations 
6.2.1 Data on complaints and their redressal 
Capture of grievances/ complaints have not been stream lined and does not display a clear 
picture for analysis.  
UIDAI ROs apart from the centrally available CRM channe ls, have their own arrangements/ 
additional channels for receiving Grievances/complaints through phone and email. ROs also 
entertain complaints through Post, e-mail, phone, in person and through RTI applications. 
Grievances/ complaints received at the ROs of UIDAI are not captured by the CRM system 
and are thus, not centrally recorded and monitored. It was observed that number of grievances 
received at the ROs and not captured through its CRM mechanism, was significantly high. The 
present system does not escalate the complaints not resolved at the RO level to the next level 
for redressal thereby compelling the complainants to register a new complaint. As a result, 
UIDAI cannot track the history of complaints and assess the efficiency of the grievance 
redressal system.  
UIDAI stated (October 2020) that up-gradation/ replacement of the existing old system was 
under process. The new CRM system has been designed as a single centralized system with 
state-of-the-art technology available for effective and comprehensive disposal and monitoring 
of grievances as centralized system.  MeitY agreed (June 2021) with replies of UIDAI to the 
a
udit observations. 
6.2.2 Grievances received through CRM 
The complaints lodged at the RO level did not get the  attention of UIDAI HQ, compromising 
the effectiveness of the grievance redressal mechanism, besides the delays in settlement of 
grievances. 
An age wise pendency report is auto generated daily i n respect of the cases lodged through 
CRM. On analysis of such pendency report for 31 December 2019, it was noticed that 58,697 
grievances were pending for disposal at the various ROs/ Divisions. Of these 6,326 cases were 
pending for more than 30 days for redressal of which 960 cases were pending for more than 90 
days. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
57 
We observed that a majority of pending cases related to Technical Support. Out of a total of 
28,276 
grievances relating to Technical Support 23,426 cases (82.85 per cent) were pending at 
CIDR. Further, 26,247 cases (92.82 per cent) had a pendency of more than one month and 202 
cases were pending for more than nine months. 
UIDAI stated (October 2020) that resolution/ redressal of grievances was an ongoing process 
and efforts had been made to bring down pendency from 58,697 cases to 27,654 cases (as on 
14 September 2020). Further, pendency of 6,326 cases beyond 30 days including 960 cases 
beyond 90 days has been brought down to 2,609 cases and 442 cases respectively (as on 14 
September 2020). There are some cases which require proper enquiry/ investigation on account 
of corruption and fraud, and these need adequate time for resolution. MeitY agreed (June 2021) 
w
ith replies of UIDAI to the Audit Observations. 
The pendency Report as on 31 March 2021, however reveals 48,000 cases were pending for 
resolution. Out of these total pending cases, 7,020 cases were pending for more than 30 days 
for redressal of which 496 cases were pending for more than 90 days. 
It emerges from the above facts that the time taken for grievance redressal was high and since 
complaints lodged at the RO level, do not get the attention of UIDAI HQ, this compromises 
the effectiveness of the grievance redressal mechanism. 
Recommendation: UIDAI may explore the possibility of introducing a single centralized 
system where grievances/ complaints lodged even at ROs are also captured so as to 
enhance the quality of customer servicing. 
 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
59 
 
Chapter 7 Conclusion 
Aadhaar, the unique ID programme for India was conceived as a voluntary identity system for 
the residents of the country and UIDAI was formed to pilot the project with mandate to develop 
appropriate strategies and plans. Till March 2021, UIDAI had generated more than 129 Crore 
Aadhaar cards since the issue of the first Aadhaar in September 2010. The project uses a 
complex state-of-the-art technology for its operations and runs on one of the largest biometric 
databases in the world. The technology is based on biometrics to establish unique identity of 
the resident applicant. Authentication of the biometric identity of the resident, using Aadhaar 
helps the government to position it and utilise it as a major tool in its efforts to plug leakages 
in the delivery of government services to beneficiaries. Voluntary use of Aadhar identity also 
enables other Agencies such as banks and telecom operators to verify the identity of the 
applicants for delivery of services to them. 
The Performance Audit of UIDAI of the selected Enrolment and Authentication system 
revealed certain deficiencies in their functioning and delivery of services and several areas 
where there is scope for improvement in the functioning of the Authority.  
It was seen that UIDAI had generated Aadhaar numbers with incomplete information/ 
documents of the holder, non-establishment of residence status of applicants with proper 
documents, non-review/ matching of documents of the resident with the Aadhar database and 
acceptance of poor-quality biometrics resulting in multiple/ duplicate Aadhar numbers to the 
same individual. Aadhaar numbers with poor quality biometrics induces authentication errors. 
UIDAI takes no responsibility for it and transfers the onus of updating the biometrics to the 
resident and also charges fees for it. Issue of Bal Aadhar to minor children below five years 
was largely focused towards expanding the Aadhaar footprint, without establishing uniqueness 
of identity of the children. Costs to the Government for issue of these Bal Aadhar numbers 
were at best avoidable 
The control mechanism instituted by UIDAI to ensure that all the authentication ecosystem 
partners adhere to the prescribed standards in the maintenance of their IT infrastructure, needed 
strengthening as it was seen that Information System Audit of the operations of a large 
percentage of REs and ASAs was never done despite UIDAI regulations prescribing annual IS 
audits. Moreover, UIDAI had not ensured that the client applications used by its authentication 
ecosystem partners were not capable of storing the personal information of the residents, which 
put the privacy of residents at risk. The Authority had not ensured security and safety of data 
in Aadhaar vaults. They had not independently conducted any verification of compliance to the 
process involved. 
UIDAI’s compliance to its own Regulations were found wanting due to belated levy of fees for 
authentication services, which deprived the government of its due revenues upto March 2019, 
though the Aadhaar database was used extensively by Banks and Mobile operators for 
authentication of identity of the applicants. The fees chargeable were determined thereafter. 
There were flaws in the management of various contracts entered into by UIDAI. The decision 
to waive off penalties for biometric solution providers was not in the interest of the Authority 
giving undue advantage to the solution providers, sending out an incorrect message of 
acceptance of poor quality of biometrics captured by them.  

Report No. 24 of 2021 
60 
The logistics arrangements with the Department of Posts were not effective for ensuring actual 
delive
ry of Aadhaar letters to the correct addressee pointing to the need for fine-tuning the last 
mile management of enrolment process for improving the efficiency of the Aadhaar delivery 
mechanism.  
The grievance redressal system at the UIDAI Hqrs and Regional Offices was ineffective and 
was plagued with delays in redressal of grievances.  
Observations emanating out of the Performance Audit show that UIDAI was successful in 
issuing a large majority of residents with an identity document, based on unique identity 
established through biometrics. This has undoubtedly helped Government as well as private 
Agencies in establishing identity of the residents before delivery of services. 
The issue of Aadhar to residents is an ongoing project and the UIDAI would do well to 
proactively accept its role and responsibility bestowed upon them by the Government by 
various statutory enactments and reduce its continued dependence on outsourced Agencies and 
instead partner with State Governments for the enrolment process.   
The audit observations and Recommendations could assist the UIDAI Management to identify 
areas that require fine-tuning, improvements in its functions, reviewing the existing systems 
for ensuring compliance to its own regulations and securing the information in the Aadhar 
database maintained by them. 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
(MANISH KUMAR) 
Director General of Audit 
Finance & Communication 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
  

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
61 
Appendix-I 
Provisions of Aadhaar Act, 2016  
(
Refer Paragraph no. 1.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
1 2(aa)* “Aadhaar ecosystem” includes enrolling 
agencies, Registrars, requesting entities, 
offline verification-seeking entities and any 
other entity or group of entities as may be 
specified by regulations; 
Partial Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
& Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016  
No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification  
Enrolment& 
Update (E&U) 
and 
Authentication 
2 2(pa)* “Offline verification” means the process of 
verifying the identity of the Aadhaar number 
holder without authentication, through such 
offline modes as may be specified by 
regulations 
No No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification 
Authentication 
3 2(g) 
54(2)(a) 
“biometric information” means photograph, 
finger print, Iris scan, or such other biological 
attributes of an individual as may be specified 
by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
4 2(j) core biometric information” means finger 
print, Iris scan, or such other biological 
attribute of an individual as may be specified 
by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
5 2(k) 
54(2)(a) 
demographic information” includes 
information relating to the name, date of birth, 
address and other relevant information of an 
individual, as may be specified by regulations 
for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number, 
but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, 
ethnicity, language, records of entitlement, 
income or medical history 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
6 2(m) 
54(2)(a) 
“enrolment” means the process, as may be 
specified by regulations, to collect 
demographic and biometric information from 
individuals by the enrolling agencies for the 
purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such 
individuals under this Act 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
62 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
7 3(2) The enrolling agency shall, at the time of 
enrolment, inform the individual undergoing 
enrolment of the following details in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations, 
namely: — (a) the manner in which the 
information shall be used 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
8 3(3) 
54(2)(b)  
On receipt of the demographic information and 
biometric information under sub-section (1), 
the Authority shall, after verifying the 
information, in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations, issue an Aadhaar 
number to such individual 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
[Clause 10&13(2)] 
& 6th Amendments  
E
&U 
9 3(4) * 
54(2) (be) 
The Aadhaar number issued to an individual 
under sub-section (3) shall be a twelve-digit 
identification number and any alternative 
virtual identity as an alternative to the actual 
Aadhaar number of an individual that shall be 
generated by the Authority in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations. 
Yes The term Aadhaar 
number to include 
virtual id also 
Aadhaar  
10 3A (2) *  
54(2) (bb) 
A child who is an Aadhaar number holder may, 
within a period of six months of attaining the 
eighteen years of age, make an application to 
the Authority for cancellation of his Aadhaar 
number, in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations and the Authority shall cancel his 
Aadhaar number 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) (eighth 
Amendment 
Regulations 2020. 
(3 of 2020 dated 
30th June 2020) 
E & U 
11 4(3) 
54(2)(c) 
An Aadhaar number, in physical or electronic 
form subject to authentication and other 
conditions, as may be specified by regulations, 
may be accepted as proof of identity of the 
Aadhaar number holder for any purpose 
*Substituted as 
Every Aadhaar number holder to establish his 
identity, may voluntarily use his Aadhaar 
number in physical or electronic form by way 
of authentication or offline verification, or in 
such other form as may be notified, in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016 
(12/09/16) 
 
 
No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification 
Authentication 
12 4(4) *      
54(2) (ca) 
An entity may be allowed to perform 
authentication, if the Authority is satisfied that 
the requesting entity is— (a) compliant with 
such standards of privacy and security as may 
be specified by regulations; 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016 
(12/09/16) 
Authentication 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
63 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
13 4(5) *      
54(2) 
(cob) 
The Authority may, by regulations, decide 
whether a requesting entity shall be permitted 
the use of the actual Aadhaar number during 
authentication or only an alternative virtual 
identity 
Yes No regulation for 
use of only an 
alternate virtual 
number. However, 
use of Aadhaar no 
allowed under 
authentication 
regulations & 
Aadhaar no include 
virtual no (as per 
amendments) 
Authentication 
14 5 
54(2)(d) 
The Authority shall take special measures to 
issue Aadhaar number to women, children, 
senior citizens, persons with disability, 
unskilled and unorganized workers, nomadic 
tribes or to such other persons who do not have 
any permanent dwelling house and such other 
categories of individuals as may be specified 
by regulations 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
15 6 
54(2)(e) 
The Authority may require Aadhaar number 
holders to update their demographic 
information and biometric information, from 
time to time, in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations, so as to ensure 
continued accuracy of their information in the 
Central Identities Data Repository. 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
only bio of 
children 
E&U 
16 8(1) 
54(2)(f) 
The Authority shall perform authentication of 
the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number 
holder submitted by any requesting entity, in 
relation to his biometric information or 
demographic information, subject to such 
conditions and on payment of such fees and in 
such manner as may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
(Clause 12(7)) 
Authentication 
17 8(2)(a) 
54(2)(f) * 
A requesting entity shall—unless otherwise 
provided in this Act, obtain the consent of an 
individual or in the case of a child obtain the 
consent of his parent or guardian  before 
collecting his identity information for the 
purposes of authentication in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
(Clause 16) 
Authentication 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
64 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
18 8(2)(b) * 
54(2) (fa) 
“Provided that the requesting entity shall, in 
case of failure to authenticate due to illness, 
injury or infirmity owing to old age or 
otherwise or any technical or other reasons, 
provide such alternate and viable means of 
identification of the individual, as may be 
specified by regulations 
No  No amendment in 
regulations found 
to provide for 
alternate and viable 
means of 
identification of an 
individual 
Authentication 
19 8(3) 
54(2)(f) 
A requesting entity shall inform, in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations, the 
individual submitting his identity information 
for authentication, the following details with 
respect to authentication, namely:— (a) the 
nature of information that may be shared upon 
authentication; (b) the uses to which the 
information received during authentication 
may be put by the requesting entity; and (c) 
alternatives to submission of identity 
information to the requesting entity 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
Authentication 
20 8A(2)(a) 
* 
 Every offline verification-seeking entity shall, 
— (a) before performing offline verification, 
obtain the consent of an individual, or in the 
case of a child, his parent or guardian, in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations 
Partial  No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification 
however in other 
cases it is available 
in Authentication 
Regulation 
Authentication 
21 8A (3) * An offline verification-seeking entity shall 
inform the individual undergoing offline 
verification, or in the case of a child, his parent 
or guardian, the following details with respect 
to offline verification, in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations, 
Partial No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification 
however in other 
cases it is available 
in Authentication 
Regulation 
Authentication 
22 8A(4)(c) 
* 
No offline verification-seeking entity shall— 
(c) take any action contrary to any obligation 
on it as may be specified by regulations. 
No  No amendments in 
Regulation for 
offline verification 
Authentication 
23 10 
54(2)(g) 
The Authority may engage one or more entities 
to establish and maintain the Central Identities 
Data Repository and to perform any other 
functions as may be specified by regulations. 
Yes Aadhaar (Data 
Security) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 04 of 2016) 
IS /Tech 
24 18(2)(e) The chief executive officer shall be the legal 
representative of the Authority and shall be 
responsible for— (e) performing such other 
functions, or exercising such other powers, as 
may be specified by regulations 
Yes UIDAI 
(Transaction of 
Business at 
Meetings of the 
Authority) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 1 of 2016) 
 Administration 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
65 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
25 19(1) 
54(2)(h) 
The Authority shall meet at such times and 
places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings, including quorum at 
such meetings, as may be specified by 
regulations 
Yes UIDAI 
(Transaction of 
Business at 
Meetings of the 
Authority) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 1 of 2016)   
[ Clause 3] 
 Administration  
26 21(2) 
54(2)(i) 
 
21(1) * 
54(2)(x) 
The salaries and allowances payable to, and the 
other terms and conditions of service of, the 
chief executive officer and other officers and 
other employees of the Authority shall be such 
as may be specified by regulations with the 
approval of the Central Government. 
 
*Substituted as 
(1) The Authority shall appoint such officers 
and employees as may be required for the 
discharge of its functions under this Act. (2) 
The salaries and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and employees of the Authority shall be 
such as may be specified by regulations.” 
No 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
UIDAI 
(Appointment of 
Officers and 
Employees) 
Regulations, 2020 
(No. 1 of 2020) 
dated 21-01-
2020   
& UIDAI (Salary, 
Allowances and 
other Terms and 
Conditions of 
Service of 
Employees) 
Regulations, 2020 
(No. 2 of 2020) 
dated 21-01-2020    
 
 Administration  
27 23(2)(a) * Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include— (a) specifying, by regulations, 
demographic information and biometric 
information required for enrolment and the 
processes for collection and verification 
thereof; 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016.  
(Clause 3,4,5,10) 
and 6 th, 7 th 
Amendments  
E & U 
28 23(2)(b) * 
 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—(b) collecting demographic 
information and biometric information from 
any individual seeking an Aadhaar number in 
such manner as may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
(Clause 3,4,5,10) 
and 6 th, 7 th 
A
mendments  
E & U 
29 23(2)(f) * 
54(2)(k) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—((f) maintaining and updating 
the information of individuals in the Central 
Identities Data Repository in such manner as 
may be specified by regulations 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E & U 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
66 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
30 23(2)(g) 
54(2)(l) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include— (g) omitting and deactivating of 
an Aadhaar number and information relating 
thereto in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
(Clause 27, 28) 
E&U 
31 23(2)(i) 
54(2)(n) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—(i) specifying, by regulations, 
the terms and conditions for appointment of 
Registrars, enrolling agencies and service 
providers and revocation of appointments 
thereof 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
and 2nd & 4th 
Amendments  
E&U 
32 23(2)(k) 
54(2)(o) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—sharing, in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations, the information of 
Aadhaar number holders, subject to the 
provisions of this Act 
Yes Aadhaar (Sharing 
of Information) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 05 of 2016) 
IS 
33 23(2)(m) 
54(2)(p) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include— (m) specifying, by regulations, 
various processes relating to data management, 
security protocols and other technology 
safeguards under this Act 
Yes Aadhaar (Data 
Security) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 04 of 2016) 
IS 
34 23(2)(n) 
54(2)(q) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include— (n) specifying, by regulations, 
the conditions and procedures for issuance of 
new Aadhaar number to existing Aadhaar 
number holder 
No The enrolment and 
update division of 
UIDAI informed 
that the purpose of 
the provision in 
the Act was not 
known to them 
E&U 
35 23(2)(o) 
54(2)(r) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—(o) levying and collecting the 
fees or authorising the Registrars, enrolling 
agencies or other service providers to collect 
such fees for the services provided by them 
under this Act in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
E&U 
36 23(2)(r) 
54(2)(s) 
Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the 
powers and functions of the Authority, inter 
alia, include—(r) evolving of, and specifying, 
by regulations, policies and practices for 
Registrars, enrolling agencies and other service 
providers 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016)- 
E&U 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
67 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
37 28(3) The Authority shall take all necessary 
measures to ensure that the information in the 
possession or control of the Authority, 
including information stored in the Central 
Identities Data Repository, is secured and 
protected against access, use or disclosure not 
permitted under this Act or regulations made 
thereunder, and against accidental or 
intentional destruction, loss or damage 
Yes Aadhaar (Data 
Security) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 04 of 2016) 
IS 
38 28(5) * 
54(2)(t) 
Provided that an Aadhaar number holder may 
request the Authority to provide access to his 
identity information excluding his core 
biometric information in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
[clause 28] 
Authentication  
39 29(2) 
54(2)(u) 
The identity information, other than core 
biometric information, collected or created 
under this Act may be shared only in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and 
in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 
Yes Aadhaar (Sharing 
of Information) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 05 of 2016) 
IS 
40 29(4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric 
information collected or created under this Act 
in respect of an Aadhaar number holder shall 
be published, displayed or posted publicly, 
except for the purposes as may be specified by 
regulations. 
Yes Aadhaar (Sharing 
of Information) 
Regulations, 2016 
(No. 05 of 2016) 
[Clause 6} 
IS 
41 31 (1) 
54(2)(v) 
In case any demographic information of an 
Aadhaar number holder is found incorrect or 
changes subsequently, the Aadhaar number 
holder shall request the Authority to alter such 
demographic information in his record in the 
Central Identities Data Repository in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016) 
and Amendments 
(7th ,6th) 
E&U 
42 31(2) 
54(2)(v) 
In case any biometric information of Aadhaar 
number holder is lost or changes subsequently 
for any reason, the Aadhaar number holder 
shall request the Authority to make necessary 
alteration in his record in the Central Identities 
Data Repository in such manner as may be 
specified by regulations. 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016 
(No. 02 of 2016)  
and Amendments 
(7th ,6th) 
E
&U 
43 31(4) No identity information in the Central 
Identities Data Repository shall be altered 
except in the manner provided in this Act or 
regulations made in this behalf 
Partial No amendments in 
Authentication 
Regulations (cl 26) 
found to include 
the change. 
Authentication 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
68 
Sl. 
No. 
Section  
no. of 
Aadhaar 
Act 2016 
Act particulars Whether 
regulation 
exists? 
Regulation 
Particulars 
Ecosystem 
44 32 (1) 
54(2)(w) 
The Authority shall maintain authentication 
records in such manner and for such period as 
may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
Authentication 
45 32 (2) 
54(2)(w) 
Every Aadhaar number holder shall be entitled 
to obtain his authentication record in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations 
Yes Aadhaar 
(Authentication) 
Regulation 2016 
(No. 03 of 2016) 
Authentication 
46 37 Whoever, intentionally discloses, transmits, 
copies or otherwise disseminates any identity 
information collected in the course of 
enrolment or authentication to any person not 
authorised under this Act or regulations made 
there under or in contravention of any 
agreement or arrangement entered into 
pursuant to the provisions of this Act, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years or with a fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees or, in the 
case of a company, with a fine which may 
extend to one Lakh rupees or with both. 
Yes  Part of the act and 
covered in 
Authentication 
Regulations, Data 
Sharing 
Regulations and 
Sharing of 
Information 
Regulations 
IS 
47 54(2)(x)  any other matter which is required to be, or 
may be, specified, or in respect of which 
provision is to be or may be made by 
regulations 
Yes  Aadhaar 
(Enrolment and 
Update) 
Regulations 2016  
Regulation no 
10(2) and 7 th 
Amendments  
E & U 
Appendix-I shows the requirements of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, 
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016,  (“Aadhaar Act 2016”) including the Aadhaar and Other Laws 
(Amendment) Act (dated 23 July 2019) 51 and corresponding provisions in the various Regulations issued by 
t
he UIDAI as on 31 March 2020. 
*   denotes the requirement of regulations as per the amendment to the Aadhaar Act 2016 by The Aadhaar 
and Other Laws (Amendment) Ordinance 2019 (No. 9 of 2019) (dated 02 March 2019) which become the 
Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Act (dated 23 July 2019) 
  
                                                           
51   The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Ordinance 2019 (No.9 of 2019) (dated 02 March 2019) 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
69 
Annexure-I 
(
Refer Paragraph no. 4.3.1) 
B
ased on the decided sample size six out of six contracts having value of `` ``100 Crore and above 
and seven out of twenty-six contracts having value less than `` ``100 Crore were selected for scrutiny.  
The selected list of contracts is furnished below: 
A.     Contracts > `` ``100 Crores entered by UIDAI 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Name of 
the firm Period 
Value  
(`` `` in 
Crore) 
Remarks 
I II III IV V VI 
1 
Agreement with Data 
Centre Development 
Agency (DCDA), 
Bengaluru M/s Wipro 
Ltd, 
06-12-2012
 
 to  
05-12-2017 
116.06 
The file related to AMC part 
was only provided for 
scrutiny. The file related to 
selection process of the 
vendor was not made 
available. Since the contract 
involved technical issues, the 
same was out of the scope of 
the Audit for scrutiny. 
2 
Agreement with 
DCDA, Manesar 
117.18 
3 
Managed Service 
Provider (MSP) 
M/s HCL 
Infosystems 
Ltd 
20-6-2012  
to 
19-6-2019 
1,978.62 
The tender/contract files 
related to MSP was denied 
citing confidentiality. The 
file related to invoices and 
payments were subsequently 
provided for scrutiny. The 
file related to selection 
process of the vendor was not 
made available. The same 
was also out of audit 
coverage period. Further the 
detailed scrutiny was not 
done as the issues of 
technical nature was kept out 
of scope of audit. The 
observations made by audit 
is presented in the Chapter-4 
of the Report. 
A 1 Cost of 35 Cells - 
Value-1 585.91 
A 2 Cost of Non-Cell 
Comp. - Value-2 325.49 
B 1 Staff cost for 
managed service - 
Value-3 
347.38 
B 2 AMC for Cell 
comp - Value-3 210.85 
B 3 AMC for Non-
Cell comp - Value-3 144.86 
B 4 N/work 
connectivity cost - 
Value-3 
21.22 
C Software 
development - Value-4 27.91 
D Cost of Biometric 
solution - Value-5 315.00 
4 
Aadhaar Document 
Management System 
(ADMS) 
M/s 
Hewlett-
Packard 
India Sales 
Pvt. Ltd. 
7-06-2011 
to 
6-06-2016 
327.98 
The management did not 
produce the file for audit 
scrutiny during the presence 
of audit team in the premises. 
Observations were made 
based on the reports of ROs 
and information collected 
through replied memos. 
However, they agreed to 
provide the same later on. 

Report No. 24 of 2021 
70 
5 
Professionals 
Recruitment (NISG) 
M/s 
National 
Institute of 
Smart 
Governance 
(NISG), 
Hyderabad 
up to 31-03-2020 The files were furnished to 
audit for scrutiny. The 
observations made on the 
contracts related to supply of 
executives by NISG has been 
brought out in the Report. 
The finance cost of SRP was 
to be met from the ICT 
assistance paid to the States. 
Field Support 
Engineers (FSE) 30-11-2009 5.43 
Project Management 
Unit (PMU) 
30-11-2009 
& 
18-12-2013 
40.68 
Aadhaar Enabled 
Applications Group 
(AEAG) 
18-04-2011 28.50 
Project Management 
Resources (SRP) 22-11-2013  
Technology Services 
Unit (TSU) 22-05-2013 62.30 
6 
Hiring of 
accommodation on 
rent at Jeevan Bharti 
Building, Connaught 
Circus, New Delhi 
M/s Life 
Insurance 
Corporation 
of India 
(LIC) 
01-11-2009 
to  
31-10-2014 
& 
01-11-2014 
to  
31-10-2019
 
 
No file was made available to 
PA Team during their 
presence at the premises. 
However, the files were 
subsequently provided to the 
Compliance Audit Team/ 
LAP during December 2020. 
 
 
B.     Contracts < `` `` 100 Crores entered by UIDAI 
Sl. 
No. Particulars Name of  
the firm Period 
Value  
(`` `` in 
Crore) 
Remarks 
I II III IV V VI 
1 
Governance Risk 
Compliance and 
Performance 
(GRCP) Service 
Provider 
M/s Price Water 
House - Cooper  
06-10-2015 
to  
05-10-2018 
17.53 
The file was not provided to 
audit. GRCP reports on for 
few periods shared under 
their watch and ward in 
separate chamber. 
2 
Processing of 
update requests 
of the residents, 
back-end work of 
self-service 
update, etc. 
M/s Karvy Data 
Management 
Services Ltd. 
28-05-2017 
to  
02-07-2018 
16.52 
The RFP file was provided 
but nothing substantial worth 
reporting was found. 
3 
Operating of 
Contact Centre 
Services of 
UIDAI 
M/s TATA 
Business Support 
Services Ltd.  
06-04-2016 
to 
05-04-2017 
& 
06-04-2017 
to 
05-04-2018
 
24.93 
The files related to selection 
process and correspondences 
was made available to audit 
but nothing substantial worth 
reporting was found. 
4 
Augmentation of 
outbound SMS 
capabilities at 
UIDAI HQrs 
M/s Value First 
Digital Media 
Pvt. Ltd. 
23-03-2013 
to 
22-03-2016 
& 
23-03-2016 
to 
22-03-2017 
4.86 
The RFP file was provided 
but nothing substantial worth 
reporting was found. 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
71 
5 
P
rinting and 
Franking of 
Aadhaar 
documents 
M/s Manipal 
Technologies 
Ltd., Manipal 
01-07-2013 
to  
31-10-2016 
& 
15-12-2016 
to  
14-12-2018
 
 
74.29 
 
 
 
50.47 
The RFP files was provided. 
The invoices along with 
GRCP reports on meeting the 
SLA parameters and sanction 
for payments were provided. 
The observations emanating 
from it has been brought out 
in the report. 
6 
Printing and 
Franking of 
Aadhaar 
documents 
M/s Seshaasai 
Business Forms 
(P) Ltd., Wadala, 
Mumbai 
21-06-2013 
to  
21-10-2016 
& 
20-12-2016 
to  
19-12-2018 
 
44.57 
 
 
 
25.24 
7 
De-duplication 
of Data 
Monitoring 
Services 
M/s HCL 
Infosystems Ltd. 
01-11-2017 
to  
31-10-2018
 
22.63 The files were not supplied. 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 24 of 2021 
72 
Abbreviations 
 
List Description 
ABIS Automatic Biometric Identification Systems 
ADMS Aadhaar Document Management System 
AEAG Aadhaar Enabled Applications Group 
AEK Aadhaar Enrolment Kit 
ASA Authentication Service Agency 
ASK Aadhaar Seva Kendra 
AUA Authentication User Agency 
BSP Biometric Service Provider 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CERT-IN Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
CIDR Central Identities Data Repository 
CRM Customer Relationship Management 
DC Data Center 
DDG Deputy Director General 
DEITY Department of Electronics & Information Technology 
DMS Document Management System 
DoB Date of Birth 
DoP Department of Posts 
EA Enrolment Agency 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EID Enrolment ID 
e-KYC Electronic Know Your Customer  
FMR False Match Rate 
FNIRA False Negative Identification Rate for Anomalous matches 
FNMR False Non-Match Rate 
FPIR False Positive Identification Rate 
FSE Field Service Engineer 
GFR General Financial Rules 
GRCP Governance Risk Compliance and Performance 
HQ Head Quarters 
ICT Information & Communication Technology 
ID  Identity Document 
IS Information Security 
IT Information Technology 
KUA e-KYC User Agency 
LD Liquidated Damages 
LLP Limited Liability Partnership 
MDD Manual De-duplication 

Functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India 
73 
MEITY Ministry of Communications and Information Technology 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MSP Managed Service Provider 
NISG National Institute for Smart Governance 
NVS Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti 
OAE Other Administrative Expense 
OAR Order Aadhaar Reprint 
OTP One Time Pin 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PII Personally, Identifiable Information 
PID Personal Identity Data 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PoA Proof of Address 
PoI Proof of Identity 
PoR Proof of Relationship 
PSP Print Service Provider 
QC Quality Check 
RE Requesting Entity 
RO Regional Office 
RTI Right To Information 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SRP State Resource Person 
STQC Standardization Testing and Quality Certification 
TSP Telecom Service Providers 
TSU Technology Service Unit 
UC Utilization Certificate 
UID Unique Identification   
UIDAI Unique Identification Authority of India 
UT Union Territories 
 
  