REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA

on

EFFICACY OF IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
74 CONSTITUTION AMENDMENT ACT

GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
Report No. 3 of the year 2022


TABLE OF CONTENTS

Para
No.

Description

Page No.

Preface

Executive Summary

Chapter I - Introduction

vii

Chapter IV— Devolution Of Financial Resources

1.1 Decentralisation in Kerala | 1! |
1.2 Organizational structure of urban governance in Kerala |_1 |
1.3 Audit Objectives 2
1.4 Audit criteria 3
1.5 Audit scope and methodology 3
(1.6 | 6 Acknowledgement 3
Chapter It - Empowerment Through Institutional
Mechanism
2.1 Enactment of State Legislation 5
2.2 Comparison of State Level Legislations with provisions in 74
CAA | |
2.3 Actual status of devolution of functions to Local Governments | 6 |
2.4 Inadequacies in mode of devolution
2.5 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urban Local 10
Bodies
2.6 Powers of the State Government over Urban Local Bodies 15
2.7 District Planning Committee 15
2.8 Metropolitan Planning Committee 16
3.1 Water Supply 19
3.2 Solid Waste Management 22
3.3 Public Health and Sanitation 24
3.4 Involvement of other Parastatals in discharge of functions 26

4.1 Finances of Urban Local Bodies 31

4.2 Receipts of Urban Local Bodies 36
ap R

5.1 Regulation of Manpower in Urban Local Bodies | 49 |



Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

“re Description Page No.
ap 0! And Reco:

6.1 Conclusion 55

6.2 Recommendations 56



Table of Contents

Appendix 1.1: List of selected ULBs 59

Appendix 2.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the a 0
provisions of 74'° CAA

Appendix 2.2: Activity Mapping 65

Appendix 2.3: State-wide shortage in number of Councillors 70

Appendix 2.4: Timeliness in constitution of SFCs and submission of 2

reports

Appendix 2.5: Recommendations of State Finance Commissions
facilitating empowerment of ULBs which were 73
accepted by Government but not implemented

Appendix 2.6: Overriding powers of Government in the KM Act 74

Appendix 3.1: Details of Solid Waste Management by selected ULBs 75

Appendix 3.2: Details of fund allotted for SWM and expenditure

78
incurred by the test-checked ULBs during 2015-20

iii


PREFACE

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31
March 2021 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of the State of

Kerala under Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India.

The Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on ‘Efficacy of

implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act’ covering the period

2015-20.

The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by

the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Local Self
Government Department, Government of Kerala, Directorate of Urban Affairs and

all test-checked Urban Local Bodies at each stage of audit process.



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 CAA) inserted
Part IX A (The Municipalities) consisting of Articles 243P to 243ZG, thereby
imparting constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). Article 243W
authorized the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with
powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as
institutions of self-government and make provisions for devolution of powers
and responsibilities. A Performance Audit on ‘Efficacy of Implementation of
the 74" Constitution Amendment Act’ was conducted to assess the extent of
effectiveness of implementation of the Amendment Act. The major findings of
the Performance Audit are presented below:

Empowerment through Institutional Mechanism

Though 17 of the 18 matters enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule of the
Constitution have been transferred, there was no documented mapping
correlating the items listed under General, Mandatory and Sector-wise functions
in the First Schedule of KM Act with the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.
Urban Local Bodies had full responsibility of only seven out of 17 functions
transferred. As regards the remaining 10, the State Government still had a
significant role in the execution of schemes, etc., either directly or through
parastatal agencies.

(Paragraph 2.3)

Parallel implementation of schemes by Government resulted in beneficiary
selection by departmental officers for departmental schemes implemented in
ULBs. These beneficiary lists prepared by departmental officers were not
subject to scrutiny by Ward Sabhas and for that reason, such selection was
vulnerable to the risk of inclusion of ineligible beneficiaries/duplication of
beneficiaries.

(Paragraph 2.4.2)

Though Government constituted Delimitation Commission in the State in 2015
and 2020 and issued Delimitation guidelines, delimitation was not conducted in
the State. Consequently, the fixing of number of seats for councillors and
number of wards for the elections to ULBs held in 2015 and 2020 was done on
the basis of population figures of 2001 census, except for 29 Municipalities and
two Municipal Corporations. As the number of seats for councillors was based
on census figure of 2001, there was an overall shortage of 60 Councillors as on
date in the State (Corporations: 01, Municipalities: 59)

(Paragraph 2.5.1)

Of the 406 recommendations offered by the five State Finance Commissions
constituted in the State, 325 recommendations were accepted by Government.
Out of these, 200 recommendations (61.54 per cent) were yet to be
implemented.

(Paragraph 2.5.3)

Though the DPC is to prepare the draft development plan for the whole district
for the next financial year before 30 September of every year, and the Chairman
of the Committee is to forward the same to the Government for approval, the
District Plan was prepared only once in 2017-18 during the audit period.
(Paragraph 2.7)

vii


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

acy in Devolution of functions

Kerala Municipality Act provides that Government, from the date specified by
notification in the Gazette, transfer all assets, all water supply and sewerage
service, execution of works, conduct of water supply, distribution, fixing water
charge, collection etc., to the Municipality. However, such a notification has not
been issued by Government. Consequently, the assets, liabilities, etc., with
regard to water supply and sewerage services continue to be vested in the
parastatal, KWA which is indicative of non-devolution of even basic core
functions required as per the Act.

(Paragraph 3.1.1)

The KWA had not furnished Utilisation Certificates for deposit works
amounting to 733.94 crore to the test-checked ULBs.
(Paragraph 3.1.1)

Despite being the parastatal playing key role in discharging the function of
water supply in ULBs, Kerala Water Authority (KWA) neither adopted the
performance measurement of benchmarking nor reported the details of
assessment of Service Level Benchmarks (SLB) relating to Water supply to
ULBs. Consequently, ULBs had to prepare the SLBs in the absence of specific
data relating to the actual implementation of the function from KWA.
(Paragraph 3.1.2)

Revision of water charges was last effected by KWA in October 2014. The
water charges as fixed by KWA to be paid by ULBs for each public tap was
27884 per year. The test checked ULBs paid 29.66 crore to KWA for public
taps during the audit period.

(Paragraph 3.1.3)

The Municipalities were not fully equipped to handle the wastes being generated
in their jurisdiction, raising concerns about the efficacy of implementation of
the devolved function of Solid Waste Management. Of the 21 test-checked
ULBs, the capacity to handle wastes was not in conformity with the quantum of
wastes generated, in nine ULBs in the case of Bio-wastes and nine and eleven
ULBs in the case of non-bio-recyclable and non-bio-non-recyclable wastes
respectively.

(Paragraph 3.2.1)

The percentage of expenditure incurred on solid waste management by test-
checked ULBs out of the allotted funds varied from 1.58 to 45.16 only, during
the audit period (2015-2020).

(Paragraph 3.2.1)

Though the Kerala Public Heath Ordinance 2021 was promulgated to endow the
health functionaries of the State, District and Local Self Government
Institutions with necessary powers and authority for the enhancement of the
administration of public health in the State, it has not been enacted till date thus
depriving the State of a unified Health Act for over half a century.

(Paragraph 3.3.1)

he opinion of Council of ULB which was against availing loan facility due to
difficulty in repayment, was not considered while sanctioning projects under
AMRUT. Though a selected ULB (Kannur Corporation) with annual plan fund
allocation of %30 crore had expressed inability to set aside %33 crore for

=

viii


Executive Summary

AMRUT as it would result in non-implementation of developmental projects,
the opinion of the Municipality was overridden by the State.
(Paragraph 3.4.2)

Devolution of financial resources

On scrutiny of financial data for the year 2019-20, it was observed that out of
the 21 test-checked ULBs, only in one ULB the ratio of own revenue to total
revenue was higher than 40 per cent. In two ULBs the ratio was in the range of
30-40 per cent. This is indicative of the urgent need to effectively tap the
potential sources of revenue to ULBs, to facilitate self-reliance in local finances.

(Paragraph 4.1.3)

The percentage of own revenue to total revenue of ULBs ranged from 17.42 to
26.65 per cent during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. This shows the need for
effective tapping of potential sources for enhancing own revenue.

(Paragraph 4.2.1)

As per the system of drawal from Consolidated fund through contingent bills,
the bills presented to treasuries at the end of March every year were to be shifted
to treasury queue and cleared in the subsequent financial year. However, bills
presented as early as in the month of June in previous year, were also kept in
queue at treasury. Consequently, the test checked ULBs could not utilise
2447.74 crore out of SFC grants during the period 2017-18 to 2019-20.
(Paragraph 4.2.3)

There was no mechanism to monitor timely collection and transfer of pension
contribution by ULBs to the Central Pension Fund (CPF) maintained by the
Director of Urban Affairs (DUA). As a result, the payment of pension to the
retiring employees of ULBs could not be assured from the CPF. Information
furnished by 14 out of 21 test checked ULBs revealed that the funds for Death-
cum-retirement-benefits were sourced from the Own fund/ General Purpose
Fund of ULBs during the audit period. As of March 2020, %542.81 crore
remained to be paid out of CPF to 75 ULBs in the whole State.

(Paragraph 4.2.4)

As per Kerala Municipality (Property Tax, Service Cess and Surcharge) Rules,
2011, assessment of property tax on Plinth area basis was to be made applicable
for new buildings from 14 January 2011 and for existing buildings (assessed on
annual value basis) from 01 April 2011. The date of coming into effect of plinth
area method of assessment for existing buildings was extended by Government
initially upto 01 April 2013 (in March 2013), and further till 01 April 2016 (in
March 2019). Consequently, the existing method and rate of assessment for
existing buildings on 14 January 2011 continued to be in force.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.1)

Though plinth area based tax rates came into force on 14 January 2011 for new
assessees, and the rates of taxes had to be revised after five years in 2016, rate
revision did not happen even after a period of ten years (March 2021). Since
Government failed to revise the maximum and minimum rates of basic property
tax, the ULBs could not revise the rates of property tax.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.1)



Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

The Property Tax Board was to take action to ensure collection and imposition
of property tax on all taxable properties, by enumerating all properties within
the jurisdiction of ULBs and offer suggestions for a suitable basis for
assessment and valuation of properties and periodic revisions. The Board was
not constituted in the State till date.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.1)
Due to the absence of a proper database of all categories of professionals, traders
and businessmen, employees and workers in the unorganized sector and self-
employed persons, and failure to conduct a survey on professionals practising
within the jurisdiction of Local Governments concerned with the help of Ward
Members/Councillors so as to bring them into the net of profession tax, the tax
base of profession tax w.r.t ULBs could not be widened.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.2)

Entertainment tax was not collected as revenue by ULBs in the State during the
period from 01 July 2017 to 10 June 2019. For compensating the loss in this
regard, though Government paid compensation to ULBs for the period 2017-
18, no compensation was paid for the period April 2018 to May 2019 which
resulted in loss of revenue to ULBs.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.4)
The time period for implementing the Kerala Municipality (Issue of Licence to
Dangerous and Offensive Trades, other Trades and Factories) Rules, 2011 was
continually extended through a series of Government orders issued during the
period from 2011 till January 2017. Thus, the licence fees continued to be
levied at rates which prevailed before the commencement of the Rules, thereby
depriving the ULBs of a potential source of revenue during the period 2011 to
2018.

(Paragraph 4.2.5.6)

Human Resources

Though the Municipalities were graded in 2014 as 1, II and III, based on revenue
and population, no such categorization of Municipal Corporations was
attempted and no new posts created in existing ULBs consequent upon the
grading exercise, except for the newly created 27 Municipalities and Kannur
Corporation, and two Corporations. Even among Municipalities belonging to
the same grade, there was wide variation in the number of staff in various posts
such as Junior Health Inspector Grade II, Senior Clerk, Office Assistant, etc.
(Paragraph 5.1.1)

Analysis of working strength in 21 test-checked ULBs in terms of the number
of employees per 1000 population as per the projected population for 2020
showed that it ranged between 0.3 and 2.74. While Aluva Municipality had a
working strength of 2.74 employees per 1000 population, 17 ULBs had less than
one employee for every 1000 population. Only three ULBs had employees
between one and two per 1000 population.
(Paragraph 5.1.1)
As on 31 March 2021, of the 6619 posts (excluding the posts in Engineering
wing) in the ULBs in the State, 859 posts remained vacant, revealing
insufficiency in recruitment. There were only 994 men in position as against
the sanctioned strength of 1117 in the Engineering wing of ULBs.
(Paragraph 5.1.2.1)



CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION



CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

The Constitution of India provided a clear mandate for democratic
decentralization through the 747 Amendment. It sought to create an institutional
framework for ushering in democracy at the grassroots level through self-
governing local bodies in urban areas of the country. The Constitution (Seventy-
Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74" CAA) inserted Part IX A (The
Municipalities) consisting of Articles 243P to 243ZG, thereby imparting
constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)!. Article 243W authorized
the State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-
government and make provisions for devolution of powers and responsibilities.
The 74 CAA also introduced the Twelfth Schedule and the matters enumerated
therein were identified as functions which could be entrusted to ULBs.

1.1 Decentralisation in Kerala

The State of Kerala laid emphasis on decentralisation through devolving
substantial development funds to Local Self Government Institutions (LSGIs)
for implementing locally appropriate development projects and programmes
through initiatives such as the People’s Planning Campaign (1996). The Kerala
Municipality Act (KM Act) 1994 was enacted in line with the 74 CAA,
endowing ULBs with necessary powers and authority to enable them to function
as institutions of self-government.

1.2. Organizational structure of urban governance in Kerala

The Local Self Government Department (LSGD), headed by the Additional
Chief Secretary to Government, is the nodal department for the governance of
all ULBs. The Directorate of Urban Affairs (DUA), established in 1962, is
concerned with the responsibility of administration of the Municipalities and
Municipal Corporations in the State.

There are 87 Municipalities / Municipal Councils and six Municipal
Corporations in the State categorised on the basis of population. The Municipal
Corporations and Municipalities are governed by the KM Act, 1994 which came
into force on 30 May 1994. There were 3527 wards? in 93 ULBs in the State
with number of councillors varying from 25 (Koothattukulam Municipality) to
100 (Thiruvananthapuram Corporation). In the test-checked ULBs, the number
of wards ranged from 26 (Aluva Municipality) to 100 (Thiruvananthapuram
Corporation).

In addition to ULBs, there are agencies that support, deliver or facilitate urban
infrastructure and services such as Kerala Water Authority (KWA),

The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Bill,
1991 recorded that it was considered necessary that provisions relating to ULBs are
incorporated in the Constitution for putting on a firmer footing the relationship between the
State Government and ULBs with respect to the functions, taxation powers, arrangements for
revenue sharing, for ensuring regular conduct of elections and timely elections in the case of
supersession, and for providing adequate representation for the weaker sections.

? 3113 wards in Municipalities and 414 in Corporations.



Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Kudumbashree, Suchitwa Mission, Trivandrum Development Authority
(TRIDA), Greater Cochin Development Authority (GCDA), Goshree Islands
Development Authority (GIDA), IMPACT Kerala Ltd. Atal Mission for
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), Smart City
Thiruvananthapuram Limited (SCTL), Cochin Smart City Mission Limited
(CSML), etc.

The organisational set up of urban governance in the State is presented in Chart
1.1:

Chart 1.1: Organisational set up of Urban Governance in the State

The Audit Objectives, criteria, scope and methodology are as detailed below.

1.3 Audit Objectives
The Performance Audit (PA) sought to ascertain

e whether the ULBs have been empowered by the State Government to
discharge their functions/responsibilities effectively through creation of
appropriately designed institutions/institutional mechanisms and their
functioning thereof;

e the effectiveness of devolution of functions stated to have been devolved;

¢ whether the ULBs have been empowered to access adequate financial and
human resources for discharge of functions stated to be devolved to them.



Chapter I - Introduction

1.4 Audit criteria

Audit observations were benchmarked against the criteria derived from the
following:

i) The Constitution (747 Amendment) Act, 1992

ii) The Kerala Municipality Act, 1994

ili) Reports of Central/State Finance Commissions

iv) State Government Orders, notifications, circulars and instructions
issued from time to time.

1.5 Audit scope and methodology

The Performance Audit covering the period from 2015-16 to 2019-20° was
carried out from August 2020 to March 2021. Twenty-one ULBs were selected
through simple random sampling with population as per 2011 census as the
basis (Appendix 1.1). Out of the 18 matters listed in the 12" Schedule, activities
relating to following were selected for test check.

a) Water Supply

b) Public Health and Sanitation

c) Solid Waste Management

d) Property Tax

e) Water tax/ charges
The Entry Conference was held on 22 October 2020 with the Principal
Secretary, LSGD in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria
were explained and agreed upon. The Exit Conference of the PA was conducted
with the Additional Chief Secretary, Local Self Government Department (ACS
LSGD) on 05 November 2021, wherein the observations in the report were
discussed in detail. The audit methodology involved analysis of records,

discussion with Government/ULB staff and eliciting responses of audited
institutions through audit queries.

1.6 Acknowledgement

Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Local Self
Government Department, Government of Kerala, Directorate of Urban Affairs
and all test-checked ULBs in the smooth conduct of the performance audit.

5Though the five year period from 2015 to 2020 was reckoned as the audit period, the updated
position as of March 2021 pertaining to the facts discussed in the report have been obtained
and included wherever made available.



CHAPTER II
EMPOWERMENT
THROUGH
INSTITUTIONAL
MECHANISM


CHAPTER II

EMPOWERMENT THROUGH INST
MECHANISM

2.1 Enactment of State Legislation

As the Kerala Municipalities Act, 1960 and the Kerala Municipal Corporations
Act, 1961 were not in conformity with the provisions of Part IXA of the
Constitution of India inserted by the Constitution (Seventy Fourth Amendment)
Act, 1992 (747 CAA), they had to be replaced by a comprehensive enactment
in line with the 747 CAA. The Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 (KM Act) was
enacted with effect from 30 May 1994, for securing a greater measure of
participation of the people in planned development and local Governmental
affairs by constituting Municipal Councils and Municipal Corporations and
through endowing the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) with powers and authority
to function as institutions of self-government.

2.1.1 Best practices

Audit observed the following achievements of the State towards effective
devolution:

. The People's Planning Campaign, initiated in 1996 in Kerala, sought to
decentralise powers to local governments with focus on local planning,
involving active participation of all sections of people for the
formulation and implementation of programmes for the overall
development of Local Self Government Institutions (LSGIs).

. Government has complied with the provisions‘ regarding constitution of
Ward Committees and Standing Committees as well as reservation of
seats for direct election in Municipal areas. The Secretaries of 21 selected
ULBs confirmed to Audit that Ward Committees and Ward Sabhas were
constituted during the five year period (2015-20), as envisaged under
Section 20 of KM Act. The three test checked Municipal Corporations
had eight Standing Committees? and 18 Municipalities had six Standing
Committees® each. The Municipal Secretary acted as the executive
officer of ULB.

. The State has taken a unique initiative to vest the District Planning
Committee (DPC) with powers of vetting and approval of the Local Self
Government plans, on account of the high extent of devolution to local
governments. The DPC is also to ensure the compliance of these plans
with State and Central Guidelines and priorities, including alignment
with centrally sponsored schemes, sectoral and inter sectoral integration
and convergence between local governments.

4 Article 2435, 2437 of the Constitution; Section 42, 6 of KM Act.

5 Standing Committees for Finance, Development, Welfare, Health, Works, Town planning,
Appeal relating to tax and Education

6 Standing Committees for Finance, Development, Welfare, Health, Works and Education, Arts
and Sports



Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

. The Act mentions that seats are reserved for Women, Scheduled Caste
(SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST), and women belonging to SC and ST, in
every Panchayat/Municipality. The reservation for SC and ST is to be in
proportion to their respective population in the Panchayat/Municipality.
In Kerala, 50 per cent of the seats reserved for SC and ST is reserved for
women belonging to SC and ST. Fifty per cent of the total seats
(including SC/ST women) is reserved for women.

. Ever since the enactment of Kerala Municipality Act and Kerala
Panchayat Raj Act, elections to the rural and urban local bodies in the
State have been conducted every five years, in 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010,
2015 and 2020.

. The State has constituted six Finance Commissions from 1994 onwards
till date. The State Finance Commissions have submitted their reports to
Government and the Action Taken Reports on the recommendations in
SFC reports have been submitted by the Government to the Legislature.

2.2 Comparison of State Level Legislations with provisions in 747
CAA

In order to give a constitutional footing to the Municipalities as institutions of
self-governance, Articles 243Q to 243ZG were introduced in the Constitution.
Audit compared the extent to which the new State legislation conformed to the
requirements of the 747 CAA. The results are indicated in Appendix 2.1.

The comparison revealed that the new statute was mostly in line with the 747
CAA in respect of inclusion of provisions of the Amendment Act. However,
compliance to the constitutional provisions by law does not guarantee effective
decentralisation on ground, unless followed by effective implementation. Audit
observed that legal provisions were not supplemented by fruitful actions,
thereby compromising the spirit of the Constitution amendment, as discussed in
ensuing paragraphs.

2.3 Actual status of devolution of functions to Local Governments

Government issued (September 1995) orders transferring functions, institutions
and schemes to ULBs, in conformity with provisions in KM Act. Audit
observed the following points in this connection;

. Though the Government informed Audit that 17 of the 18 (except Fire
Services) matters in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution have been
transferred, there was no documented mapping correlating the items
listed under General, Mandatory and Sector-wise functions in the First
Schedule of KM Act, with the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.

. The entity in which each of the functions/ sub-functions was vested was
not clearly indicated. Neither the KM Act nor the Government Order
of September 1995 indicated whether powers, authorities and
responsibilities continue to vest in the State and if so to what extent, in
respect of each function/ sub-function transferred to Municipalities. No
document showing activity wise mapping of functions with executing
agency was made available to Audit. Activity wise mapping would
enable clear demarcation of activities and the authority to which they

6


Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

are entrusted. In the absence of such demarcation of roles, Government
Departments and parastatals were involved in the execution of
functions stated to have devolved to Municipalities. Audit observed
overlapping of roles in execution and duplication of duties entrusted.

Audit attempted an Activity mapping of the role of ULBs with respect to
execution of functions enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution,
as included in the First Schedule of KM Act. Where the entire activities
pertaining to a function were undertaken by ULBs, the role of ULBs was
mapped as ‘full jurisdiction’, whereas if any of the related activities were
undertaken by Government Departments/ parastatals/ other agencies along with
ULBs, the role of ULBs was mapped as ‘limited’ (Appendix 2.2).

The exercise revealed that the ULBs were fully responsible for seven’ out of 17
functions transferred, and had limited role as regards ten functions. The
function-wise role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 2.1.

Chart 2.1: Role of ULBs in execution of functions devolved

= Full Jurisdiction = Limited Role = Not devolved

(Source: KM Act, Government orders)

It was seen that the ULBs play a limited role in major share of activities
pertaining to the devolved functions listed in the Twelfth Schedule. This
situation facilitates involvement of more than one agency in execution of a
function which adversely impacts upon the accountability in scheme
implementation as seen from instances mentioned in paragraph 2.4.

Government replied (December 2021) that KM Act already has thorough
separation of functions and listing of responsibilities and that a comprehensive
in-built activity mapping was in place, Chapters XIII to XX and First Schedule
of KM Act deal with specific functions and that detailed activity mapping has
been undertaken within the framework of the Act itself.

7 Roads and bridges, Slum improvement and upgradation, Urban poverty alleviation, Burials
and burial grounds, cremations, cremation grounds and electric crematoriums, Vital statistics
including registration of births and deaths, Public amenities including street lighting, parking
lots, bus stops and public conveniences, Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.

7


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

The reply is not acceptable as the State Government and Urban Local Bodies
would not be undertaking similar schemes in local bodies as discussed in
paragraph 2.4.2, if proper activity mapping was in place.

Feasibility of presenting the functions devolved as two lists comprising (a)
purely Municipality functions (Municipality List) and (b) Concurrent functions
between State and Municipality (Concurrent List), with clear demarcation of
boundaries, may be considered, along the lines of categorisation in the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution.

Government also assured (December 2021) that the suggestion on introducing
a concurrent list separating the functions of the State from those of the Local
Governments will be given due consideration.

2.4. Inadequacies in mode of devolution

2.4.1 Incomplete Transfer of Institutions and functionaries for functions
transferred

Government transferred (September 1995) institutions under 10 departments to
implement schemes for matters enumerated in Twelfth schedule of Constitution.
Four functionaries, viz., Deputy Director Agriculture, Fisheries Sub Inspector,
Industries Extension Officer and Senior Co-operative Inspector were also
transferred to Municipalities/ Municipal Corporations. However, the transfer
was not performed in a complete manner, as is evident from Table 2.1:

Table 2.1: Inadequacies in transfer of functions

Function stated
as devolved in
KM t /
Government ULBs Impact in test-checked ULBs
Order
(September
1995)

Dairy No transfer of institutions and | Dairy sector schemes had to be
Development functionaries implemented by other
implementing officers such as
Veterinary Surgeon, Secretary
of ULB, etc. in 11 out of 21 test
checked ULBs.
2 | Co-operation A Senior Co-operative | The service of Co-operative
Inspector was posted as the | Inspector not made available
implementing officer to the | and no — schemes/projects
Municipality/ | Corporation | relating to Co-operative sector
located in the district | proposed or implemented in
headquarters, who was to | any of the 21 ULBs.
oversee implementation in all

Actual status of transfer to

ULBs in the district.
3. | Industries Post of Industries Extension | Service of Industries Extension
Officer transferred to every | officer not made available for
ULB. implementing related schemes

in eight out of 21 ULBs.

iy Scheduled SC department schemes | Service of SCDO not provided
Caste(SC) transferred (February 1997) to | in seven out of 21 ULBs. SC
Development ULBs. Taluk level Scheduled | development schemes were

Caste Development Officer | being implemented by
SCDO) to offer technical | Secretary/Project Officer,



Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

Function stated
as devolved in
Sl. Lea ANH Actual status of transfer to ,
Government Impact in test-checked ULBs
No. onnen ULBs

(September
1995)

assistance and guidance to | Poverty Alleviation Cell of
implement SC schemes in | ULB.
ULBs.

Government stated in reply (December 2021) that the transfer of functions,
institutions and functionaries in decentralised governance cannot be complete,
as there are residual functions to be undertaken to further priorities at the level
of departments. It was also stated that most of the centrally sponsored schemes
envisage minor participation by Local governments, but definitive roles for the
departmental/district administration. In view of the financial constraints, it has
not been possible to create an independent cadre of related functionaries
exclusively for local governments. This has necessitated dual control — by both
the ULB and the department, with LSG priorities having to play second fiddle
to departmental requirements.

The reply of the Government corroborates the Audit observation about
incomplete transfer of functions to LSGIs and reflects the reality of
Governmental control dominating the Municipalities, despite decentralisation
initiatives taken so far.

2.4.2. Parallel implementation of schemes transferred to ULBs by
Government Departments

Audit observed that the schemes relating to the transferred functions which were
included in the Annual Plans of ULBs, were implemented in a parallel manner
by the Department concerned also. The following instances were noticed in this
regard:

. Activities under the function Agriculture, viz., running of Krishi
Bhavans, promotion of horticulture and vegetable cultivation,
development of seed production, etc., were transferred to ULBs. Audit
observed that schemes taken up by ULBs were implemented in a parallel
manner by Agriculture department also, through the same implementing
officer handling activities of both the department and ULB. During
2019-20, promotion of group farming for augmenting rice production
was implemented in the ULBs by the Department, whereas 117 test
checked ULBs, additionally undertook the same scheme in the name
‘Integrated rice production’.

. Schemes relating to development of the Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled
Tribes taken up by ULBs were implemented in a parallel manner by
Scheduled Caste Development Department with department funds. In
20 out of 21 test checked ULBs, Marriage assistance for SC women and
Scheme for housing for SC/ST were seen implemented by ULBs, while

3 Wadakkancherry, Thiruvalla, Pandalam, Nileshwar, Cherpulassery, Mattannur, Ottappalam,
Kalpetta, Irinjalakkuda, Haripad Municipalities and Thiruvananthapuram Corporation.

9


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

the same schemes were implemented by SC/ST Development
Department also.

. The Ward Committees/ Ward Sabhas are to identify and include eligible
applicants from the respective ward area, based on the criterion
prescribed in the beneficiary oriented scheme guidelines and submit the
final list to the ULB. Parallel implementation of schemes by
Government resulted in beneficiary selection by departmental officers
for departmental schemes implemented in ULBs. These beneficiary lists
prepared by departmental officers were not subject to scrutiny by Ward
Committees/ Ward Sabhas and for that reason, such selection was
vulnerable to the risk of inclusion of ineligible beneficiaries/duplication
of beneficiaries. Eleven? test-checked ULBs confirmed that they had no
role in selection of beneficiaries in schemes implemented by
departmental officers with department funds.

The Fourth SFC observed that there was no clarity in the relationship between
local Governments and State Government including parastatals performing
functions assigned to local governments and this has to be laid down clearly.
Though the recommendation was accepted by Government and State Finance
Commission Cell was entrusted with pursuing further action, no action was
taken in this regard.

Implementation of schemes of similar nature relating to the transferred
functions by ULBs and Government in a parallel manner may result in lack of
accountability of ULBs towards effective implementation of schemes. Further,
Departments continuing to implement programmes on devolved functions goes
against the spirit of decentralisation and reduces the autonomy of ULBs.

Accepting the audit observation, ACS LSGD stated in the Exit Conference
(November 2021) that the departments with their technical knowhow should be
supporting local bodies in their interventions on economic and social planning.
Transfer is not complete and assets and personnel are still under the control of
various Departments. The Administrative Departments need to monitor the
functioning of respective personnel transferred to Local Governments and
whether they involve actively in working groups and implementation of
schemes, thereby furthering the development agenda through the Local
Governments. ACS also remarked that had the supervision of departments been
effective, audit observations regarding ineffective implementation would not
have arisen.

2.5 Institutional mechanisms for empowerment of Urban Local
Bodies

The Constitution (74th Amendment Act), prescribed a common institutional
framework for the efficient and effective delivery of municipal services
comprising of mandatory institutions as mentioned in Appendix 2.1. The
discharging of the functions transferred to the Municipalities can be performed
in an effective manner only when appropriate institutions have been established,

° Cherpulassery, Irinjalakkuda, Haripad, Thiruvalla, | Wadakkencherry, Mattannur,
Nedumangad, Kayamkulam Municipalities, Kozhikode Corporation, Kochi Corporation,
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation.

10


Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

which are adequately empowered to enable fulfilment of intended objectives.
Audit undertook a review of the functioning of the institutional mechanism
established in the State in the following paragraphs.

2.5.1 State Election Commission

In line with provisions laid down by Article 243K of the Constitution of India
and Section 68 of KM Act 1994, the superintendence, direction and control of
the preparation of electoral rolls, and the conduct of all elections to the
Municipalities shall vest with the State Election Commission. In Kerala, the
State Election Commissioner (SEC) or officer authorised by him was
empowered for executing delimitation!? vide Section 10(1) of KPR Act, 1994
and Section 69 of KM Act, 1994 upto 10 January 2005. With effect from 10
January 2005, the KM Act (Section 69) provided that the Delimitation
Commission constituted by the Government shall be entrusted with the task of
delimitation. The Delimitation Commission was set up in the State in 2005 with
SEC as Chairperson and four officers not below the rank of Government
Secretary as members. The number of seats for councillors in each ULB is
determined on the basis of population of ULB. As per Article 243P (g) of the
Constitution, ‘population’ means the population as ascertained in the last
preceding census, of which relevant figures have been published.

Audit observed that though Government constituted Delimitation Commission
in the State in 2015 and 2020 and issued Delimitation guidelines, delimitation
was not conducted in the State. Consequently, the fixing of number of seats for
councillors and number of wards for the elections to ULBs held in 2015 and
2020 was done on the basis of population figures of 2001 census, except for 29
Municipalities and two Municipal Corporations!'.

As the number of seats for councillors was based on census figure of 2001, there
was an overall shortage of 60 Councillors as on date in the State (Corporations:
01, Municipalities: 59) as shown in Appendix 2.3. In the test-checked ULBs,
there was a shortage of nine Councillors.

Government stated (December 2021) that the shortage pointed out by Audit
occurred due to the peculiar situation arising out of the restrictions of Covid
which ruled out public consultations and compelled the Government to not
undertake the delimitation exercise even though the Delimitation Commission
had been constituted.

The reply of the Government did not justify the non-adoption of population
figures of census 2011 in 2015 election.

In the absence of timely delimitation of wards on the basis of population of
latest census, the elected representatives of ULBs in the State had to look after
the interests of larger group of persons than they would have had to, had
delimitation been effected with number of seats fixed as per the latest census.

10 Delimitation is the process of dividing Panchayats and Municipalities into as many
constituencies or wards as there are seats (member/councillors) and fixing or re-fixing of the
boundaries of the territorial constituencies for the purpose of general lection.

1 ‘The more recently formed Municipalities and Corporations for which the 2011 census figures
were adopted.

11]


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

2.5.2, Ombudsman and Appellate Tribunal

In accordance with Section 271G of the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act!?, an
Ombudsman was constituted to function as a state-level authority to conduct
investigations and enquiries on charges of corruption, maladministration or
irregularities in discharge of administrative functions by LSGIs, officials and
elected representatives of the LSGIs. The State constituted (May 2000) an
Ombudsman originally with seven members!* which was later dissolved and the
single Ombudsman system came into existence on 11 December 2001. Though
the Fourth SFC (2011-12) recommended conversion of Ombudsman into a
three-member body!‘, the recommendation was deferred for detaile
examination by Finance Department and was not seen acted upon till date. Thus,
the institution despite being entrusted with substantial responsibilities, continue
to be a single member body for the last twenty years.

An Appellate Tribunal for LSGIs, as envisaged in Section 509 of KM Act was
set up (February 2004)!> at Thiruvananthapuram to consider appeals and
revisions against decisions of LSGIs in exercise of their functions such as
assessment, demand and collection of taxes or fees or cess, issue of licences,
grants of permits, etc. Though the Fourth SFC recommended setting up of one
more Appellate Tribunal in the northern region of the State, preferably in
Kozhikode, this has not happened.

Timely implementation of the above recommendations of SFC would have
contributed to enhanced effectiveness in discharge of duties by Ombudsman and
Appellate Tribunal.

2.5.3 State Finance Commission

Article 243Y envisages that the Finance Commission constituted to review the
financial position of Panchayats shall also review the financial position of
Municipalities. The first SFC was constituted on 23 April 1994, covering the
period 1996-2001. Since then, six SFCs have been constituted in the State
(September 2021). The details regarding the timeliness in constituting SFCs and
submission of Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on the recommendations by
Government are given in Appendix 2.4.

Though the respective SFCs submitted the Reports before commencement of
award period, Audit observed significant delay in submission of ATR by
Government on the recommendations of SFCs in the case of first, second and
fifth SFC reports. Action Taken Reports on the recommendations of the Second
and Fifth SFCs were submitted to State Legislature after a prolonged delay of
over two years. The delay in placing the ATRs means that there is little effective
time left for implementation of the recommendations. It was also seen that an
effective mechanism was not ensured by Government for review of
implementation of accepted recommendations. Absence of such a system may

12 read with Section 57, 64, 90, 229 (A) of KM Act.

1 the Chairman who was holding the post of a High Court Judge and the other six members
drawn from Judicial, Administrative sections as well as from eminent social activists.

14 consisting of serving or retired High Court Judge, serving or retired Secretary to Government
and an eminent public person.

'S with a District Judge constituting the single member Tribunal.

12


Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

have contributed to the lethargy in implementation of accepted SFC
recommendations.

Audit compiled a status report of compliance of recommendations of previous
SFCs by Government, from the Action Taken Reports, which is presented in
Table 2.2.

Table 2.2: Status of acceptance and implementation of recommendations
of SFCs by Government

151 115 35 113
103 74 3 36
406 325 46 200

(Source: Action Taken Reports on the Reports of State Finance Commissions and Part I of the
Report of the Sixth SFC)

The substantial number of recommendations which have been accepted by
Government but remain to be implemented, is a matter of concern as it reflects
the low priority assigned by Government to the suggestions of the constitutional
body set up for comprehensive analysis and betterment of the financial position
of ULBs in the State.

The Additional Chief Secretary LSGD pointed out in the Exit Conference
(November 2021) that compared to other States, SFCs have been constituted in
a timely manner in Kerala and their recommendations have been duly
considered by Government. Though there are plenty of recommendations on
which action needs to be taken, many of them are complementary/
supplementary recommendations, and the critical ones related to devolution of
funds have been consistently acted upon by GoK. As the SFCs were constituted
for the specific purpose of appropriate devolution of funds to Local
Governments, Audit is to consider whether this has been achieved in a
substantial manner. Government also stated (December 2021) that some of the
recommendations of earlier SFCs have become redundant in the context of new
developments/ recommendations and that these specific recommendations are
being reviewed to bring about compliance and closure.

The contention of ACS that the recommendations on devolution of funds have
been acted upon is not acceptable as it was seen that the recommendations to be
implemented included significant recommendations facilitating empowerment
of Local bodies as listed in Appendix 2.5.

Further, though recommendations on devolution of funds made by the first four
SFCs were accepted as such or with modifications, as regards the Fifth SFC,
most of the core devolution recommendations, which were formulated on the
basis of clear norms for general purpose, maintenance of assets and
development, have been rejected. Though there is no obligation on the part of
the Government to accept all or some of the recommendations of SFCs,
rejection of all major recommendations, even though with detailed justification,
would only subvert the fiscal decentralisation system.

13


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

The First SFC in its final report (February 1996) stated that implementation of
the recommendations of SFC has to be closely watched to analyse the results
achieved. Important basic economic indicators of Panchayats and
Municipalities which would help the State Government to make accurate
assessments of the financial and developmental needs of the Local Bodies (LBs)
are now Virtually lacking and can be collected and collated for future use only
if a concerted attempt is started now itself. The Commission therefore
recommended constitution of a special cell in Finance Department to

. prepare a reliable database on important basic economic indicators of
the rural and urban LBs through appropriately drawn up formats and to
preserve the same in floppy disc for future reference.

. conduct comprehensive case studies in selected LBs on upgradation of
standards of civic administration at a desired level as well as special
problems, assessment of gap between the existing resources and cost of
civic services at satisfactory standards.

The State Finance Commission Cell was constituted in Finance Department,
GoK in 1996. In reply to the audit enquiry on the above aspects, the SFC Cell
stated (September 2021) that the above requirements have not been fulfilled.
The reply is indicative of the lack of prudence towards effective compliance
with the recommendations of SFCs.

2.5.3.1 Constitution of SFCs

The State Finance Commission shall consist of members not exceeding three,
including the Chairman. One member of SFC shall have special knowledge and
experience in financial matters and economics and the other two shall be
persons having experience in public administration or local administration or
having special knowledge in financial matters and accounts of the Government
and local bodies.

The Twelfth Central Finance Commission had remarked that since the SFCs are
temporary bodies required to discharge their functions within the time limit, all
members and Chairman should be full time. Further, routine transfers of
Government officials if included in SFCs, may lead to frequent reconstitution
of SFCs, which could be avoided if the SFC comprises of non-official experts.
However, it was observed that all six SFCs formed in the State till date
comprised of two Government Secretaries representing Finance and Local Self
Government Departments as members, apart from the Chairman who was a non-
official member. Government replied (December 2021) that the inclusion of
Local Self Government and Finance Secretaries in SFCs has ensured that the
most critical recommendations regarding the nature of devolution and transfers
are seamlessly implemented by Government.

However, Audit observed that, despite these Secretaries playing key roles in
formulating recommendations offered by SFCs and the Administrative
Departments under them vested with the responsibility of implementing the
accepted recommendations, 200 (61.50 per cent) out of 325 accepted
recommendations were yet to be implemented.

14


Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

2.6 Powers of the State Government over ULBs

The KM Act laid down provisions which enabled the State Government to have
overriding powers on ULBs, which was against the spirit of the 74° CAA.
Some of these provisions are listed in Appendix 2.6.

It was noticed that an amendment (w.e.f. 24 March 1999) to section 58 of the
KM Act resulted in imparting very wide powers to the State Government to
issue directions to Municipalities. Prior to the amendment, the section permitted
the Government to issue directions to a Municipality only after giving the
Municipality an opportunity to be heard. Also, such direction could be issued
only if the Government was satisfied that any action taken/order issued/license
or permission granted by the Municipal Authority was defective on specific
grounds!®, The amendment has bestowed upon the Government, the power to
issue directions to the Municipality in matters of finance, maintenance of
accounts, office management, selection of schemes, sites and beneficiaries,
proper functioning of Ward Sabhas and Ward Committees, welfare
programmes, environment control, etc., and the Municipality will have to
comply with such directions.

On the other hand, as a positive step towards safeguarding the decision making
powers of Municipalities, Section 57 which empowers the Government with
powers to suspend and cancel resolutions of the Council was amended to
include Section 57(2) w.e.f. 24 March 1999. Consequent upon the amendment,
the Government has to refer any proposal for suspension/cancellation of a
decision of the Municipal Council to the Ombudsman or to the Tribunal for
Local Self-Government Institutions and the Government may cancel/amend/
approve a resolution/decision of the Council only based on the Tribunal’s
Report, after giving the Municipality an opportunity of being heard.

Government replied (December 2021) that the principle behind devolution to
Local Government, viz., the paramountcy of people and Grama/Ward Sabhas
was the responsibility of the State while furthering local governance systems.
However, whenever it was noticed that some local action tended to have
negative ramifications on state and central policy and imperatives or when some
areas of inaction were detrimental to the interests of citizens, particularly
vulnerable communities, the State had to step in.

The Government’s response is silent on the aspect of doing away with the
Municipality’s right to be heard. This right of the Municipality needs to be
safeguarded even in the extreme situations where the State may have to step in.
Functional autonomy to Local Governments, envisaged by the 747 CAA is
compromised through such amendments.

2.7... District Planning Committee

Section 53 of KM Act provides for the constitution of a District Planning
Committee (DPC) for consolidation of plans prepared by the Panchayats and
the Municipalities. The DPC is also to prepare a draft development plan for the

16 (a) erroneous, improper etc., or (b) causes or is likely to cause injustice to any person etc.,
(०) causes or is likely to cause undue hardship etc., to any person or (d) omits to discharge a
legal duty or fulfil an obligation cast upon it by law, or (०) is against public interest and better
administration of the Municipality

15


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

district as a whole and matters of common interest between the Panchayats and
the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and other
physical and natural resources, integrated development of infrastructure and
environment conservation, etc. The ULBs upload the annual plans prepared and
approved by Municipal Council in the software Sulekha, which are in turn
approved by respective DPCs. The DPCs of 14 districts have approved the
Annual Plans uploaded by the ULBs during the period from 2015-16 to 2019-
20. However, Audit observed as follows:

. Though the DPC is to prepare the Draft Development Plan for the whole
district for the next financial year before 30 September of every year,
and the Chairman of the Committee is to forward the same to the
Government for approval, District Plan was prepared only once in 2017-
18 during the audit period.

. The Draft Development Plan did not cover matters of common interest
between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including spatial
planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the
integrated development of infrastructure and environmental
conservation and the extent and type of available resources.

. As per para 15.2 of Plan formulation and Subsidy Guidelines 2016-17,
District Development Vision document is to be prepared once in five
years by each DPC. Audit observed that the District Development
Vision document has not been prepared by 10765.

The ACS, LSGD stated in the Exit Conference (November 2021) that
preparation of District Plan was a very complicated process necessitating
involvement of many technical institutions and experts which would not be easy
to access in all districts in the State. As the process of formulation of District
plan is not detailed by the Constitution, there is no clear instruction at any level.
As far as the Vision Document is concerned, though the five year planning
process is taking care of the objective, the State would work towards preparing
the document. It was also informed that the Town and Country Planning Act
was being amended to include the feature of spatial planning as well as risk
informed planning.

The integration and consolidation of local level plans prepared by all Local
Governments of the region into a District plan by DPC would have enabled
streamlining of planning process by scientifically keeping track of the
development status of the district.

2.8 Metropolitan Planning Committee

Article 243ZE mandates constitution of a Metropolitan Planning Committee
(MPC) in every Metropolitan area'” to prepare a draft development plan for the
area as a whole. Section 54 of the KM Act, 1994 provides for constitution of
MPC to prepare a draft development plan for Metropolitan Areas. The Kerala

"7 Metropolitan area denotes an area having a population of ten lakh or more, comprised in one
or more districts and consisting of two or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other
contiguous areas, specified by the Governor by public notification to be Metropolitan area.

16


Chapter II - Empowerment Through Institutional Mechanism

Metropolitan Planning Committee (Election of Members and Proceedings of
Meeting) Rules, 1995 were framed under Section 54 of the KM Act, 1994.

Despite formulation of Rules, no Metropolitan areas have been notified in
Kerala and MPCs have not been constituted in the State so far. Constitution of
MPCs would have enabled formation of sub-committees consisting of experts
nominated from the respective fields by the Committee, for submitting reports
after studying about the development requirements of that Metropolitan area.

The ACS, LSGD stated (November 2021) in response that there was no ULB in
Kerala which qualifies for Metropolitan area with a population above 10 lakh
and that Kochi Corporation would achieve it if the Urban agglomeration also is
taken into account. ACS added that the next Five Year Plan of the State would
consider whether the Greater Kochi Area could be notified as a Metropolitan
Area.

17


CHAPTER III
EFFICACY IN

DEVOLUTION OF
FUNCTIONS



EFFI

In accordance with Article 243W of 74" CAA, Section 30 (3) of Kerala
Municipality Act envisages that the Government shall transfer all institutions,
schemes, buildings, other properties, assets and liabilities connected with the
matters mentioned in the First Schedule, to the Municipalities concerned.
Further, under section 30(4), the Central and State Plan allocations and the
annual budget allocation in respect of the subjects transferred to the
Municipalities by the Government shall be wholly allotted to the respective
Municipalities.

Audit analysed the effectiveness of devolution of specific functions stated to
have been devolved, by reviewing the roles performed by the test-checked
ULBs in the overall implementation of the function. Water Supply, Water
Charges, Solid Waste Management, Public Health and Sanitation and Property
Tax were the functions selected to assess the efficacy of devolution.

3.1. Water Supply

The Kerala Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1986 which came into force on 01
March 1984, transferred all existing water supply and sewerage services,
sewerage works and sewage farms to Kerala Water Authority (KWA), an
autonomous authority for providing water supply and undertaking sewerage
related functions in the State. It also stipulated that all assets and liabilities of
ULBs relating to water supply were to be transferred to KWA. The KWA was
to implement water supply schemes, plan for extension, execute Operation and
Maintenance and collect water charges from consumers. The KM Act, 1994
included provisions envisaging the re-transfer of assets, water supply services
etc., to the Municipalities keeping in view the goal of empowering the local
government institutions. However, audit scrutiny in test-checked ULBs
revealed that these provisions have not been adhered to at ground level, as
discussed in the following paragraphs.

3.1.1 Deviation from constitutional provisions of devolution

Audit observed the following deviations from the principles of devolution
enacted by 747 CAA, in execution of the function of water supply in test-
checked ULBs:

. Section 315 of KM Act provides that Government, from the date
specified by notification in the Gazette, transfer all assets, water supply
and sewerage service, execution of works, conduct of water supply,
distribution, fixing water charge, collection, etc., to the Municipality.
However, Local Self Government Department, GoK confirmed to Audit
(January 2021) that such a notification has not been issued by
Government. Consequently, the assets, liabilities, etc., with regard to
water supply and sewerage services continue to be vested in the
parastatal, KWA. Unless Government, by notification, transfers the
assets, liabilities and all duties related to Water Supply to the ULBs, the
State cannot claim to have initiated the devolution of even basic core

19


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

functions to Local Governments, in compliance with the provisions of
KM Act.

The ULBs identify their specific needs and formulate annual plan
projects for distribution pipelines, which are approved by DPC. The
ULBs take up extension of distribution pipeline by arranging deposit
works with KWA, but the assets thus created with Municipal fund are
owned by KWA and not transferred to the ULBs. Pipelines laid with
ULB funds thereafter became assets of KWA and Operation and
Maintenance of water supply schemes remained to be the responsibility
of KWA. Audit observed that despite the test-checked ULBs paying
337.76 crore to KWA during the audit period (2015-2020) for
undertaking these deposit works, the capital assets created with funds
from ULBs were not seen transferred to ULBs.

Audit observed that the public taps in ULBs were not fitted with water
meters in the test-checked ULBs to record quantity of water consumed,
which deprived assurance of level of actual consumption by ULBs.
Further, no joint verification to locate non-functioning taps in their
respective areas of jurisdiction was seen to be undertaken by the test-
checked ULBs and KWA during the audit period. Consequently, no
action could be taken by the selected ULBs to identify and repair the
defunct taps. Therefore, ULBs continue to pay annual charges fixed by
KWA for water supply, which were not commensurate with their levels
of actual consumption.

Government instructed (February 2019) that in case of on-going works
entrusted to KWA which are not feasible, a joint meeting of LSGIs and
KWA is to be convened and changes if any required for the
project/scheme are to be made, to make the project feasible. Thirteen'®
test-checked ULBs stated that such a joint meeting was not convened
during the audit period. Further, KWA had not furnished Utilisation
Certificates (UC) for deposit works amounting to 233.94 crore to the

test-checked ULBs
UCs by KWA for

lespite requests made by ULBs. Non-furnishing of
works entrusted, could be indicative of non-

completion of works and the probability of some of them being

infeasible to pursue.

However, in the absence of joint meetings of

officials of ULBs and KWA, no efforts were seen undertaken to identify
such works and suggest modifications to make them feasible for
execution.

The Final report of Kerala State Urban Development Project issued (July
2002) by Local Self Government Department states that the White Paper
on Kerala Water Authority based on a review of functions of KWA, had
emphasised the need to transfer responsibility of urban water supply
distribution to ULBs, by 2007. It was also mentioned that KWA will be
vested with authority only to provide, meter and charge bulk water
supply to Local Governments. However, even after a lapse of 13 years,
KWA still builds and maintains all bulk water supply related assets and

'SJrinjalakkuda, Wadakkancherry, Cherpulassery, Ottappalam, Kalpetta, Mattannur, Panoor,
Nileshwar, Kayamkulam, Haripad, Pandalam, Kochi Corporation, Thiruvananthapuram
Corporation

20


Chapter III - Efficacy In Devolution Of Functions

water supply distribution system, except in Thrissur Municipal
Corporation, where the ULB manages water supply distribution system
within its jurisdiction.

Government stated in reply (December 2021) that the notification to transfer
water supply systems from KWA to Local Governments has not been issued
since the human resources to undertake the ensuing responsibilities have not
been transferred to them by the department concerned, the absence of which
would only create liability and difficulty for ULBs in the current scenario. It
was also stated that as the major drinking water supply schemes cover several
local governments or several districts, centralised management by a state level
agency is necessitated.

The above reply is indicative of the reluctance of State in endowing Local
Governments with self-sufficiency in implementing schemes related to
devolved functions. Persistence of control over local governments by State level
agencies dilutes the spirit of devolution, raising concerns about the extent of
meaningful decentralisation that has taken place in the State. In the light of the
effective decentralised management of water supply by Thrissur Municipal
Corporation, the Government needs to transfer the requisite manpower and
technical expertise to the Local Governments to implement the water supply
schemes, thereby equipping them to execute the function effectively.

3.1.2 Inadequacies in Service Level Benchmarking

The Handbook of Service Level Benchmarking, Ministry of Urban
Development, Government of India recorded (2008) that Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) are deficient in providing quality services to the existing population in
spite of their accountability to citizens. Benchmarking involves the measuring
and monitoring of service provider performance on a systematic and continuous
basis. Sustained benchmarking can help to identify performance gaps in service
delivery and introduce improvements through the sharing of information and
best practices, ultimately resulting in better services to the people in ULBs.

The Thirteenth Central Finance Commission made it mandatory for ULBs to
notify, by the end of fiscal year, the service standards against nine service level
benchmarks (SLBs) in four service sectors-water supply, sewerage, solid waste
management and storm water drainage, proposed to be achieved in the
succeeding fiscal year. The Fourteenth Central Finance Commission reiterated
that the ULBs will have to measure and publish SLBs for basic services as
mandatory pre-requisite for availing performance grant.

Audit observed that despite being the parastatal playing key role in water
supply, KWA neither adopted the performance measurement of benchmarking
nor reported the details of assessment of SLBs relating to Water supply to
ULBs. Consequently, ULBs had to prepare the SLBs in the absence of specific
data relating to the actual implementation of the function from KWA. This is
fraught with the risk of SLB data prepared by ULBs being unrealistic and short
of authenticity. Negligence in assessment of SLBs would be all the more crucial
as it may adversely impact upon effectiveness in monitoring of performance
indicators like quality of water supplied, which has a direct linkage to public
health hazards.

21


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

While accepting the necessity of a system of benchmarking of service delivery
standards of public service, Government reiterated (December 2021) that this
needs to be standardised at the state level and be included in the Citizen’s
Charter of each ULB. It was also emphasised that social accountability
instruments including social audit needs to be set up to periodically monitor
progress in achievement of requisite standards of benchmarking.

3.1.3 Water Charges

Section 315 (b) of KM Act specifies that the right to recover arrears of sewerage
charge, water charge, meter rent and of any cost of fees relating to water supply
and sewerage services, shall be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the
Municipality. However, Water charges are not, at present, a source of revenue
to ULBs in the state, as they are being collected by KWA. Scrutiny of records
in selected ULBs revealed that in actual practice, water charges for public taps
at rates fixed by KWA were being paid by ULBs to KWA annually for supply
of water to the areas in their jurisdiction. Further, the rates of water charges
collected from consumers are fixed by Government on the basis of proposals
submitted by KWA. The ULBs did not have any role in fixing water charges to
be collected in their areas of jurisdiction.

Revision” of water charges was last effected by KWA in October 2014. Audit
observed that the water charges as fixed by KWA to be paid by ULBs for each
public tap was रैं7884 per year. The test checked ULBs paid %9.66 crore to KWA
for public taps during the audit period. Had the ULBs been vested with the right
to recover the water charges as envisaged in the Statute, it would have
contributed to hike in own revenue of ULBs, which in turn could be utilised for
developmental activities.

3.2 Solid Waste Management

In accordance with Article 243W, performance of functions and the
implementation of schemes related to Solid Waste Management (SWM)
included in the Twelfth Schedule were entrusted to ULBs under Section 30 of
the KM Act read with the First Schedule. Section 332 of KM Act, 1994 entrusts
to the ULBs, the tasks of recycling, treating, processing and disposing of solid
wastes within their areas of jurisdiction.

The Suchitwa Mission”! functions as the Technical Support Group (TSG) in
Waste Management sector under the Local Self Government Department
(LSGD), Government of Kerala. Its governing body is comprised of the
Minister for Local Self Government Department as Chairperson, Additional
Chief Secretary, LSGD as Vice Chairperson, Commissioner for Rural
Development as Member Secretary and Executive Director, Suchitwa Mission
as Member Convener.

The Mission also acts as the Nodal agency for implementing schemes like
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban), Swachh Bharat Mission (Rural), etc. State and
Central share of funds for SWM are routed through Suchitwa Mission.

19 Except in Thrissur Municipal Corporation.

20 applicable to all type of consumers including Domestic/ Non-Domestic/ Industrial.

2 The Clean Kerala Mission and Kerala Total Sanitation and Health Mission were integrated to
form Suchitwa Mission in September 2008.

22


Chapter III - Efficacy In Devolution Of Functions

Audit however observed that the action of the above agency was not always in
conformity with the principles of decentralisation, as discussed below.

Government uses its authority under Section 58 of the KM Act to issue
directions to ULBs as regards waste management. For instance, Government
directed (September 2020) the ULBs citing Section 58, to enter into a
participatory agreement with Suchitwa Mission in connection with a World
Bank Aided Project (Kerala Solid Waste Management Project (KSWMP)) and
to return the appended document signed before the date specified therein. The
agreement specified that the ULB wished to enter into a participation agreement
with Suchitwa Mission and become a participating ULB under KSWMP. This
was clearly, a case of Government imposing its will on the ULBs rather than
the ULB exercising its choice. Audit notes that this was possible only because
of an amendment to Section 58 of the KM Act in March 1999, which introduced
blanket powers to the State Government to issue directions to a Municipality,
thereby concentrating power in the hands of the State contrary to the spirit of
the 74 CAA. Prior to that, the Section permitted the Government to issue
directions to a Municipality only after giving the Municipality an opportunity
to be heard except under special circumstances as mentioned in Paragraph 2.6.

3.2.1 Efficiency in disposal of wastes generated

Wastes which originate in ULBs can be grouped under Bio-waste, Non bio-
recyclable, and non bio-non recyclable”. Whether the ULBs were equipped to
handle the waste generated was looked into, in terms of quantity of waste
generated and capacity to handle the same. The details of quantum of wastes
generated and disposed by test-checked ULBs are given in Appendix 3.1.

Audit noticed that all Municipalities were not fully equipped to handle the
wastes being generated in their jurisdiction, raising concerns about the efficacy
of implementation of the devolved function of Solid Waste Management. Of the
test-checked ULBs, the capacity to handle wastes was not in conformity with
the quantum of wastes generated, in nine ULBs in the case of Bio-wastes and
nine and eleven ULBs in the case of non-bio-recyclable and non-bio-non-
recyclable wastes respectively. On joint site verification in four” selected ULBs
it was found that solid waste was piled up in public places causing
environmental issues.

LSGIs entrusted management of non-biodegradable waste to an agency, Clean
Kerala Company Limited (CKCL). The Company was formed in 2013 with a
vision to support local governments to manage the non-biodegradable solid
waste including plastic waste, e-waste, etc., using the most appropriate,
innovative and scientific methods with people’s participation.

In the test checked 21 ULBs, it was seen that 15 ULBs had executed agreement
with CKCL for collection of plastic wastes. In the remaining six ULBs™, there
was no effective mechanism in place to monitor the disposal of plastic wastes.
Further, no agreement was seen executed by any of the selected ULBs with

2 A non-biodegradable material is a type of material which cannot be broken down by natural
organisms and serve as a source of pollution. Some of them (non-bio-recyclable) can be
recycled for future use whereas others (non-bio-non-recyclable) are non-recyclable.

23 Kayamkulam, Pandalam, Kattappana Municipalities and Kochi Corporation.

ख Aluva, Kalpetta, Panoor, Ponnani, Koduvally Municipalities and Kochi Corporations.

23


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

CKCL for collection of e-waste.

The Clean Kerala Company had to enable every local body in the state to
acquire adequate and appropriate facilities for safe management of solid waste.
However, CKCL confirmed to Audit that it had not entered into agreements
with 499 out of 1200 LSGIs in the State to facilitate timely removal of non bio-
degradable waste.

The parastatals involved in the execution of devolved functions may be assigned
supportive roles, with the prime responsibility being vested in Local
Governments. It was evident that ULBs were not equipped enough to effectively
pursue the devolved function and could not also utilise the agencies set up to
handhold and technically support solid waste management ventures. The
percentage of expenditure out of the allotted funds varied from 1.58 to 45.16
only, during the audit period (2015-2020) (Appendix 3.2).

Thus, despite Solid Waste Management having been categorised as a function
to be devolved to ULBs under the Twelfth Schedule and specific provisions
relating to the function included in the KM Act under Sections 326 to 345, the
efficacy of devolution of the said function remains a moot point. Devolution of
function to ULBs has not been effective in true sense, going by the extent of
expenditure incurred and capacity for disposal of wastes.

The ACS, LSGD stated in the Exit Conference (November 2021) that
convergence of Suchitwa Mission, Haritha Keralam Mission and Clean Kerala
Company Limited was being considered as they work together to facilitate Solid
and Liquid Waste Management, formulate SWM Action Plans, identify
agencies to execute functions, negotiate with Local Bodies, etc., for better
management of the function.

3.3. Public Health and Sanitation

Section 135 of the Travancore-Cochin Public Health Act, 1955 and Section 127
of the Madras Public Health Act, 1939 required that every Municipality shall
earmark not less than 30 per cent of its income from all sources other than grants
by the Government, for expenditure on public health in its local area including
expenditure on medical relief. With decentralisation, the functions, institutions
and schemes of health care institutions in the government sector were
transferred to the Local bodies. Accordingly, institutions under the departments
of Health Services, Homoeopathy and Indian System of Medicine at the Grama,
block and district level came under the control of LSGIs. Maintenance of
Environmental hygiene is also a mandatory function of ULBs under the KM
Act, 1994. ULB health wing staff (health supervisors, health inspectors, and
JPHN?®) are responsible for ensuring sanitation through chlorination of wells,
pre-monsoon cleaning, fumigation against mosquitoes, etc., for control of
vector borne diseases, cleaning of public markets and streets engaging
contingent sanitation staff, purchase of cleaning equipment, etc.

25 Junior Public Health Nurse

24


Chapter III - Efficacy In Devolution Of Functions

3.3.1 Issues in Decentralisation of Health Sector

The ULBs prepared budget and allocated funds in annual plans of projects/
schemes as envisaged in Plan formulation and Subsidy guidelines. The Annual
plan projects/schemes were uploaded in Sulekha software and approved by
District Planning Committee. Plan schemes under Public Health and Sanitation
are implemented utilising development funds and non-road maintenance funds.
The following aspects regarding execution of the said function were noticed in
Audit:

. Running of Community Health Centres (CHCs), Government Hospitals
and Taluk Headquarters Hospitals in Corporation and Municipal areas
are entrusted to the Corporation Councils and Municipal Councils
respectively. However, functionaries/personnel of Public Health
Institutions are not yet transferred to ULBs. Regular employees of
Public Health Institutions continue as state government employees
under respective departments. ULBs have only a limited control over
these functionaries/personnel. The Government continues to be
responsible for recruitment, placement and promotion as well as
payment of salary and allowances of health personnel posted to Local
Governments. Thus, the staff of ULBs is under the dual control of
Government and Local Body. The duality of responsibilities and control
over health care is not in line with the transfer of functionaries
envisioned in 74" CAA.

. Audit noted that in February 2021, an ordinance has been promulgated
(The Kerala Public Heath Ordinance 2021) to endow the health
functionaries of the State, District and Local Self Government
Institutions with necessary powers and authority for enhancement of the
administration of public health in the State. The Ordinance also aimed
at entrusting health functionaries in LSGIs with the functions of the
preparation of action plans for public health and implementation of
schemes for containing emerging diseases, outbreaks of communicable
diseases, etc. Until then, only the Travancore-Cochin Public Health Act,
1955 and the Madras Public Health Act, 1939 covered the subject of
Public Health concerning the State, thus depriving it of a unified Health
Act for over half a century. The ordinance has not yet been enacted
(September 2021).

The Government replied (December 2021) that the involvement of LSGIs in
community health is significant ranging from medicine supply, providing
dialysis equipment, supporting palliative care interventions, besides the recent
Covid related interventions. It was also stated that the XV Central Finance
Commission had recommended introduction of health grant to local
governments in states based on the experience of local bodies of Kerala in
managing the pandemic.

However, the Government’s reply does not meet the issues raised by Audit.
3.3.2. Environmental Hygiene

Regulation of slaughtering of animals and sale of meat is a mandatory function
of ULBs as per first schedule of KM Act, 1994. In the 21 ULBs test checked,

25


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

slaughter houses were functioning only in four ULBs”° as of March 2021. In the
remaining 17 ULBs, no slaughter houses were seen functioning, which is
indicative of the possibility of slaughtering being performed illegally. The joint
site verification conducted by the Audit team and officials of Kochi Corporation
(09 March 2021) in the slaughtering house functioning under the Corporation,
revealed that the slaughter house was functioning under very low hygienic
standards posing environment hazards and there was no system in place for
disposal of slaughter waste. The biogas plant installed was not functioning and
the slaughter house was functioning without the mandatory approval of Kerala
State Pollution Control Board.

3.4 Involvement of other Parastatals in discharge of functions

Apart from the parastatals mentioned in discharge of functions with respect to
water supply and solid waste management, agencies such as IMPACT Kerala
Limited, Smart City Thiruvananthapuram Limited, Cochin Smart Mission
Limited (CSML), State Mission Management Unit AMRUT, etc., also played
prominent roles in implementation of schemes in ULBs as detailed below:

3.4.1 IMPACT Kerala Limited

Government issued (October 2017) order registering IMPACT Kerala Ltd.
(Investment in Municipal and Panchayat Asset Creation for Transformation
Kerala Ltd.) as the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for Kerala Infrastructure
Investment Fund Board (KIIFB) to implement major infrastructure projects in
Local Self Government sector as a Limited Company. The objectives of
IMPACT Kerala Ltd. include developing schemes and projects to be pursued
by the IMPACT Kerala Ltd. or by local bodies, sourcing and expending funds
for developmental activities on behalf of local bodies or other public agencies,
etc. Procedures and General Guidelines for project registration with KIIFB
issued (February 2018) by Government stipulated that Detailed Project Reports
(DPR) shall be prepared by the SPV for all projects identified for
implementation by availing assistance (partly/fully) from KIIFB.

The status of implementation of projects of IMPACT Kerala as on March 2021
in test checked ULBs is as shown in Table 3.1:

Table 3.1: Status of implementation of projects by IMPACT Kerala

Name of Project Name of ULB Project outlay Whether
(% in crore) sanction for
funding by
Government
received
Building for New | Pandalam 5.89 No
Municipalities
Establishing Wadakkanchery 10.00 No*
Sense a Ottappalam 11.40 Yes
Establishing modern | Thiruvalla 10.36 Yes
Abattoirs/Slaughter Kozhikode Corporation | 11.56 Yes
House Kayamkulam 5.70 No
Kochi Corporation 14.26 No

26 Kochi Corporation, Kattappana, Pathanamthitta and Kayamkulam Municipalities

26


Chapter III - Efficacy In Devolution Of Functions

Name of Project Name of ULB Project outlay Whether
(® in crore) sanction for
funding by
Government
received
Establishing Modern | Haripad 11.44 No
Gas Fired | Kozhikode 0.80 No*
Crematorium Corporation
Ponnani 0.80 No
Establishing Modern | Nedumangad 34.60 No
Markets Wadakkanche: 19.31 Yes
Aluva 4.60 Not furnished
(Source: Data obtained from IMPACT Kerala Ltd.)
*DPR not submitted to KIIFB
Despite funds from KIIFB sourced through an SPV for implementation of

projects in local bodies, the progress of works announced in budget speeches of
2016-17 and 2017-18 has been very slow.

IMPACT Kerala replied (April 2021) that majority of its staff members were
appointed during the period from August 2019 to October 2019 and that the
company became fully operational only from October 2019. It was also stated
that DPRs of all the projects were prepared by ULBs and No Objection
Certificates from Government and clearances from State Pollution Control
Board were wanting in the case of many projects. Further, structural designs
were to be examined by Engineering Colleges and concurrence obtained from
Government for Septage Treatment plants.

Audit observed that the role of ULBs in implementing projects relating to their
mandatory functions such as Septage treatment plants, slaughter houses,
crematoriums etc., were being assigned to parastatal agencies, whose mode of
functioning involved a series of procedures/multiple levels of clearances. It was
also seen that though KIIFB guidelines specified that the SPV was to prepare
DPRs, the DPRs of projects in test checked ULBs were prepared by ULBs
themselves.

3.4.2 State Mission Management Unit, AMRUT - Imposition of loan on
Municipalities
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)”’ aims at
providing basic services to households and building amenities in cities to
improve the quality of life of the poor. The scheme was launched on 01
September 2015 with a mission period of five years (2015-2020) and
subsequently extended upto March 2022. As per Clause 13.1 of the AMRUT
Guidelines, States have to undertake extensive capacity building activities for
their ULBs to achieve Urban Reforms and implement projects in Mission Mode.
The State Mission Management Unit (SMMU) coordinates implementation of
projects like water supply, sewerage and septage management, storm water
drainage, etc., in AMRUT cities with State Government and AMRUT Mission
Directorate, Government of India. AMRUT projects are being implemented in

274 revamped programme of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (INNURM).

27


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

all six Corporations”* and three Municipalities” in the State.

The fund sharing pattern for AMRUT in the State involves 50 per cent Central
share, 30 per cent State share and 20 per cent ULB share. As most of the
AMRUT Cities did not have the financial capacity to meet the ULB share,
Government decided (March 2018) to execute the projects through specialized
parastatal agencies, based on resolution passed by the ULB. Such arrangements
were to be executed by way of a tripartite agreement amongst the State
Government, the specialized parastatal agency and the Municipality concerned.
GoK was to contribute 15 per cent of ULB share upfront subject to the condition
that, both the principal amount and interest at the rate of 7.50 per cent would be
recovered from the annual plan fund allocation to ULBs over a period of ten
years.

Scrutiny of records in three ULBs*’selected for implementation of AMRUT
projects revealed that the opinion of the Council of ULB which was against
availing loan facility due to difficulty in repayment, was not considered while
sanctioning projects. Request for loan was not seen approved in the Council and
forwarded to Government/SMMU. While requesting exemption from
implementing AMRUT projects, though the selected ULB (Kannur
Corporation) with annual plan fund allocation of %30 crore had expressed
inability to set aside %33 crore for AMRUT as it would result in non-
implementation of developmental projects, the opinion of the Corporation was
overridden by the State. Such instances are clearly not in consonance with the
spirit of the 747 CAA which sought to set on a firm footing the rights and
privileges of local self-governing units.

The ACS, LSGD while acknowledging (November 2021) that any Centrally
sponsored scheme with its conditionalities in the space of ULB takes away the
decision making power of the ULB, stated that ULBs did not have a choice to
opt out of such schemes. Audit observes that the State Government needs to
ascertain the repayment capacity of ULBs and uphold the decision of the
Municipal/Corporation Councils and refrain from imposing loans on ULBs
against their willingness.

3.4.3, Smart Cities Mission

The Government of India (Gol) launched (June 2015)
the Smart Cities Mission (Mission) to promote sustainable cities that provide
core infrastructure and improve the quality of life of people by enabling local
development and harnessing technology as a means to create smart outcomes
for citizens. The Gol would extend financial support on an average of 7100
crore per city per year for a five year period. An equal amount, on a matching
basis, will have to be contributed by the State/ULB. Smart City
Thiruvananthapuram Limited (SCTL) and Cochin Smart City Mission Limited
(CSML) were constituted as Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV) for the
development of these cities. The Board of Directors of the SPV was to include
representatives of Gol, State Government and ULBs. The Divisional
Commissioner/Collector/Municipal Commissioner/Chief Executive of the

28Thiruvananthapuram, Kollam, Kochi, Thrissur, Kozhikode, Kannur
2°Alappuzha, Guruvayur and Palakkad
30K ollam Corporation, Kannur Corporation, Guruvayur Municipality

28


Chapter III - Efficacy In Devolution Of Functions

Urban Development Authority was to be the Chairperson.

Contrary to the above, Audit observed that the Chief Secretary of the State was
the Chairperson of the Mission and that the Secretary of Municipal Corporation
was not always included in the Board of Directors in both districts during the
five year period (2010-2015). Further, the Mission Statement and Guidelines
delegated the rights and obligations of the Municipal Council with respect to
the Smart City project to the SPV. The decision making powers extended to the
ULB under the Municipal Act/ Government rules were assigned to the Chief
Executive Officer of the SPV and the approving/decision making powers of
Urban Development Department/Local Self Government Department/
Municipal Administration department were bestowed upon the Board of
Directors of the SPV in which the State and ULB are represented.

The Smart City Mission Statement and Guidelines encourage the State
Government and ULB to empower the SPVs by delegating various rights and
obligations of the ULB in relation to the smart city project to the SPV. The
delegation contemplated in the Guidelines overrides the powers conferred upon
ULBs as per 747 CAA.

3.4.4 Development Authorities

Trivandrum Development Authority (TRIDA) comprising Thiruvananthapuram
Corporation and five*! GPs, Greater Cochin Development Authority (GCDA)
consisting of Kochi Corporation and 21 Panchayats/ nine Municipalities and
Goshree Islands Development Authority (GIDA) comprising eight Panchayats
and three islands of Kochi Corporation are the Urban Development Authorities
functioning in the State.

The 13" CFC had recommended that ideally Development Authorities were to
'€ dissolved and their functions taken over by the Local Bodies in whose
jurisdiction they operate or to consider sharing of revenue of Development
Authorities with concerned local bodies. The Second Administrative Reforms
Commission of Government of India, in its sixth report recommended that 25
per cent of the revenue realised by Development Authorities from the sale of
land should be made available to the Municipalities for meeting expenses for
their infrastructure projects and State Governments were requested to offer their
comments in this regard and implement if found suitable.

Despite Development Authorities owning assets and earning rental and lease
income from renting out these assets, no revenue sharing was seen undertaken
tween the ULBs and the Development Authorities. Though GIDA earned
(2005-06) an amount of 287.30 crore as revenue through sale of 25 hectares of
and in Kochi Corporation/ Panchayats, no amount was transferred to the Local
Bodies. Despite these parallel authorities owning substantial amount of revenue
from sale of land belonging to ULBs, resultant benefits are not seen accruing to
the ULBs.

The ACS, LSGD stated (November 2021) that the dismantling of Development
Authorities is fundamental and that the State Government has been considering
the same and also as to whether funds meant to reach Local Bodies were being
retained by these authorities.

अ Kalliyoor, Pallichal, Venganoor, Vilappil, Vilavoorkal GPs.

29


CHAPTER IV
DEVOLUTION OF

FINANCIAL
RESOURCES



CHAPTER IV

DE UTION OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES

Robustness of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) gets reflected in the state of their
finances and in their capacity to look after their own needs. Devolution to take
effect in its true sense in the context of ULBs would require them to be endowed
with financial resources commensurate with their requirements. As fiscal
autonomy is one of the core elements of decentralisation, effective
decentralisation would imply not just availability of adequate financial
resources (either self-generated or transferred), but also the power to make
financial decisions. Funds available to ULBs in Kerala include own revenues
(tax and non-tax), grants from the Centre and State and loans. This Chapter
attempts to study the efficacy of financial devolution facilitated by 7470 CAA
and the State legislations, through observations pertaining to overview of
finances and analysis of receipts of ULBs.

4.1 Finances of Urban Local Bodies

Article 243X of the Constitution provided for constitution of Funds for crediting
all moneys received, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and for their
withdrawal, as well as for grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the
Consolidated Fund of the State. Article 243Y mandated constitution of State
Finance Commissions to review the financial position of the Municipalities and
to make recommendations on the principles governing the grants-in-aid to the
Municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State and the measures
needed to improve the financial position of the Municipalities. The KM Act,
1994 also reiterated through its provisions, measures to strengthen local finance.

The Kerala Municipality (Manner of Inspection and Audit System) Rules, 1997
envisage that every Municipality has to submit Annual Financial Statements for
audit to the primary auditor within four months after the completion of the
financial year, i.e., before 31“ day of July to the Auditor authorised to conduct
the audit of the accounts of that Municipality. It was noticed that during the
period from 2017-18 to 2020-21, all the 93 ULBs had submitted their Annual
Financial Statements for audit to the Statutory Auditor, Kerala State Audit
Department.

Audit came across shortcomings in financial management of ULBs as discussed
in following paragraphs, which if rectified, would facilitate higher level of
financial autonomy and good governance thereby.

4.1.1 Unrealistic budget formulation

Sections 285 and 287 of the Kerala Municipality Act, 1994 make it mandatory
for the urban local governments to prepare the annual budget before the
beginning of each financial year. As per Section 285 of KM Act, the Secretary
of ULB shall prepare and submit to the Standing Committee concerned, a
budget containing a detailed estimate of receipts and expenditure for the ensuing
year before the fifteenth day of January each year. The Standing Committee
concemed, after considering the estimate and proposals of the Secretary of the
ULB and the officials dealing with the respective subjects, shall submit the
proposals to the Standing Committee for Finance. After considering these

31


Name of

Wadakkanchery 2015-16 | 3882.11 755.69 19.47 3951.27 820.89 20.78

Municipality

Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

proposals, the Standing Committee for Finance shall prepare budget estimate of
the receipts and expenditure of the Municipality for the next year. The budget
estimate prepared by the Standing Committee for Finance shall be laid by its
Chairman before the Municipality/Corporation Council for its approval before
the end of the first-week of March. The Council shall finally pass the budget
estimates before the beginning of the year to which it relates and submit copies
to the Government.

Audit noted that the LSGIs did not prepare estimates on the basis of the trends
in receipts and expenditure in previous years. Thus there was wide variation in
figures of budget estimates and actuals. The budgeted figures would have been
more realistic, if the LSGIs had relied upon the trends in receipts and
expenditure in previous years.

Illustrative examples of preparation of unrealistic budget by four test-checked
ULBs are shown in Table 4.1:

Table 4.1: Statement showing the details of unrealistic budget

ULB Receipts (% in lakh) Expenditure (& in lakh)
Budget Actual Percen Budget Actual Percent
tage of age of

actuals actuals
to to
budget budget

2016-17 | 9239.04 | 2132.47 23.08 8733.22 | 1835.20 21.01
2017-18 | 10748.54 | 3487.55 32.45 10665.85 | 3118.81 29.24
2018-19 | 30819.41 | 4234.26 13.74 | 29242.48 | 3692.87 12.63
2019-20 | 20709.59 | 3562.65 17.20 | 19680.51 | 2668.07 13.56

Kalpetta Municipality | 2015-16 | 12947.63 | 3081.15 23.80 | 12873.68 | 2379.92 18.49

2016-17 | 16785.61 | 1896.43 11.30 | 16720.61 | 2713.70 16.23
2017-18 | 19126.67 | 3498.14 18.29 | 19073.54 | 3293.88 17.27
2018-19 | 4444.19 | 3353.67 75.46 4401.59 | 2887.23 65.60
2019-20 | 9012.92 | 3622.75 40.20 8957.61 | 3567.42 39.83

Thiruvananthapuram | 2015-16 | 80568.96 | 25803.70 32.03 | 68620.91 | 26001.81 37.89

Corporation 2016-17 | 57454.09 | 39661.63 69.03 | 48626.69 | 27492.26 56.54
2017-18 | 68994.75 | 41952.69 60.81 | 60049.23 | 28566.44 47.57
2018-19 | 84304.17 | 58442.97 69.32 | 72873.87 | 54476.21 74.75
2019-20 | 92205.35 | 55445.56 60.13 | 95867.91 | 39486.44 41.19
Kochi Corporation 2015-16 | 88154.17 | 42132.93 47.79 | 84188.00 | 32506.76 38.61

2016-17 | 88355.99 | 41367.63 46.82 | 84095.02 | 30762.67 36.58
2017-18 | 85416.69 | 54334.06 63.61 82229.92 | 43546.86 52.96
2018-19 | 91747.57 | 65762.97 71.68 | 88898.97 | 50134.74 56.40
2019-20 | 98756.95 | 57885.27 58.61 | 94518.59 | 52133.98 55.16

(Source: Details furnished by test-checked ULBs)

The percentage of actual receipts to the budget figures during the period 2015-
16 to 2019-20 ranged from 13.74 to 32.45 per cent in Wadakkanchery
Municipality; 11.30 to 75.46 per cent in Kalpetta Municipality; 32.03 to 69.32
per cent in Thiruvananthapuram Corporation and 46.82 to 71.68 per cent in
Kochi Corporation. On the other hand, the expenditure was over estimated by

32


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

12.63 to 29.24 per cent in Wadakkanchery Municipality; 16.23 to 65.60 per cent
in Kalpetta Municipality; 37.89 to 74.75 per cent in Thiruvananthapuram
Corporation and 36.58 to 56.40 per cent in Kochi Corporation during the same
period. The above trends raise concern about the realistic nature of the budgets
of these ULBs, which makes them ineligible to qualify as instruments of
financial control and expenditure management.

The trends in receipts and expenditure in previous financial years are to be taken
into account while formulating budget estimates of a financial year. Budget
estimates are to be made realistic by analysing reasons for persistent savings, if
any, for effecting correction. Consistent significant variations between budgeted
and actual figures in test-checked ULBs during the five-year period is indicative
of the low priority assigned by the ULBs towards planned formulation of
budget. ULBs need to exercise due care in their budgeting processes, as the
budget of the Municipality does not require approval by the State Government
in the light of decentralisation. The Report of the Committee for Evaluation of
Decentralised Planning and Development had pointed out (March 2009) the
failure of all Local Government Institutions to use budget as an instrument of
financial control.

Reply of the Government is awaited (December 2021).
4.1.2 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies

The expenditure of ULBs can be categorised into five, viz., Human Resource
expenses, General expenses, Operations and Maintenance, Interest and Finance
charges and Programme expenses. The details of expenditure incurred by 93
ULBs in the State as well as by test-checked 21 ULBs during the period 2015-
16 to 2019-20 are shown in Tables 4.2 and 4.3 respectively.

Table 4.2: Expenditure incurred by ULBs in the State
(@ in crore)

Human General Operationand _Interest Programme Total
Resource expenses Maintenance and expenses Expenditure
Expenses Finance _ expenses out of
charges Grants
2015-16 107.45 39.93 118.13, 9.12 835.44 1110.07
(9.68%) | (3.60%) (10.64%) (0.82%) (75.26%)
2016-17 145.77 44.84 125.34 6.98 796.66 1119.59
(13.02%) | (4.01%) (11.20%) (0.62%) (71.16%)
2017-18 201.76 60.54 140.31 13.84 1409.39 1825.84
(11.05%) | (3.32%) (7.68%) (0.76%) (77.19%)
2018-19 212.27 64.95 249.70 10.39 1958.42 2495.73
(8.51%) | (2.60%) (10.01%) (0.42%) (78.47%)
2019-20 197.76 44.23 207.83 13.68 1796.07 2259.57
(8.75%) | (1.96%) (9.20%) (0.61%) (79.49%)

8810.80

(Source: Figures furnished by IKM)

33


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Table 4.3: Expenditure incurred by selected ULBs
(@ in crore)
Human | General Operation —Interest Programme Total
Resource | expenses and and expenses, Expenditure

Expenses Maintenance Finance _ expenses out
charges of Grants

2015-16 | 43.54 13.63 58.81 5.53 323.09 444.60
(9.79%) | (3.07%) | (13.23%) (1.24%) (72.67%)

2016-17 | 52.41 12.35 56.63 2.57 309.17 433.13
(12.10%) | (2.85%) | (13.07%) | (0.59%) (71.38%)

2017-18 | 74.60 20.62 60.79 2.95 458.47 617.43
(12.08%) | (3.34%) | (9.85%) (0.48%) (74.25%)

2018-19 | 71.66 30.93 127.83 3.89 705.76 940.07
(7.62%) | (3.29%) | (13.60%) | (0.41%) (75.08%)

2019-20 | 64.47 13.23 74.95 2.65 610.59 765.89
(8.42%) | (1.73%) | (9.79%) (0.35%) (79.72%)

(Source: Figures furnished by IKM)

The major share of expenditure by ULBs in the State, ranging from 71.16 per
cent to 79.49 per cent of the total expenditure is seen incurred for Programme
expenses, expenses out of grants, etc., which is reflective of the high priority
given to project implementation by ULBs. Sufficient share of funds are to be
allotted to Operation and Maintenance (O&M) expenses also, to facilitate the
pace of delivery of mandatory civic functions like disposal of solid and liquid
waste, vector control, establishment of slaughter houses, maintenance of burial
grounds, provision of public toilets, etc.

The Fifth SFC observed that the laxity on the part of Local Governments
towards civic functions has created serious problems relating to public health,
sanitation and environment in the State. Hence, the approach of the Commission
was to assign top priority to these functions and devolve sufficient funds for the
purpose.

4.1.3 Analysis of financial data of Urban Local Bodies

The following ratios were considered by Audit to establish the fiscal autonomy

of ULBs.

. Local fiscal autonomy: This is the share of own revenue to the total
revenue of the ULB.

. Local dependency on fiscal transfer: This is the share of Central Finance

Commission (CFC) and State Finance Commission (SFC) grants to the
total fiscal revenue of the ULB.

Local fiscal autonomy and local dependency on fiscal transfer are inversely
related to each other. The higher the fiscal autonomy, lesser is the dependency
on fiscal transfer. On scrutiny of the data for the year 2019-20, it was observed
that the ratio of own revenue to total revenue was higher than 40 per cent in one

34


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

ULB* only (out of test-checked 21 ULBs). In two ULBs the ratio was in the
range of 30-40 per cent. This is indicative of the urgent need to effectively tap
the potential sources of revenue to ULBs, to facilitate self-reliance in local
finances.

The trend in fiscal autonomy in the test-checked 21 ULBs during the year 2019-
20, is depicted in the Chart 4.1:
Chart 4.1: Local Fiscal Autonomy

Ratio-wise performance of selected ULBs for 2019-20

° 8
8
7
6 5 5
5
4
8 2
2
1
: iz
0

Fiscal Autonomy

Number of ULBs

MLessthan 10% # 10% to20% ™20%to30% m™30%to40% m™More than 40%

4.1.4 Extent of utilisation of funds

A comparison of the total expenditure with total revenue for the period 2015-16
to 2019-20 showed that expenditure incurred by 93 ULBs in the State ranged
from 35.78 to 57.67 per cent, and that of selected ULBs from 32.71 per cent to
53.54 per cent of total revenue as shown in Tables 4.4 and 4.5 respectively.

Table 4.4: Extent of utilisation of funds by ULBs in the State
(सर in crore)

Revenue Expenditure

2015-16 2169.86 1110.07 51.16
2016-17 3129.30 1119.59 35.78
2017-18 3166.06 1825.84 57.67
2018-19 4447.56 2495.73 56.11
2019-20 4210.47 2259.57 53.67

Total 17123 8810.80 51.46

(Source: Data furnished by IKM)

32 Aluva Municipality

35


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Table 4.5: Extent of utilisation of funds by test-checked ULBs
(% in crore)
Revenue Expenditure Percentage of

Expenditure out of

Revenue
2015-16 1002.57 444.60
2016-17 1324.25 433.13
2017-18 1264.02 617.43
2018-19 1755.74 940.07
2019-20 1759.69 765.89
Total 7106.27 3201.12
(Source: Data furnished by IKM)
The figures of expenditure incurred by ULBs in the State and test-checked
ULBs in the five year period 2015-2020 recorded a total percentage of 51.46

and 45.05 respectively. Higher expenditure would symbolise active intervention
of ULBs to bring all weaker sections of society under social security net and to
impart quality services in health and education sectors. It was noticed that the
ULBs in the State could not incur appreciable trends in expenditure during the
audit period (2015-2020), which may hamper positive outcomes in priority
sectors.

4.1.5 Non-preparation of Budget Manual

Sections 285 to Section 293 of KM Act, 1994 stipulate the procedure for
preparation of budget in ULBs. The power to make rules by Government in
matters relating to the estimate of receipts and expenditure is provided in
Section 565 of KM Act.

Fourth SFC had recommended (March 2011) that the Budget Rules may be
thoroughly recast with adequate provisions for participatory planning and
budgeting and that the Rules should incorporate provisions for transparency and
ensure integrity and sanctity of budget, especially in relation to forecasting of
revenues and estimating expenditure. The Budget Rules needed to be amplified
in considerable detail in a simple manner with enough number of illustrations
and issued in the form of a Budget Manual which would detail procedures for
re-appropriation and enable appropriation control. Though Government in its
Action Taken Report (2011-12) accepted the above recommendations and
assured necessary action, Budget Manual for Local Bodies has not been
formulated in the State till date. Non formulation of Budget Manual may
facilitate laxity in adherence to financial norms and unrealistic estimation of
receipts and expenditure by Local Governments. The recommendations
discussed above, if implemented, would streamline the financial accounting of
ULBs and enable a reliable financial reporting system for Local Governance.

4.2 Receipts of Urban Local Bodies

Devolved functions can be carried out effectively by ULBs only when they are
supported by sufficient financial resources. Financial resources are obtained
through fiscal transfers facilitated by State Finance Commissions and
compliance to State and Central Finance Commission recommendations as well

36


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

as through increased access to own sources of revenue commensurate with
expenditure requirements. Audit attempted to analyse the channels of receipts
of ULBs as detailed below:

4.2.1 Sources of revenue of Urban Local Bodies

The chief sources of revenue of ULBs are grants devolved as per
recommendations of SFC and own revenue comprising tax and non-tax revenue
and other revenue**. The details of revenues of ULBs in the State during the
period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are indicated in Table 4.6:

Table 4.6: Details of revenues of ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20
(% in crore)

Year Finance Commission Grants Own Other Total Percentage
Development Maintenance Revenue Revenue Revenue of own

Fund and General revenue to

Purpose total

Fund revenue
2015-16 1000.77 595.81 | 791.73 | 582.44 | 2970.75 26.65
2016-17 1439.05 719.93 | 938.37 | 2289.63 | 5386.97 17.42
2017-18 1688.28 784.65 | 1008.54 | 1716.33 | 5197.80 19.40
2018-19 1850.56 935.55 | 1149.05 | 2538.87 | 6474.03 17.75
2019-20 1837.16 870.55 | 1080.08 | 1595.27 | 5383.06 20.06

(Source: Details of FC Grants from SFC Cell, Own revenue figures from IKM and figures of
Other revenue from VLC cell, AG (A&E)/various offices)

The share of own revenue to total revenue of ULBs ranged from 17.42 to 26.65
per cent during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20. This is indicative of the urgent
need for enhancing the own revenue of ULBs.

4.2.2 Fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies

Significant quantum of funds is made available to ULBs through fiscal transfers
by the Central and State Governments. These include Finance Commission
grants**, central share of Centrally Sponsored Schemes and lumpsum grants?
provided in the Budget for schemes/ functions transferred to ULBs.

The fiscal transfers from Government formed the major portion of the revenue
(ranging from 73.35 to 82.58 per cent) of ULBs in the State during the period
2015-16 to 2019-20.

A. State Finance Commission grants

The major share of financial resources of ULBs comprised grants recommended.
by SFC. The details of funds due as per the orders of the State Government and
funds actually released to ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 are given
in Table 4.7:

33 Funds to transferred institutions and Centrally Sponsored Schemes.

** Including Central Finance Commission grant, Development Fund, Maintenance Fund and
General Purpose Fund.

35 Against separate sub heads of account under the Minor head ‘191-Assistance to Municipal
Corporations, 192-Assistance to Municipalities/Municipal Councils’, under the functional
Major and Sub Major heads of the Departments concerned.

37


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Table 4.7: Details of grants due and released under SFC during 2015-16 to
2019-20

SFC
allocation

as
accepted
by State

Actual
allocation
in Budget-
Appendix

IV

Actual
release from
Finance
Department
Gok

(+)release

(@ in crore)
of short

(-) / Excess

(+)release

2015-16 1438.07 1438.07 1939.04 (+)500.97 (+) 34.84
(4 SFC)

2016-17 2250.33 2250.33 2222.50 (-) 27.83 (-) 1.24

6० SFC)

2017-18 2306.16 2306.16 2473.00 (+)166.84 (+) 7.23

2018-19 2554.85 2554.85 2786.13 (+)231.28 (+) 9.05

2019-20 2827.72 2827.72 2707.71 (-) 120.01 (-) 4.24

(Source: Data furnished by SFC Cell)

The funds released to ULBs under SFC was short of the mandated devolution
by 1.24 per cent and 4.24 per cent during 2016-17 and 2019-20 respectively.
However, fund distribution in the remaining three years was marked by excess
release varying from 7.23 per cent (2017-18) to 34.84 per cent (2015-16). This
suggests the prominent share of contribution facilitated by State Finance
Commissions to the finances of Local Bodies.

B. Central Finance Commission grants

Article 280(3)(c) of the Constitution mandates the Central Finance Commission
(CFC) to recommend measures to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to
supplement the resources of Municipalities based on the recommendations of
the respective SFCs. The 147 CFC recommended providing of Basic grant and
Performance grant to ULBs. The details of 147 CFC grants received by ULBs
in the State during the audit period are shown in Table 4.8:

Table 4.8: Details of Fourteenth CFC grants received by ULBs in the
State during 2015-20

General Basic Grants

(@ in crore)

Performance Grants

Allocation Re Release _ Allocation Release by Release
by Gol Gol to State _ from State by Gol Gol to State _ from State to
to ULBs ULBs
2015-16 351.66 351.66 316.49 | 0०० | | ००० | | ००० |
2016-17 486.94 486.94 510.84 143.71 143.71 143.71
2017-18 562.61 562.61 562.61 162.63 162.63 193.82
2018-19 650.84 650.84 650.84 184.69 | ००० | 184.69
2019-20 879.42 879.42 879.42 241.83 | ००० | | ००० |

(Source: Data furnished by SFC Cell)

38


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

(i) The 147 Finance Commission recommended a total allocation of 2931.47
crore under Basic grants*° and 732.86 crore under Performance grants*”
for the period 2015-20. Out of the Basic Grants allotted for the period, the
State Government released %2920.20 crore to the ULBs. Against the
Performance Grants of %306.34 crore released by Gol, the State
Government released 3522.22 crore, which was in excess of the amount
received*® from Gol. As per the 147 Finance Commission Performance
Grant Scheme, if the ULB has an overall score of 60 or more from three
criteria i.e, Audit of annual accounts (weightage 10), Increase in own
revenue sources (weightage 40) and Publishing of Service Level
Benchmarks (weightage 50), it qualifies for receiving the Performance
Grants.

The list of ULBs eligible for Performance Grants was forwarded
(November 2018) to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA)
by GoK alongwith Utilisation Certificates for 2016-17 and 2017-18. The
MoHUA recommended™ for release of Performance Grants for Kerala for
the years 2018-19 and 2019-20 and the matter is pending with the Ministry
of Finance, Gol. Though GoK requested (October 2020) to expedite the
release of these funds, no favourable action was seen initiated. The
Additional Chief Secretary (Finance), GoK stated that no reply has been
received from MoHUA in response to the above request till February 2022.

As the underlying objective of the grant is to initiate action at the grassroots
level for compilation of data on local bodies’ receipts and expenditure for
the stakeholders to have access to reliable information for decision making,
non-receipt of this grant may adversely impact upon the quality of service
delivery by LSGIs.

(ii) During 2014-15, GoK released 2166.39 crore of Thirteenth FC grant for
the year in advance, anticipating that the funds will be received from Gol
either in the same year or in the next year. However, Gol did not release
second instalment for the year 2014-15 as the term of Thirteenth FC was
over by 2014-15. Paragraph 17 of Fourteenth Central Finance Commission
guidelines stipulates that there should not be any deductions at source from
the grant due to the local bodies. Contrary to this, GoK adjusted the excess
amount (March 2016) released on account of Thirteenth Finance
Commission Grant relating to the year 2014-15 amounting to 7166.39 crore
from the Development Fund grant in 2015-16, in violation of guidelines.
Out of this, an amount of 220.44 crore relates to 21 test-checked ULBs,

36 Basic grant is intended to be used to improve the status of basic civic services including water

supply, sanitation including septage management, sewerage and solid waste management,
storm water drainage, maintenance of community assets, maintenance of roads, footpaths and
street-lighting, and burial and cremation grounds

57 Performance grant is provided to address the following issues: (i) making available reliable
data on local bodies’ receipt and expenditure through audited accounts; and (ii) improvement
in own revenues.

38 Due to formation of new Municipalities and consequent transfer of funds of upgraded
Panchayats

39 The National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA) vide e-mail dated: 17 March 2020 has
informed GoK that Performance Grant for ULBs in Kerala has been recommended for the
years 2018-19 and 2019-20 and that the matter is pending with MoF.

39


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

which would have remained at the disposal of these ULBs for fruitful
utilisation in project implementation.

Reply of the Government is awaited (December 2021).
4.2.3, Change in system of drawal of funds by Local Bodies

The Local Self-Governments followed the practice of drawing funds for
utilisation from the Consolidated Fund through contingent bills‘? until 12 April
2006. As per this system, funds allotted to ULBs remaining unutilised at the
end of the financial year would lapse. The Third SFC recommended (November
2005) fiscal freedom for LSGIs by introducing a system to avoid lapse of funds
on 31 March of every financial year and to remove difficulties such as treasury
restrictions/ways and means clearance from Finance Department. Government
accepted the recommendation and the new system was introduced from 2006-
07 onwards, wherein the grant devolved to each ULB was to be deposited in
three public accounts‘! in the treasury for development fund, maintenance fund
and general purpose fund.

This system was dispensed’? with in March 2015 and Government
re-introduced the system of drawal from Consolidated Fund through contingent
bills, under which the allotment for a financial year would be issued by the
Finance Department in three instalments on or before 25% of March, July and
November every year. The bills submitted at treasuries at the end of March
every year were to be shifted to treasury queue as per orders* issued by the
State Government. The queued bills were intended to be cleared in the
subsequent financial year. As per details furnished by Information Kerala
Mission (IKM), the bills which were presented well in advance before the month
of March i.e., as early as in the month of June in previous year, were also kept
in queue at treasury. Consequently, the test-checked ULBs could not utilise
2447.74 crore out of SFC grants during the period 2017-18 to 2019-20.

Further, the allotment not drawn as on 31 March every year was to be provided
to LSGIs through Additional authorization/Supplementary Demand for Grants,
based on the consolidated figures furnished by the Director of Treasuries.
However, scrutiny of the Government orders permitting additional authorisation
to enable drawal of bills kept in queue during previous year revealed that the
amount was being authorised from the fund allotment to ULBs for the current
year. Thus, the amount devolved in a particular year remaining unutilised at the
end of the year was not made available to the ULBs for utilisation in the
subsequent year.

Reversal of the fund flow system proposed to avoid lapse of funds and treasury
restrictions, which was recommended by SFC, accepted by Government and
adopted by LSGIs, to the system prevalent earlier, without assessing the
possible bottlenecks in effective fund utilisation resulted in non-utilisation of
2447.74 crore by test-checked ULBs.

40 from the Major heads 3604 and 3054

41 Major Head 8448

® vide GO (P) No. 119/2015/Fin dated 21 March 2015 and GO (P) No. 419/2015/Fin dtd.19
September 2015 (for KLGSDP and CFC Grants)

48 March 2018, March 2019, March 2020

40


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

The ACS, LSGD stated in response (November 2021) that the queue bill system
was adopted to incentivise the Local Governments and prompt them to push up
their annual expenditure, to address the gap between actual expenditure incurred
and budgetary allocation. It would compensate for the amount authorised
through budget which could not be utilised and resultant lapse of funds, through
additional authorisation.

The response does not explain why the additional authorisation was being made
out of the funds allotted for the next year and not over and above the allocation
for the next year. Further, resort to Government orders as an instrument to
bypass or overturn an accepted recommendation of the Finance Commission is
contrary to the spirit of devolution.

4.2.4 Payment of pension from Own Fund/ General Purpose Grant

Kerala Municipality (Employees Death-Cum-Retirement Benefit) Rules, 1996
envisage that 15 per cent of the total monthly emoluments of each employee
shall be remitted to the Central Pension Fund (CPF) as pension contribution by
the ULB. Each ULB is to contribute amount equivalent to 15 per cent of total
monthly emoluments of each of its employees every month to the CPF, which
was administered by the Director of Urban Affairs (DUA). The amount so
contributed was to take care of the payment of Death-Cum-Retirement Benefit
(DCRB) to the employees, thus absolving the ULB of any liability to pay DCRB
at a later stage. The major advantage of this system was that the liability for the
payment of DCRB of an employee could be apportioned among the ULBs in
proportion to the length of his service in each ULB.

As per request of DUA, Government transfer credited funds to the account of
CPF, prior to 2016, to release pension allotment to the ULBs. In March 2016,
Government permitted ULBs to utilise General Purpose Fund for payment of
pensionary and other benefits, on condition that additional fund will not be
sanctioned for the purpose. Audit noticed that though DUA maintains the CPF,
there is no mechanism to monitor timely collection and transfer of pension
contribution to DUA by ULBs. As a result, the payment of pension to the
retiring employees of ULBs could not be assured from the CPF. Information
furnished by 14“ out of 21 test checked ULBs pointed out that the funds for
DCRB were sourced from the Own fund/ General Purpose Fund of ULBs during
the audit period. Audit also observed that as of March 2020, %542.81 crore
remained to be paid to 75 ULBs out of CPF in the whole State.

The Director of Urban Affairs replied (August 2021) to Audit that due to lack
of sufficient amount in CPF, Government issued permission to grant pension
and pensionary benefits from General Purpose Fund of Municipalities. The
pensionary benefits of employees in ULBs were since then, being sanctioned to
the employees from the General Purpose Fund. Audit observes that permitting
utilisation of General Purpose Funds for payment of pensionary benefits without
any other long term solution to the issue would not be a preferred situation. This
would limit the scope of utilisation of funds at the disposal of ULBs for
development purposes and thereby deprive them of their financial autonomy.

“Aluva, Irinjalakkuda, Cherpulassery, Kalpetta, Mattannur, Kozhikode Corporation,
Thiruvananthapuram Corporation, Kochi Corporation, Kayamkulam,  Thiruvalla,
Pathanamthitta, Nileshwar, Panoor, Ottappalam

41


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

While accepting the audit observation that the CPF was not being supplied with
the funds required, ACS, LSGD stated in the Exit Conference (November 2021)
that the ULBs had to take care of their employees’ pension benefits and generate
resources and maintain them for the purpose.

4.2.5 Own Revenues of ULBs

The Fifth State Finance Commission reported that own tax revenue and non-tax
revenue of ULBs in Kerala constitute only 30.30 per cent of their total receipts
indicating that ULBs are dependent to a large extent on the Government for
resources. Audit noted that the tax and non-tax revenue of Kochi Corporation
was only 2108.92 crore and 223.95 crore respectively for the year 2019-20,
compared to the corresponding figures of 50323.14 crore and %12265.22 crore
for the State as a whole.

The constraints/deficiencies observed in realisation of own revenue in the test-
checked ULBs are discussed below:

4.2.5.1 Property tax
Undermining fiscal autonomy through Government control on property tax

. The Council of the Municipality shall levy property tax on every building
within the Municipality. The shift in basis of taxation from Annual Rental
Value (ARV) of the buildings to plinth area was introduced through an
amendment to Section 233 of the KM Act with effect from 07 October
2009. As per Kerala Municipality (Property Tax, Service Cess and
Surcharge) Rules, 2011, assessment of property tax on Plinth area basis
was to be made applicable for new buildings from 14 January 2011 an
for existing buildings (assessed on annual value basis) from 01 April 2011.
The buildings were classified under ten categories and minimum and
maximum rates fixed for each category. The date of coming into effect of
plinth area method of assessment for existing buildings was extended by
Government initially upto 01 April 2013 (in March 2013), and further til
01 April 2016 (in March 2019). Consequently, the existing method and
tate of assessment for existing buildings on 14 January 2011 continued to
be in effect. Continued extension of date of effect of revised basis and
rates of assessment resulted in denial of potential revenue to the ULBs.

. Audit noticed that out of 21 test checked ULBs which have furnished
information, property tax is still being levied (2021) on the basis of ARV
on buildings existing as on 14 January 2011, in 14 ULBs. State-wide
assessment of buildings for revised property tax has not been completed
in 45 out of 93 ULBs. Audit observes that despite the amendment to the
Act changing the basis of tax calculations to plinth area basis w.e.f.
07 October 2009, the intent of the legislators could not be given effect to
for a long time, on account of the time taken by Government to frame the
Rules (2011) and due to extensions permitted. The inaction of the State in
this regard would undermine effective fiscal autonomy in the hands of
ULBs.

¢ The increase in annual property tax on plinth area basis of Residential
buildings assessed before 14 January 2011 was to be limited to 60 per cent
of tax levied on ARV basis. However, the above order was kept in

42


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

abeyance for more than two years and the modified order was issued in
March 2013. The increase in Annual property tax assessed was to be in
the range of 25 per cent to 60 per cent for residential buildings and 25 per
cent to 150 per cent for commercial buildings. Government provided
(April 2015) for continuing the levy of taxes for existing residential
buildings of plinth area upto 2000 sq.ft. and limited the increase in Annual
tax for residential buildings above 2000 sq.ft. to 25 per cent of tax. Also,
the increase in annual tax of Commercial/Industrial use buildings assessed
on ARV basis before 14 January 2011, if reassessed on plinth area basis
was to be limited to 100 per cent. The above order exempted all dwelling
houses with plinth area upto 660 sq.ft. from property tax w.e.f. 2015-16.

The Fifth SFC observed that above action of Government in having
modified the limit of enhancement of property tax fixed as per Kerala
Municipal Rules, 2011 through an Executive order was undesirable and
would not stand before law. Further, SFC recommended that Kerala
Municipality (Property Tax, Service Cess and Surcharge) Rules, 2011 as
amended in 2013, have to be enforced by revoking the Government order
dated 27 April 2015. Government was silent on this part while furnishing
(February 2018) Action Taken Report on the recommendations of SFC.

. As per Section 233 of KM Act, the maximum and minimum rates of basic
property tax fixed by the Government and the rates of basic property tax
determined by the Council shall have effect for five years from the date
on which they came into force. Thereafter, before the expiry of the period
of five years, the Government and the ULBs shall revise the rates of basic
property tax as well as the limits of rates, so as to be in effect for the next
five years. It was noted that though plinth area based tax rates came into
force on 14 January 2011 for new assessees, and the rates of taxes had to
be revised after five years in 2016, rate revision did not happen even after
a period of ten years (March 2021). Since Government failed to revise the
maximum and minimum rates of basic property tax, the ULBs could not
revise the rates of property tax.

Audit observed that Geographic Information System (GIS) mapping for
identifying buildings for levy of property tax was not implemented in any of the
test-checked ULBs. Government directed (December 2013) that no schemes
relating to GIS were to be taken up and no expenditure in this regard incurred
by Local Self Government Institutions. Consequently, no GIS system has been
developed by the State for assessment of Property Tax in ULBs, which deprives
the ULBs of a sound and updated database to facilitate effective extraction of
tax revenue (March 2021). The above action of the Government has effectively
blocked one of the potential ways of improving the property tax base for
Municipalities. The ACS, LSGD informed (November 2021) that the capability
to utilize GIS for identifying buildings for levying property tax has been
developed recently only and is in its nascent stages across the country.
Government of Kerala is conducting experiments to improve the system.

Government replied (December 2021) that action was afoot to strengthen the
collection of own source revenues.

43


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

Property Tax Board

The Thirteenth Finance Commission mandated constitution of a Property Tax
Board on the lines of West Bengal Valuation Board, which was constituted in
the year 1980. Accordingly, Government issued (February 2011) orders for
constituting a Property Tax Board with one chairperson and three members.
The Board was to take action to ensure imposition and collection of property
tax on all taxable properties, share expertise on valuation and arrange training
in this regard to the staff of ULBs. It was to assist all Municipalities and
Municipal Corporations in the State to put in place an independent and
transparent procedure for assessing property tax, by enumerating all properties
within the jurisdiction of ULBs and offering suggestions for a suitable basis for
assessment and valuation of properties and periodic revisions.

However, LSGD intimated Audit that the Board was not constituted in the State.
Setting up of Property Tax Board would have been a positive step towards
enhanced collection and timely revision of property tax.

4.2.5.2 Profession Tax

Kerala Municipality (Profession Tax) Rules, 2005 provide for the levy and
realization of Profession Tax. The Fifth State Finance Commission
recommended that a proper database of all categories of professionals, traders
and businessmen, employees and workers in the unorganized sector and self-
employed persons should be prepared and assessed for profession tax. This
database was to be updated from time to time. All commercial institutions/
enterprises which have been issued licences under D & O licence* rules and
employees were also to be assessed for profession tax. It was further suggested
that a survey on professionals practising within the jurisdiction of Local
Governments concerned be made with the help of Ward Members/Councillors
so as to bring them into the net of profession tax. Though the recommendation
was accepted by Government, it was not implemented. Due to non-
implementation of the recommendation, the tax base of profession tax w.r.t
ULBs could not be widened.

As per Section 447 of KM Act, licence is to be issued for all trades included in
prescribed laws. The licence for functioning of all type of trades /establishments
in the ULB area is issued by Health wing of ULB which maintains a traders’
list. A separate register is to be maintained in Revenue section in the ULB for
entering the details relating to levy and collection of profession tax of traders/
shops/ establishments in its jurisdiction. A sample check of traders’ lists for
profession tax in Revenue section in ULBs and traders’ list for D&O licence in
Health wing in ULBs revealed that profession tax was not being levied and
collected from all traders to whom licence was issued by Health wing. The
traders’ list maintained in Health wing was not being shared with Revenue
section, which indicates lack of concerted action among the sections in the
ULBs to ensure collection of profession tax from all licensed business
establishments.

Government replied (December 2021), that action would be taken to strengthen
the collection of own source revenues.

45 Dangerous and Offensive Trade Licence

44


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

4.2.5.3 Advertisement Tax

Advertisement Tax, being an item in the State List*® of the Constitution, was
subsumed (July 2017) with the introduction of Goods and Services Tax (GST).
Consequently, vide Kerala Goods and Services Act 2017, Section 2717 of KM
Act was omitted. Thus, the Municipalities/ Corporations lost a prominent source
of revenue. This has not been compensated by assigning or sharing the revenues
earned by the Government from advertisements. As per Section 272, in case of
an advertisement liable to Advertisement tax, the Secretary of ULB shall grant
permission for the advertisement for the period to which the payment of tax
relates and no fee shall be charged in respect of such permission. Section 567
(32)** of KM Act empowers the Council to make bye-laws to provide for the
prohibition and regulation of advertisements in public streets or parks. Among
the test-checked ULBs, Nedumangad Municipality and Thiruvananthapuram
Corporation stated that they were levying licence fee for advertisements in their
jurisdiction, consequent to the discontinuance of Advertisement tax. But such
fees were not being collected in most other Municipalities in the absence of
clarification from the Government as to the permissibility of such levy.

4.2.5.4 Entertainment Tax

Entertainment and Amusement Tax“?, except when levied by the Local Bodies,
was subsumed*®? in GST from 01 July 2017. Government, however, issued
orders on 24 June 2017 stopping the collection of Entertainment tax by Local
Bodies from July 2017.

Levy of Entertainment Tax by Local Bodies was re-introduced from 10 June
2019. Thus, Entertainment tax could not be collected as revenue by ULBs
during the period from 01 July 2017 to 10 June 2019. For compensating the loss
in this regard, Government sanctioned (October 2018) %83.72 crore as
compensation to ULBs for the period 2017-18. However, no compensation was
paid for the period from April 2018 to May 2019, which resulted in loss of
revenue to ULBs. Audit observed that on account of an incorrect Government
order which had the effect of curtailing the fiscal autonomy of the
Municipalities, own revenue of the Municipalities was adversely impacted.

The Sixth SFC in its first Report (December 2020), while acknowledging that
the Government action in stopping collection of Entertainment tax and
Advertisement tax has caused loss to Local Governments of around 2100 crore
per year, had recommended that since Government is collecting GST, this
cumulative loss since 2017-18 may be made good in four half yearly instalments
starting from 01 April 2021. This was not seen complied with (November 2021).

In the Exit Conference (November 2021), ACS, LSGD assured that the
recommendations of Sixth SFC to make good the cumulative loss in collection

#6 Entry 55 in List II of 7" Schedule

47 Every person who erects, exhibits, fixes or retains in a municipal area any advertisement,
shall pay a tax as the Council with the approval of the Government, by resolution determine.

48 Power of Council to make bye-laws

* Section 3 of Kerala Local Authorities Entertainment Tax Act, 1961

30 vide Section 17(b) of the 101th Amendment of the Constitution Act, 2016 dated 08 September
2016

45


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

of Entertainment tax and Advertisement tax would be considered by
Government.

4.2.5.5 Show Tax

The KM Act envisages that Show tax may be levied by the Municipal Council
as determined by resolution, on all shows within the Municipal area. The
Council can impose the said tax every two years after making a fixed percentage
of enhancement. Further, no Show tax is to be levied in respect of any show for
which no entertainment tax is leviable.

The Fifth SFC recommended that the existing minimum rate of Show tax which
varied from rupees five to %50 need be raised by 100 per cent. The
recommendation though accepted by Government, was not implemented. Tax
rate fixed as on 24 March 1999 was not revised even after a period of twenty-
one years. Audit also observed that Show Tax was also not levied during the
period of discontinuance of levy of Entertainment Tax from 01 July 2017 to 10
June 2019, and is yet to be compensated.

4.2.5.6 Licences for Dangerous and Offensive trades and other trades

The Municipal Council shall, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the
application, either grant a licence for the use of a place for conducting a
dangerous or offensive trade or refuse to grant it. Audit observed that the time
period for implementing the Kerala Municipality (Issue of Licence to
Dangerous and Offensive Trades, other Trades and Factories) Rules, 201 1°! was
continually extended through a series of Government orders”? issued during the
period from January 2011 till January 20177, Thus, the licence fees continued
to be levied at rates which prevailed before the commencement of the Rules,
thereby depriving the ULBs of a potential source of revenue during the period
2011 to 2018.

Audit also noted that Government issued orders in October 2020, further
curtailing the Councils of ULBs of their levying power, by replacing the
condition stipulated for levy “as per rates fixed by the Council subject to the
minimum rate specified in Schedule III’ with “as per rate specified in Schedule
mr’.

The ACS, LSGD accepted the observation stating (November 2021) that GoK
fixed the rates of licence fee for issue of D&O licence, thereby curtailing the
levying power of ULBs, and that the minimum rates remained to be low.

4.2.5.7 Income from other sources

Audit also observed that there was inadequacy in generation of income from
non-tax sources of income.

. Rent from commercial establishments
A Municipality may construct commercial or other buildings and let
them out to the public on licence and may charge such fees as it may fix,

5! With effect from 30 October 2020, this licence has been renamed as Licence for factories,
trade, entrepreneurial initiatives and other services.

5 Twelve Government orders issued from 25 January 2011 to 10 January 2017.

53 vide Notification dated 30 October 2020, Government amended the Kerala Municipality
(Issue of Licence to Dangerous and Offensive Trades, other Trades and Factories) Rules,
2011, incorporating revised rates of licences

46


Chapter IV - Devolution Of Financial Resources

for the use and occupation of the building, under the KM Act. However,
extent of contribution of this source of income to the Own revenue of
test-checked ULBs was not satisfactory. Scrutiny of records in 21 test-
checked ULBs revealed that rent amounting to 74.11 crore was in arrears
as at the end of March 2020, underlining the immediate need to spruce
up collection of eligible rent from the buildings constructed by the ULBs
themselves.

. Building permit fees
Schedule II of Kerala Municipality Building Rules (KMBR)1999 which
provides for the permit fee to be collected by Local Bodies was revised
in June 2010, enhancing permit fee. KMBR 1999 was subsequently
revised in November 2019. However, the Schedule of Rates for permit
fee fixed in 2010 remained the same.

. Penalties

Section 538 of KM Act deals with all costs, damages, penalties,
compensation, charges, fees (other than school fees), expenses, rents,
contributions and other sums due to the Municipality to be recovered.
The penalty to be charged w.e.f. 24 March 1999 is provided in Fourth
Schedule and Fifth Schedule of KM Act. The rates of penalty to be
charged have not been revised even after a period of 22 years.

There is an urgent need for Government to review and enhance the rates of
above items to strengthen own revenue resources of ULBs.

Government replied (December 2021), that action would be taken to strengthen
the collection of own source revenues.

4.2.6 Inadequate reliance on application software

Information Kerala Mission (IKM) is entrusted with the responsibility for
development of software for various activities in ULBs. The Technical Support
and Infrastructure Management Division of IKM provides support to ULBs by
appointing Technical Assistants. The services of Technical Assistants include
handholding in the operation of the application software and support for data
entry of local databases. Sanchaya is the revenue and licence system software
developed by IKM for the computerisation of Revenue System in local
governments. The software handles property tax, profession tax, rent on Land
and building, licence for Dangerous and Offensive Trades, Prevention of Food
Adulteration, Advertisement tax, etc. The software also provides facility for e-
Filing of property tax self-assessment, e-Filing of profession tax details, e-
payment system, generation of Demand-Collection-Balance (DCB) statements,
etc. The software was developed in 2010-11 and was made functional during
2016-17 in all ULBs.

As per Government order of March 2019, data entry on property tax in Sanchaya
database was to be completed by September 2019. The Director of Urban
Affairs confirmed to Audit that as on date (March/April 2021) only 48 out of
93 ULBs in the State were using the finalised database. Out of the test checked
ULBs, only seven ULBs™ recorded entries in the property tax database.

54 Thiruvananthapuram Corporation and Nedumangad, Pathanamthitta, Thiruvalla, Kattappana,
Mattannur, Nileshwar Municipalities

47


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

Database on D & O Module was made functional by four®> ULBs only. Nine
and eight test-checked ULBs offered the facility for printing ownership
certificates and licences respectively, directly to public. Audit also observed that
separate modules as described in the Administrative Report of IKM, for utility
payment services such as hall booking, ambulance, vehicles, crematorium, etc.,
were not seen incorporated in Sanchaya Software. The facilities other than
Property Tax and D&O licence were not functional in Sanchaya Software in test
checked ULBs. Thus, despite Technical Assistants from IKM posted in all
ULBs, the extent of applicability of the software in generating DCB statement
by ULBs is restricted to property tax alone, even after a lapse of ten years since
its inception.

As a positive step towards improving the efficiency of tax collection in ULBs,
it is essential that Demand, collection and balance needs to be monitored
regularly through the effective functioning of application software in all
Municipalities.

55 Ponnani, Nedumangad, Kattappana Municipalities and Thiruvananthapuram Corporation

48


CHAPTER V
HUMAN

RESOURCES



CHAPTER V
HUMAN RESOURCES

5.1 Regulation of Manpower in Urban Local Bodies

Along with transfer of functions and funds, functionaries also need to be
available with the Municipalities in sufficient numbers to facilitate the effective
functioning of Urban Local Bodies as full-fledged units of self-governance.
Audit observations on assessment of staff requirement on the basis of norms
prescribed and adequacy of availability of manpower in ULBs are as follows:

5.1.1 Inadequate assessment of manpower requirement

As per Section 222 of KM Act, the Government was to constitute a common
municipal service for the employees under the service of the Municipalities in
the State and regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the employees
of the Municipalities.

In accordance with the above provision, the State Government regulates the
classification, method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowance,
discipline and conduct of staff and officers of ULBs. The Kerala Municipal
Common Service (Ministerial and Revenue Branch) Qualification and Method
of Appointment Rules 2001, Public Health Recruitment Rules 1972 and Special
Rules for the Kerala Local Self Government Engineering Services 2007 regulate
the recruitment of the staff in ULBs.

The broad framework of functions carried out by various wings in the ULBs is
depicted in Table 5.1:

Table 5.1: Functions entrusted to various wings in ULBs

Functions

General Council, General establishment, mail distribution
Administration and despatch, Typing and Legal matters.
Revenue Tax Assessment and Collection, fee collection of

Municipal properties, Rent of Municipal building,
issue of certificates like residential certificates,
ownership certificates and change of ownership.
Public health and Supervision of sanitation work, Registration of birth
sanitation and death and marriage, issue of Licence to Factories,
Trades, Entrepreneurship Activities and Other
Services, Registration of hospitals and paramedical
institutions, Registration of Tutorials,
implementation of projects related to waste
management, supervision of public health awareness
programme and poverty alleviation activities.
Finance/Accounts Handling of all Municipal funds and accounts,
Preparation of Budget and Annual Financial
Statement, All receipts and payments, social security
pension, recoveries, Advances, Loan, GST and

Audit.
Engineering and All Municipal works and Town planning works,
town planning building permit related activities and public works,

49


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Functions

maintenance of municipal vehicles, water and
electricity charges, land acquisition, establishment of
Engineering wing.
Development All works relating to decentralised planning,
convening Ward Sabha and Development Seminar,
Plan Approval, etc.
Miscellaneous Kudumbashree, Ayyankali Urban Employment
Guarantee Scheme (AUEGS), National Urban
Livelihood Mission (NULM), etc.

Welfare Social security pension, unemployment wages.
(Source: Data furnished by Directorate of Urban Affairs, Thiruvananthapuram)

Adequate staff strength was essential to cater to the needs of the fast growing
population in ULBs. The ULBs passed resolutions for upgrading their status
and revising the establishment structure by creation of new posts. Audit
observed that though the Municipalities were graded® as I, II and III in 2014,
based on revenue and population, no such categorization of Municipal
Corporations was attempted. It was also noted that no new posts were created
in existing ULBs consequent upon the grading exercise, except for the newly
created 27 Municipalities and Kannur Corporation, and two Corporations*’.
Audit observed that even among Municipalities belonging to the same grade,
there was wide variation in the number of staff in various posts such as Junior
Health Inspector Grade II, Senior Clerk, Office Assistant, etc.

Audit noticed that there was no sanctioned strength as regards the manpower in
ULBs. As per the current practice, the number of existing posts in ULBs is
increased based on requests from individual ULBs forwarded to Government
by the Director of Urban Affairs. The cadre strength was seen fixed in the case
of Engineering wing of Local Self Government Institutions only. For other
categories of staff, there were no criteria for assessing the staff requirement. No
work study or assessment was conducted by the Government or any external
agency to assess staff requirement of ULBs on a scientific basis.

The Fourth SFC had recommended a scientific rearrangement and fixing of staff
pattern to be implemented as early as possible, which was accepted by
Government. The Action Taken Report submitted (March 2011) by
Government on the recommendation stated that an effective result oriented
study on manpower requirement in ULBs was to be conducted and that LSGD
may select the agency for this purpose. However, no action has been taken in
this regard till date (March 2021).

As per data furnished to Audit by the Director of Urban Affairs (DUA), as
against the existing 7736 posts in ULBs, the men-in-position was 6754 as of 31
March 2020. Government in LSGD reported that there were 982 vacancies in
the State out of which 123 (12.52 per cent) was in the Engineering wing of
ULBs. The DUA also stated (April 2021) that when the Municipalities were
upgraded (July 2014), posts were not sanctioned according to the revised grade

56 Based on the recommendation of First SFC, Municipalities were first classified in 1993 on
the basis of income. Post 1993, the grading of Municipalities was done after a gap of 20
years in 2014.

57 Kollam and Kozhikode Corporations.

50


Chapter V - Human Resources

of Municipalities. Hence, there is no particular staff pattern for Municipalities/
Corporations conforming to their grading.

Analysis of working strength** in 21 test-checked ULBs in terms of the number
of employees per 1000 population as per the projected population for 2020
showed that it ranged between 0.3 and 2.74 as indicated in Chart 5.1:

Chart 5.1: Analysis of working strength against projected population

3

2.5

ष्>

बएट 1000 population 2020 projections (working strength)

(Source: Data furnished by ULBs)

While Aluva Municipality had a working strength of 2.74 employees per 1000
population, 17 ULBs had less than one employee for every 1000 population.
Only three ULBs had employees between one and two per 1000 population.
The shortage in working strength would adversely impact the quality of delivery
of civic services.

Audit notes that devolution of powers to local bodies to be fully effective would
necessarily require involvement of the local bodies in determining the staffing
norms, recruitment, ete. With Section 223 of KM Act explicitly advocating that
no post in the service of a Municipality shall be created except with the previous
sanction of the Government, Government needs to address the dearth of
manpower in Local bodies with utmost priority. Insufficient manpower in local
bodies would undermine the goal of ensuring a system of effective institutions
of self-government in place in the ULBs.

In the Exit Conference (November 2021), ACS LSGD accepted the audit
observation and remarked that the ULBs were overburdened as responsibilities
had both expanded and deepened over time and the resources to meet the needs
were not complementary.

5.1.2 Inadequacies in Recruitment of staff

Despite the steps taken so far for implementing the 747 CAA to empower ULBs,
the Government still exercises control over the classification, method of
recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowance, discipline and conduct of
staff and officers of ULBs.

58 Excluding Engineering wing of LSGD

51


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

The vacancies are reported by the ULBs to DUA which are forwarded to the
Kerala Public Service Commission (KPSC) for recruitment of staff. There was
unexplained delay in reporting of vacancies by ULBs, sending vacancy
proposals to KPSC, completion of entire process of recruitment and appointing
of persons, as listed below:

. There was delay extending to 169 days in sending the proposals received
from ULBs by DUA to KPSC.
. The KPSC had taken a total time ranging from 22 to 1640 days for

completion of the entire process starting from notifying of posts to
selection of candidates.

. Time gap of six to 595 days occurred between receipt of selection list
from KPSC and appointment of staff by DUA.

5.1.2.1 Insufficiency of staff in Urban Local Bodies

Audit observed that there was considerable shortage of staff against the existing
posts in ULBs, as shown in Table 5.2:

Table 5.2: Existing posts vis-a-vis actual strength of staff in ULBs in
the State as of 31 March 2021

Wing and Category Existing Appointment Vacant posts
posts

General 3655 3323 332
Revenue 1018 948 70
Health 1847 1410 437
Municipal

Secretaries/Assistant Lo» | 79 20
Secretaries

Total 6619 0 859

(Source: Details furnished by the Directorate of Urban Affairs, which do not include details
pertaining to Engineering wing)

There were only 994 men in position against the sanctioned strength of 1117 in
the Engineering wing of ULBs, as revealed by data furnished by LSGD, GoK.
as stated in Table 5.3:

Table 5.3: Sanctioned strength and men-in-position in Engineering

Wing in ULBs in the State
SI. Designation Sanctione: Men-in
as eee ]
| 6 |
19

1 Superintending Engineer | 6 [

2__| Executive Engineer 20

3_| Assistant Executive Engineer 52 41

4 | Assistant Engineer 179 169

5 __| Overseer Grade I 262 227

[| 6 | Overseer Grade II 221 190

7__| Overseer Grade III 350 318

[ 8 | Clerk 27 24
Total | 1117 994

(Source: Data furnished by Chief Engineer, LSGD)

52


Chapter V - Human Resources

As the Engineering wing in ULB plays a crucial role in planning and execution
of projects designed to implement mandatory functions, inadequacy of staff
may pose problems in timely execution of projects and assurance in quality of
outcome. Non-filling of vacancies in posts involving technical expertise would
adversely affect the timeliness and competence in execution of approved
infrastructure projects. Besides, as already indicated in Chapter III, functions
such as water supply continue to be handled through parastatal agencies in all
Municipalities other than Thrissur Corporation. Certain functions in many
Municipalities continued to be handled by staff lent by the Government and
hence risk of conflict of interest owing to dual accountability could arise.

The Government replied (December 2021) that the State has been continually
responding to the need for additional human resources and enabling local
governments to take up additional specialised resources for specific projects and
interventions. Kerala also has been tapping into its rich community resources
and finding new modalities of engagement and cooperation which enables
harnessing human resources that are available locally without permanent
employment.

Audit observed that the new modalities of engagement remain limited to
specific projects and are not adequate to equip the ULBs in terms of all functions
devolved and mould them into self-governing institutions in the true sense.

53


CHAPTER VI

CONCLUSION
AND
RECOMMENDATIONS



APTER VI

CONCLUS MMENDATIONS

6.1. Conclusion

The State had taken measures in decentralising local governance over the past
few decades, which inter alia included measures like local body elections every
five years, provision for reservation for Scheduled castes and tribes and women
as envisaged in the Constitutional amendment, transfer of significant funds to
local bodies, constitution of District Planning Committees, Ward Sabhas in
every ward, constitution of State Finance Commissions, etc.

However, the Performance Audit revealed that though the KM Act came into
effect in 1994 as required by the 74 Constitutional Amendment, certain
provisions in the Act such as Section 58 required to be reviewed in the light of
the goal of ensuring vibrant self-governing institutions. Further, though 17 out
of 18 matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution had been
covered in the First Schedule of the KM Act, ULBs had full responsibility of
only seven out of 17 functions transferred. As regards the remaining 10, Audit
observed that the State Government still had a significant role in the execution
of schemes, etc., either directly or through parastatal agencies.

Transfer of functions, functionaries and institutions concerned to ULBs was not
complete despite the passage of over 25 years since the Constitutional
Amendment. The schemes relating to the transferred functions which were
included in the Annual Plans of ULBs, to be executed by ULBs were
implemented in a parallel manner by the Departments concerned and other
parastatal agencies.

As the number of seats for Councillors and number of wards for the elections to
ULBs (except for newly formed 29 Municipalities and two Municipal
Corporations) held in 2015 and 2020 were fixed on the basis of population
figures of 2001 census (instead of the last previous census in 2011), there was
an overall shortage of 60 Councillors as on date in the State (Corporations: 01,
Municipalities: 59). Out of 325 recommendations of the State Finance
Commissions which had been accepted by Government, 200 were not
implemented till date. The recommendations to be implemented included
significant recommendations facilitating devolution of activities to Local
bodies.

Kerala Water Authority (KWA) functioned as the parastatal entrusted with
centralised water supply activities to Municipalities across the State, with no
time frame identified for transfer of functions, assets, etc., to the Municipalities.
The ULBs take up extension of distribution pipeline by arranging deposit works
with KWA, but the assets thus created with Municipal fund were not transferred
to the ULBs. The KWA had not furnished Utilisation Certificates for deposit
works amounting to =33.94 crore to the test-checked ULBs. Water charges were
collected at rates fixed by KWA from all consumers including those from the
Municipalities and revenues were not shared with the Municipalities.

Of the 21 test-checked ULBs, nine ULBs did not have the capacity to handle
Bio-waste and nine and 11 ULBs did not have the capacity to handle non bio-

55


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

recyclable and non-bio-non-recyclable wastes respectively. Only 15 ULBs
executed agreement with the agency entrusted with the collection of plastic
wastes. The agency had not entered into agreements with 499 out of 1200 LSGIs
in the State to facilitate timely removal of non bio-degradable wastes. No
agreement was seen executed by any of the selected ULBs with the agency for
collection of E-wastes.

Audit observed that the Municipalities did not use the budget as a tool for
financial control and formulated unrealistic receipt and expenditure budgets.
The test-checked ULBs allocated resources for various activities without
considering the actual receipt of funds in previous years. Deficient system of
drawal of funds from the treasuries resulted in Municipalities not being able to
use 2447.74 crore out of SFC grants. Besides, they were constrained by the
absence of effective powers to fix the rate of taxes in respect of Advertisement
tax, Entertainment tax, etc. Though plinth area based property tax rates came
into force on 14 January 2011 for new assessees, rate revision did not happen
even after a period of ten years (March 2021). The Municipalities could not levy
Entertainment Tax during the period from 01 July 2017 to 10 June 2019 owing
to an incorrect Government order.

Though the Municipalities were graded as I, II and III in 2014 on the basis of
revenue and population, no new posts were created in existing Municipalities.
Shortage of staff was significant with 982 posts lying vacant.

Thus, the implementation of 74"" CAA in the State was impeded by deficiencies
in execution of transferred functions and non-devolution of even basic core
functions required as per the Act.

6.2 Recommendations

In order to bestow Urban Local Bodies with genuine autonomy and proper
accountability, clarity regarding the functions/ sub functions devolved to ULBs
as well as the extent of powers retained in the hands of the State Government
needs to be ensured. Clear demarcation of the respective roles of the State
Government, Municipalities and parastatals needs to be in place.

In line with the principles of devolution, Government may transfer functions
with functionaries to ULBs for effective implementation of schemes. It may also
be ensured that functions entrusted to ULBs are not implemented in a parallel
manner by Government Departments, so as to facilitate accountability and
effective monitoring.

Government may take urgent action to implement the accepted
recommendations of State Finance Commissions, considering their role in
facilitating devolution and improving quality of expenditure of local bodies,
resulting in better outputs and outcomes as envisaged by the 74" Constitution
Amendment Act.

In line with provisions laid down in the State legislation conforming to the 74"
Constitution Amendment Act, Government may, by notification, endow the
ULBs with responsibilities of water supply distribution as well as its
maintenance and upkeep, in their areas of jurisdiction for ease of service
delivery.

56


Chapter VI — Conclusion and Recommendations

To comply with the provisions in Kerala Municipality Act, Urban Local Bodies
may be allowed to collect water charges in accordance with the number of
operational connections in their zonal areas, thereby avoiding loss to own
revenue in the form of charges paid to KWA.

With regard to functions which have been indicated in the First Schedule of KM
Act, where revenue generating services are currently being rendered by
parastatals and revenue is not being shared with the Municipalities, priority
needs to be given to hand over such functions/ activities to the Municipalities,
as the provision of this service through the parastatal deprives the Municipality
of a potential source of revenue.

Government needs to ensure that parastatal agencies such as KWA are to
handhold and guide ULBs in their progress towards self-reliance in
implementation of activities. There needs to be a shift in the relationship
between the Municipalities and the parastatals with the flow of accountability
from the parastatal to the Municipality for decentralisation to become
meaningful.

Government may assign topmost priority to enactment of a unified Public
Health Act containing provisions enabling the Local Governments to address
the issues in Public Health and Sanitation and facilitate effective delivery of
Health services in the wake of emerging challenges in Health sector.

In order to make decentralisation effective, special efforts in capacity building
of ULBs need to be undertaken to ensure that ULBs prepare their budgets in a
scientific manner, after taking into account a realistic projection of receipts from
potential sources as well as funds expected to be utilised.

Government may prepare Budget Manual for Local Bodies in line with the
recommendations of State Finance Commissions, to conceptualise Budget as an
instrument of effective financial control.

Government may ensure that the quantum of funds lapsing on account of
queuing of bills may be provided in the subsequent year over and above the
Municipality’s allotment for that year, so as to avoid the Municipality being
deprived of funds due to it.

A sustainable solution for fulfilling the requirement of funds for pension
payments of employees in ULBs in a timely manner in line with the goal of
empowering Municipalities through fiscal autonomy may be arrived at.

As the various types of taxes levied by ULBs are currently based on fixation of
the rates/ limits by Government, there is an urgent need for Government to
ensure periodic upward revision of the rates of taxes and effective
implementation of revised rates, to uphold the fiscal autonomy of ULBs
resulting in enhanced own revenues and improved delivery of civic services.

In order to ensure effective fiscal autonomy in the area of levy and collection of
property tax, Government may ensure that

. once the basis of arriving at property tax (such as annual rental value of
buildings, plinth area, fair value, etc.) has been specified in the Kerala
Municipality Act, the provision is not rendered ineffective through non-
issue or delay in issue of notification, non-framing of rules, etc. The Act
may be amended making it mandatory for the Government to report to

57


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

the Legislature, reasons for non-issue of notification in cases exceeding
a period which may be prescribed by law.

Need for setting in place an institutional mechanism such as a Property
Tax Board may be considered in order that Municipalities could be
guided on issues concerning property tax valuation, maintenance of
updated database, etc.

Feasibility of empowering the Municipalities either directly or indirectly
through a body comprising of, inter alia, selected members from
Municipal Councils, to determine the minimum and maximum rates of
property tax may be examined, as the power to determine the maximum
rate of property tax rests in the hands of the State even after the passage
of over 25 years since the enactment of the 7470 Constitution
Amendment Act.

Government may consider issuing a clarification on the authority of
Municipalities to levy fees for raising advertisements in view of the differing
approaches taken by various local bodies consequent upon advertisement tax
having been subsumed in GST.

Assessment of manpower requirements for Urban Local Bodies on the basis of
norms to be prescribed, needs to be undertaken at the earliest to ensure that
manpower available is commensurate with the functions entrusted to

Municipalities.
ber 4
Thiruvananthapuram, (ANIM CHERIAN)
The Principal Accountant General
(Audit - 1), Kerala
Countersigned
New Delhi, (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

58


Appendices

Appendix 1.1
List of selected ULBs
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5)

Corporations
1. Thiruvananthapuram Corporation
2. Kochi Corporation
3. Kozhikode Corporation

Municipalities
Nedumangad
Kayamkulam
Haripad
Pandalam
Thiruvalla
Pathanamthitta
Kattappana
Aluva
Trinjalakkuda
10. Wadakkanchery
11. Ponnani

12. Ottappalam
13. Cherpulassery
14. Kalpetta

15. Koduvally

16. Panoor

17. Mattannur

18. Nileshwar

४ 9० ० 9 ७ # YN

59


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 2.1
Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 747 CAA
(Reference: Paragraphs 2.2, 2.5)
Provision | Requirement as per provi
of of Constitution of Indi:

Provision of Remarks

State Act (The

Constituti Kerala
on of lunicipality
India ct, 1994)
Constitution of Municipalities: It | Section 4 Provides for Town
243Q provides for constitution of three | Constitution, Panchayat for
types of Municipalities namely, a | conversion and | transitional area, a
Municipal Council for a smaller | alteration of | Municipal Council for a
urban area, a Nagar Panchayat for | Municipalities. smaller urban area and a
transitional area and a Municipal Municipal Corporation
Corporation for a larger urban area. for a larger urban area.
However Town
Panchayats were not
seen notified/formed in
the State.
Article Composition of Municipalities: | Section 6 - | No representation
243R All the seats in a Municipality shall | Constitution of | provided for persons
be filled by direct elections and by | Council with special knowledge
persons with special knowledge in in municipal
municipal administration administration
nominated by Government. The nominated by
Legislature of a State may by law, Government, Members
provide for representation to the of Parliament and
Municipality of Members of Legislative Assembly
Parliament and Legislative representing
Assembly representing constituencies which
constituencies which comprise comprise wholly and
wholly and partly the Municipal partly the Municipal
area and Members of the council of area and members of
State and State Legislative Council council of State/State
who are registered as electors Legislative Council who
within the city. are registered as electors
within the city.
Article Constitution and composition of | Section 42 - | Provision given for
2435 Wards Committees: This | Constitution of | constitution of Ward
provides for constitution of Wards | Ward committees in

Committees in all municipalities
with a population of three lakh or
more

Committees— In

every
Municipality
where the
population
exceeds one lakh,
there shall be
constituted a Ward

Committee for
each ward of that
Municipality as
provided in
Section 43, within
three months from
the date of its
constitution.

Municipalities where the
population exceeds one
lakh, in place of three
lakh.

60



Appendices

Appendix 2.1 (Contd...)

Provision Requirement as per provision Provision of State Remarks
of of Constitution of India Act (The Kerala
Constituti Municipality Act,
on of 1994)
India
Article Reservation of seats: The seats | Section 6 ((5) to | Included
243T shall be reserved for SC/ST and | (8)) -Constitution
women.” of Council. The
provision for

reservation of seats
for SC/ST and
women specified.

Article Duration of Municipalities: The | Section 7 - | Included
2430 Municipality has a fixed tenure of | Duration of
five years from the date of its first | Municipalities and
meeting and re-election to be held | filling up of
within the six months of end of | vacancies
tenure.
Article Disqualifications for | Section 91 - | Included
2439 membership: A Person shall be | Disqualification of
disqualified for being a member of | Councillors
a Municipality-
elf he is so disqualified by or
under any law for the time being
in force for the purposes of
elections of the Legislature of the
State concerned.
elf he is so disqualified by or
under any law made by the
Legislature of the State.
Article Powers, authority and | Section 5(2) - | Powers and authority
243W responsibilities of the | Incorporation and | being vested, are not
Municipalities: All Municipalities | Administration of | specified to be related
would be empowered with such | Municipality to Twelfth Schedule.

powers and authority as may be | Every

necessary to enable them to | Municipality, shall
function as effective institutions of | exercise such
self-government. The State | powers, perform
Government shall entrust them | such duties and
with such powers and authority to | functions and shall

enable them to carry out the | have such
responsibilities in relation to the | responsibilities and
Twelfth Schedule. authority as are

provided by or
under this Act or
any other law for
the time being in
force.

5° KM Act, 1960 envisaged that for every Municipal Council the sanctioned strength of which
is twenty or less, the number reserved for women shall be one and in Municipal Councils
the sanctioned strength of which is above twenty, the number of such reservations shall be
two.

61


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Provision
of
Constituti

on of

India
Article
243K

Appendix 2.1 (Contd...)

Requirement as per provi
of Constitution of India

Power to impose taxes by, and

funds of the Municipalities:

© Municipalities would be
empowered to levy and collect

State Act (The
Kerala
Municipality
Act, 1994)
Section 230 -
Enumeration of

taxes and duties

Remarks

Included

the taxes, fees, duties, etc. Section 279 -
+ Grant-in-aid would be given to | KO's OF by
the Municipalities from the State | Government
© Constitution of funds for
crediting and withdrawal of व
moneys by the Municipality Section 283 7
Municipal Fund
Article Finance Commission: State | Section 205 - | Included
243Y read | Government shall _ constitute | Finance
with Finance Commission to Commission
Article * Review the financial position of
2431 the Municipalities and for taking | Section 206 -
such steps that help in boosting | Powers and
the financial condition of the | functions of the
Municipal bodies Finance
Make recommendation on Commission
Distribution between the State
and the Municipalities of the net
proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls
and duties that are charged by the
State Government.
* Allotting the funds to the
municipal bodies in the State
from the Consolidated fund of
the State.
Article Audit of —_ accounts of | Section 295  - | Included
2437 Municipalities: This provides for | Accounts and
maintenance of accounts by the | Audit
Municipalities and the auditing of
such accounts.
Article Elections to the Municipalities: | Section 68 - | Included
243ZA The Superintendence, direction and | Elections to
read with | control ofall procedures of election | Municipalities
Article of the Municipalities shall be
243K vested in the State Election
Commission.
Article Application to Union territories: No provisions were
243ZB The provisions of this Part shall given in KM Act
apply to the Union Territories
Article Part not to apply to certain No provisions were
243ZC areas: given in KM Act

Part not applicable to certain
Scheduled areas and Tribal areas

62



Appendices

Appendix 2.1 (Contd...)

Provision Requirement as per provisio! Provision of Remarks
of of Constitution of India State Act (The

Constituti Kerala

on of Municipality

India Act, 1994)
Article Committee for District Planning: | Section 53  - | Included
243 ZD © Constitution of District | District Planning
Planning Committee at district | Committee
level.

¢ Composition of District
Planning Committee.

« Preparation of draft
development plan to be
forwarded to the Government.

Article Committee for Metropolitan | Section 54 - | Metropolitan area not
243ZE Planning: Provision for | Metropolitan defined in KM Act.
constitution of Metropolitan | Planning However provision

Planning Committee (MPC) in | Committee— (1) | included for constituting
every Metropolitan area with a | The Government | Metropolitan Planning
population of 10 lakh or more (as | shall, by | Committee in any
defined in Article 243P). notification in the | Metropolitan area,
Gazette, constitute | without specifying ‘the
a Metropolitan | population limit of 10
Planning lakh or more’
Committee in a
Metropolitan area
to prepare a draft
development plan
for such area as a

whole.
Article Continuance of existing laws and | Section 575 - | Included
243ZF Municipalities Repeal and

Notwithstanding anything in this | saving
Part, any provisions of any law
relating to Municipalities in force
in a State immediately before the

commencement of the Constitution
(Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act,
1992, which is inconsistent with
the provisions of this Part, shall
continue to be in force until
amended or repealed by competent
Legislature or other competent
authority or until the expiration of

one year from such
commencement, whichever is
earlier.

63


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 2.1 (Concld.)

Provision Requirement as per provisio! Provision of Remarks
of of Constitution of India State Act (The
Constituti Kerala
on of Municipality
India Act, 1994)
Article Bar to interference by courts in | Section 70 - | Included
243ZG electoral matters Validity of

(a) the validity of any law relating | delimitation, etc.

to the delimitation of | Section 163 -
constituencies or the allotment of | Election petitions
seats to such constituencies, made
or purporting to be made under
Article 243ZA shall not be called in
question in any court;

(b) no election to any Municipality
shall be called in question except
by an election petition presented to
such authority and in such manner
as is provided for by or under any
law made by the Legislature of a
State

(Source: 747 CAA and KM Act 1994)

64


Appendices

Sl. Functions
No.

as per 747
CAA

1. | Urban
planning
including
town
planning.

Appendix 2.2
Activity Mapping
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3)

Functions as included in KM Act
Mandatory (A), General (B), Sector
wise / transferred (C)
Preparation of detailed town planning
and Action plan for implementation in

a phased manner (A)

Remarks on role of ULBs in
execution of the function

Limited Role for ULBs

¢ Master Plan and Detailed Town
Planning Scheme are to be prepared
or got prepared by ULBs.

e¢ The ULBs passed resolution for
preparation of Master Plan and
Detailed Town Planning Scheme and
get them prepared by Town and
Country Planning Department.

2. Regulation of
land use and
construction
of buildings.

Regulating building construction (A)

Limited Role for ULBs

¢ Regulation of land use has no
mention as a function in Schedule I of
KM Act. However, Section 381 of
KM Act provides for regulation of
land use.

e Master Plan and Detailed Town
Planning schemes are prepared by the

Town and Country Planning
Department.
3. | Planning for | Ensuring maximum people's | Limited Role for ULBs
economic and | participation in all stages of | + Development plans are prepared
social development (B) every year by Municipalities based
development. on Plan formulation and subsidy
guidelines issued by Government.
« Transferred departments are also
involved in scheme implementation.
ULBs function as implementing arms
for various Central/State
Government schemes.
: Roads and | Maintenance of roads and other public | Full jurisdiction of ULBs
bridges. properties (A)

Construct and maintain the roads
except National Highways, State
Highways and major District roads
within the Municipality (C)

Amenities including foot path, road
crossing facilities for pedestrians (A)

5. Water supply
for domestic,
industrial and
commercial
purposes.

Maintain water supply schemes within
the respective Municipal area (C)
Arrange water supply schemes within
the respective Municipalities (C)
Conservation of traditional drinking
water sources (A)

Preservation of ponds and other water
tanks (A)

Limited role for ULBs
* Kerala Water Authority plays the
major role. KWA arranges

distribution pipeline extension works
for uncovered areas in ULB as
deposit works.

© ULBs also pay for water charges to
KWA for water supplied through
public taps.

© Conservation of traditional drinking
water sources and preservation of
ponds and other water tanks are
undertaken by ULBs.

65


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Sl. Functions
74%

No. as per

CAA
Public health,
sanitation
conservancy
and solid
waste

management

Appendix 2.2 (Contd...)

Functions as included in KM Act
Mandatory (A), General (B), Sector
wise / transferred (C)

Run Dispensaries, Primary Health

Centres and sub centres, Taluk
hospitals under all systems of
Medicines (C)

Conduct child welfare centres and
mother care homes (C)

Organize remedial and _ other
preventive measures against diseases
(C)

Implement family welfare programmes
(C)

Adopt immunisation measures (A)
Effective implementation of National
and State level strategies and
programmes for prevention and control
of diseases (A)

Remarks on role of ULBs in
execution of the function

Limited role for ULBs

«Health and Family Welfare
Department involved in execution of
functions, Purchase of medicines and
medical equipment, repairs of
buildings entrusted to ULBs.

The elected representatives exercise
limited control over hospital
activities through Hospital
Management Committees (HMCs).
Health Institutions under all systems
of medicine as well as functions like
conducting child welfare centres and
mother care homes, family welfare
programmes, etc., are executed by
Health and Family Welfare
Department.

Immunisation as well as strategy for
controlling diseases are under the
purview of Health and Family
Welfare Department.

.

Implement sanitation programmes (C)
Collection and disposal of solid waste
and regulation of disposal of liquid
waste (A)

Maintenance of environmental hygiene
(A)

Suchitwa Mission. provides
managerial and technical support for
solid waste disposal activities.
Central and State funds routed to
ULBs through Suchitwa Mission.
Suchitwa Mission also provides
funds to Ward Sanitation Committees
for pre-monsoon cleaning

Liquid waste disposal done by
KWA/Department. Collection and
disposal of solid waste by ULBs
Maintenance of Environmental
hygiene is a mandatory function of
ULBs. Cleaning of public markets
and streets are done by ULBs
engaging contingent sanitation staff.
© Detailed Project Report for Solid
Waste Management prepared and
projects implemented by ULBs

.

Management of public markets (A)

* Managed by ULBs

7. | Fire services Not devolved

: Urban Growing of trees for fodder or fuel and | Limited role for ULBs
forestry, growing of fruit trees (C) * Forest department is also involved in
protection of | Organize campaign for planting of growing trees for fodder, fuel, etc.,
the trees and environmental awareness (C) and organising campaigns for
environment | Afforestation of waste land (C) afforestation
and
promotion of
ecological
aspects.

66



Sl.

No.

Appendices

Functions
as per 747
CAA

Safeguarding
the interests
of weaker
sections of
society,
including the
handicapped
and mentally
retarded.

Appendix 2.2 (Contd...)

Functions as included in KM Act
Mandatory (A), General (B), Sector
wise / transferred (C)

Run Anganvadis (C)

Remarks on role of ULBs in
execution of the function

Limited role for ULBs

© ULBs provide basic facilities.

« ICDS officer is the implementing
officer of nutrition programmes.
Fifty per cent of central funds for

.

nutrition programmes is routed
through Women and = Child
Development Department

Sanction and distribute pension to
destitute, widows, handicapped and
agricultural labourers (C)

Sanction and distribution of pension
to destitute, widows, differently
abled and agricultural labourers are
done by ULBs

Funds for the above purposes are
provided by Government

Sanction and distribute unemployment
wages (C)

Sanction and distribution of
unemployment wages is done by
ULBs.

Funds for the above purposes are
provided by Government

Sanction financial assistance for the
marriage of daughters of widows (C)

.

Financial assistance sanctioned by
ULBs as well as Scheduled Caste

Development Department and
Scheduled Tribe Development
Department

Start institutions for the welfare of | ¢ Social Justice Department runs

handicapped, destitute, etc. (C)

institutions for welfare of
handicapped, destitute, etc.

Identify the homeless and puramboke
dwellers and to provide house sites and
houses (C)

Implement beneficiary _ oriented
schemes under Special Component Plan
(SCP) and Tribal Sub Plan (TSP) (C)

« ULB implements beneficiary
oriented schemes under Special
Component Plan (SCP) and Tribal
Sub Plan (TSP).

Provide basic facilities in the
residential centres for the Scheduled
Caste/Scheduled Tribe (C)

Provide financial assistance for the
Scheduled  Caste/Scheduled — Tribe
students (C)

Provide assistance discretionally to the
deserving Scheduled Caste and the
Scheduled Tribes (C

ULBs provide basic facilities in
residential centres.

ULBs and SC/ST Development
Department _ provide financial
assistance to SC/ST students.

.

Nursery schools, Vocational Training
Centres, Pre-matric and post-matric
hostels for SC/ST in Municipal area
and develop Co-operative Societies (C)

.

SC/ST Development Department
runs Nursery schools, Vocational
Training Centres, pre-matric and
post-matric hostels, etc.

Implementing housing programmes,
shelter rejuvenation programmes, low-
cost housing, development of housing
complex and infrastructure, etc. (C)
Mobilise funds necessary for housing

(0

.

ULBs mobilise funds
implementation.
ULBs, Department of Housing,
SC/ST and Fisheries departments
implement housing schemes and
Kudumbashree plays role in
implementation.

for scheme

.

67


No.

Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

Functions
as per 747
CAA

Appendix 2.2 (Contd...)

Functions as included in KM Act
Mandatory (A), General (B), Sector
wise / transferred (C)

Remarks on role of ULBs in
execution of the function

10. | Slum Providing basic facilities in slum areas | Full jurisdiction of ULBs
improvement | (A) « Implementation through
and Kudumbashree.
upgradation.

11. | Urban poverty | Identify the poor (C) Full Jurisdiction of ULBs
alleviation Implement self-employment and group | * ULBs involve through people's

employment schemes for the poor, participation in all stages of

especially for women (C) development through Ward

Create community assets to get committees / Ward sabhas.

continuing benefit to the poor (C) Plan schemes executed with grants

Develop the skills of those below given to ULBs.

poverty line to do self-employment and | ७ Schemes implemented by

for remunerative employment (C) Kudumbashree through NHG/SHGs.

Provide basic facilities for self- Assets created by ULBs.

employment schemes (C)

12. | Provision of Construct playgrounds and studios (C) | Limited role for ULBs
urban «¢ Smart City Mission and AMRUT
amenities and Mission also engaged in execution
facilities such
as parks,
gardens,
playgrounds.

13. | Promotion of | Regulating the conduct of fairs and | Limited role for ULBs
cultural, festivals (A) « Education Department and Tourism
educational Department involved
and aesthetic © Only pre-primary schools, primary
aspects. Run the Government pre-primary, schools, High schools are transferred

primary schools, High schools, to the Local Bodies with

Government Higher Secondary | _ functionaries to implement schemes.

Schools, | Government Industrial | ¢ Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan

Training Centres, Government (SSA)/Samagra Shiksha Kerala

Technical Schools, _ Government (SSK) schemes implemented by

Vocational Training Centres and Education Department.

Polytechnics in the Municipal area (C) | ७ The ULBs provide toilets, undertake
repair of school buildings and
contributes 40 per cent of the share
towards expenditure incurred by SSA
for various items, viz., providing
furniture, teacher training, etc.

14. | Burials and | Establishment and maintenance of | Full jurisdiction of ULBs
burial burial and burning grounds (A)
grounds,
cremations,
cremation
grounds and
electric
crematoriums.

15. | Cattle pounds; | Issue licence to domestic dogs and | Limited role for ULBs
prevention of | destroy stray dogs (A) « Animal Husbandry Department
cruelty to | Prevention of cruelty to animals (C) issues license to domestic dogs and
animals. are entrusted with management of

stray dogs and prevention of cruelty
to animals.

68



Appendices

Appendix 2.2 (Concld.)

Functions Functions as included in KM Act Remarks on role of ULBs in
as per 74 Mandatory (A), General (8), Sector execution of the function
CAA wise / transferred (C)
7 Vital statistics | Registration of births and deaths (A) Full jurisdiction of ULBs
including
registration of
births and
deaths.
17. | Public Street lighting and its maintenance (A) | Full jurisdiction of ULBs
amenities Providing parking spaces for vehicles
including (A)
street Construction of waiting sheds for
lighting, travellers (A)

parking lots, Providing toilet facilities and bathing
bus stops and | ghats at public places (A)

public Providing bathing and washing ghats
conveniences. | (A)

Arranging ferries (A)

18. | Regulation of | Regulation of slaughtering of animals | Full jurisdiction of ULBs

slaughter and sale of meat, fish and other easily
houses and perishable food stuffs, etc. (A)
tanneries.

(Source: 74" CAA, KM Act, Government Orders)

69


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 2.3
State-wide shortage in number of Councillors
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.1)

Population Requi | Actual Short
red No.of —_age
No. of  Counci

Counc llors

illors
Corporation Corporation: Fifty
- five councillors for the
| Emakulam Kochi 602046 B 74 7 “frst four lakhs and
one each for every ten
thousand exceeding
four lakhs, subject toa
‘maximum of one
hundred councillors
Municipalities Municipality: Twenty
—_ five councillors for
T | Emakulam Tripunithura 92522, BT] 3 | frst twenty thousand
2 | Emakulam Kalamassery 71038 5 a2 3 | and one each for
every two thousand
3_| Emakulam Maradu 44704 34 33 जिया and five hundred
exceeding twenty
4) Emakulam Kothamangalam 38837 32 31 वा #ट वह, cobain ०
5. Emakulam Muvattupuzha 30397 29 28 fo eH CHES) 89
Councillors
[=| Emakulam Piravom 29105 28 27 |
7_| Emakulam Perumbavoor 28105 8 27 T
[| Idukki Thodupuzha 52025 37 35 2
[5 | Kannur Payyannur Tait 45 a |
10 | Kannur Kuthuparamba 32405 29 28 T
[| T | Kasaragod Kanhangad 73536 46 B 3
12 | Kottayam Changanassery 56049 39 37 2
छ | Kottayam Eitumanoor 31129 37 35 2
14 | Kottayam Erattupetta 34245 30 B 2
15 | Kozhikode Vadakara 80356 बढ a 2
| 16 | Koahikode Koyilandy 71929 45 att
17 | Malappuram | Manjeri 97102 52 30 2
| 3 | Malappuram | Ponnani 90491 32 31 जा
| 19 [Mateppuram | Malappuram 8088 al | 4
20 | Malappuram | Tirur 56058 39 38 fo
21 | Malappuram | Perinthalmanna 49723 36 34 2
22 | Malappuram | Kottakkal 48342, 36 32 4
25. | Malappuram | Nilambur 46342 35 33 2
24 | Malappuram | Valanchery 44037 34 3 f
75 | Palakkad Ottappalam 53792 38 36 2
26 | Palakkad Shoranur 43528 34 33 T
27 | Pathanamthitta | Pandalam 45497 35 33 2

70


Appendices

Appendix 2.3 (Concld.)

District Population Requir | Actual
No. edNo. No.of age
रन... Counci

Councillors

Thiruvanan Neyyattinkara
thapuram
29 | Thiruvanan Nedumangad 60161 41 39 2
thapuram
30 | Thrissur Kodungalloor 71244 45 [| 1
31 | Thrissur Guruvayur 70012 45 43 2
32 | Thrissur Kunnamkulam, 54071 38 37 1
33 | Wayanad Kalpetta 31580 29 28 1

(Source: KM Act, 1994, Data furnished by Directorate of Urban Affairs, Official Website of
Municipalities and Corporations)

71


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 2.4
Timeliness in constitution of SFCs and submission of reports
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.3)

Date by Date of Date of Date of Time Period
which SFC constitution elapsed submissionof submission _ elapsed __ covered
was to be (days) SFCReport of Action (days)
constituted to cen.
Government Report by
Government
23 April 23 April i 29 February | 13 March 1996-97
1994 1994 1996 1997 to
2000-01
| 23 April 23 June 61 08 January O7 January | 1094 | 2001-02
1999 1999 2001 2004 to
2005-06
Third 23 April 20 150 23 November | 16February | 85 2006-07
2004 September 2005 2006 to
2004 2010-11
Fourth 23 April 19 149 20 January 24February | 35
2009 September 2011 2011 (First. | 2011-12
2009 (First Part) (First Part) | Part) to
2015-16
31 March 22 March 357
2011 2012 (Second
Second Part) | (Second Part) | Part )
7 23 April 7 238 19 December | 07 February | 781 2016-17
2014 December 2015 2018 (First to
2014 (First Part) (First and Part) | 2020-21
Second Part)
11 March 698
2016 (Second
Second Part Part

(Source: SFC Cell, Government of Kerala)

72


Appendices

Appendix 2.5

Recommendations of State Finance Commissions facilitating
empowerment of ULBs which were accepted by Government but not
implemented

(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.3)

i. Recommendations relating to Own revenue

> Cable television/Dish TV operators may be required to pay annual Licence Fee as
well as Entertainment Tax (First, Second and Fourth SFCs).

> Government may look into the possibility of bringing the land developed for non-
agricultural purpose into the property tax domain, as the change in land use pattern
is gaining unusual momentum all over the State in recent times (Fourth SFC).

> Building Tax collected under Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975 be exclusively

assigned to local bodies (First SFC).

The entrance fees in tourism centres and agricultural farms and operation of house

boats to be brought under the purview of Entertainment tax by making necessary

amendments to the Kerala Local Authorities Entertainments Tax Act, 1961 (Fourth

SFC).

Building Permit Fee and Rates of all other non-tax items (except fee for marriage

certificate) to be raised at least by 50 per cent (Fifth SFC).

Vv

Vv

ii. Recommendations relating to Institutional Measures

Vv

New posts of Environmental Engineer, Mechanical Engineer and Electrical
Engineer in the cadre of Assistant Engineer shall be created in three regions to look
after the engineering related issues of Municipalities and Municipal Corporations
(Fifth SFC).
> Kerala Institute of Local Administration (KILA) should come out with a plan of
action to build the capacity of different grades of staff within three years, with
special emphasis on imparting the necessary skill to use computers (Fourth SFC).
> A Human Resource Commission for Local Governments headed by an eminent
expert and consisting of the Secretaries of Finance, Personnel and Administrative
Reforms and Local Self Government Departments and two other experts may be
constituted to work out the details and modalities involved in the issue of Human
Resource Development. The work may be completed in six months (Fourth SFC).
> A Manual of Personnel Management may be developed incorporating not only
disciplinary rules and code of conduct but also explaining well accepted techniques
of human resource management and Performance assessment (Fourth SFC).

iii. Other recommendations

> A chapter on Fiscal accountability to be added in KM Act to strengthen
appropriation controls (Fourth SFC).

> The Budget Rules needed to be amplified in considerable detail in a simple manner
with enough number of illustrations and issued in the form of a Budget Manual
which would detail procedures for appropriation to enable appropriation control.
(Fourth SFC).

> The lack of clarity in powers and functions of critical constitutional mechanism like
District Planning Committee has to be remedied (Fourth SFC).

> The relationship between Local Governments and the State Governments including
parastatals performing functions assigned to Local Governments has to be laid down
clearly (Fourth SFC).

73


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74° Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 2.6

Overriding powers of Government in the KM Act

Subject

1 | Power to make

(Reference: Paragraph 2.6)

Pro

The Government may, by notification in the Gazette, make

Government to
issue direction to
Municipality

Rules tules, either prospectively or retrospectively, to carry out all
or any of the purposes of this Act (Section 565 of KM Act,
1994)
2. | Power of | Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the

Government shall have the power to issue directions to the
Municipality in accordance with the National and State
policies in matters of finance, maintenance of accounts,
office management, selection of schemes, sites and
beneficiaries, proper functioning of Ward Sabhas and Ward
Committees, welfare programmes, environment control,
etc., and the Municipality shall comply with such directions
(Section 58 of KM Act, 1994)

3 | Power to
dissolve ULBs

Before the expiry of a financial year, if the council fails to
approve the budget of the Municipality for the succeeding
financial year, and if, for that reason, there is financial crisis
to the Municipality or if the majority of the councillors
resign or have been disqualified, the Government may, by
notification in the Gazette, dissolve the Municipality from
such date as may be specified therein and shall forward a
copy thereof to the State Election Commission (Section 64
of KM Act, 1994)

4 | Power of
Government to
undertake

certain works

The Government may, with the consent of a Municipality,
undertake on its behalf the construction of water supply,
drainage or any other work, appoint any officer or person
to carry out the construction of such works and direct that
the expenses including the pay and allowances of such
officers be paid from the Municipal fund in priority, to any
charges except charges for the service of authorised loans
(Section 62 of KM Act, 1994)

5 | Power of
Municipality to
acquire and
dispose of
property

A Municipality may in the manner prescribed, acquire any
property such as land or building within or outside its
Municipal area or dispose of any of its properties with the
prior approval of the Government for providing any
arrangement or facility for a public purpose (Section 215 of
KM Act, 1994)

| | Power to give
retrospective
effect to certain
bye-laws

The Council may, with the previous sanction of the
Government, and subject to the provisions hereinafter
contained in this Chapter make bye-laws with retrospective
effect (Section 568 of KM Act, 1994)

7 | Confirmation of
bye-laws or
regulations

No bye-law or regulation or any cancellation or alteration
thereof shall have effect until the same is approved and
confirmed by the Government (Section 572 of KM Act,
1994)

(Source: KM Act, 1994)

4



Appendices

Appendix 3.1
Details of Solid Waste Management by selected ULBs
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1)

Urban Local Per day Capacity | Percentage
Body generation tohandle | of Waste
(Tonne) (Tonne) handling

capacity to
per day
generation

Irinjalakuda Bio Waste 15.50 | 9.00 |
Non bio- 3.50 3.50 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- | ; | 100.00
recyclable

Wadakkanchery | Bio Waste 12.00 2.00 16.67
Non bio- 5.00 5.00 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 3.00 3.00 100.00
recyclable

Cherpulassery Bio Waste No details available
Non bio- 2.00 | 50.00
recyclable
Non bio non- P| 0.50 50.00
recyclable

Ottappalam Bio Waste | 0.10 | 10 | 0.10 | 10 100.00
Non bio- 5.00 0.45 pe]
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.02 0.015 0.75
recyclable

Ponnani Bio Waste [| 6.00 | 5.00 83.33
Non bio- 1.50 ; | 66.67
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.50 0.25 50.00
recyclable

Koduvally Bio Waste 0.05 0.05 100.00
Non bio- ; 3] 0.40 66.67
recyclable
Non bio non- po] 10 0.08 80.00
recyclable

Kalpetta Bio Waste | 6.00 | | 6.00 | 100.00
Non bio- 3.50 4.00 114.29
recyclable
Non bio non- 4.00 4.00 100.00
recyclable

Mattannur Bio Waste 9.38 9.38 100.00
Non bio- 5.00 5.00 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.49 0.49 100.00
recyclable

75


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 3.1 (Contd...)

Urban Local Per day Capacity | Percentage
Body generation tohandle | of Waste
(Tonne) (Tonne) handling
capacity to
per da
generation
Nileshwar Bio Waste 100.00
Non bio- ; | 1.00 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 3.00 ; | |
recyclable
Kochi Bio Waste 226.00 250.00 110.62
Corporation Non bio- 80.00 ; | .00 1.25
recyclable
Non bio non- 20.00 pm | p00]
recyclable
Nedumangad Bio Waste 5.60 2.80 50.00
Non bio- 5.60 2.80 50.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.20 po | pm]
recyclable
Kayamkulam Bio Waste 5.00 3.00 60.00
Non bio- 0.10 0.45 450.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.34 ; | ; |
recyclable
Haripad Bio Waste 8.30 4.00 48.19
Non bio- 0.25 0.25 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.05 0.05 100.00
recyclable
Thiruvalla Bio Waste 5.20 4.00 76.92
Non bio- 2.00 0.5 0.25
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.45 ; | P|
recyclable
Pathanamthitta | Bio Waste 2.00 1.50 75.00
Non bio- 0.50 0.40 80.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.50 0.30 60.00
recyclable
Pandalam Bio Waste 1.50 2.00 133.33
Non bio- 0.05 ; | 2000.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 0.15 1.00 666.67
recyclable

76


Appendices

Appendix 3.1 (Concld.)

Urban Local Per day Capacity | Percentage
Body generation tohandle | of Waste
(Tonne) (Tonne) handling
capacity to
per da
generation
Kattappana Bio Waste
Non bio- 2.50 2.50 100.00
recyclable
Non bio non- 2.00 2.00 100.00
recyclable
Bio Waste 205.00 150.00 0.73
Keenivode Non bio- 26.00 10.00 0.38
Corporation 1६०७० ab g
Non bio non- 69.00 25.00 0.36
recyclable
Bio Waste 10.00 | 65.00 | | 0.6 |
Non bio- ; A 4.00 ;™|
Aluva recyclable
Non bio non- ; 3] pm | p00]
recyclable
Bio Waste 13.13 [06 | 0.05
Non bio- 3.00 3.00 100
Panoor recyclable
Non bio non- 1.38 1.38 | ™|
recyclable

(Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs)

77


Performance Audit on Efficacy of Implementation of the 74" Constitution Amendment Act

Appendix 3.2
Details of fund allotted for SWM and expenditure incurred by the
test-checked ULBs during 2015-20
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1)

ULB Allotment Expenditure Percentage of
(₹) ()
Thiruvananthapuram 404460817 182672434 45.16
Kochi 59086897 4928656 8.34
Kozhikode 143054509 29555000 20.66
Nedumangad 32623640 4383940 13.44
Kayamkulam 87332568 3268772 3.74
Haripad 8185302 3536839 43.21
Thiruvalla 22916822 2117138 9.24
Pandalam 14437672 1350418 9.35
Pathanamthitta 10102508 4232043 41.89
Kattappana 34496497 6757269 19.59
Aluva 51899297 21245020 40.94
Trinjalakkuda 26770079 9742747 36.39
Wadakkanchery 13264618 209519 1.58
Cherpulassery 15457149 2052425 13.28
Ottappalam 38232275 6143697 16.07
|Ponnani | 23510375 1917091 8.15
Koduvally 37685732 952872 2.53
Kalpetta 35681688 9830368 27.55
Panoor 11487500 337500 2.94
Mattannur 4954000 980000 19.78
Nileshwar 41424120 9678946 23.37

(Source: Data furnished by test-checked ULBs)

78