  
                      
                 
  
 
Performance Report of The  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
 
 
Government of Chhattisgarh 
Report No. 2 of the year 2022 
 
 

 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Audit on 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in 
Chhattisgarh 
for the year ended 31 March 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Chhattisgarh 
Report No. 2 of the year 2022 
 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
i 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Content Paragraph 
number 
Page 
Number 
Preface  iii 
Executive Summary  v 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
74th Constitutional Amendment 1.1 1 
Trend of urbanisation in Chhattisgarh 1.2 1 
Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1.3 1 
Organisation Stru cture of Urban Governance in 
Chhattisgarh 
1.4 2 
Audit Objectives 1.5 2 
Sources of Audit Criteria 1.6 2 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.7 3 
Acknowledgement 1.8 3 
Organisation of Audit Findings 1.9 4 
Chapter II 
Compliance to provisions of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
Comparison of State level legislations with 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act 
2.1 5 
Powers of the State Government over Urban Local 
Bodies 
2.2 7 
Chapter III 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Actual status of devolution of functions 3.1 9 
Limited powers over manpower 3.2 13 
Staff position of urban Local Bodies 3.2.1 14 
Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urban 
Local Bodies 
3.3 15 
State Election Commission 3.3.1 16 
Status of elections and formation of councils 3.3.2 16 
Ward and Mohalla Committees 3.3.3 17 
State Finance Commission 3.3.4 19 
Response of the State Government to State Finance 
Commission recommendation 
3.3.4.1 19 
Property Tax Board and Municipal Revenue Regulatory 
Commission 
3.3.5 20 
State Institute of Urban Governance and Development 3.3.6 21 
Adoption of Accrual Based Accounting 3.3.7 21 
Chapter IV 
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Sources of Revenue 4.1 24 
Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 4.1.1 24 
Transfer of funds to Urban Local Bodies 4.1.2 25 
Central Finance Commission Grants 4.1.2.1 28 
Property Tax 4.1.3 29 
Water Charges 4.1.4 30 
Solid Waste Management 4.1.5 31 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 
ii 
 
Other sources of revenue 4.1.6 32 
Expenditure on services 4.2 33 
Expenditure of selected services 4.3 33 
Effectiveness of devolved functions 4.3.1 35 
Chapter V 
Conclusion - 39 
 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 
Number 
Title Page 
Number 
1 Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in 
Chhattisgarh 
41 
2 Statement showing the functioning of the Government 
Department/Parastatal Agency 
42 
3 List of selected Urban Local Bodies 43 
4 Statement showing the delayed transfer of stamp duty to 
Urban Local Bodies 
44 
5 Statement showing the details of outstanding revenue of 
Property Tax in test-checked Urban local Bodies 
45 
6 Statement showing the details of outstanding revenue of 
Water Tax in test-checked Urban local Bodies 
46 
7 Statement showing the details of user charges collected in 
test-checked Urban local Bodies 
47 
8 Statement showing the details of mobile tower in test-
checked Urban local Bodies 
48 
 

 
iii 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  for the year ending 
31st March 2020  has been prepared for submission  to the Governor of 
Chhattisgarh under Article 151 of the Constitution of  India, for being laid before 
the Legislature of the State. 
The Report contains significant results of Pe rformance Audit on ‘Implementation 
of 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh’, covering the period 
2015-16 to 2019-20.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are among those  which came to notice in 
the course of test audit.   
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards  
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

v 
Executive Summary  
The 74th Constitutional Amendment, which  came into effect on 1 June 1993 , 
provided a clear mandate for democratic decentralization and sought to create an 
institutional framework for ushering in democracy at the grass root level through 
self-governing local bodies in urban areas of the country. It empowered Urban Local 
Bodies to perform 18 functions listed in the 12th Schedule of the Constitution. 
Chhattisgarh, located in central India, is geographically the ninth largest State of the 
country, having a population of 2.55 crore of which 59.37 lakh reside in urban areas. 
Urban Chhattisgarh faces multiple challenges, namely, public health issues, poverty 
alleviation, waste management, depletion of natural resources, etc. In this scenario, 
Urban Local Bodies have an important role to play, as most of these issues are dealt 
best at the local level. 
In Chhattisgarh, three tiers of Urban Local Bodies are categorised on the basis of 
population in their jurisdiction.  The objective of this Audit was to see  whether the 
State Government had empowered the Urban Local Bodies through the creation of a 
robust institutional framework , supported by  transfer of fun ctions, funds and 
functionaries. 
We observed that the task of delimitation has not been entrusted to the State Election 
Commission and elections of Urban Local Bodies were being held in 15 Urban Local 
Bodies with a delay of one year. 
Adherence to  business procedures and regular meetings of various committees  is 
imperative for successful functioning of Urban Local Bodies. However, we noticed 
that meetings of Corporations/Councils were not held as per laid down norms . 
Advisory Committees were not constituted in 10 Urban Local Bodies . On the other 
hand, Ward Committees and Mohalla Committees that were to be created to ensure 
community participation in local governance , were not constituted across the Urban 
Local Bodies . Further, due  to absence of provision in the Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporations Act, the Metropolitan Planning Committees were not constituted in any 
city. Meetings of District Planning Committees were  also not held regularly and 
consolidated District Developments Plans for the D istrict as a whole by considering 
the matters of common interest were not prepared in any of the 12 Districts in which 
the 27 test-checked Urban Local Bodies were located.  
Timely constitution of State Finance Commission and taking swift actions on its 
recommendations is critical to wards strengthening the financial position of Urban 
Local Bodies. Delay in constitution of State Finance Commissions (first to third) and 
consequent delays in submission of their reports, as well as delay in acceptance and 
implementation of recommendations relating to devolution of funds  have adversely 

vi 
affected the financial position of the Urban Local Bodies . We noticed that the  
devolution of funds is still being carried out as per the recommendations of the  
Second State Finance Commission, even when the constitution of Fifth State Finance 
Commission was due. 
We noticed that the  revenue raised by Urban L ocal Bodies from own sources was 
low. Significant amounts were due to the Urban Local Bodies pertaining to Property 
Tax and Water Tax, which are two of the ir biggest revenue sources. GIS Survey , 
which can have a substantial progressive impact on Property Tax,  too was conducted 
only in 1 0 Urban Local Bodies. Further, it was noticed that none of the selected 
Urban Local Bodies except Nagar Nigam Korba had installed meters for water 
connections and only fixed water charges were being levied which was not sufficient 
to even pay for expenses on operation and maintenance of water supply.  
There were large variation s between Budget Estimates and actual income and 
expenditure over several years, which indicated improper budget formulation. 
Sufficient and suitably trained Human Resource is critical for effective functioning 
of any institution. The Urban Local Bodies neither had the powers to assess the staff 
requirement, nor recruit the required permanent staff except on contractual basis as 
these powers were vested with the State Governmen t. The Urban Local Bodies were 
working with acute shortage of staff and dependent on out -sourced staff. The State 
Government assessed  the requirement of s taff based on population alone , without 
seeking the actual requirement from Urban Local Bodies . Majority of the staff were 
appointed by State Government, and the powers to regulate their conditions of 
services, discipline, and conduct was vested with the State Government . Though 
training courses have remained more or less constant ov er the years, participation of 
staff has decreased. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
Chapter-I: Introduction 
 
1.1  74th Constitutional Amendment 
In order to enable the Urban Local Bodies to perform effectively as vibrant democratic 
units of self-government, it was considered necessary that provisions relating to Urban 
Local Bodies are incorporated in the Constitution  of India through an amendment. Such 
an amendment was to put on a firmer footing , their relationship between the State 
Government with respect to the functions  and resources as well as for regular conduct of 
elections and providing adequate representation for the weaker sections like Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women. 
The Constitu tion (Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 , which came into effect on 1 
June 1993, provided a constitutional status to Urban Local Bodies  in the country. Article 
243W of the Constitutional Amendment Act  authorised the State Legislatures to enact 
laws to endow local bodies with powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them 
to function as  institutions of self -governance and make provisions for devolution of 
powers and responsibilities.  The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution enumerates 18 
specific functions to be devolved to Urban Local Bodies. 
1.2  Trend of urbanisation in Chhattisgarh 
Chhattisgarh, located in central India, is the ninth largest State of the country. It covers 
almost 4.11 per cent of the area  (135,192 Sq. km.) and 2.11 per cent  (2.55 crore) of 
country’s total population. As per Census 2011, 59.37 lakh (23.24 per cent ) out of the 
total population resides in urban areas. During the period 2001-2011, the urban population 
in Chhattisgarh increased by 17.51 lakh. 
Urban Chhattisgarh faces multiple challenges, namely, public health issues, poverty 
alleviation, waste management etc. In this scenario, Urban Local Bodies  have an 
important role to play, as most of these issues are handled best at the local level. 
 
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies 
In Chhattisgarh, three tiers of Urban Local Bodies  are categorised on the basis of 
population1 in t heir jurisdiction. There are 169 Urban Local Bodies  as shown in Table 
1.1below: 
Table 1.1: Category-wise Urban Local Bodies in Chhattisgarh State 
Types of Urban Local Body No. of Urban Local Bodies 
Nagar Nigam  14 
Nagar Palika Parishad 43 
Nagar Panchayat 112 
Total 169 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
 
1 Population of 1,00,000 or more is Nagar Nigam, population of 20,000 or more but less than 1,00,000 
is Nagar Palika Parishad, and population of 5,000 or more but less than 20,000 is Nagar Pa nchayat. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
2 
The Municipal Corporations (Nagar Nigams) are governed by the Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporations Act (Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation) Act, 1956 and other Urban Local 
Bodies (Nagar Palika Parishads and Nagar Panchayats) are governed by the Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act ( Chhattisgarh Municipalities) Act, 1961. Corporation/Munici pal area 
is divided into Wards, which are determined and notified by the State Government for the 
purpose of election of Councillors. All Urban Local Bodies  have an elected body 
comprising Mayor/President as head of the Urban Local Body  and Parshads/ Councillors 
as members of the Council. 
1.4  Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Chhattisgarh 
The Urban Administration and Development Department, headed by the Secre tary to the 
Government, is the Nodal Department for the governance of all Urban Local Bodies. The 
Urban Administration and Development Directorate, functions as an interface between the 
State Government and Urban Local Bodies , which function  directly under the Urban 
Administration and Development Department . The Urban Administration and 
Development Directorates headed by a Director who is assisted by five Joint Directors2 at 
Division level. The organisation structure with respect to functioning of Urban Local 
Bodies in the State is indicated in Appendix 1. 
In additio n to Urban Local Bodies , the Urban Administration and Development 
Department has five key Parastatal agencies/ other Departments that deliver or facilitate 
urban infrastructure and services , such as Nagar and Gram Nivesh , Chhattisgarh Housing 
Board, Public Works Department, Public Health Engineering Department and 
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation.  The details of parastatal s/other 
Department and their functions are given in Appendix2. 
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit seeks to ascertain whether: 
➢ The Urban Local Bodies  have been adequately empowered by the State Government 
to discharge their functions/responsibilities effectively through creation of 
appropriately designed institutions/institutional mechanisms and their function; 
➢ The functions stated to have been devolved were effective on the ground; and 
➢ The Urban Local Bodies  have been empowered to access adequate resources , 
including sufficient resources, for discharge of functions stated to have been devolved 
to them. 
1.6 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The criteria for the Performance Audit were derived from the following sources: 
➢ 74th Constitutional Amendment Act 1992; 
➢ Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation Act 1956 and the Rules made thereunder; 
➢ Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act 1961 and the Rules made thereunder; 
 
2 Ambikapur,Bilaspur, Durg, Jagdalpur and Raipur. 

Chapter-I 
 
3 
➢ Chhattisgarh Municipal Accounting Manual; 
➢ Reports of 13th and 14th Finance Commission; Reports of first, second and third State 
Finance Commissions; and 
➢ Instructions and circulars issued by the State Government and Directorate, Urban 
Administration and Development Department. 
1.7 Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Performance Audit covered the period of 2015 -16 to 20 19-20(henceforth mentioned 
as 2015-20) through test-check of data collectedfrom27Urban Local Bodies across all tiers 
for selected functions . These 27Urban Local Bodies  were chosen , by using Simple 
Random Sampling without replacement method in the following way: 
➢ Five Nagar Nigams , i.e.  35 per cent  of 1 4 Nagar Nigams, including Raipur Nagar 
Nigam being Municipality of State Capital; 
➢ 11 Nagar Palika Parishads, i.e. 25 per cent of 43Nagar Palika Parishads; and 
➢ 11 Nagar Panchayats, i.e. 10 per cent of 112Nagar Panchayats of the State. 
Details may be seen in Appendix 3. Further, at Apex l evel records of Director, Urban 
Administration and Development Directorate  and S ecretary, Urban Administration and 
Development Department have also been test -checked. Out of 18 functions identified in 
the 12th Schedule, following functions/activities were selecte d for test-check in the Urban 
Local Bodies: 
i) Planning for Economic and Social Development; 
ii) Water supply; 
iii) Public Health, Sanitation conservancy and Solid Waste Management; 
iv) Slum improvement and up-gradation; 
v) Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, gardens, playgrounds; and 
vi) Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public 
conveniences. 
We conducted an Entry Conference on 05 March 2021  with the Secretary, Urban 
Administration and Development Department , in which the audit methodology, scope, 
objectives and criteria were shared. The audit methodology involved online requisitions of 
information and short visit to units for collection of documents  and analysis of responses 
to Audit queries. An Exit Conference was held on 23 December 2021. 
1.8 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the cooperation and assistance e xtended by the Department, Nagar 
Nigams,Nagar P alika Parishads and Nagar Panchayats . However, challenges we faced 
specifically with regard to non -production of records and information are mentioned in 
the Report at appropriate places. 
 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
4 
1.9 Organisation of Audit Findings 
Our findings are organised as under: 
Chapter II – Compliance to provisions of 74thConstitutional Amendment Act; 
Chapter III – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning; 
Chapter IV – Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies; 
Chapter V– Conclusion. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
Compliance to provisions of 74th 
Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
 

5 
Chapter-II 
 
Compliance to provisions of 74thConstitutional Amendment Act 
 
2.1 Comparison of State level legislations with 74th Constitutional Amendment 
Act 
The 74 thConstitutional Amendment Act  introduced certain provisions relating to 
municipalities vide Articles 243Q  to 243ZG. The provisions exist ing in the Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation /Chhattisgarh Municipalities Acts and Chhattisgarh Zila Yojana 
Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995 corresponding to the Constitutional Amendment Act  provisions 
are as indicated in Table 2.1 below. 
Table 2.1: Comparison of State level legislations with the provisions of 74thConstitutional 
Amendment Act 
Provision of the 
Constitution of 
India 
Requirement as per provision of the 
Constitution of India 
Provision of State Act/Acts 
Article 243Q  Constitution of Municipalities : It provides for 
constitution of three types of M unicipalities, 
namely, a Nagar Panchayat for transitional area, 
a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area 
and a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban 
area. 
Section5 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 7 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956  
Article 243R  Composition of Municipalities: All the seats in 
a Municipality shall be filled by direct elections 
and also by persons with special knowledge in 
municipal administration nominated by 
Government.  The Legislature of a State , may 
by law, provide for representation to the 
Municipality, Members of Parliament and 
Legislative Assembly , whose constituencies lie 
within the mun icipal area and Members of the 
Council, of State and State Legislative Council , 
who are registered as electors within the city. 
Section 19 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 9 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243S  Constitution and composition of Wards 
Committee: This provides for constitution of 
Wards Committees in all municipalities with a 
population of 3 lakh or more. 
Section 48 (A) of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act 1956 
Section 72 (A) of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act 1961 
Article 243T  Reservation of seats: The seats to be reserved 
for S cheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe, women 
and Backward Classes for direct election. 
Section 29(A) of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 11(A) of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243U  Duration of Municipalities: The municipality 
has a fixed tenure of 5 years from the date of its 
first meeting and re -election is to be held within 
six months of end of tenure. 
Section 36 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 20 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243V  Disqualifications for membership: A p erson 
shall be disqualified from being a member of a 
Municipality: 
Section 35 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
6 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law 
for the time being in force for the purposes of 
elections of the Leg islature of the State 
concerned, and 
• If he is so disqualified by or under any law 
made by the Legislature of the State.  
Section 17 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243W Powers, authority  and responsibilities of the 
Municipalities: All municipalities would be 
empowered with such powers as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as effective 
institutions of self -government. The State 
Government shall entrust them with such 
powers and authority as to enable them to carry 
out the responsibilities in relation to the 12 th 
Schedule.  
Section 124 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 69 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243X  Power to impose taxes by the Municipalities  
and their funding: 
• Municipalities would be empowered to levy 
and collect the taxes, fees, duties, etc. 
• Grant-in-Aid would be given to the 
Municipalities from the State. 
• Constitution of funds for crediting and 
withdrawal of moneys by the Municipality. 
Section 129 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 133 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243Y read 
with Article 243I  
Finance Commission: State Government shall 
constitute a Finance Commission for: 
• Reviewing the financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such steps that help 
in boosting the financial condition of the 
Municipal Bodies. 
• Distributing between the S tate and the 
Municipalities of the net proceeds of the 
taxes, fees, tolls and duties that a re charged 
by the State Government. 
• Allotting the funds to the Municipal Bodies in 
the S tate from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State. 
Section 3 of Chhattisgarh State 
Finance Commission Act, 1994 
Article 243Z  Audit of accounts of Municipalities : This 
provides provision for maintenance of accounts 
by the Municipalities and the auditing of such 
accounts.  
Section 121 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
 
Section 125 to 131 of 
Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243ZA 
read with Article 
243K  
Elections to the Municipalities: The 
superintendence, direction and control of all 
procedures of election of the Municipalities 
shall be vested in the State Election Commission 
(SEC). 
Section 32 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act, 1961 
Section 14 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 
Article 243ZD  Committee for District Planning:  
• Constitution of District Planning Committee 
at district level. 
• Composition of District Planning Committee. 
• Preparation of Draft Development Plan and 
forwarding to the Government. 
Section 3 of Chhattisgarh Zila 
Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995 

Chapter-II 
 
7 
Article 243ZE of 
Constitution of 
India 
Committee for Metropolitan Planning: 
Provision for constitution of Metropolitan 
Planning Committee in every Metropolitan area 
with a population of 10 lakhs or more. 
No provision has been made by 
State Government. 
(Source: Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation / Chhattisgarh Municipalities Acts and Chhattisgarh 
Zila Yojana Samiti Adhiniyam, 1995) 
As seen from Table 2.1 above,  barring the constitution of the committee for the 
Metropolitan Planning, the State Acts/Rules have complied with all requirements as 
envisaged in the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act  regarding inclusion of codal 
provisions in the State Acts/Rules . However, compliance to the constitutional provisions 
by law does not guarantee effective decentralisation on ground unless followed by 
effective implementation. We observed that the legal provisions were not backed by 
decisive actions, which goes against the spirit of the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act. 
These shortages relate to institutional mechanism s for empowerment of Urban Local 
Bodies, devolution of financial powers of Urban Local Bodies , manpower management, 
etc., as discussed in the subsequent chapters. 
2.2 Powers of the State Government over Urban Local Bodies 
We observed that the State Government had overriding powers over Urban Local Bodies, 
which was against the spirit of the Constitutional Amendment. A few provisions are 
indicated in Table 2.2 below: 
Table 2.2: Statement showing the overriding powers of State Government over Urban Local 
Bodies 
Sl. 
No. Subject Provision 
1 Power to frame Rules The State Government may by notification in the Gazette, frame rules for 
the Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation / Chhattisgarh Municipalities 
Acts after approval of the State Legislature (Section 433 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation  Act and Section 355  of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act). 
2 Power to cancel and 
suspend a resolution or 
decision taken by 
Urban Local Bodies 
The State Government may cancel a resolution or decision taken by 
Urban Local Bodies , if the State Government is of the opinion that it is 
not legally passed or in excess of the power conferred by Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation  and Chhattisgarh Municipalities Acts, any other 
law or likely to lead to a breach of the peace or to cause i njury or 
annoyance to the public or to any class or body or persons or is likely to 
cause waste of or damage to Municipal funds in violation of directions 
issued by Government (Section 421 of Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporation Act and Section 323 of Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act). 
3 Power to dissolve 
Urban Local Bodies 
The State Government shall, by notification in the Gazette, dissolve the 
Urban Local Bodies , if Urban Local Bodies  fail to perform or default in 
the performance of any of the duties imposed on them, after giving 
reasonable opportunity.  The State Government may appoint 
Administrators during the period of dissolution of Urban Local Bodies . 
(Sections 422 and 423 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation  Act and 
Sections 328 of Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act). 
4 Sanction of laws by 
Government 
Section 427 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation  Act and Section 355 
of Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act empowers the Urban Local Bodi es to 
make by -laws. However, the by -laws made by Urban Local Bodies  are 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
8 
Sl. 
No. Subject Provision 
not valid unless and until sanctioned by the Government (Section 430 of 
Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation Act and Section 357 of Chhattisgarh 
Municipalities Act). 
5 Sanction to deposit 
and invest surplus 
funds 
Section 108 (3) of Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act allow Municipal 
Council to deposit and invest surplus funds but only after prior sanction 
from the Government. 
6 Sanction to borrow 
money 
Section 102 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation  Act and Section 115 
of Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act allow M unicipal Council and 
Municipal Corporations to borrow money, but only after prior sanction 
from the Government. 
7 Lease/sale of property Section 80 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation  Act and 109 of 
Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act allow the Municipal Councils and 
Municipal Corporations to lease or sell movable and immovable property 
belonging to them but with certain restrictions and prior sanction of the 
Government. 
8 Withdrawal from 
Reserved Fund 
According to the Government instruction (April 2016) five per cent  of 
income of the Urban Local Bodies  should be credited in Reserved fund 
but prior permission has to be obtained from Urban Administration and 
Development Directorate for withdrawal from it. 
Overriding powers by the State Government creates obstacles in the democratic 
decentralisation process and delays creation of an institutional framework for ushering in 
democracy at the grass root level of the State. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies 
and their functioning 
 
 

9 
 
Chapter-III 
 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
 
Summary 
Out of total 169 Urban Local Bodies, 151 have their City Government where elections 
were held in December 2019. Elections were held in 15 Urban Local Bodies in December 
2021 after a delay of one year. Remaining three Urban Local Bodies were working under 
the administrator -ship of the State Government. Thus,provisions of the Act regarding 
holding of election before expiry of the stipulated period, were not adhered to. 
Many of the Urban Local Bodies are virtually defunct as not even the prescribed meetings 
of the Corporation/councils were held in 113 out of 27 test -checked Urban Local 
Bodies.Advisory Committees were not constituted in 10Urban Local Bodies. Except for 
Nagar Nigam, Korba, Ward and Mohalla Committees were not constituted in any of the 
27test-checked Urban Local Bodies.This defeated the objective of facilitating community 
participation in local governance as well as prioritization and monitoring of development 
works.Meetings of District Planning Committees were not held regularly and consolidated 
District Developments Pl ans for the District as a whole by considering local needs and 
matters of common interest were not prepared in any of the 12 districts in which the 27 
test-checked Urban Local Bodies were located.20,526 Audit Paras were pending in 27test-
checkedUrban Local Bodies .Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System hasbeen 
adopted in all 169 Urban Local Bodies. 
Delay in constitution of State Finance Commissions ( first to third) and consequent delay 
in submission of their recommendation reports as well as further delay in acceptance of 
recommendations and implementation/devolution of funds have adversely affected the 
financial position of the Urban Local Bodies.Devolution of fun ds is being done as per 
Second State Finance Commission, even when the constitution of Fifth State Finance 
Commission was due. 
The Urban Local Bodies neither have the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to 
recruit the required permanent staff except on contractual basis. The State Government 
appoints Group A, B and C  staff and the powers to regulate their conditions of services, 
discipline, as well as the conduct are also with the State Government. 
 
3.1  Actual status of devolution of functions  
The 74 thConstitutional Amendment Act  sought to empower Urban Local Bodies  to 
perform functions and implement schemes in relation to 18 subjects specified in the 12 th 
Schedule. Each State was expected to enact a legislation to implement the amendment. 
Out of the 18functions, eight each  were obligatory 4 and discretionary5and tw o were of 
dual nature for Urban Local Bodies. 
 
3 Raipur, Durg, Bhilai, Tilda, Kawardha, Dabhara, Jarahi, Gandai, Bijapur, Sukuma and Baikunthpur 
4 The functions, which shall be done compulsorily by the Urban Local Bodies. 
5 The functions which are not mandatory to be done by the Urban Local Bodies  

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
10 
We observed (Table 3.1) that out of 18 functions specified in the Schedule , Urban Local 
Bodies were solely responsible for eight functions, had no role in one function, had dual 
role in six functions, were mere implementing agencies in two functions, and in respect of 
Regulation of land -use, the Urban Local Bodies  had an overlapping jurisdiction with  
otherDepartments. 
Table 3.1: Status of devolution of functions 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/ 
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
Functions where Urban Local Body has full jurisdiction 
1. Water supply for 
domestic, industrial and 
commercial purposes 
(O) 
Distribution of water Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. Providing connections 
Operation & Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges 
2. 
 
Slum improvement and 
upgradation (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. Affordable Housing 
Upgradation 
3. Urban poverty 
alleviation (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. Livelihood and 
employment 
Street vendors 
4. Provision of urban 
amenities and facilities 
such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds (D) 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. 
Operation and 
Maintenance 
5. Burials and burial 
grounds; cremations, 
cremation grounds (O) 
Construction and O&M of 
crematoriums and burial 
grounds and electric 
crematoriums. 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. 
6. Cattle pounds; 
prevention of cruelty to 
animals (O) 
Catching and keeping 
strays 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. 
Sterilisation and anti -
rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
7. Public amenities 
including street lighting, 
parking lots, bus stops 
and public conveniences 
(O) 
Installation and 
maintenance of street 
lights 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. 
Deciding and operating 
bus routes 
Urban Local Bodies and District Urban 
Public Society , headed by the Collector 
concerned are discharging the function. 
Creation and maintenance 
of parking lots 
Urban Local Bodies and Smart Cities are 
maintaining parking lots. 
Creation and maintenance 
of public toilets 
8. Regulation of 
slaughterhouses and 
tanneries (O) 
Ensuring quality of 
animals and meat 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these functions. 
Disposal of waste 
O & M of slaughter 
houses 

Chapter-III 
 
11 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/ 
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
 
Functions with no role for Urban Local Bodies 
9. Fire services (D) 
 
 
Establishing and 
maintaining fire brigades 
This function was withdrawn (2015) from 
the Urban Local Bodies and now vested 
with Home Department. 
However, Fire services ha ve not been 
transferred from three Urban Local Bodies. 
Instead, Urban Administration and 
Development Directorate accorded 
sanctioned in October 2019 for purchase of 
a Fire vehicle to a Nagar Palika Parishad , 
Sukma and was subsequen tly transferred to 
the District Commandant, Nagar Sena. 
Providing fire NOC / 
approval certificate in 
respect of high-rise 
buildings 
Functions with dual roles 
10. Urban planning, 
including town planning 
(D) 
Master 
Planning/Development 
Plans/Zonal Plans 
Master plans are prepared by the Nagar and 
Gram Nivesh, Directorate, Chhattisgarh 
Housing and Environment Department. 
Enforcing Master 
Planning regulations 
Enforcing building 
byelaws and licenses 
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging this service. 
Group Housing, 
Development of Industrial 
Areas 
Urban Local Bodies  and Chhattisgarh State 
Industrial Development Corporation are 
discharging this function. 
11. Roads and bridges (O) Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
While Urban Local Bodies  played a 
significant role in the construction and 
maintenance of roads, drains and footpaths 
whereas bridges and flyovers were 
constructed by the Public Works 
Department. 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
12. Public Health, 
Sanitation Conservancy   
and Solid Waste 
Management (O&D) 
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries  
Department of Health and Family Welfare 
is discharging the service   
Immunisation/Vaccination  
Registration of births and 
deaths  
Department of Health and Family Welfare 
and Urban Local Bodies both are 
discharging service.   
Cleaning and disinfection 
of localities affected by 
infectious disease  
Urban Local Bodies were wholly 
responsible for discharging these three 
functions. 
Solid-waste management 
Control and supervision 
of public markets 
13. Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects (D) 
Afforestation Forest department is discharging these 
services.  Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
12 
Sl. 
No. 
Functions 
Obligatory(O)/ 
Discretionary (D) 
Activities Actual status of implementation 
 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water 
bodies etc. 
Urban Local Bodies  and Water Resources 
Department are discharging this function. 
14. Promotion of cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects (O & 
D) 
Schools and education School and education Function was 
withdrawn (2015) and Education 
Department is discharging the service. 
However, a primary school was still 
operational unde r a Nagar Palika 
Parishad.Four Nagar Nigams and one Nagar 
Panchayat collected Education Ce ss even 
though no educational institution was under 
their control. 
Public space 
beautification 
Urban Local Bodies are discharging these 
services. 
Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings / Urban Local Bodies, Culture Department 
and Archaeological Department are 
discharging these services. 
Institutions 
Heritage 
15. Vital statistics including 
birth and death 
registration (O) 
Coordinating with 
hospitals/crematoriums 
etc. for obtaining 
information 
Urban Local Bodies and Department of 
Health and Family Welfare are discharging 
these services. 
Maintaining and updating 
database 
Urban Local Bodies as mere implementing agencies 
16. Planning for economic 
and social development 
(D) 
Program implementation 
for economic activities 
State Departments such as Social welfare, 
Tribal welfare, Empowerment of 
Differently abled and senior citizens and 
Parastatal such as District Urban 
Development Authorities (District Urban 
Development Agency) were responsible for 
these functions. Urban Local Bodies were 
only an implementing arm for Central and 
State Government schemes. 
Policies for social 
development 
17. Safeguarding the 
interests of weaker 
sections of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded (D) 
Identifying beneficiaries 
Providing tools/benefits 
such as tricycles 
Housing programs 
Scholarships 
Functions with minimal role and/or having overlapping jurisdictions with state departments and / or 
parastatal 
18. Regulation of land -use 
and construction of 
buildings (D) 
Regulating land use Revenue Department (Collector office)  
Approving building 
plans/high rises 
Urban Local Bodies, Nagar and Gram 
Nivesh 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 
Urban Local Bodies and Revenue 
Department 
(Source: Information received from Urban Administration and Development Directorate , 
Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation Act and Chhattisgarh MunicipalitiesAct) 
Without complete devolution of the functions ,the local self -Governments cannot be 
strengthened in the State. The advent of Smart Cities has further eroded the space of 
Urban Local Bodies. 

Chapter-III 
 
13 
Government stated (December 2021) that all the 18 functions could not be devolved to 
Urban Local Bodies because of insufficient manpower and lack of capacity building  and 
necessary steps will be taken for transfer of Schools under the control of U rban Local 
Bodies to Education Department.  It was further stated that i nstruction will be issued to 
Urban Local Bodies for transferring of Fire services to Home Department. 
The fact remains that devolution of functions in the State has not been completed even 
after 20 years of its inception . The withdrawal of two functions from U rban Local Bodies 
is arbitrary and against the spirit of 74th CAA. 
3.2  Limited powers over manpower  
Urban Local Bodies are organised under different wings as shown in Table 3.2: 
Table 3.2: Functional Organisations in Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. 
No. Name of wing/ section Functions 
1 General Administration General Ad sministration, including meetings of council and 
committees. 
2 Water Works and Sewerage  Construction / O & M / networks of Water Supply and Sewerage, 
etc. 
3 Public Works and 
Horticulture 
Construction/ O & M of roads, drains, buildings, parks, 
playgrounds, water supply.  
4 Revenue  Assessment and collection of various Taxes, Rent, 
Advertisements and other property related activities. 
5 Finance and Accounts Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparation of budget 
etc. 
6 Electrical and Mechanical Street Lighting and maintenance of Heavy / Light Motor 
Vehicles, etc. 
7 Sanitation and Solid Waste 
Management  
Sanitation, Street sweeping, Solid Waste Management and other 
public health related activities. 
8 Public Transport and Traffic 
Control 
Public Transport and Traffic Control, etc. 
Box 1: Impact of Smart City on Urban Local Bodies in Chhattisgarh 
The Government of India introduced “100 Smart Cities Mission" on 25 June 
2015 with the objective to promote cities that provide  core infrastructure and 
give a decent quality of life to its citizens, a clean and sustainable environment 
and application of ‘Smart’ Solutions. In Chhattisgarh, two cities, Raipur and 
Bilaspur were selected to be developed as Smart Cit ies. The smart citi es have 
been given financial resources amounting to ` 1355 crore during the period 
2016-20. Under the mission guidelines, the smart cities are responsible for 
construction of road s and houses, development and maintenance of parks, 
renovation of heritage Sites etc. With the formation of Smart Cit y, the scope 
and extent of work of Urban Local Bodies has further been reduced  and there 
will also be an impact on devolved funds of the Urba n Local Bodies, further 
diminishing the already stressed revenues of Urban Local Bodies. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
14 
9 Planning and Information 
Technology  
Town Planning activities such as issue of Building Licences, etc. 
10 Urban Poverty Alleviation  Implementation of Schemes relating to Social and Economic 
Development. 
3.2.1  Staff position of Urban Local bodies 
The assessment of manpower should be based on the functions undertaken by Urban 
Local Bodies with a view that majority of the functions which are service oriented have to 
be discharged within a reasonable time period. This assessment could be done best by 
Urban Local Bodies themselves considering various criteria such as the extent of 
geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, the number of existing 
properties etc.  
We observed that Urban Local Bodies neither had the powers to asses s the staff 
requirement nor to recruit the required permanent staff except on contractual basis. These 
powers are vested with the State Government. The State Government assesses the 
requirement of staff based on population alone, as discussed subsequently,  and without 
seeking the actual requirement from Urban Local Bodies. We also observed that, Revenue 
Officials and Accountants from other than Chhattisgarh Municipal Service cadre officials 
were discharging the functions of Chief Municipal Officer in 63 Nag ar Palika 
Parishad/Nagar Panchayats. 
Further, the State Government can affect transfers of officers between Urban Local 
Bodies. An appeal against any order of Urban Local Body imposing penalty on any 
officer or employee rests with the State Government. S taff of Group A, B and C were 
appointed by State Government, and the powers to regulate their conditions of services, 
discipline, as well as the conduct were with the State Government. 
The staff strength was not revised considering the increase in population. Chart-1 depicts 
the position in 27 Urban Local Bodies by the working streng th per 1000 of projected 
population of 2020 6. As can be seen from the Chart , the working strength in all the Urban 
Local Bodies was less thanthe sanctioned strength. 
 
6 Projected population of 2020 = Population of 2011 X 120%. In Chhattisgarh, the population growth 
during 2001 to 2011 i.e. for 10 years was 22.61 per cent, hence growth for nine years from 2011 to 
2020 calculated as 20 per cent. 

Chapter-III 
 
15 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
Tier wise details of working strength of s electedUrban Local Bodies showing sanctioned 
posts, person-in-positionand vacancies are given in Chart-2. 
 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
As seen from Chart-2that the vacancyin staff strength is higher in Nagar Nigam (1073) as 
against Nagar Palika Parishad (122) and Nagar Panchayat (27) respectively. 
Government stated (December 2021) that recruitment and promotion processes for 
different posts are in progress and after recruitment Chief Municipal Officers will be 
posted against from the Chhattisgarh Municipal Service cadre. 
3.3 Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urban Local Bodies 
Table3.1 detailed the status of devolution of 18 functions to Urban Local Bodies . The 
discharge of these functions can be effective only when appropriate institutions are 
established and enabled to function effectively. 
Under the Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation and Chhattisgarh Municipalities Acts, the 
Corporations and Municipalities consist of elected Parshads/Councillors, nominated 
Parshads/Councillors, Member of Legislative Asse mbly, Member of Legislative Council, 
Member of Lok Sabha and Member of Rajya Sabha who represent the constituencies 
1.74
1.21
1.86
3.74
2.67
1.74
1.82
2.33
3.38
2.01
2.16
2.31
1.85
1.49
1.61
1.01
1.86
3.10
1.19
2.16
1.43
2.04
1.16
1.15
1.42
0.93
1.66
0.83
0.87
1.57
3.05
1.45
1.41
0.89
1.81
2.20
1.44
1.22
1.62
0.49
0.97
0.65
0.42
1.71
2.32
0.82
1.28
1.22
1.36
0.91
0.64
1.14
0.26
0.65
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
Chart-1: position of employees per 1,000 population as per census 2011 and 2020 
in test-checked Urban Local Bodies
Per 1,000 population 2011 (Sanction strength)
Per 1,000 population 2020 projection (Working strength)
4892
614 157
3819
492 130
1073
122 27
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Nagar Nigam Nagar Palika Parishad Nagar Panchayat
Chart-2: Details of Working Strength of Selected ULBs
Sactioned Post
Person-in Position
Vacant

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
16 
falling in  the Municipal area. The nominated members do not have voting power. A 
Mayor, i.e. chairperson, is directly elected from the Municipal area and Councillors are 
directly elected from the Wards. The Nagar Nigams, Nagar Pa lika Parishads and Nagar 
Panchayats have 10, seven and five Departments respectively  for discharging allotted 
functions. The Commissioner/Chief Municipal Officer is the executive head of Urban 
Local Body. 
This section discusses the effectiveness of such institutional mechanisms: 
3.3.1 State Election Commission 
(i) The 2 nd Administrative Reforms Commission recommended that the task of 
delimitation and reservation of constituencies be entrusted to the State Election 
Commission. This recommendation was accepted by the Government of India.  
(ii) The powers of the State Election Com mission include superintendence, direction 
and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections 
to Urban Local Bodies.  
(iii) However, in Chhattisgarh, the power of delimitation of local government 
constituencies has been retained by the State Government. 
Government stated (December 2021) that the Municipalities Acts have been formulated in 
accordance with GOI instruction and the power of delimitation of wards, reservation of 
seats f or the council and rotation policy of seats for the posts of Mayor/President and 
wards are kept with the State Government. 
The reply is not acceptable since the 2nd Administrative Reforms Commission 
recommended that the task of delimitation and reservation of constituencies be entrusted 
to the State Election Commission but the same has not been done. 
3.3.2 Status of elections and formation of councils 
Every Nagar Nigam/Municipality, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for five years 
from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer. Elections to Urban Local 
Bodies shall be completed before the expiry of their duration. In case of dissolution, 
election shall be held within six months from that date. Subject to the provisions of these 
Acts, the term of Mayor/ President and every Councillor shall be co -terminus with the 
term of the Corporation/ the Council.  
The status in 15Urban Local Bodies out of 169 where elections were not conducted is as 
detailed in Table 3.3 below: 
Table 3.3: Conduct of elections of Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Previous Election held Election due but not 
conducted 
No. of 
New 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
due for 
election 
Total 
No. of 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
due for 
election 
Delay in 
election as 
of 
December 
2021 
(months) 
Months/Year No. of 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
Year/Months No. of 
Urban 
Local 
Bodies 
1 November 2015 1 November 2020 1 3 4 12 
2 December 2015 11 December 2020 11 0 11 12 
 Total 12  12 3 15  
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 

Chapter-III 
 
17 
Out of total 169Urban Local Bodies , elections were held in 151in December 2019  and  
15 in December 2021after a delay of one year .In the remaining three7Urban Local Bodies 
working under the administrator-ship of the State Government , theelectionswere delayed 
by almost a year.Thus,provisions of the Act regarding holding of election before expiry of 
the stipulated period, were not adhered to. 
With regard to other institutional mechanisms, we found the following: 
• According to the Section 27 and 54 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation and 
Municipalities Act, t heCorporation/Councils requiredto meet at least once in every two 
months for the transaction of its business . Further, Minutes of every meeting of the 
Corporation are required tobe sent to the State Government or prescribed authority as well 
as a copy of the same shall be pasted onthe notice board of the Corporation/ Council 
within seven/ten days from the date of confirmation of theMinutes. 
We observed that many of the Urban Local Bodies are virtually defunct as not even  the 
prescribed meetings of the Corporation/councils were held in 118out of 27 test -checked 
Urban Local Bodies. 
• According to Section s 46 and 71 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation and 
Municipalities Act , a fter its first meeting the Speaker is to  constitute an Advisory 
Committee for every Department of the Nagar Nigam /Nagar Palika Parishad /Nagar 
Panchayat from amongst the elected Councillors  which shall meet  at least once in every 
two months. 
Advisory committees hav e not been constituted in 10 9 out of 27 selected Urban Local 
Bodies.However, after being pointed out by Audit, (January 2022) theAdditional 
Secretary, Department of Urban Administration and Development has issued instructions 
(January 2022) to all Urban Local Bodies for constitution of Advisory Committees. 
Government stated (December 2021) that the elections could not be conducted in time 
mainly due to spread of Covid -19 and the elections in 15 Urban Loca l Bodies have been 
conducted in December 2021 and instructions will be issued to Urban local Bodies for 
constitution of Advisory Committees. 
3.3.3 Ward and Mohalla Committees 
➢ Article 243S of the Constitution and Section 48A & 72A of Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporation and Municipalities Act provides that a Ward Committee,consisting 
of one or more wards, should be constituted for every Municipality having a population of 
three lakh or more within thirty days from the date of election of Speaker .The second and 
third SFC havealso recommended for constitution of these Committees. 
➢ Section 48(B) of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation Act provides that i n every 
Municipal area, wh ich is notified by the State Government in this behalf, a Mohalla 
Committeeis also to be constituted within three months from the date of 
notification.Weobserved that Ward Committee was constituted only  in Korba and 
 
7 Three Nagar Panchayat constituted in December 2020. 
8 Raipur, Durg, Bhilai, Tilda, Kawardha, Dabhara, Jarahi, Gandai, Bijapur, Sukuma and Baikunthpur  
9 Arjunda, Chhuikhadan, Dongargaon, Gandai, Gunderdehi, Jamul, Khairagarh, Korba, Pathariya and 
Sukuma. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
18 
Mohalla Committee swerenot constituted in the selected Urban Local Bodies . This 
defeated the objective of facilitating community participation in local governance  and 
would adversely impact prioritisation of development works, monitoring of execution of 
works, utilisation and maintenance of assets created, etc. 
➢ Article 243ZD of the Constitution and Section 3 of District Planning Committee 
Act provides that  a District Planning Committee is to be constituted in every District to 
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the District and 
to prepare a Draft Development Plan for the District as a whole. These plans would cover  
spatial planning ;sharing of water and other physical and natural resources ; integrated 
development of infrastructure and environmental conservation  and extent and type of 
available resources whether financial or otherwise. The Development Plan was to be 
integrated into the State plan. Further, the meeting of the  Committee shall be held at least 
once in every quarter of the Financial Year. We observed that though District Planning 
Committees were constituted  during the period 2015 -20, no meetings of the committees 
were held in Durg , Kondagaon and Sukuma district , only one meeting was held in 
Surajpur and Kabirdhamand three meetings were held in Raipur during 2015 -20. Further, 
consolidated District Development Plan for the District as a whole  was prepared without 
getting the plans from Urban Local Bodies in any of the 12Districts in which the 27 test-
checked Urban Local Bodies were located, which may affect the effective implementation 
of functions of Municipalities , budget assessment and prioritisation of developmental 
works. 
➢ Every metropolitan area10will have a Metropolitan Planning Committee to prepare 
itsDraft Development Plan . We observed that M etropolitan Planning Committees were 
not constituted in any city due to absence of provision in the Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporation Act. Thus, comprehensive development of metropolitan area and matters of 
common interest between the local authorities which includes mainly, coordinated spatial 
planning of the area, sharing of water, sharing of other physical and natural resources  and 
the issue of integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conservation are 
likely to be carried out in a sub optimal manner. 
➢ A Municipal Accounts Committee must be constituted to consider the report of the 
auditor. Defects or irregularities pointed in audit are to be remedied and a report sent to 
the State Government within a period of four months from the date of receipt of the Audit 
Report. The Municipal Account Committee was not formed in any of the selected Nagar 
Nigams.In all 20,526Audit Paraswere pending in 27 selected Urban Local Bodies relating 
to the period since inception to 2019-20. 
Government stated (December 2021) that Ward Committee has been constituted in Nagar 
Nigam Raipur, resolution has been passed in Nagar Nigam, Korba and remaining Nagar 
Nigams will be instructed to constitute Ward Committees on priority andDistrict 
Collectors will be instructed to expedite the process of Mohalla Committees at Urban 
Local Bodies level. It was further stated that instructions will be issued to Urban 
 
10 An area having a population of 10 lakh or more. 

Chapter-III 
 
19 
LocalBodies for preparation and timely submission of their Annual Plans to District 
Planning Committee for inclusion in District Development Plans. 
3.3.4 State Finance Commission 
A State  Finance Commission constituted every five years shall review the financial 
positions of the Municipalities and make recommendations to the Governor.  
Accordingly, the fifth State Finance Commission was due from 2021-22. However, as o n 
date, recommendations of the secondState Finance Commission were being implemented. 
Although, the r ecommendations of the thirdState Finance Commission have been 
accepted (October 2019) with modifications, their implementation has been delayed. The 
delays in constitution of State Finance Commission andimplementation of State Finance 
Commission recommendations are detailed in Table 3.4 below: 
Table 3.4: Delay in constitution of State Finance Commission and implementation of 
recommendations 
State 
Finance 
Commissio
n  
To be 
constituted 
as per 
constitutio
n 
To be 
constituted 
with 
reference to 
previous 
State 
Finance 
Commission
s 
Actuallyconstitute
d 
Delay in 
days from 
proposed 
constitutio
n 
Date of 
submission of 
Recommendation
s 
Acceptance 
by the 
Governmen
t 
Days 
taken for 
acceptanc
e (in days) 
Period 
covere
d 
 
First 2001-0211 01.04.2001 22.08.2003 774 30.05.2007 30.07.2009 790 2005-
2011 
Second 2006-07 21.08.2008 23.07.2011 1066 31.03.2013 July 2013 122 2011-
2020 
Third 2011-12 22.07.2016 20.01.2016 No delay 30.09.2018 October 
2019 
396 2020-
2025 
(Source: Finance Commission reports and notification of acceptance) 
The delay in constitution of State Finance Commissions  and implementation of the State 
Finance Commission’s recommendations resulted in further delay in devolution of funds 
to the Urban Local Bodies  affecting the financial position of the Urban Local Bodies  
adversely. The impact thereof is discussed in paragraph 4.1.2. 
3.3.4.1 Response of the State Government to State Finance Commission 
recommendations 
The State Government may accept the recommendations of the State Finance Commission 
in totality or with certain modifications. We observed that the State Government accepted 
few of the recommendations with modifications, and action was yet to be initiated on 
other recommendations. The important recommendations of first, second and third State 
Finance Commissions and their modifications with reference to transfer of funds are given 
in Table 3.5 below: 
 
  
 
11 Chhattisgarh State  carved out of Madhya Pradesh State and came into existence on 01 November 
2000and the first State Finance Commission in Madhya Pradesh was constituted for the period from 
1996-2001. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
20 
Table 3.5: State Finance Commission wise important recommendations and their 
modifications 
State 
Finance 
Commission 
Recommendations Modifications 
First Devolution of 1.66 per cent of the 
Own Tax Revenue of the State 
toUrban Local Bodies. 
State Government accepted 1.21 per cent of the 
Own Tax Revenue of the State  over a period from 
2005-06 to 2009-10. 
Second Devolution of 1.85 per cent of the 
Own Tax Revenue of the State to 
Urban Local Bodies. 
State Government accepted 1.85 per cent of the 
Own Tax Revenue of the State  from 2012 -13 to 
2016-17. 
Third Devolution of 2.09 per cent of the 
SOTR to Urban Local Bodies from 
2017-18. 
State Government acce pted 2.09 per cent of the 
Own Tax Revenue of the State  from 2020 -21 to 
2024-25 and instead of 2.09 per cent, 1.85 per cent 
was given for the period 2017-18 to 2019-20. 
(Source: Recommendations of State Finance Commissions Reports) 
Government stated (December 2021) that the State Finance Commissions have been 
constituted by the State Government and the recommendations of State Finance 
Commissions will be accepted after the approval of Cabinet and State Government 
decision. 
The reply is not acce ptable because t he delay in constitution and implementation of the 
State Finance Commission  recommendationsrestricted the role of State Finance 
Commissions in facilitating the U rban Local Bodies for financial autonomy as well as 
inrealisation of the objectives of 74thConstitution Amendment Act. 
3.3.5 Property Tax Board and Municipal Revenue Regulatory Commission 
The 13 th Finance Commission recommended the State Government to constitute a 
Property Tax Board to assist all Corporations and Municipalities to put in place an 
independent and transparent procedure to enumerate all properties, assess property tax , 
review the pres ent property tax system, make suggestions for a suitable basis for 
assessment and valuation of properties and make recommendations on modalities for 
periodic revisions. 
We observed that Property Tax Board has not been constituted in the State even after lapse 
of a decade. 
Second State Finance Commission had also recommended for constitution of the 
Chhattisgarh Municipal Revenue Regulatory Commission for Municipal finances to 
undertake a survey of properties and bring the un -assessed and under -assessed properties 
into the purview of Property tax and carry out related functions. 
Although the State Government had enacted Chhattisgarh Municipal Revenue 
(Establishment of Regulatory Commission) Act, 2011 (May 2011) ,the Commission is yet 
to be constituted. 
Government stated (December 2021) that State Government has notified the Chhattisgarh 
Municipality ‘Determination of Taxable Property Value of Building/land ’ Rule in 
February 2021. Hence , the Property Tax Board and Chhattisgarh Municipal Revenue 
Regulatory Commission are not required. 

Chapter-III 
 
21 
The reply is not acceptable as the Property Tax B oard was not  constituted as 
recommended by Thirteenth Finance Commission . Further, as recommended by the 
Second State Finance Commission, the State Government enacted Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Revenue (Establishment of Regulatory Commission) Act, 2011 (May 2011 ) which  
mandated the constitution of Chhattisgarh Municipal Revenue Regulatory Commission , 
but the samewas not constituted. 
3.3.6 State Institute of Urban Governance and Development (SIUGD) 
All three State Finance Commissionshad recommended for establishment of training 
institute for providing training to all Municipal functionaries mandatorilyto both elected 
and appointed ones. 
We noticed that SIUGD had not been established and training w as provided to only 245 
out of 4441  officers/officials in the State Institute of Rural Development during  
2015-2020.Absence of proper training  is likely to impact , the implementation of Central 
and State schemes, survey for actual assessment and collection of various 
taxes/fees/charges etc. Further,  no training program was arranged for the elected 
representatives of Urban Local Bodies during 2015-2020. 
Government stated (December 2021) that trainings to staffs have been provided in State 
Administrative Academy, State Institute of Rural Development , Nimora  and National 
Institute‘Regional Centre for Urban and Environmental Studies , Lucknow. Hence, there is 
no requirement for aseparate Training Institute for UADD. 
The fact remains that no training program  was arranged for the elected representatives of 
Urban Local Bodies during 2015-2020. 
3.3.7 Adoption of Accrual Based Accounting  
On the recommendation of 11 th Finance Commission, the CAG of India had constituted a 
Task Force to recommend budget and accounting formats for Urban Local Bodies in 
India. The CAG Task Force in its report, inter alia, suggested adoption of accrual basis of 
accounting by Urban Local Bo dies. TheGovernment of Chhattisgarhintroduced Accrual 
Based Double Entry Accounting System w.e.f. 2011 in all the Urban Local Bodies and the 
Accrual Based Double Entry Accounting System was  adopted as per Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Accounting Manual in phased manner. 
We observed that Urban local bodies were maintaining accounts in the single entrysystem 
manually. Thereafter Chartered Accountants are hired to prepare accounts in Double entry 
from the single entry system . As a result, Audited accounts till the year 2019-20has been 
compiled and audited, and accounts for the year 2020-21 is undercompilation. 
Recommendations: 
1. The Government may take decisive action in order to translate the vision of 
decentralisation into reality, besides providing adequate degree of autonomy to 
Urban Local Bodies in respect of functions assigned to them in line with the 
Constitutional provisions. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
22 
2. The Government may grant autonomy to ULBs to assess, recruit and manage human 
resources commensurate with their needs and functions. 
3. The Government may consider entrusting the task of delimitation to the State 
Election Commission and ensure timely elections of the Urban Local Bodies. 
4. Various Committees, like Advisory Committee, Ward Committees and Mohalla 
Committees,may be constituted in the Urban Local Bodies as per the Chhattisgarh 
Municipal Corporations/ Chhattisgarh MunicipalitiesActs and they should be 
nurtured and encouraged to function effectively. 
5. Government may avoid d elays in constituti ngthe State Finance Commission and 
ensure prompt implementation of their recommendations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter IV 
Financial Resources of Urban Local 
Bodies 
 

23 
 
Chapter IV 
 
Financial Resources of Urban Local Bodies 
 
Summary 
The share of Own Reve nue (₹  2572.47 crore) in total f inancial r esources (₹ 15256.23 
crore) of the Urban Local Bodies is approximately 17 per cent . On the other hand, 
devolution of funds by the State Government to the Urban Local Bodies  during 2015-
2020 was short of the norms of the third State Finance Commission by ₹ 256.10 crore. 
The average collection of Property Tax for the period 2015-20 was 6 3 per cent of total 
demand. The collection declined from 6 7 to 58 per cent during the period 201 5-19. An 
amount of ₹  41.74 crore was outstanding for collection as on March 2020 in the selected 
Urban Local Bodies. GIS Survey was conducted only in 1 0 (six per cent) of Urban Local 
Bodies. 
Similarly, in case of Water Charges of 26 Urban Local Bodies, during 2016-20, collection 
has declined from 67 to 58 per cent . An amount of ₹ 30.09 crore of water tax was 
outstanding in selected Urban Local Bodies as of March 2020. Further, we noticed that 
none of the selected Urban Local Bodies except Korba  had installed meters for water 
connections and only fixed water charges were being levied. Therefore, the collection of 
monthly water charges from the beneficiaries was insufficient against the expenses 
incurred on Operation and Maintenance of water supply . Shop Rent amounting to ₹ 3.52 
crore was also outstanding against leaseholders/occupiers. 
The Urban Local Bodies spent  17 to 40 per cent of budgeted amount in water supply and 
61 to 86 per cent  of budgeted amount in Public Health, Sanitation and Solid Waste  
Management respectively. 
In terms of effectiveness of devolved functions on ground, Urban Local Bodies were 
generally effective in achieving the coverage of toilets and household level coverage of 
Solid Waste Management, but as far as other parameters are concerned, there were gaps.  
Sustainable Financing is paramount to ensure discharge of any function. The devolved 
functions can be carried out effectively by Urban Local Bodies  only when they are 
supported with sufficient financial resources. Such financial resources could take the form 
of predict able fiscal transfers or access to own revenue streams that are buoyant and 
commensurate with the expenditure obligations, accompanied by appropriate expenditure 
powers. Predictable fiscal transfers to Urban Local Bodies  need to be ensured through a 
robust State Finance Commission mechanism and compliance with State and Central 
Finance Commission recommendations. Access to own sources of revenue would include 
both the power to levy and collect from specific revenue streams. Expenditure powers 
refer to reaso nable delegation limits that allow the Urban Local Bod ies to utilise their 
financial resources. 
  

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
24 
 
4.1  Sources of Revenue 
The detail of revenue  of Urban Local Bodies  in the State during the period 2015 -20 is 
indicated in Table 4.1 below: 
Table 4.1: Details of revenues of Urban Local Bodies during the period 2015-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Own 
Revenue 
Assigned 
Revenue Grants Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of 
Own Revenue 
to Total 
Revenue 
Percentage of 
fiscal transfer 
to Total 
Revenue 
2015-16 445.25 889.00 544.10 1878.35 23.70 28.97 
2016-17 520.22 1071.46 1889.63 3481.31 14.94 54.28 
2017-18 538.08 1351.26 1653.93 3543.27 15.19 46.68 
2018-19 530.42 881.76 1542.20 2954.38 17.95 52.20 
2019-20 538.50 1106.92 1753.50 3398.92 15.84 51.59 
Total 2572.47 5300.40 7383.36 15256.23 16.86 48.40 
(Source: Information by Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
The share of Own Revenue to total financial resources of the Urban Local Bodies  is 
approximately 17 per cent. Thus, the Urban Local Bodies rely largely on other revenue 
streams, which  are not under their control. Moreover, the share of own resources was 
falling over the period 2018-20. 
Government stated (December 2021) that as the scope of source of revenue at Urban local 
Bodies level are very limited, Grants were provided for other development works under 
different schemes. 
4.1.1 Own Revenue of Urban Local Bodies 
Urban Local Bodies do not have a large independent tax domain. The Property Tax on 
land and buildings is the mainstay of Urban Local Bodies’ Own Revenue. The own non -
tax revenue of Urban Local Bodies comprises Water Charges, rent from commercial 
establishments, trade licences, fee for sanction of plans/mutations, etc. The share of Own 
Revenue to Total Revenue of Urban Local Bodies for the period 2015 -20 in test checked 
Urban Local Bodies ranged from 16 to 29 per cent as shown in Table4.2 below: 
Table 4.2: Details of total own revenue against total financial resources for 2015-20 
(₹ in crore) 
Type of Urban Local 
Body 
Assigned 
Revenue 
Own 
Revenue 
Government 
Grants 
Total 
financial 
resources 
Percentage of Own 
Revenue against 
financial resources  
(in per cent) 
Nagar Nigam 523.07 1461.95 3106.73 5091.75 28.71 
Nagar Palika Parishad 60.76 101.64 470.43 632.83 16.06 
Nagar Panchayat 14.50 28.74 137.33 180.57 15.92 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
It is evident from the above table that financial condition of the Nagar Palika Parishads 
and Nagar Panchayats is highly critical and they are totally dependent on the Government 
Grants. Even the Nagar Nigams are collecting only around 2 9 per cent of total revenue as 
their Own revenue. The details of Own tax revenue of Urban Local Bodies for the period 
2015-20 in test checked Urban Local Bodies is shown in Table 4.3. 

Chapter-IV 
 
25 
Table 4.3: Details of year wise own tax revenue for the period 2015-20 in test checked Urban 
Local Bodies 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Type of own tax revenue Total own tax 
revenue Property tax Consolidated tax Water tax Market tax 
2015-16 90.48 23.84 35.86 5.00 155.18 
2016-17 156.59 25.78 40.58 4.60 227.55 
2017-18 141.57 28.73 40.02 4.14 214.46 
2018-19 130.06 26.64 40.44 0.00 197.14 
2019-20 129.87 26.59 40.96 0.00 197.42 
Total 648.57 131.58 197.86 13.74 991.75 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
The property tax is the major contributor of own tax revenue during the period 2015 -20 in 
test checked Urban Local Bodies as depicted in Chart 3. 
 
4.1.2 Transfer of funds to Urban Local Bodies 
Funds were transferred to Urban Local Bodies  by the Central and State Governments in 
the form of grants. Grants from Government based on the recommendations of the State 
Finance Commission, account for 48 per cent of revenue of Urban Local Bodies  in the 
State during the period 2015-20. 
a. Short release of divisible fund 
Successive State Finance Commission s recommended (accepted by State Government in 
July 2013 and October 2019 ) that 1.85 to 2.09 per cent  of divisible fund of the State 
Government should be devolved to Urban Local Bodies . The funds to be devolved and 
those actually devolved by the State Government are given in Table 4.4below: 
Table 4.4: Details of short devolution of State Finance Commission Grant 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Own tax revenue 
/divisible Fund of the 
State 
Funds to be devolved as per second 
and third State Finance Commissions 
recommendation 
Funds devolved to 
Urban Local Bodies 
by State Government 
Short 
release 
2015-16 17074.86 315.88 228.24 87.64 
2016-17 18945.21 350.49 339.98 10.51 
2017-18 19894.68 415.80 547.45 -131.65 
2018-19 21427.26 447.83 299.76 148.07 
2019-20 22117.85 462.26 320.73 141.53 
Total 99459.86 1992.26 1736.16 256.10 
(Source: State Finance Accounts and Urban Administration and Development Directorate ) 
65
13
20
1
Chart 3-Deatils of collection percentage of own tax revenue
Property tax Consolidated tax Water tax Market tax

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
26 
It can be seen from the above table that devolution of funds by the State Government to 
the Urban Local Bodies  was short by ₹ 256.10 crore as compared to the norms of the  
second and third State Finance Commission. 
Government stated (December 2021) that  to match the period of 15 th Finance 
Commission, Government has extended the period of Second State Finance Commission 
up to 2019 -20 and started the period of Third State Finance Commission from 2020-21. 
However, no reply was furnished regarding short devolution of funds  to urban local 
Bodies. 
b. Trend in growth of Assigned Revenue 
Assigned Revenue constitutes 35 per cent of the total revenue  during the period 2015 -
2020. The year wise break-up of the Assigned Revenue is given in Table 4.5 below: 
Table4.5: Year wise break-up of the Assigned Revenue 
(` in crore) 
Year Chungi12co
mpensation 
Stamp 
duty 
Excise 
duty 
Bar 
license  
Entertain
ment tax  
Passenger 
tax 
Total assigned 
revenue 
2015-16 767.16 65.44 13.19 19.20 16.01 8.00 889.00 
2016-17 916.08 79.00 13.51 35.50 19.37 8.00 1071.47 
2017-18 1204.20 69.00 14.46 35.50 20.10 8.00 1351.26 
2018-19 791.52 49.02 14.46 12.76 6.00 8.00 881.76 
2019-20 1000.00 71.35 10.47 17.10 0.00 8.00 1106.92 
Total 4678.96 333.81 66.09 120.06 61.48 40.00 5300.40 
(Source: Urban Administration and Development Directorate) 
c. Chungi compensation 
Subsequent to withdrawal of power of levy and collection of Chungi compensation the 
third Finance Commission recommended that the Government will collect the tax and 
make it available to Urban Local Bodies on population basis as Assigned Revenue. 
Further, State Government fixed (2003) the rate of ` 26 as per population of Census 2001  
and gradual increase at the rate of 10 per cent each year. The State Government abolished 
(September 2007) the criteria of increasing the Chungi compensation by 10 per cent each 
year, and decided that this rate would be increased as and when considered appropriate. 
Further, second State Finance Commission had recommended transfer of total amount of 
Chungi compensationto U rban Local Bodies  without any conditions, State Government 
accepted the recommendation and decided to increase the rate (August 2014), but no 
action has since been taken. Hence, even after 17 years, the rate of Chungi compensation 
has not been revised by the State Governme nt, despite rapid increase in population and 
establishment expenditure of the Urban Local Bodies. 
Assigned Revenue in total should also gradually increase in terms of Chungi 
compensation, but we noticed negative growth in assigned revenue during the years 201 5-
20 except in 2017-18 and 2019-20, as depicted in Chart 4 below: 
 
12   A duty levied on various goods entering a town or city.  Government of erstwhile Madhya Pradesh   
withdrew the Chungi from Urban Local Bodies to avoid traffic congestion or unwanted delay in trade 
and business. 

Chapter-IV 
 
27 
(Source: information received from Urban Administration and Development Directorate)  
Government stated (December 2021) that  in addition to Chungi compensation, additional 
funds were provided to U rban Local Bodies according to their demand for pending 
liability of pay and allowances. Further, the proposal for increase  in the rate of Chungi 
compensation will be submitted for Cabinet decision. 
 
d. Stamp Duty 
Duty of one per cent  is imposed on transaction s relating to immovable property.  The 
Inspector General Registration and Stamps (IGRS), Chhattisgarh, collected the amount on 
account of transfer of immovable properties.  
We noticed that second State Finance Commission recommended to make the procedure 
of transfer of stamp duty easier and institute a system for timely transfer of stamp duty to 
Urban Local Bodies. However, no such procedure has been established by the 
Government. 
We also noticed that transfer of total ` 47.88 crore of stamp duty to 33  Urban Local 
Bodies was delayed ranging from six months to 10 years ( Appendix 4). Further, during 
the years 2015 -16 and 2018 -19 against the budgeted provision of ` 83.95 crore, Urban 
Administration and Development Directorate (UADD) withdrew only ` 58.06 crore for 
Urban Local Bodies. The  remaining amount of ` 25.89 crore lapsed at year end as 
detailed in Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6:Statement showing the lapsed amount of stamp duty during the year 2015-16 and 
2018-19 
(` in crore) 
ULB Year Budget provision Amount withdrawn Lapsed amount 
Nagar Panchayat 2015-16 12.60 9.04 3.56 
2018-19 12.60 5.76 6.84 
Nagar Palika Parishad 2018-19 9.50 6.25 3.25 
Nagar Nigam 2018-19 49.25 37.01 12.24 
Total  83.95 58.06 25.89 
(Source: Information compiled from records of UADD) 
935.98 979.77
1204.20
1375.20
1000.00
767.16 916.07
1204.20
791.52
1000.00
-168.82 -63.70 0.00
-583.68
0.00
-1000.00
-500.00
0.00
500.00
1000.00
1500.00
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 4: Trend in receipt of Assigned revenue
Demand for the year Actual release in current year Short release

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
28 
Government stated (December 2021) that  a system will be developed for ensuring timely 
availability of data of stamp duty from the Director General, Registration & 
Superintendent of Stamp so that the actual budget provision could be made , and fund will 
be provided to Urban Local Bodies on time. Further, the budget provision of  Stamp Duty 
lapsed due to non-clearance of bills by the Treasury in the month of March of respective 
years. 
4.1.2.1 Central Finance Commission Grants 
The Fourteenth Finance Commission recommended Basic Grant and Performance Grant 
to Urban Local Bodies as a percentage of divisible pool account. 
On the recommendation of Fourteenth Finance Commission, the State Government fixed 
the following conditions for distribution of Performance Grant among Urban Local 
Bodies:  
i) The Municipality will have to submit audited account that relate to the year, not 
earlier than two years preceding the year, in which the municipality seeks to claim the 
Performance Grant. 
ii) The Municipality will have to show an increase in its own revenue over the 
preceding year as reflected in the audited accounts. 
iii) The Municipality must  measure and publish the Service Level Benchmarks to 
basic urban services each year for the period of the award and make it publicly available. 
(Source: Information received from Urban Administration and Development Directorate)  
We observed that all 169 Urban Local Bodies received the Basic Grants of ` 1270.33 
crore on the recommendations of Fourteenth Finance Commission during  2015-20 but did 
not receive Performance Grants for the period from 2018 -20, amounting  to ₹ 184.83 
crore13from the State Government . The reason s for non -receipt of Performance Grants 
were not furnished by the department. 
 
13 ₹ 184.83 crore (₹ 80.03 crore for 2018-19 and ₹ 104.80 crore for 2019-20). 
152.39
211.01
243.80
282.04
381.09
0
62.28
70.47
80.03
104.80
152.39
211.01
243.80
282.04
381.09
0
62.28
70.47
0
0
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
350.00
400.00
450.00
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 5- Allocation of 14th CFC basic and performance grants
(` in crore)
Provision of basic grant Provision of performance grant
Allocation of basic grant Allocation of performance grant

Chapter-IV 
 
29 
Government stated (December 20 21) that  proposals for release of funds have been 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance, GOI with due recommendations from Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs, but funds are yet to be released. 
Based on the recommendation of the Fourteenth Finance Commission  for Performance 
Grant to Urban Local Bodies , State Government fixed certain conditions like submission 
of audited accounts that relate to the year, showing an increase in its own revenue over the 
preceding year and measure and publish the Service Level Benchmarks to basic urban 
services each year for the period of the award . Although the audited accounts were being 
prepared on time, own revenue did not increase from previous year s (refer para 4.1.1). 
Further, the performance of Urban Local Bodies  against Service Level Benchmarks was 
also not satisfactory (refer para 4.3.1) and indicate that these may be the reasons for non- 
release of performance grants  by the Ministry of Finance, GoI. State Government may 
make efforts to get the Performance Grants released at the earliest. 
4.1.3 Property Tax 
The Urban Local Bodies  were empowered to levy Property Tax every year on all 
buildings or vacant lands or both situated within their jurisdiction. Every owner is to  
assess the Annual Letting Value  of his land or building and deposit the amount of 
Property Tax along with a retur n in this behalf, in the prescribed form, on or before the 
date fixed by the Council on the basis of self -assessment. Following are our findings on 
property tax collection. 
a. Short Realisation of Property Tax  
We noticed in the test checked 27Urban Local Bodies  that the average collection of 
Property Tax for the years from 2015 -20 was 6 3 per cent  of total demand and it was 
declining in the year 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 ( Chart 6). An amount of ` 41.74 crore of 
these selected Urban Local Bodies was outstanding as on March 2020.Details are given in 
the Appendix5. 
(Source: Information received from selected Urban Local Bodies) 
b. Revision of Property Tax 
As per Section 132 of Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, the Property Tax is levied at the 
rate not less than six percent and not more than 20 percent of the A nnual Letting Value,  
135.24
250.17
260.31
224.88
171.61
90.48
156.69
141.57
130.07
129.87
44.76
93.48
118.74
94.81
41.74
66.90
62.63
54.38
57.84
75.17
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
250.00
300.00
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 6 - Details of property tax collected by the selected ULBs
(` in crore)
Demand Collection Outstanding Collection percentage

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
30 
as may be determined by the Corporation for each Financial Year  as decided by State 
Government. 
Out of 27 test checked Urban Local Bodies, in 24 Urban Local Bodies the last revision 
was in 2015-16, while three Urban Local Bodies14 did not provide the information. 
c. Geographical Information System (GIS) survey for enhancing Property Tax  
The Third State Finance Commission recommended use of GIS survey in levy of property 
tax. 
We noted that GIS was conducted  (2017-18) in  only 10 Urban Local Bodies . Even in 
these Urban Local Bodies, 100 per cent demand on the basis of GIS survey was not being 
raised. Further, State Government accorded administrative approval (March 2020) for 
survey of property, collection of property tax , and GIS mapping in 4615 Urban Local 
Bodies. 
However, the following deficiencies were noticed in assessment, imposition and 
collection of Property tax in test checked Urban Local Bodies: - 
➢ Online property tax collection system has not been introduced in an y of the Nagar 
Palika Parishads, and Nagar Panchayats, however, it is partially implemented in test 
checked Nagar Nigams. 
➢ During test check it was found that demand and collection registers of tax were not 
maintained properly. During the years 2015-20 in Nagar Nigam, Raipur the amount 
of tax recovered was more than the demand raised for by 18 to 87 per cent indicating 
the amount of tax demand was not calculated properly.  
➢ Among the test checked U rban Local Bodies, the property tax on vacant land was 
noticed in only one case in Nagar Nigam , Raipur , where tax  of ` 8.72 lakh was 
assessed on two vacant lands in February and June 2019 .However, the tax has not 
been collected. No property tax was assessed on vacant land  in other test checked 
Urban Local Bodies.  
Government stated (December 2021) that  the Module for online property tax collection 
system has been prepared and will be rolled out. State Government has also notified the 
Chhattisgarh Municipality ‘Determination of Taxable Property Value of Building/land ’ 
Rule in February 2021. 
4.1.4 Water charges 
As per Section 132 of Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, the Urban Local Bodies were 
empowered to levy water tax in respect of lands and buildings to which water supply is 
ensured or which are connected by means of pipeline under municipal water works 
according to the rates fixed by State Government. 
 
14 Nagar Nigam Korba, Nagar Palika Parishad Khairagarh and Nagar Panchayat Keshkal hav e not 
provided data. 
15 Three Nagar Nigam and 43 Nagar Palika Parishad 

Chapter-IV 
 
31 
Test check of Water Charges in 2616 out of 27 Urban Local Bodies revealed that average 
collection for the period 2015-20 was only 61.65 per cent of the total demand (Chart 7). 
During the period  2016-20, the collection declined from 67.12 to 57.64 per cent . An 
amount of ₹ 3 0.09 crore of these selected Urban Local Bodies  was outstanding as o f 
March 2020. Details are at Appendix6.  
(Source: Information provided by the selected Urban Local Bodies) 
• The water tax rates prescribed by the State Government have not been revised since 
January 2011. 
• We also noted that none of the selected Urban Local Bodies  except in Korba had 
installed meters with the water connections and generated bill as per actual reading on 
volumetric basis. 
• The water charges collected could not meet the expenses incurred by the Urban Local 
Bodies on Operation and Maintenance and electricity bill of water supply. As a result, 
Urban Administration and Development Directorate provided separate fund for 
Operation and Maintenance to Urban Local Bodies and paid all the electricity bills on 
behalf of Urban Local Bodies. 
Government stated (December 20 21) that  survey for laying of distribution pipeline ha s 
been completed in Tumgaon  and the project will be completed soon . Water metering 
under AMRUT Mission will be completed by March 2022 in nine Nagar Nigams and in 
remaining Urban Local Bodies water meters will be provided under AMRUT 2.0.  
Necessary instructions will be issued to Urban Local Bodies for recovery of outstandi ng 
water Tax. 
4.1.5 Solid Waste Management 
According to Solid Waste Management  Rules 2016, domestic waste should be collected 
by the Urban Local Bodies  and the Urban Local Bodies  have power to decide and levy 
user charges on Solid Waste Management . However, the Urban Administration and 
 
16 Water supply pipeline has not been laid in Nagar Panchayat, Tumgaon till date . 
53.84
60.44
65.27
71.56
71.05
35.86
40.57
40.02
40.44
40.95
17.98
19.87
25.25
31.12
30.09
66.60
67.12
61.31
56.51
57.64
0.00
10.00
20.00
30.00
40.00
50.00
60.00
70.00
80.00
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 7- Details of water tax collected by the selected ULBs
(` in crore)
Demand Collection Outstanding Collection percentage

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
32 
Development Department had prescribed the rates of user charges to be collected by the 
Urban Local Bodies.  
a. Non-levy of user charges for Solid Waste Management  
We noticed that in test checked 2517 out of 27Urban Local Bodies , ` 30.93 crorewas 
collected as user charges during 2017 -20. We also noted that survey of different 
categories of establishment  was not done and U rban Local Bodies were charging user 
charges at a flat minimum slab rate, as a result of which in 18out of 27 test checked Urban 
Local Bodies, user charges of ` 10.64 crore was set for collection instead of ` 14.93 crore 
as per slab rates  applicable to different category of establishments  of which ` 4.29crore 
was outstanding as of March 2020 as detailed in Appendix 7. 
Thus, there was lack of financial autonomy to Urban Local Bodies since they cannot 
determine the rates of property tax, water charges, user charges etc. on their own. 
Government stated (December 2021) that  the collection of user charges was increased 
gradually, and instructions has already been issued for collection of user charges 
according to the category of establishment . Further, public is not paying the full amount 
of user charges as due resulting in outstanding balances. 
4.1.6 Other sources of revenue  
Sub-Section 6 of the Section 132 of Chhattisgarh Municipal Corporation Act and Section 
127 of the Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act, provides for urban local bodies to explore 
other sources of revenue  by levying other kinds of taxes like  water tax, general sanitary 
cess, drainage tax etc. We noticed that 25 Urban Local Bodies collected `86.34 crore from 
other sources during 2015-20. Our finding on other sources are as detailed below: 
a. Levy on Outdoor Advertisement 
Out of 27 selected Urban Local Bodies, only four 18 levied tax on outdoor advertisement  
and collected ` 29.52 crore during 2015-20. 
b. Levy on Mobile Tower 
Twenty-three Urban Local Bodies collected ` 3.57 crore as levy on mobile towers. Out of 
1298 mobile towers installed in the vicinity of the 23Urban Local Bodies ,155 mobile 
towers located under the jurisdiction of four Urban Local Bodies 19, were found to be 
unauthorised but no action for regularisation as well as levy of penalty was initiated by the 
Urban Local Bodies  concerned. Further,  renewal fee amounting to ` 6.62 crore of 1143 
towers (22Urban Local Bodies) was outstanding (August 2021) but action for recovery of 
renewal fee was not initiated by the Urban Local Bodies  concerned as detailed in 
Appendix 8. 
  
 
17 Data not provided by Arjunda and Jarahi 
18 Bhilai, Durg, Korba and Raipur 
19 Unauthorised mobile towers at Baikunthpur-2, Jarahi-5, Raipur-146 and Surajpur-2 

Chapter-IV 
 
33 
c. Shop Rent 
In 2520 out of 27 sampled Urban Local Bodies , shop rent amounting ₹ 3.52 crore was 
outstanding as of March 2020 as shown in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7:  Details of outstanding Shop Rent 
(₹ in lakh) 
Year 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Opening Balance 494.50 479.52 447.46 450.56 513.52 
Demand 783.35 878.32 995.89 1041.38 1062.32 
Total Demand 1277.85 1357.84 1443.35 1491.94 1575.84 
Total Collection 955.57 966.14 1179.23 1193.35 1224.34 
Closing Balance 322.28 391.70 264.12 298.59 351.50 
(Source: Information provided by the selected Urban Local Bodies) 
4.2  Expenditure on services 
Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act, 1961 is not in consonance with the spirit of the 
74thConstitutional Amendment Act , as in the case of Nagar Palika  Parishads and Nagar 
Panchayats, Budget is to be sent to the State Government for information, indicating the 
control of State Government on these tiers.  
There was significant variation between Budget Estimates and actual income and 
expenditure (Table 4.8). 
 
Table 4.8: Showing the details regarding preparation of unrealistic budget 
(₹ in crore) 
Year 
Revenue Expenditure 
Estimate Actual Difference 
Percentage 
of actuals to 
budget 
Estimate Actual Difference 
Percentage 
of actuals to 
budget 
2015-16 3052.28 928.09 2124.19 30.41 3382.60 936.44 2446.17 27.68 
2016-17 3472.45 1210.85 2261.60 34.87 3744.79 1081.87 2662.92 28.89 
2017-18 3775.81 1507.52 2268.30 39.93 4200.65 1289.27 2911.38 30.69 
2018-19 4048.83 1339.17 2709.66 33.08 4337.31 1335.36 3001.95 30.79 
2019-20 4332.40 1704.43 2627.97 39.34 4669.06 1690.89 2978.17 36.21 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
The actual revenue of the Urban Local Bodies  was on an average only 36 per cent  of 
estimated revenue, which indicates that the budget preparation was unrealistic. There was 
over estimation of revenue by 64 per cent during 2015-20. 
Government stated (December 2021) that due to non -availability of sufficient fund s at 
Department under the schemes and funds being provided to Urban Local Bodies based on 
priorities, differences arise between amount of Grant proposed and actual Grant received. 
4.3  Expenditure on selected services 
We noticed in test checked 27 selected Urban Local Bodies  that separate provision for 
Public Health, Sanitation and Solid Waste Management was not made by the Urban Local 
Bodies. Further, the requisite information  in respect of Water Supply and Public Health 
and Solid Waste Management has  not been provided by six21 Urban Local Bodies. In the 
 
20 No shops have been constructed by Nagar Panchayat Jarahi and Pathariya.  
21        Arjunda, Dongargarh, Gunderdehi, Khairagarh, Pathariya and Rajnandgaon 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
34 
remaining 21 Urban Local Bodies, we found that expenditure on  selected services, viz. 
Water Supply, Public Health, Sanitation and Solid Waste Management fell short of the 
plan during the period 2015-20 (Table 4.9). 
 
Table 4.9: Details of plan and expenditure of the selected services 
(₹ in crore) 
Services  Particulars Years 
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Water Supply Planning 199.91 266.65 296.48 233.53 274.70 
Expenditure 73.26 107.39 88.12 65.10 45.80 
Difference percentage 63.35 59.73 70.28 72.12 83.33 
Public Health, 
Sanitation and Solid 
Waste Management 
Planning 39.38 42.05 49.97 88.65 92.50 
Expenditure 33.75 35.51 40.79 53.98 76.63 
Difference percentage 14.30 15.55 18.37 39.11 17.16 
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
The average per capita expenditure on these services varied significantly ranging from ₹  3 
to ₹ 714 for the period 2015-20 (Chart 8). The main reason for such huge variation is the 
difference in population density and the level of infrastructure development required in 
particular areas.  
(Source: Information provided by the Urban Local Bodies) 
The Urban Local Bodies incurred on an average  40 per cent  of expenditure on these 
functions. As per the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act, the functions of Water Supply 
and Public Health  were to be completely devolved to the Urban Local Bodies. It can be 
seen from Table 4.10  below that in case of water supply the expenditure incurred by 
Urban Local Bodies have considerably increased over the period 2015-20, however, in the 
Public Health major expenditure/work is still being carried out by Public Health and 
Family Welfare Department during the period 2015-20 (Table 4.10). 
  
98
610
318
141
274
35 79
293
61 29
130 156
64
714
15
62
3
225
10 48 15
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
NN Raipur
NN Durg
NN Bhilai
NN Korba
NPP Tilda
NPP Gobra Navapara
NPP Jamul
NPP Bijapur
NPP Balod
NPP Kawardha
NPP Surajpur
NPP Sukuma
NPP Baikunthpur
NP Tumgaon
NP Dabhara
NP Jarhi
NP Keshkal
NP Gandai
NP Dongargaon
NP Chhuikhadan
NP Kharora
Chart 8 : Per capita expenditure on PH and SWM (Average)

Chapter-IV 
 
35 
Table 4.10: Expenditure incurred on urban and rural water supply and Public Health and 
Solid Waste Management 
(` in crore) 
Expenditure incurred on the Functions 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
Water Supply Urban Local Bodies 3.34 230.34 211.09 256.09 469.96 
Public Health Engineering Department  360.62 441.24 345.80 343.66 234.50 
Percentage of expenditure of Urban Local 
Bodies  
0.93 52.20 61.04 74.52 200.41 
Public Health, 
Sanitation and 
Solid Waste 
Management 
Urban Local Bodies 44.73 260.88 217.18 156.86 38.91 
Public Health and Family Welfare 
Department 
1767.96 2183.65 1614.74 2320.83 2187.80 
Percentage of total expenditure 2.53 11.95 13.45 6.76 1.78 
(Source: Information provided by UADD and Appropriation Account) 
4.3.1 Effectiveness of devolved functions  
Benchmarking is an important mechanism for introducing accountability in service 
delivery. Recognising its importance, Ministry of Urban Development, Government of 
India prescribed Service Level Benchmarks since 2008 fo r performance management of 
basic services. Ministry of Urban Development had also issued Service Level Benchmarks 
Handbook prescribing the standardised framework for performance monitoring in respect 
of four basic municipal services, viz., water supply, s ewerage, solid waste management 
and storm water drainage. SLB indicators include coverage of water supply connections, 
quality of water, cost recovery in water supply, coverage of toilets, coverage of sewage 
network service, household coverage of solid waste management, segregation and disposal 
of municipal solid wastes and coverage of storm water drainage network. 
Handbook on Service Level Benchmarking developed by the M inistry of Urban 
Development, seeks to: 
(i) Identify a minimum set of standard performance parameters for the water and 
sanitation sector that are commonly understood and used by all stakeholders across 
the country;  
(ii) Define a common minimum framework for monitoring and reporting on these 
indicators; and  
(iii) Set out guidelines on how to operationalize this framework in a phased manner. 
Urban Local Bodies  are to generate performance reports on Service Level Benchmarks  
periodically and institutionalise systems for performance management.  
Out of the 28 para meters under four heads (Water Supply, Sewerage and Solid Waste 
Management), we analys ed17 parameters under three heads of Water Supply, Sewerage 
and Solid Waste Management, in 2422 out of 27 Sampled Urban Local Bodies. Table 4.11 
indicates the Service Level Benchmarks set for these parameters. 
  
 
22 Nagar Palika Parishad Bijapur, Khairagarh and Dongargarh have not provided the data. 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
36 
Table 4.11: Details of indicators for Service Level Benchmark 
Water Supply 
Sl. No. Indicator Benchmark 
1.  Coverage of Water Supply Connections 100 % 
2.  Per Capita Supply of Water 135 lpcd 
3.  Continuity of Water Supplied 24 Hours 
4.  Extent of metering 100 % 
5.  Cost Recovery 100 % 
6.  Efficiency in Collection of Water Charges 90 % 
Sewerage 
1.  Coverage of Toilets 100 % 
2.  Coverage of Sewage Network 100 % 
3.  Adequacy of Sewage Treatment Capacity 100 % 
4.  Cost Recovery 100 % 
5.  Efficiency in Collection of Sewage Water Charges 90 % 
Solid Waste Management 
1.  Household Level Coverage 100 % 
2.  Efficiency in Collection of Solid Waste 100 % 
3.  Extent of Segregation of Municipal Solid Waste 100 % 
4.  Extent of Scientific Disposal of Municipal Solid Waste 100 % 
5.  Cost Recovery 100 % 
6.  Efficiency in Collection of Solid Waste Management Charges 90% 
(Source: Handbook on Service Level Benchmarking) 
a. Water Supply:  
Nineteen Urban Local Bodies  were yet to meet the target of achieving 100 per cent  
connection to households . Only Nagar Nigam Korba and four 23 Nagar Panchayats had 
provided connections to 100 per cent of the households .18 Urban local Bodies had 
provided connections to 16 to 85 per cent of households. Further, 16Urban Local Bodies  
are still not able to provide the per capita requirement of 135 lpcd of water . In case of 
continuity of water supply, Service level benchmarks provided for 24 hours water supply. 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation  and Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission  also prescribed the criteria of 24 hours water supply. However, 
only 16Urban Local Bodie s were able to provide water for two to six hours per day as 
against these parameters. 
b. Sewerage:  
Coverage of toilets has increased considerably  over the period , with 15 Urban Local 
Bodies indicating 100 per cent  coverage. However, coverage of sewage network is 
abysmal, with 1324 Urban Local Bodies indicating nil capacity in sewerage treatment. 
c. Solid Waste Management:  
Household Level Coverage has improved considerably, with 17 Urban Local Bodies 
indicating 100 per cent  coverage. Similarly, Collection Efficiency was also reported as 
100 per cent  by 16 Urban Local Bodies. 18Urban Local Bodies reported 100 per cent  
 
23 Arjunda, Chhuikhadan, Gunderdehi and Jarahi 
24 Arjunda, Balod, Baikunthpur,Dabhara, Dongargaon, Gandai,Gunderdehi,Jarhi, Kawardh,  Korba, 
Pathriya, Sukma andTumgaon 

Chapter-IV 
 
37 
segregation of solid waste and only four Urban Local Bod y reported upto 85 per cent  
segregation. 
Recommendations: 
1. Devolution of funds to the Urban Local Bodies, as recommended by State Finance 
Commission, may be done in a timely manner so that Urban Local Bodies have 
adequate financial resources to carry out their developmental activities. 
2. Monitoring mechanism for  realisation of revenue due to the Urban Local Bodies 
may be strengthened so that receivable amounts are realised fully and in time. 
3. The Government may ensure preparation of realistic budget estimates by ULBs in 
respect of receipts and expenditure. 
4. The Government may  provide adequate powers to the Urban Local Bodies  in 
administrative and executive spheres to enable them to function effectively as 
institutions of self-government and to strengthen Municipal level governance in line 
with the provisions of 74th CAA. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter V 
Conclusion 
 

 
39 
 
Chapter-V: Conclusion 
The 74th Amendment introduced Part IX A (the Municipalities) containing Articles 243P 
to 243ZG in the Constitution. This amendment which came into effect on 1 June 1993 
authorised State Legislatures to enact laws to endow local bodies with powers and 
authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self -
government and make provisions for devolution of powers and responsibilities (Article 
243W). The 12 th Schedule lists out the 18 functions  to be carried out by Urban Local 
Bodies. 
Each State had to enact a legislation to implement the 74 th Constitutional Amendment 
Act. The Urban Local Bodies in the State were governed by the Chhattisgarh Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1956 and the Chhattisgarh Municipalities Act, 1961. After enactment of 
the 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act, the State Governme nt had made some rules to 
comply with the provisions of 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act. These rules were, 
however, not supported by firm action thus, defeating the spirit of the constitutional 
amendment specifically with reference to devolution of funct ions and creation of 
appropriate institutional mechanisms. 
Out of the 18 functions, Urban Local Bodies were solely responsible for eight functions, 
had no role in one function, had dual role in s ix functions, were mere implementing 
agencies in two function s, and in respect of one function, the Urban Local Bodies had 
minimal role or were having overlapping jurisdiction with State Departments/Parastatal.  
The power of delimitation of wards, reservation of seats for the council and rotation 
policy of seats for  the posts of Mayor/President, Deputy -Mayor/Vice-Presidents and 
wards were vested with the State Government.  
It was also seen that in three Urban Local Bodies, elections were not held and hence, in 
the absence of elected local government, development of t hese Urban Local Bodies may 
be hampered, besides mandate of 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act to empower the 
Urban Local Bodies was also getting violated. 
Advisory Committees, Wards and Mohalla Committees, Municipal Accounts Committees 
and Metropolitan Planning Committees were not found constituted in case of some of the 
Urban Local Bodies. Though the District Planning Committees were constituted, meeting 
of the committees were not held regularly.  
There are  significant difference between planning and expenditure on the services of 
Water Supply and Public Health, Sanitation and Solid Waste Management by the Urban 
Local Bodies. Further, there were wide variations between per capita money spent under 
Water Supp ly and Public Health, Sanitation and Solid Waste Management among 
different Urban Local Bodies. 
Urban Local Bodies were found to be generally effective in terms of achieving the 
coverage of Sanitation and household level coverage of Solid Waste Management,  but as 
far as other parameters were concerned, there were huge gaps. As per indicators of 
Service Level Benchmarks, when seen in conjunction with the fact that Urban Local 
Bodies have not been able to collect the requisite charges appropriately and are no t 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
40 
making adequate efforts to recover cost of services, shows a dire situation of their 
financials which is adversely impacting the implementation of services. 
As per the constitutional provisions and the Acts, implementation of the recommendations 
of the fifth State Finance Commission was due from 20 21-22. However, as on date, 
recommendations of the second State Finance Commission were being implemented. The 
devolution of funds by the State Government to the Urban Local Bodies was short by up 
to ₹ 256.10 crore, compared to the norms of the third State Finance Commission.  
The share of Own Revenue to Total Revenue of Urban Local Bodies for the period 2015 -
20 in test checked Urban Local Bodies was meagre ( Nagar Pa nchayats 15.92 per cent , 
Nagar Palika Parishads 16.06 per cent and Nagar Nigams 28.71 per cent). This shows that 
the financial condition of the Urban Local Bodies was highly critical and they were totally 
dependent on the Government grants. Instances of short realisation of various 
taxes/charges in respect of Property tax, Service Charges and Water Charges were also 
observed. 
In case of Human Resources, most of the Urban Local Bodies were found to be 
functioning with acute shortage of staff and were highly dependent on outsourced staff. 
We also noted that the training needs of the staff and the councillors were not adequately 
addressed with a view towards improving their efficiency. 
 
 
 
 
Raipur 
The      : 03 Jun 2022 
(Dinesh R. Patil) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit)  
Chhattisgarh 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The           : 28 Jun 2022 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
 

41 
 
Appendix 1 
(Reference Paragraph 1.4, Page 2) 
Organisation Structure of Urban Governance in Chhattisgarh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Source: Administrative Report 2020-21) 
Secretary, Urban Administration and Development Department 
Director, Urban Administration and Development Department 
Chief Executive Officer, 
State Urban Development Agency (SUDA) 
Deputy Director Deputy Director 
(Finance) Additional Chief 
Executive Officer, 
SUDA 
Joint Director, 
Regional Offices 
Deputy Chief 
Executive Officer 
(Mission) 
Deputy Chief 
Executive Officer 
(Finance) 
Commissioner, 
Municipal Corporation 
Chief Municipal 
Officer, Municipal 
Council 
Chief municipal 
Officer, 
Nagar Panchayat 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
42 
Appendix 2 
(Reference Paragraph 1.4, Page 2) 
Statement showing the functioning of the Government Department/Parastatal Agency 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Government 
Department/Parastatal 
Agency 
Functioning of Government Department/Parastatal Agency 
1 Town and Country 
Planning  
In order to achieve a holistic and planned development in the 
State, Town and Country Planning Directorate prepares 
Regional Plans and  various development plan for different 
towns and also coordinate with allied Government/ Semi 
Government and Urban Local Bodies and private developers in 
delivering advisory/ consonant/ License . Further, to develop 
land and to have control on its use in the state, Directorate is 
responsible to sanction development license and development 
control under Bhumi Vikas Niyam, 1984 and adopted Regional 
Plans and Development Plans prepared under C.G. Town and 
Country Planning Act, 1973. 
2 Public Works Department The Department is the principal agency of the Government of 
Chhattisgarh responsible for Architecture, Surveys, design, 
construction, improvement and maintenance of roads and 
bridges of the State. Design, construction and maintenance of 
public buildings of the State. Carrying out any other works 
assigned from time to time. 
3 Public Health Engineering 
Department 
The Department is the principal agency of the Government of 
Chhattisgarh responsible for preparation and execution of the 
water supply and sanitation projects in the State, maintenance 
of which may be done either by itself or through local agencies. 
Carrying out any other works assigned from time to time. 
4 Chhattisgarh Housing 
Board 
In order to ensure dwellings with necessary support 
infrastructure for all its citizens. To provide shelter to all 
homeless rural families on subsidized rates and on priority 
basis. To assist all the citizens of Chhattisgarh and in particular 
the rural poor to, secure for themselves affordable dwellings. 
Remove legal and administrative barriers for robust housing 
activities in the st ate. Mobilize resources and ensure increased 
investments in housing by promoting strong partnerships 
among public, private, co -private, self -help groups and local 
government institutions. Promote integrates housing 
development for the establishment of viab le, society and 
economically integrated communities situated in areas which 
allow convenient access to economic opportunities as well as 
health, educational and social facilities. 
5 Chhattisgarh State 
Industrial Development 
Corporation (CSIDC) 
CSIDC is a  Government undertaking under the control of 
Department of Commerce and Industry and is the Nodal agency 
to facilitate and promote industrial development in the State. 
Development, maintenance and upgradation of industrial areas. 

Appendices 
 
43 
Appendix 3 
(Reference Paragraph 1.7, Page 3) 
 
List of selected Urban Local Bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Division District Unit selected for Sample 
Nagar Nigam Nagar Palika 
Parishad 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
1  
 
Raipur 
 
 
Raipur 
Raipur   
2  Tilda  
3  Gobaranavapara  
4   Kharora 
5   Tumgaon 
6  
 
 
 
 
 
Durg 
 
Durg 
Durg   
7 Bhilai   
8  Jamul  
9  
Balod 
 Balod  
10   Arjunda 
11   Gundardehi 
12 Kabirdham  Kawardha  
13  
 
 
Rajnandgaon 
Rajnandgaon   
14  Khairagarh  
15  Dongargarh  
16   Dongargaon 
17   Gandai 
18   Chhuikhadan 
19 Bilaspur Korba Korba   
20 Mungeli   Pathariya 
21 Janjgir-Champa   Dabhara 
22 Bastar Kondagaon   Keshkal 
23 Bijapur  Bijapur  
24 Sukuma  Sukuma  
25 Sarguja Surajpur  Surajpur  
26   Jarahi 
27 Koriya  Baikunthpur  
 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
44 
Appendix 4 
(Reference Paragraph 4.1.2, Page 27) 
Statement showing the delayed transfer of stamp duty to Urban Local Bodies 
(` in lakh) 
Year Month of transfer Amount 
2006-07 March 2017 2.99 
2007-08 March 2017 2.48 
2008-09 June and December 2016 0.40 
2009-10 June and December 2016 0.85 
2010-11 June and December 2016 1.04 
2011-12 June and December 2016 and February 2020 3.17 
2012-13 June and December 2016 and February 2020 5.61 
2013-14 June, September, October and December 2016, March and July 2017 
and February 2020 
32.51 
2014-15 June, July, October and December 2016 and July 2017 58.44 
2015-16 October 2016, February, March and May 2017 and January 2018 1959.26 
2016-17 March, May and November 2018 1478.89 
2017-18 February and October 2020 52.14 
2018-19 October 2016, October 2019, March and October 2020 185.13 
2019-20 October 2020 1004.70 
 Total 4787.61 
(Source: Information compiled from records of UADD) 

Appendices 
 
45 
Appendix 5 
(Reference Paragraph 4.1.3, Page 29) 
Statement showing the details of outstanding revenue of Property Tax in test-checked Urban 
Local Bodies 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB Current year 
demand 
Outstanding 
demand 
Total 
Demand Recovery Demand Recovery Demand Recovery Outstanding 
1 Raipur 6289.69 5188.94 703.46 801.66 6993.15 5990.60 1002.55 
2 Bhilai 2500.00 1945.11 600.00 902.54 3100 2847.65 252.35 
3 Durg 645.31 608.26 195.51 213.50 840.82 821.76 19.06 
4 Rajnandgaon 313.08 194.02 103.40 80.88 416.48 274.90 141.58 
5 Korba 3258.18 2282.28 1644.36 191.28 4902.54 2473.56 2428.98 
6 Baikunthpur 21.60 19.75 11.81 15.10 33.41 34.85 -1.44 
7 Surajpur 11.50 4.80 5.41 4.26 16.91 9.06 7.85 
8 Gobaranavapara 43.32 31.47 13.55 11.62 56.87 43.09 13.78 
9 Tilda 39.67 29.16 20.76 7.85 60.43 37.01 23.42 
10 Balod 45.14 30.51 18.46 9.07 63.6 39.58 24.02 
11 Jamul 121.07 109.16 7.92 6.94 128.99 116.10 12.89 
12 Kawardha 57.95 51.49 12.02 11.11 69.97 62.60 7.37 
13 Dongargarh 39.14 16.10 31.67 13.54 70.81 29.64 41.17 
14 Khairagarh 25.00 8.34 41.93 13.26 66.93 21.60 45.33 
15 Bijapur 21.27 11.70 14.71 8.39 35.98 20.09 15.89 
16 Sukuma 23.89 21.27 6.57 5.85 30.46 27.12 3.34 
17 Jarahi 21.99 1.20 20.62 39.35 42.61 40.55 2.06 
18 Pathariya 6.25 3.87 13.45 4.65 19.7 8.52 11.18 
19 Dabhara 9.57 4.75 16.41 5.27 25.98 10.02 15.96 
20 Kharora 19.46 15.73 3.50 2.27 22.96 18.00 4.96 
21 Gunderdehi 8.50 5.63 4.65 3.70 13.15 9.33 3.82 
22 Arjunda 7.29 6.77 1.05 0.70 8.34 7.47 0.87 
23 Chhuikhadan 5.10 3.78 1.90 1.74 7 5.52 1.48 
24 Gandai 4.79 5.09 6.69 0.11 11.48 5.20 6.28 
25 Dongargaon 16.52 9.16 24.95 5.59 41.47 14.75 26.72 
26 Tumgaon 13.52 6.72 12.47 4.92 25.99 11.64 14.35 
27 Keshkal 16.14 4.82 33.23 9.15 49.37 13.97 35.40 
  Total 13582.32 10610.31 3578.60 2376.84 17160.92 12987.15 4173.77 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
46 
Appendix 6 
(Reference Paragraph 4.1.4, Page 31) 
Statement showing the details of outstanding revenue of Water Tax in test-checked Urban 
local Bodies 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB Current year 
demand 
Outstanding 
demand 
Total 
Demand Recovery Demand Recovery Demand Recovery Outstanding 
1 Raipur 2404.17 1850.06 436.41 461.51 2840.58 2311.57 529.01 
2 Bhilai 400.00 192.15 250.00 235.73 650.00 427.88 222.12 
3 Durg 447.78 369.18 153.92 119.81 601.70 488.99 112.71 
4 Rajnandgaon 325.29 176.19 416.72 88.50 742.01 264.69 477.32 
5 Korba 293.72 79.81 780.00 41.32 1073.72 121.13 952.59 
6 Baikunthpur 18.00 8.83 20.29 12.95 38.29 21.78 16.51 
7 Surajpur 6.00 1.63 9.20 1.75 15.20 3.38 11.82 
8 Gobaranavapara 48.98 24.11 72.68 11.79 121.66 35.90 85.76 
9 Tilda 26.30 11.05 45.89 8.87 72.19 19.92 52.27 
10 Balod 53.35 29.26 73.89 13.11 127.24 42.37 84.87 
11 Jamul 40.50 19.54 52.92 9.31 93.42 28.85 64.57 
12 Kawardha 99.09 74.88 144.51 36.99 243.60 111.87 131.73 
13 Dongargarh 43.07 19.82 80.60 8.21 123.67 28.03 95.64 
14 Kharora 38.76 23.14 49.73 11.74 88.49 34.88 53.61 
15 Bijapur 34.72 17.43 23.93 7.46 58.65 24.89 33.76 
16 Sukuma 13.00 6.04 5.87 5.08 18.87 11.12 7.75 
17 Jarahi 0.52 0.57 0.06 0.13 0.58 0.70 -0.12 
18 Pathariya 6.45 4.90 7.80 4.73 14.25 9.63 4.62 
19 Dabhara 2.05 0.69 1.74 2.41 3.79 3.10 0.69 
20 Kharora 20.82 18.77 10.96 3.27 31.78 22.04 9.74 
21 Gunderdehi 8.86 5.43 2.90 1.29 11.76 6.72 5.04 
22 Arjunda 11.94 13.84 1.07 1.07 13.01 14.91 -1.90 
23 Chhuikhadan 13.45 13.81 6.72 7.59 20.17 21.40 -1.23 
24 Gandai 10.93 11.03 10.37 0.41 21.30 11.44 9.86 
25 Dongargaon 22.19 9.11 19.33 8.63 41.52 17.74 23.78 
26 Tumgaon 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
27 Keshkal 25.11 6.27 12.44 4.66 37.55 10.93 26.62 
  Total 4415.05 2987.54 2689.95 1108.32 7105.00 4095.86 3009.14 
 

Appendices 
 
47 
Appendix 7 
(Reference Paragraph 4.1.5, Page 32) 
Statement showing the details of user charges collected in test-checked Urban local Bodies 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
ULB Period Total 
Houses 
Total 
establishment 
Target to 
be as per 
minimum 
slab rate* 
Target 
Set for 
user 
charges 
Recovery 
of User 
charges  
 
1 Raipur 2018-21       0.00 272.43  
2 Korba 2018-20       0.00 54.30  
3 Tilda 2018-20       0.00 9.54  
4 Kawardha 2018-20       0.00 10.85  
5 Dongargarh 2017-20       0.00 18.78  
6 Rajnandgaon 2017-21       524.31 210.91  
7 Bhilai 2017-20       1600.00 1757.99  
8 Durg 2017-20 64613 7007 899.62 625.18 625.53  
9 Gobranavapara 2017-20 4571  901 65.59 48.36 25.24  
10 Jamul 2017-20 5641 476 69.49 30.77 16.72  
11 Balod 2018-20 5439 610 76.31 12.40 11.23  
12 Khairagarh 2018-20 4850 315 61.45 38.70 16.24  
13 Bijapur 2017-20 4445 237 41.12 52.05 2.03  
14 Sukma 2018-20 3339 365 31.05  52.39 0.00  
15 Surajpur 2018-20 3476 30 25.60 52.00 18.70  
16 Baikunthpur 2018-20 3454 181 28.35  58.78 4.98  
17 Kharora 2018-20 1737 669 20.53 39.91 9.57  
18 Gunderdehi 2018-20 1993 314 18.12 27.85 4.33  
19 Dongargaon 2017-20 3498 330 43.72 32.43 5.55  
20 Gandai 2018-20 2385 359 32.22 26.43 6.23  
21 Chhuikhadan 2017-20 1562 390 23.89 35.53 4.84  
22 Pathariya 2018-20 1053 125 9.08 8.56 0.58  
23 Dabhara 2018-20 1811 359 17.35  29.90 1.81  
24 Keshkal 2018-20 1728 194 14.77 21.70 3.16  
25 Tumgaon 2018-20 1641 215 14.39 11.18 1.46  
  Total       1492.64 1063.05 3093.00  
* Calculated on the information provided by ULB based on minimum user charges of ` 30 per 
household and ` 80 per establishments  for Nagar Nigam &Nagar Palika  Parisgad and ` 50 per 
establishments for Nagar Panchayat 

Implementation of 74th Constitutional Amendment Act in Chhattisgarh 
 
48 
Appendix 8 
(Reference Paragraph 4.1.6, Page 32) 
Statement showing the details of mobile tower in test-checked Urban local Bodies 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of ULB's Mobile tower Pending for regularisation and renewal  
Number of 
unauthorised 
Tower  
Number of 
valid 
Tower 
Amount 
recovered as 
renewal fee  
Outstanding 
renewal fee 
1 Raipur 146 392 118.42 247.12 
2 Surajpur 2 13 2.00 6.70 
3 Jarhi 5 0 0.14 0.00 
4 Durg   124 80.89 0.00 
5 Bhilai   243 99.17 181.70 
6 Korba   209 7.35 126.44 
7 Tilda   13 5.28 4.00 
8 GobraNavapara   17 0.40 15.50 
9 Jamul   13 4.10 10.28 
10 Balod   18 10.81 10.55 
11 Kawardha   17 7.81 12.69 
12 Dongargarh   10 1.11 9.58 
13 Bijapur   9 7.03 2.05 
14 Sukma   6 1.45 3.60 
15 Baikunthpur 2 12 2.20 14.90 
16 Kharora   7 1.74 1.93 
17 Tumgaon   5 1.05 1.20 
18 Arjunda   5 1.04 1.00 
19 Dongargaon   5 0.74 0.89 
20 Gandai   6 1.68 2.20 
21 Chhuikhadan   2 0.79 0.22 
22 Dabhara   7 0.09 2.97 
23 Keshkal   10 2.00 7.30 
  Total 155 1143 357.28 662.81 
 

@ 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
2022 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.agauchhattisgarh@cag.gov.in 
 