 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on Performance Audit on  
Efficacy of implementation of the 
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Government of Punjab 
Report No. 7 of the year 2021 

 

 
i 
Table of Contents 
 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii-xii 
Chapter-I: Introduction 
Background 1.1 1-2 
Trend of urbanisation in Punjab 1.2 2-3 
Profile of Urban Local Bodies 1.3 3 
Organisational Structure of Urban Governance in 
Punjab 1.4 3-4 
Chapter-II: Audit Framework 
Audit objectives 2.1 5 
Audit scope and methodology 2.2 5-6 
Audit criteria 2.3 6 
Organisation of audit findings 2.4 6 
Acknowledgement 2.5 6 
Chapter-III: Compliance with provisions of Seventy-fourth 
Constitutional Amendment Act 
Comparison of provisions under 74 th CAA with 
State legislations 3.1 7-10 
Chapter-IV: Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and  
their functioning 
Powers of the State Government over Urban Local 
Bodies 4.1 11-13 
Status of devolution of functions 4.2 13-18 
Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urban 
Local Bodies 4.3 18-29 
Parastatal bodies, their functions and impact on 
Urban Local Bodies 4.4 29-32 
Role of ULBs in AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission 4.5 32-36 
Conclusions 4.6 36-37 
Recommendations 4.7 37-38 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
ii 
Description Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Sources of revenue 5.1 39-49 
Budget estimates and expenditure 5.2 49-51 
Financial powers of Urban Local Bodies 5.3 51-53 
Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies 5.4 53-55 
Solid Waste Management 5.5 55-56 
Conclusions 5.6 56-57 
Recommendations 5.7 57-58 
Chapter-VI: Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
Limited powers over human resources 6.1 59-63 
Sufficiency and functioning of staff 6.2 63-65 
Capacity building 6.3 65-66 
Conclusions 6.4 66 
Recommendations 6.5 67 
 
 

Table of Contents 
iii 
 
Appendices 
 
Description Reference to 
Appendix  Page 
List of functions (with activities) enumerated in 
the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution of India, 
to be devolved to Urban Local Bodies 
1.1 69-70 
List of total Urban Local Bodies in Punjab 1.2 71-72 
Details of number of selected units which achieved 
the benchmarks set by the Finance Commissions 4.1 73 
Details of progress of projects under Smart Cities 
Mission 4.2 74-80 
Details of payment made to Gram Panchayat, 
Dudhar on account of lease money 5.1 81 
 

v 
Preface  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the 
per
iod April 2015 to March 2020 has been prepared for submission to 
the Governor of the State of Punjab under Article 151(2) of the 
Constitution of India.  
The State Government entrusted the audit of Urban Local Bodies to the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for Technical Guidance and 
Support under Section 20(1) of Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.   
The Report contains the results of performance audit on ‘Efficacy of 
implementation of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1992’ in the Department of Local Government, Government of 
Punjab, for the period April 2015 to March 2020.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the 
Department of Local Government.  
 

Executive Summary 

 

vii 
Executive Summary 
This Report contains significant results of the performance audit on ‘Efficacy 
of i
mplementation of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth) Amendment 
Act, 1992’ covering the period from April 2015 to March 2020. 
Introduction 
The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 th CAA) was 
enac
ted, which came into force on 1 June 1993, to give Constitutional 
recognition to the Urban Local Bodies (ULB) for decentralising urban 
governance along with the Constitutional right to exist.  The 74 th CAA 
author
ised the State Government to enact laws to empower ULBs with powers 
and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of 
self-government to transfer various responsibilities to Municipalities and to 
strengthen Municipal level governance.  The Twelfth Schedule of the 
Constitution enumerates 18 specific functions to be devolved to ULBs. 
In the State of Punjab, ULBs are categorised into three types of Municipalities 
viz. Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council and Nagar Panchayat on the 
basis of population, revenue generated by local administration and such other 
factors as may deem fit, specified by a notification in the Official Gazette.  As 
of March 2020, there were 167 ULBs in Punjab.  The Municipal Corporations 
and other Municipalities viz. Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats are 
governed by the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (PMC Act) and the 
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (PM Act) respectively, amended in 1994.   
Audit framework 
The overall objective of this performance audit was to ascertain whether ULBs 
have 
indeed been empowered in terms of funds, functions and functionaries to 
establish themselves as effective institutions of local self-government and 
whether the 74 th CAA has been effectively implemented in the State.  The 
mai
n objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether provisions of 
74th CAA have been adequately covered in the State legislation; whether 
ULB
s in the State were empowered to discharge their functions effectively 
through creation of appropriately designed institutions/institutional 
mechanisms; and whether ULBs have access to financial resources and human 
resources commensurate with their functions. 
The audit findings, conclusions and recommendations relating to each of the 
four audit objectives have been reported in four distinct chapters viz. 
Chapters III to VI to facilitate easy comprehension and follow up. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
viii 
Compliance with provisions of Seventy-fourth Constitutional 
Amendment Act 
The State statutes largely complied with the provisions under 74 th CAA.  
Howe
ver, compliance with the Constitutional provisions by law did not give 
assurance to effective decentralisation on ground unless followed by effective 
implementation of functions enlisted in Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.  
[Paragraph 3.1] 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning 
Though the State Government carried out necessary amendments in State 
sta
tutes viz. PMC Act, PM Act, etc., to comply with the provisions of 
74th CAA, these amendments were not supported by firm action in terms of 
emp
owerment of ULBs to discharge their functions freely and effectively, 
thus, defeating the spirit of the Constitutional amendment, as is evident from 
the following inconsistencies noticed during the course of performance audit: 
The State Government had overriding powers over the Urban Local Bodies in 
various matters  viz. power to frame rules, power to cancel and suspend a 
res
olution or decision taken by ULBs, power to dissolve ULBs, sanction of 
regulations/bye-laws, sanction to borrow money, lease/sale of property, power 
in regard to taxes, budget estimates, etc. 
[Paragraph 4.1] 
Notification regarding devolution of functions had not been issued by the State 
Government and the ULBs were performing functions what were already 
entrusted to them before 74 th CAA.  Out of 18 functions, ULBs were solely 
res
ponsible for five functions except for framing of rules and budgeting; with 
minimal role in six functions; had overlapping jurisdictions with State 
departments and/or parastatal bodies in four functions; were mere 
implementing agencies in two functions; and had no role in one function.   
[Paragraph 4.2] 
The State Government delayed the delimitation process on two occasions, 
which in turn delayed the election process for up to two years in 130 ULBs. 
[Paragraph 4.3.1] 
Composition in respect of test-checked ULBs was in accordance with the 
provisions.   The seats for direct elections were being reserved for SCs/STs 
and women as per the prescribed norms and the seats of Councillors were 
being rotated as per reservation policy for each election.  The term of office of 
Mayor in the case of a Municipal Corporation and the President in case of a 

Executive Summary 
ix 
Council was coterminous with the term as Councillor and Municipality 
respectively.  
[Paragraphs 4.3.1.1, 4.3.1.3 and 4.3.2] 
Wards Committee and District Planning Committee were not constituted in 
any of the ULBs. 
[Paragraphs 4.3.3 and 4.3.4] 
Reports of the Third, Fourth and Fifth State Finance Commissions (SFC) 
submitted in December 2006, May 2011 and June 2016 respectively were 
accepted by the Government between 175 to 675 days.  
[Paragraph 4.3.5] 
The parastatal bodies being controlled by the Government were having their 
own governing bodies which did not include elected representatives of ULBs, 
thereby making them unaccountable to the elected body of ULBs.  Though 
these parastatal bodies were handling various activities in urban areas of the 
State, it undermined the powers and authority of the ULBs as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government to 
transfer various responsibilities to Municipalities and to strengthen Municipal 
level governance in line with the 74th CAA.   
[Pa
ragraph 4.4] 
There was no substantial role of ULBs in implementation of Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and Smart Cities Mission 
in the State. 
[Paragraph 4.5] 
Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
 taking decisive action in order to translate the vision of decentralisation 
into 
reality, besides providing adequate degree of autonomy to ULBs in 
respect of functions assigned to them in line with the Constitutional 
provisions; 
 entrusting the task of delimitation to State Election Commission to avoid 
delay
 in conducting elections of ULBs; 
 constituting requisite committees viz. Wards Committee, District 
Planni
ng Committee, etc. for effective planning and better execution at 
ULBs’ level; and 
 involving democratically elected representatives of ULBs in functions 
such 
as urban/town planning, regulation of land use, water supply, 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
x 
sewerage and sanitation, besides ensuring role of ULBs in AMRUT, 
Smart Cities Mission, etc. in line with the provisions of 74th CAA. 
Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
The 74 th CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the Central and State 
Gov
ernments to the ULBs besides empowering them to raise their own 
revenue.  However, the ULBs were having limited access to the financial 
resources, which were not commensurate with their functions. 
The fiscal transfers constituted about 18 per cent of the revenue of ULBs 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  However, there was shortfall in 
release of committed funds by the State Government.  Out of mandated 
devolution of ` 3,287 crore during 2015-2020 as per SFC recommendatio n s, 
only ` seven crore (0.21 per c ent) were released to ULBs during the same 
period.  
[Paragraphs 5.1 and 5.1.1] 
Against the allocation of ` 1,962.36 crore and ` 490.59 crore as Basic Grant 
and Pe
rformance Grant as per recommendations of 14 th Central Finance 
Comm
ission, GoP received ` 1,902.65 crore and ` 200.15 crore, thereby 
resul
ting into short receipt of ` 59.71 crore and ` 290.44 crore respectively 
during
 the period 2015-2020.   
[Paragraph 5.1.2] 
Recovery on account of Municipal tax ( ` 127.81 crore) from Punjab State 
Power
 Corporation Limited (PSPCL); property tax (` 216.84 crore); user 
charg
es (` 535.96 crore); rent/lease (` 40.30 crore); amount of ` 229.31 crore 
from 
Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA) was 
outstanding; thereby showing ineffectiveness of the ULBs in augmenting their 
own revenue. 
[Paragraphs 5.1.3 to 5.1.7] 
As against the recommendations of the Fourth and Fifth SFCs requiring the 
user charges to cover 90 per cent of the cost of expenditure on operation and 
maintenance (O&M), the average collection of user charges during 2015-2020 
was only 18 per cent. The underlying reasons for short collection of user 
charges was short assessment of demand which was only 20 per cent of the 
expenditure incurred on O&M during the same period. 
[Paragraph 5.1.5] 
There was short release of ` 866.13 crore on account of Grants-in-aid by the 
Stat
e Government to Punjab Municipal Fund during 2017-2020. 
[Paragraph 5.1.8] 

Executive Summary 
xi 
Percentage of actual receipts vis-à-vis budget estimates ranged between 
34.59 per cent  and 108.61 per cent , and that of actual expenditure vis-à-vis 
budget estimates ranged between 38.93 per cent and 120.41 per cent in ULBs 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  Thus, the budget estimates with 
variation of more than 10 per cent could be termed as unrealistic. 
[Paragraph 5.2.1] 
The powers and role of ULBs were limited in respect of administrative 
approvals in emergent maintenance of essential services, technical sanctions, 
acceptance of financial bids and other expenditure, thereby restricting the 
autonomy of ULBs.   
[Paragraph 5.3] 
During the five years’ period from 2015-16 to 2019-20, despite increase in 
population and expansion of services, the expenditure on O&M decreased 
from 20.22 per cent in 2015-16 to 19.16 per cent in 2017-18. 
[Paragraph 5.4] 
Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
 ensuring release of mandated share to ULBs as per recommendations of 
Cent
ral/State Finance Commissions and due Grants-in-aid to Punjab 
Municipal Fund; 
 putting in place an effective mechanism for the recovery of outstanding 
dues 
from the organisations/bodies concerned by ULBs to augment their 
own resources; 
 taking appropriate action on the recommendations of SFC with regard 
to l
evy such charges on water supply and sewerage by ULBs so that they 
are able to recover 90 per cent expenditure on O&M incurred on these 
services, besides improving O&M on the water supply and sewerage 
system; 
 ensuring preparation of realistic budget estimates by ULBs in respect of 
rec
eipts and expenditure; and 
 providing adequate powers and enhancing role of ULBs in 
admini
strative and executive spheres to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government and to strengthen Municipal level 
governance in line with the provisions of 74th CAA. 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
xii 
Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
The ULBs were having minimal access to human resources, as is evident 
fro
m the following: 
The ULBs neither had the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to recruit 
the required staff.  These powers were vested with the State Government.  The 
State Government assessed the requirement of staff based on consideration, 
requirements and financial capacity of the Corporations/Councils/Nagar 
Panchayats.  The State Government had the powers to regulate classification, 
method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances, initiate 
disciplinary action on staff of ULBs, transfer of staff across ULBs, etc. 
[Paragraph 6.1] 
There was shortage of staff ranging from 29.08 per cent  to 36.48 per cent 
amongst various cadres/categories during 2015-2020.  In 13 Municipal 
Corporations, for every thousand people, four ULBs had only two employees, 
five ULBs had three employees, three ULBs had four employees and one ULB 
had five employees.  Evidently, the ULBs lacked adequate manpower to carry 
out efficient delivery of services.  
[Paragraph 6.2.1] 
Training to staff for capacity building was deficient, as only 0.75 per cent  to 
1.44 per cent of total men-in-position (excluding Group D employees) were 
nominated for capacity building training programmes during 2017-18 to  
2019-20.  
[Paragraph 6.3] 
Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
 empowering autonomy to ULBs to assess, recruit and manage human 
res
ources commensurate with their needs and functions; and 
 ensuring adequate manpower to ULBs, besides imparting need-based 
trai
ning to staff to enable them to carry out efficient delivery of services.  
 

Chapter-I 
 
Introduction 

1 
Chapter-I 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 Background 
Towns and cities contribute substantially to the economic development of the 
countr
y. These urban centres also play an important support role in the 
development of rural hinterland. To keep this economic transformation in line 
with needs and realities at the grass-root level, it is necessary that the people 
and their representatives are fully involved in the planning and implementation 
of the programmes at local level. If democracy in Parliament and State 
Legislatures is to remain strong and stable, its roots must reach villages, towns 
and the cities where the people live. 
The Constitution of India has made detailed provisions for ensuring protection 
of democracy in Parliament and in State Legislatures. Hence, democracy in 
these institutions has survived and flourished. However, the Constitution did 
not make Local Self Government in urban areas a clear-cut Constitutional 
obligation.  
As a consequence of inadequate Constitutional provision for Local Self 
Government, democracy in Municipal governance was not stable. Though the 
respective Municipal Acts of the States provided for regular elections to 
Municipal bodies, they were frequently suspended and superseded for 
indefinite periods of time. Frequent and indefinite suspensions or 
supersessions eroded the very basis of local self-government and had a 
negative effect on democracy at the grass-root level. The general position with 
regard to financial resources of the Municipal bodies was also not satisfactory. 
Over the years, there was a steady encroachment on the assigned functions and 
revenues of Urban Local Bodies (ULB) by specialised agencies of the State 
Governments. As a result, many ULBs became weak and were not able to 
perform effectively. The weakened status of ULBs crystallised public opinion 
in favour of need for a Constitutional guarantee to safeguard the interests of 
ULBs in order to provide for: 
• Regular and fair conduct of elections to these bodies; 
• Holding of elections within a specified time limit in case of supersession; 
• Adequate representation of SCs/STs and women in the elected bodies; 
• Placing on firm footing the relationship between the State Governments 
and the ULBs with respect to: 
– functions and taxation powers of the ULBs; 
– arrangement for revenue sharing between the State Government and 
the ULBs; and 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
2 
• involvement of elected representatives at grass-root level in planning at the 
district and metropolitan levels. 
Accordingly, the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 
(74th CAA) was enacted, which came into force on 1 June 1993, to give 
Const
itutional recognition to the ULBs for decentralising urban governance 
along with the Constitutional right to exist.  The 74th CAA authorised the State 
Gover
nment to enact laws to empower ULBs with powers and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government 
to transfer various responsibilities to Municipalities and to strengthen 
Municipal level governance.  The Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution 
enumerates 18 specific functions to be devolved to ULBs, as listed in 
Appendix 1.1.   
1.2  Trend of urbanisation in Punjab  
Trend of urbanisation in the State of Punjab vis -à-vis at national level in two 
decades during 1991-2011 is depicted in Chart 1.1. 
Chart 1.1: Trend of urbanisation in the State of Punjab vis-à-vis at n ational level 
 
Source: Punjab Economic Survey, 2020 
As per census 2011, 37.50 per cent of popul ation reside in urban areas of the 
State as compared to 31.10 per cent  at the national level. Urbanisation in 
Punjab grew from 30.00 per cent  to 37.50 per cent vis-à-vis 26.00 per cent to 
31.10 per cent at national level in two decades during 1991-2011.   
Urban Punjab faces multiple challenges such as water supply, sewerage, storm 
water drainage, solid waste management, roads, street lighting, etc.  There is 
an acute pressure on these services in the wake of growing urbanisation.  In 

Chapter-I: Introduction 
3 
this scenario, ULBs have an important role to play, as most of these issues are 
handled best at the local level.   
1.3 Profile of Urban Local Bodies  
In Punjab, ULBs are categorised into three types of Municipalities viz . 
Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council and Nagar Panchayat on the basis 
of population, revenue generated by local administration and such other 
factors as may deem fit, specified by a notification in the Official Gazette.  As 
of March 2020, there were 167 ULBs in Punjab, details of which are given in 
Appendix 1.2.  The category wise break-up is shown in Chart 1.2 below: 
Chart 1.2: Category-wise ULBs in Punjab State  
10
101
56
Municipal Corporation Municipal Council Nagar Panchayat
 
Source: Department of Local Government, Punjab  
The Municipal Corporations and other Municipalities viz . Municipal Councils 
and Nagar Panchayats are governed by the Punjab Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1976 (PMC Act) and the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (PM Act) 
respectively, amended in 1994.  The Municipal area has been divided into 
wards, which are determined and notified by the State Government for the 
purpose of election of Councillors.  All ULBs have an elected body headed by 
Mayor in case of Municipal Corporation and President both in case of 
Municipal Council and Nagar Panchayat. 
1.4 Organisational Structure of Urban Governance in Punjab   
In the State of Punjab, ULBs are governed by the Department of Local 
Gover
nment (Department). The organisational structure of the Department is 
given in Chart 1.3. 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
4 
Chart 1.3: Organisational Chart of Department of Local Government 
 
Executive Level Ele cted Level 
 
Source: Department of Local Government, Punjab  
Besides, the Department also has three key parastatal bodies viz . Punjab Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (PWSSB), Punjab Municipal Infrastructure 
Development Company (PMIDC) and State Urban Development Authority 
(SUDA) which deliver or facilitate urban infrastructure and services in Punjab. 

Chapter-II 
 
Audit Framework 

5 
Chapter-II 
 
Audit Framework 
The overall objective of this performance audit was to ascertain whether Urban 
Loca
l Bodies (ULB) have indeed been empowered in terms of funds, functions 
and functionaries to establish themselves as effective institutions of local 
self-government and whether the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1992 (74 th CAA) has been effectively implemented in the State. The 
fra
mework for conducting the performance audit was as under: 
2.1 Audit objectives  
The main objectives of the performance audit were to assess: 
 Whether provisions of 74th CAA have been adequately covered in the State 
leg
islation; 
 Whether ULBs in the State were empowered to discharge their functions 
eff
ectively through creation of appropriately designed institutions/ 
institutional mechanisms; 
 Whether ULBs have access to financial resources commensurate with their 
funct
ions; and 
 Whether ULBs have access to human resources commensurate with their 
funct
ions. 
2.2  Audit scope and methodology 
The performance audit covering five years’ period i.e. April 2015 to 
Mar
ch 2020 was conducted (July 2020 - March 2021) by test-checking the 
records of the office of the Principal Secretary; Directorate office, Department 
of Local Government, Government of Punjab (GoP); and 19 1 out of 167 ULBs 
acr
oss all tiers.  Related information was also obtained from the three 
parastatal bodies of the Department, viz. Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board (PWSSB), Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development Company 
(PMIDC) and State Urban Development Authority (SUDA).  Besides, role of 
ULBs in Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
and Smart Cities Mission was also examined. 
                                                           
1  Municipal Corporations: (i ) Amritsar; (ii) Ludhiana; (iii) Patiala; (iv) SAS Nagar;  
Municipal Councils:  (v) Nabha, (vi) Rajpura, (vii) Samana in district Patiala;  
(viii) Banur; (ix) Derabassi; (x) Kharar; (xi) Kurali, (xii) Lalru, (xiii) Naya Gaon;  
(xiv) Zirakpur; Nagar Panchayats : (xv) Bhadson, (xvi) Ghagga; (xvii) Ghanour;  
(xviii) Patran; and (xix) Sanour, selected on judgmental basis keeping in view the 
Covid-19 Pandemic situation in Punjab.  

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
6 
An entry conference was held (October 2020) with the Secretary, Local 
Government Department, Punjab wherein audit objectives, scope, 
methodology and criteria were explained.  The audit findings were discussed in 
the exit conference held (August 2021) with the Principal Secretary, Local 
Government Department, Punjab.  The comments furnished by the Principal 
Secretary in the exit conference and the replies received (August 2021) from 
the Department have been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
2.3  Audit criteria   
The audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
 The Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992; 
 Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976; 
 Punjab Municipal Act, 1911; 
 Model Municipal Law, 2003;  
 Central/State Finance Commission Reports;  
 Punjab Municipal Accounting Manual, 2017;  
 Report of Second Administrative Reforms Commission; and 
 Various orders, notifications, circulars and instructions issued by the State 
Gover
nment from time to time.   
2.4 Organisation of audit findings  
The audit findings, conclusions and recommendations relating to each of the 
four 
audit objectives have been reported in the following four distinct chapters 
to facilitate easy comprehension and follow up: 
Chapter-III – Compliance with provisions of 74 th CAA; 
Chapt
er-IV – Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning ; 
Chapter-V – Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies; and 
Chapte
r-VI – Human resources of Urban Local Bodies. 
2.5 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the State 
Gover
nment; Director, Local Government (Department); the parastatal bodies 
of the Department viz. PWSSB, PMIDC and SUDA; and all the test-checked 
ULBs in conducting the performance audit.   

Chapter-III 
 
Compliance with provisions of 
Seventy-fourth Constitutional 
Amendment Act 

7 
Chapter-III 
 
Compliance with provisions of  
Seventy-fourth Constitutional Amendment Act 
 
3.1 Comparison of provisions under 74 th CAA with State legislations 
The 
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 th CAA) 
intr
oduced (June 1993) certain provisions relating to Municipalities vide 
Articles 243P to 243ZG.  Accordingly, the State Government also adopted 
those provisions vide amendments (1994) to their existing Acts viz. the Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (PMC Act) and the Punjab Municipal Act, 
1911 (PM Act), as depicted in Table 3.1.   
Table 3.1: Comparison of provisions under 74th CAA with State legislations 
Provision 
under 
74th CAA 
Requirement as per provisions 
under 74th CAA 
Provisions under  
PMC Act, PM Act, as amended  
in 1994 and PFCPM Act1  
Article 243P Definitions:  It defines various terms 
such as Committee, District 
Metropolitan Area, Municipal Area, 
Municipality, Panchayat and 
Population. 
Necessary terms/definitions had 
been incorporated in Section 2 of 
PMC Act and Section 3 of PM Act. 
Article 243Q Constitution of Municipalities : It 
provides for constitution of three 
types of Municipalities, namely -  
a Nagar Panchayat for transitional 
area, a Municipal Council for a 
smaller urban area and a Municipal 
Corporation for a larger urban area. 
Section 3 of PMC Act and Section 4 
of PM Act. 
Article 243R Composition of Municipalities: All 
the seats in a Municipality shall be 
filled by direct elections and by 
persons with special knowledge in 
municipal administration, nominated 
by Government.  The Legislature of 
a State may by law, provide for 
representation to the Municipality, 
Members of Parliament and 
Legislative Assembly whose 
constituencies lie within the 
municipal area and Members of the 
Council of State and State 
Legislative Council who are 
registered as electors within the city. 
Section 5 of PMC Act and 
Section 12 of PM Act provide for all 
provisions of Article 243R, except 
for provision for filling up any seat 
in a Municipality by persons with 
special knowledge in Municipal 
administration, nominated by the 
Government. 
Article 243S Constitution and composition of 
Wards Committees, etc.: It 
provides for constitution of Wards 
Committees in all municipalities 
with a population of three lakh or 
more.   
Sections 42 and 42-A of PMC Act 
and Section 34 of PM Act.   
                                                           
1  Punjab Finance Commission for Panchayats and Municipalities Act, 1994 (PFCPM Act).  

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
8 
Provision 
under 
74th CAA 
Requirement as per provisions 
under 74th CAA 
Provisions under  
PMC Act, PM Act, as amended  
in 1994 and PFCPM Act1  
Article 243T Reservation of seats: It provides for 
reservation of seats for Scheduled 
Castes (SC)/ Scheduled Tribes (ST) 
and Women for direct election. 
Sections 6 & 6-A of PMC Act and 
Section 8 of PM Act.   
Article 243U Duration of Municipalities, etc.: 
The Municipality has a fixed tenure 
of five years from the date of its first 
meeting and re-election to be held 
within the six months of end of 
tenure.   
Section 7 of PMC Act and 
Section 13 of the PM Act. 
Article 243V Disqualifications for membership: 
A person shall be disqualified for 
being chosen as a member of a 
Municipality -  
• If he is so disqualified by or 
under any law for the time being 
in force for the purposes of 
elections of the Legislature of the 
State concerned. 
• If he is so disqualified by or 
under any law made by the 
Legislature of the State.  
Section 13 of PMC Act and 
Section 16 of the PM Act. 
Article 243W Powers, authority and 
responsibilities of the 
Municipalities, etc.: All 
Municipalities would be empowered 
with such powers as may be 
necessary to enable them to function 
as effective institutions of self-
government.  The State Government 
shall entrust with such powers and 
authority to enable them to carry out 
the responsibilities in relation to the 
12th Schedule.  
Sec
tion 7 of PMC Act and Sections 
50A and 50B of PM Act.   
Article 243X Power to impose taxes by, and 
Funds of, the Municipalities: 
• Municipalities would be 
empowered to levy and collect 
taxes, fees, duties, etc.  
• Assignment to Municipalities 
such taxes, duties, tolls and fees 
levied and collected by the State 
Government. 
• Grants-in-aid would be given to 
the Municipalities from the 
State.   
• Constitution of funds for 
crediting and withdrawal of 
moneys by the Municipalities.  
 
Sections 76 & 90 of the PMC Act 
and Sections 52 & 61 of PM Act. 

Chapter-III: Compliance with provisions of 74th CAA 
9 
Provision 
under 
74th CAA 
Requirement as per provisions 
under 74th CAA 
Provisions under  
PMC Act, PM Act, as amended  
in 1994 and PFCPM Act1  
Article 243Y 
read with 
Article 243-I 
Finance Commission: The Finance 
Commission constituted under 
Article 243-I shall review -  
• The financial position of the 
Municipalities and taking such 
steps that help in boosting the 
financial condition of the 
Municipal bodies.   
• Distribution between the State 
and the Municipalities of the net 
proceeds of the taxes, fees, tolls 
and duties that are charged by 
the State Government. 
• Allotment of funds to the 
Municipal bodies in the State 
from the Consolidated Fund of 
the State. 
Sections 3(i) and 9 of Punjab 
Finance Commission for Panchayats 
and Municipalities (PFCPM) Act, 
1994. 
Article 243Z Audit of accounts of 
Municipalities: Provision for 
maintenance of accounts by the 
Municipalities and the auditing of 
such accounts.  
Section 176 to 180 of the PMC Act 
and Section 240 of the PM Act.  The 
accounts of the ULBs are being 
audited by the Examiner, Local 
Fund Accounts, Punjab (ELFA) 
(Statutory Auditor).  Besides, the 
CAG of India has also been giving 
Technical Guidance and Support 
over the audit of ELFA. 
Article 
243ZA read 
with  
Article 243K 
Elections to the Municipalities: 
The superintendence, direction and 
control of all procedure of election 
of the Municipalities shall be vested 
in the State Election Commission. 
Section 10 of the PMC Act and 
Section 240-A of the PM Act. 
Article  
243ZD 
Committee for District Planning:  
• Constitution of District 
Planning Committee at district 
level. 
• Composition of District 
Planning Committee. 
• Preparation of draft 
development plan and forward 
to the Government. 
Section 42-B of the PMC Act. 
Article 243ZE Committee for Metropolitan 
Planning: Provision for constitution 
of Metropolitan Planning Committee 
in every metropolitan area. 
Section 42-C of the PMC Act. 
Source: 74th CAA; PMC Act; PM Act; and PFCPM Act. 
Table 3.1 shows that the State statutes largely complied with the provisions 
under 
74th CAA.  However, compliance with the Constitutional provisions by 
law
 does not guarantee effective decentralisation on ground, unless the same is 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
10 
also followed by effective implementation of functions enlisted in Twelfth  
Schedule of the Constitution. 
Audit
 observed that the legal provisions were not backed by decisive actions 
with regard to the actual implementation, resulting in a situation in which the 
spirit of 74th CAA was not completely upheld. This was especially true in case 
of pr
ovisions pertaining to the devolution of the functions and creation of 
appropriate institutional mechanism for effective decentralisation, which have 
been discussed in subsequent Chapters.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs were more or less 
performing the same functions as they used to perform prior to implementation of 
74th CAA.  

Chapter-IV 
 
Empowerment of  
Urban Local Bodies and  
their functioning 

11 
Chapter-IV 
 
Empowerment of Urban Local Bodies and their functioning  
 
4.1 Powers of the State Government over Urban Local Bodies  
Article 243W of the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 
(74th 
CAA) provides that all Municipalities would be empowered with such 
power
s as may be necessary to enable them to function as effective institutions 
of self-government, which was also adopted by the State Government by 
making amendments to its Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 
(PMC Act) and Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (PM Act).  The Report of the 
Fifth Punjab Finance Commission for the period 2016-2021, observed 
(June 2016) that both Municipal Corporations and Municipal Committees 
were handicapped because of certain provisions in the respective statutes 
which compelled them to seek prior approval of the Government for levying 
various taxes. 
Audit observed that the State Government had overriding powers over the 
Urban Local Bodies (ULB) in various matters, as detailed in Table 4.1, which 
was against the spirit of the 74th CAA. 
Table 4.1: Overriding powers of the State Government over ULBs 
Sr.
No. Subject Provision 
1. Power to frame Rules The State Government may by notification in the 
Gazette, frame rules under PMC Act and PM Act after 
approval of the State Legislature (Section 397 of PMC 
Act and Section 240 of PM Act). 
2. Power to cancel and suspend 
a resolution or decision taken 
by ULBs 
The State Government may cancel a resolution or 
decision taken by ULBs, if the State Government is of 
the opinion that it is not legally passed or in excess of 
the power conferred by PMC Act and PM Act, any 
other law or likely to endanger human life, health, 
public safety or communal harmony or in violation of 
directions issued by the Government (Section 422 of 
PMC Act and Section 232 of PM Act). 
3. Power to dissolve ULBs The State Government shall, by notification in the 
official Gazette, dissolve the ULBs, if ULBs fail to 
perform or default in the performance of any of the 
duties imposed on them, after giving reasonable 
opportunity. The order of dissolution of ULBs shall be 
laid before the House of State Legislature with a 
statement of reasons thereof.  The State Government 
may appoint such person or authority during the 
period of dissolution of ULBs. (Section 407 of PMC 
Act and Section 14 of PM Act). 
4. Sanction of regulations/  
bye-laws by Government 
No regulation/bye-law made by the Corporation under 
this Act shall have effect until it has been approved by 
the Government and published in the Official Gazette 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
12 
Sr.
No. Subject Provision 
(Sections 398 and 401 of PMC Act).  Similarly, a 
Municipal Committee may make bye-laws but with 
the prior approval of the State Government (Section 
31 of PM Act).   
5. Sanction to borrow money Section 158 of PMC Act and Section 60 of PM Act 
allow ULBs to borrow money, but only after prior 
sanction from the Government. 
6. Lease/Sale of property Section 172 of PMC Act allows a Corporation to lease 
or sell movable and immovable property belonging to 
them, but with certain restrictions. No corresponding 
provision available in the PM Act. 
7. Determination of rateable 
value of lands and buildings 
assessable to taxes 
Subject to the rules, if any, made by the State 
Government in this behalf, such value of any land or 
building assessable to taxes as specified in Section 91 
of PMC Act and Section 61 of PM Act. 
8. Leasing of octroi/tolls or 
appointment of agent for 
collection thereof 
Subject to the directions of the State Government by 
general or special order from time to time, if any, 
ULBs shall regulate the collection of octroi either 
through the lessee or agent in such a manner or 
procedure as it may deem fit having regard to the 
provisions of the Act (Section 117-A of PMC Act).  
Further, as per Section 83 of PM Act, collection of any 
octroi/toll may be leased by the Committee with the 
previous sanction of the Deputy Commissioner. 
9. Budget estimates The budget estimates received by the Government 
under sub-section (2) of Section 86 of PMC Act shall 
be returned to the Corporation before 31 st day of 
Mar
ch after approval, without any modification or 
with such modifications as the Government may deem 
fit.  Further, every increase in a budget-grant and 
every additional budget-grant made in any year under 
sub-section (1) of Section 87 of PMC Act shall be 
made with the prior approval of the State Government 
and after such approval shall be deemed to be included 
in the budget estimates finally adopted for that year. 
No corresponding provision available in the PM Act. 
10. Taxes to be imposed by 
ULBs under the relevant Acts 
and arrangement of certain 
taxes collected by 
Government 
The taxes shall be levied at such rates as may, from 
time to time, be specified by the Government by 
notification and shall be assessed and collected in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the 
bye-laws made thereunder.  The Government may, 
by special or general order, direct to impose any tax 
not already imposed, within such period as may be 
specified and the ULB shall act accordingly.  
(Section 90 of PMC Act and Section 61 of PM Act). 
11. Components and rates of 
taxes on lands and buildings 
Water tax, fire tax, general tax of such percentage of the 
value of lands and buildings as the Government may 
deem reasonable, may be levied for providing services 
in the city. The Government shall exempt from the 
general tax lands and buildings of which such value 
does not exceed the prescribed limit.  (Section 91 of 
PMC Act and Section 61 of PM Act). 
 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
13 
Sr.
No. Subject Provision 
12. Powers of Government with 
regard to taxes 
The Government may by order exempt in whole or in 
part from the payment of any such tax any person or 
class of persons or any property or description of 
property (Section 157 of PMC Act and Section 71 of 
PM Act). 
Source: PMC Act and PM Act  
The Department stated (August 2021) that the powers and controls as given under 
the
 respective Municipal laws were exercised by the State in order to bring 
uniformity in the imposition of taxes/implementation of laws, to control the 
arbitrariness and to regulate the expenditure and borrowings in the best interest of 
the ULBs.  The reply of the Department was not in line with the provisions under 
74th CAA to give autonomy to ULBs to enable them to function as institutions of 
sel
f-government. 
4.2 Status of devolution of functions 
The 74th CAA sought to empower ULBs to perform functions and implement 
sche
mes in relation to 18 subjects specified in 12 th Schedule.  Accordingly, the 
Sta
te Government made requisite amendments to PMC Act and PM Act in the 
year 1994 to bring them in conformity with the Constitutional provisions.  
Section 50B(1) of PM Act provides that the State Government may, by 
notification, subject to such condition as may be specified, endow the 
Municipalities with such powers and authorities, as may be necessary to 
enable them to function as institutions of self-government.  Further, 
Section 50B(2) of PM Act provides that nothing contained in the provisions of 
this section shall be construed to divest the Municipalities of various powers 
and functions vested in them under various provisions of this Act, rules and 
bye-laws made thereunder.  However, there is no mention about devolution of 
18 subjects to the Municipal Corporation in PMC Act though related 
provisions by and large have been enumerated in this Act. 
Audit observed that the notification regarding devolution of functions had not 
been issued by the State Government (June 2021) and the ULBs were 
performing functions what were already entrusted to them before 74th CAA.   
As 
per information/status obtained from the selected ULBs and parastatal 
bodies, the actual status of implementation of 18 subjects/functions, as 
enumerated in 12 th Schedule of 74 th CAA, being performed by ULBs/other 
author
ities in the State of Punjab is depicted in Table 4.2 and function-wise 
role of ULBs is depicted in Chart 4.1.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
14 
Table 4.2: Status of implementation of subjects/functions  
under 12th Schedule of 74th CAA 
Sr. 
No. Subject/Function Activities Status 
Functions where ULBs have full jurisdiction except for framing of rules and budgeting 
1. Burials and burial 
grounds; cremations, 
cremation grounds; and 
electric crematoriums 
Construction and operation 
and maintenance (O&M) of 
burial grounds and 
crematoriums including 
electric crematoriums 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
2. Cattle pounds; 
prevention of cruelty to 
animals  
Catching and keeping strays ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. Sterilisation and anti-rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
3. Regulation of slaughter 
houses and tanneries  
Ensuring quality of animals 
and meat 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
Disposal of waste 
O&M of slaughter houses 
4. Fire Services  Establishing and 
maintaining fire brigades 
ULBs were wholly responsible for 
discharging this function. 
Providing fire NOC/ 
approval certificate in 
respect of high rise 
buildings 
5. Roads and Bridges  Construction and 
maintenance of roads 
ULBs played a significant role in 
construction and maintenance of 
roads, bridges, drains, flyovers, 
alteration and improvement of 
public streets, culverts, and 
causeways within their jurisdiction.  
 
Construction and 
maintenance of bridges, 
drains, flyovers and 
footpaths 
Functions where ULBs have minimal role  
6. Urban planning 
including town 
planning  
Master Planning/ 
Development Plans/ Zonal 
Plans 
Master plans were being prepared 
by Urban Development Authorities 
(UDA)/Town Planning Authorities 
(TPA).  
Enforcing master planning 
regulations 
Enforcement was being done by 
UDA/TPA. 
Enforcing building  
bye-laws and licenses 
ULBs’ role was limited to issue and 
renewal of building licences.  
Group Housing, 
Development of Industrial 
areas 
ULBs’ role was to identify 
beneficiaries for group housing. 
7. Regulation of land use 
and construction of 
buildings  
Regulating land use Regulation of land use was 
primarily vested with the 
Department of Revenue, whereas 
construction of buildings was 
regulated by various bodies under 
jurisdiction of UDA.  The role of 
ULBs was limited to issue and 
renewal of building licences and 
enforcement of building bye-laws. 
Approving building plans/ 
high rises 
Demolishing illegal 
buildings 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
15 
Sr. 
No. Subject/Function Activities Status 
8. Urban poverty 
alleviation  
Identifying beneficiaries Entrepreneurship and Livelihoods – 
Central and State Government 
schemes were vested with the 
Punjab Skill Development Mission. 
All functions in respect of 
implementation of National Urban 
Livelihood Mission and Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojna (PMAY) were 
being done by SUDA.  The role of 
ULBs was limited to execute 
various welfare schemes through 
grants received for the purpose and 
own funds.  
Livelihood and employment 
Street vendors 
9. Urban forestry, 
protection of the 
environment and 
promotion of 
ecological aspects  
Afforestation Forest Department played a 
significant role in the discharge of 
this function.  ULBs only undertook 
afforestation and awareness drives 
along with the Forest Department.  
Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the 
environment and promotion 
of ecological aspects 
Maintenance of natural 
resources like water bodies, 
etc. 
10. Promotion of cultural, 
educational and 
aesthetic aspects  
Schools and education Schools and education were being 
handled by the Education 
Department. ULBs along with 
Department of Cultural Affairs, 
Archives, Archaeology & Museums 
and UDAs undertake activities allied 
with public space beautification, 
organising fairs and festivals. 
Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings/ 
institutions  
Heritage 
Public space beautification 
11. Vital statistics 
including birth and 
death registration  
Coordinating with hospitals/ 
crematoriums, etc. for 
obtaining information 
Department of Health and Family 
Welfare was maintaining database 
of births and deaths. ULBs were 
responsible for registering and 
issuing certificates of birth and 
death.  
Maintaining and updating 
database 
Functions where ULBs have overlapping jurisdictions with State Departments and/or parastatal 
bodies  
12. Water supply for 
domestic, industrial 
and commercial 
purposes  
Distribution of water In 162 out of the total 167 ULBs, 
the work/responsibility of water 
supply and sanitation is with 
Parastatal bodies viz. PWSSB  
(139 ULBs); GMADA (2 ULBs); 
GLADA (5 ULBs); and DWSS  
(16 ULBs).  
In case of the remaining 5 ULBs 
only, the function is being carried 
out by themselves. 
Providing connections 
Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) 
Collection of charges 
13. Public health, 
sanitation conservancy 
and solid waste 
management  
Maintaining hospitals, 
dispensaries 
ULBs had limited role in case of 
public health allied responsibilities, 
as Department of Health and Family 
Welfare played a significant role in 
maintaining hospitals and 
dispensaries.  ULBs along with the 
State Department undertook 
immunisation/ vaccination 
programmes.  ULBs were also 
responsible for cleaning and 
disinfection of localities affected  by 
Immunisation/Vaccination 
Registration of births and 
deaths 
Cleaning and disinfection of 
localities affected by 
infectious disease 
Solid waste management 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
16 
Sr. 
No. Subject/Function Activities Status 
Control and supervision of 
public markets 
infectious diseases, solid waste 
management and control and 
supervision of public markets.  
ULBs register and issue certificates 
of birth and death.   
14. Provision of urban 
amenities and facilities 
such as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds, etc. 
Creation of parks and 
gardens 
This function was obligatory for 
Development Authorities and ULBs 
in their respective jurisdiction. 
Operation and Maintenance 
15. Public amenities 
including street 
lighting, parking lots, 
bus stops and public 
conveniences  
Installation and 
maintenance of street lights 
ULBs were in-charge of creation and 
maintenance of parking lots, public 
toilets and installation & 
maintenance of street lighting. The 
Punjab Road Transport Corporation 
shared jurisdiction in respect of 
provision of bus shelters.  The State 
Transport Department was 
responsible for deciding and 
operation of bus routes. 
Creation and maintenance 
of parking lots 
Creation and maintenance 
of public toilets 
Deciding and operating bus 
routes 
Functions where ULBs act merely as implementing agencies  
16. Planning for Economic 
and Social 
development  
Programme implementation 
for economic activities 
ULBs:  Implementation of various 
welfare schemes in sectors such as 
Housing, Employment, Health, 
basic necessities, etc., as per the 
guidelines issued by the State 
Government. 
Social Welfare Department:  
Safeguarding welfare of 
SCs/STs/OBCs and other weaker 
sections of the population, 
implementation of various 
programmes and schemes for 
upliftment of SCs/STs for their 
socio-economic and educational 
advancement, implementation of 
Special Component Plan and Tribal 
Sub Plan schemes, scholarships, 
maintenance of hostels, etc. 
Policies for social 
development 
17. Safeguarding the 
interests of weaker 
sections of society, 
including the 
handicapped and 
mentally retarded 
Identifying beneficiaries Department of Social Security and 
Women and Child Development, 
Punjab and parastatal body such as 
State Urban Development Authority 
(SUDA) were responsible for these 
functions. ULBs were only an 
implementing arm for Centre and 
State Government schemes. 
Providing tools/benefits 
such as tricycles 
Housing programs 
Scholarships 
Functions with no role of ULBs 
18. Slum improvement and 
upgradation  
Identifying beneficiaries ULBs have no role in Slum 
improvement and upgradation. Affordable housing 
Upgradation 
Source: PMC Act, PM Act, ULBs and parastatal bodies 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
17 
Full jurisdiction 
28%
No role 
6%Mere 
implementing 
agency 
11%
Minimal role 
33%
Overlapping 
jurisdiction
22%
Chart 4.1: Role of ULBs in 18 functions 
Source: PMC Act, PM Act, ULBs and parastatal bodies 
Table 4.2 and Char t 4.1 show that out of 18 functions, ULBs were solely 
responsible for five functions except for framing of rules and budgeting 
(28 per cent ); with minimal role in six functions (33 per cent ); had 
overlapping jurisdictions with State departments and/or parastatal bodies in 
four functions (22 per cent ); were mere implementing agencies for two 
functions (11 per cent); and had no role in one function (06 per cent).  
The Department stated (August 2021) that most of the functions depicted in the 
74th CAA were already being performed by most of the ULBs.  It was added that 
the
 ULBs were more or less performing the same functions as they used to 
perform prior to implementation of 74th CAA.   
It w
as further noticed that: 
 The State Government transferred (March 2006) the function of 
Pri
mary Education in urban areas along with functionaries to the Department 
of Local Government for management and running of the schools by ULBs.  
But, the same was transferred back to the Education Department in 
December 2014.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that keeping in view the demands of 
agitating teachers to come under the Education Department, the function of 
Primary Education was transferred back from the Department of Local 
Government to the Education Department by the State Government.   
  In accordance with the decision (September 2013) of the State 
Gover
nment, the function of water supply and sewerage (earlier being 
performed by Municipal Council, Rajpura) along with related staff was 
transferred (September 2014) to the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
(PWSSB).  However, the Municipal Council continued to bear expenditure on 
this account (March 2020).   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
18 
The Department stated (August 2021) that PWSSB was a specialised executing 
agency for water supply and sewerage. Thus, to avail the benefit of its 
specialisation, the Municipal Council had resolved in 2014 to handover its water 
supply and sewerage O&M work to PWSSB. Accordingly, 2/11 th share of its 
Pun
jab Municipal Fund (PMF) was being transferred to the PWSSB and 
collection of user charges was also being made by PWSSB to meet O&M 
expenditure. The reply of the Department, however, did not justify the reasons for 
bearing expenditure on account of O&M by the Municipal Council, Rajpura when 
PWSSB was receiving share from PMF and collecting the user charges itself.   
Thus, the above actions of the Government were against the spirit of 74 th CAA 
to provi
de autonomy to the ULBs.   
4.3 Institutional mechanism for empowerment of Urban Local 
Bodies  
Though the State Government did not issue any notification for devolution of 
funct
ions, the ULBs were performing some functions solely/partially, what 
were already entrusted to them before 74 th CAA, as discussed in preceding 
para
graph.  However, discharge of functions/subjects enumerated in the 
12th schedule of 74 th CAA can be effective only when functions are devolved 
to U
LBs and when appropriate institutions are established and adequately 
empowered.  The 74 th CAA provided for establishment of such institutional 
mec
hanisms as can be seen from Table 3.1.  The effectiveness of such 
institutional mechanisms is discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.3.1 State Election Commission  
Article 243ZA of 74 th CAA read with Article 243K of the Constitution of 
India
 provide that the superintendence, direction and control of preparation of 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to Municipalities shall be 
vested in the State Election Commission (SEC).  The PMC Act and PM Act 
also provide that elections of ULBs shall be completed before the expiry of 
their duration.  In case of dissolution, elections shall be held within six months 
from date of their dissolution.  Further, Article 243U(1) of the Constitution of 
India and provisions of the PMC Act and PM Act, stipulate a fixed tenure of 
five years for the ULBs from the date of first meeting.   
Audit observed that:  
 Out of 167 ULBs, elections in respect of 166 ULBs were held during 
2015-16 t
o 2019-20.  Of these, though elections of one ULB i.e. Nagar 
Panchayat, Nurpurbedi were held in February 2015, the council was dissolved 
in its first meeting.  Elections in respect of one ULB i.e. Nagar Panchayat, 
Bhagta Bhai Ka1 due in April 2018 could not be held as of December 2020.  
                                                           
1 Election could not be held due to Court case regarding change in Municipal limits.   

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
19 
 The power of delimitation of wards, reservation of seats for ULBs and 
rota
tion policy of seats for the posts of Mayor/President, Deputy Mayor/ 
Vice-President and wards were vested in the State Government, in spite of the 
recommendation of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2007) 
to entrust the task of delimitation and reservation of constituencies to SEC. It 
was noticed that the State Government delayed the delimitation process, which 
in turn delayed elections in 128 ULBs (excluding Nagar Panchayat, Bhagta 
Bhai Ka) for two years and the elections due in 2013 were actually held in the 
year 2015.  During this intervening period, these 128 ULBs were functioning 
without an elected body. Further, in case of Nagar Panchayat, Bhagta Bhai Ka, 
the elected body was not constituted due to an ongoing court case.    
Subsequently, the elections of 129 ULBs (including Nagar Panchayat, Bhagta 
Bhai Ka) due in February 2020 were not held as of December 2020. Further, 
the elections of two ULBs viz. Nagar Panchayats Bhadson and Talwara due in 
April 2018 were actually held in June 2019 due to delay in delimitation 
process. 
The Department attributed (December 2020) the reasons for not holding elections 
of 128 ULBs due in February 2020 to Covid-19 pandemic. The reply of the 
Department was not acceptable as the elections in respect of 129 ULBs were 
due in February 2020 and the Department should have initiated the process 
well before February 2020. However, nothing on records was found to 
indicate that process of holding the elections was started prior to pandemic 
which spread in March 2020.   
As regards delay in elections due to delayed delimitation process, the Department 
stated (August 2021) that the State Government had taken decision to hold the 
elections of Municipalities on the basis of new delimitation and attributed the 
delay in holding elections to lengthy procedure of delimitation of wards and other 
procedural activities like reservation of wards.  It was assured that every effort 
would be made in future to complete the election process within time.  The reply 
of the Department was not in line with the Constitutional provisions and 
recommendation of the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (2007).   
Thus, in the absence of elected council, involvement of elected representatives 
in decision making and implementation, which was an essential element of 
democracy, was missing.  Further, a ULB without a council cannot be held 
accountable to citizens, besides affecting discharge of functions in matters of 
policy involving public interest such as prioritisation of development works, 
etc.   
4.3.1.1 Composition of Municipalities  
Article 243R stipulates the composition of Municipalities.  As per the PMC 
Act and PM Act, the Municipal Corporations and other Municipalities i.e. 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
20 
Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats consist of elected Mayor/Deputy 
Mayor, President/Vice President/Councillors, Member of Legislative 
Assembly representing the constituencies which comprise wholly or partially 
the Municipal area.  The Mayor/President is elected from amongst the 
Councillors and is assisted by the Standing Committees.  The 
Commissioner/Executive Officer is the executive head of the ULB.   Each 
Municipal Corporation shall constitute a Finance and Contract Committee and 
may constitute any other Ad-hoc committee e.g. Water Supply and Sewerage 
Disposal Committee, etc. for the exercise of any power or discharge of any 
function which the Corporation may by resolution delegate to them or for 
inquiring into, reporting or advising upon any manner which the Corporation 
may refer to them as per provision of Sections 42, 42-A, 42-B & 42-C of the 
PMC Act.   
Audit noticed that composition in respect of selected ULBs (04 Municipal 
Corporations; 10 Municipal Councils; and 05 Nagar Panchayats) was in 
accordance with the provisions above.   
4.3.1.2 Upgradation of Municipality  
As per Section 4(2) of PM Act, 1911, where an area is specified as a 
transitional area or as a smaller urban area under sub-section (1), the State 
Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute for the 
transitional area so specified a Nagar Panchayat and for the smaller urban area 
so specified a Municipal Council of the first class, second class or third class,  
provided that the State Government may, after consulting the Municipal 
Council by notification, changes its classification from one class to another.   
Further, Government of Punjab (GoP) prescribed (November 2011) the 
classification of Municipalities as Class I, II and III on the following financial 
criteria: 
Sr. No. Category Annual income 
1. Municipal Council (Class I) Above ` 10 crore 
2. Municipal Council (Class II) Above ` two crore but less 
than ` 10 crore 
3. Nagar Panchayat/Municipality (Class III) Up to ` two crore 
Audit observed that Nagar Panchayat, Lalru was upgraded to Municipal 
Council (Class I) in January 2017 without fulfilling the prescribed eligibility 
financial criteria, as during the years 2015-16 and 2016-17, the annual income 
of the Nagar Panchayat was less than ` 10 crore. The Executive Officer, 
Munici
pal Council, Lalru stated (February 2021) that the matter would be 
taken up with the higher authorities.  The Department did not furnish any reply 
(July 2021). 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
21 
 The House of the Municipal Council, Banur passed (October 2016) a 
res
olution regarding change of classification of Council from Class-III to 
Class-II after fulfilling the criteria of annual income between ` two crore and 
` ten crore. However, in spite of matter being taken (F e bruary 2017-
March 2019) with the Department/State Government, no action to upgrade the 
classification of Municipal Council, Banur as Class II was taken.   
On this being pointed (February 2021) in audit, the Department stated 
(August 2021) that Municipal Council, Banur had been upgraded to Class-II in 
June 2021. 
4.3.1.3 Reservation of seats 
Article 243T of 74 th CAA stipulates reservation of seats for SCs/STs and 
wome
n for direct election.  The PMC Act and PM Act also provide for 
allotment of reserved seats to different constituencies as per the rotation policy 
adopted by the Government.  As regards reservation for women, not less than 
one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election, 
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to 
different wards in the city.   
Audit observed in the selected ULBs that the seats for direct elections were 
being reserved for SCs/STs and women as per the prescribed norms and the 
seats of Councillors were being rotated as per reservation policy for each 
election.   
4.3.2  Mayor/President 
As per Section 38 of PMC Act and Section 20 of PM Act, the Mayor/President 
elected from amongst the elected members of the Municipalities, is 
empowered to preside over every meeting of the Municipality, enjoys the 
power of inspection, may give direction to the Commissioner/Executive 
Officer with regard to implementation of any resolution of the Corporation/ 
Council and may call for any record of the Municipality from the executive 
head.  The Model Municipal Law, 2003, circulated by the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), Government of India (GoI), provides that the term of 
office of the Mayor/President shall be coterminous with the duration of the 
Municipality.  The office of the Mayor/President in the Municipality shall be 
reserved for SCs, STs and Women to such extent, and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed.   
Audit observed that in the State of Punjab, the term of office of Mayor, Senior 
Deputy Mayor and Deputy Mayor in the case of a Municipal Corporation was 
coterminous with their term as Councillor.  The term of the office of the 
President of a Council was also coterminous with the term of the Municipality, 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
22 
whereas the term of office of the Vice President would be as the Municipality 
may fix under its bye-laws.   
4.3.3  Wards Committee  
Article 243S of the Constitution provides for Wards Committee in all 
Municipalities with a population of three lakh or more.  Section 42-A of PMC 
Act also provides that Wards Committee shall be constituted by all the 
Corporations. As per Report of the Second Administrative Reforms 
Commission (2007), the Wards Committee can be entrusted with sub-local 
functions like street lighting, local sanitation, management of local schools, 
management of local health centres, etc. 
Audit observed that no Wards Committee was constituted in any such 
Municipal Corporation in the State.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the concerned Councillors of the 
wards generally seek participation of residents of their wards to prioritise 
development works, etc.  It was, however, assured that the process of 
constitution of Wards Committees would be initiated soon so that objective of 
facilitating community participation in local governance was not defeated. 
4.3.4  District Planning Committee 
Article 243ZD of the Constitution and Section 42-B of PMC Act, provide for 
the constitution of a District Planning Committee (DPC) to consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Corporation in the district and to prepare a draft 
Development Plan for the district as a whole.  The DPC was to prepare a 
comprehensive District Development Plan (DDP) with regard to matters of 
common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities including 
spatial planning; sharing of water and other physical and natural resources; 
integrated development of infrastructure and environment conservation and 
extent and type of available resources, whether financial or otherwise.  The 
Chairperson of every DPC shall forward the DDP, as recommended by such 
Committee, to the Government.   
Audit observed that the DPCs had not been constituted in the State.  Hence, no 
comprehensive development plans, taking into consideration the local needs 
and matters of common interest such as drinking water, roads and sewerage 
system, solid waste management etc., were prepared at district level, which 
may affect the effective implementation of functions by Municipalities.   
The Department while admitting the facts stated (August 2021) that all ULBs 
generally took into consideration their local needs and matters of common 
interest such as drinking water, roads, sewerage, etc. while preparing 
development plans so that functions entrusted to them are effectively 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
23 
implemented by them from the municipal funds and grants received from 
different agencies.  The reply of the Department was not in line with 
Constitutional provisions ibid. 
4.3.5 State Finance Commission  
Article 243Y read with Article 243-I of the Constitution of India makes it 
manda
tory for the State Government to constitute a Finance Commission 
within one year of the commencement of the 74 th CAA and thereafter on 
expi
ry of every five years.  The mandate of the State Finance Commission 
(SFC) is to review the financial position of local bodies and to make 
recommendations to the Governor for devolution of funds.   
Audit observed that the State Government had been constituting the SFC as 
per the legislation/provisions made in Punjab Finance Commission for 
Panchayats and Municipalities Act, 1994  (PFCPM Act) in line with the 
Const
itutional provisions above.   
The status of constitution of the SFCs after enactment of 74 th CAA is given in 
Tabl
e 4.3.   
Table 4.3: Status of constitution of SFCs  
SFC To be 
constituted 
as per 
Constitution 
To be 
constituted 
with 
reference 
to previous 
SFCs 
Actually 
constituted 
Delay in 
constitution 
of SFC  
(In days) 
Date of 
submission 
of Report of 
SFC 
Date of 
acceptance 
of Report of 
SFC 
Time taken 
in 
acceptance 
of Report  
(In days) 
Period 
covered  
in SFC 
First 31.05.1994 NA,  
being first 25.07.1994 54 20.12.1995 NA -- 1996-97 to 
2000-01 
Second 1999-2000 July 1999 21.09.2000 419 15.02.2002 NA -- 2001-02 to 
2005-06 
Third 2004-05 July 2004 17.09.2004 53 28.12.2006 22.06.2007 175 2006-07 to 
2010-11 
Fourth 2009-10 July 2009 05.11.2008 No delay 30.05.2011 05.04.2013 675 2011-12 to 
2015-16 
Fifth 2014-15 July 2014 18.09.2013 No delay 23.06.2016 13.06.2017 354 2016-17 to 
2020-21 
Source: Departmental information 
Note:  Date of acceptance of first and second SFCs Report was not available with the Department. 
Table 4.3 shows that the reports of the Third, Fourth and Fifth SFCs were 
submi
tted in December 2006, May 2011 and June 2016 respectively, which 
were accepted by the Government between 175 to 675 days.  However, it did 
not affect the financial devolution to ULBs which remained the same 
(four per cent) during the course of all the three SFCs.   
4.3.5.1 Response of the State Government to SFC recommendations 
The State Government accepted all the recommendations of SFCs.   
The SFC-wise recommendations on devolution of funds to the ULBs are given 
in Table 4.4.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
24 
Table 4.4: Recommendations of SFCs in respect of devolution of funds 
SFC Recommendation Modification,  
if any 
First 
Devolution of 20 per cent share of the net proceeds of five 
taxes (Stamp Duty, Motor Vehicle Tax, Electricity Duty, 
Entertainment Tax and Cinematography Shows); receipts of 
the State Government amongst ULBs and PRIs based on 
Urban and Rural area collection of five taxes. 
No modification 
Second 
Devolution of 4 per cent of the net total tax receipts of the 
State Government amongst ULBs and PRIs based on 
population ratio of 32.5:67.5. 
No modification 
Third 
Devolution of 4 per cent of the net total tax receipts of the 
State Government amongst ULBs and PRIs based on 
population ratio of 3:2.   
No modification 
Fourth 
Devolution of 4 per cent of the net total tax receipts of the 
State Government amongst ULBs and PRIs based on 
population ratio of 32.5:67.5. 
No modification 
Fifth 
Devolution of 4 per cent of the net total tax receipts of the 
State Government amongst ULBs and PRIs based on 
population ratio of 37.5:62.5. 
No modification 
Source: Departmental information 
4.3.5.2 Devolution of funds recommended by SFCs and funds actually 
rel
eased by the State Government   
The 5th SFC had observed that the local bodies in Punjab continue to perform 
prac
tically the same functions, which they had been handling in the period 
prior to the 73 rd and 74 th Constitutional Amendments. To discharge these 
lim
ited functions, the funds required by the local bodies are not large by any 
means, but even then the task of balancing the budget of local bodies remains 
dependent on Governmental support.  The terms of reference of the SFC 
mandate it to make recommendations regarding the principles for sharing of 
State taxes with ULBs and to suggest measures needed to improve the 
financial status of Municipalities and bridge the gap through devolution.  The 
status of devolutions recommended by SFCs and funds actually released by 
the State Government there-against are depicted in the Table 4.5. 
Table 4.5: Status of recommended devolution by SFC vis-à-vis release of 
funds by the State Government 
(
`` `` in crore) 
SFC Period covered  
in SFC 
Funds 
recommended 
to be devolved 
by SFC 
Funds actually 
released by the 
State 
Government  
Shortfall Percentage 
shortfall 
First 1996-97 to 2000-01 180.65 78.04 102.61 56.80 
Second 2001-02 to 2005-06 412.92 95.37 317.55 76.90 
Third 2006-07 to 2010-11 860.36 53.75 806.61 93.75 
Fourth 2011-12 to 2015-16 1,695.85 6.35 1,689.50 99.63 
Fifth 2016-17 to 2020-21 2,095.13 7.00 2,088.13 99.67 
Source: Departmental information  

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
25 
Table 4.5 shows that the percentage of shortfall in releasing of funds by the 
State Government continuously increased from 56.80 per cent  to 
99.67 per cent against the recommendations of SFCs.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that efforts were made to get the funds 
released from the State Government.  Sufficient funds were released by the 
State and other State Agencies like PIDB, PMIDC under CFCs and other State 
and Central schemes to ULBs.  The reply of the Department was not 
convincing as the funds released from other sources as mentioned in the reply 
were for the specific schemes and purposes, which did not fall within the 
ambit of devolution recommended by SFCs.  
The Principal Secretary stated (August 2021) that the Department was 
regularly taking up the matter with the Finance Department of the State 
Government for release of funds.   
4.3.5.3 Status of other recommendations by SFC   
Besides recommendations relating to devolution of funds, the SFCs also 
recommended several institutional measures that would strengthen ULBs in 
the long term. An illustrative list of recommendations of Fifth SFC (2016-21) 
along with status thereof are discussed as under: 
(i)  Computerisation and e-Governance: The project of Computerisation and 
e-Governance aims to bring high level of citizen satisfaction through 
integrated service delivery on anytime, anywhere basis; in a transparent, 
effective and efficient manner.  
It was however noted that the exact details of the services to be brought out 
under the ambit of the project was not spelt out explicitly by the SFC. During 
test check of selected ULBs, it was noted that few services 2 related to online 
ass
essment and application, were being provided through the ‘mSeva’ portal 
developed under the project. 
The Department stated (August 2021) that many services under the project had 
been rolled out and stabilised. 
(ii)  Accounting and Auditing System: The Thirteenth Central Finance 
Commission stressed upon the adoption of an accounting framework based on 
the National Municipal Accounts Manual for ULBs.  The Fourteenth Finance 
Commission further recommended that the books of accounts prepared by the 
local bodies should distinctly capture income on account of own taxes and 
non-taxes, assigned taxes, devolution and grants for any agency functions 
assigned by the Union and State Governments.  
                                                           
2 Online billing and collection of water and sewerage charges; online application of water and 
sew
erage connections; online assessment and collection of property tax; online application 
of fire NOC; online application of trade licence, etc.  

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
26 
The State Government issued (September 2017) notification for the enactment 
of Punjab Municipal Accounts Manual, 2017 to be adopted by all ULBs.   It 
was, however, noticed in test-checked ULBs that though the consolidated 
figures of budget, receipt and expenditure were available with them,  
function-wise/activity-wise details thereof were not being maintained in 
various forms as prescribed in the Manual.   
Further, the State Government specifically constituted a Legislative 
Committee on the lines of Public Accounts Committee of the State 
Legislature, for the purpose of reviewing the audit reports on the accounts of 
ULBs submitted by the Examiner, Local Fund Accounts (ELFA)/ the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG). 
The Department stated (August 2021) that an application named ‘iHRMS’ in 
respect of payroll and pension had been launched in all ULBs to strengthen the 
accounting system and in order to implement the double entry accounting system, 
another application had also been rolled out in all ULBs under ‘mSeva’ portal.  
The reply of the Department was not convincing as the above applications did not 
cover all the requisite provisions of the manual, for which no reply was furnished 
to Audit (October 2021).   
(iii) Benchmarking and Evaluation: The standards of service level 
benchmarking is the yardstick to judge the level of services provided to the 
people. Hence, Fifth SFC, in accordance with the recommendations of 
13th Central Finance commission (CFC), recommended that the set Service 
Lev
el Benchmarks (SLB) should be finalised and regularly monitored.  For 
this, a proper monitoring mechanism should be created in the concerned 
departments and bottlenecks in achievement of set targets regarding service 
level benchmarks may be identified and rectified regularly, so that required 
goal of providing these basic services to rural and urban population may be 
achieved. 
Further, 14th CFC also recommended that the Municipalities must measure and 
publis
h the SLBs relating to basic urban services (Solid Waste Management, 
Water Supply and Sewerage Management) each year for the period of the 
award (2015-2020) and make it publically available. The SLBs of the Ministry 
of Urban Development may be used for this purpose.   
The State Government notified (March 2016-June 2019) the requisite 
benchmarks in compliance to recommendations of Fifth SFC and 13 th CFC.  
The 
sector-wise position of achievement of SLBs in the selected ULBs with 
regard to the constituent components/indicators as of 31 March 2019 3, is 
deta
iled in Appendix 4.1 and shown in Charts 4.2 to 4.4.   
                                                           
3  Achievement of SLBs for the years 2015-16 and 2019-20 were not maintained.   

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
27 
 
Source: Departmental Information 
 
 
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Household
level coverage
of Solid Waste
Management
Services
Efficiency of
collection of
Municipal
Solid Waste
Extent of
collection of
solid waste
Extent of solid
waste
recovered
Extent of
scientific
disposal of
solid waste
Efficiency in
redressal of
customer
complaints
Extent of cost
recovery in
solid waste
services
Efficiency in
collection of
Solid Waste
Management
related charges
(No. of ULBs)
Chart 4.2: Solid Waste Management
Between 0-50% Between 50-99% 100% and above
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Coverage of
water supply
connections
Per capita
supply of
water
Extent of
metering of
water
connections
Extent of
non-revenue
water
Continuity of
water supply
Quality of
water
supplied
Efficiency in
redressal of
customer
complaints
Cost recovery
in water
supply
services
Efficiency in
collection of
water supply
related
charges
(No. of ULBs)
Chart 4.3: Water Supply
Between 0-50% Between 50-99% 100% and above
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Coverage of
toilets
Coverage of
sewage
network
services
Collection
efficiency of
the sewage
network
Adequacy of
sewage
treatment
capacity
Quality of
sewage
treatment
Extent of re-
use and
recycling of
treated
sewage
Efficiency in
redressal of
customer
complaints
Extent of cost
recovery in
sewage
management
Efficiency in
collection of
sewage
charges
(No. of ULBs)
Chart 4.4: Sewage Management
Between 0-50% Between 50-99% 100% and above

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
28 
Charts 4.2 to 4.4 shows that as of March 2019, out of 19 test-checked ULBs, 
no ULB had achieved the targets of all 26 indicators/components fixed under 
three services viz. Solid Waste Management, Water Supply and Sewage 
Management.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that since 14 th Finance Commission 
rec
ommended Performance Grant from the year 2016-17 onwards and the 
award period was up to 2019-20, achievement of SLBs were not maintained 
by the ULBs for the years 2015-16 and 2019-20. It was added that actual 
implementation of SLBs as notified by the State Government was being 
monitored by the technical wings at the level of State as well as ULBs though 
no institutional monitoring mechanism had been set up.  
In the exit conference, the Principal Secretary stated (August 2021) that the 
Department was making every effort to keep pace with the growth of 
urbanisation to cover the newly created extensions of the Municipal areas 
under water supply and sewerage schemes.  It was added that a post of 
Additional Deputy Commissioner (Urban Development) had been made 
functional in each district to look after the needs of the urban development.   
(iv)  Use of Solar energy for energy saving and conservation:   Fifth SFC 
recommended that the State was witnessing a great surge in tapping of solar 
energy.  For energy saving and conservation, particularly in street lighting, the 
use of solar energy may be very useful. It would reduce the recurring 
expenditure on electricity bills along with the expenditure on O&M of the 
street lighting in the long run, as Electricity Department claims commercial 
bills from Municipal Committees.   
Audit observed that no targets/benchmarks in regard to timelines and coverage 
of ULBs for use of solar energy were fixed by the State Government/ 
Department.  The solar power projects had been considered only under Smart 
Cities Mission covering three cities viz. Ludhiana, Jalandhar and Amritsar.  
Thus, adequate efforts had not been made by the Department in line with the 
recommendation of SFC with regard to use of solar energy. 
(v)  Uniform staffing pattern and common norms for all ULBs: A uniform 
staffing pattern and common norms for all the ULBs should be fixed in the 
State.  Interaction among ULBs should be encouraged so that best practices of 
particular ULBs may be followed by others.  Regional seminars may also be 
organised for this purpose.  The Directorate of Local Bodies should play a 
pivotal role in this regard.   
Audit observed that no uniform staffing pattern and common norms were 
fixed for all ULBs, as is evident from the shortfall of staff pointed out in 
paragraph 6.2.1.  Besides, negligible staff was nominated for capacity building 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
29 
training programmes during 2017-18 to 2019-20, as discussed in 
paragraph 6.3.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs were already being 
instructed either in departmental meetings or by issuance of separate 
guidelines from time to time to adopt the best practices to improve their 
functioning.  However, necessary instructions in this regard would be issued to 
all ULBs for compliance of the recommendations of the SFC.  
Implementation of the above recommendations would have contributed 
significantly to realisation of objectives of the 74th CAA.  Non-implementation 
was
 a setback to the process of achieving genuine decentralisation.   
4.3.5.4 Property Tax Board  
The 13 th Central Finance Commission mandated constitution of a Property 
Tax
 Board (Board) on the lines of West Bengal Valuation Board.  The Board 
shall assist all Municipalities in the State to put in place an independent and 
transparent procedure for assessing property tax.  The Board (a) shall, or cause 
to, enumerate all properties within the jurisdiction of the municipalities and 
corporations; (b) shall review the present property tax system and make 
suggestions for a suitable basis for assessment and valuation of properties; and 
(c) shall make recommendations on modalities for periodic revisions.   
Audit observed that though GoP had constituted (March 2013) Punjab State 
Property Tax Board, it was not performing its mandated task of assisting the 
municipalities in putting in place an independent and transparent procedure for 
assessing property tax.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that in order to provide the technical 
guidance for assessment, staff of ULBs was given handholding from time to 
time and property tax had also been revised from time to time as per 
requirement. Thus, the main purpose of constituting Property Tax Board to 
assist the ULBs was being fulfilled by the Department. The reply of the 
Department was not convincing as 17 out 19 test checked ULBs had not 
conducted survey of properties, enumeration of properties and revision of 
rates, besides there was short realisation of property tax, as discussed in 
paragraph 5.1.5.   
4.4  Parastatal bodies, their functions and impact on Urban 
Local Bodies 
The objective of the 74 th CAA was to entrust delivery of major civic functions 
to U
LBs.  However, functions such as urban/town planning, regulation of land 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
30 
use, water supply, sewerage and sanitation, etc. were being carried out mostly 
by the parastatal bodies4, as discussed in Table 4.1.   
The 
role of parastatal bodies under the control of the Department and their 
impact on the functions in the test checked ULBs is discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs.   
4.4.1 Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
Water supply for domestic, commercial and industrial purposes was an 
obligatory function of ULBs. Out of 167 ULBs, the work/responsibility of 
water supply and sanitation in respect of 139 ULBs was with Punjab Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board (PWSSB).  PWSSB was constituted by the State 
Government in 1976 for the purpose of regulation and development of 
drinking water supply and sewerage in the State.  The Board shall perform all 
functions regarding investigating and surveying the requirements of water 
supply and sewerage; planning and preparing schemes and executing such 
drinking water-supply or sewerage facilities schemes as may be transferred by 
the Government from the Department of Public Health to the Board.  
In case of a scheme relating to local authority, a representative of such 
authority, shall be invited to attend the meeting convened for the purpose to 
examine the draft scheme in all aspects to express his opinion but shall not be 
entitled to vote.   
The Board prepares a feasibility report for every project and after detailed 
examination or entire satisfaction about the feasibility of the draft scheme, the 
same shall be forwarded to Government for approval, instead of ULBs.  After 
approval, the scheme becomes final and shall be hereinafter called the 
approved scheme while notified by the Government in Official Gazette.  The 
cost of investigation, preparation and execution of such scheme undertaken by 
the Board shall initially be incurred by the Board subject to recovery from the 
concerned local authority.   
4.4.2 Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development Company 
With the objective to promote upliftment of the living standard of urban 
population including urban poor in the State of Punjab and for the purpose to 
assist the ULBs and other agencies by augmenting essential resources 
including, but not limited to through pooled manner 5, facilitate urban 
infr
astructure projects, operate as a complementary window to assist the ULBs 
                                                           
4  (i) Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (PWSSB); (ii) Punjab Municipal Infrastructure 
Dev
elopment Company (PMIDC); (iii) State Urban Development Authority (SUDA); (iv) Greater 
Mohali Area Development Authority; etc. 
5  Pooled financing arrangements allow the local bodies to pool their resources and access 
the
 capital market.  

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
31 
in addressing the problems of urban poor not with the motive of profit, a 
company called Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development Company 
(PMIDC) was incorporated (March 2009) as a public limited company under 
the Companies Act, 1956, in the State of Punjab.   
PMIDC undertakes various projects with support from external sources under 
pooled finance structure to borrow or raise monies or loan or receives grants 
or accepts contribution from financial institutions, multilateral agencies, 
agencies of Government, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State Government 
schemes for providing capacity building and investment support to ULBs.  
There shall be constituted a Fund, to be called the Punjab Municipal 
Infrastructure Development Fund, which shall be vested in the State 
Government.  Twenty per cent of the additional tax, levied and collected under 
the Punjab Value Added Tax Act, 2005 shall be credited to the Fund, provided 
that the amount so credited shall not be less than ` 200 crore per annum.  In 
the e
vent of amount falling short of ` 200 crore, the State Government shall 
make 
it up by giving the amount so falling short, as Grants-in-aid.  The Fund 
shall be utilised to raise resources for infrastructure development projects from 
the National or Scheduled Banks or financial institutions for providing 
financial assistance to the Municipalities for the development of infrastructure 
development projects. 
The ULBs concerned shall identify and prioritise the urban development 
projects.  The estimates of the project, so identified shall be prepared and 
forwarded to PMIDC for release of funds.  PMIDC shall release the funds to 
ULBs, as decided by High Powered Committee for the execution of the 
projects.  High Powered Committee shall consist of a Chairman,  
a Vice-chairman and Members who are also accountable to Government 
instead of ULBs.  The ULBs shall execute the project under the 
superintendence of the PMIDC and shall send physical and financial progress 
report of the project to Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development 
Company.   
4.4.3 State Urban Development Authority 
The Government of Punjab declared (December 2014) that the State Urban 
Development Authority (SUDA) would work as Punjab State Urban 
Livelihood Mission (PSULM) as per National Urban Livelihood Mission 
(NULM) scheme guidelines and instructions issued by the Government of 
India/State Government from time to time. 
NULM aims to reduce poverty and vulnerability of the urban poor household 
by enabling them to access self-employment and skilled wage employment 
opportunities, resulting in an appreciable improvement in their livelihoods on 
sustainable basis, through building strong grassroots level institutions of the 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
32 
poor.  The mission aim at providing shelter equipped with essential services to 
the urban homeless in a phased manner.  In addition, the Mission would also 
address livelihood concerns of the urban street vendors by facilitating access 
to suitable spaces, institutional credit, social security and skills to be urban 
street vendors for accessing emerging market opportunities. 
The governing body of the Mission consists of the Director, Local 
Government as Mission Director, the Additional/Joint/Assistant 
Commissioners of all Municipal Corporations in the State as City Project 
Officers, and the Superintendents/Accounts/Other officials of all the 
Municipal Councils/Nagar Panchayats in the State as Town Project Officers 
for implementation of the scheme and were directly accountable to the State 
Government. Audit observed that the governing body of the Mission was 
constituted in December 2014, but no elected members were included in the 
Governing body of the Mission.   
The above parastatal bodies were being controlled by the Government and 
have their own governing bodies which did not include elected representatives 
of ULBs, thereby making them unaccountable to the elected body of ULBs.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the parastatal bodies were 
specialised executing agencies, which helped ULBs immensely in the 
provision of basic civic amenities in a time bound and effective manner.  
Audit is of the view that though these parastatal bodies were handling various 
activities in urban areas of the State, it undermined the powers and authority of 
the ULBs as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of 
self-government to transfer various responsibilities to Municipalities and to 
strengthen Municipal level governance in line with the 74th CAA.   
4.5 Role of ULBs in AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission  
 
4.5.1 AMRUT Mission  
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India (GoI) 
launched (June 2015) the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) to ensure (i) every household has access to a tap 
with assured supply of water and a sewerage connection; (ii) increase the 
amenity value of cities by developing greenery and well-maintained open 
spaces (e.g. parks); and (iii) reduce pollution by switching to public transport 
or constructing facilities for non-motorised transport (e.g. walking and 
cycling).  All these outcomes are valued by citizens, particularly women, and 
indicators and standards have been prescribed by the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD) in the form of Service Level Benchmarks (SLBs). The 
Mission period for AMRUT was from 2015-16 to 2019-20.   

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
33 
Under AMRUT Mission, 16 cities 6 of the State with population of more than 
one l
akh (as per census 2011) were covered.  As per guidelines, the following 
components were to be covered under the Mission: 
• Water Supply  
• Sewerage 
• Septage 
• Storm Water Drainage 
• Urban Transport 
• Green Space and Parks  
• Reform Management and Support  
• Capacity Building  
As per Mission guidelines, projects will be executed by ULBs. In case the 
ULBs do not have adequate capacity to handle projects, the State Government 
may recommend in State Annual Action Plan (SAAP 7), upon a resolution 
pass
ed by the ULB, for the execution of the projects by specialised parastatal 
agencies of the State or Central Governments. Such arrangements should 
necessarily be executed by way of a tripartite Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) amongst the State Government, the specialised parastatal agencies and 
the concerned Municipality. 
In urban area, the Municipal Commissioner will ensure timely preparation of 
Service Level Improvement Plan (SLIP).  The role of ULBs in implementation 
of Mission would be as under: 
• Preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR) and bid documents for 
projects approved in the State Annual Action Plan (SAAP);  
• Ensure city level approvals of DPRs and bid documents, and forward these 
to the State Level Technical Committee (SLTC)/State Level High Powered 
Steering Committee (SHPSC) for approvals;  
• Employ/procure implementation agencies as provided in the financial rules 
and regulations.  After award of work, ensure its timely completion and for 
this, they will take support from Project Development and Management 
Consultants (PDMC) to perform these activities;  
• Develop a roadmap for Reform implementation and capacity building;  
                                                           
6 (i) Abohar; (ii) Amritsar; (iii) Barnala; (iv) Batala; (v) Bathinda; (vi) Ferozepur; (vii) Hoshiarpur; 
(vi
ii) Jalandhar; (ix) Khanna; (x) Ludhiana; (xi) Malerkotla; (xii) Moga; (xiii) Pathankot; 
(xiv) Patiala; (xv) SAS Nagar; and (xvi) Sri Muktsar Sahib. 
7  The SLIPs of all Mission cities will be aggregated into the SAAP. The basic building block for the 
SAA
P will be the SLIPs prepared by the ULBs.  

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
34 
• Responsible for building coordination and collaboration among 
stakeholders for timely completion of projects without escalation of 
project cost; and 
• Monitor the projects through their elected representatives and ULBs and 
through direct citizens’ feedback using mobiles and e-groups.   
The State Government has appointed Punjab Municipal Infrastructure 
Development Company (PMIDC) as a Nodal Agency for implementation of 
AMRUT Mission in the State.   
Audit noticed that SAAP for ` 2,785.40 crore (Centre share: ` 1,204.47 crore 
and St
ate share: ` 1,580.93 crore) was approved (December 2015) under 
AMRU
T Mission.  As of September 2020, 113 works for ` 2,275.65 crore 
acros
s the selected cities were awarded to the different contractors.  Of these, 
only nine works involving expenditure of ` 108.40 crore were completed; 
75 works
 were under progress ranging between one per cent and 95 per cent; 
and 29 works with estimated cost of ` 1,177.50 crore were not yet started.   
The D
epartment stated (August 2021) that in view of spread of Covid 
pandemic situation, the progress of works had suffered and some of the 
projects could not be completed.  It was added that the completion date of 
works had been extended up to March 2023 by GoI. 
The component-wise status under the AMRUT Mission is detailed in 
Table 4.6. 
Table 4.6: Component-wise status under AMRUT Mission  
as of
 September 2020 
Sr. No. Component Status 
1. Water Supply Only 37.74 per cent  of population of ULBs 
had been covered, out of the targeted  
100 per cent. 
2. Sewerage Only 11.29 per cent  of population of ULBs 
had been covered, out of the targeted  
100 per cent. 
3. Septage Since all the cities were proposed to have 
100 per cent coverage by sewerage system, 
there was no requirement of septage 
management. 
4. Storm Water Drainage No work was done under these components 
due to shortage of funds and priority to 
cover water supply and sewerage. 5. Urban Transport 
6. Green Space and Parks Development works of 73 green spaces 
costing ` 22.12 crore were approved 
(September 2017-August 2020), of which 
41 green spaces (56.16 per cent) at a cost of 
` 11.86 crore were awarded, which have still 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
35 
Sr. No. Component Status 
remained incomplete. Further, no action was 
initiated in respect of remaining 32 green 
spaces. 
7. Reform Management and 
Support 
PMIDC stated (February 2021) that 
timelines for reforms to be implemented in 
the ULBs had been prepared and being 
implemented accordingly. 
8. Capacity Building 53 training programmes were conducted 
during 2016-2020 and 1,427 participants of 
ULBs covered for the purpose. 
Source: Departmental information 
The Department though provided (August 2021) the updated status of various 
compone
nts under the Mission, it did not supply any document in support 
thereof. 
It was noticed in the selected ULBs that in Amritsar, the AMRUT Mission 
was being implemented solely by the Municipal Corporation, whereas in 
another three ULBs viz. Ludhiana, Patiala and S.A.S. Nagar, the Mission was 
being jointly handled by the respective Municipal Corporations and 
PWSSB/DWSS.   
4.5.2 Smart Cities Mission  
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), GoI launched (June 2015) 
Smart Cities Mission (SCM) with aim to cover 100 cities during the period of 
five years i.e. up to June 2020. The objective of the Mission is to promote 
cities that provide core infrastructure 8 and give a decent quality of life to its 
cit
izens, a clean and sustainable environment and application of ‘Smart’ 
Solutions.  The focus is on sustainable and inclusive development and the idea 
is to look at compact areas, create a replicable model which will act like a light 
house to other aspiring cities.  The implementation of the Mission at city level 
would be done by Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) promoted by the State 
Government.  In the State of Punjab, three cities viz. Amritsar; Jalandhar; and 
Ludhiana were selected to be covered under the Mission. 
Audit observed that three companies (SPVs) viz. Amritsar Smart City Limited 
(ASCL); Jalandhar Smart City Limited (JSCL); and Ludhiana Smart City 
Limited (LSCL) were constituted under the control of PMIDC, a nodal 
                                                           
8 (i) Adequate water supply: (ii) assured electricity supply; (iii) sanitation, including solid 
was
te management; (iv) efficient urban mobility and public transport; (v) affordable 
housing, especially for the poor; (vi) robust IT connectivity and digitalization; (vii) good 
governance, especially e-Governance and citizen participation; (viii) sustainable 
environment; (ix) safety and security of citizens, particularly women, children and the 
elderly; and (x) health and education. 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
36 
agency, for implementation of SCM.  There was no substantial role of ULBs 
in execution of projects under the Mission.  The status of projects under the 
SCM as of October 2020 is depicted in Table 4.7. 
Table 4.7: Status of projects under Smart Cities Mission as of October 2020 
(
`` `` in crore) 
Status of 
project 
ASCL JSCL LSCL Total 
Projects Cost Projects Cost Projects Cost Projects Cost 
Total projects 
sanctioned 32 1,116.93 49 982.90 43 971.55 124 3,071.38 
Completed  5 12.64 3 9.54 7 18.51 15 40.69 
Under progress  9 74.90 12 54.54 12 357.70 33 487.14 
Yet to be 
started  18 1,029.39 34 918.82 24 595.34 76 2,543.55 
Source: Departmental information 
Table 4.7 shows that as of October 2020, out of total 124 projects amounting 
to ` 3,071.38 
crore, only 15 projects (12.10 per c ent) in respect of three 
Smart Cities were completed by incurring expenditure of ` 40.69 crore. The 
rema
ining projects were either under progress or yet to be started. The details 
of progress of the above projects have been given in Appendix 4.2. 
The Department though provided (August 2021) the updated status of the 
projects under the Mission, it did not supply any document in support thereof.  
It was added that the Mission period had been extended up to March 2023 
by GoI. 
4.6 Conclusions  
Though 
the State Government carried out necessary amendments in State 
statutes viz. PMC Act, PM Act, etc., to comply with the provisions of 
74th CAA, these amendments were not supported by firm action in terms of 
empow
erment of ULBs to discharge their functions freely and effectively, 
thus, defeating the spirit of the Constitutional amendment, as is evident from 
the following inconsistencies noticed during the course of performance audit: 
 The State Government was having overriding powers over the Urban 
Loca
l Bodies in various matters viz. power to frame rules, power to 
cancel and suspend a resolution or decision taken by ULBs, power to 
dissolve ULBs, sanction of regulations/bye-laws, sanction to borrow 
money, lease/sale of property, power in regard to taxes, budget 
estimates, etc. 
 Notification regarding devolution of functions had not been issued by the 
Sta
te Government and the ULBs were performing functions what were 
already entrusted to them before 74 th CAA.  Out of 18 functions, ULBs 
wer
e solely responsible for five functions except for framing of rules and 

Chapter-IV: Empowerment of ULBs and their functioning 
37 
budgeting; with minimal role in six functions; had overlapping 
jurisdictions with State departments and/or parastatal bodies in four 
functions; were mere implementing agencies in two functions; and had 
no role in one function.  
 The State Government delayed the delimitation process on two 
occa
sions, which in turn delayed the election process for up to two years 
in 130 ULBs. 
 Composition in respect of test-checked ULBs was in accordance with the 
provis
ions.  The seats for direct elections were being reserved for 
SCs/STs and women as per the prescribed norms and the seats of 
Councillors were being rotated as per reservation policy for each 
election.  The term of office of Mayor in the case of a Municipal 
Corporation and the President in case of a Council was coterminous with 
the term as Councillor and Municipality respectively. 
 Wards Committee and District Planning Committee were not constituted 
in an
y of the ULBs. 
 Reports of the Third, Fourth and Fifth SFCs submitted in 
Dec
ember 2006, May 2011 and June 2016 respectively were accepted by 
the Government between 175 to 675 days.  However, it did not affect the 
financial devolution to ULBs during the course of all three SFCs.   
 The parastatal bodies being controlled by the Government were having 
thei
r own governing bodies which did not include elected representatives 
of ULBs.  They were directly accountable to the State Government 
rather to ULBs.  Though these parastatal bodies were handling various 
activities in urban areas of the State, it undermined the powers and 
authority of the ULBs as may be necessary to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government to transfer various responsibilities to 
Municipalities and to strengthen Municipal level governance in line with 
the 74th CAA.   
 There was no substantial role of ULBs in implementation of AMRUT 
Mis
sion and Smart Cities Mission in the State. 
4.7 Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i) t
aking decisive action in order to translate the vision of 
decentralisation into reality, besides providing adequate degree of 
autonomy to ULBs in respect of functions assigned to them in line with 
the Constitutional provisions; 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
38 
(ii) entrusting the task of delimitation to State Election Commission to 
avoid delay in conducting elections of ULBs; 
(iii) constituting requisite committees viz. Wards Committee, District 
Planning Committee, etc. for effective planning and better execution at 
ULBs’ level; and 
(iv) involving democratically elected representatives of ULBs in functions 
such as urban/town planning, regulation of land use, water supply, 
sewerage and sanitation, besides ensuring role of ULBs in AMRUT 
Mission, Smart Cities Mission, etc. in line with the provisions of 
74th CAA. 
 

Chapter-V 
 
Financial resources of  
Urban Local Bodies 

39 
Chapter-V 
 
Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies  
The Fifth SFC had observed that local bodies in Punjab continue to perform 
the 
same functions which they had been handling prior to the Constitution 
(Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 (74 th CAA).  To discharge these 
funct
ions, the funds required by the local bodies are not large by any means 
but even then, the task of balancing the budgets of local bodies remains 
dependent entirely on Government support.  The key to make these bodies 
viable, dependable and successful units of self-government is to put their 
financial and organisational set up on a sound, stable and self-sustaining 
footing.  The finance of Municipalities comes from a mix of internal and 
external resources.  The internal resources comprise revenues from taxes that 
the Municipalities are statutorily allowed to levy, non-tax revenues from 
various fees, fines, levies, borrowings and State devolutions by way of share 
of taxes, Grants-in-aid for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
and grants in pursuance of the recommendations of the Central and State 
Finance Commissions.   
5.1 Sources of revenue  
The detail of revenues of ULBs in the State during the period 2015-16 to 
2019-20 is
 given in Table 5.1.   
Table 5.1: Detail of revenues of ULBs during 2015-2020 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Own 
revenue 
Assigned 
revenue 
Grants-in-
aid# 
Total 
revenue 
Percentage of 
own revenue to 
total revenue 
2015-16 2,398.53 37.48 461.35 2,897.36 82.78 
2016-17 2,689.32 63.19 744.71 3,497.22 76.90 
2017-18 2,593.48 15.73 504.93 3,114.14 83.28 
2018-19 2,963.51 21.54 579.17 3,564.22 83.15 
2019-20 3,111.67 22.60 608.09 3,742.36 83.15 
Total 13,756.51 160.54 2,898.25 16,815.30 81.81 
Source: Departmental information 
#  Includes grants from CFC, CSS, MPLADS, PIDB, etc.  
Table 5.1 shows that duri ng the period 2015-16 to 2019-20, major portion of 
the r
evenue of ULBs came from its own resources, which remained 
81.81 per cent of the total revenue and the fiscal transfers from Government, 
which 
were only 18.19 per cent , constituted a small portion of the revenue of 
ULBs.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
40 
5.1.1 State Finance Commission grants 
The share of financial resources of ULBs includes grants recommended by the 
State Finance Commission (SFC).  Timely constitution of SFC and acceptance 
of its recommendations would have a bearing on the assured transfer of funds 
to ULBs.  Devolution of adequate resources from State Government to local 
bodies will always remain critical for the financial health and stability of local 
bodies.   
The detail of grants due as per recommendations of SFC and actually released 
to ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is given in Table 5.2.   
Table 5.2: Detail of grants due as per recommendations of SFC vis
 -à-vis actually 
released to ULBs  
(`` `` in crore) 
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total 
Non-Loan Net Own 
Revenue Receipts 
(NLNORR) of the State 
26,200 27,280 30,005 31,156 29,209 1,43,850 
Allocation as per 
recommendations of 
SFC (four per cent of 
NLNORR) 
1,048 1,091 1,200 1,246 1,168 5,754 
Share due to ULBs as 
per respective SFCs 340 682 750 779 736 3,287 
Funds actually released 
to ULBs 0 7 0 0 0 7 
Source: Departmental information   
Table 5.2 shows  that out of mandated devolution of ` 3,287 crore during  
2015-2020, onl
y ` seven crore (0.21 per c ent) were released to ULBs during 
the same period.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that sufficient funds had been released 
to ULBs under Central Finance Commissions and other schemes so that 
development works did not suffer adversely.  The reply of the Department was 
not in line with recommendations of SFCs. 
5.1.2 Central Finance Commission grants  
Article 280(3)(c) of the Constitution of India mandates the Central Finance 
Commission (CFC) to recommend measures to augment the Consolidated 
Fund of the State to supplement the resources of Municipalities based on the 
recommendations of the respective SFCs.  The 14 th CFC recommended Basic 
Gra
nt and Performance Grant to ULBs as a percentage of divisible pool 
account.   
The position of allocation and release of CFC grants during the period  
2015-16 to 2019-20 is depicted in Table 5.3. 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
41 
Table 5.3: Allocation and release of Central Finance Commission grants  
(`` `` in crore)  
Particulars 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total 
Basic Grant  
Allocation as per CFC 235.41 325.96 376.62 435.68 588.69 1,962.36 
Released by GoI 233.97 322.03 337.15 427.86 581.64 1,902.65 
Shortfall(-) -1.44 -3.93 -39.47 -7.82 -7.05 -59.71 
Released by GoP 233.97 161.99 160.05 337.15 1,009.49 1 1,9 02.65 
Shortfall(-) 0.00 -160.04 -177.10 -90.71 427.85 0.00 
Performance Grant 
Allocation as per CFC NA 96.20 108.87 123.63 161.89 490.59 
Released by GoI NA 93.89 106.26 0.00 0.00 200.15 
Shortfall(-) NA -2.31 -2.61 -123.63 -161.89 -290.44 
Released by GoP NA 93.89 106.26 0.00 0.00 200.15 
Shortfall(-) NA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Source: Departmental information 
NA=Not applicable, as the Performance Grant was to be provided from 2016-17 onwards. 
Audit observed that against the allocation ` 1,962.36 crore and ` 490.59 crore 
as B
asic Grant and Performance Grant as per recommendations of 14 th Central 
Fina
nce Commission, GoP received ` 1,902.65 crore and ` 200.15 crore, 
there
by resulting into short receipt of ` 59.71 crore and ` 290.44 crore 
respe
ctively during the period 2015-2020.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that the share of Basic Grant in respect 
of those ULBs whose elected bodies had not been constituted, was not 
released by GoI during 2015-2020 and the Performance Grant for the years 
2018-19 and 2019-20 was not released to any State by GoI. 
5.1.3 Octroi on electricity and Municipal Tax 
(i)  The Government of Punjab (GoP), in exercise of the powers conferred 
under Section 90(b) of PMC Act and Section 62-A of PM Act directed 
(February 2008) all the ULBs in the State to adopt the revised octroi rate of 
` 0.10 per unit on import of electricity into the limits  of ULBs for sale, use and 
consumption within the period of 15 days from the date of issue of the 
notification.  The Fifth SFC had projected the expected income from levy of 
octroi on electricity for the years 2015-16 to 2019-20.  However, due to 
implementation of GST Act, the octroi on electricity consumption was 
abolished in July 2017.   
Audit noticed that as against the expected revenue of ` 216.41 crore  
during
 two years’ period (2015-17) projected by Fifth SFC, ULBs in the State 
                                                           
1 Out of ` 1, 009.49 crore, ` 290.82 crore (of 14 th Finance Commission) were released by the State 
Gov
ernment during 2020-21.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
42 
received ` 228.15 crore 2, besides collecting ` 186.77 crore during next three 
year
s i.e. from 2017-18 to 2019-20, which included arrears of previous years.  
This showed that the ULBs were not receiving revenue on account of octroi on 
electricity in time. 
(ii) Further, in order to safeguard the revenue of ULBs in lieu of abolition 
of octroi on electricity, the Department of Local Government, GoP vide 
notifications issued (October 2017 and November 2017) under PM Act and 
PMC Act respectively levied two per cent  Municipal tax on consumption, use 
or sale of electricity within the Municipal limits in the State of Punjab.  The 
tax was to be collected by PSPCL and transferred to the respective ULBs, after 
deducting service charges at the rate of 10 per cent  on total collection, as 
intimated (July 2018) by PSPCL. 
The year-wise status of Municipal tax collected by PSPCL and outstanding 
amount to be transferred to the Department (ULBs), is depicted in the 
Table 5.4. 
Table 5.4: Status of Municipal tax as of March 2020 
(
`` `` in crore) 
Year Total amount 
of tax collected 
by PSPCL 
Deductible 
amount of 
service 
charges  
@ 10% 
Amount due 
to be 
transferred 
to ULBs 
Amount 
transferred 
to ULBs 
Outstanding 
amount of 
tax 
2017-18 25.92 2.59 23.33 2.56 20.77 
2018-19 182.20 18.22 163.98 119.08 44.91 
2019-20 196.34 19.63 176.71 114.57 62.13 
Total 404.47 40.44 364.02 236.21 127.81 
Source: Punjab State Power Corporation Limited, Patiala   
Table 5.4 shows  that PSPCL collected Municipal tax amounting to 
` 404.47 crore during 2017-18 to 2019-20.  However, after deductible service 
char
ges of ` 40.44 crore at the rate of 10 per cent on total collection, only 
` 236.21 crore were transferred to the ULBs leaving an outs tanding amount of 
` 127.81 crore.   
The D
epartment stated (August 2021) that ULBs would be instructed to 
recover the pending amount of Municipal tax.   
5.1.4 Property tax  
The ULBs were empowered to levy property tax on all buildings or lands or 
both situated within their jurisdiction under Section 90 of the PMC Act and 
Section 61 of the PM Act with the prior approval of the Government.  Further, 
as per Section 112-A of PMC Act, every owner or occupier shall calculate the 
                                                           
2 2015-16: ` 11 8.07 crore against the projection of ` 106.51 crore; and 2016-17: ` 110.08 crore 
against the projection of ` 109.09 crore. 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
43 
tax on land and building himself.  The Department developed (October 2018) 
an online property tax calculator (mSeva) through which property owners 
could assess and pay their taxes.  The guidelines of Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) also emphasised the need to implement 
the reforms of at least 85 per cent collection efficiency of property tax.   
The status regarding collection of property tax during 2015-16 to 2019-20 is 
depicted in Table 5.5.   
Table 5.5: Status of collection of property tax during 2015-2020 
(
`` `` in crore) 
Year Arrears 
as on 
1st April 
Demand 
assessed 
during the 
year 
Total 
amount 
due 
Amount 
realised 
Arrears 
as on 
31st March 
Percentage 
of amount 
realised 
2015-16 241.37 162.20 403.57 199.80 203.77 49.51 
2016-17 203.77 195.09 398.86 193.61 205.25 48.54 
2017-18 205.25 224.89 430.14 210.29 219.85 48.89 
2018-19 219.85 228.91 448.76 219.39 229.37 48.89 
2019-20 229.37 243.48 472.85 256.01 216.84 54.14 
Source: Departmental information  
Table 5.5 shows that an amount of ` 216.84 c rore on account of property tax 
was 
outstanding at the end of March 2020.  The collection efficiency of 
property tax ranged between 48.54 per cent and 54.14 per cent only during the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20. 
Audit noticed in test-checked ULBs that: 
 Survey of properties was not conducted by 17 out of 19 ULBs during 
las
t five years.   The Municipal Corporations, SAS Nagar and Patiala, 
conducted the survey during 2014-15 and 2017-18 respectively.  
Further, only the data in respect of property owners who had paid 
property tax in the past was available with ULBs.  As such, neither any 
complete database was prepared nor any other source of information 
was available to identify correct number of properties existing in the 
respective area and the property tax was being realised on the basis of 
self-assessment.   
 The Property Tax Board constituted (March 2013) by the State 
Gover
nment was also not effective, as discussed in paragraph 4.3.5.4.  
Further, efforts to improve the recovery of property tax by launching 
special collection drives from time to time, collection at door steps, 
mutual resolution of disputes, attractive incentives for timely 
payments, etc. as recommended by Fifth SFC, were lacking though 
provisions of e-collection and penalties for defaulters were in place.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
44 
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs had been advised from 
time to time through departmental review to improve the recovery of user 
charges and speed up the recovery of income under other sources of 
revenue by conducting special collection drives, e-collection, collection at 
door step, etc. Thus, earnest efforts were being made to recover the 
outstanding arrears. 
5.1.5 User charges  
The expenditure on the provision of basic services like water supply, sewer, 
sewage treatment plant (STP) and solid waste management (SWM) in urban 
areas is rising enormously.  The ULBs were expected to meet at least the 
maintenance charges of these facilities from their own sources by levying 
suitable charges on the beneficiaries.  The Fourth SFC recommended that the 
ULBs should levy such charges on water supply and sewerage so that they are 
able to recover 90 per cent expenditure on operation and maintenance (O&M) 
incurred on these services by 2015-16.  The Fifth SFC also observed that 
despite this recommendation accepted by the Government, the policy was still 
in the process of finalisation. 
The year-wise position of user charges assessed vis-à-vis expenditure on O&M 
is depicted in Chart 5.1. 
Chart 5.1: User charges assessed vis-
 à-vis expenditure on O&M during 2015-2020 
(`` `` in crore) 
Source: Departmental information 
 
511.20
532.64
486.94
511.28
536.85
138.44 ( 27%)
107.41 (20%) 
94.81 (19%)  
119.85 (23%)
127.24 (24%) 
88.22 (17%)
99.40 (19%)
89.88 (18%)
87.34 (17%) 
98.66 (18%) 
0.00
100.00
200.00
300.00
400.00
500.00
600.00
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
O&M expenditure Demand assessed Amount realized

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
45 
Chart 5.1 shows that as against the recommendation of SFCs requiring the 
user charges to cover 90 per cent  of the cost of expenditure on O&M, the 
average collection of user charges during 2015-2020 was only 18 per cent .  
The underlying reasons for short collection of user charges was short 
assessment of demand which was only 20 per cent of the expenditure incurred 
on O&M during the same period.  The status of recovery/outstanding user 
charges during 2015-2020 is given in Table 5.6.   
Table 5.6: Status of recovery of user charges during 2015-2020 
(
`` `` in crore) 
Year Arrears 
as on  
1st April 
Demand 
assessed 
during 
the year 
Total 
amount 
due 
Amount 
realised 
Arrears as 
on 
31st March 
Percentage 
of amount 
realised 
2015-16 411.71 138.44 550.15 88.22 461.93 16.04 
2016-17 461.93 107.41 569.34 99.40 469.94 17.46 
2017-18 469.94 94.81 564.75 89.88 474.87 15.92 
2018-19 474.87 119.85 594.72 87.34 507.38 14.69 
2019-20 507.38 127.24 634.62 98.66 535.96 15.55 
Source: Departmental information 
Table 5.6 shows that collection of user charges remained between 
14.69 per
 cent and 17.46 per cent  only during the period 2015-2020 and an 
amount of ` 535.96 crore was outstanding on this account at the end of the 
year 2019-20. 
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs would be issued 
necessary instructions to recover the arrears. 
5.1.5.1 Four authorities viz. (i) Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar; 
(ii) Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA); (iii) Punjab 
Small Industries and Export Corporation (PSIEC); and (iv) Department of 
Water Supply and Sanitation (DWSS) were providing water supply and 
sewerage services/other civic services in SAS Nagar and were collecting user 
charges against these services.  Test-check of records of Municipal 
Corporation, SAS Nagar revealed the following: 
(i) The Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar was providing water supply 
service in its jurisdiction 3 and collecting water charges as per resolution 
pass
ed by the House in April 2001.  Though the Government had revised the 
water rates in September 2009, the MC continued to charge the water supply 
at old rates. If the Corporation too had revised the water rates, it would have 
received ` 4.99 crore instead of ` 1.92 crore on this account during the period 
01.07.20184 to 31.12.2020.   
                                                           
3 Industrial Area (Phase VI to IX) and Village Mohali. 
4  Information prior to 01.07.2018 was not provided by MC, SAS Nagar. 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
46 
The Department stated (August 2021) that the rates were being charged as per 
resolution passed by the House, therefore, there was no loss of revenue.  It was 
added that the Corporation had now adopted the revised rates of 2009 as per 
resolution passed by the House.  The reply was not in line with the 
recommendations of Fourth and Fifth SFCs which stipulated that ULBs should 
levy such charges on water supply and sewerage so that they were able to 
recover 90 per cent  expenditure on operation and maintenance (O&M) 
incurred on these services.  But the ULBs were able to assess demand of user 
charges ranging between 19 to 27 per cent  of O&M expenditure incurred 
during 2015-2020, as discussed in the preceding paragraph. 
(ii) The Department of Water Supply and Sanitation (DWSS) was 
entrusted with the work of operation and maintenance (O&M) of water supply 
in partial area 5 of SAS Nagar.  It was noticed that DWSS was recovering 
O&M
 expenses from the Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar even though the 
water charges were being collected by the DWSS.  No record/instructions/ 
agreement was available with the Corporation for such type of arrangement.  
In the absence of any agreement, transfer of funds amounting to ` 14.84 crore 
during 
2015-2020 on account of operation and maintenance of water supply 
and sewerage services was not justified.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that as per policy of the State 
Government (September 2013), the provision of water supply and sewerage in 
Municipal Corporation, Mohali (SAS Nagar) had been specifically entrusted 
to DWSS. But, since the function of provision of water supply and sewerage 
fell within the domain of ULBs, therefore, the estimates thereof were passed 
by the Municipal Corporation for providing funds for provision of such 
services.  However, the Department did not clarify under which circumstances 
the DWSS was recovering the expenses on O&M from the Corporation, when 
the user charges were being collected by DWSS.   
5.1.6 Rent and lease money  
The ULBs were empowered to collect rent from the buildings/premises let out 
to private agencies.  The position of assessment and recovery of rent/lease 
money during 2015-16 to 2019-20 is depicted in Table 5.7.   
                                                           
5 Phase I to XI, Sectors 48, 70 and 71, Village Shahi Majra, Madanpura, Mataur and Industrial Area 
(Ph
ase I to V). 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
47 
Table 5.7: Position of assessment and recovery of rent/lease money  
during 2015-2020 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Arrears 
as on 
1st April 
Demand 
assessed 
during 
the year 
Total 
amount 
due 
Amount 
realised 
Arrears  
as on 
31st March 
Percentage 
of amount 
realised 
2015-16 21.27 23.71 44.98 21.21 23.77 47.15 
2016-17 23.77 25.02 48.79 22.11 26.68 45.32 
2017-18 26.68 28.98 55.66 23.29 32.37 41.84 
2018-19 32.37 28.95 61.32 25.00 36.32 40.77 
2019-20 36.32 31.17 67.49 27.19 40.30 40.29 
Source: Departmental information 
Table 5.7 shows that at the end of March 2020, rent/lease of ` 40.30 c rore was 
in ar
rears.  The recovery rate ranged between 40.29 per cent  and 
47.15 per cent which was in decreasing trend during the period 2015-2020, 
thereby showing the ineffectiveness of the ULBs in augmenting their own 
revenue.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs would be issued 
necessary instructions to recover the arrears.   
5.1.7 Short receipt of revenue from GMADA  
The work of urban planning and development in SAS Nagar is mainly vested 
in the Greater Mohali Area Development Authority (GMADA).  Test-check of 
records of Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar revealed the following: 
(i) As per decision taken in the meetings held (July 2016) under the 
chairmanship of the Principal Secretary, Housing and Urban Development, 
Punjab, GMADA, after initial development, handed over (August 2016) the 
areas of Sectors 48 to 71 and Sectors 76 to 81 to the Municipal Corporation, 
SAS Nagar for further maintenance and capital works. For this purpose, 
GMADA was to release funds maximum up to ` 50 crore per annum to 
Munici
pal Corporation, SAS Nagar for first five financial years (2016-17 to 
2020-21) and ` 22.50 crore per annum for the next five financial year s  
(2021-22 to 2025-26) on certain terms and conditions.   
It was, however, observed that GMADA released ` 35 crore (out of due 
amount 
of ` 250.00 crore) during the period of five years i.e. 2016-17 to  
2020-21, whereas the Corporation had already executed works amounting to 
` 100.10 crore from their own funds during 2018-19 to 2019-20 in the areas 
handed over to it by GMADA.  However, the balance funds of ` 215.00 crore 
had not
 been released by GMADA in line with the decision (July 2016) of the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development, thereby overburdening the 
Municipal Corporation.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
48 
The Department stated (August 2021) that the efforts were being made by the 
Municipal Corporation to recover the amount as per agreement executed 
between both the authorities.  
(ii) The building plans in SAS Nagar were approved by GMADA and all 
the charges receivable were also collected by them.  It was decided in the 
meeting held (June 2011) under the chairmanship of the Chief Minister that 
GMADA would transfer 50 per cent  of the collection on account of scrutiny 
fee and non-construction charges to Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar 
retrospectively w.e.f. 01 April 2008.   
Accordingly, GMADA transferred (July 2011) ` 4.30 crore for the period 
from 
April 2008 to June 2011 to MC, SAS Nagar on account of scrutiny fee 
and non-construction charges and thereafter, neither any fee was transferred 
nor any details thereof were given to the Corporation.  Audit noticed that 
GMADA collected scrutiny fee and non-construction charges amounting to 
` 28.62 crore during 2015-16 to 2019-20, but the requisi
 te share of 
` 14.31 crore was not transferred to the Corporation.   
The 
Department stated (August 2021) that efforts were being made by the 
Municipal Corporation, SAS Nagar to recover the due amount from GMADA.   
5.1.8 Short release of grant to Punjab Municipal Fund  
The Government of Punjab enacted (October 2006) the Punjab Municipal 
Fund Act, 2006 to assign6 amount of tax levied and collected under the Punjab 
Val
ue Added Tax Act, 2005 to the Municipalities and to provide for 
constitution of the Punjab Municipal Fund (PMF) with a view to compensate 
Municipalities for the loss of revenue, suffered due to abolition of octroi in the 
State of Punjab and for the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
Thereafter, the GoI enacted (June 2017) Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
Act, 2017 and VAT was subsumed under the GST.  Accordingly, the 
Government decided (June 2017) that the Grants-in-aid so provided to PMF 
would not be less than the sum provided during the year 2015-16 with 
14 per cent annual increase.  
The details of Grants-in-aid (GIA) provided to PMF during the period 2015-16 
to 2019-20 is depicted in Table 5.8.   
                                                           
6 As per Section 3(2) of the PMF Act, 2006, 11 per  cent of VAT collected shall be credited direct to 
the PMF provided that the amount so collected to the fund shall not be less than ` 550 crore. 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
49 
Table 5.8: Details of Grants-in-aid provided to PMF during 2015-2020 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Budget 
estimate  
Amount due after 
including 14 per cent 
annual increase 
Total amount 
received 
Amount 
short 
received 
2015-16 1,449.99 NA 1,449.99 0.00 
2016-17 1,564.58 NA 1,564.58 0.00 
2017-18 1,933.99 1,884.41 1,783.43 -150.56 
2018-19 1,984.73 2,148.22 1,834.73 -150.00 
2019-20 2,107.20 2,448.98 1,541.63 -565.57 
Total 9,040.49 6,481.61 8,174.36 -866.13 
Source: Departmental information NA=Not applicable 
Note:  Prior to 01.07.2017, 11 per cent share of VAT was being credited direct to PMF. 
Table 5.8 shows that there was short release of ` 866.13 cr ore on account of 
GIA 
provided to PMF during 2017-2020 against the decision of the 
Government (June 2017).  Further, the Government also ignored the factor of 
annual increase of 14 per cent while preparing the budget estimates in respect 
of PMF for years 2017-18 to 2019-20.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the proposal of 14 per cent annual 
increase was not approved by the Council of Ministers in its meeting held in 
June 2017.  Audit, however, noticed that the Local Government Minister had 
observed that exclusion of 14 per cent increase was an omission in recording 
the minutes and directed (June 2017) that the matter be taken up with the 
Chief Secretary for amending the minutes suitably so that the decision which 
was actually taken, be recorded and implemented.  Further outcome of the 
matter was awaited. 
5.2 Budget estimates and expenditure  
In accordance with the provisions of Section 86 of PMC Act, the Corporation 
shal
l, not later than the first week of February of every year, prepare the 
budget estimate for the ensuing year which shall be an estimate of the income 
to be received and expenditure to be incurred by the Corporation on account of 
the Municipal Government of the city and forward it to the State Government.   
The budget estimate received by the Government shall be returned to the 
Corporation before 31st day of March after approval, without any modification 
or w
ith such modifications as the Government may deem fit.  Further, every 
increase in a budget-grant and every additional budget-grant made in any year 
under sub-section (1) of Section 87 shall be made with the prior approval of 
the Government and after such approval, shall be deemed to be included in the 
budget estimate finally adopted for that year.   
As per paragraph 31.9 of Punjab Municipal Accounting Manual, 2017, Class I 
Municipal Councils send their budget proposals to the Department and 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
50 
Class II & III Councils including Nagar Panchayats forward their budget 
proposals to the concerned Regional Deputy Directors for approval.   
The procedure of preparation and approval of budget in respect of ULBs, as 
laid down in the Punjab Municipal Accounting Manual, 2017, is detailed in 
Table 5.9.   
Table 5.9: Procedure of preparation and approval of budget in ULBs 
Category of ULB Preliminary 
edition of budget 
Finalisation of 
preliminary budget 
Budget approval  
Municipal 
Corporation Commissioner Finance Sub-
Committee 
Secretary to Government 
of Punjab, Department of 
Local Government  
Municipal 
Council (Class-I) Executive Officer President Director, Department of 
Local Government 
Municipal 
Council  
(Class-II & III)/ 
Nagar Panchayat  
Executive Officer President Concerned Regional 
Deputy Director 
Source: Punjab Municipal Accounting Manual, 2017  
Thus, the provisions of PMC Act, stipulating the role of State Government in 
sanc
tioning/modifying the budget, were not in consonance with the provisions 
of 74th CAA.   
5.2.1 Unrealistic budget estimates  
Expenditure estimation depends on services to be provided by the Local 
Government and the costs associated with the provision of these services.  It 
should include both the capital and O&M expenditure that the local body will 
have to incur to achieve appropriate service levels.   
Since the delivery of Municipal services comes with a cost, it was necessary to 
scientifically estimate the cost of each Municipal service to assess the 
requirement and source of funds for efficient delivery.   
The details of budget estimates vis-à-vis actuals in respect of receipts and 
expenditure of ULBs during the period 2015-2020 are shown in Table 5.10.  
Table 5.10: Budget estimates vis-à-vis actu
 al receipt and expenditure of ULBs 
(`` `` in crore) 
Category of 
ULB  
Year Receipts (Own Revenue) Expenditure 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Municipal 
Corporation 
2015-16 1,645.15 1,423.63 86.53 1,659.13 1,461.16 88.07 
2016-17 1,721.84 1,580.56 91.79 2,246.90 1,410.12 62.76 
2017-18 1,934.50 1,537.53 79.48 2,435.11 1,424.73 58.51 
2018-19 2,073.07 1,738.22 83.85 2,147.68 1,495.96 69.65 
2019-20 2,317.12 1,825.12 78.77 2,197.42 1,570.76 71.48 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
51 
Category of 
ULB  
Year Receipts (Own Revenue) Expenditure 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Budget Actuals Percentage 
of actuals 
to budget 
Municipal 
Council 
2015-16 1,038.78 852.18 82.04 1,073.16 935.52 87.17 
2016-17 908.01 986.19 108.61 953.87 1,148.52 120.41 
2017-18 943.95 941.64 99.76 1,036.13 981.89 94.77 
2018-19 1,024.67 1,083.30 105.72 1,091.72 1,030.98 94.44 
2019-20 1,256.15 1,137.46 90.55 1,346.97 1,082.53 80.37 
Nagar 
Panchayat 
2015-16 163.32 122.72 75.14 172.06 132.08 76.76 
2016-17 315.66 122.57 38.83 336.54 189.88 56.42 
2017-18 330.49 114.31 34.59 347.78 135.40 38.93 
2018-19 337.37 141.99 42.09 336.00 142.17 42.31 
2019-20 189.33 149.09 78.75 198.87 149.28 75.06 
Source: Departmental information  
Table 5.10 shows that percentage of actual receipts vis -à-vis budget estimates 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 ranged between 34.59 per cent  and 
108.61 per cent , and that of actual expenditure vis-à-vis budget estimates 
ranged between 38.93 per cent and 120.41 per cent in ULBs.  Thus, the budget 
estimates with variation of more than 10 per cent  could be termed as 
unrealistic. 
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs would be instructed to 
meet the budget targets so that development works or implementation of other 
activities as planned in the budget did not suffer adversely. Further, ULBs 
would also be advised to adopt minimum standards prescribed for civic 
services and ascertain the requirement of funds as well as analyse actual 
expenditure to be incurred in the succeeding year so as to minimise the 
variations in the budget estimation of receipts and expenditure.   
5.3 Financial powers of Urban Local Bodies  
Fiscal autonomy can be complete only when supported by decentralisation of 
fina
ncial and administrative powers.  The decentralisation provides for -  
 creating an efficient and reliable administration;  
 intensified and improved local governance;  
 enhanced accountability and responsiveness;  
 improved capacity of the local people to participate in the decision making 
proce
ss, especially with regard to service delivery; and  
 increased motivation. 
In or
der to streamline the process of execution of development works and 
procurement of goods in Local Government Department, a Standard Operating 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
52 
Procedure was prepared (August 2018) by the State Government for 
administrative, technical and tender approval powers relating to ULBs for 
undertaking basic infrastructure works.  
The ULBs shall preferably procure goods at the Rate Contracts with the 
registered suppliers for such goods with Controller of Stores, Punjab or 
through Government e-Marketplace (GeM) portal.  The GeM portal shall be 
utilised by the ULBs for direct on-line purchases as under:  
Sr. No. Procedure Amount  
1. Available supplier on the GeM Upto ` 50,000 
2. GeM seller having lowest price amongst the 
available sellers, of at least three different 
manufacturers, on GeM, meeting the requisite 
quality, specification and delivery period. 
Above ` 50,000 and 
up to ` 30 lakh 
3. Supplier having lowest price meeting the 
requisite quality, specification and delivery 
period after mandatorily obtaining bids, using 
online bidding or reverse auction tool provided 
on GeM. 
Above ` 30 lakh 
The administrative approval powers of ULBs in emergent maintenance of 
essential services are as under:  
Sr. No. Authority/Type of ULB Amount (`) 
1. Commissioner, Municipal Corporation  1,00,000 
2. Executive Officer for Class I Municipal Council 40,000 
3. Executive Officer for Class II Municipal Council 30,000 
4. Executive Officer for Class III Municipal Council and 
Nagar Panchayat 20,000 
Provided that the total expenditure on such emergent maintenance works shall 
not exceed two per cent of the total annual budget for development and 
maintenance works of ULBs.   
The powers of ULBs in respect of technical sanction are as under:   
Sr. No. Officer competent to accord 
technical sanction 
Amount up to which the technical 
sanction can be accorded 
1. Junior Engineer Up to `  2 lakh  
2. Assistant Municipal Engineer/ 
Assistant Corporation Engineer 
Above ` 2 lakh up to ` 25 lakh 
3. Municipal Engineer/ 
Corporation Engineer 
Above ` 25 lakh up to ` 50 lakh 
4. Superintending Engineer Above ` 50 lakh up to ` 1 crore 
5. Chief Engineer Above ` 1 crore up to ` 5 crore 
6. Committee of three Chief Engineers Above ` 5 crore 
 

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
53 
The comparative statements shall be vetted by the authorities as under:  
Sr. 
No. 
Officer competent to accord  
technical sanction 
Amount of financial bid up to 
which to be vetted by the  
technical officer 
1. Assistant Municipal Engineer/  
Assistant Corporation Engineer 
For works up to ` 5 lakh 
2. Municipal Engineer/Corporation Engineer Above ` 5 lakh up to ` 25 lakh 
3. Superintending Engineer Above ` 25 lakh to ` 50 lakh 
4. Chief Engineer Above ` 50 lakh up to ` 5 crore  
5. Committee of three Chief Engineers Above ` 5 crore  
 Purchases of goods up to ` 5,000 oc casionally or in emergent needs may 
be m
ade without inviting quotations or bids on the basis of certificate to be 
recorded by the competent authority.   
 All tenders above ` 20,000 shall be invited through e-tendering mode only.  
The powers to incur other expenditure viz. celebration of Independence Day 
and Republic Day and on works of emergent nature are as under:  
(Amount in `` ``) 
Sr. 
No. 
Type of ULB For celebration of 
Independence Day and 
Republic Day (fixed in 
January 2004) 
For emergent 
nature works  
(fixed in February 
2016) 
1. Municipal Corporation 30,000 -- 
2. Municipal Council Class-I  
(at District level)  
20,000 30,000 
3. Municipal Council Class-I 15,000 30,000 
4. Municipal Council Class-II 10,000 30,000 
5. Municipal Council Class-III 7,000 30,000 
6. Nagar Panchayat 7,000 20,000 
Audit observed that the powers and role of ULBs were limited in respect of 
administrative approvals in emergent maintenance of essential services, 
technical sanctions, acceptance of financial bids and other expenditure, 
thereby restricting the autonomy of ULBs.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that issues raised by Audit would be 
considered at the time of renewing the Standard Operating Procedure in 
respect of ULBs. 
5.4 Expenditure of Urban Local Bodies  
(i) The expenditure of ULBs can be divided into five major 
ca
tegories/heads such as salaries and wages; contingencies; capital 
expenditure; operation and maintenance (O&M) and repayment of loan and 
interest.  The detail of expenditure incurred by ULBs in the State for the 
period 2015-2020 is exhibited in Table 5.11.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
54 
Table 5.11: Trend of expenditure of ULBs 
(`` `` in crore) 
Head 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 Total Percentage 
of total 
expenditure 
Salaries and 
wages 1,326.49 1,422.79 1,522.94 1,599.08 1,679.04 7,550.34 56.81 
Contingencies 338.47 221.87 170.92 179.46 188.43 1,099.15 8.27 
Capital 
expenditure 314.30 526.69 319.99 335.99 352.79 1,849.76 13.92 
Operation and 
maintenance 511.20 532.64 486.94 511.28 536.85 2,578.91 19.40 
Repayment of 
loan and interest 38.30 44.54 41.24 43.30 45.46 212.84 1.60 
Total 2,528.76 2,748.53 2,542.03 2,669.11 2,802.57 13,291 
Source: Departmental information 
The Fifth SFC emphasised that O&M of water supply and sewe rage system 
was either supply driven or complaint driven without any kind of assessment 
of quality of services.  There is, thus, an urgent need to improve the O&M of 
these services so as to provide satisfactory facilities to the public, who in turn 
will normally be happy to pay for these services.  Table 5.11  shows that 
during the five years’ period from 2015-16 to 2019-20, the average 
expenditure on O&M was 19.40 per cent only, and it decreased from 
20.22 per cent in 2015-16 to 19.16 per cent in 2017-18 and remained at this 
level during 2018-2020. Thus, despite increase in population and expansion of 
services, the expenditure on O&M remained nearly static during this period.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that instructions would be issued to the 
ULBs to make every effort to increase their expenditure on O&M works so 
that satisfactory facilities could be provided to public. 
(ii) A comparison of the total expenditure with total revenue for the period
from 2015-16 to 2019-20 showed that ULBs were able to utilise
75 per cent to 87 per cent of the available funds during the period of five
years, as depicted in Chart 5.2.
(
`` `` in crore) 
 Source: Departmental data 
2,897.36
3,497.22
3,114.14
3,564.22 3,742.36
2,528.76 
(87%)
2,748.53
(78%) 2,542.03
(82%)
2,669.11
(75%)
2,802.57
(75%)
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20
Chart 5.2: Extent of utilisation of funds 
Total revenue Total expenditure

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
55 
It was further noticed that expenditure more than 100 per cent  of their own 
revenue was incurred by 57 ULBs.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the ULBs would be instructed to 
make earnest efforts to increase the extent of utilisation of funds in a time 
bound manner so that satisfactory facilities could be provided to public. 
5.5 Solid Waste Management  
Unscientific disposal of Municipal Solid Waste has serious consequences on 
the 
environment as well as on human health.  To tackle these problems, 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, GoI notified 
(April 2016) Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016 and also defined 
the duties of the Urban Development Department in the States and Union 
Territories for management of solid waste.   
Rule 11 of SWM Rules provided that the State Government would prepare a 
State Policy and SWM Strategy for the State through Director, Local Bodies 
Department within one year from the notification of SWM Rules.  Further, as 
per Rule 15, ULBs would also prepare a SWM plan as per State Policy and 
Strategy on SWM within six months from the date of notification issued by 
the State Government in this regard and submit a copy of the same to the 
Local Bodies Department.  Under these rules, ULBs were authorised to collect 
user fee as determined by it from time to time on its own or through its 
authorised agency from all waste generators.   
The State Government notified (July 2018) Punjab State SWM Policy, 2018 
and SWM Strategy, prepared by Punjab Municipal Infrastructure 
Development Company (PMIDC), for the State in accordance with SWM 
Rules after analysing the deficiencies of earlier cluster approach for filling all 
gaps in respect of infrastructure for door-to-door collection of segregated 
waste at source, transportation, processing and disposal which have the 
provision of collection of user charges from categories of waste generators.   
Audit observed (April 2021) that 100 per cent  door-to-door collection of solid 
waste was being done in 137 out of 163 ULBs 7 (84.05 per cent ) a
 nd 
100 per cent source segregation of solid waste was also being done in 
72 ULBs (44.17 per cent ).  During test-check of records related to SWM in 
selected ULBs, audit noticed the following: 
5.5.1 Payment made without realising intended benefits due to  
non-commissioning of Solid Waste Processing Project  
Prior to implementation of SWM Rules, 2016, the Department of Local 
Government, GoP, had divided (August 2013) the State into eight clusters 8 for 
devel
opment of Municipal SWM Project.   
                                                           
7  Position in respect of four ULBs was not provided by the Department. 
8 (i) Amritsar; (ii) Bathinda; (iii) Ferozepur; (iv) Jalandhar; (v) Ludhiana; (vi); Pathankot; 
(vi
i) Patiala; and (viii) SAS Nagar (GMADA). 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
56 
During test-check of records (January 2021) in Municipal Corporation, 
Patiala, it was noticed that 22 ULBs were to be covered under Patiala Cluster 
under the project.  While tenders for SWM project were in progress, the 
acquisition process of land for dumping site at village Dudhar for Patiala 
Cluster was finalised and possession taken (November 2013) by the Municipal 
Corporation, Patiala though the agreement for the purpose in respect of 
Shamlat land measuring 20 acres was executed for 33 years with Gram 
Panchayat, Dudhar village in January 2015. 
The tenders for Patiala SWM Cluster could not be finalised till May 2018, 
when it was decided by PMIDC under the control of the Department to 
combine Patiala and GMADA Clusters.  The land for the project for Patiala 
Cluster had already been acquired on lease in village Dudhar, whereas 
acquisition of land for GMADA Cluster was under process, due to which 
tenders for the combined Patiala-GMADA cluster could not be finalised.  
However, as per agreement (January 2015), Municipal Corporation, Patiala 
kept paying rent to Gram Panchayat, village Dudhar @ ` 10.00 lakh per 
annum w
ith annual increase of 10 per cent (` one lakh) without utilising the 
land f
or any purpose.  This resulted into unfruitful expenditure amounting to 
` 94.75 lakh for the period from November 2013 to March 2021  
(
Appendix 5.1).   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the Dudhar based plant was a 
collective enterprise of 22 ULBs including Patiala and liquidation of the same 
could be done only if all stakeholders agreed to the same.  The Municipal 
Corporation, Patiala on its own, was not authorised to release the land marked 
for utilisation of all the constituent ULBs.  Thus, it was prudent not to give up 
the stake over land as so much homework had already been done.  The fact, 
however, remains that expenditure of ` 94.75 lakh on rent/lease had already 
been 
incurred for more than seven years without utilising the land for any 
purpose. 
5.6 Conclusions  
The 
74th CAA provided for fiscal transfers from the Central and State 
Gover
nments to the ULBs besides empowering them to raise their own 
revenue.  However, the ULBs were having limited access to the financial 
resources, which were not commensurate with their functions. 
 The fiscal transfers constituted about 18 per  cent of the revenue of ULBs 
during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  However, there was shortfall in 
release of committed funds by the State Government.  Out of mandated 
devolution of ` 3,287 crore during 2015-2020 as per SFC 
recom
mendations, only ` seven crore (0.21 per cent) were released to 
ULBs during the same period.  

Chapter-V: Financial resources of Urban Local Bodies 
57 
 Against the allocation of ` 1,962.36 c rore and ` 490.59 crore as Basic 
Grant
 and Performance Grant as per recommendations of 14 th Central 
Fina
nce Commission, GoP received ` 1,902.65 crore and ` 200.15 crore, 
there
by resulting into short receipt of ` 59.71 crore and ` 290.44 crore 
respe
ctively during the period 2015-2020.  
 There was short release of ` 866.13 c rore on account of Grants-in-aid by 
the St
ate Government to Punjab Municipal Fund during 2017-2020. 
 Recovery on account of Municipal tax (` 127.8 1 crore) from PSPCL; 
proper
ty tax ( ` 216.84 crore); user charges (` 535.96 crore); rent/lease 
(` 40.30 crore); amount of ` 229.31 crore from GMADA was 
outst
anding; thereby showing ineffectiveness of the ULBs in augmenting 
their own revenue. 
 As against the recommendations of the Fourth and Fifth SFCs requiring 
the 
user charges to cover 90 per cent  of the cost of expenditure on 
operation and maintenance (O&M), the average collection of user 
charges during 2015-2020 was only 18 per cent. The underlying reasons 
for short collection of user charges was short assessment of demand 
which was only 20 per cent of the expenditure incurred on O&M during 
the same period. 
 During the five years’ period from 2015-16 to 2019-20, despite increase 
in popul
ation and expansion of services, the expenditure on O&M 
decreased from 20.22 per cent in 2015-16 to 19.16 per cent in 2017-18. 
 Percentage of actual receipts vis -à-vis budget estimates ranged between 
34.59 per cent  and 108.61 per cent , and that of actual expenditure  
vis-à-vis budget estimates ranged between 38.93 per cent  and 
120.41 per cent in ULBs during the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  Thus, 
the budget estimates with variation of more than 10 per cent could be 
termed as unrealistic. 
 The powers and role of ULBs were limited in respect of administrative 
approva
ls in emergent maintenance of essential services, technical 
sanctions, acceptance of financial bids and other expenditure, thereby 
restricting the autonomy of ULBs.   
5.7 Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i) e
nsuring release of mandated share to ULBs as per recommendations 
of Central/State Finance Commissions and due GIA to Punjab 
Municipal Fund; 
(ii) putting in place an effective mechanism for the recovery of outstanding 
dues from the organisations/bodies concerned by ULBs to augment 
their own resources; 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
58 
(iii) taking appropriate action on the recommendations of SFC with regard 
to levy such charges on water supply and sewerage by ULBs so that 
they are able to recover 90 per cent expenditure on O&M incurred on 
these services, besides improving O&M on the water supply and 
sewerage system; 
(iv) ensuring preparation of realistic budget estimates by ULBs in respect 
of receipts and expenditure; and 
(v) providing adequate powers and enhancing role of ULBs in 
administrative and executive spheres to enable them to function as 
institutions of self-government and to strengthen Municipal level 
governance in line with the provisions of 74th CAA. 
 

Chapter-VI 
 
Human resources of  
Urban Local Bodies 

59 
Chapter-VI 
 
Human resources of Urban Local Bodies  
 
6.1 Limited powers over human resources  
Adequate and qualified manpower is essential for the empowerment of Urban 
Loca
l Bodies (ULB).  Fifth SFC also recommended that a uniform staffing 
pattern for all ULBs in the State should be established and common norms 
should be fixed in this regard.  Interaction among ULBs should be encouraged 
so that best practices of particular ULBs may be followed by others.  Regional 
seminars may also be organised for this purpose.  The Directorate of Local 
Bodies should play a pivotal role in this regard.  The broad framework of 
functions carried out by ULBs is depicted in Table 6.1.   
Table 6.1: Broad framework of functions carried out by ULBs 
Sr. No. Wing/Section Functions 
1. Administration  General administration, including meetings of 
Councils and Committees 
2. Revenue  Assessment and collection of various taxes, rent, 
advertisements and other property related activities 
3. Accounts  Preparation and maintenance of accounts, preparation 
of budget, etc. 
4. Public Health  Sanitation, street sweeping, solid waste management 
and other public health related activities 
5. Engineering  Construction/O&M of roads, drains, buildings, parks, 
playgrounds, water supply and street lighting, etc. 
6. Town Planning  Town planning activities such as issue of building 
licences, etc. 
7. Welfare  Implementation of schemes relating to Social and 
Economic development. 
Source: Departmental information 
Section 71 of Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (PMC Act) and 
Sec
tion 38 of Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (PM Act) provide the following 
powers related to human resources to the State Government:   
 The Government may make rules for regulating the recruitment and the 
condit
ions of service of members of the Corporation/Municipal 
Services and the classification of such services and for the duties and 
functions of the members of such services.   
 The Government may transfer any member of a Corporation/Municipal 
Ser
vices from a post in one Corporation/Municipal Service to a post 
carrying the same scale of pay in another Corporation/Municipal 
Service.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
60 
 The salary, allowances, gratuity, annuity, pension and other payments 
requi
red to be made to the members of the Corporation/Municipal 
Services in accordance with the conditions of their service shall be 
charged from the Corporation/Municipal Fund in the prescribed 
manner.   
 Creation of posts in a Corporation/Municipal Service and appointment 
of m
embers thereto shall be made by the Government or by an 
authority empowered by the Government in this behalf after taking into 
consideration the requirements of the Corporation/Municipal Service 
and their financial capacity but no such member shall be deemed to 
have been appointed to any Civil Service or post under the State.   
 The powers of punishment or dismissal of any officer rests with the 
Sta
te Government.   
The assessment of manpower should be based on the functions undertaken by 
ULBs with a view that majority of the functions which are service oriented 
have to be discharged within a reasonable time period.  This assessment could 
be done best by ULBs themselves considering various criteria such as the 
extent of geographical area to be covered, the extent and type of population, 
the number of existing properties, etc.  Audit observed that ULBs neither had 
the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to recruit the required staff.  
These powers were vested in the State Government.  The State Government 
assessed the requirement of staff based on consideration and requirements of 
the Corporations/Councils/Nagar Panchayats and their financial capacity, as 
discussed in subsequent paragraphs.   
The Department stated (August 2021) that the Government or Directorate was 
having various powers related to human resources in respect of provincialised 
cadre employees. Whereas, such powers with regard to non-provincialised 
cadre employees, who were higher in numbers vis-à-vis provincialised 
employees, vested with the concerned Municipality.  It was added that 
majority of the functionaries were under the administrative control of 
Municipalities.  The powers with the Government were not absolute and were 
generally exercised in the best interest of ULBs to streamline their 
functioning.  The reply of the Department showed that the full autonomy had 
not been given to the ULBs to enable them to function as self-government 
institutions in line with the provisions of 74th CAA. 
6.1.1 Recruitment of staff 
In accordance with the Acts governing ULBs, the State Government regulates 
the classification, method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and 
allowances, discipline and conduct of staff and officers of ULBs.  The Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) 
(Third Amendment) Rules, 2015 lists out the Appointing Authorities for 
various categories of posts as indicated in Table 6.2.   

Chapter-VI: Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
61 
Table 6.2: Appointing authorities for recruitment of staff 
Sr. No. Name of the post Appointing Authority 
1. Executive Officer (Class I, II & III) Government 
2. Joint Deputy Director Government 
3. Chief Engineer Government 
4. Superintending Engineer Government 
5. Municipal Engineer Government 
6. Senior Town Planner Government 
7. Town Planner Government 
8. Assistant Divisional Fire Officer Government 
9. Assistant Town Planner Director 
10. Assistant Municipal Engineer Director 
11. Junior Engineer Director 
12. Legal Assistant Director 
13. Station Fire Officer Director 
14. Sub Fire Officer Director 
15. Superintendent (Grade II) Director 
16. Head Draftsman Director 
17. Draftsman Director 
18. Accountant Grade I & II Director 
19. Senior Assistant/ Inspector Director 
20. Senior Scale Stenographer Director 
21. Chief Sanitary Inspector Director 
22. Sanitary Inspector Director 
23. Building Inspector (Technical) Director 
24. Personal Assistant Director 
Source: Government notification  
The Department stated (August 2021) that the control at the end of the 
Gover
nment had been retained in order to maintain uniformity of rules, 
guidelines for implementation by ULBs.  The reply of the Department was not 
in line with the provisions of 74th CAA. 
6.1.2 Method of recruitment  
As per provisions contained in the Punjab Municipal Corporation Services 
(Recruitment and Conditions of Service) (Third Amendment) Rules, 1975, 
recruitment for various category of posts in a service at the time of initial 
consideration shall be made by the appointing authority by absorption of 
persons already holding corresponding posts in the service of a Municipality 
provided they are found fit by an authority appointed by the Government in 
this behalf for becoming member of the service after taking into consideration 
their qualification and service record.  The remaining vacancies and the 
vacancies which may occur thereafter shall be filled up in the following 
manner namely:  
 Fifty per cent of t
 he vacancies by direct recruitment; and  
 Fifty per cent of  the vacancies by promotion on seniority-cum-merit 
basis.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
62 
Provided that if no suitable candidate is available for appointment by direct 
recruitment or by promotion, the vacancies may be filled up by transfer or 
deputation.   
The Government may from time to time by notification constitute a Selection 
Committee consisting of at least three officers of the Government and two 
non-officials who have sufficient experience in the functioning of ULBs and 
different Selection Committees for different categories of posts in a Service.  
Provided that at least one member of the Selection Committees shall belong to 
the Scheduled Caste.   
6.1.2.1 During test-check of records of the Department of Local 
Government, Punjab (Department) Audit noticed that the Government of 
Punjab approved (October 2012) recruitment of vacant posts in different 
cadres/categories in Municipal Corporations/Councils/Nagar Panchayats, 
Improvement Trusts and PWSSB and decided that test for recruitment of these 
posts would be conducted through an independent agency. The Panjab 
University, Chandigarh was selected (March 2013) by three-member 
Committee for this purpose.   
Accordingly, the Department invited (July 2015) applications to fill up 
670 posts in different cadres/categories.  The Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana 
High Court in a civil writ petition stayed (August 2015) the result of 32 posts 
of Executive Officers (Grade I & II), though the selection process was allowed 
to be continued.  The written test for the purpose was conducted in 
November 2015.  However, while the work of appointment was in progress, a 
vigilance case was registered (April 2016) and the recruitment process of 
456 posts was cancelled (November 2016) by the Hon’ble Court with the 
directions to re-conduct the test of cancelled posts (March 2018); besides 
staying the result of 25 posts of Junior Draftsman. 
Out of remaining 157 posts, only 84 candidates were selected for appointment 
under different cadres and no candidate was found eligible for selection in 
respect of balance 73 posts.  However, the Department did not conduct re-test 
in respect of 456 posts, as per directions of the Hon’ble Court.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that the recruitment in ULBs could not 
be made due to on-going court cases and efforts were being made to speed up 
the recruitment process.  It was added that in order to meet the shortage of 
staff in respect of provincialised cadre employees, adjustments by way of 
giving additional charge, etc. was made by the Government so that urgent 
work in ULBs did not suffer.  The reply of the Department was not convincing 
as in spite of shortage of staff, recruitment of only 84 posts in different 
categories was made during 2015-16 to 2019-20. 

Chapter-VI: Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
63 
6.1.3 Powers over staff  
The Second Administrative Reforms Committee (ARC) opined 
(October 2007) that the ULBs should have autonomy to recruit human 
resources and assess their performance measurement with suitable incentives 
and penalties. 
It was, however, noticed that the powers to promote officials, initiate 
disciplinary action, impose penalties, etc. in respect of the provincialised cadre 
was with the State Government.  In case of non-provincialised cadre, the 
ULBs exercised the power only with the approval of the State Government. 
The Department stated (August 2021) that powers of promotion, disciplinary 
action, etc. were exercised by the Government/Director only in respect of 
provincialised cadre employees.  The autonomy to recruit staff of  
non-provincialised cadre staff rested in ULBs and was being exercised by 
them.  The reply of the Department in respect of provincialis e
 d staff was not 
in line with the recommendation of ARC. 
6.2 Sufficiency and functioning of staff  
 
6.2.1 Shortage of staff in Urban Local Bodies  
The staff position under various categories of ULBs in the State during the 
period 2015-16 to 2019-20 is depicted in Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Staff position under various categories during 2015-2020  
Year Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Men-in-
position 
Vacancy Percentage 
of shortage 
2015-16 
A 463 259 204 44.06 
B 2,131 1,240 891 41.81 
C 7,898 4,546 3,352 42.44 
D 27,470 20,877 6,593 24.00 
Total  37,962 26,922 11,040 29.08 
2016-17 
A 475 283 192 40.42 
B 2,147 1,236 911 42.43 
C 7,864 4,349 3,515 44.70 
D 27,336 20,520 6,816 24.93 
Total  37,822 26,388 11,434 30.23 
2017-18 
A 475 265 210 44.21 
B 2,154 1,275 879 40.81 
C 7,813 4,060 3,753 48.04 
D 27,309 19,933 7,376 27.01 
Total  37,751 25,533 12,218 32.36 
2018-19 A 473 264 209 44.19 
B 2,165 1,251 914 42.22 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
64 
Year Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
Men-in-
position 
Vacancy Percentage 
of shortage 
C 7,810 3,927 3,883 49.72 
D 27,158 19,281 7,877 29.00 
Total  37,606 24,723 12,883 34.26 
2019-20 
A 473 267 206 43.55 
B 2,161 1,238 923 42.71 
C 7,798 3,718 4,080 52.32 
D 27,102 18,620 8,482 31.30 
Total  37,534 23,843 13,691 36.48 
Source: Departmental information  
Table 6.3 shows tha t there was shortage of staff ranging from 29.08 per cent 
to 36.48 per cent amongst various cadres/categories during 2015-2020.  It was 
further noticed that: 
 In 131 Municipal Corporations, the staff in different categories was short 
by 42.84 
per cent.   
 In five ULBs2, 34 officers/officials under different cadres were posted in 
exc
ess of the sanctioned strength and such excess staff could be 
deployed against the vacant posts in other ULBs. But no efforts were 
made by the Department in this regard.   
Working strength in terms of number of employees per thousand population in 
13 ULBs is shown in Chart 6.1.   
 
  Source: Departmental data 
                                                           
1  (i) Abohar; (ii) Amritsar; (iii) Batala; (iv) Bathinda; (v) Hoshiarpur; (vi) Jalandhar; 
(vi
i) Kapurthala; (viii) Ludhiana; (ix) Moga; (x) Pathankot; (xi) Patiala; (xii) Phagwara 
and (xiii) SAS Nagar (MCs Abohar, Batala and Kapurthala came into existence after the 
audit period i.e. March 2020). 
2  (i) Batala; (ii) Jalandhar; (iii) Ludhiana; (iv) Patiala; and (v) SAS Nagar. 

Chapter-VI: Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
65 
Chart 6.1 shows that out of 13 ULBs, for every thousand people, four 3 ULBs 
had onl
y two employees, five 4 ULBs had three employees, three 5 ULBs had 
four 
employees and one 6 ULB had five employees.  Evidently, the ULBs 
lac
ked adequate manpower to carry out efficient delivery of services. Thus, 
acute shortage of staff in the ULBs could hamper smooth/effective functioning 
of the ULBs.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that every effort would be made to 
ensure that ULBs did not lack adequate manpower to carry out delivery of 
services in an efficient manner. 
The Principal Secretary stated (August 2021) that a proposal of recruitment of 
1,000 posts had been submitted to Punjab Public Service Commission and 
ULBs had been directed to recruit Group D staff on contractual basis keeping 
in view the revenue being generated by them. 
6.2.2 Functioning of the Municipal Commissioner/Executive Officer  
The Municipal Commissioner/Executive Officer was the executive head of the 
Municipality.  In terms of the provision under Section 47 of PMC Act, the 
Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Class I 
Officer of the Government with a minimum service as such of ten years as the 
Commissioner of the Corporation.  Further, Section 3 of PM (Executive 
Officer) Act, 1931 read with Section 5(a) of PM Act provide that the 
Committee shall, by resolution to be passed by not less than five-eighths of the 
total number of members constituting the Committee for the time being, 
appoint a person within three months from the date of notification with the 
approval of the State Government as Executive Officer for a renewable period 
of five years.  The Punjab Municipal Service (Recruitment and Conditions of 
Service) Rules, 1975, provided that the appointing, punishing, appellate 
authority in case of Executive Officer (Class-I, II and III) would be the State 
Government.  Audit noticed that the provisions ibid were being complied with 
in the State of Punjab. 
6.3 Capacity building  
Special training programmes for the staff of ULBs may be helpful in the 
enhanc
ement of their working knowledge and capabilities.  The State 
Government should also take steps to create teams consisting of qualified 
technical experts in the field of finance, accounting, engineering and urban 
planning, etc. which could regularly undertake field visits and impart hands on 
training to the staff.   
                                                           
3  Abohar, Batala, Pathankot and SAS Nagar.   
4  Amritsar, Hoshiarpur, Kapurthala, Moga and Patiala.   
5  Jalandhar, Ludhiana and Phagwara.   
6  Bathinda.   

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992 
66 
Audit observed that no Training need analysis had been done for the staff by 
any of the test checked ULBs. It was further noted that while no training for 
capacity building was imparted during 2015-16 and 2016-17,  
182 officers/officials ranging between 0.75 per cent  and 1.44 per cent of total 
men-in-position (excluding Group D employees) were nominated for capacity 
building training programmes during 2017-18 to 2019-20.  The expenditure 
incurred on such training/courses was met directly from the grants released by 
MoUD.  
It was further noticed that no mechanism existed to evaluate the impact of the 
training imparted to the staff of ULBs on the discharge of their functions.  In 
the absence of any such evaluation, Audit could not ascertain whether the 
training imparted helped the participants in improving their skills and whether 
the course design needed revision. 
Thus, non-providing adequate training to the staff as per requirement resulted 
in non-acquisition of enhanced skills by the personnel.  
The Department stated (August 2021) that serious efforts would be made to 
arrange training programmes for staff of ULBs so as to enhance their skills.  It 
was added that the course design of training programmes would be revised as 
per the present circumstances.  
6.4 Conclusions  
The 
ULBs were having minimal access to human resources, as is evident from 
the following: 
 The ULBs neither had the powers to assess the staff requirement nor to 
rec
ruit the required staff.  These powers were vested with the State 
Government.  The State Government assessed the requirement of staff 
based on consideration, requirements and financial capacity of the 
Corporations/Councils/ Nagar Panchayats.  
 The State Government had the powers to regulate classification, method 
of r
ecruitment, conditions of service, pay and allowances, initiate 
disciplinary action on staff of ULBs, transfer of staff across ULBs, etc. 
 There was shortage of staff ranging from 29.08 per cent to 
36.48 per cent amongst various cadres/categories during 2015-2020.  In 
13 major ULBs (Municipal Corporations), for every thousand people, 
four ULBs had only two employees, five ULBs had three employees, 
three ULBs had four employees and one ULB had five employees.  
Evidently, the ULBs lacked adequate manpower to carry out efficient 
delivery of services.  
 Training to staff for capacity building was deficient, as only 
0.75 per
 cent to 1.44 per cent of total men-in-position (excluding 
Group D employees) were nominated for capacity building training 
programmes during 2017-18 to 2019-20.  

Chapter-VI: Human resources of Urban Local Bodies 
67 
6.5 Recommendations 
In the light of the audit findings, the State Government may like to consider: 
(i) empower
ing autonomy to ULBs to assess, recruit and manage human 
resources commensurate with their needs and functions; and 
(ii) ensuring adequate manpower to ULBs, besides imparting need-based 
training to staff to enable them to carry out efficient delivery of 
services. 
 
Chandigarh 
The  
(PUNAM PANDEY) 
Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
The  
Countersigned 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 

Appendices 

69 
Appendices 
 
Appendix 1.1  
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1; page 2) 
List of functions (with activities) enumerated in the Twelfth Schedule  
of th
e Constitution of India, to be devolved to Urban Local Bodies 
 
Sr. No. Functions  Activities 
1. 
Burials and burial grounds; 
cremations, cremation 
grounds  
Construction and O&M of crematoriums and burial 
grounds and electric crematoriums 
2. Cattle pounds; prevention 
of cruelty to animals  
Catching and keeping stray animals 
Sterilisation and anti-rabies 
Ensuring animal safety 
3. Regulation of slaughter 
houses and tanneries  
Ensuring quality of animals and meat 
Disposal of waste 
O & M of slaughter houses 
4. Fire Services  
Establishing and maintaining fire brigades 
Providing fire NOC/ approval certificate in respect 
of high rise buildings 
5. Urban planning including 
town planning  
Master Planning/ Development Plans/ Zonal Plans 
Enforcing master planning regulations 
Enforcing building bye-laws and licenses 
Group Housing, Development of Industrial areas 
6. Slum improvement and 
upgradation  
Identifying beneficiaries 
Affordable Housing 
Upgradation 
7. Planning for Economic and 
Social development  
Program implementation for economic activities 
Policies for social development 
8. 
Safeguarding the interests 
of weaker sections of 
society, including the 
handicapped and mentally 
retarded 
Identifying beneficiaries 
Providing tools/benefits such as tricycles 
Housing programs 
Scholarships 
9. Urban poverty alleviation  
Identifying beneficiaries 
Livelihood and employment 
Street vendors 
10. Roads and Bridges  
Construction and maintenance of roads 
Construction and maintenance of bridges, drains, 
flyovers and footpaths 
11. Regulation of land-use and 
construction of buildings  
Regulating land use 
Approving building plans/ high rises 
Demolishing illegal buildings 
12. 
Water supply for domestic, 
industrial and commercial 
purposes  
Distribution of water 
Providing connections 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) 
Collection of charges 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
70 
Sr. No. Functions  Activities 
13. 
Public health, sanitation 
conservancy and solid 
waste management  
Maintaining Hospitals, Dispensaries 
Immunisation/Vaccination 
Registration of births and deaths 
Cleaning and disinfection of localities affected by 
infectious disease 
Solid waste management 
Control and supervision of public markets 
14. 
Urban forestry, protection 
of the environment and 
promotion of ecological 
aspects  
Afforestation 
Greenification 
Awareness drives 
Protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects 
Maintenance of natural resources like water bodies, 
etc. 
15. 
Provision of urban 
amenities and facilities such 
as parks, gardens, 
playgrounds, etc. 
Creation of parks and gardens 
Operation and Maintenance 
16. 
Promotion of cultural, 
educational and aesthetic 
aspects  
Schools and education 
Fairs and festivals 
Cultural buildings/ institutions 
Heritage 
Public space beautification 
17. Vital statistics including 
birth and death registration  
Coordinating with hospitals / crematoriums, etc. for 
obtaining information 
Maintaining and updating database 
18. 
Public amenities including 
street lighting, parking lots, 
bus stops and public 
conveniences  
Installation and maintenance of street lights 
Creation and maintenance of parking lots 
Creation and maintenance of public toilets 
Deciding and operating bus routes 
  Source: 74th CAA and Department of Local Government, Punjab 
 

Appendices  
71 
 
Appendix 1.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.3; page 3) 
List of total Urban Local Bodies in Punjab 
Sr. No. Name of ULB Sr. No. Name of ULB 
Municipal Corporation 
1. Amritsar 6. Moga 
2. Bathinda 7. Mohali 
3. Hoshiarpur 8. Pathankot 
4. Jalandhar 9. Patiala 
5. Ludhiana 10. Phagwara 
Municipal Council 
11. Abohar 62. Kurali 
12. Adampur 63. Lehragaga 
13. Ahmedgarh 64. Longowal 
14. Alawalpur 65. Machiwara 
15. Amloh 66. Majitha 
16. Baghapurana 67. Malerkotla 
17. Balachaur 68. Malout 
18. Banga 69. Mansa 
19. Banur 70. Maur 
20. Bareta 71. Morinda 
21. Bariwala 72. Mukerian 
22. Barnala 73. Mullanpur Dakha 
23. Bassi Pathana 74. Nabha 
24. Batala 75. Nakodar 
25. Bhadaur 76. Nangal 
26. Bhawanigarh 77. Nawanshahr 
27. Bhikhi 78. Nurmahal 
28. Bhogpur 79. Patran 
29. Bhucho Mandi 80. Patti 
30. Budhlada 81. Payal 
31. Dasuya 82. Phillour 
32. Dera Baba Nanak 83. Qadian 
33. Derabassi 84. Rahon 
34. Dhanaula 85. Raikot 
35. Dharamkot 86. Rajpura 
36. Dhariwal 87. Raman 
37. Dhuri 88. Ramdas 
38. Dinanagar 89. Rampuraphul 
39. Doraha 90. Rupnagar 
40. Faridkot 91. Sahnewal 
41. Fatehgarh Churian 92. Samana 
42. Fazilka 93. Samrala 
43. Ferozepur 94. Sanaur 
44. Gardhiwala 95. Sangat 
45. Garhshankar 96. Sangrur 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
72 
Sr. No. Name of ULB Sr. No. Name of ULB 
46. Gidderbaha 97. Sardulgarh 
47. Gobindgarh 98. Shamchurasi 
48. Goniana 99. Sri Anandpur Sahib 
49. Gurdaspur 100. Sri Muktsar Sahib 
50. Guruharsahai 101. Sirhind 
51. Hariana 102. Sri Hargobindpur 
52. Jagraon 103. Sujanpur 
53. Jaito 104. Sultanpur Lodhi 
54. Jalalabad 105. Sunam 
55. Jandiala Guru 106. Talwandi Bhai 
56. Kapurthala 107. Tapa 
57. Kartarpur 108. TarnTaran 
58. Khanna 109. UrmurTanda 
59. Kharar 110. Zira 
60. Kotfatta 111. Zirakpur 
61. Kotkapura   
Nagar Panchayat 
112. Ajnala 140. Kotshamir 
113. Amargarh 141. Lalru 
114. Arniwala Sheikh Suban 142. Lehra Mohabbat 
115. Badhnikalan 143. Lohiankhas 
116. Ballianwali 144. Mahilpur 
117. Begowal 145. Makhu 
118. Bhadson 146. Mallanwala Khas 
119. Bhagta Bhai Ka 147. Maloud 
120. Bhai Roopa 148. Maluka 
121. Bhikhiwind 149. Mamdot 
122. Bhulath 150. Mandikalan 
123. Bilga 151. Mehatpur 
124. Boha 152. Mehraj 
125. Chauke 153. Moonak 
126. Cheema 154. Mudki 
127. Dhilwan 155. Nadala 
128. Dirba 156. Narot Jaimal Singh 
129. Fatehgarhpanjtur 157. Nathana 
130. Ghagga 158. Naya Gaon 
131. Ghanaur 159. Nihal Singh Wala 
132. Goraya 160. Rajasansi 
133. Handiaya 161. Rampura 
134. Joga 162. Rayya 
135. Khamano 163. Shahkot 
136. Khanauri 164. Sri Chamkaur Sahib 
137. Khemkaran 165. Sri Kiratpur Sahib 
138. Kot Ise Khan 166. Talwandi Sabo 
139. Kothaguru 167. Talwara 
Source: Department of Local Government, Punjab  

Appendices  
73 
 
Appendix 4.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.5.3(iii); page 26) 
Details of number of selected units which achieved the benchmarks set by 
the
 Finance Commissions 
Civic 
Service 
Indicators/ Components Bench 
marks 
No. of units achieved 
benchmarks 
Between 
0-50% 
Between 
50-99% 
100% 
and 
above 
Solid Waste Management 
House hold level coverage of Solid 
Waste Management Services 100% 1 16 2 
Efficiency of collection of 
Municipal Solid Waste 100% 1 9 9 
Extent of collection of solid waste 100% 11 8 0 
Extent of solid waste recovered 80% 12 7 0 
Extent of scientific disposal of 
solid waste 100% 8 10 1 
Efficiency in redressal of customer 
complaints 80% 1 18 0 
Extent of cost recovery in solid 
waste services 100% 16 3 0 
Efficiency in collection of solid 
waste management related charges 90% 15 4 0 
Water Supply 
Coverage of water supply 
connections 100% 0 19 0 
Per capita supply of water 135 lpcd 0 1 18 
Extent of metering of water 
connections 100% 18 1 0 
Extent of non-revenue water 20% 18 1 0 
Continuity of water supply 24 hours 11 8 0 
Quality of water supplied 100% 0 1 18 
Efficiency in redressal of customer 
complaints 80% 0 18 1 
Cost recovery in water supply 
services 100% 1 17 1 
Efficiency in collection of water 
supply related charges 90% 3 16 0 
Sewage Management 
Coverage of toilets 100% 8 11 0 
Coverage of sewage network 
services 100% 4 11 2 
Collection efficiency of the sewage 
network 100% 7 10 0 
Adequacy of sewage treatment 
capacity 80% 7 8 2 
Quality of sewage treatment 100% 7 6 4 
Extent of re-use and recycling of 
treated sewage 20% 17 0 0 
Efficiency in redressal of customer 
complaints 80% 2 13 2 
Extent of cost recovery in sewage 
management 100% 14 2 1 
Efficiency in collection of sewage 
charges 90% 8 9 0 
Source: Departmental information 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
74 
 
Appendix 4.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.5.2; page 36) 
Details of progress of projects under Smart Cities Mission 
(A)  Status of works completed under Ludhiana Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
Progress 
1. Installation of Rooftop Solar Panels on existing buildings 
(Phase I) 2.64 95% 
2. Construction of building for ICCC 0.35 99% 
3. Procurement of Sewer Cleaning Machines  5.94 74% 
4. 
Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning of Flow 
and Quality Management Instrument including AMC for five 
years for existing STPs at Balloke, Bhattian and Jamalpur in 
the city of Ludhiana under Smart Cities Mission 
2.08 66% 
5. Proposed Façade Lighting of iconic Clock Tower 0.63 56% 
6. Installation of Wayfinding & Signages (Digital & Analogue) 6.13 58% 
7. Procurement of Poclains 0.74   
 Total 18.51   
(B)  Status of works in progress under Ludhiana Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
Progress 
1. LED Street Lighting  57.78 98% 
2. 
Fabrication, Installation, and Commissioning of 
Prefabricated DUAC Toilet Blocks at different locations in 
Ludhiana City under Smart Cities Mission 
3.10 68% 
3. 
Construction & Commissioning of Masonary Toilet Blocks 
at different locations in Ludhiana City under Smart Cities 
Mission 
3.40 58% 
4. Retrofit of Sarabha Nagar Market  & Development of Malhar 
Road as Smart Road 38.63 58% 
5. Development of Smart School Class Room in Government 
Schools at Ludhiana City (Phase-I) 6.28 98% 
6. 
24x7 Water Supply Scheme for ABD Area 46.50 
13% Rehabilitation of existing Sewerage System for ABD Area 39.30 
Rehabilitation of Storm Water Drainage System for ABD 
Area 17.79 
7. RoB / RuB at Pakhowal Road and Construction of obligatory 
span of RoB and RuB on Pakhowal Road Railway Crossing 124.00 40% 
8. 
Selection of Contractor for setting up of Carcass Utilisation 
Plant at Ludhiana on Design, Built, Operate, Maintain and 
Transfer  (DBOMT) basis 
7.98 40% 

Appendices  
75 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
Progress 
9. Water Front Development including Landscaping and 
Beautification along Sidhwan Canal -I 4.74 85% 
10. Extension of Animal Birth Control Centre 0.97 60% 
11. Installation of Rooftop Solar panels on existing Buildings 
Phase -2 4.00 34% 
12. Provision of Flow Bypass Arrangement for STP and Final 
Polishing Unit at Bhattian STP 3.23 2% 
Total 357.70   
(C)  Status of works for which DPRs were approved and tendered but works not yet started 
under Ludhiana Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
1. Sewer Rehabilitation- Malhar Road by trenchless technology  82.22 
2. Retrofit & Development of Ghumar Mandi market and Smart Road 
Phase II (Rotary Club Road) 18.93 
3. Water Front Development and Landscaping on Sidhwan Canal Front 
(From Dugri Chowk to Pakhowal Road) - Phase II 5.22 
4. Compactors in Ludhiana Municipal Corporation (Civil Works Only) 13.62 
5. Installation of Chain Link Fencing along the 14 Km stretch along Budha 
Nallah within the city of Ludhiana.  13.42 
6. AMC of Safe City & Establishment of MCC 55.00 
7. Procurement of Machinery for Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana under 
Smart Cities Mission   
a) Procurement of 3 Nos of Wheel Loader Machines 0.51 
b) Supply of backhoe loaders - 3 Nos  0.86 
c) Supply of Dumper  (5 cum capacity) - 3 Nos  0.47 
d) Supply of  Dumper (10.5 cum capacity) - 5 Nos  1.20 
8. 
Selection of Contractor for Supply, Installation, Testing, 
Commissioning, Operation and Maintenance of façade light illumination 
of flyover at Sidhwan Canal in the city of Ludhiana under Smart Cities 
Mission (2nd Call) 
3.51 
9. Fire Fighting Upgradation and other Aspects under Disaster 
Management Plan   
a) Supply of life detector type - I  0.66 
b) Portable emergency lighting  system  0.11 
c) Thermal Imager  0.42 
d) Combi tool  0.75 
e) Supply and Fabrication of 4 Nos. Quick Response Tender (QRT) based 
on water mist technology  0.88 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
76 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
f) Fabrication & supply of different types of fire-fighting vehicles on 
suitable chassis  8.03 
g) 
Fabrication and supply of 50M and above working height Hydraulic 
Platform to be mounted on Suitable BS VI (Euro 6) chassis of reputed 
make for firefighting and rescue operation with 5 years CSMC as per the 
specifications of Ludhiana Fire Brigade under Smart Cities Mission  
8.55 
h) Supply of Fire-fighting Portable Pump sets for Fire Brigade Department 
of Municipal Corporation Ludhiana under Smart Cities Mission 0.60 
10. Supply of Fire-fighting Suits for Fire Brigade Department of Municipal 
Corporation Ludhiana under Smart Cities Mission.   
a) Option 1: Supply of Fire-fighting /Approach Suit certified as per NFPA-
1971-2018. 0.47 
b) Option II: Supply of aluminised Fire-fighting Proximity suits certified as 
per EN-1486-2007. 0.10 
11. Smart Multi Level Car Parking (MLCP) at Feroze Gandhi Market  77.11 
12. 
Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning of Façade Lighting of 
Zone D office of Municipal Corporation Ludhiana under Smart Cities 
Mission  
0.71 
13. Procurement of Portable Multi Gas Detectors for Fire Brigade 
Department of MCL under Smart Cities Mission.  0.13 
14. Procurement of Foam Fire-fighting media AFFF for use in firefighting 
under Smart Cities Mission 0.19 
15. Digital Library Web Portal and Mobile App for the Library of Municipal 
Corporation Ludhiana at Guru Nanak Bhawan 3.10 
16. Trenchless Rehabilitation of existing Storm water Drains in Dugri Area 41.35 
17. Comprehensive Road Safety Project for Ludhiana city 26.00 
18. Beautification of parks in Ludhiana city  25.00 
19. Construction and  Demolition of (C&D) Waste Management Plant in 
Ludhiana  5.00 
20. 
Development of Sports Park Phase-1 (Rakh Bagh) - All weather 
swimming pool at Indoor stadium of MC, upgradation of Guru Nanak 
Stadium, Development of Sports Infra at Govt. College, Ludhiana  
20.00 
21. 
Development of Basketball Court and Badminton Court refurbishment at 
Guru Nanak Stadium & Olympic Size Swimming Pool at Rakh Bagh 
Sports Complex  
26.79 
22. 
Rejuvenation of Buddha Nala - Rehabilitation of STPs at Jamalpur, 
Bhattian, Balloke; Construction of 225 MLD STP at Jamalpur and 60 
MLD STP at Balloke; Rehabilitation of IPSs 
150.00 
23. 
Beautification and Refurbishment of Mini Rose Garden with three years 
of Annual Maintenance Contract at Ludhiana under Smart Cities 
Mission (1st Call) 
3.98 
24. Beautification of parks in Ludhiana city  0.45 
Total 595.34 

Appendices  
77 
(D)  Status of completed works under Jalandhar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
progress 
1. Procurement of self-propelled sweeping machine for ABD 
area 2.17 100% 
2. Development of Smart E-Class Room (Deposit Work) 6.53 100% 
3. Truck mounted sweeping machine  0.84 100% 
Total 9.54   
(E)  Status of works in progress under Jalandhar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
progress 
1. Installation of Rooftop Solar Panels on Government 
buildings (17 Nos.) 17.83 82% 
2. Way finding and Traffic Signage 1.98 61% 
3. Park Development - B.R. Ambedkar Park (Part of Green 
Area Phase I) 0.29 35% 
4. 3 Green Areas under flyovers 3.90 28% 
5. Park Development - Industrial Area Park  1.07 22% 
6. Park Development - Beant Singh Park  1.26 20% 
7. Park Development - Tanki Wala Park  0.62 20% 
8. Traffic Junction Improvement (11 Nos.) 20.32 16% 
9. Park Development - Tobri Mohalla Park  0.42 15% 
10. Park Development - Urban Estate Park  2.40 13% 
11. Construction of ICC building  1.67 60% 
12. Green Area Development of  Bist Doab canal area 
Rejuvenation 2.78 10% 
  Total 54.54   
(F)  Status of works not yet started under Jalandhar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost   
(`` `` in crore) 
1. Bulk surface water supply Scheme Jalandhar 200.00 
2. Installation of LED Lights at PAN City 43.84 
3. Augmentation of storm water drainage System in ABD area 20.99 
4. City level disaster management activities plan 20.22 
5. Foot over bridge, circulating area works and escalator and other allied 
works at Jalandhar City Railway Station (Deposit work) 6.26 
6. Safety and Security measures for Rainak bazar street using utility duct for 
overhanging electrical wires 2.71 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
78 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost   
(`` `` in crore) 
7. Installation of reverse vending machines for PET bottle 1.40 
8. Installation of Sanitary vending Machine & Electric Incinerators at various 
locations in Jalandhar 0.90 
9. Development of Burlton park integrated Sports hub (on PPP basis) 250.00 
10. Selection of MSI for Integrated Command & Control Centre (ICCC) 116.94 
11. Wariyana Dumpsite remediation (Bio Mining) project 60.00 
12. Development of Smart roads 36.16 
13. Development of C&D Waste Management at City Level  4.48 
14. Digitization of the existing Guru Nanak Dev Library 2.09 
15. Construction of ROB and its approaches on existing level crossing  
(to be executed through PWD-B&R Jalandhar) 119.15 
16. Traffic Management and Pedestrian crossing 7.74 
17. Development of Street Vending Zone at 4 Locations in Jalandhar city 
under Jalandhar Smart City Limited 5.94 
18. Procurement of Sewer Cleaning machines for MC Jalandhar 3.15 
19. Jetting cum suction machines and de-silting machines for Jalandhar city 3.03 
20. Infrastructure Development of C&D Waste Management at City Level  2.41 
21. Construction of new road in Urban Estate Phase II park from Cool Road 
towards disposal under Jalandhar Smart City Limited. 
2.37 
22. Installation of GIS-Linked Property UID Number plates and its integration 
with MIS existing services of MCJ  2.20 
23. 
Rooftop Rain Water Harvesting Structures under Jalandhar Smart City 
Limited (to be executed through Department of Soil and Water 
Conservation - Jalandhar). 
1.56 
24. Procurement of Poclain Machine for cleaning of Kala Singhian Nallah and 
for maintaining of Wariana MSW Dumping Site  
1.22 
25. Development and upgrading of Anganwadi Centres in Jalandhar city 1.00 
26. 
Design, Fabrication, Supply, Commissioning and testing and handing over 
of 4 (Four) Nos Quick Response Tender (QRT) Based on Water Mist 
Technology to be fabricated on small commercial vehicle having minimum 
payload of one Ton Capacity including Procurement of Chassis, for Fire 
Brigade Department of MC Jalandhar 
0.89 
27. Kabir Vihar Park 0.84 
28. Chokan Kalan Park redevelopment 0.26 
29. Rose Park 0.23 
30. Guru Nanak Park redevelopment  0.21 
31. Lajpat Nagar Park redevelopment 0.21 
32. Maharaja Agrasen Park redevelopment 0.19 
33. Procurement of Portable Multi Gas Detectors for Fire Brigade Department 
of MCJ  
0.13 
34. Mast Ram Park 0.10 
Total 918.82 

Appendices  
79 
(G)  Status of works completed under Amritsar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
progress 
1. Free Wi-Fi 2.21 100% 
2. Fire Safety-I 1.59 100% 
3. Anganwadi Centre 0.14 100% 
4. Smart Class room 6.17 100% 
5. RVM 2.53 100% 
 Total 12.64  
(H)  Status of works in progress under Amritsar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Physical 
progress 
1. LED Street Lighting  35.75 85% 
2. Rooftop Solar - Government Buildings 10.40 80% 
3. Development of Open spaces under flyovers (Civil) 7.35 45% 
4. Development of Open spaces under flyovers (Electrical) 4.77 75% 
5. Construction of FOBs (2 Nos.) 5.35 25% 
6. Development of Parks - Phase 1(17 parks) 3.70 80% 
7. Automatic Sanitary Napkin Vending Machines and Electric 
Incinerators  0.58 70% 
8. Development of NMT Infrastructure - Pilot 1.93 20% 
9. Development of Existing Sports Facility at Golbagh 5.07 2% 
Total 74.90   
(I)  Status of works not yet started under Amritsar Smart City Limited 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost   
(`` `` in crore) 
1. Smart Road 118.65 
2. Junction Improvement 21.89 
3. Self Service Tourist Kiosk 3.99 
4. Smart Street 0.90 
5. Truck Mounted Sweeping Machine 0.86 
6. Grab Bucket 0.77 
7. 
Design, Build and Operation of 440 MLD Water Treatment Plant and 
associated Transmission Network and Over Head Service Reservoirs 
in City of Amritsar (Total Project Cost: ` 1156.20 crore and ASCL 
Share: ` 450 crore) 
450.00 
8. Procurement of SWM Materials - Phase 2 (1. C&D  2. Sewerage 
Cleaning Machine) 23.15 

Performance Audit Report on Efficacy of implementation of 74th CAA, 1992  
80 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the project Estimated / 
Awarded cost   
(`` `` in crore) 
9. Shaheedan Sahib Plaza  (Multiple Foot over Bridge, Skywalk 
Plaza on Circular road ) 53.14 
10. Signage Branding  25.00 
11. Integrated Command & Control Centre (ICCC) 124.66 
12. Improvement in Electrical Distribution (IED) 82.00 
13. Procurement of Aerial Ladder Hydraulic Platform  8.57 
14. MLCP Kairon Market 32.07 
15. Procurement of SWM Materials - Phase I 8.57 
16. Development of Parks & open Spaces Phase II  5.19 
17. Procurement of Fire Safety Equipment Phase II 3.00 
18. Construction of Trunk Storm Water Drainage & Rehabilitation 
of Sewer Network 66.98 
 Total  1,029.39 
Source: Departmental data 
 

Appendices  
81 
 
Appendix 5.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 5.5.1; page 56) 
Details of payment made to Gram Panchayat, Dudhar  
on acc
ount of lease money  
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sr. No. Year Cheque/Voucher No. and Date Amount 
1. 2013-14 506883 dated 12.02.2014 5.00* 
2. 2014-15 509621 dated 09.03.2015 8.75 
3. 2015-16 512581 dated 20.05.2015 11.00 
4. 2016-17 526676 dated 13.07.2016 12.00 
5. 2017-18 533743 dated 26.04.2017 13.00 
6. 2018-19 33104 dated 30.05.2018 14.00 
7. 2019-20 PR tax No. 08 dated 27.05.2019 15.00 
8. 2020-21 PR tax No.-nil-dated 09.07.2020 16.00 
Total 94.75 
Source: Departmental records 
*  Includes `` `` 1.25 lakh pertaining to the year 2014-15. 