Report No. 2 of 2022 
i Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on 
Management of Spectrum assigned on  
the Administrative basis to Government  
Departments/ Agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Minis
try of Communications 
Department of Telecommunications 
Report No. 2 of 2022 
(Performance Audit)


Report No. 2 of 2022 
i Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
 
Contents 
 
Description Pages 
Preface iii 
Executive Summary v-x 
Summary of Recommendations xi-xii 
Chapter 1: Introduction to Spectrum and Organisational Set up 1-10 
Chapter 2: Audit Approach and Methodology 11-13 
Chapter 3: Spectrum Management and Monitoring in Department of 
Telecommunications 
15-36 
Chapter 4: Spectrum Management in Ministry of Defence 37 
Chapter 5: Spectrum Management in Department of Space 39-49 
Chapter 6: Spectrum Utilisation in Other Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 51-71 
Chapter 7: Conclusion 73-76 
Annexure 77 
Abbreviations 78-82 
 
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
iii Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Preface 
Spectrum as an economic resource is unusual in that it is both non-exhaustible and  
non-s
torable, although it may become increasingly congested. It’s essential that these scarce 
resources are used rationally, optimally, efficiently and economically so that equitable access 
could be available to large radio communication networks in an interference free radio 
environment. With the emerging new technologies and the phenomenal growth of radio 
communication services, requirements for the radio frequency spectrum and the satellite orbit 
are increasing. The social and economic benefits of spectrum are expected to be wide ranging, 
and Department of Telecommunications needs to work closely with industry, Government 
users and the community to make spectrum available in a manner that maximizes the benefits 
for all.  
Government Departments/ Agencies had been allotted/assigned spectrum administratively 
when there was little spectrum scarcity and therefore historically there was no pressure on such 
users to consider the efficient use of their spectrum resources. This is no longer the case with 
ever increasing demand for spectrum. As such there is a need to periodically assess the 
requirement of spectrum for use by the Public Sector bodies. Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India (TRAI) had recommended to the Government to conduct the audit of spectrum in its 
various recommendations issued from time to time. DoT has conducted internally only one 
Audit of spectrum in 450-3600 MHz Band, during 2017-2018. 
The Performance Audit (PA) carried out by the C&AG on Management of Spectrum 
assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies,  revealed 
deficiencies in database of spectrum assignments in  both Department of Telecommunications 
and user Departments/ Agencies, absence  of policy for assignment of spectrum to captive 
users, delayed decision making in DoT and non-availability of a permanent mechanism for 
monitoring  spectrum utilisation, instances of sub optimal utilization of spectrum in important 
bands suitable for commercial services, utilisation of spectrum by users without valid licenses 
from Department of Telecommunications, lack of infrastructure/ resources in DoT for effective 
monitoring of spectrum users and penal action wanting  against unauthorized users. The need 
for corrective action by the Government is highlighted in the specific recommendations made 
in the PA Report. 
This Report had been prepared for submission to the President of India under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India, for laying before the Parliament.  
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
v Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Executive Summary 
Spectrum Management 
Spe
ctrum (radio waves) is an important natural, scarce resource with economic value, needed 
for all wireless applications. Today, Radio Frequency (RF) spectrum affects virtually 
everyone’s life and has become a significant contributor to national economic growth. It has 
been recognized world-over as an important tool for socio-economic development of a nation.  
Since radio waves do not stop at national frontiers, the need for international planning of 
frequency allocations, protection of the legitimate use of radio spectrum are key issues in   
Spectrum Management whereas global compatibility of devices and technology are the key 
issues in Spectrum Utilisation . At the global level, the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), is the specialized planning agency of the UN. At the national level, the Wireless 
Planning & Coordination (WPC) Wing of Department of Telecommunications (DoT), is the 
nodal agency of the Government of India (GoI) for radio frequency regulation, responsible for 
pla
nning, regulating, and managing the limited resources of RF spectrum.  
Spec
trum Management involves regulatory, administrative, supervisory, and specialized 
technical procedures necessary to ensure the efficient operation of radio communication 
services. It includes frequency planning, assignments, and licensing to spectrum users. The 
Nodal agency is required to balance the demands of government users and private service 
providers. Government departments use spectrum for providing national public services, 
whereas private players contribute towards value-added services. Rapid changes in technology, 
liberalization of markets, globalization and public welfare are important factors that go into 
strategic planning of Spectrum. In Spectrum Management short term, medium term and long-
term planning is an absolute necessity for management of requirements due to dynamic changes 
in spectrum uses and technology. 
Owing to increased importance and demand for valuable RF spectrum, allocations and 
allotments to Government Ministries/ Departments need to be revisited for ensuring optimal 
utilisation of spectrum. A balance needs to be ensured between demands for Spectrum by 
Government and Private Telecom Operators, since many Departments such as Defence and 
Space are also major holders of RF Spectrum.  
Historically, Spectrum was assigned to users on administrative basis, wherein user applications 
would be analysed on the basis of available spectrum and requirements. Licenses for frequency 
utilization were issued for specific purposes.  Where the demand for RF spectrum has increased 
exponentially, market mechanism is being used for spectrum allotment and assignment. As 
such there is a need to periodically assess the requirement of spectrum for use by the Public 
Sector bodies and balance their requirements with the need to making available sufficient 
spectrum for commercial services. This would enhance provision of communication services, 
bridge digital divide and anchor the nation towards digital sovereignty.  
In India, spectrum in frequency bands 700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 
2300 MHz, 2500 MHz and 3.3-3.6 GHz bands had been allotted/ assigned for Telecom Access 
Services (communications services used by subscribers and spectrum used for it is known as 
access services and access spectrum). The use and consequent economic value of a spectrum 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
vi  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
band depends upon the development of technology and the spectrum bands that were initially 
used for first/ second generation (1G/ 2G) mobile services can be now used for next generation 
(3G/4G/5G, etc.) mobile services, with enhanced appropriate technology. 
Why did we decide to conduct this Performance Audit? 
Government Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies had been assigned spectrum administratively 
in IMT bands suitable for commercial use, as well as in non IMT bands. Hence, assessment of 
utilization of spectrum assigned on administrative basis to such entities is important. Audit had 
earlier conducted a Performance Audit on ‘Spectrum Management in DoT’ , whose scope 
was largely limited to DoT, and the audit findings were included in Chapter II of CAG’s Report 
Number 21 of 2018. The Ministry has submitted Action Taken Notes (ATNs) in respect of 15 
out of 18 Paras which were to be followed up in Audit.  
Additionally, DoT requested CAG (October 2020) to audit Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
who had been allotted spectrum administratively. It stated that spectrum being scarce, it is vital 
that each Ministry/ Department/ Agency makes optimal use of the allotted/ assigned spectrum 
and hence desired an audit of the utilization of Spectrum allotted administratively to 
Government Departments and Agencies. 
The scope of the Performance Audit conducted against this background examined the 
important aspects of Spectrum Management like process of assignment of spectrum bands and 
pricing of spectrum to captive users, licensing and database management of frequencies 
assigned to Government Users, sharing of spectrum and utilization of spectrum by selected 
Government Departments/ Agencies.  
The Performance Audit covering the period 2012 to 2021, conducted  during the  period 
March-July 2021 was done in  Department of Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Defence 
(MoD), Department of Space (DoS), Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB), 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Ministry of Railways, selected PSUs of Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas namely Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC), Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited (IOCL) and Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) and in  Airports 
Authority of India (AAI). 
Major Findings: 
Spectrum Management in DoT 
1. One of the objectives of the National Digital Communication Policy (NDCP) 2018 is 
“D
eveloping a transparent, normative and fair policy for spectrum assignments and 
allocations”, either through auction or administrative allotment. Post the Hon’ble SC 
judgement of February 2012 regarding allotment of spectrum for access services, there 
has been an adhoc arrangement in DoT of opening application windows for three/ six 
months regarding allotment/ assignment of spectrum administratively for both captive 
uses as well as for other commercial services on provisional basis. This has not only 
caused uncertainties of availability of the resource among Government users but also 
delays in assignments and denial of spectrum to them in some cases.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
vii Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Despite receiving a legal opinion (July 2021) on its own reference, regarding method 
for allotment of spectrum for captive uses including Government Departments, DoT 
had not finalized the policy for allotment/ assignment of spectrum for captive uses/ 
other commercial services with approval of the Digital Communications Commission, 
the Apex body for policy formulation.  DoT had also not reviewed pricing of spectrum 
assigned for captive users administratively, on formulae basis since 2012, though a 
Committee had recommended for a periodical review of the pricing policy in 2013. 
There was no differential pricing for spectrum depending on features and usage of 
various spectrum bands assigned to users. 
  [Paragraphs 3.2 and 3.3] 
2. There has been a Standing Committee since 1966 viz. SACFA (Standing Advisory 
Committee on Frequency Allocation) in DoT, to make recommendations on issues 
related to frequency allocation, deliberations at international forums like International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) and Asia Pacific Telecommunity (APT), 
formulation of National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP) etc. However, its role has 
been limited to giving siting clearances for wireless installations. DoT had not 
constituted a Permanent Committee/ Group to advise them on complex issues related 
to Spectrum Management including refarming of spectrum, for efficient and optimal 
utilization of the scarce resource. 
[Paragraphs 1.8 and 3.4.1] 
3. Decision making in DoT  was plagued with adhocism and absence of any Permanent 
Mechanism in the Department, constituting all Government stake holders to advise 
them on important issues relating to Spectrum Management comprising of spectrum 
allocation/ assignments/ utilization of assigned spectrum, refarming and sharing of 
spectrum amongst Government users etc.  There were no arrangement in place to study 
technological developments worldwide for suggesting their deployment in India to 
spectrum users, as mandated by NDCP 2018. 
They had instead constituted (June 2015) Seven Working Groups for identifying 
frequencies in specific spectrum bands viz. 470-520 MHz, 1215-1400 MHz, 1427-1500 
MHz, 1800 MHz, 1880-1900 MHz, 2300-2400 MHz and 21.2-23.6 GHz for 
Government Users. Only four Groups had submitted their final recommendations 
between March 2016 and February 2021 though these working Groups were required 
to submit their recommendations within six months. However, DoT had not taken any 
final decision on recommendations received so far. 
[Paragraphs 3.4.1, 3.4.2 and 3.4.3] 
4. Spectrum allotted so far is liberalized one and can be utilised for all types of Access 
Services i.e. 2G/3G/4G and also 5G services with requisite technology. Spectrum 
allotted/ assigned to Government Departments in Bands 470-646 MHz, 700 MHz, 900 
MHz, 1427-1500 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 2300-2400 MHz, 2500-2690 MHz, 
3300-3670 MHz, 24.25-28.5 GHz was found to be either sub optimally utilized or not 
utilized at all for years together for various reasons. For Spectrum assigned to 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
viii  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Government users, DoT had not taken any lead so far, for refarming and sharing of 
spectrum in economically valuable IMT Bands. There was a large quantity of idle 
spectrum in these Bands, for which DoT had yet to take action for auction/ allotment to 
Government/ private users. 
[Paragraph 3.5] 
5. Utilization of spectrum by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) in 470-698 
MHz band allotted long ago (during the period from 1989 to 2013) and thereafter, is 
very suboptimal due to obsolete technology of Analogue Terrestrial Television (ATT) 
and non-viability of Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT). DoT had not finalized their 
decision in regard to the recommendations of the Working Group constituted for 470-
520 MHz band and Committee of Secretaries (CoS) that 120 MHz (526-646 MHz) 
spectrum in these bands can be made available on pan India basis for IMT (5G) 
applications.  
[Paragraphs 3.5 and 6.2] 
6. Railways, had been allotted 1.6 MHz paired spectrum since 2003 on pan India basis in 
commercially important 900 MHz band for its GSM-R based Mobile Train Radio 
Communications (MTRC) system. They could commission MTRC equipment only in 
57.90 per cent of routes planned covering nine out of 22 service areas. Utilisation of 
spectrum in this band is inefficient and sub optimal due to non-maintenance of 
equipment and unavailability of spare parts. However, this 1.6 MHz paired spectrum in 
900 MHz band was not re-farmed from Railways as recommended by TRAI, where 
Railways has not commissioned its GSM-R based MTRC system (first in 13 service 
areas) and in phases in balance nine service areas. 
Railways have been allotted 5 MHz Spectrum in 700 MHz IMT Band (June 2021) for 
roll-out of LTE based network, for which work was stated to be in progress. 
 [Paragraph 3.5] 
7. Spectrum in 2100 MHz and 2300-2400 MHz frequency bands being IMT bands has 
huge commercial value. The spectrum in these commercially important bands were 
lying unutilized/ sub-optimally utilized, and needed to be harmonized or vacated. 
 [Paragraph 3.5] 
8. Frequency band 2500-2690 MHz identified for IMT applications is currently being used 
for both terrestrial and satellite based services. Out of 190 MHz available Spectrum, 
only 40 MHz had been allotted/ assigned for IMT applications and satellites (GSAT 6, 
7 and 17) had been launched for 100 MHz for satellite-based services for users. Launch 
of satellite for balance 50 MHz was under process. There has been interference in the 
existing operations and lack of coordination between DoT and DoS for proper 
technology solution for co-existence of both services, leading to sub optimal use of 
spectrum in this band. 
 [Paragraph 3.5] 
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
ix Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
9. Similarly, Spectrum in 3.3 GHz - 3.6 GHz had been identified for both terrestrial and 
satellite-based services. DoS and DoT had not identified an appropriate technology 
solution and limitations of use in such a manner that both services can co-exist in these 
bands. Therefore, non-utilization of 175 MHz of the total capacity, reserved for 
Broadband Wireless Access services was observed. 
[Paragraphs 3.5] 
10. Automated Spectrum Management System (ASMS) implemented by DoT in 2005 for 
engineering calculation of interference free frequency assignments and processing of 
applications, issue of licenses, generation of invoices, integration with monitoring 
organization, etc. is not being used for full functionalities as per International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) standards/ guidelines. Obsolete and poorly 
maintained equipment/ systems lead to ineffective Spectrum Management in WPC 
(DoT). The National Frequency Register (NFR) was also not updated in the ASMS 
vis-à-vis cancellation and surrender of frequency authorization, change of frequency, 
etc. and there was largescale mismatch of database regarding spectrum assigned to 
Government Departments/ PSUs/ Agencies. 
[Paragraph 3.6] 
11. WPC (DoT) issues Agreement in principle (AIP)/ Decision Letters (DLs) before 
granting Wireless Operating licenses (WOL), which were legally required under 
Section 3 of Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933 for establishing Wireless Telegraph 
Station. Audit observed that Several Departments/ Agencies were found using spectrum 
without getting valid Wireless Operating licenses as required, due to delays in disposal 
of their applications by WPC wing or non-compliance of terms and conditions of AIP/ 
Decision Letter by the users.  
[Paragraphs 6.1.2, 6.4.3, 6.5.2 and 6.7.3] 
 
Monitoring of Spectrum Use 
12. Monitoring of spectrum use is an important aspect of spectrum management. The 
Wi
reless Monitoring Organization (WMO), a field unit of DoT did not have sufficient 
and updated monitoring equipment, enforcement groups. Proposals for procurement of 
required equipment were pending at different stages awaiting approval in DoT. This 
adversely affected the effectiveness of monitoring activities and action on unauthorized 
use of spectrum.  
Further, DoT did not have any institutionalized mechanism or any apparent MIS for 
monitoring of spectrum use by the Government Departments/ Agencies. 
[Paragraph 3.7] 
 
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
x  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Spectrum Management in Ministry of Defence 
Ministry of Defence have historically been one of the largest users of RF Spectrum which 
has been assigned to them on Administrative basis. JCES Defence is the Nodal agency in 
MoD responsible for Spectrum Management for the Defence services. The Audit Findings 
relating to Spectrum Management in MoD have been issued separately to them due to 
their security concerns.  
Spectrum Management in Department of Space 
13. Bandwidth capacities on GSAT 29, GSAT 19 and GSAT 11 remained idle for long 
per
iods since their launch in June 2017, November 2018, and December 2018 
respectively. DoS allotted spectrum bandwidth to users only in 2020/ 2021, resulting in 
non-utilization spectrum bandwidth for several years. 
[Paragraph 5.2.2] 
14. The Orbit Spectrum Coordination and Acquisition Wing (OSCA) functioning under 
Satellite Communication Programme Office (SATCOM PO) of ISRO is the focal point 
for spectrum coordination and its management. Audit observed weakness in the 
supervision and review mechanism in OSCA to maintain strict discipline in the usage, 
management and surrender of IMT band spectrum. 
[Paragraph 5.2.4] 
Spectrum Management in other Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
15. Directorate of Coordination, Police Wireless (DCPW) being the nodal advisory body 
to 
the MHA for the police telecommunication has not devised any policy guidelines 
regarding spectrum and equipment required for meeting all emergency requirements.  
[Paragraph 6.3.1] 
16. POLNET, a nationwide Satellite based Captive Communication Network/ Digital 
Information Highway in C-band is not being utilised optimally as it was not yet fully 
commissioned due to some shortcomings in the Hub.  
[Paragraph 6.3.2] 
17. ONGC could not commission its planned networks due to poor contract management 
and surrendered the allotted spectrum in 3.3-3.4 GHz and 7 GHz respectively in 
December 2019 and November 2020. Thus, spectrum in these important bands 
remained unutilized for four to nine years. 
[Paragraph 6.4.1] 
18. Frequency spots assigned to Airports Authority of India remained unutlised for years 
together at various Airports owing to delayed procurement of equipment/ non 
completion of projects in time. 
[Paragraphs 6.7.1 and 6.7.2]
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
xi Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Summary of Recommendations 
i) DoT may devise a policy on allotment and assignment of spectrum for Captive Users/ 
other commercial usage in alignment with statements made in NDCP 2018 and end 
adhocism in allotment of spectrum to Government Departments/ Agencies. 
ii) DoT may review the pricing mechanism of Spectrum for Captive Users in order to 
incentivize Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies and maintain spectrum management 
discipline. They may consider differential pricing depending on the features and 
usage of various spectrum Bands. 
iii) DoT may establish a Permanent set up comprising all stake holders for periodical 
review of spectrum planning, spectrum availability, allotments/ assignments, pricing, 
etc. to expedite decisions for efficient management and optimal utilisation of 
spectrum in India. They may also ensure that a MIS is put in place in DoT to get 
details of actual spectrum utilized by Government user Departments and Agencies.   
iv) DoT needs to encourage/ support research studies and other technical initiatives by 
user Departments/ entities as well as other organizations for technology solutions for 
efficient spectrum utilization. 
v) DoT in consultation with all the Departments may take proactive measures for 
finalization of recommendations of Working Groups and decisions of the Committee 
of Secretaries for reassignment/ re-allotment/ refarming of spectrum. 
vi) In pursuance of NDCP 2018, DoT may coordinate with Government users to provide 
spectrum in substitute bands for users in 1427-1500 MHz and 2300-2400 MHz bands, 
harmonization exercise in 2100 MHz, sharing of spectrum in 700 MHz band as these 
had been identified for IMT use and have scope for commercial utilization of 
spectrum. 
vii) All the stakeholders in the 2500 MHz band viz. DoT, DoS and others need to ensure 
synergy for which DoT may take the lead so that this important IMT band can be 
utilized optimally with proper technological solutions for co-existence of both 
terrestrial and satellite-based services without causing harmful interference. 
viii) DoT in consultation with Ministry of Information & Broadcasting may take 
immediate action to make available spectrum in frequency band 526-646 MHz for 
IMT/5G services, based on recommendation of Working Group and Committee of 
Secretaries that Doordarshan and other Government user could coexist in 470-520 
MHz frequency band. 
ix) DoT and Railways may monitor the completion of LTE based network project in 700 
MHz band so that Railways vacate the spectrum in 900 MHz band being used by them 
and it is made available for commercial utilization.  
x) DoT in consultation with TRAI may take early action for the auction/ utilization of 
IMT spectrum lying idle with them. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
xii  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
xi) DoT needs to acquire and implement an industry standard Automated Spectrum 
Management System. Further, DoT may update the existing database on spectrum 
users on priority before migration to the new system and make available the updated 
database on a timely basis to WMO for efficient monitoring of assigned Spectrum. 
xii) DoT may urgently upgrade the infrastructure and equipment of its WMO offices and 
its field units to strengthen their monitoring of spectrum. Further, DoT may also 
conduct a comprehensive review of the manpower and resource requirements of 
WMO units to enable them to discharge their monitoring responsibilities effectively 
and efficiently in an increased environment of spectrum users. 
xiii) DoT may review the international best practices in Spectrum Management, for 
suitable incorporation of these best practices for Spectrum Management in India. 
xiv) DoS and DoT need to work together to identify an appropriate technology solution in 
such a manner that both services can co-exist in important frequency bands. 
xv) DoS needs to engage with client Departments and other potential users at an early 
stage before planning and launching the satellite capacity so as to minimize non-
utilization of spectrum resources. 
xvi) DoS needs to establish a mechanism for assessing and reviewing the utilization of 
spectrum in all bands, particularly in IMT bands and satellite bandwidth for ensuring 
optimal and efficient utilization of assigned spectrum. DoS may consolidate spectrum 
related information and make it available at a common platform for easy access and 
assessment of spectrum at Corporate Infocom level. 
xvii) Ministry of Home Affairs may devise policy for spectrum management among 
Central Armed Police Forces. Further, efforts may be made for optimal utilisation of 
POLNET 2.0 by all State Police Departments and CAPFs and other related agencies 
for their operational requirements. 
xviii) DoT may ensure that PSUs like ONGC and GAIL etc. use the assigned spectrum 
optimally and efficiently and   surrender unutilsed frequencies. 
xix) AAI may introduce a mechanism for periodical review of utilization of assigned 
frequencies and adhere to the regulatory provisions governing use of wireless 
equipment/ networks. 
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
1 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER 
Introduction to Spectrum and Organisational Set up 
1 
A Introduction to Spectrum 
1.1 Electromagnetic Spectrum 
Electromagnetic (EM) Spectrum is a range of wavelengths or frequencies of electro-magnetic 
radiation. It includes gamma rays, X-rays, ultraviolet rays, the visible spectrum (light), infrared 
rays, microwaves and radio frequency waves. The part of EM spectrum that can be used for 
communication is referred to as Radio Frequency (RF) spectrum. 
RF spectrum is an important but scarce resource needed for wireless communication, and thus 
affects each person and had become recognized the world-over as an important tool for socio-
economic development of a nation. The ability to carry energy and messages at a distance, with 
the speed of light and no cost, had made RF Spectrum a valuable resource with the potential 
for providing gains to everybody. 
The RF spectrum corresponds to frequencies from 3 KHz1 to 3,000 GHz2. This band had been 
fur
ther divided by the International Telecommunication Union3 (ITU) into various categories. 
RF
 spectrum ranging from 8.3 KHz to 275 GHz had been allocated as per the table of 
Frequency Allocation under Article 5 of ITU’s Radio Regulations (RRs) for various radio 
communication services. There were 41 different types of services defined in the Radio 
Regulations such as Fixed service, Mobile service, Broadcasting service, Space operation 
service, Aeronautical mobile service, Amateur service, Maritime mobile service, Land mobile 
service, Port operation service, Radio determination service, Mobile satellite service, 
Radiolocation service, Ship movement service, Meteorological aids service, etc. Figure 1.1 
illustrates different frequency bands and their applications. 
Figure 1.1: Frequency bands and its applications 
 
                                                           
1 kHz  is the abbreviation for k ilohertz. A unit of measurement of frequency, also known as cycles per second. 
One KiloHertz (kHz) is equal to 1,000 Hertz (Hz) or 1,000 cycles per second. 
2 One GigaHertz (GHz) is equal to 1,000 MHz ie 1000000 kHz  
3  ITU is a specialized agency of United Nations tasked with coordinating spectrum use at a global level with 
it
s headquarter in Geneva. 


Report No. 2 of 2022 
2  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Table 1.1 exhibits the different ITU frequency bands, wavelengths and major applications. 
Table 1.1: The ITU frequency bands and its applications 
Band Symbol Frequency (lower limit 
exclusive, upper limit 
inclusive)/ Wavelength 
Major services/ applications 
4 VLF Very Low Frequency- 3 to 30KHz 
Myriametric waves 100 to 10 km 
Meteorological aids, Navigation and 
position location 
5 LF Low Frequency- 30 to 300 KHz 
Kilometric waves 10 to 1 km 
Radio navigation, Maritime mobile, 
beacons, Weather broadcast stations for 
air navigation 
6 MF Medium Frequency- 300 to 3000 
KHz 
Hectometric waves 1000 to 100 m 
Aeronautical radionavigation, Maritime 
mobile, AM broadcasting 
7 HF High Frequency- 3 to 30 MHz 
Decametric waves 100 to 10 m 
Shortwave broadcasting, Maritime 
mobile, Aeronautical mobile. 
8 VHF Very High Frequency- 30 to 300 
MHz 
Metric waves 10 to 1 m 
Space operation, Space research, 
Maritime mobile, Radar, FM 
broadcasting, Mobile radio 
communications, Air traffic control 
9 UHF Ultra-High Frequency- 300 to 
3000 MHz 
Decimetric waves 100 to 10 cm 
Cellular telephones, TV broadcasting, 
Radar, Radio astronomy, Microwave 
links 
10 SHF Super High Frequency- 3 to 30 
GHz 
Centimetric waves 10 to 1 cm 
Radar, Satellite communications systems, 
Aircraft navigation, Radio astronomy, 
Remote sensing, 
11 EHF Extremely High Frequency- 30 to 
300 GHz 
Millimetric waves 10 to 1 mm 
Radar, Advance communications 
systems, Radio astronomy, Remote 
sensing,  
12 THF Tremendously High Frequency- 
300 to 3000 GHz 
Decimillimetric waves 1 to 0.1 
mm 
Not allocated  
There were several physical and technical limitations on the utilization of radio frequencies. Its 
use for communication purposes is dependent on availability of equipment and technology, 
propagation and operational constraints and suitability of different frequencies for specific 
applications. Therefore, only a limited portion of the RF spectrum is useful for specific 
telecommunication services. Some RF spectrum (such as in the UHF band, 300-3000 MHz, or 
slightly higher) is suitable for a wide variety of services and is thus in great demand. 
Frequency bands in the microwave range 4 were designated by letters such as L, S, C, Ku, K 
and 
Ka, etc. which were standardized by US Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE). The details of frequency band classification by US IEEE are given in Annexure 1.1. 
These terminologies are being commonly used in satellite-based spectrum. 
1.2 Spectrum Allocation and Management 
RF spectrum is not limited by national boundaries and is susceptible to interference as it is 
governed by laws of physics due to its propagation characteristics and it must be shared by all 
                                                           
4 Microwave is a form of electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths ranging from about one meter to one 
millimeter. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
3 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
countries for several telecommunication services. Since, radio waves are not limited by 
national boundaries the need for international planning for frequency allocations and protection 
of the legitimate use of RF spectrum had long been recognized. 
1.2.1 Role of International Telecommunication Union 
At the global level, this task lies with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) which 
is a specialized planning agency of the UN. ITU agreements on spectrum allocation are set out 
in the ITU Radio Regulations (ITU RRs) which have treaty status. RRs regulate the use of radio 
spectrum internationally and form the global framework for regional and national planning 
(although nations remain sovereign in their use of the radio spectrum in their own territory and 
Article 48 of the ITU Constitution states that ITU members may retain their freedom regarding 
military radio use). RRs are regularly reviewed and if necessary, revised through World Radio 
Conferences (WRC) which takes place every three to four years. The last WRC took place at 
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt during October-November 2019. 
At the national level, the Wireless Planning & Coordination (WPC) Wing of Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), is the nodal agency of the Government of India (GoI) for radio 
reg
ulation and is responsible for planning, regulating, and manag ing the limited resources of 
RF spectrum and associated satellite orbits including geo-stationary satellite orbit, as well as 
licensing of wireless stations in the country. As the national radio regulator, WPC represents 
India in ITU forums. 
1.3 Spectrum Allocation and Management Process and Poli
 cy in India  
1.3.1 National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP) and National Frequency Register 
(NFR) 
In India, the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 and related 
rules and procedures provide the legal basis for spectrum management.  
The National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP) is an important policy document identifying 
band wise availability of spectrum for spectrum managers, wireless users and manufacturers in 
the country facilitating optimal utilization of radio frequency spectrum for various services and 
applications. It is developed in consultation with stakeholders within the framework of the 
International Frequency Allocation Table (IFAT) contained in Article 5 of the ITU Radio 
Regulations. The NFAP currently in vogue is NFAP-2018 which came into effect from October 
25, 2018 aims to provide a roadmap for the availability and allocation of wireless spectrum to 
facilitate the development and deployment of next generation wireless services in the country 
viz. Machine to Machine (M2M) communications and Internet of Things (IOT), which would 
be supported in a large measure by the forthcoming 5G technology.  
The National Frequency Register (NFR) is the basic record for all frequency assignments and 
is referred to for identifying assignable frequency for any new applicant.  
 
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
4  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
1.3.2  Approaches to Spectrum Allotment: Administrative allotment and market-based 
allotment 
Historically, spectrum allotment was done by assigning frequencies by issuing licenses to 
specific users for specific purposes and by limiting access to and use of RF spectrum; this is 
referred to as the administrative approach to spectrum management.  
In India, spectrum auction was introduced in 2010 for 3G/ BWA services only. Post the 
Supreme Court judgement of February 2012 in the 2G Spectrum case, spectrum for telecom 
access services (2G/3G/4G) under the Unified License regime had been allotted through 
auctions. However, spectrum for other telecom services viz. Point to Point links, Internet 
Services, NLD/ ILD, VSAT, etc. and captive uses continues to be allotted administratively. 
1.3.3 RF Spectrum users and types of licenses 
In terms of spectrum usage, allotment and pricing, the spectrum users are broadly categorized 
as Captive users and Commercial users. 
(I) A ‘Captive user’ of RF spectrum is a person/ entity to whom the WPC had assigned one 
or more radio frequencies within specified space-time combination(s) to meet his own needs, 
but not for providing any kind of broadcasting or telecommunication service(s) to others (third 
parties) directly using the said frequencies. Major captive users are Central/ State Government 
Departments, Defence and Paramilitary Forces, Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), State 
Police/ Fire services, Airport Authority and Aircrafts, Maritime, Ports and Ships, Captive Very 
Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) Service Providers, Private entities and other users. Spectrum 
assigned to State Police organizations, Central Para Military Forces, Civil Aviation are 
primarily in non-International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) bands5 whereas spectrum to 
De
fence and some PSUs are in both IMT and non-–IMT bands. Spectrum assignment to 
Captive users is made through administrative pricing mechanism and not through market 
related process. 
(II) A ‘Commercial user’ of RF spectrum is an entity to whom the WPC had assigned one or 
more radio frequencies within specified space-time combination(s) for providing any kind of 
broadcasting or telecommunication service(s) to others (third parties) directly using the said 
frequencies. Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), Internet Service Providers (ISPs), Commercial 
Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) Service Providers, National Long Distance (NLD) / 
International Long Distance (ILD) Service Providers, Public Mobile Trunking Service 
Providers and Private Frequency Modulation (FM) Broadcasters are major commercial users 
of RF spectrum. Satellite based services like Licensed Teleport Operators for Satellite 
uplinking, Licensed Digital Satellite News Gathering (DSNG) 6 Operators, Sound and 
Te
rrestrial TV Broadcasting (Prasar Bharti), etc. are also commercial users.  
 
                                                           
5  IMT bands refers to spectrum band used for providing public mobile telecom services.  
6  DSNG is a kind of electronic news gathering (ENG), which simply refers to all the electronic technologies 
that allow news reporters to broadcast from remote locations outside of a TV studio. It is a broadcasting 
service under satellite application. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
5 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
1.3.4 Formulation of Telecom Policies and Spectrum Management 
(a)  Telecom Policies 1994, 1999 and 2012 
Use of spectrum in India is governed by the provisions of Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 
1933 and allocation of spectrum is made under the framework of National Frequency 
Allocation Plan (NFAP) which is revised from time to time. Cellular services using spectrum 
was introduced in the country in 1994 in pursuance of National Telecom Policy (NTP) 1994. 
However, NTP 1994 was silent about spectrum management policy. Subsequently, NTP 1999 
was formulated which identified the issues relating to spectrum management and emphasized 
that spectrum be utilized efficiently, economically, rationally, and optimally. It further 
identified the need for re-farming of spectrum from Defence and other departments and to 
charge a spectrum usage fee. 
In the backdrop of significant growth and penetration of telecommunication services in the 
country and controversies relating to continued administrative allotment of spectrum to 
Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), NTP 2012 was formulated. It provided for delinking of 
allotment of spectrum with licenses and to make spectrum available at a price determined 
through market related processes. It further emphasized on liberalization of spectrum to enable 
use of spectrum in any band to provide any service in any technology as well as to permit 
spectrum pooling, sharing and trading to enable optimal utilization of spectrum. A road map is 
to be prepared every five years to continuously assess the additional availability of spectrum. 
(b)  National Digital Communication Policy 2018 
Communication sector in the country had been witnessing rapid growth and technological 
changes. To ensure the advantages of new technologies and promote policies that increase 
opportunities for social and economic development in the country, a new policy statement viz. 
National Digital Communication Policy (NDCP) 2018 was announced, whose salient features 
are as follows: 
i. Developing a transparent, normative, and fair policy for spectrum assignments and 
allocations. 
ii. Identifying and making available new spectrum bands for Access and Backhaul 
segments for timely deployment and growth of 5G networks. 
iii. Making available harmonized and contiguous spectrum required for deployment of 
next generation access technologies. 
iv. Coordinating with Government departments for freeing underutilized/ substitutable 
spectrum, and its assignment along with unutilized spectrum for efficient and 
productive use. 
v. Ensuring the optimum utilization of spectrum by management of interference free 
spectrum and encouraging new technologies and consolidation  
vi.  Monitoring efficient utilization of spectrum by conducting systematic audits of the 
spectrum allocated to both commercial and government organizations.  
vii. Recognizing mid-band spectrum, particularly the 3 GHz to 43GHz range, as central 
to India’s strategy for Next-Generation Networks. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
6  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
viii. Promoting the effective utilization of high capacity backhaul E-band (71-76/ 81-86 
GHz) and V-band (57-64 MHz) spectrum in line with international best practices. 
ix. Rationalizing annual royalty charges for microwave links for backhaul 
connectivity. 
1.4 Availability of spectrum for Telecom Services in India  
Table 1.2 indicates frequency bands or parts thereof that had been identified for 
implementation of IMT as per IFAT and NFAP 2018. 
Table 1.2: Frequency band under IFAT and NFAP 
Frequency 
Band 
IFAT foot 
Note No. 
IND foot 
Note No. 
Remarks 
450-470 MHz 5.286AA IND 16, 18 Identified as IMT band but not yet allotted for 
commercial use. Major users in this band are 
Railways, Airports Authority of India, Other 
Government user and PSUs. 
470-610 MHz 5.296A IND 16 (a) Large part of the band 470-698 MHz 7 is used 
for broadcasting services by MIB. 
(b) As per band plan adopted in India for 700 
MHz band, 45+45 MHz (703-748 MHz/ 758-803 
MHz) is available for use, but only 30+30 MHz 
was put to auction held in March 2021. 5+5 MHz 
for Railways and 10+10 MHz is earmarked for 
other Government user. 
(c) 806-824 MHz/ 851-869 MHz earmarked for 
Public Protection and Disaster Relief (PPDR) and 
Public Mobile Radio Trunking (PMRT) services. 
 
(d) 824-844 MHz/ 869-889 MHz (800 MHz 
band) allotted for telecom use. Some spectrums 
also assigned to a Government user  in a few 
service areas. 
610-890 MHz 5.313A IND 16, 18 
890-960 MHz 5.317A IND 16, 26  In the 900 MHz band (890-915 MHz/ 935-960 
MHz) earmarked for telecom use, some parts of 
it allotted to Railways and other Government 
user. 
1427-1518 MHz 5.341C, 
5.346A  
IND 16 Identified as IMT band but not yet allotted for 
commercial use. Major users in this band are 
MIB, other Government user, Fire Brigade 
and PSUs. 
1710-2200 MHz 5.384A 
5.388 
IND 16 (a) In the 1800 MHz band (1710-1785 MHz/ 
1805-1880 MHz), 20+20 MHz had been allotted 
for a Government user and 55+55 MHz allotted 
for telecom use (Access services). 
(b) In the 2100 MHz band (1920-1980 paired 
with 2110-2170 MHz), 40+40 MHz allotted for 
                                                           
7  This band is yet to be coordinated at ITU for IMT applications in India, however, it had been identified as 
IM
T in NFAP 2018. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
7 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Frequency 
Band 
IFAT foot 
Note No. 
IND foot 
Note No. 
Remarks 
telecom use.20+15 MHz had been earmarked for 
a Government user.  
2300-2400 MHz 5.384A  IND 16 As per band plan for 2300 MHz band adopted in 
India, 100 MHz in TDD8 mode (2300-2400 MHz) 
is identified for IMT. 80 MHz made available for 
commercial use and 20 MHz earmarked for a 
Government user.  
2500-2690 MHz 5.384A  IND 16 2500 MHz band in TDD mode is identified for 
IMT. Out of it, only 40 MHz is coordinated for 
telecom use and balance is for DoS and other 
users. 
3300-3400 MHz 5.429 
5.429F 
IND 16 As per band plan, 3300-3400 MHz in TDD mode 
is identified for IMT. It is likely to emerge as 
primary band for IMT 2020 (5G) system.  
3400-3600 MHz 5.432A, 
5.432B, 
5.433A  
IND 16 As per band plan, 3400-3600 MHz in TDD mode 
is identified for IMT. Out of the 200 MHz 
available in this band, 25 MHz spectrum is 
allotted for ISRO’s use and the remaining 175 
MHz spectrum is available for commercial (5G) 
services.  
1.5 Process of allocation/ assignment of spectrum 
In India, assignment of frequencies for various services is based on the NFAP.  WPC is the 
license issuing authority for different services/ purposes. All licenses issued by WPC can be 
categorized into network license for using radio frequency and non-network license viz. Import 
licenses, DPL/ NDPL, Experimental licenses, etc.  
In furtherance of Government’s policy on ease of doing business and making the licensing 
process transparent, DoT introduced a Web based Portal, 'SARALSANCHAR'(Simplified 
Application for Registration and Licenses) for issuing various types of licenses and registration 
certificates as part of various Digital India programs. Different modules for different licenses 
were launched in July and November 2020.  
Applicants seeking to use radio frequencies are initially issued Letters of Intent (LoI) intimating 
the license fee and royalty (spectrum charges) payable. After receipt of payment, the 
application is processed first for issue of an Agreement in Principle (AIP) or Decision Letter 
(DL) and then issue of Wireless Operating License (WOL). The Standing Advisory Committee 
for Frequency Allocation ( SACFA) clearance is required for all fixed wireless st ations and 
compliance to conditions of AIP/ DL are prerequisite for issue of WOL. 
For providing space-based services such as communications, meteorology, navigation, etc., 
Department of Space (DoS) allocates satellite capacities on Geo-stationary satellites to the 
users.  A user is required to obtain service license from the concerned licensing Ministry viz. 
                                                           
8  In lower frequency bands, channel plan is normally made in Frequency Division Duplex (FDD) mode where 
se
parate frequency band is allotted for uplinking and downlinking.  However, in higher frequency bands, 
channel plan is made in Time Division Duplex (TDD) mode where both uplinking and downlinking is done 
in same frequency band. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
8  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB)/ DoT, apply to DoS for the satellite capacity 
and wait for the allotment by DoS. After obtaining the satellite capacity, the user must obtain 
operating license from WPC/ DOT for assignment and use of the spectrum. The user must 
finally obtain network licence from Network Operation Control Centre (NOCC) of DOT before 
utilising the network.  The user pays spectrum charges to WPC/ DOT and transponder lease 
charges to DoS for the satellite capacity allocated. 
B Organizational Setup in DoT 
1.6 Department of Telecommunications and Digital Communication Commission  
The work relating to formulation of Telecom policy, issue of licenses for various telecom 
services like Unified Access Services, Internet Services, VSAT services, etc., and frequency 
management (spectrum allotment) in the field of radio communications in close coordination 
with the international bodies (ITU), is under the overall control of DoT under the Ministry of 
Communications (MoC). It also enforces wireless regulatory measures by monitoring wireless 
transmission of all users in the country. 
Digital Communication Commission (DCC) (erstwhile Telecom Commission) is the apex body 
in DoT which is responsible for policy formulation in DoT. An Apex Committee comprising 
officers from DoT, DoS and MIB had been constituted for coordination and management of 
satellite-based spectrum. 
1.7 Wireless Planning & Coordination Wing 
The WPC Wing of DoT created in 1952, is the National Radio Regulatory Nodal agency of 
Gover
nment of India. Broad functions of WPC include- 
a. Coordination and assignment of frequencies for all wireless operations in India.  
b. Regulating, planning, and administering the usage of frequencies and radio spectrum in 
India. 
c. International conferences and agreements and the implementation of the decisions 
taken at these conferences and all associated work, so far as wireless is concerned.  
d. Negotiating with other countries and all associated matters connected with wireless 
communications.  
e. Licensing, regulations, and associated matters in the field of wireless, except broadcast 
receivers.  
f. Discharging all other responsibilities of the MoC as the central coordinating and 
regulatory authority of the country on all matters relating to wireless communications.  
Apart from licensing of wireless stations in the country, WPC is responsible for planning, 
regulating, and managing the limited resources of RF spectrum and associated satellite orbits, 
including geo-stationary satellite orbit as well as licensing of wireless stations in the country. 
It is headed by the Wireless Advisor to the GoI. It exercises the statutory functions of the 
Central Government and issues licenses to establish, maintain and operate wireless stations. 
1.8 Standing Advisory Committee on Radio Frequency Al l ocations 
SACFA, constituted in 1966, is a high-level committee chaired by Secretary (DoT) and heads 
of major wireless users/ administrative ministries of the GoI, and had other senior officers of 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
9 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
DoT/ WPC as its members. It was reconstituted in 2007 with the Secretary (DoT) remaining 
chairman and four other members being the Wireless Advisor to GoI, Director, JCES, Ministry 
of Defence, Executive Director, Airports Authority of India and the Director, Directorate of 
Coordination Police Wireless. The WPC wing of the DoT provides secretarial help to the 
committee. Joint Wireless Adviser, WPC wing is the member-secretary of the Committee. The 
main functions of the Committee are to make recommendations on: - 
a. Major Frequency Allocation issues 
b. Formulation of National Frequency Allocation Plan 
c. Making recommendations on various issues related to ITU such as India’s views on 
various agenda items of WRCs, Study Group Meetings and Bilateral coordination 
meetings, etc. 
d. Making recommendations on various issues dealt at APT (Asia Pacific Telecommunity) 
including views on regional issues 
e. To sort out problems referred to the Committee by various users including clearances 
of all wireless installations in the country.  
SACFA clearances are issued after getting a 'no objection' from various SACFA members who 
must carry out detailed technical evaluation including field surveys, etc. The   technical 
evaluation is done primarily for- 
1. Aviation hazards. 
2. Obstruction to line of site of existing/ planned networks       
3. Interference (Electro Magnetic Interference (EMI)/ Electro Magnetic Compatibility 
(EMC)) to existing and proposed networks.  
With the launch of Saral Sanchar, a web-based portal, issuance of SACFA clearance had been 
made fully automated since 2020.  
At Present, the role of reconstituted Standing Advisor y
  Committee on Frequency Allocations 
(SACFA) is restricted to site clearances of fixed wireless stations and does not look into the 
work related to Spectrum management. 
1.9  Regional Licensing Offices  
In the past, spectrum users were predominantly in the Government sector and private sector 
was using spectrum for their captive uses. Wireless licenses were being issued by WPC wing 
of DoT. With the increase in number of spectrum users, certain wireless licenses (Radio paging, 
Import, Maritime mobile station, Experimental, etc.) were decentralized from WPC wing to 
five Regional Licensing Offices (RLOs) at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Shillong 
(now Guwahati) since January 2007. 
1.10 Wireless Monitoring Organization 
The Wireless Monitoring Organization (WMO) is the field organization of the WPC wing. 
Wireless monitoring is an integral part of spectrum management and this monitoring is carried 
out by WMO through a network of 22 Wireless Monitoring Stations (WMSs), five International 
Monitoring Stations (IMSs) and 1(one) International Satellite Monitoring Earth Station 
(ISMES) located all over India. WMO is also equipped with five Radio Noise Survey Units 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
10  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
(RNSUs), which undertake detailed and complicated measurements to aid in the spectrum 
management activity. WMO had 10 Inspection Units which carry out physical inspection of 
wireless installations. WMO is headquartered at New Delhi and had four Regional 
Headquarters (RHQs) at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, and Chennai.  
1.11  Other Entities 
a. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) was established by an Act of 
Parliament in March 1997 to regulate the telecommunication services, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. Main functions of TRAI include- to recommend the 
need and timing for introduction of new service providers and the terms and conditions of 
license to a service provider, to ensure technical compatibility and effective inter-connection 
between different service providers, to render advice to the Central Government in matters 
relating to the development of telecommunication technology and any other matter related to 
telecommunication industry in general, etc. Its functions were strengthened by an amendment 
to the TRAI Act 1997 made in 2000. 
b. Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT)  was established in 
2000 by an amendment to TRAI Act 1997 to take over the adjudicatory dispute resolution 
functions of TRAI. The tribunal is mandated to adjudicate disputes between the licensor and 
licensees, between two or more service providers, between a service provider and a group of 
consumers, and to hear and dispose-off appeals from any direction, decision or order made by 
the TRAI.  
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
11 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER 
Audit Approach and Methodology 
2 
2.1 Audit Objectives 
The
 objectives of the Performance Audit were to: 
1. Examine whether utilization of spectrum assigned administratively to user Government 
Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies was optimal. 
2. Examine measures taken by DoT for adequate management and monitoring of spectrum 
utilization. 
3. Examine efforts made by user departments and DoT to enhance spectral efficiency and 
release/ surrender unused spectrum. 
2.2 Audit Scope and Sampling 
The
 Performance Audit covering the period 2012 to 2021 was conducted during March –July 
2021 for examining the process of allotment/ assignment and utilization of RF spectrum 
assigned administratively 9 to different Departments/ Agencies. The PA involved scrutiny of 
re
levant records of selected Departments/ agencies. 
Two levels of sampling were employed in the audit – first at the level of Departments/ Agencies 
and second for selection of specific units of the selected Departments/ Agencies. The following 
criteria were adopted for selection of Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies to be covered: 
a.  Quantum of spectrum allotted to Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
b. Frequency allotted in the IMT band 
c. Departments/ Agencies identified by DoT. 
d. Use/ allotment of both IMT and Non-IMT bands. 
After analyzing the preliminary data of spectrum assigned to Government Departments/ 
Agencies made available by DoT, Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies were selected, details of 
which are given below: 
1) Ministry of Defence (MoD) 
2) Department of Space (DoS) 
3) Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB) 
4) Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
5) Ministry of Railways,  
6) PSUs under Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas i.e. Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation (ONGC), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) and Gas Authority of 
India Limited (GAIL) 
7) Airports Authority of India 
In the selected Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies, all spectrum allotted in IMT bands was 
covered. In case of spectrum in non-IMT bands, sample selection was restricted to 25 per cent 
of field audit units/ areas/ locations/ frequency spots.  
                                                           
9 In case of satellite-based spectrum, the scope includes allotment and assignment to all types of users. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
12  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
2.3 Audit Methodology 
An entry meeting was held with the Secretary, DoT and officers of WPC and WPF wings of 
DoT on 26 February 2021. Entry meetings were also held by audit with the senior management 
of the selected Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies during March-April 2021. In the entry 
meeting, the scope and objectives of audit were explained. The audit was conducted on the 
basis of records/ information made available by the respective wings/ divisions/ zones/ 
authorities of the Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies. Audit also accessed public documents 
available on the website of DoT and selected Departments/ Agencies, TRAI, TDSAT and ITU. 
Additional data, information and clarifications were obtained through issue of Audit Memos.  
Draft reports were issued to respective Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies and consolidated 
draft report was also issued to DoT in August 2021. Exit meetings were held by audit on 17 
September 2021 under the chairmanship of Secretary (DoT) associated by senior officers from 
DoT/ WPC on the issues raised in the draft reports. Representatives from the Ministry of 
Defence (MoD), Ministry of Railways (MoR), Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(MIB) were present and officers from Department of Space (DoS) participated through video 
conferences. The Report considers the replies to audit observations furnished by the concerned 
authorities of the respective Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies. 
2.4 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The major sources of audit criteria used in the Audit include the following:  
(a) Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 as amended 
from time to time and rules/ orders made there under. 
(b) National Telecom Policies (NTP 1999 and 2012) and National Digital 
Communications Policy 2018. 
(c) ITU Radio Regulations and relevant ITU recommendations. 
(d) NFAP of 2011 and 2018.  
(e) International practices of Spectrum Management  
(f) Laid down guidelines/ procedures for Spectrum Management by user Departments/ 
Agencies. 
(g) TRAI recommendations and Supreme Court judgement on spectrum allotment, use 
and on spectrum usage charges. 
(h) Government decisions/ recommendations including Cabinet, GoM, COS and reports 
of DoT’s committees/ taskforce etc., on the subject.  
(i) Relevant orders issued by WPC and WPF wings of DoT. 
2.5 Audit Constraints  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the Management in the audited Ministries/ 
Departments/ Agencies in facilitating this audit. However, we were not provided complete and 
accurate records sought by us for analysis and scrutiny, in time by the authorities in the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies, hampering the pace and completeness of 
records sought for. WPC/ DoT did not furnish basic details about applications for frequency 
assignments and their status (rejected/ pending) despite repeated requests and reminders. 
Ministry of Defence delayed the provision of preliminary data and had not been forthright in 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
13 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
providing required details/ records for audit scrutiny on grounds of classified information. Air 
Force and Navy did not supply any data on spectrum utilization and hence we did not have any 
authentic confirmation from them about utilization of spectrum in bands assigned to them. 
Ministry of Railways and Information & Broadcasting also delayed information/ records with 
the plea that these were not maintained/ available at Apex level and are to be sought from field 
units.  
Audit findings in different Chapters of this Report deal with constraints faced by us and its 
effect on audit conclusions and we had to draw conclusions based on limited records and 
information provided in DoT. Audit findings relating to Ministry of Defence have been 
issued separately to them for their security concerns. 
 
Audit was also disrupted due to Covid-19 pandemic and resultant impact. 
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
15 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER Spectrum Management and Monitoring in 
Department of Telecommunications 3 
3.1 Introduction 
Spe
ctrum Management entails both administrative and technical procedures necessary to 
ensure efficient operation of radio communication services at the world and national level. 
Globally, this task lies with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) which is a 
specialized agency of the UN.  
The work relating to formation of Telecom Policy is under overall coordination of Department 
of Telecommunications (DoT). Most importantly, management of Spectrum lies with DoT and 
its Wireless Planning & Coordination (WPC) Wing. DoT monitors the usage of Spectrum 
through Wireless Monitoring Organisation and its field units. The audit issues relating to DoT/ 
WPC and WMO are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
3.2 Ad hoc basis for assignment of Spectrum 
In the absence of a fair and transparent policy on allotment and assignment of spectrum 
on administrative basis, there had been adhocism in assignment of spectrum and non-
availability of spectrum on time.  
DoT introduced auction of spectrum in 2010 for 3G/ BWA  services. Post Hon’ble Supreme 
Court (SC) judgement of February 2012 in 2G Spectrum case, spectrum for telecom access 
services (2G/3G/4G) under Unified License regime, had been allotted through auctions. 
However, spectrum for other telecom services viz. Point to Point links, Internet Services, NLD/ 
ILD, VSAT, etc. and captive uses continues to be allotted administratively. One of the 
objectives of National Digital Communication Policy (NDCP) 2018 is “ Developing a 
transparent, normative and fair policy for spectrum assignments and allocations”, either 
through auction or administrative allotment. 
Audit found that post the Hon’ble SC judgement of February 2012 regarding allotment of 
spectrum for access services, there had been an adhoc arrangement regarding allotment/ 
assignment of spectrum administratively for both captive uses as well as for other commercial 
services. Assignment of spectrum to captive users is being done as an interim measure for 
periods of three/ six months on each occasion as shown in Table 3.1. 
Table 3.1: Details of interim measures for spectrum allotment 
Date of issue 
of Office 
Memorandum 
Period of 
interim 
measure 
Services applicable 
01-10-2013 6 months 
from the 
date of issue 
Captive usage, satellite networks of broadcasting and captive 
VSATs, commercial satellite usage (DSNG/ Commercial VSATs, 
Teleport/ DTH/ NLD/ ILD) and Community Radio Stations (CRS) 
with the condition that it is provisional allotment and subject to final 
decision on allotment and pricing of spectrum. 
09-01-2014 Upto  
31–03-2014 
Public Mobile Radio Trunking Services (PMRTS) with the 
condition that it is provisional allotment and subject to final 
decision on allotment and pricing of spectrum. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
16  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Date of issue 
of Office 
Memorandum 
Period of 
interim 
measure 
Services applicable 
10-09-2014 Upto  
31–12-2014 
Captive usage, satellite networks of broadcasting and captive 
VSATs, commercial satellite usage (DSNG/ Commercial VSATs, 
Teleport/ DTH/ NLD/ ILD), CRS and PMRTS. 
27-07-2017 3 months 
from the 
date of issue 
Captive and non-commercial use of the wireless users providing 
security, safety and/ or essential services with the condition that it 
is provisional allotment and subject to final decision on allotment 
and pricing of spectrum. 
02-04-2019 3 months 
from the 
date of issue 
Broadcasting (including community radio), H/V/UHF/SHF fixed 
mobile networks (including CMRTS but excluding PMRTS) 
radars, experimentations, demonstrations, and satellite-based 
applications with the condition that it is provisional allotment and 
subject to final decision on allotment and pricing of spectrum. 
29-07-2019 
05-01-2021 6 months 
from the 
date of issue 
Table 3.1 shows that there had been a practice of issuing provisional measures for allotment 
for the past nine years, causing uncertainties among users as well as spectrum manager. As 
evident above, assignment to PMRTS and several commercial services were withheld after 
December 2014. Spectrum to ISPs was also denied as seen in Audit. Further, WPC did not 
furnish the details of applications received for assignment of spectrum and their status viz. 
rejected or pending and reasons for rejection, pendency for captive users/ other commercial 
service providers (except TSPs). Audit was unable to comment on this aspect. 
On being pointed out by audit, DoT stated (September 2021) that in addition to OMs mentioned 
in the Table 3.1, similar OMs (April 2014, April; June; December 2015, August 2016, 
December 2017, March; June; September; December 2018, April 2020 and July 2021) were 
issued for three/ six months. It was further stated that post legal opinion of Learned Attorney 
General (July 2020) on “Policy for normative and Transparent Assignment/ Authorization of 
Spectrum”, the matter was under consideration.  
Recommendation 1: DoT may devise a policy on allotment and assignment of spectrum for 
Captive Users/ other commercial usage in alignment with statements made in NDCP 2018 and 
end adhocism in allotment of spectrum to Government Departments/ Agencies. 
3.3 Pricing of spectrum assigned for captive uses 
Pricing of spectrum assigned for captive uses on formulae basis revised in 2012 was not 
reviewed till date despite DoT Committee recommending for periodical review in 2013. 
Present pricing method does not incentivize Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies to use 
spectrum efficiently. 
ITU-R recommendation SM.2012-6 “Economic aspects of spe ctrum management” requires 
that decisions and changes related to fee collection should be undertaken in an open manner 
through consultation with users and industry. It further elaborates that fees should take into 
consideration, to the maximum extent possible, the value of the spectrum. Fees should not be 
an impediment to innovation and use of new radio technologies, or to competition.  
The allotment and charging methodology (formulae basis) for captive use in India is decided 
administratively and following are the features noticed: 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
17 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
a. The default tenure of license is one year, which is extendable based on specific request 
of the licensee.  
b. All frequency bands had the same spectrum rates even though the demand substantially 
varies from one band to another. There is no incentive for Spectrum bands and locations 
where there is no demand or less demand. 
c. There is no incentive for efficient use of spectrum through spectrum efficient 
technology.  
NDCP 2018 provides for optimal pricing of spectrum to ensure sustainable and affordable 
access to Digital Communications. 
The spectrum fee for captive uses in India is levied on formulae basis which was last revised 
(increased) in March 2012 and made effective from 01 April 2012. Three formulae cover 
royalty charges for assignment of frequencies to captive users including government users 
according to single channel operations and multi-channel operations for fixed/ land/ land 
mobile/ terrestrial broadcasting and satellite-based systems irrespective of bands. However, 
differential (percentage increase over annual fee as per formulae) charging for highly 
demanded VHF/ UHF bands of 146-174 MHz and 338-470 MHz in some areas/ States 10 was 
pre
scribed (September 2012). 
A Committee constituted by the Secretary (T) in December 2012 under the Chairmanship of 
Advisor (T) recommended (March 2013) for periodic review of spectrum price for 
administrative assignments.  
The present formula-based pricing model is more suited in the frequency bands below 10 GHz 
due to lower bandwidth for its variety of applications. The fixed wireless links using bands 
from 10 GHz to 30 GHz permit maximum link lengths ranging from about 20 KM at the lower 
edge of this frequency range, to about 10 KM at the upper edge. The transport networks and 
mobile backhaul mainly use the frequency bands from 15 GHz. However, these microwave 
links are not capable of transporting data generated by 4G and 5G due to limited bandwidth 
capacity in microwave frequency range below 15 GHz, and hence there needs to be a 
commensurate pricing basis and not one price fits all.  The higher frequency band i.e. more 
than 30 GHz is largely unutilized at this point of time and the present formulae based pricing 
cannot be applied to these bands considering the quantum of available spectrum and the 
different characteristics of these bands. 
The present formula is based on two factors i.e. ‘M’ factor which corresponds to coverage 
distance and ‘W’ factor for channel bandwidth. This formula is best suited for lower 
bandwidths (upto 28 MHz) but in the case of higher bandwidth of the order of 250/ 500 MHz, 
the W factor becomes too high and the royalty of spectrum usage per annum for the shortest 
length of less than 1 KM happens to be higher than even alternate media like OFC. 
Many users both in Government and private sectors had been assigned spectrum in 
commercially important IMT bands which are charged on formulae basis applicable for all 
bands. Further, communication sector had witnessed major technological changes and alternate 
communication channels had become available to the users.  
                                                           
10 Municipal/state areas of Mumbai (including Navi Mumbai and Brihan Mumbai), Delhi (including 
Gh
aziabad, Noida and Gurgaon), Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
18  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Audit noticed (September 2021) that WPC had not undertaken any review of pricing policy for 
administratively assigned spectrum to captive users/ other commercial service providers 
(except TSPs) post revision of spectrum charges in April 2012 even though periodic review of 
spectrum price for administrative assignments was recommended by a DoT Committee  
in 2013. 
We are of the view that the pricing formula should be such as to incentivize Ministries/ 
Departments/ Agencies to use spectrum efficiently in the important IMT bands and also to 
encourage use of spectrum in higher frequency bands presently not in use. Further, the pricing 
formula should be based on the opportunity cost of spectrum i.e. the more valuable the 
spectrum (e.g. in the IMT band) the more the price as well as to encourage users to shift to 
spectrum in non-IMT bands through viable pricing methods in view of availability of alternate 
communication systems. 
DoT agreed (September 2021) to revisit the pricing mechanism for spectrum assigned on 
administrative basis.  
Recommendation 2: DoT may review the pricing mechanism of Spectrum for Captive Users in 
order to incentivize Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies for optimal utilisation of available 
Spectrum and maintain spectrum management discipline. They may consider differential 
pricing depending on the features and usage of various spectrum Bands. 
3.4 Decision making in DoT  
3.4.1 Absence of a Permanent Committee for Spectrum Management .  
There was no institutional mechanism in DoT for periodical review of spectrum planning, 
availability, allotments/ assignments and pricing for efficient Spectrum Management   
The task of frequency planning and assignment involves  coordination with national users as 
well as foreign administrations. To seek coordination for major frequency allocations, presently 
no Standing Spectrum Management Committee had been constituted in WPC Wing as is 
existent in countries like USA and UK. In the past, Government had constituted several adhoc 
committees to deal with specific issues as given in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Details of Committees constituted in DoT 
Committee/ 
Date of 
constitution 
Compos
ition 
Brief ToR Date of 
report 
Brief 
recommendations 
Action taken 
1. Spectrum 
Management 
Committee 
 
16 Dec 1998 
Lt Gen 
(SO-in-
C), DG 
NIC,  
WA, 
 Dir 
(JCES) 
To review 
procedures 
for 
spectrum 
allocation, 
ways to 
make more 
spectrum 
available 
for 
telecom, 
etc. 
24 Dec 
1998 
Recommended 
solutions for 
additional spectrum 
after coordination 
from a Government 
user, pricing and 
auction, 
modernization of 
spectrum 
management 
system and 
reorganization of 
WPC. 
Spectrum from a 
Government user 
were coordinated 
for mobile services. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
19 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Committee/ 
Date of 
constitution 
Compos
ition 
Brief ToR Date of 
report 
Brief 
recommendations 
Action taken 
2. Committee 
on Review of 
Spectrum 
Usage Charges 
 
09 Dec 2010 
Sr DDG 
(WPF),  
DWAs 
(WPC), 
Dir 
(TEC), 
Dir 
(WR), 
Engineer 
(WPC) 
To suggest 
appropriate 
method-
logy for 
spectrum 
pricing for 
captive 
users and 
bringing 
other TSPs 
under the 
ambit of 
AGR 
30 June 
2011 
Recommended 
methods for 
charging Royalty, 
License Fee, late 
fees from captive 
users and telecom 
services like ISP/ 
NLD/ ILD. 
Spectrum charges 
revised w.e.f. 
 
01 April 2012 
3. High Level 
Committee 
 
14 Aug 2012  
Advisor 
(T),  Sr 
DDG 
(WPF),  
DDGs 
(CS/ 
DS),  
JWA 
(RLO-
WPC), 
DWA 
(WPC) 
 
To look 
into issues 
raised in 
the 
representati
ons on the 
revision of 
spectrum 
charges on 
recommend
ations of 
Spectrum 
pricing 
Committee 
at Sl. No. 2 
22 Aug 
2012 
Largely endorsed 
the 
recommendations 
of the Spectrum 
pricing Committee 
at Sl No 2 
- 
4. Committee 
for issues 
related to 
Administrative 
Allotment/ 
Assignment of 
spectrum 
 
10 Dec 2012  
Advisor 
(T), 
Sr DDG 
(WPF), 
DDG 
(CS), 
JWA 
(WPC) 
DWA 
(WPC) 
To look 
into issues 
related to 
Administra
tive 
Allotment/ 
Assignment 
of spectrum 
in various 
categories- 
CMRTS, 
PMRTS, 
Commercial 
VSAT and 
all captive 
users. 
01 Mar 
2013 
Recommended re-
farming of 
spectrum from 
government users, 
continuance of 
administrative 
allotment/ 
assignment of 
spectrum for 
captive usage, 
allotment of MW 
band for ISP/ NLD/ 
ILD through market 
related process, 
periodic review of 
spectrum price for 
administrative 
assignments, etc. 
Re-farming of 
spectrum is an 
ongoing process. 
Final decision 
regarding 
administrative 
assignment pending 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
20  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Committee/ 
Date of 
constitution 
Compos
ition 
Brief ToR Date of 
report 
Brief 
recommendations 
Action taken 
5. Expanded 
Committee 
 
12 April 2013 
Advisor 
(T)/  
JS (T), 
Sr DDG 
(TEC, 
WPF), 
DDGs 
(AS, CS, 
DS, LF) 
WA/ 
JWA 
Represen
tatives 
from 
MIB, 
DoS 
Review and 
revise the 
report dated 
01 March 
2013  
1st 
report 
on 02 
July 
2013 
and 2nd 
report 
on 02 
Aug 
2013 
Recommended 
continuance of 
administrative 
allotment/ 
assignment of 
spectrum for 
captive usage and 
charging on 
administrative 
formulae basis 
Final decision 
regarding 
administrative 
assignment pending 
DoT again constituted   a Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in October 2020 for examining the 
competing demands in identified bands and to recommend current and future spectrum 
allocation/ assignment to different Ministries/ Departments/ Users in the larger public and 
national interest, identify a mechanism which disincentivizes the holding of spectrum 
unnecessarily by Departments with recommendations on applicable disincentives, and provide 
a future roadmap regarding spectrum allocation and use. 
DoT had stated (September 2021) that no Committee as on date exists on Spectrum Management. 
Beside above committees, Working Groups in line with ITU had been constituted for WRC 
preparatory meetings. Similarly, the work related to revision of NFAP, Committees under the 
Wireless Adviser and its Working Groups under the Chairmanship of JWAs were constituted. 
They accepted that there is no Committee in WPC/ DoT as an institutional mechanism for 
periodical review of spectrum planning, spectrum availability, allotments/ assignments, pricing, 
etc. to expedite decisions for efficient management of spectrum in India. 
Recommendation 3: DoT may establish a Permanent set up comprising all stakeholders for 
periodical review  of spectrum planning, spectrum availability, allotments/ assignments, 
pricing, etc. to expedite decisions for efficient management and optimal utilization of spectrum 
in India. They may also ensure that a MIS is put in place in DoT to get details of actual spectrum 
utilized by Government user Departments and Agencies. 
3.4.2 Identification of advanced technology for efficient use of spectrum 
DoT had not formed any Committee/ Working Group to study technological 
developments worldwide and suggest their deployment to spectrum users in various 
frequency bands as mandated by NDCP 2018. 
NDCP-2018 inter alia provides for efficient spectrum ut ilization and management by ensuring 
interference free spectrum and encouraging new technologies and consolidation. It also 
emphasizes on “Constituting a Spectrum Advisory Team (SAT) consisting of experts, industry 
and academia to facilitate the identification of new bands, applications and efficiency measures 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
21 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
to catalyze innovation and efficient spectrum management”. Further, one of the broad functions 
of WPC/ WMO wing of DoT is to provide “Technical assistance to wireless user 
organizations”.  
Spectrum planning must satisfy the resource availability for current demands and anticipate 
future demand. Spectrum planning might be carried out in line with technological 
developments, flexibility in use, international industry trends, innovation in the 
communications, market fluctuations, user needs, technological neutrality, especially 
considering public policies on national Defence, education, environment, and social 
integration.  
The efficient use of spectrum can be achieved with the use of advanced engineering techniques 
and latest equipment for this purpose, it is necessary to identify the need for technology 
upgradation and deployment of latest communication network. Upgradation/ replacement of 
old spectrum inefficient equipment is required to be done keeping in view the life of equipment. 
DoT accepted (June 2021) that no such Committee/ Group had been formed in WPC to study 
the technological development worldwide and suggest their deployment in India to the 
spectrum users in various frequency bands. As the role of SACFA had been limited to giving 
site clearances for fixed wireless stations, the need of a technical group as proposed in NDCP 
2018 is urgently required to be addressed by DoT. 
DoT agreed (September 2021) with the audit recommendation. 
Recommendation 4: DoT needs to encourage/ support research studies and other technical 
initiatives by user Departments/ entities as well as other organizations for technology solutions 
for efficient spectrum utilization. 
3.4.3 Delays in finalisation of Recommendations of Working Groups   
Out of seven Working Groups constituted by DoT in June 2015, only four Groups 
submitted their final recommendations between March 2016 to February 2021. DoT had 
not finalised any action on these recommendations. 
DoT constituted seven Working Groups in June 2015 for the identification of frequencies in 
specific spectrum Bands for Government Users in addition to the frequency sub bands 
identified as Defence Band. The Working Groups were required to submit their 
recommendations within six months. Terms of reference and status of recommendations of the 
Working Groups is given in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Particulars of Working Groups 
Sl. 
No. 
Frequency 
Bands 
Terms of reference – To 
provide recommendations  
Committee 
members from 
Departments 
Remarks 
1 1880-1900 
MHz 
On coexistence of low 
power cordless system in 
this band for operation of 
Government user.  
DoT (4 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
DIPP (1 member) 
Telecom Sector Skill 
Council (1 member) 
Final recommendation 
date – 08-03-2016. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
22  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Frequency 
Bands 
Terms of reference – To 
provide recommendations  
Committee 
members from 
Departments 
Remarks 
2 21.2-23.6 
GHz 
On identification of 4 
carriers of 28 MHz each in 
this band for a Government 
user. 
DoT (5 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
DoS (1 member) 
Final recommendation 
date – 23-08-2016. 
3 1765-1785 
MHz 
1860-1880 
MHz 
On release of additional 
15+15 MHz spectrum for 
Telecom Service in certain 
specified service area. 
DoT (5 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
Final recommendation 
date – 06-04-2017. 
4 470-520 
MHz 
On spectrum requirement 
for various service/ 
application in this band. 
DoT (4 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
MIB (1 member) 
DeitY (1 member) 
IIT Kanpur (1 
member) 
Recommendation dated 
16-02-2021 under 
circulation, which is yet 
to be approved. 
5 1427-1500 
MHz 
On early identification of 3 
carriers each of 8 MHz in 
this band for a Government 
user. 
 
DoT (4 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
MIB (1 member) 
 
Recommendation dated 
17-02-2021 under 
circulation, which is yet 
to be approved.  
6 2300-2400 
MHz 
On identification of one 
chunk of 20 MHz spectrum 
in this band for a 
Government user. 
DoT (5 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
Final recommendation 
date – 18-02-2021 
7 1215-1400 
MHz 
On spectrum requirement 
for various service/ 
application in this band.  
 
DoT (4 members) 
MoD (1 member) 
DoS (1 member) 
AAI (1 member) 
Recommendation dated 
12-02-2021 under 
circulation, which is yet 
to be approved. 
Table 3.3 indicates that out of the seven Working Groups constituted in June 2015, only four 
Groups had submitted their final recommendations in March 2016, August 2016, April 2017, 
and February 2021, respectively. Though the Committee Members had agreed (February 2021) 
their final recommendations had not been received (July 2021). However, the Competent 
Authority in DoT, had not taken/ initiated final action on any of the recommendations received 
way back in 2016/ 2017. 
Recommendation 5:  DoT in consultation with all the Departments may take proactive 
measures for finalization of recommendations of Working Groups and decisions of the 
Committee of Secretaries for reassignment/ re-allotment/ refarming of spectrum. 
 3.5 Usage and Sharing of Spectrum in Existing Bands 
Spectrum allotted administratively in 800, 900 and 1800 MHz bands before auction of 
spectrum (introduced in 2010) were authorized for 2G services only.  Spectrum allotted through 
auctions were liberalized ones and can be used/ being used for all types of Access Services 
(2G/ 3G/ 4G) and can be used for 5G services also with requisite technology. Further, DoT 
issued guidelines in November 2015 and September 2016 for liberalization of administratively 
allotted spectrum in 800 & 1800 MHz bands and 900 MHz band respectively. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
23 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Our observations relating to important IMT bands based on records in DoT and 
recommendations of Working Groups/ Committees are described in the Table 3.4 as given 
below:  
Table 3.4: Status of available in all Service Areas and unsold spectrum with DoT in IMT 
Spectrum Bands along with Audit observations 
Radio 
Frequency 
Band& User 
involved 
Identified 
Technology 
Spectrum 
available 
for Telecom 
Use 
Unsold 
Spectrum 
with DoT 
Audit Observations 
470-646 
MHz 
Doordarshan/ 
MIB and 
others 
526-646 
MHz for 
IMT (5G) 
2640 MHz 2640 MHz 
(Not yet 
auctioned) 
Actual utilization of Spectrum in frequency 
band 526-646 assigned to Doordarshan way 
back (during the period from 1989 to 2013) for 
broadcasting services was found to be sub 
optimal. Their Digital Terrestrial Television 
(DTT) project initiated in 2003 had not fructified.  
A Working Group constituted (June 2015) by 
DoT recommended that Doordarshan and 
another Government user would co-exist in the 
470-520 MHz frequency band.  
CoS had also recently decided (January 2021) that 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
(MIB) should vacate the frequency band in 526-
646 MHz band and coexist with Government user 
in 470-520 MHz band. Frequency 526-646 is 
important IMT Band for 5G Services. 
700 MHz 
band 
(703-748 
MHz/ 
758-803 
MHz) 
Railways 
& others 
IMT (4G/ 
5G) 
660+660 
MHz 
660+660 
MHz 
Sharing of spectrum in a band by Government 
users with Commercial users or by a Government 
user with other Government user would result in 
efficient and optimal utilization of spectrum. In 
many countries in Europe and North America 
(Box A and B – Para 3.8) , sharing of spectrum 
by Government users with other Commercial 
users had been a reality. In India, sharing of band 
between Government Departments had been 
possible. 
Audit noticed that WPC had not started 
deliberations with stakeholders to explore the 
feasibility of sharing spectrum by various 
Government users for 700 MHz band in 
pursuance of NDCP 2018 and TRAI 
recommendations (Oct 2019). The actual 
assignment to a Government user in 700 MHz 
band was less than 10 MHz (unpaired). Further, 
requirement of Indian Railways would be along 
the railway tracks and stations only. As such, 
TRAI recommended that option for co-existence 
of Railways and a Government user in the 5 MHz 
or 10 MHz sub band in 700 MHz band reserved 
for a Government user  should be explored. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
24  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Radio 
Frequency 
Band& User 
involved 
Identified 
Technology 
Spectrum 
available 
for Telecom 
Use 
Unsold 
Spectrum 
with DoT 
Audit Observations 
Railways confirmed and agreed (June 2021) with 
this TRAI recommendation. 
If proper co-existence studies were done, 5 to 10 
MHz (paired) out of 15 MHz (paired) earmarked 
for Railways and a Government user can be made 
available for IMT applications including 
upcoming 5G services. 
900 MHz 
band 
(890-915 
MHz/ 
935-960 
MHz) 
 
Railways 
& Others 
IMT (2G/ 
4G) 
550+550 
MHz 
60.4+60.4 
MHz 
Spectrum in commercially important 900 MHz 
band had been earmarked to Railways on pan 
India basis for deployment of their GSM-R 
(Global System for Mobile Communication-
Railways in 2G) GSM-R based Mobile Train 
Radio Communications (MTRC) system. 
Audit noticed that MTRC system was 
commissioned for use only at 3,445 route KM out 
of the total 5,949 route KM sanctioned, covering 
58 per cent of routes planned covering nine 
service areas out of 22 service areas. Utilisation 
of spectrum in this band is inefficient and sub 
optimal due to non-maintenance of equipment 
and unavailability of spare parts. However, 1.6 
MHz paired spectrum in 900 MHz band was not 
re-farmed from Railways as recommended by 
TRAI.  
i) An audit observation was made in para No 
2.1.7.2 of the CAG’s report No. 21 of 2018. DoT 
in its ATN stated (Feb 2021) that spectrum in 900 
MHz band would be taken back from Railways 
after the roll-out of LTE based proposed network. 
Railways were allotted 5 MHz spectrum in 700 
MHz band (June 2021) for LTE based network. 
The fact remains that 1.6 MHz paired spectrum 
earmarked for Railways since 2003 remained 
unutilized in 13 service areas and only partly 
utilized in nine service areas. Furthermore, 
spectrum assigned to Railways is susceptible for 
unauthorized use by TSPs as it remains vacant 
outside Railways routes/ stations in a service area. 
Efforts should have been made to surrender the 
unused spectrum in the valuable Band in co-
ordination with WPC. 
ii) An audit observation was made in Para No 
2.1.7.1 of the CAG’s Report No. 21 of 2018 
wherein it was pointed out that DoT had not taken 
action for refarming of spectrum in 900 MHz 
band.  
DoT had initiated the exercise of harmonization 
of spectrum in 900 MHz band in coordination 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
25 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Radio 
Frequency 
Band& User 
involved 
Identified 
Technology 
Spectrum 
available 
for Telecom 
Use 
Unsold 
Spectrum 
with DoT 
Audit Observations 
with a Government user and completed it in 2018 
resulting in availability of additional 59.2 MHz 
spectrum in the Band.  
1427-1500 
MHz 
MIB & 
Others 
IMT 1606 MHz 1606 MHz 
(Not yet 
auctioned) 
NFAP 2018, had identified the frequency band 
1427-1518 MHz for IMT applications in line with 
the ITU Radio Regulations. The frequency sub 
band 1427-1500 MHz is not identified as Defence 
band. 
As this Band has been identified for IMT 
applications and assignment for All India Radio 
and other Government user in this band is not on 
pan India basis in all service areas, there is scope 
to shift All India Radio and other Government 
user out of this band to any other Non IMT bands. 
Requirements of Government user can be taken 
care in other identified Bands, before Spectrum is 
put to auction.  
1800 MHz 
band 
(1710-
1785 
MHz/ 
1805-1880 
MHz) 
 
Government 
user 
IMT (2G/ 
4G) 
1210+1210 
MHz 
202.8+202.8 
MHz 
In the 1800 MHz band, (1710-1785 MHz paired 
with 1805-1880 MHz), 20 MHz (paired) was 
identified for a Government user in March 2015. 
The Working Group constituted recommended 
(April 2017) that 15 MHz spectrum in Kerala and 
Odisha service areas and 10 MHz spectrum in 
Haryana, Mumbai and Kolkata service areas can 
be made available for telecom services.  
Spectrum in 1800 MHz band is being used for 
IMT applications and available spectrum of 
55+55 MHz earmarked for telecom services in 
this band had been largely assigned to TSPs. 
The recommendation of the Working Group had 
not been implemented.  
2100 MHz 
band 
(1920-
1980 
paired 
with 
2110-2170 
MHz) 
 
Government 
user 
IMT (3G/ 
4G) 
880+880 
MHz 
160+160 
MHz 
As per frequency arrangements adopted by India 
for 2100 MHz band, 60 MHz paired (1920-1980 
MHz paired with 2110-2170 MHz) spectrum 
band is available for commercial telecom use. Out 
of this 60+60 MHz, only 40+40 MHz had been 
allotted for telecom use which had largely been 
assigned/ allotted to TSPs. However , 20 MHz in 
uplink sub band and 15 MHz in downlink sub 
band was identified for a Government user in 
2015. As per data made available to audit, 
assignments to a Government user were not pan 
India and at few stations in uplink sub band of 
2100 MHz band (6 to 12 MHz) and 5 MHz was 
found assigned pan India (except J & K) in 
downlink sub band of 2100 MHz band.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
26  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Radio 
Frequency 
Band& User 
involved 
Identified 
Technology 
Spectrum 
available 
for Telecom 
Use 
Unsold 
Spectrum 
with DoT 
Audit Observations 
DoT should take up harmonization of 
allotments/ assignments in 2100 MHz, which 
may result in availability of more spectrum in the 
range of 5 to 10 MHz paired spectrum for 
telecom use in this band. 
2300 MHz 
band 
(2300-
2400 
MHz) 
 
Government 
user 
IMT (4G) 1760 MHz 60 MHz Spectrum in 2300-2400 MHz band had huge 
commercial and economic value.  
Working Group constituted (June 2015)  
recommended (Feb 2021) one block of 20 MHz 
in 2300-2400 MHz band to a Government user. 
Audit observed that assignments in this band had 
been upto 6 MHz at various locations of a 
Government user.  
There is scope for re-farming of minimum 10 
MHz spectrum on pan India basis in this band for 
commercial use after realistic assessment of 
requirement of the Government user in this band 
and availability of alternate bands/ NFS, after 
coordination with the Government user. 
2500 MHz 
band 
(2500-
2690 
MHz) 
 
Department  
of Space  
(DoS) and 
others 
IMT (4G) 880 MHz 230 MHz Currently, this band or parts thereof had been 
allocated for Fixed, Fixed Satellite, Mobile 
except aeronautical mobile and Broadcasting 
Satellite services and some other services.  
Out of 190 MHz, only 40 MHz had been allotted/ 
assigned for IMT applications in this band and 
satellites (GSAT 6, 7 and 17) had been launched 
for 100 MHz for satellite-based services for 
Government users. Launch of satellite for balance 
50 MHz was under process. This band had been 
identified for both terrestrial and satellite-based 
services and there had been interference in the 
existing operations in the band.  
Since the Band is predominantly in use for 
satellite based communication services, DoT, 
DoS and other Government users need to ensure 
synergy so that this important IMT band can be 
utilized optimally with proper technological 
solutions for co-existence of both terrestrial and 
satellite-based services without causing harmful 
interference. 
3300 – 
3670 MHz 
 
DoS 
IMT (5G) 8140 MHz 8140 MHz 
(Not yet 
auctioned) 
3400 – 3600 MHz is identified as IMT bands for 
terrestrial services in NFAP 2018, which had 
already been coordinated by DoS with ITU for its 
space-based services.  Thus, the same band had 
been identified for both the services causing 
overlap.  
It was seen that DoS and DoT had not identified 
an appropriate technology solution and 
limitations of use in such a manner that both 
services can co-exist in these bands.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
27 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Radio 
Frequency 
Band& User 
involved 
Identified 
Technology 
Spectrum 
available 
for Telecom 
Use 
Unsold 
Spectrum 
with DoT 
Audit Observations 
In July 2011, DoT requested DoS that the 
frequency band 3400-3600 MHz was being 
considered for auction for BWA as per guidelines 
of GoI and requested to restrict their filings for 
space stations in frequency band 3600-4200 MHz 
instead of 3400-3425 MHz. However, DoT has 
not auctioned 175 MHz frequency (3425 – 3600 
MHz) reserved for BWA services, and the same 
was lying unutilized since 2011.  
At present, part of the frequency band 3425-3600 
MHz had been given to TSPs at few locations for 
5G on experimental basis. With regard to plan for 
auction of spectrum, a reference had been sent to 
TRAI seeking its recommendations on issues 
involved in auction of spectrum in various 
frequency bands including 3300-3670 MHz. 
There had been an undue delay in finalizing the 
allocation of the said frequencies by DoT and 175 
MHz frequency could neither be used for space-
based services nor utilized for IMT services. 
24.25–
28.5 GHz 
IMT (5G) 93500 
MHz 
93500 MHz 
(Not yet 
auctioned) 
Spectrum band 24.25 to 28.5 GHz is already 
being used for 5G services globally. As per 
information made available to audit, no 
assignment had been made in the aforesaid 
frequency bands. CoS also recommended 
(January 2021) that spectrum in 24.25 GHz to 
28.5 GHz would be used exclusively for IMT/ 5G 
except for a protection distance of 2.7 Km at 5 
DoS stations.  
Based on the Government approval regarding 
new frequency bands for IMT/ 5G in India, DoT 
had informed that 24.25-28.5 GHz band had also 
been made a part of the reference sent to TRAI for 
providing its recommendations on issues 
involved in next spectrum auction. NFAP is also 
under revision and the mmWave bands identified 
for IMT applications would be reflected 
accordingly. 
The audit observations on utilization of spectrum by Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies who 
had been assigned spectrum on Administrative basis, indicate that IMT bands were either sub-
optimally/ under-utilized or not utilized at all due to various reasons. Some bands had been 
identified to roll out 5G services in the country or there is a possibility that other bands are 
going to be offered to TSPs for 5G services due to technological advancement worldwide. 
Railways, Department of Space and other Government users, particularly had been assigned 
spectrum where there was a possibility for sharing or re-farming of spectrum for better 
utilization from economic point of view. DoT in consultation with other Ministries/ 
Departments needs to take decision in this regard for refarming/ sharing and optimal 
utilisation of spectrum in various bands.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
28  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Recommendation 6: In pursuance of NDCP 2018, DoT may coordinate with Government users 
to provide spectrum in substitute bands for users in 1427-1500 MHz and 2300-2400 MHz 
bands, harmonize spectrum in 2100 MHz, for sharing of spectrum in 700 MHz band as these 
had been identified for IMT use and have scope for commercial utilization of spectrum. 
Recommendation 7: All the stakeholders in the 2500 MHz band viz. DoT, DoS and other 
Government users need to ensure synergy for which DoT may take the lead so that this 
important IMT band can be utilized optimally with proper technological solutions for 
co-existence of both terrestrial and satellite-based services without causing harmful 
interference. 
Recommendation 8: DoT in consultation with Ministry of Information & Broadcasting may 
take immediate action to make available frequency band 526-646 MHz for IMT/ 5G services, 
based on recommendations of Working Group and Committee of Secretaries that Doordarshan 
and other Government users, could coexist in 470-520 MHz frequency Band. 
Recommendation 9: DoT and Railways may monitor the completion of LTE based network 
project in 700 MHz band so that Railways vacate the spectrum in 900 MHz band being used 
by them and it is made available for commercial utilization.  
Recommendation 10: DoT in consultation with TRAI may take early action for the auction/ 
utilization of IMT spectrum lying idle with them. 
3.6 Automated Spectrum Management System 
ASMS implemented by WPC in 2005 did not have an AMC and suffered from technical 
snags which resulted in non-updation of NFR. Further, there was large scale mismatch 
of database of spectrum assignments to Government users’ viz. Railways, AAI and PSUs  
A computerized Spectrum management system incorporates  administrative and technical data 
such as assigned frequencies, licensees, equipment characteristics, etc. An Automated 
Spectrum Management System (ASMS) would facilitate national spectrum management and 
monitoring, coordination among administrations and exchange of information with the 
Radiocommunication Bureau (BR) 11, which maintains the Master International Frequency 
Re
gister (MIFR). Coupling of spectrum management and spectrum monitoring makes possible 
an integrated system, which can automatically use measured data from the monitoring system 
and license information from the management database to detect frequencies of apparent 
unlicensed transmissions and other licensing violations for closer examination. Data analysis 
can facilitate better spectrum management for frequency withdrawal and reassignment. 
ITU Recommendations on Spectrum Management System 
In terms of ITU Recommendations/ guidelines, the ASMS should have the following important 
features among other technical aspects: 
a. That the ASMS should contain engineering calculation features for radio services and 
should be capable of using a terrain database for specific engineering calculations 
                                                           
11 Radio communication Bureau is the executive arm of the Radio communication Sector of ITU and is headed 
by an elected Director who is responsible for the coordination of the work of the Sector.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
29 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
b. That output documents such as licenses and invoices should be easily generated. 
Further, ITU recommendations of 2013 (revised edition of 2001) provides for “Automation 
and integration of spectrum monitoring systems with automated spectrum management”. 
Automation can support various functions of spectrum management that include: 
i. Frequency planning, allocations, assignment, licensing, coordination, and international 
notification, 
ii. Standards, specifications, equipment authorization and monitoring activities, 
iii. Storing and maintaining spectrum management data, statistical and advanced reporting 
and providing an interface for inquiries, 
iv. Fees and automatic notification of renewal and EMC calculations including 
propagation. 
A properly maintained and integrated system would result in benefits through effective 
compliance, and the establishment of a more expeditious and fully documented, timely billing 
of customers for their use of spectrum. 
Spectrum Management System in India 
WPC implemented an ASMS in 2005. This had features like provisions for engineering 
calculation for interference free frequency assignments and processing of applications, issue of 
licenses, generation of invoices, integration with monitoring organization, etc. However, the 
ASMS implemented by WPC did not have any maintenance contract and WPC faced network 
issues. As a result, frequency assignments and licenses issued were not being updated in the 
system.  
Non-updation of National Frequency Register 
Audit noticed that the National Frequency Register (NFR) to be maintained by all 
administrations in the world to record the details of the frequency assignments made to licensed 
radio stations was not updated in the ASMS vis-à-vis cancellation and surrender of frequency 
authorization, change of frequency, etc. Surrender of spectrum assignments by users is an 
ongoing process. However, it was ascertained that the ASMS did not have the functionality to 
automatically reflect surrender/ cancellation of frequency authorization and it is being done 
manually, which is the prime reason for not having an updated NFR. 
Action Taken Note on CAG’s Report No. 21 0f 2018 
Deficiencies in maintenance of NFR and ASMS viz. non updation of NFR w.r.t assignment of 
new frequencies (MW) and cancellation of quashed licenses, non-availability of updated NFR 
to monitoring organization and non-monitoring of realization of spectrum charges from private 
captive users were reported in Para No. 2.1.11.1, 2.1.11.2 and 2.1.12.4 of the CAG’s Report 
No. 21 of 2018. 
DoT in its ATN stated (February-May 2021) that, in case of surrender of license, it is done in 
physical form instead of ASMS. Such detail lies with the respective group. Since the existing 
ASMS software is very old and obsolete and had no maintenance contract, efforts were being 
undertaken to procure new Technical Analysis Software. It further stated that the WPC 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
30  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
licensing process had been migrated to Saral Sanchar. The migration of old data would take 
place in Phase-II of Saral Sanchar. The respective groups would update the existing NFR in 
view of the surrendered assignments before migrating to Saral Sanchar in Phase-II. In Phase-
II, the integration between WPC and WMO would also be carried out whereby WMO can view 
the license information as soon as it is issued/ surrendered by WPC and would have access to 
all data automatically. 
However, it was observed (July 2021) that  
 ASMS in vogue in WPC was not being used even for basic functionalities of processing 
appl
ication for assignment of spectrum for various users and instead was being done by 
the respective Groups/ Sections of WPC. It did not have a system for generation of 
invoices for renewal and collection of spectrum fee. The ASMS was not integrated with 
the monitoring systems. Valid database of spectrum users and known radio 
environment viz. time-geography combination of a user, spectrum sensitivity, 
repeatability and equipment details could help in better utilization of available 
spectrum.  
 Our analysis of database of spectrum assignments to selected Government users viz. 
Ra
ilways, AAI, GAIL, IOCL, ONGC, etc. revealed large scale mismatch. Many 
frequencies stated to be assigned as per WPC records were not available/ used by these 
Departments/ Agencies and many frequencies used by them were not found in the NFR 
of WPC. This indicates that database of spectrum users/ licenses/ authorizations 
maintained by WPC, DoT is not updated. 
 Particulars/ details of surrender of spectrum in IMT bands by TSPs were found to be 
ava
ilable with the respective groups of WPC, but proper database of surrender/ 
cancellation of spectrum assignments in non-IMT bands was not found to be 
maintained. 
 Audit further noticed that the database for regular monitori ng activities as well as 
monitoring for resolving interferences were maintained in manual registers/ excel 
sheets and often not updated. 
The recently implemented Saral Sanchar for processing of application for assignment of 
spectrum is not a substitute of an ASMS; rather it is just an interface between the applicant and 
the WPC . No concrete action had been taken to procure any new system like Technical 
Analysis software or migration of old data to new system of Saral Sanchar (Phase II) or to 
update/ replace ASMS having full functionalities as per ITU recommendations.  
Above deficiencies in the ASMS in vogue suggests that Spectrum Management in WPC, DoT 
continues to be inefficiently managed. 
Recommendation 11: DoT needs to acquire and implement an industry standard Automated 
Spectrum Management System. Further, DoT may update the existing database on spectrum 
users on priority before migration to the new system and make available the updated database 
on a timely basis to WMO for efficient monitoring of assigned Spectrum. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
31 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
3.7 Monitoring of Spectrum by Wireless Monitoring Organization 
Monitoring of spectrum by WMOs suffered from non-availability of sufficient 
monitoring equipment. No concrete action had been taken by DoT/ WPC on proposal of 
upgradation and repair of equipment resulting in improper monitoring of spectrum 
utilization. The Database with WMO Hqrs for wireless users was not updated and did 
not have access to the WPC database making monitoring of frequencies difficult. 
Spectrum monitoring provides a method of verification a nd “closes the loop” on the spectrum 
management process. Spectrum monitoring in turn also assists in the process of frequency 
planning, assignment, database management, etc. Monitoring in India is carried out by Wireless 
Monitoring Organization (WMO), a field unit of WPC. Main functions of WMO is to monitor 
the spectrum uses, identify and resolve interferences to authorized spectrum users, inspects the 
premises of licenses for checking the compliances of licenses and support the spectrum 
management functions by providing input required by WPC. 
Audit observations on the functioning of WMO are described in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.7.1 Availability and procurement of monitoring equipment with WMO and its field 
units 
WMO carries out spectrum monitoring through a network of One International Satellite 
Monitoring Earth Station (ISMES) and 27 Wireless Monitoring Stations (WMS)/ International 
Monitoring Stations (IMS), strategically located all over India. For conducting its monitoring 
activities in different frequency bands and with different network configuration standards, 
monitoring stations require specialized equipment. Audit noticed that there had been a lack of 
proper and sufficient equipment for carrying out the monitoring of spectrum uses. 
(A) Availability of monitoring equipment at WMS/ IMS 
1. In 1985, 19 VHF/ UHF equipment were 
procured to monitor the wireless users in VHF/ 
UHF radio frequency ranges. As of now only six 
VHF/ UHF equipment were in working 
condition. 
2. In 1993, 34 HF equipment were procured for HF 
monitoring. As of now only five HF equipment 
were in working condition.  
3. During 2006-07, under World Bank project, 21 
Spectrum Analyzers Agilent and 21 EB 200 
equipment were procured for Spectrum 
monitoring. Out of this only 10 Spectrum 
Analyzers Agilent and 12 EB 200 equipment i.e. 
around 50 per cent were in working condition.  
4. Thereafter, during 2014 & 2015, 27 Handheld 
Spectrum Analyzers (N9344C) for each 27 
WMS/ IMS were procured. 
5. No monitoring equipment had been procured 
si
nce then. 
 
Mon
itoring equipement used by WMOs 
 


Report No. 2 of 2022 
32  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
(B) Procurement of Monitoring Equipment 
WMO had proposed procurement of following monitoring equipment, considering the obsolete 
and faulty conditions of available monitoring equipment. However, their proposals remained 
pending with DoT for several years, at various stages, as given in Table 3.5. 
Table 3.5: Equipment proposed for procurement 
Sl 
No 
Proposal for Equipment Month/ year of proposal 
for procurement 
Present status 
1 Four Radio Network Analysis 
Equipment 
October 2016 Revised proposal under 
consideration 
2 28 Radio Receivers February 2018 Approval of bid document 
stage. 
3 Five Super High Frequency 
monitoring equipment 
April 2019 Approval of bid document 
stage. 
4 Six VHF/ UHF vehicle mounted 
mobile terminal  
June 2014 Proposal yet to be approved 
 
5 Six HF monitoring facility  June 2014 Approval of bid document 
stage. 
6 Five Radio Noise Survey Unit  June 2014 Approval of bid document 
stage. 
 
7  Non-Upgradation of Satellite 
Monitoring System 
October 2019 by the In-
charge of satellite 
monitoring station, Jalna 
Proposal yet to be approved  
Absence of modern and sufficient monitoring equipment resulted in inadequate monitoring and 
non-resolution of interferences as evident from following facts and figure. 
a. 2,490 interference cases (pertaining to the period from January 2012 to December 2020) 
were still pending with WMO. Further, 99 interference cases were more than four years 
old, and 1,860 interference cases were more than one year old. 
b. WPC issued instructions (December 2017) to WMO for spectrum audit in respect of 
operation of 16,982 frequencies in the frequency range 450 MHz - 3600 MHz through 
monitoring method. However, only 13,061 frequencies were monitored by WMSs/ 
IMSs during the period from January 2018 to November 2018. Further, 20 out of 27 
WMSs/ IMSs could not complete the assigned frequencies for monitoring. 
c. WPC instructed (November 2018) WMO to carry out spectrum monitoring to find out 
the utilization of RF spectrum allocated to TSPs in six frequency bands (800 /900/ 1800/ 
2100/ 2300/ 2500 MHz). However, even after lapse of approximately two years only 
2,140 out of 4,050 locations assigned were monitored. Further, review of the 
monitoring reports revealed that 44 vacant frequency channels were found occupied 
while monitoring 211 locations/ geo-coordinates. This indicates that these vacant bands 
were being used in an unauthorized manner. Further, out of these 44 channels, in case 
of only 12 channels, the name of the user/ IMT operators who were using these vacant 
frequency channels could be identified, whereas infringement notices were served only 
in six cases. No concrete legal action against the unauthorized users was found to be 
taken by WMO or WPC. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
33 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
On this being pointed out by audit, WMO stated (June 2021) that spectrum monitoring is a 
complex, tedious, and technical exercise and 93.2 per cent of assignments had already been 
completed even with the crunch of resources. It was emphasized that WMO had done 
unprecedented works within limited manpower, equipment, resources, vehicles, financial 
powers and with few stations across the country. Limitation of financial powers within WMO 
is also a bottleneck in procurement of even petty items, servicing of vehicles, etc. Also, the 
availability of advanced sophisticated equipment and vehicles would enhance the overall 
spectrum monitoring capability.  
Regarding unauthorized use of vacant band, WMO in their reply mentioned (June 2021) that 
during the last few years due to exponential rise in Public Telecom Services and wireless users 
across the country in different frequency bands and with different network configuration 
standards the cases of unauthorized usage of the spectrum had also increased. However, the 
manpower, vehicles, equipment of the WMO which were quite essential for the spectrum 
monitoring had not been increased in tune with this increase in the spectrum use and activities. 
Moreover, WMO primarily being a monitoring agency did not have any dedicated enforcement 
wing for taking punitive and legal actions on unauthorized usage on regular basis. Regarding 
non-identification of operators/ users occupying 32 vacant frequency channels, it was stated 
(June 2021) that carrier identification can be done by equipment like Cell ID kits and not by 
Spectrum Analyzer. In case Cell ID kit with laptop is not used by any station during monitoring, 
the identification of IMT signal could not be done. 
DoT stated (September 2021) that proposals for procurement of equipment were under various 
stages of approval. As soon as necessary administrative and financial approvals were obtained, 
procurement would be done as per rules. It was also stated that a proposal was earlier sent for 
approval of the Competent Authority for increasing the financial powers of Director, WMO, 
being the Head of Department. Another proposal   sent earlier with a request to extend the 
powers exercised by Sr. DDG, JS/ DDG (Wing Head) in the DoT HQ to approve Technical 
Evaluation Committee reports for procurement through GeM upto ₹ 50 Lakhs to Director, 
WMO
.  These proposals were being sent again for approval of the Competent Authority. 
Further, DoT also did not have any institutionalized mechanism or any apparent MIS for 
monitoring of spectrum uses by the Government Departments/ Agencies. 
Above admission by the WMO authorities establishes the 
 fact that lack of suitable and 
sufficient monitoring equipment with monitoring stations had been the main reasons for non-
identification of interferences and unauthorized use of spectrum by users. However, no 
concrete action to expedite the procedure for procurement of the required equipment was found 
to be taken by WPC/ DoT.  
3.7.2 Manpower for Monitoring   
Manpower, vehicles, equipment of the WMO are essential for the spectrum monitoring. In this 
conne
ction reference is invited to response of WMO mentioned in the para 3.7.1, wherein it 
was mentioned that the manpower, vehicles, equipment of the WMO which were quite essential 
for the spectrum monitoring had not been increased in tune with this increase in the spectrum 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
34  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
use and activities. Further, WMO had expressed need for more manpower in surveillanc e for 
detecting unauthorized use of spectrum.  
It was seen that their sanctioned Manpower has remained the same despite exponential increase 
in Spectrum allotments and utilisation. DoT had not reviewed their manpower position and on 
the contrary there were vacancies in the technical staff - viz. Engineers (32 per  cent), Junior 
Wireless Officers (eight per cent) etc. and other categories also. This shortage of manpower 
need to be addressed for enabling enhanced detection for unauthorized spectrum as only 
procuring modern equipment without equipping them with adequate manpower is not going to 
meet the objectives. 
Recommendation 12: DoT may urgently upgrade the infrastructure and equipment of its WMO 
offices and its field units to strengthen the monitoring of spectrum. Further, DoT may also 
conduct a comprehensive review of the manpower and resource requirements of WMO units to 
discharge its monitoring responsibilities effectively and efficiently in an environment of 
increased spectrum users. 
3.7.3 Database for monitoring 
Accurate and reliable spectrum database is the starting point for spectrum monitoring. To 
achieve monitoring objectives, it is essential that WMO Headquarter/ Regional Headquarters 
(MHQ/ RHQ) and Monitoring Stations had accurate, complete and timely information on 
allocated band/ frequencies and wireless licenses. The need for updated data/ records with 
MHQ/ RHQ and Monitoring Stations is clearly spelt out in Wireless Monitoring Stations 
Manual. Monthly monitoring plans are decided by the four RHQs of WMO for WMSs/ IMSs 
under their jurisdiction. In addition to this monthly plans, special monitoring assignments are 
given by WMO Headquarter and WPC on need basis. 
Test check of Data base/ NFR available with the MHQ Delhi revealed that they did not have 
updated database of wireless users and no access to the database with WPC. It was noticed 
that frequencies asked to be monitored by WPC were not included in the NFR available with 
the WMO. Few instances are as given in Table 3.6. 
Table 3.6: Frequency spots not entered in NFR 
Sl. No. Frequency Spot/ Band (MHz) Licensee 
1 465.95-467.05 IOCL 
2 461.9695-461.9805 ONGC 
3 0734-0742, 495.25, 476.75, 482.665, 530.375,532.84 DD 
4 1523.5, 1522, 1473, 1474.5 All India Radio 
Non availability of aforesaid frequencies clearly indicate that the Database of wireless users/ 
NFR available with the WMO was not updated from time to time. Further, it was also noticed 
that many fields in database/ NFR is either incomplete or blank viz. name of licence holder, 
GEOCORD, TRANSLOC, RECLOC, EMMISSION, UNIQUENO etc. and field like licence 
no./ date of expiry is not provided in the data. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
35 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
On being pointed out by Audit, WMO stated (June 2021) that WMO receives data from WPC 
and udpation of data is done by WPC Wing only. The last data was received on April 2017, 
however, as regards to IMT band data, last data was received on March 2019. 
DoT stated (September 2021) that WPC agrees wit h the audit recommendation that "WPC/ 
DoT 
might make available the updated database on a timely basis to WMO for monitor ing". 
SARAL SANCHAR Project is already under implementation in various stages. Moreover, it is 
worth
while to mention here that possibility of Technical Analysis Software is being explored 
by WPC/ WMO. 
As 
such updated NFR that forms the basic document for devising monitoring plans by RHQs 
was not supplied to WMO regularly which had adverse impact on preparing monitoring plans 
and actual monitoring activities.  
Recommendation 13: WPC/ DoT may make available the updated database on a timely basis 
to WMO for its monitoring activities. 
3.8 International practices in Spectrum Management 
Box A: Salient features of Spectrum Management in USA12 
a. Joint Management of Spectrum:  In the United States, the National Telecommunications and 
Information Administration (NTIA) and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) jointly 
manage the use of radio spectrum to balance the interests of the US government interests, private 
players and the public good. NTIA manages spectrum use by federal agencies, while the FCC 
manages non-federal use (private sector, state and local government uses). The two agencies 
coordinate in radio spectrum allocation and reallocation as specified in a Memorandum of 
Understanding. 
b. Coordinated approach: The NTIA uses the Inter-department Radio Advisory Committee (IRAC) 
as an interagency radio spectrum radio coordination body which consists of technical representatives 
from many agencies. The IRAC advises the NTIA on federal radio spectrum needs so that it can 
represent the interests of federal agencies in discussions with the FCC. 
c.  Sharing of Band: “Repurposing” of spectrum  – either on an exclusive or shared basis – to support 
commercial wireless services had been a facet of US spectrum policy, especially with a focus on 
mid-band spectrum i.e. 1 GHz to 10 GHz to increase the amount of such spectrum made available to 
facilitate and augment 5G. Often, repurposing requires significant effort to replace or modify 
sophisticated equipment, to find suitable bands for relocation, and to coordinate with new commercial 
entrants – all while federal agencies carry out their primary, and typically critical, missions.  
d. Spectrum Relocation Fund:  Through Acts of the US Congress, a Spectrum Relocation Fund 
(SRF) was created to reimburse the costs associated with relocating federal spectrum uses to new 
bands or agreeing to share use of their spectrum; this also provides funding for federal agencies to 
conduct studies to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their spectrum use.  
                                                           
12  Information in this section is adapted from the “Overview of Department of Defence Use of the 
El
ectromagnetic Spectrum” produced by the Congressional Research Service, updated March 31, 2021 and 
the “Second Annual Report on the Status of Spectrum Repurposing” of December 2020 by the US 
Department of Commerce. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
36  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
e.  Spectrum Policy: The Spectrum Pipeline Act required NTIA and the FCC to identify 130 MHz 
of federal and non-federal spectrum for repurposing, while the MOBILE NOW Act of 2018 requires 
NTIA and FCC to identify 255 MHz of federal and non-federal spectrum for mobile and fixed 
wireless broadband use by December 2022. In particular, a 100 MHz block of contiguous mid-band 
spectrum in the 3450-3550 MHz band would be made available for commercial use (e.g. 5G) and is 
expected to be auctioned in 2021. Further, new technologies that would enable dynamic spectrum 
sharing – automated sharing between federal and non-federal users – are stated to be under 
development. 
 
Box B: Salient features of Spectrum Management in UK13 
a. Spectrum Policy: The UK Prime Minister declared a vision through the UK spectrum strategy in 
2014 to double spectrum’s annual contribution to the economy. The Public Sector Spectrum Release 
Programme (PSSRP) target, as announced in the 2016 Budget, stipulates that 750 MHz of valuable 
public spectrum in bands under 10 GHz will be made available by 2022, of which 500 MHz would 
be made available by 2020; this includes both “release” and “share”. Ofcom’s proposed spectrum 
management vision for the 2020s involves “providing flexibility in spectrum use to support 
innovation, with appropriate assurances for continued use” and “encouraging sustained 
improvements in the efficiency of spectrum use”; promoting spectrum sharing is one of the strategic 
themes.  
b. Administrative Incentive Pricing:  The Government had also set out a policy to incentivise 
government departments to release or share the spectrum they manage, known as Administrative 
Incentive Pricing (AIP), which sets out the opportunity cost for the frequency bands Departments 
use. This cost is calculated by Ofcom (the communications regulatory agency) on a frequency band 
using current license fees and recent spectrum bands; Ofcom recommends to the UK Government 
how much each frequency band is worth and how much each department should pay annually to 
retain access to the spectrum. 
Recommendation 14: DoT may review the international best practices in Spectrum 
Management, for suitable incorporation of these best practices for Spectrum Management in 
India.  
                                                          
 
13  Information in this section is adapted from the UK Ministry of Defence Electromagnetic Spectrum Blueprint 
– 
Version 1 – 9 August 2019 and a Consultation Paper from Ofcom “Supporting the UK’s wireless future: 
Our spectrum management strategy for the 2020s” published on 4 December 2020 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
37 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER 
Spectrum Management in Ministry of Defence 4 
4.1 Introduction 
De
fence had always been a major user of spectrum in India.  Defence uses spectrum for 
strategic security related operations like air defence, command and control, information 
superiority, communication, and early warning systems. Effective spectrum management is 
fundamentally essential for all types of operations and should ensure that operations are 
conducted with minimal unintentional friendly interference (fratricide) and without negative 
Electromagnetic Environmental Effects. Lack of concise, pre-planned frequency coordination 
might have a disastrous effect upon operations. 
The task of frequency coordination and all aspects of spectrum management in Defence 
Services had been entrusted to the Joint Communications and Electronics Staff (JCES). The 
respective Service Headquarters are responsible for planning their own radio communications 
within the allotted frequency bands. JCES is tasked with inter service coordination and other 
related aspects.  JCES is the custodian of the Defence Services Frequency Allocation Registers.   
4.2 Audit findings  
The audit findings relating to Spectrum Management by the Defence Services have been 
issued to Ministry of Defence separately, due to their security concerns. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
39 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER Spectrum Management in Department of Space 5 
5.1 Introduction 
The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) was established in August 1969 to carry out 
space research. In June 1972, Government of India (GoI) constituted the Space Commission 
and the Department of Space (DoS) and brought ISRO under DoS (September 1972). DoS 
implements various programmes such as satellite communication, earth observation, launch 
vehicle, space science, etc. through ISRO and its various units. The Orbit Spectrum 
Coordination and Acquisition Wing (OSCA) functioning under Satellite Communication 
Programme Office (SATCOM PO) of ISRO is the focal point for spectrum coordination and 
its management.  
5.1.1 Types of Radio Frequency Spectrum available with DoS/ ISRO 
The Radio Frequency Spectrum used by DoS/ ISRO are of the following two categories: 
(i) Orbit-frequency spectrum: This is acquired and coordinated by SATCOM PO with 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) through WPC/ DoT for its Geo satellites for 
providing space-based services such as communications, meteorology, navigation, etc. DoS 
allocates satellite capacities on these Geo satellites to the users.  A user is required to obtain 
service license 14 and apply to DoS for the satellite capacity allotment. After obtaining the 
satellite capacity, the user must obtain operating license from WPC/ DoT for assignment and 
use of the spectrum. The user must finally obtain network licence from DoT before utilising 
the network.  The user pays spectrum charges to WPC/ DoT and transponder lease charges to 
DoS for the satellite capacity allotted. The band wise and frequency wise allotment of the 
spectrum for Geo Satellites, Earth Observation Satellites and Inter Satellite Services of DoS/ 
ISRO is detailed in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1:  Radio Frequency Spectrum of DoS/ ISRO  
Band/  
Frequency 
(MHz) 
Range (MHz) Service 
IMT/ Non-IMT  
Geo satellites 
UHF/ Below 450 137-138, 144-146, 148-149.9/ 435-438 (Non 
IMT) 
Student Satellites 
UHF/ Below 450 290-320/ 240-270, 402.5-402.85, 406.05 (Non 
IMT) 
Defence Data Relay 
Transponders, Search and 
Rescue 
UHF/ 450-3600 460-470 (IMT) Ocean monitoring 
L-MSS/ 450-
3600 
1980-2010/ 2170-2200 (IMT) 
1518-1559/ 1610-1675 (Non IMT) 
Mobile Satellite Service 
(MSS) 
L&S Band/  
450-3600 
1164.45-1188.45, 1563.42-1587.42, 
2483.5-2500 (Non IMT) 
Navigation, GPS Aided Geo 
Augmented Navigation 
(GAGAN) 
                                                           
14  The licence obtained from the concerned Ministry/ Department for the service to be provided, e.g. service 
li
cense is obtained from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting for TV/DTH services and DoT for 
VSAT services. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
40  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Band/  
Frequency 
(MHz) 
Range (MHz) Service 
IMT/ Non-IMT  
L&S Band 
450-3600 
1215-1300 (Non IMT) Navigation 
S Band 2655-2690/ 2500- 2535, 2555-2635 (IMT) MSS, Broadcast Satellite 
Services (BSS) 
Normal C/  
Above 3600 
MHz 
5850-6425/ 3700-4200 (Non IMT) Television, Digital Outdoor-
Broadcast Digital Satellite 
News Gathering (DSNG), 
Telemetry Tracking and 
Command (TTC), Feeder 
link 
L Ext C/  
Above 3600  
3400-3600 (IMT) 
6425-6725/ 3600- 3700 (Non IMT) 
Very Small Aperture 
Terminal (VSAT), GAGAN, 
TTC, Antarctica 
connectivity, Navigation 
Constellation Ranging 
U Ext C/  
Above 3600 
6725-7025/ 4500-4800 (Non IMT) VSAT, TTC, Feeder link 
Ku FSS 
(Planned)/  
Above 3600 
12750-13250/ 10700-10950, 11200-11450, 
17300-17800/ 11700-12200 
17800-18100, 14500-14800 (Non IMT) 
VSAT, Direct To Home 
(DTH), TTC 
Normal Ku/  
Above 3600 
13750-14500/ 10950-11200, 11450-11700, 
12200-12750 (Non IMT) 
VSAT, DSNG, DTH 
Ka Band/  
Above 3600 
27500-31000, 17700-21200 (Non IMT) VSAT, Broadband 
Q band/  
Above 3600 
42500-43500, 47200-50200, 
50400-51400/ 37500-42500 (Non IMT) 
VSAT, Broadband, Feeder 
link 
V-band 
(Planned)/  
Above 3600 
71000-76000/ 81000-86000 (Non IMT) VSAT, Broadband & Feeder 
link 
Earth Observation Satellites 
S-band/ 450-
3600 
2025-2120 (IMT) 
2200-2300 (Non IMT) 
TTC and Data 
X-band/  
Above 3600 
7145-7235/ 8025-8500 (Non IMT) TTC and Data 
Ka band/  
Above 3600 
25500-27000 (Non IMT) Data downlink 
L-band 1215-1300 (Non IMT) Active sensor 
C-band 5250-5475 (Non IMT) Active sensor 
X-band 9300-9900 (Non IMT) Active sensor 
Ku band 13250-13750 (Non IMT) Active sensor 
Ka and Higher 
band 
18600-18800, 23600-24000, 36000-37000, 
50000-64000, 86000-92000, 155500-158500, 
174800-191800 (Non IMT) 
Passive sensors 
Inter Satellite Services (Planned) 
S-band/ 450-
3600 
2025-2110 (IMT) 
2200-2290 (Non IMT) 
Inter satellite 
Ka band/  
Above 3600 
25250-27500 (IMT) 
22500-23550 (Non IMT) 
Inter satellite 
V band/  
Above 3600 
66000 – 71000 (IMT) 
59000-66000 (Non IMT) 
Inter satellite 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
41 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
(ii) DoT/ WPC allots Spectrum administratively to DoS/ ISRO and its units for satellite 
technical support services and for experimental/ developmental projects, as detailed below:   
(a) Technical Support Services: DoS/ ISRO and its units use space based and terrestrial 
based spectrum for technical support. The Space based spectrum includes Telemetry 
Tracking and Command (TT&C) for Geo-Stationary Orbit (GSO) and Non-GSO, 
SATCOM network and data download from NGSO. SATCOM PO identifies the 
frequencies for this spectrum and allots the transponder capacity to Centres/ Units for 
their SATCOM networks. Terrestrial based spectrum includes Radars, Walkie-Talkies, 
lab testing, etc.  for which requirements are specific to a particular centre/ unit. In both 
cases, the respective Centres/ Units approach WPC directly for operating license. WPC 
grants license to the centre/ unit where the RF equipment is located. 
ITU identifies the coordination requirements with the concerned countries for all kinds 
of satellites operating in Geo-Stationary Orbit (GSO) and for communication and 
navigation satellites operating in NGSO.  
(b) Experimental/ Developmental Projects:  The units of DoS utilise spectrum for their 
Research/ Experimental/ Developmental/ Projects.  DoS/ ISRO is of view that no 
license is required to be obtained for these activities. 
5.2.  Audit Findings 
Audit findings on the utilisation of spectrum are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
5.2.1  Co-existence of Space based and Terrestrial services in IMT band  
DoS had coordinated for orbital slot and associated frequency slots with ITU. NFAP 2018 
identified certain range of frequency bands for IMT services which causes overlap 
between satellite based and terrestrial services which need proper technological solution 
for coexistence. 
Orbit-frequency resource comprises of the Orbital slot, which is the position of the 
communication satellite in the sky; and frequency spectrum, which is the band and bandwidth 
in which the satellite operates. Orbit-frequency coordination with ITU includes coordination 
of both the orbital slot and the associated frequency spectrum. 
The orbit-frequency rights are permitted by ITU on the principle of first-come-first-served 
basis.  A satellite needs to be launched within a period of seven to eight years from the date of 
filing with ITU. Once launched, the satellite needs to be maintained at the designated orbital 
slot continuously for a period of 90 days. In case of failure of the satellite, a new satellite must 
be brought into the slot within a period of three years. Failure to do so would result in 
cancellation of the orbit-frequency resource. 
Recognising the potential of this natural resource, many countries being early entrants had 
already occupied bulk of the orbital spectrum.  India could coordinate limited orbit-frequency 
rights at 32.5○, 48○, 55○, 74○, 82○, 83○, 93.5○ and 111.5○ East. Since the signals of the satellites 
go beyond national boundaries, it is strategically important that India occupy the orbit- 
frequency resources in the Indian sky.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
42  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Satellite communication services generally require a minimum of 500 MHz to a few GHz of 
bandwidth in frequency bands like C, Ext-C, Ku, Ka, etc. Some of the frequency bands UHF, 
VHF, L, S band etc. using bandwidth in the range of KHz to few MHz are used to provide 
narrow band and thin route services like Search and Rescue, Satellite phones, etc.  
NFAP 2018 identified a certain range of frequencies as IMT bands to be used for terrestrial 
mobile telephone services such as 2G/ 3G/ 4G/ 5G services. Audit observed that some of these 
IMT bands allocation had Fixed-satellite  service (FSS) allocation as co-primary orbit-
frequency spectrum to India/ DoS for satellite services. This created an overlap of frequencies 
identified for terrestrial and satellite-based systems as shown in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2:  Overlap in frequency range identified for IMT Band for terrestrial services 
with satellite services 
NFAP 2018 allocation for 
terrestrial system 
Spectrum coordinated with ITU for satellite services 
Range of 
Frequency 
(MHz) 
Bandwidth 
(MHz) 
Frequency 
Bands (MHz) 
Bandwidth 
(MHz) 
Space craft 
2500 - 2690 190 2500-2535 35 GSAT 17 (2500-2535 = 35 MHz) 
GSAT-7 (2513-2517 = 4 MHz) 
2555-2635 80 GSAT-6 (2560-2590 = 30 MHz) 
2655-2690 35 GSAT-6 (2670-2680 = 10 MHz) 
GSAT-7 (2683-2687 = 4 MHz) 
GSAT-17(2655-2690 = 35 MHz) 
3300 - 3600 300 3400-3600 200 IRNSS Satellites 
It can be seen from the Table 5.2 that 3.4 GHz band (3400 – 3600 MHz) and 2.5 GHz (2500 – 
2690 MHz) band are the two important bands identified as IMT bands for terrestrial services 
in NFAP 2018, which had already been coordinated by DoS with ITU for its space-based 
services.  Thus, the same band had been identified for both the services causing overlap. 
While acknowledging the position, ISRO stated (May 2021) that if co-existence is possible, 
both satellite and terrestrial services (including IMT) would operate in the same frequency with 
or without conditions to protect each other. However, if co-existence is not feasible, the 
national regulator (WPC/ DoT) would have to identify/ decide the frequency that had to be 
earmarked for satellite and terrestrial services. ISRO added that orbit-frequency resources 
allocated by ITU cannot be diverted for any other service including IMT services and any 
attempt to change the allocated frequencies to other frequency range to facilitate IMT would 
trigger the international coordination process to start afresh, which would be the main 
challenge. 
Further, Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was constituted (October 2020) to optimize the use 
of spectrum; in the meeting (January 2021) it was decided that 3.3 GHz to 3.67 GHz sub-band 
would be used for IMT/ 5G throughout the country, subject to the following in respect of DoS: 
 25 MHz in 3.4 GHz to 3.425 GHz band would be made available for IMT thought out 
the
 country except in 6 DoS locations where the keep off distance of 40 to 130 Kms 
shall be maintained. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
43 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
 DoS agreed to give up 3.6 to 3.67 GHz band for use by DoT for IMT/ 5G, hence, 3.6 
to 3.67 G
Hz shall be used for IMT/ 5G. 
In view of the above, Audit is of the view that DoS and DoT had not identified an appropriate 
technology solution and limitations of use in such a manner that both services can co-exist in 
these bands.  
Recommendation 15: DoS and DoT need to work together to identify an appropriate 
technology solution in such a manner that both services can co-exist in important frequency 
bands. 
5.2.2  Non-utilisation of spectrum in High Throughput Satellite 
Bandwidth capacities on GSAT 29, GSAT 19 and GSAT 11 remained idle for long periods 
since their launch in June 2017, November 2018, and December 2018 respectively, upto 
2020-21, resulting in non-utilization of valuable spectrum for several years.  
Secretary DoT (Dec 2017) conveyed to Secretary DoS the data bandwidth requirement for 
satellite base connectivity at about 2,500 Gram Panchayats (GPs) under second phase of Bharat 
Net Project.  
DoS launched three High Throughput Satellites15 (HTS) (GSAT 19, GSAT 29 and GSAT 11) 
bet
ween June 2017 and December 2018 for various applications. DoT requested (April 2018) 
DoS to allot the entire capacity of GSAT 29 satellite for data connectivity requirement of 
Jammu & Kashmir and North Eastern Region (NER).  Similarly, DoT, BBNL and BSNL 
requested DoS to utilise large capacity of GSAT 19 and GSAT 11 for their flagship 
programmes.   
Considering the importance of the national programmes, the INSAT Coordination Committee16 
and 
DoS decided (December 2018) to allot the entire capacity of GSAT 29 as well as a large 
capacity on GSAT 19 and GSAT 11 to DoT/ BSNL/ BBNL as per their requirement on primary 
basis.  The remaining capacity of GSAT 11 satellite was to be offered to other private users.  
In a meeting held between the Secretary, DoT and the Secretary DoS (December 2018), a 
Committee was formed to bring out a joint Approach paper  to finalise various issues including 
total bandwidth requirement for various DoT/ USOF funded projects and bandwidth 
requirement of BSNL and optimum utilization of available bandwidth from current HTS – 
GSAT-19, 11 and 29. Accordingly the Committee comprising of officers of DoS, BSNL and 
BBNL met during March – May 2019 and submitted the Approach paper on position of 
utilisation of Indigenous capacity jointly by DoS and DoT(May 2019).  
As per Approach paper, 
                                                           
15  High-throughput Satellite o r H TS is a communication satellite that provides more throughput than 
conventional communication satellites (Fixed Satellite Service). Higher-throughput refers to a significant 
increase in capacity when using the same amount of orbital spectrum. The increase in capacity typically 
ranges from 2 to more than 100 times as much capacity as the classic FSS (Fixed Satellite Service).  
16  ICC is a high level multi-departmental control mechanism consisting of Secretaries of six Departments viz. 
Do
S, Department of Economic Affairs, Department of Telecommunications, MIB, Department of Science 
and Technology and Department of Information Technology that is responsible for coordinating and 
monitoring the implementation of space and ground segments of satellite projects.   

Report No. 2 of 2022 
44  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
(i) Total capacity requirement for various DoT/ USOF funded projects and bandwidth 
requirement of BSNL are given in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3:  Capacity requirement as per Approach paper 
Project requirement Requirement 
(Mbps) 
Short 
Term 
Long 
Term 
1. Bharat Net (For NE, J&K, Himachal, 
Uttarakhand & other states) 
7,128 Gram Panchayats 
on Satellite Media 
21,384
 71,280 
2. Mobile Connectivity (For NE, J&K, 
Himachal, Uttarakhand) 
1,146 BTSs 4,584 4,584 
3. Backhaul for DHQ, BHQ (For NE, J&K, 
Himachal, Uttarakhand) 
413 Sites 9,380
 9,380 
4. For NFS project 305 Sites 450 450 
5. Connectivity at A & N and Lakshadweep 
Islands 
- 8,000 8,000 
6. LWE Area  - 1,600 1,600 
7. Mobile connectivity at Meghalaya  - 320 320 
  Total 45,718 95,614 
(ii) The project demand was proposed to be met through the indigenous HTS capacity i.e. 
GSAT – 11, 19, 29 & 20 (GSAT 20 was scheduled to be launched by the end of 2019 but not 
yet launched). The remainder and further demands would be met through the planned HTS 
capacity in Ka & Ku bands in next 3-4 years.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that the capacities on GSAT 29, GSAT 19 and GSAT 11 remained idle 
for long periods of time before they were allotted to users. The satellites were launched in 
June 2017, November 2018, and December 2018 respectively. The responsibility of 
establishment of ground segment (Gateways) was entrusted by WPC/ DoT to DoS/ ISRO.  
While the ground segment of GSAT-11 was ready by March 2019, GSAT-19 and GSAT-29 
were ready by October 2020. DoS provisionally allotted (June 2020) the space segment 
capacity on GSAT-19 and GSAT-11 effective from 29 April 2020.  The capacity of GSAT 29 
however was not allotted to BSNL/ BBNL. The roll out of user segment and utilisation of the 
satellite capacity rest with DoT through its PSUs. There were delays on the part of DoS in 
completing the ground segments of the three satellites. The spacecraft wise capacity of the 
satellites, date of establishment of ground segment by DoS and allotted capacity utilization are 
detailed in Table 5.4. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
45 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Table 5.4: Utilisation of spectrum in HTS 
Satellite 
Mission 
Life 
Spectrum 
capacity 
Date of 
Launch 
 
Date of 
establish-
ment of 
ground 
segment 
Date of 
allotment of 
transponder 
capacity 
Expenditure  
on satellite 
launch from 
DoS 
budget17 
(₹ crore)  
Total 
Usable 
Capacity 
(MHz)  
Period of 
Allotment 
(excluding 
the first 
month from 
launch)18 
Capacity 
allotted 
to the 
users in 
MHz 
Unallotted 
capacity 
after 
leaving 
mandatory  
20 per cent 
spare 
GSAT-19 
10 years 
1000 
MHz 
05.06.2017 
 
Interim 
Gateways- 
(July 2017 
& Oct 2018) 
Permanent 
Gateways- 
Oct 2020 
29.04.2020 366.59 1,624 05.07.2017  
to 28.04.2020 
0 1,299 
29.04.2020 
onwards 
1,624 0 
GSAT-29 
10 years 
1000 
MHz 
14.11.2018 
 
Oct 2020 10.05.2021 
 
503.22 2,520 14.12.2018  
to 09.05.2021 
0 2,016 
10.05.21 
onwards 
81 1,935 
GSAT-11 
15 years 
2000 
MHz 
05.12.2018 
 
Mar 2019 29.04.2020 1,618.62 7,424 05.01.2019 
to 
29.04.2020 
0 5,939 
30.04.2020 
to 
28.02.2021 
4,176 1,763 
01.03.2021 
to 
31.05.2021 
4,196 1,743 
In response ISRO stated (June 2021) that the Department was continuously pursuing with DoT 
to make use of the capacity of GSAT 29 satellite and had also proposed to bring the satellite 
capacity under open allotment to any interested user.  ISRO added (July 2021) that based on 
the clearance from DoT, 81 MHz of the capacity was allotted to a private service provider. 
In respect of GSAT 19, ISRO stated (June 2021) that though the satellite was operational from 
July 2017, the satellite capacity was allotted to BBNL and BSNL from April 2020 due to delay 
in conducting in-orbit pay load tests, connectivity tests and demonstrations using HTS Platform 
which was inducted for the first time in the country. DoS added (August 2021) that in addition, 
readiness of the user segment for utilisation of the satellite, which is the responsibility of the 
users, also took some time. 
Regarding delays in launch of services, for GSAT 11, ISRO stated (June 2021) that user beams 
had been allotted to BSNL/ BBNL, as per direction of DoT for connectivity in J&K, NER, 
Hilly states, LWE and Islands from April 2020. It was also stated that though other private 
players were approached for left over capacity (after use by BSNL/ BBNL), it did not 
materialise due to the COVID 19 situation.   ISRO further stated (July 2021) that in general 
100 per cent of beams of the HTS were not planned to be utilised in the beginning and only 
60 per cent utilisation was considered. DoS added (August 2021) that HTS technologies were 
                                                           
17 Includes cost of the satellite, launch cost and cost of establishing Ground Segment.  
18 After launch of satellite, the satellite is made operational within a reasonable period of one month and 
sa
tellite transponder capacity is allocated to users.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
46  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
being introduced for the first time in the country due to which users required time to get 
acquainted and deploy the user systems in a gradual manner. DoS also stated that it had now 
adopted a demand driven approach, whereby firm commitments would be obtained from the 
users before releasing the satellites. 
Further, as per information provided by WPC/ DoT (July 2021), 
(i) BSNL had applied (July 2021) for WOL for 928 MHz in GSAT 11 Satellite and 
428 MHz in GSAT 19 Satellite (For Commercial VSAT). 
(ii) Hughes Communication India Pvt. Ltd. (May 2021) applied for WOL for 81 MHz 
in GSAT 29 (For Commercial VSAT). 
(iii) BBNL had not yet applied for WOL. 
It was also informed by WPC/ DoT that no WOL had been issued as on date for operation of 
satellite bandwidth on GSAT-11, GSAT-19 and GSAT-29. 
BBNL had informed that Bandwidth allotted to them,  from GSAT 19 & GSAT 11 is 4,444 
MHz for implementing the Satellite base connectivity at 5,521 (GPs19, DSPTs20 and additional 
si
tes) under Bharat Net Project. It was also stated that Project is still under implementation and 
filing of application for obtaining the WOL is under process. 
BSNL in response stated that Bandwidth allotted to them from GSAT 19 & GSAT 11 is 
428 MHz and 928 MHz respectively, and their application for WOL on 01 July 2021 was 
pending with DoT. 
The above facts corroborate that valuable satellite capacity had remained unutilised for 
a long period of time, due to delays in launching, testing/ readying the ground segment 
and allotting spectrum capacity to users. WPC had not issued WOL (June 2021) and 
assigned spectrum to user agencies leading to non-realisation of spectrum capacity due 
to delays by all stakeholders. 
Recommendation 16: DoS needs to engage with client Departments and other potential users 
at an early stage before planning and launching the satellite capacity to minimize non-
utilization of spectrum resources. 
5.2.3  Future satellites planned for operation in spectrum bands identified for terrestrial 
purpose  
DoS had planned and coordinated spectrum with ITU to launch future satellites for 
various services. These frequency bands had also been identified for terrestrial IMT 
services which had caused a concern for interference and needs technological solution for 
co-existence. 
Audit observed cases in which DoS/ ISRO had coordinated spectrum with ITU for satellites 
planned to be launched in future in frequency bands that had already been identified for 
terrestrial purposes for IMT services. The cases are detailed in Table 5.5. 
                                                           
19  Gram Panchayats 
20  Digital Satellite Phone Terminals. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
47 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Table 5.5: Future satellites planned in bands identified for terrestrial purpose 
Frequency 
Band 
(MHz) 
Bandwidth 
(MHz) 
Satellite 
Services 
planned 
Remarks 
2170 - 2200 30 Mobile Satellite 
Services (MSS) 
DoS/ ISRO made its filings with ITU for Geo 
Sat
ellite Services to provide MSS.  Audit observed 
that the same band had also been identified for IMT 
services. The Department is however, yet to acquire 
this spectrum resource from ITU. 
ISRO stated (July 2021) that this band is highly 
useful for space to earth MSS and that there was no 
viable alternative to this band for MSS. However, 
ISRO did not indicate as to how the band is planned 
to be used interference free. 
1980 - 2010 30 
2025 – 2110 85 Inter Satellite 
Services 
DoS planned its Inter-satellites IDRSS 1 & 2 
satellites under these bands for communication with 
planned Human Space mission (Gaganyaan) from 
the deep space ground network at ISTRAC, 
Bengaluru whenever the mission is not visible from 
the ground station. ISRO replied (July 2021) that 
the band is not identified for IMT by ITU.  ISRO 
added that the same had been communicated to 
DoT/ WPC and DoS had requested WPC to revise 
NFAP in line with ITU RR so that the services of 
ISRO can be provided interference free. 
460-470 10 Meteorological 
satellite services 
(Space to earth) 
DoS planned this spectrum in its upcoming satellite 
GSAT 32 to be utilised for ocean monitoring 
purpose. The plan of action of DoS to utilise the 
spectrum on non-interference and non-protection 
basis was not on record. 
ISRO replied (July 2021) that the band would be 
used on non-protection basis without causing 
interference to IMT services planned in the band 
since ocean monitoring services are limited to 
ocean only.  
It can be seen from the Table 5.5 that capacities in orbital resources coordinated for future 
satellite-based services had also been identified for delivering terrestrial IMT services, which 
had raised a concern of interference. This is particularly critical in the case of MSS in the bands 
1980 – 2010 MHz and 2170 - 2200 MHz, which was stated to be highly useful for space to 
earth MSS and for which there was no viable alternative. 
DoS stated (August 2021) that National Working/ Study Groups had been constituted to work 
out a strategy for coexistence of space and terrestrial based services. 
Recommendation 17:  DoT and DoS may work out a strategy so that space-based and 
terrestrial services can co-exist to address the problem of spectrum co-ordinated with ITU for 
planned satellite launches in frequency bands already identified for terrestrial purposes for 
IMT services.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
48  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
5.2.4  Management of administratively assigned projects   
DoS did not have any centralised mechanism for spectrum management as different 
ISRO units/ centres were allotted spectrum in non-IMT bands without being routed 
through SATCOM PO. 
The SATCOM PO wing in ISRO is the focal point in DoS for spectrum coordination and its 
management.  Out of 249 projects where spectrum was specifically allotted by DoT/ WPC 
administratively to DoS and its units against specific requests, 10 projects utilising a total of 
566.75 MHz were in IMT bands.  The remaining 239 projects utilising 37,135.40 MHz were 
in Non-IMT bands.  
Audit selected all the 10 projects in IMT bands (utilising 566.75 MHz) and 60 projects in Non 
IMT bands (utilising 37,086.79 MHz21) for detailed examination.  
Of the 566.75 MHz in IMT bands, 540.75 MHz (95 per cent) was used towards Technical 
Support Services such as TTC services for Earth Observation Satellites, Surface Imaging, 
Ground Segment Activities, Satellite support Services, Lab Test Services etc., and 25 MHz was 
used towards Research/ Laboratory Test/ Experimental/ Demonstration purpose in one project 
allotted to SAC, Ahmedabad. Similarly, 31924.79 MHz of the spectrum (86 per cent) from 
Non-IMT bands was used towards Technical Support Services and 5162 MHz was used 
towards Research/ Experimental/ Demonstration purpose in 13 projects as shown in Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Non-IMT spectrum used for Research/ Experimental/ Demonstration 
purpose 
Centre Frequency Band Band Bandwidth 
(MHz) 
Remarks 
SAC 425 – 450 MHZ UHF 25.00  
SAC 9600 MHz X 675.00  
SAC 1250 MHz L 75.00  
SAC 3200 MHz S 75.00  
SAC 29879 – 29889 MHz Ka 10.00 Temporary allotment. 
SAC 11329 – 11339MHz Ku 10.00 Temporary allotment. 
SAC 13129 – 13139 MHz Ku 10.00 Temporary allotment. 
SAC 20079 – 20089MHz Ka 10.00 Temporary allotment. 
SAC 220000 -230000 MHz Ka & Higher 2000.00  
SAC 330000 – 345000 
MHz 
Ka & Higher 2000.00  
VSSC 1 – 22.6 MHz VHF 22.00 No commercial use/ value. 
NARL 1280 MHz L 10.00  
SAC 35610 MHz Ka 240.00  
Total 5162.00  
Audit observed that the requests of individual ISRO centres/ units for frequency allotment were 
not routed through SATCOM PO. The papers maintained at the units of ISRO were not 
furnished to Audit. As such, Audit could not ascertain if the spectrum requests of DoS units 
for IMT spectrum could have been allotted under Non-IMT Bands. 
                                                           
21  37603.54 MHz of the 70 Selected Projects the spectrum pertains to 60 Non IMT band projects were 
37
086.79 MHz after deducting 516.75 MHz of IMT Band projects. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
49 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Audit also observed that there was no supervision and review mechanism in OSCA to maintain 
strict discipline in the usage, management and surrender of IMT band spectrum. Detailed 
guidelines on document flow, process flow, utilisation, timely surrender, etc. were not in place.  
There was no system of submission of periodic returns/ reports to check whether the system 
was running smoothly. Absence of such a mechanism exposes the system to the risk of 
inefficient utilisation, idling capacity, etc. For instance, it can be seen from Table 5.6 that in 
four projects, spectrum was allotted on temporary basis.  SATCOM PO did not review the 
requirement and the possibility of surrendering the spectrum allotted for Temporary Research 
and Development activities.  
ISRO stated (July 2021) that in view of the expansion of activities in DoS and its units and the 
fact that the licensing process had been made online by WPC, individual units/ centres of DoS 
had been permitted to apply directly with WPC.  DoS stated (August 2021) that a centralised 
mechanism for supervision, review and control of usage of spectrum by centres/ units was not 
felt necessary, as the spectrum required by the centres/ units was specific to them and they 
manage/ utilise the spectrum themselves.  
As management of the spectrum, particularly IMT band is critical for its optimal utilisation, 
DoS may seriously consider putting in place a centralised monitoring/ control mechanism for 
ensuring strict discipline in usage and management of the spectrum as well as timely surrender 
of unutilised spectrum. 
Recommendation 18: DoS may establish a centralized monitoring/ control mechanism for 
supervision and review of utilisation of spectrum by the users. 
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
51 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER Spectrum Utilisation in other Ministries/ Departments/ 
Agencies 6 
This Chapter deals with issues relating to Spectrum Management in the Ministries/ 
De
partments/ Agencies such as Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Ministry of Railways, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB), Oil and Natural Gas Corporation, Airports 
Authority of India, Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Gas Authority of India Limited. 
A. Spectrum Management in Indian Railways 
6.1 Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR) had a network of over 68,000 route KM connecting more than 8,000 
stations on which 21,000 passenger and freight trains run every day. Highest decision-making 
body in IR is the Railway Board (RB) headed by the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and 
Chairman. The RB comprises Members, Secretary and Director General of various wings.  IR 
carries out its rail transportation through 17 Zonal Railways headed by General Managers. 
Operation and maintenance of rail transportation under a zonal railways is looked after by its 
Divisional Offices. In addition to Zonal Railways, there were Production units, Central Public 
Sector Undertakings, and other Administrative units under the control of RB.  
Indian Railways uses spectrum for radio communication for (i) Traffic Control, 
(ii) Communication in the train between Guard & Driver, (iii) Mobile Communication between 
moving train/ vehicle with fixed location (Station) or another moving train/ vehicle, 
(iv) Emergency Communication between driver, guard, station master & Cabin, etc.  
RB approaches Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) Wing of DoT for allotment of 
spectrum. After getting approval for allotment of spectrum from WPC, Zonal Railways/ units 
directly apply to DoT on SARAL SANCHAR portal for obtaining license. RB had issued 
(March 2006) “Guidelines for dealing with WPC” and prescribed the procedure for obtaining 
the WOL by Zonal Railways. 
The details of frequencies, their use, surrendering of frequencies etc. were not maintained 
centrally either at RB or at Zonal Railways. It is being maintained at the Divisional Offices/ 
sub-units where frequencies were being used for radio communication. As per available 
records, details of spectrum available at IR for radio communication are given in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1: Spectrum bands and systems being used by Indian Railways 
Sl. 
No. 
Frequency band 
allotted to IR 
Purpose of frequencies 
1 146 MHz-174 MHz Walkie-Talkie sets being used by Driver, Guard, Station Masters, RPF 
and Maintenance staff. 
2 380.15 MHz-396.75 
MHz 
Terrestrial Trunked Radio communication (TETRA)22. 
                                                           
22 Terrestrial Trunked Radio (TETRA) is a professional land mobile radio standard specifically designed for 
us
e by government agencies, emergency services, public safety networks, rail transportation etc. In 
Railways, TETRA network is used both for operational voice communications between train drivers and 
train controllers as well as to carry train signaling and control information.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
52  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Frequency band 
allotted to IR 
Purpose of frequencies 
3 400 MHz-417 MHz End of Train Telemetry (EoTT), a proven, low cost, radio telemetry-
based device which replaces Guard and Break Van in freight trains. 
This technology is used to establish communication between the 
locomotive driver and last wagon of the train to ensure that the train is 
running with all coaches/ wagons as a complete unit.  
4 406 MHz-407 MHz Distributed Power Wireless Control System 23, used in Electric 
locomotives in all Indian Railways.  
5 416.8 MHz-466.8 
MHz 
Train Collision Avoidance System 24 being used in 250 route km in 
South Central Railway.  
6 MHz-445 MHz and  
MHz-470 MHz 
The frequencies in UHF band are currently not being used for voice 
channel. However, spot frequency of 441.8/ 466.8 MHz for Train 
Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) are also known as KAVACH. 
7 890 MHz-960 MHz  
(900 MHz band)  
Mobile Train Radio Communication between train driver/ guard to the 
station master or section controller based on GSM-R technology (2G), 
commissioned for use at 3,445 route km.  
6.1.1 Non maintenance of database of spectrum assigned and lack of monitoring of 
spectrum usage by Railways 
Railways had not maintained a proper central database of spectrum assigned/ being used 
or surrendered by it. 
Railways uses spectrum in various bands for different services. However, neither Railway 
Board nor the Zonal Railways maintained proper database of spectrum assigned/ being used or 
surrendered by it. Test check of records of Northern Railway zone at Delhi revealed that 
Microwave and UHF bands were not in use from December 2011 and January 2013 
respectively. However, no details of surrender of frequencies under these two bands were made 
available to audit. Audit also observed that even the units using the frequencies had not 
maintained proper records of Spectrum being used/ not in use by them. Even WPC could not 
state (September 2021) the details of frequency surrendered by Railways in Microwave and 
UHF bands though as per the ASMS data base (NFR), it stands assigned to Railways.  
On being pointed out by audit, Railways stated (September 2021) that present MIS is planned 
to be replaced with a new MIS covering all aspects of spectrum utilization and related asset 
management in the near future, subject to availability of funds.  
This indicates inherent deficiencies in maintenance of database of spectrum assigned to 
Railways by both the Departments.  
                                                           
23  Distributed Power Wireless Control System (DPWCS)  of locomotives is a method to increase the 
throughput (or line capacity) of a railway line with minimal incremental inputs. In DPWCS, more than one 
MU Consist are provided in a train, the Master Locomotive is provided with crew but Slave Locomotive (s) 
are operated based on commands from Master Locomotive through wireless communication.  
24 Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) is
  an indigenously developed Automatic Train Protection 
(ATP) System meant to provide protection to trains against Signal Passing at Danger (SPAD) , excessive 
speed and collisions. TCAS provides continuous update of Movement Authority (distance up to which the 
train is permitted to travel without danger). Hence during unsafe situations when brake application is 
necessitated, and the Crew had either failed to do so, or is not in position to do so, automatic brake application 
shall take place. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
53 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
6.1.2 Use of spectrum without obtaining valid operating license  
WPC (DoT) issues Agreement in-principal (AIP)/ Decision Letters (DLs) before granting 
WOL for establishing Wireless Telegraph Station, subject to various conditions. The operation 
of the stations should commence after obtaining license for the same from WPC. Audit 
observed that in the following instances operation of wireless stations was started after 
obtaining DLs only but without obtaining required operating license as given in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Use of spectrum by IR without valid wireless license from WPC 
Zone Particulars of Decision Letters 
issued 
Frequency band Purpose/ services 
Northern 
Railway 
Five DLs issued during September 
2006 to October 2011 
900 MHz band MTRC 
North Frontier 
Railway 
Three DLs issued April 2003 to 
February 2008 
900 MHz band MTRC 
Kolkata Metro 
Railway 
One DL issued in March 2013 900 MHz band MTRC 
Northern 
Central 
Railway 
Four DLs issued during December 
2018 to September 2020 
146.4 MHz to 
161.15 MHz. 
Radio 
communication  
Thus, Railways had been using spectrum without obtaining valid WOL from WPC (DoT) in 
violation of provisions under Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933. Further, Railway Board 
did not have updated/ real time database of use of spectrum at railways in view of absence of 
relevant periodical returns/ reports.  
On being pointed out by audit, Railways stated (September 2021) that a few Zonal Railways 
commenced operations based on DLs received from the WPC. However, Railways had been 
paying the due spectrum charges for usage of GSM-R after the issue of DL to DoT. SACFA 
clearance and other formalities required in connection with the issue of WOL had been 
requested. The concerned Zonal Railways were also being advised to further pursue the case 
with WPC for issue of operating license. 
DoT in response stated (September 2021) that WPC wing had assigned 1.6 MHz spectrum in 
900 MHz band and issued five DLs/ Licenses to Northern Railways for operation of MTRC 
System in 900 MHz band for different routes, among others. It was mentioned that as per 
information and records available, Railways had not submitted any requisite documents such 
as SACFA siting clearance, equipment invoice etc. for issue of WOL, therefore, no WOL had 
been issued to Railways against these DLs. It was also added that Indian Railways had 
requested for surrender of 24 nos. of FX stations and 400 nos. of VM & HH stations (100 VM 
& 300 HH), however, no frequency had been surrendered by IR in 900 MHz.  
Fact remains that Railways had been using spectrum without obtaining valid WOL from WPC.     

Report No. 2 of 2022 
54  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Recommendations 19: Indian Railways may maintain proper data base of spectrum assigned/ 
surrendered after reconciliation with WPC data. RB may introduce periodic returns/ reports 
from Zonal/ Unit levels in respect of information on management of spectrum, to ensure 
efficient, timely and effective utilization or surrender of the spectrum assigned to IR by DoT 
and timely renew/ obtain WOL for spectrum assigned to IR. 
 
B.   Spectrum Management in Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
6.2 Introduction 
Doordarshan was providing broadcast service in 470-646 MHz band in Analog as well as 
Digital Terrestrial Television mode. As ATT has become obsolete technology with public 
audience of only 0.3 per cent and implementation of DTT was only in four per cent of 
transmitters, scope exists for Doordarshan to vacate 526-646 MHz band and coexist with 
other Government user in 470-526 MHz band. 
DD was broadcasting seven national channels and 28 reg ional channels through its own Analog 
and Digital Terrestrial Transmitters (DTT) using RF spectrum and Direct to Home (DTH) (Free 
Dish) services using satellite-based spectrum. 
a) Analog Terrestrial Television (ATT):  ATT was the original television technology that 
uses analog signals to transmit video and audio. However, analog signals vary over a 
continuous range and are susceptible to electronic noise and interference, causing a moderately 
weak signal to become snowy. This technology requires dedicated transmitter for broadcast of 
each channel. A substantial DD’s transmission network has been created for ATT and currently 
566 of the total 589 (96 per cent) transmitters were ATT transmitters. However, a study was 
conducted by Doordarshan in February 2017, thereafter no public domain information of 
Audience Research Unit of DD, BARC25 data, independent third-party survey exists to indicate 
the
 audience coverage of ATT.  During Audit, information about audience research data, 
periodical operation reports, periodical inspection reports indicating operation of these 
transmitters and utilisation of earmarked frequencies was sought from DD.  However, the same 
was not provided. 
b) Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) : DTT is a better technology compared to ATT as 
DTT technology can carry multiple channels and is a more spectrally efficient technology 
giving an enhanced viewing experience. Scheme of converting ATT to DTT was underway 
since 2003 at DD and currently, there were 23 DTT transmitters at 19 locations 26.   Reception 
fr
om DTT requires DTT compatible devices and setting up of an alternate ecosystem 
comprising of manufacturing/ import/ marketing of DTT compatible devices, trained personnel 
for installation, troubleshooting, tuning, repair, and maintenance of these devices.  Otherwise, 
content transmitted in this manner on any mobile device/ TV cannot be viewed.  However, 
requisite hardware was not available at any Doordarshan Kendra or any e-commerce site. It 
was apparent that after a lapse of about 18 years since introduction of DTT broadcast, defeating 
                                                           
25  Broadcasting Audience Research Council  
26  Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai (2 DTT each), Guwahati, Patna, Ranchi, Cuttack, Lucknow, Jallandhar, 
Ra
ipur, Indore, Aurangabad, Bhopal, Bengaluru, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and Srinagar. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
55 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
the very objective of introducing DTT for public broadcasting, was not served leading to non-
utilisation of spectrum assigned for this technology.  
c) Alternative methods of broadcast available with DD 
Besides having captive RF resources for ATT and DTT broadcast, Doordarshan is using 
satellite-based spectrum for providing DTH Services (FreeDish) in C-Band in Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and Ku-Band in Rest of India. Also, being a public service broadcaster, DD 
gets regulatory support in broadcasting its content over private television broadcast 
infrastructure and all private Cable operators, Multi-service Operators, DTH operators, IPTV 
operators who were mandatorily required to carry 23 Doordarshan channels over their networks 
to deliver its content to audience. 
Test check of records at DTT transmitter at Delhi revealed that frequency band 582-646 MHz 
was not utilised for any transmitter, but DD continues to occupy this band citing future plans.  
Prasar Bharati defended holding of spectrum for DTT/ ATT services citing future plans; 
objective of providing infotainment to public in far flung areas; compulsory requirement to 
fulfil its mandate; and provide robust all-weather platform. However, there was minuscule 
audience (0.3 per cent in 2017 as per the study conducted by Doordarshan; data after 2017 not 
available) of terrestrial television and DTT was primarily focused in big cities.  
MIB in its reply (November 2021) stated that Prasar Bharati has entered into an MoU with IIT 
Kanpur to develop Next Gen Broadcast solution/ roadmap for Digital Terrestrial Broadcasting 
consistent with emerging standards such as 5G Broadcast and defended holding of spectrum 
for future plans. 
Reply of the MIB is not acceptable as CoS had also recently decided (January 2021) that MIB 
should vacate the frequency band in 526-646 MHz band and coexist with other Government 
User in 470-520 MHz band. Frequency 526-646 is important IMT Band for 5G Services. 
Recommendation 20: MIB may vacate unutilised frequency band 526-646 MHZ which was 
occupied by them citing future plans. 
 
C. Spectrum Management in Ministry of Home Affairs 
6.3 Introduction 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) discharges multifarious responsibilities, which inter-alia 
include border management, internal security, and disaster management.  To discharge these 
responsibilities, MHA maintains eight Central Armed Police Forces 27 (CAPFs) which had 
dif
ferent objectives viz. border management (ITBP, SSB and BSF), internal security (IB, 
CRPF, CISF), anti-terrorism/ anti-hijacking (NSG) and disaster management (NDRF).  These 
CAPFs require radio-frequency bands/ spots to fulfil their peacetime and operational 
communication requirements. 
                                                           
27  Border Security Force (BSF), Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF), Central Industrial Security Force 
(C
ISF), Intelligence Bureau (IB), Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP), National Disaster Response Force 
(NDRF), National Security Guard (NSG) and Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
56  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Directorate of Coordination, Police Wireless (DCPW), is the nodal advisory body to the MHA 
for police telecommunication in the country and is also responsible for coordinating various 
police communication services of CAPFs and laying down technical specifications for 
communication equipment to be inducted in the police forces. Besides, DCPW maintains a 
reserve stock of radio communication sets to meet the emergent communication needs of 
CAPFs.  DCPW had also created a VSAT network e.g. POLNET for providing connectivity to 
all district/ state headquarters and national capital Delhi for various police organisations 
including CAPFs. CAPFs use spectrum in non-IMT bands below 450 MHz and in 450-470 
MHz in IMT band for their communication networks and NDRF uses satellite-based spectrum 
in addition to the frequencies in VHF, UHF and HF bands. 
Audit examined the records regarding spectrum management by eight CAPFs and audit 
findings are described in succeeding paragraphs. 
6.3.1 Lack of coordination between DCPW and CAPFs with respect to communication 
requirements of CAPFs 
Directorate of Coordination, Police Wireless of Ministry of Home Affairs had not devised 
any policy for spectrum management among Central Armed Police Forces. CAPFs have 
been independently applying to WPC for spectrum allotment without consulting DCPW.  
CAPFs independently apply to DoT for allocation of fre quency spots in UHF, VHF and HF 
bands without any consultation with DCPW. There was no method of independent analysis of 
spectrum requirements of CAPFs in DCPW. Frequency, redundancy, and equipment 
requirements were worked out by each CAPF based on their own perception of need.  Although 
DCPW broadly coordinates with DoT for spectrum requirements of all police forces, it had not 
conducted any objective requirement analysis for frequency spots for each CAPF after 
considering its role, need and area of operation. With the advent of latest technologies and 
availability of alternative communication infrastructure, CAPFs had multi-layered 
communication networks 28 besides captive RF based communication methods.  The CAPFs 
pri
marily use these methods to meet majority of their communication needs such as Audio/ 
Data communication, Video Conferencing, etc.  Most of the CAPFs indicated that even though 
RF equipment (primarily HF) were being regularly tested for operational readiness, these were 
primarily used in extreme emergency situations in case of failure of all alternate methods of 
communication and normal communications through Walkie Talkie and other wireless 
communication devices. 
DCPW had not devised any policy guidelines regarding spectrum and equipment redundancy 
that should be maintained to meet all emergency requirements.  In the absence of any policy 
guidelines regarding quantum of spectrum for emergency use and equipment redundancy, the 
possibility of excess redundancy of RF spectrum and sub-optimal utilisation of frequency spots 
cannot be ruled out.  
On being pointed out by audit it was replied (September 2021) that DCPW being the nodal 
agency under MHA coordinates with WPC/ DoT for allocation of spectrum as and when 
                                                           
28 Captive VSAT terminals, Satellite Phones, Satellite based broadband, Fiber optic/line-based connectivity 
an
d POLNET 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
57 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
requested by States/ UTs Police/ CAPFs/ CPOs. There were no instructions from MHA for 
mandatory scrutiny of proposal of CAPFs/ CPOs by DCPW before approaching WPC. 
However, DCPW provides expert advice as and when sought by CAPFs/ CPOs user 
organization. It was upto CAPFs user organization to approach DCPW in case they need any 
help. 
Acting as technically competent nodal agency and advisory body to MHA, it was expected that 
DCPW should coordinate efficiently between the CAPFs and recommend effective strategies 
that would not only spare redundant RF spots but would prevent burden and cost of acquiring 
and maintaining a variety of equipment and communication services in CAPFs. 
6.3.2 Unutilized capacity of POLNET 2.0 
POLNET 2.0 is not fully commissioned for use by CAPFs. Out of 614 projected 
requirements of VSAT terminals (2015) for six CAPFs, only 213 terminals were installed. 
ITBP and NSG had not taken any terminals.  
POLNET is a nationwide Satellite based Captive Communic ation Network/ Digital 
Information Highway for the police organisations of the Country.  Currently, POLNET 1.0 had 
been upgraded to POLNET 2.0 in order to achieve efficient utilisation of bandwidth and to 
support high speed multimedia applications viz. Video, Voice, Data and Messaging.  POLNET 
2.0 started functioning from February 2021.  
Test check in audit revealed that POLNET 2.0 was not fully commissioned due to some 
shortcomings in the Hub.  
Against the projected requirements during 2015 for six CAPFs of 614 VSAT terminals, they 
had taken 262 terminals and only 213 terminals were installed as on date. 
POLNET 2.0 was operational from February 2021 and against the estimated cost of 
₹ 18.25 crore, total expenditure incurred on POLNET 2.0 t
 ill August 2021 was ₹ 14.14 crore 
(inc
luding cost on Hub Equipment ₹ 8.65 crore) and recurring annual expenditure of 
₹ 11.38 crore on payment of spectrum charges, transponder  charges, etc. 
On being pointed out by audit it was replied (September 2021) that the POLNET 2.0 was a cost 
effective proposition for States/ UTs Police/ CAPFs as only equipment cost was to be borne by 
them and all recurring regulatory charges were bore by DCPW. Currently various Police 
Organisation work in silos. If States/ UTs Police/ CAPFs were on a common network, then 
communication, coordination & interoperability between these organisations would be 
effective while achieving efficient utilisation of available resources.  
Keeping in view the expenditure of incurred on the installation of POLNET 2.0 and recurring 
annual expenditure, it is imperative that services of all the terminals of POLNET 2.0 may be 
optimally utilised by all State Police Departments and CAPFs and other related agencies for 
their operational requirements. 
Recommendations 21: Ministry of Home Affairs may devise policy for spectrum management 
among Central Armed Police Forces. Further, effort may be made for optimal utilisation of 
POLNET 2.0 by all State Police Departments and CAPFs and other related agencies for their 
operational requirements. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
58  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
D. Spectrum management by PSUs under Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  
6.4 Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) 
Oil and Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) is a public sector company having In-house service 
capabilities in areas of Exploration and Production of oil & gas and related oil-field services. 
Presently, ONGC had 13 Onshore & four Offshore Assets (Producing Hydrocarbons), seven 
Basins (engaged in all facets of hydrocarbon exploration activities), three Plants (Processing 
Crude Oil and Gas), 16 Institutes (providing specialized R & D and other services in specific 
business areas) and 22 Service Groups (providing common & specialized services across 
ONGC).  
To support ONGC’s operations spread across India in geographically remote and difficult 
terrains/ areas, Corporate INFOCOM29 was responsible for creation and upkeep of Information 
and C
ommunication infrastructure and providing uninterrupted network connectivity for local 
area network/ wide area network (LAN/ WAN) at locations across ONGC. From 1980s 
onwards, ONGC started its Satellite based Communication Network, which was progressively 
augmented over the years. Applications were submitted by individual user groups, plants, 
assets, work centers, etc. in ONGC.  Based on the requests and the information shared by 
ONGC work centers spread across India, Corporate Infocom, New Delhi expedites and follows 
up on these requests. On need basis executives from work centers also approach WPC/DoT 
directly. In addition, spectrum group also looks after the hiring of space segment on satellite 
transponder, signing of annual agreement with DoS and payments thereof. 
6.4.1  Non utilization of allotted spectrum by ONGC due to poor contract management 
relating to communication network projects 
Poor contract management by ONGC in executing communication network systems on 
turnkey basis resulted in non-utilization of spectrum in 3300-3400 MHz and 7 GHz bands 
for seven and three years respectively. 
(a) Non utilization of allotted spectrum in 3300-3400 MH z band 
DoT gave network approval (June 2012) for establishing RF spectrum-based communication 
network in frequency range of 3300-3400 MHz to ONGC for operations in North East and 
Southern Parts of India.   ONGC had existing communication network in this frequency band 
in Gujarat region/ Offshore. ONGC placed (May 2012) the Notification of Award (NOA) on 
M/s Essel Shyam Technologies Limited, Noida (contractor) for execution of network system 
on Turnkey basis with scheduled completion date as 21 July 2013 for Phase-I and 21 October 
2013 for phase-II from the date of NOA. ONGC was liable to pay license fee and royalty from 
date of commissioning of the project or 18 months from the date of issue of network approval 
by DoT, whichever was earlier.  
The work could not be completed even after providing the required extension to the contractor 
and hence the contract was terminated (November 2014) with PBG amounting to ₹ 3.54 crore 
bei
ng invoked. A fresh tender was floated in April 2016 with a total cost of ₹ 39.97 crore. The 
sec
ond contractor also failed in completing the work within the extended period and it was 
                                                           
29  Corporate unit of ONGC for Management of communication system including spectrum management in 
ON
GC 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
59 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
finally terminated in November 2019. ONGC surrendered the spectrum in December 2019 
without utilizing it for a single day and had to pay ₹ 38.12 crore towards spectrum charges to 
DoT
.   
DoT issued (March 2018) notices to ONGC and others (ISPs/ IOCL) to vacate spectrum 
assigned to them in 3300-3400 MHz band as this had been identified for introduction of IMT 
2020 (5G) services.  
DoT in reply stated (September 2021) that M/s ONGC (December 2019) surrendered their 
frequency assignments in the frequency band 3.3-3.4 GHz issued for NER and Southern region. 
It was also stated that M/s ONGC (December 2019) had requested for frequency assignment 
in 7 GHz band in place of frequency band 3.3-3.4 GHz in the onshore locations in western 
region of Gujarat service areas. Accordingly, M/s ONGC had been issued frequency 
assignments in 7 GHz band in Gujarat service area. Further, M/s ONGC (December 2019) 
stated that various networks were operational in 3.3-3.4 GHz in off-shore region, and would 
continue to be in operation till the end of their useful life of equipment (tentatively till 2024) 
and would be replaced in a phased manner.  
The fact remains that the network approved in June 2012 was not implemented due to poor 
contract management by ONGC and finally the spectrum allotted to them in June 2012 for 
North East and Southern regions was surrendered (December 2019)  resulting in non-utilization 
of spectrum in 3300-3400 MHz band by ONGC for almost five  years. Existing network in this 
band in Gujarat region/ Offshore was in use and spectrum was yet to be surrendered by ONGC. 
(b) Non utilization of allotted spectrum in 7 GHz band  
ONGC requested (March 2017) WPC for frequency authorization for deployment of Onshore 
Microwave Backbone Network at Mumbai to cater to high bandwidth requirements at 
10 links 30 to meet various communications connectivity for operational activities like ERP 
appl
ication, SCADA 31 data networks, Surveillance Network, Access Control Networks and 
Se
curity Networks System. WPC approved (October 2017) frequency authorization in 7 GHz 
band for interconnecting all offices through point-to-point microwave links radio networks and 
DL was issued in August 2018. In the meantime, ONGC floated (April 2017) a tender for 
supply, installation and commissioning of Onshore Microwave network project with one-year 
warranty and five-year comprehensive annual maintenance service and the contract was 
awarded (October 2018) to M/s. TECL with scheduled completion within 10 months i.e.  
08 August 2019. ONGC was to supervise, co-ordinate and monitor the performance and 
progress of the project. However, in view of slow progress and delays, ONGC terminated the 
contract on 02 November 2020. Subsequently, ONGC surrendered the spectrum on 
17 November 2020 after paying license fee/ royalty of ₹ 5.76 crore.  
                                                           
30  NBPGH to 11 High, VB to 11 High, VB to Trombay, Trombay to NSB, Trombay to Parshik Hill, Panvel 
Ph
-II to Parshik Hill, Panvel Ph-II to Panvel Ph-I, Trombay to Jawahar Dweep and Jawahar Dweep to JNPT. 
31  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems is used for collecting data during Production 
& 
Drilling operations for the monitoring and management of the production of Oil & Gas and drilling 
activities. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
60  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
On being pointed out by audit, Management did not produce any documentary evidence to 
substantiate that timely monitoring of the contract was undertaken. It further stated  
(September 2021) about framing the guidelines for addressing the issues relating to statutory 
clearances, project monitoring tool for project valuing less than ₹ 50 crore. 
Do
T in response stated (September 2021) that ONGC was issued frequency assignments in  
7 GHz band for their Mumbai onshore project during the year 2017-2018 and ONGC  
(November 2020) requested for surrender of these DLs stating that the project did not commence 
due to unavoidable reasons. It was also stated that M/s ONGC had paid the spectrum charges 
against these DLs for the period up to 30 September 2021 and ONGC requested for refund of the 
spectrum charges paid against these DLs stating that the Microwave Backbone project did not 
commence, and the system could not be installed. Refund/ adjustment of spectrum charges paid 
for the period 01 December 2020 to 30 September 2021 would be considered after surrender of 
the above DLs. 
Thus, poor contract management resulted in surrender of allotted spectrum in November 2020 
without any installation and commissioning of network leading to non-utilization of spectrum.  
6.4.2 Delay in upgradation of the existing network system by ONGC for efficient 
utilization of satellite-based spectrum 
Delay in upgradation of satellite based network due to poor contract management by 
ONGC caused non-utilization of satellite bandwidth hired from DoS for more than four 
years. 
ONGC constituted (June 2011) a Technical Task Force, w hich inter-alia recommended 
(December 2012) induction of new Technologies to meet the application requirement to 
upgrade/ replace obsolete equipment and to hire one more 36 MHz full transponder. In view 
of the above it was proposed (March 2014) to implement the project “revamping of C-Band 
communication infrastructure” on lump-sum turnkey basis. ISRO offered (August 2015) 
additional transponder on GSAT-16 Satellite. ONGC awarded (September 2016) a Turnkey 
Contract to M/s. HCIL Comtel Limited for revamping of C-Band Communication 
Infrastructure project at a cost of ₹ 45.28 crore with scheduled completion period of 12 mont
 hs 
from date of award.  
The contractor could complete the installation, configuration, and testing of system in August 
2019 against the scheduled date of July 2017. Subsequently after Site Acceptance Test (SAT) 
in November 2019 and June 2020 for Onshore and Offshore network, the handing over of 
system & project completion was done in February 2020 and June 2020. Due to persistent 
delays in completion of required activities, the satellite network could not be utilized during 
the period 2015-16 to 2019-20.  
On being pointed out by audit Management replied (July 2021) that prior to allotment of space 
capacity on GSAT-16, the offshore sites were getting connectivity through GSAT-10. These 
sites continued to get connectivity through Space capacity on GSAT-10 till the time it was 
shifted to GSAT-16. Further, the offshore network on GSAT-16 was put into use since 
March 2017 and was being utilized since then. It further stated (September 2017) that delay 
was mainly due to several meetings of tender committee to finalize the tender and multiple 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
61 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
rounds of clarifications. It was also stated (September 2021) that several improvements such 
as adherence of Material Management guidelines for tender processing, introduction of 
category management policy were being followed to strengthen financial bid evaluation. 
Management reply of use of GSAT-16 bandwidth since March 2017 is not acceptable as the 
system installation and configuration was completed by the contractor in August 2019 and the 
site acceptance test could only be conducted during November 2019 and June 2020 for Onshore 
Network and Offshore Network respectively as elaborated above. The Management had not 
provided any documentary evidence/ report to substantiate the network utilization to audit.  
The above observations suggest that satellite-based spectrum could not be efficiently utilized 
for almost four years.  
6.4.3 Operation of network systems without obtaining valid license (WOL) from WPC 
ONGC did not obtain requisite WOL for several frequencies being used by it. 
Section 3 of Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933 stipulates that  
‘save as provided in Section 4, no person is supposed to possess wireless telegraphy apparatus 
except under and in accordance with a valid license issued under this Act.’ 
Audit noticed that ONGC had seven frequency assignments in IMT band (450-3600 MHz),  
10 frequency assignments in spectrum band beyond 3600 MHz range and 173 frequency 
assignments in spectrum band below 450 MHz as on 31 March 2021.  In case of IMT band 
spectrum having frequency of 3329.75/ 3379.75, 3333.25/ 3383.25 MHz, DLs were issued in 
respect of 32 locations during the years 2008 to 2016.  Out of these 32 locations, WOL for only 
five locations were obtained from DoT/ WPC in August 2014.  WOL were not obtained in 
respect of remaining 27 locations for use of these frequencies till July 2021. 
ONGC had obtained DLs for 19 locations for utilization of spectrum for three frequencies viz. 
9410 (eight locations), 7327.5 (four locations) and 7299.5 (seven locations) MHz during the 
period from 2011 to 2020; WOL for only one location (9410 MHz) was obtained till date 
(July 2021), though these frequencies were in use. 
In respect of frequencies in the spectrum band below 450 MHz, out of total 143 active 
frequencies in use in ONGC as on 31 March 2021, 34 frequencies were examined.  It was 
noticed that ONGC had obtained WOL in respect of only six frequencies till date (July 2021). 
On being pointed out by audit, the Management replied (July 2021) that WOL were pending 
from DoT although requisite formalities had been completed by ONGC. It further stated 
(September 2021) that it would take steps to obtain WOL for pending cases at the earliest and 
SOP & guidelines were being framed for addressing statutory issues including obtaining WOL.  
DoT in response stated (September 2021) that based on the request and supply of requisite 
documents such as SACFA, Equipment Invoice, payment details etc., WOL had been issued 
against the DLs. WOL had not been issued against remaining DLs as ONGC had not applied 
and submitted the requisite documents for the same. 
However, the fact remains that ONGC had been using spectrum without obtaining WOLs 
which was a statutory requirement to be completed for utilization of spectrum as per the Indian 
Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
62  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
6.4.4 Absence of laid down procedure/ protocol for ensuring optimal and efficient 
utilization of spectrum in ONGC 
ONGC uses spectrum in both IMT and non IMT bands but did not have any laid down 
guidelines, procedure for spectrum management to ensure its optimal use. 
ONGC had been assigned spectrum administratively in both IMT and non IMT bands with 
huge economic value.  Therefore, the objective of spectrum management should be to ensure 
efficient and effective use of spectrum.  ONGC should plan for requirement of spectrum band 
with due care, establish latest technology network system and monitor the usage of spectrum 
on regular basis. However, Audit did not find any laid down guidelines, procedure for spectrum 
management to ensure its optimal use. Audit observed that applications for spectrum to DoT/ 
WPC were directly submitted by individual work centers which indicated that there was no 
mechanism in place for assessing/ reviewing and updating the spectrum use at Corporate 
Infocom level. Above mentioned audit findings clearly suggest poor contract management 
relating to communication networks using spectrum. 
On being pointed out by audit, the Management stated (March 2021) that the Company had a 
well-established mechanism for reviewing/ assessing and updating spectrum technology 
requirement and its utilization.  At times wherever envisaged, independent opinion was also 
taken.  The Management further replied (July 2021) that the communication requirement for 
various work centers of ONGC were addressed by Infocom Services and accordingly network 
permission/ frequency allotment were taken up by local Infocom offices, except for 
requirement in 0-450 MHz.  The requirement for 0-450 MHz spectrum was processed by local 
unit itself.  
Management further stated (September 2021) that efforts had been initiated for consolidation 
of spectrum information and making it available on common platform for easy access, 
assessment, monitoring, optimization, etc. and suitable SOPs, guidelines would be framed for 
adoption in ONGC. 
The fact remains that ONGC had not laid down guidelines, procedure for spectrum 
management to ensure its optimal use. 
Recommendations 22: ONGC may effectively monitor the contracts for establishing the 
network facilities to ensure timely utilization of the allotted spectrum. There is also a need to 
establish a mechanism for assessing and reviewing the utilization of spectrum in all bands, 
particularly in IMT bands and satellite bandwidth for ensuring optimal and efficient utilization 
of assigned spectrum. It may timely renew/ obtain WOL for the spectrum assigned to ONGC. 
It may consolidate spectrum related information and make it available at a common platform 
for easy access and assessment of spectrum at Corporate Infocom level. 
6.5 Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) is engaged in the business of refining, transportation, 
and marketing of petroleum products. It owns and operates nine refineries, one Naphtha 
Cracker Plant and 14,600 km cross-country pipelines network.  To monitor performance and 
safety of crude/ product pipeline through SCADA, an application software, the Company had 
laid approximately 8,631 km of OFC cables en-route its cross-country pipeline network. In line 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
63 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
with the Petroleum and Natural Gas Board and Oil Industrial Safety Directorate provisions 
regarding dealing in highly hazardous/ inflammable products, the Company had obtained 
licenses for wireless networks from DoT/ WPC in VHF/ UHF for the safety and security of its 
refineries/ pipeline/ marketing locations situated across the country. 
6.5.1 Absence of laid down policy/ procedure/ guidelines for optimum utilization of 
spectrum 
IOCL uses spectrum in both IMT and non IMT bands but did not have any laid down 
policy/ procedure/ guidelines for spectrum management to ensure its optimal use. 
Spectrum being a scarce natural resource should be us e d optimally, for which a user 
organization like IOCL should have laid down policy/ procedure/ guidelines for assessing its 
use, requirements, upgradation of wireless communication networks in view of changing 
technologies. However, Audit noticed that the Company had neither maintained a central 
record of licenses/ spectrum as assigned by DoT nor formulated any policy/ guidelines for 
ensuring the optimal and efficient utilization of spectrum. 
Further, the Company also failed to provide any document suggesting it had reviewed/ assessed 
or updated its requirement of spectrum or had identified unused spectrum and changed its 
utilization requirements with time and technological changes. Hence, audit could not make any 
observation about the utilization efficiency or surplus frequency.  
On being pointed out by Audit, the Management accepted (May 2021) the fact that there was 
no defined policy or specific Divisional procedure/ protocol for ensuring optimal and efficient 
utilization of spectrum/ bandwidth as assigned by DoT/ WPC. It further stated (August 2021) 
that it had developed a format for maintaining central record of licenses/ spectrum as assigned 
by DoT, to each division for monitoring optimum and efficient utilization of assigned 
frequencies. 
6.5.2 Utilization of spectrum in IMT bands based on DoT/ WPC authority letter without 
having a valid license 
IOCL did not obtain requisite WOL for several frequencies being used by it.  
Section 3 of Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act 1933 stipulates that  
‘save as exempted provided by the Central Government in accordance with Section 4 of the 
Act, no person is supposed to possess wireless telegraphy apparatus except under and in 
accordance with a valid license issued under this Act.’ 
However, Audit noticed that the Company had been using frequencies below 450 MHz, 806/ 
851 MHz bands along with several wireless walkie-talkie sets after obtaining the authority 
letter from DoT. However they had not obtained a valid license (WOL) for use of the same at 
Naphtha Cracker Plant Panipat, Gujrat Refinery Jamnagar, Digboi Refinery Assam and 
Gorakhpur (Marketing location).  
Management stated (August 2021) that based on the decision to grant license they were using 
these licenses by making timely payment of all requisite charges associated with spectrum 
allotment. All documents required for issue of Wireless Operating License had been submitted 
to DoT and regular follow up was being done for the same.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
64  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
However, DoT in reply stated (September 2021) that M/s IOCL had been issued WOL no.  
TG-41/ 1-440 in 800 MHz band for their CMRT operation at their Naphtha Cracker Plant from 
T-Group of WPC Wing, which is valid up to 30 June 2022. They were silent on issue of WOL 
for Gujrat Refinery Jamnagar, Digboi Refinery Assam, and Gorakhpur (Marketing location).   
Recommendations 23: IOCL may laid down policy/ procedure/ guidelines for spectrum 
management to ensure its optimal use. They may renew/ obtain WOL in time for the spectrum 
assigned to them. 
6.6  Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) 
Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) is India’s leading natural gas company with diversified 
interests across the natural gas value chain of trading, transmission, LPG production & 
transmission, LNG re-gasification, petrochemicals, city gas, E&P, etc. It owns and operates a 
network of around 13,340 km of natural gas pipelines spread across the length and breadth of 
the country. In order to ensure effective and reliable communication within plants, pipeline 
installations, compressor stations (CS)/ Pump Stations (PS) and Townships, licenses for 
wireless communication systems in the frequency ranges of below 450 MHz, 806/ 851 MHz 
and in 1.4 GHz bands had been taken from WPC for its captive uses. Besides, GAIL had also 
obtained registration/ licenses for commercial services viz.  Infrastructure Provider (IP) I & II 
and ISP. The license for IP-II and ISP had since expired.  
GAIL had a policy regarding management of spectrum allotted to them by DoT and had created 
a separate department known as GAILTEL to look after matters relating to Spectrum. All 
licenses/ registration/ statutory permissions/ statutory compliance issues related to 
GAILTEL business were dealt with by CO-GAILTEL32. During the project phase, GAILTEL-
Project33 was responsible for providing the desired licenses along with the system and handing 
over the same to the GAILTEL O&M. Payment of applicable Royalty/ License fee/ Radio 
Spectrum fees wherever applicable was to be ensured by respective site units of GAIL. 
6.6.1  Underutilization of spectrum by GAIL in 1.4 GHz band 
GAIL had obtained license in three frequency ranges for 58 Wireless Telegraph stations 
but using only 30 stations. 
GAIL obtained (March 2011) license in three frequency ranges 1448/ 1497, 1456/ 1505 and 
1464/ 1513 for 58 Wireless Telegraph stations. The license fees for point to point/ multipoint 
was ₹ 58,000 and royalty fees was ₹ 1.80 crore. However, GAIL had been using only 30 stations 
instead of 58 stations and paying the spectrum charges of ₹ 1,80,58,000 per annum applicable 
for 58 stations. GAIL had not taken any action for surrender of frequency authorizations for  
28 stations and to revise the spectrum charges payable.  
                                                           
32  Corporate GAILTEL is responsible for formulation and implementation of policy and guidelines, pertaining 
to operation and maintenance of OFC, Telecom & SCADA systems installed across GAIL. Licenses/ 
registration/statutory permissions/statutory compliance issues related to dark-fiber lease business shall be 
dealt with by CO-GAILTEL.  
33  Projects GAILTEL group is responsible for design, engineering & planning of the OFC, Telecom, SCADA 
network for all new pipelines. During the project phase, GAILTEL-Project is responsible to provide the 
desired licenses along with the system and handover the same to the GAILTEL O&M.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
65 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
On being pointed out by audit, the Management stated (July 2021) that it paid only ₹ 28,000 
per annum in excess as license fee and there was no change in royalty fee.  
However, the management has not assessed the actual requirement of frequency authorization 
in this band and surrender the frequency no more required by it. 
Recommendations 24: GAIL needs to establish a mechanism for assessing and reviewing the 
utilization of spectrum in all bands for ensuring optimal and efficient utilization of assigned 
spectrum. GAIL may assess the actual requirement of frequency and surrender the frequency 
no more required by it. 
 
E. Spectrum Management in Airports Authority of India 
6.7  Introduction 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) was constituted by an Act of Parliament and came into being 
on 01 April 1995 by merging erstwhile National Airports Authority and International Airports 
Authority of India. It functions under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(MoCA), GoI. AAI is responsible for providing Air Navigation Services (ANS) over the 
designated Indian airspace and adjoining oceanic airspace for purposes relating to the safety, 
regularity, and efficiency of air navigation. In pursuit of this goal, AAI provides 
Communication, Navigation & Surveillance (CNS) facilities, which completely depend on the 
availability of radio frequency spectrum and its rational utilization within the aeronautical 
bands. To avoid harmful interference, it was incumbent on AAI to ensure that all aeronautical 
and non-aeronautical systems in-use were duly authorized and licensed from WPC. 
CNS were the three main functions which constitute the foundation of Air Traffic Management 
(ATM) infrastructure and were vital for a safe and reliable air travel.  The CNS activities were 
handled in AAI by the CNS wing headed by Member (ANS) of AAI. The Directorate is 
responsible for planning, procurement, maintenance of equipment, implementation, and 
installation of systems etc. These services were provided over the Indian Air Space by the AAI 
which had CNS/ ATM facilities at 137 Airports.  
Spectrum Management in AAI 
An Aeronautical Frequency Spectrum Management (AFSM) Cell had been established and was 
operational in the Directorate of CNS-OM at AAI Headquarters. The General Manager 
(Communication) was the designated authority for the administration of aeronautical frequency 
spectrum. This Cell was responsible for planning, selection and assignment of frequencies. The 
initial mandatory regulatory clearances (frequency clearances) from the WPC wing of DoT 
were obtained by this Cell. At the Regional Headquarter level (RHQ), GM (CNS-R) at 
Chennai, Delhi, Guwahati, Kolkata and Mumbai, were responsible for obtaining, maintaining 
and regularly renewing (annually) each WOL for all airports under the jurisdiction of the 
concerned RHQ. The regulatory requirements at metro Airports in Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, and Mumbai were fulfilled by the concerned GM (CNS). In respect of 
non-aeronautical facilities such as walkie-talkie use, the responsibility was delegated to all 
Senior Manager/ Assistant General Manager level field stations. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
66  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
AAI also coordinates and assists WPC in such a manner that the competing and conflicting 
demands of non-AAI users (military, airline operators etc.) for frequencies in the aviation band 
were met in an optimum manner to avoid harmful interference. As one of the key members in 
National Preparatory Committee (NPC) for WRC, there was close coordination between AAI 
and WPC as their respective activities mature into preliminary views and Indian proposals. 
AAI also participates in the National Working Group constituted under NPC to study 
aeronautical, maritime, and amateur issues. AAI participates in the meetings held to revise the 
NFAP after every WRC to ensure that the aeronautical bands are protected.  
6.7.1  Non utilization of spectrum in VHF bands by various Airports 
Frequency spots assigned to AAI remained unutilized for periods from three to 12 years 
due to non-completion of related projects at Airports. 
Audit noticed cases of non-utilization of frequencies  allotted to AAI in different bands for 
various projects/ systems planned by AAI as detailed in Table 6.5. 
Table 6.5: Cases of non-utilization of frequency by AAI 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Frequency 
allotted 
Month of 
allotment of 
frequency/ 
issue of DL 
by WPC 
Purpose 
 
Present status 
1 Kolkata 120.025, 
124.650, 
132.700 
134.375 
134.125 
MHz  
April to 
August 2014 
Stand by 
frequencies for 
UAH project34 
UAH project implemented 
by AAI at Kolkata airport 
during August 2015 
without utilization of 
standby frequencies 
2 Imphal 119.775 
and 121.5 
MHz 
April 2014 
 
For operation of 
Transmitter/ 
Receiver 
Installation of equipment 
still in planning stage 
3 Chennai 108.900,  
329.300 
987(Tx)/ 
1050 (Rx) 
MHz 
July to 
August 2008 
Instrument 
Landing System 
(ILS), a component 
of navigational 
system 
Proposal cancelled  
(September 2013)   
4 Hyderabad 1118/ 1181 
MHz  
June 2018 For Distance 
Measuring 
Equipment – High 
Power (DME-HP) 
facility 
Equipment required for 
operations of DME-HP 
facility was yet to be 
received 
Above instances indicate non utilization of frequencies allotted to AAI for periods ranging 
from 3-13 years due to reasons stated above. Non surrender of allotted frequencies for such a 
long period leads to inefficient and sub optimal utilization of spectrum.  
On being pointed out by Audit, the AAI stated (September 2021) that procurement action had 
a considerable lead time and accepted systematic gap in procurement. It also attributed delay 
                                                           
34  Upper Airspace Harmonization - upper airspace is the space above a specific flight level (26,000 ft and 
ab
ove) dedicated to overflight, while lower airspace is the space below that flight level, dedicated to airport 
approaches 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
67 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
in procurement due to the moratorium on issuance of any new frequency by WPC due to court 
directive and the pandemic. However, the non-utilization of allotted frequencies for such a long 
duration by the AAI cannot be justified and indicates systemic deficiencies in procurement of 
radio equipment and frequency management. 
6.7.2  Under-utilization of spectrum assigned for navigational services by AAI  
Frequency spots assigned to AAI remained under utilised for periods ranging from three 
to five years due to delay in receipt of equipment. 
WPC allots frequency by issue of DL which should norm a lly be used within one year. Audit 
noticed instances of underutilization of frequencies by AAI due to delay in operationalization 
of equipment/ systems as detailed in Table 6.6. 
Table 6.6: Cases of underutilization of frequency by AAI 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Frequency 
allotted 
Month of 
allotment 
of 
frequency/ 
issue of DL 
by WPC 
Purpose 
 
Present status 
1 Bhubaneswar 121.500 
MHz 
April 2014 
 
Emergency purpose 
of aeronautical 
communication/ 
radio-navigation 
service 
Put to use w.e.f. 20 
September 2020 being the 
date of operationalization 
of equipment after lapse 
of more than five years of 
allotment.  
2 Lucknow 121.625 
MHz 
January 
2016 
For Surface 
Movement & 
Control (SMC-
main) facility. 
Lying unutilized for more 
than four years due to 
unavailability of Tx and 
Rx equipment, though it 
had been received now 
(July 2021). 
3 Jaipur 1090 MHz July 2012 For Automatic 
Dependant 
Surveillance 
Broadcast (ADS-B) 
a ground-based 
facility that receives 
the ADS-B 
information 
(position, altitude, 
aircraft 
identification and 
velocity). 
ADS-B facility 
commissioned (January 
2017) even though 
provisional 
commissioning was done 
in February 2014. 
Above instances show under-utilization of frequencies allotted to AAI due to delay for periods 
ranging from 3-5 years. 
On being pointed out by Audit, the AAI stated (September 2021) that radio equipment could 
not be arranged at Bhubaneswar due to diversion, delay in procurement, etc. Further, ADS-B 
facility was inducted for the first time in India and there were no clear guidelines for 
commissioning of the facility. As per DGCA instruction (December 2013), AAI Chennai team 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
68  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
carried out the analysis/ assessment and accordingly, provisional commissioning (February 
2014) of the facility was done by DGCA on 18 February 2014. 
Management did not offer any valid reasons for delay in receipt of equipment and consequent 
under-utilization of allotted frequency and delay of almost three years between provisional and 
permanent commissioning of the facility. 
6.7.3  Use of spectrum without obtaining valid Wireless Operating License (WOL) 
AAI had been utilizing frequency spots at 10 Airports without getting requisite WOL 
from DoT for period ranging from five to 25 years. 
WOL is a mandatory requirement to possess and operate any wireless telegraphy apparatus 
(radio equipment) in India and the possession/ operation of wireless equipment without a valid 
WOL is in violation of the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933. All aeronautical (CNS) or 
non-aeronautical systems viz. walkie-talkie etc. must be commissioned for regular operation 
only after obtaining the WOL from WPC wing of DOT. Audit observed cases of utilization of 
frequencies without obtaining valid WOL from WPC as detailed in Table 6.7. 
Table 6.7: Cases of utilization of frequency by AAI without valid license from WPC 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Frequency spots  Used since Purpose Remarks 
1 Guwahati  75 MHz February 
2003 
 
VHF Marker 
beacons (Outer 
marker and 
middle 
marker) 
Outer marker and 
Middle Marker facility 
were withdrawn from 
operation from 12 
October 2017 and 07 
March 2017 
respectively. 
2 Chennai  109.700 323.200 
995/ 1058 MHz 
2006 ILS facility at 
runway 25 
Management (July 
2021) stated that no 
DL was available, and 
station was in the 
process of applying for 
WOL for ILS facility at 
Runway 25. 
3 Chennai  1096/ 1159 MHz September 
2012 
 
DME-HP 
facility 
DL for above 
frequency was 
obtained (November 
2019) after a delay of 
almost seven years 
since date of 
commissioning of the 
equipment. 
4 Bhubaneswar 302 KHz August 2005 Non-
Directional 
radio Beacons 
(NDB) facility 
Facility from 
Bhubaneswar airport 
withdrawn during 
December 2013 and 
transferred to 
Jharsuguda airport in 
Odisha, but no DL 
found on record. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
69 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Frequency spots  Used since Purpose Remarks 
5 Kolkata 110.3, 111.3, 
332.3, 335, 385, 
1001/ 1064, 
1011/ 1074 MHz 
April 2002 
to January 
2013 
Navigational 
equipment like 
Glide path, 
DME-LP, 
Localisers.  
These frequencies 
were being used for a 
period from eight years 
to 19 years without any 
authorization from 
WPC 
6 Delhi In the range of 
108.5-335 MHz 
and 1046-1206/ 
983-1143 MHz 
September 
2008 to 
January 2020
 
28 
navigational 
equipment 
Out of 28 equipment 
being operated on 28 
frequency spots, 13 
were being operated 
without any 
authorization from 
WPC. 
7 Imphal 115.9 MHz, 
110.3 MHz and 
335.0 MHz 
March 1998 
to March 
2001 
Navigational 
equipment 
These equipment were 
operated without 
frequency authorization 
from WPC till  
Mar-May 2019.  
8 Guwahati 401 KHz, 
110.3, 335, 
342.3, 342.8, 
357.3,  357.8,  
1001/ 1064,MHz 
April 2000 
to January 
2013 
Navigational 
equipment 
Out of 22 frequency 
allotted, authorization in 
case of 15 frequencies 
found. DL in case of 
two obtained in March 
2019 after 19 years and 
five  frequencies being 
used without any 
authorization for 
periods ranging from 13 
to 19 years.  
9 Hyderabad 110.1, 334.400 
999/ 1062 MHz 
 
May to 
August 1995 
Navigational 
equipment 
Out of 38 frequencies, 
three frequencies used 
without any DL/ WOL 
from WPC upto  
April-July 2019 as 
such unauthorized use 
continued for more 
than 25 years 
10 Jaipur 295 KHz, 
109.9, 333.8 
997/ 1060 MHz 
December 
1999 to July 
2008 
Navigational 
equipment 
Out of 15 frequencies, 
four frequencies being 
used unauthorizedly 
for 13 to 22 years. 
11 Imphal 2861 MHz December 
2015 
operation of 
surveillance 
radar (ASR/ 
MSSR) 
WPC authorized 
frequency 2878/ 2898 
MHz to operate ASR/ 
MSR’s Tx/ Rx. 
However, AAI was 
using frequency 2861/ 
2898 MHz against the 
allotted 2878/ 2898 
MHz and did not 
surrender 2878 MHz.  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
70  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Frequency spots  Used since Purpose Remarks 
12 Imphal 289 KHz, 
161.825 and 
1064/ 1001 MHz 
2004 to 2009 Walkie – 
Talkie, 
navigational 
equipment 
These three 
frequencies in addition 
to other 13 authorized 
frequencies, was being 
used without any DL/ 
WOL. 
Above instances of use of frequencies by AAI for its CNS activities without proper 
frequency authorization by WPC indicates weak internal controls in WPC and AAI as 
well since deficient monitoring mechanism by DoT resulted in violation of regulatory 
provisions governing uses of spectrum.  
On being pointed out by Audit, the AAI stated (September 2021) that the facilities were very 
old and records pertaining to the facility could not be located. Prior to 2007-08 the requirements 
of WPC were not very stringent and the awareness level within AAI towards license 
requirements was being established. AAI had initiated the internal audit process and would 
identify any deficiencies and take corrective action accordingly.  
Above indicates systematic deficiencies in the frequency management by WPC/ AAI and needs 
to be strengthened. 
 6.7.4 Irregularities in utilization of frequency 161.825/ 166.525 MHz assigned for walkie 
talkie (communication) service at AAI Airports 
AAI had been using excess/ short wireless equipment beyond those authorized by WPC 
without getting it further authorized by WPC.  
As per the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act-1885 r ead with the Indian Wireless 
Telegraphy Act 1933, a need may arise to amend the DL issued by WPC due to changes to 
equipment quantity (addition/ deletion), location details, etc. or inclusion of additional Remote 
Communications Air/ Ground (RCAG) networks. Further, the licensee shall be responsible to 
apply for the renewal of the existing frequency authorization or WOL, within a period of  
30 days before the expiry of the said WOL/ AIP/ DL. Audit noticed instances of major 
deviation in using of communication equipment as detailed in Table 6.8. 
Table 6.8: Excess/ short wireless equipment used by AAI other than authorized 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Month of 
issue of DL 
No of 
authorized 
equipment 
No of 
equipment 
used as on  
31 March 2021 
Deviations 
1 Jaipur August 2003 20 equipment 
(Fixed and 
Handheld) 
131 equipment 
(Fixed and 
Handheld) 
Excess use of 
111 equipment 
2 Bhubaneswar August 2018 71 equipment 
(Handheld) 
174 equipment 
(Fixed and 
Handheld) 
Excess use of 
103 equipment 
3 Imphal January 
2014 
22 equipment 
(fixed and 
handheld) 
71 equipment Excess use of 
49 equipment 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
71 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Sl. 
No. 
Airport Month of 
issue of DL 
No of 
authorized 
equipment 
No of 
equipment 
used as on  
31 March 2021 
Deviations 
4 Chennai April 2018 26 equipment 
(fixed and 
handheld) 
20 equipment 
(fixed and 
handheld) 
six less 
equipment 
being used. 
 
5 Guwahati October 
2018 
115 numbers of 
equipment 
122 equipment 
(fixed and 
handheld) 
Excess use of 
seven 
equipment 
Use of excess/ short wireless equipment beyond those authorized by WPC without getting it 
further authorized indicates weak internal controls in adhering to regulatory provisions 
governing use of wireless equipment. 
  
Recommendation 25: AAI may introduce a mechanism for periodical review of utilization of 
assigned frequencies and adhere to the regulatory provisions governing use of wireless 
equipment/ networks. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
73 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
CHAPTER Conclusion 7 
The spectrum management process is not restricted to frequency assignments but also 
enc
ompasses efficient spectrum planning, spectrum engineering and utilization of spectrum 
monitoring techniques and tools. The increased demand for spectrum in the recent years had 
made it mandatory for users to utilize spectrum efficient techniques.  
Government Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies had been assigned spectrum administratively 
in both IMT bands suitable for commercial use with huge economic value as well as in non 
IMT bands. Most of the spectrum allocations were made years ago by administrative 
assignment, when there was little spectrum scarcity and therefore no pressure for users to 
consider the efficiency of use of their spectrum resources. This is no longer the case. Further, 
the spectrum usage is dynamic and not static in view of fast changing communication network 
technology and equipment. In this context assessment of utilization of spectrum assigned on 
administrative basis to the Government Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies like Ministry of 
Defence, Department of Space, Ministry of Railways, Airports Authority of India, other PSUs, 
was important in view of the possibility of low and sub-optimal utilization of spectrum by these 
users. As such there is a need to periodically assess the requirement of spectrum for use by the 
Public Sector bodies. This Performance Audit was conducted in this background. 
The Performance Audit was conducted during March –July 2021 with a view to examine the 
process of allotment/ assignment and utilization of RF spectrum assigned administratively35 to 
dif
ferent Departments/ Agencies and involved audit scrutiny of the relevant records of selected 
Departments/ Agencies. An entry meeting was held with the Secretary, DoT and officers of 
WPC and WPF wings of DoT on 26 February 2021. Entry meetings were also held by audit 
with the senior management of the selected Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies during  
March-April 2021. In the entry meeting, the scope and objectives of audit were explained. 
Important audit findings are summarized in succeeding sections: 
A. Spectrum Management in DoT 
Audit findings relating to Spectrum Management in DoT are summarized as under: 
 Post SC judgement of 2012 in 2G case that spectrum being a valuable natural resource 
has
 to be auctioned wherever there is demand, there had been adhoc mechanism for 
assignment of spectrum to needy users for captive uses as well as for commercial 
services other than telecom access services. This had caused delay and denial in 
assignment of spectrum, causing uncertainties amongst potential users. 
 Pricing policies for administrative assignment of spectrum had not been reviewed since 
2012, depe
nding on the usage and demand for spectrum. 
 DoT had not constituted a Permanent Committee/ Group to advise them on complex 
is
sues related to Spectrum Management including re-farming of spectrum for efficient 
                                                           
35 In case of satellite-based spectrum, the scope includes allotment and assignment to all types of users. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
74  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
and optimal utilization of the scarce resource. There was no MIS in place in DoT to get 
a feedback on actual utilization of spectrum assigned to Government users 
 Automated Spectrum Management System (ASMS) implemented by WPC in 2005 is 
not 
in line with the standards/ guidelines of the ITU and did not had any maintenance 
contract and WPC faced network issues. As a result, frequency assignments and 
licenses issued were not being updated in the system.  
 The National Frequency Register (NFR) remained un-updated and was not the correct 
re
flection of the frequency assignments with various users. Large scale mismatch 
between the database of frequency assignments as per DoT and frequencies uses by the 
selected Departments/ PSUs were noticed. 
 Spectrum is susceptible to harmful, illegal, and unauthorized uses by unscrupulous 
age
ncies. There were serious deficiencies in the maintenance of infrastructure for 
effective monitoring of spectrum, even though it was one of the most critical 
responsibilities of DoT. Available equipment was not maintained properly and no 
concrete action for replacements/ procurement of advance monitoring equipment was 
taken, despite recognizing the need in view of tremendous growth in wireless uses and 
deployment of advance technologies by the users of such monitoring equipment. Due 
to available vehicles not being in operational condition, mobile monitoring could not 
be done up to desired level.  
 Due to inadequate monitoring equipment and ineffective infrastructure, unauthorized 
use
s of spectrum had been noticed by audit, but no effective action was found to be 
taken against the unauthorized users. 
B. Utilization of Spectrum 
Important Spectrum band wise utilization by the various Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
and scope for refarming/ sharing and release of spectrum audit findings are summarized in the 
Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1: Utilization of Spectrum 
Ministry/ 
Department/ 
Agencies 
Frequency Band/ 
IMT-Non-IMT 
Remarks 
Ministry of 
Information and 
Broadcasting 
470-698 MHz 
(IMT) 
Suboptimal utilization due to obsolete technology 
of Analogue Terrestrial Television (ATT) and non-
viability of Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT); 120 
MHz of 526-646 MHz can be made available for 
IMT/ 5G services on pan India basis. 
Ministry of Railways 
and other 
Government user 
698-806 MHz  
(700 MHz) band 
(IMT) 
If proper study for 
sharing of spectrum  between 
Railways and other Government user in this band 
was done, 5 to 10 MHz (paired) in different service 
areas may be available for commercial use out of 15 
MHz (paired) allotted to Railways and other 
Government user. 
Ministry of Railways 900 MHz (IMT) Suboptimal utilization  of GSM-R based MTRC 
System. 1.6 MHz (paired) in nine service areas can 
be re-farmed for IMT applications. 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
75 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Ministry/ 
Department/ 
Agencies 
Frequency Band/ 
IMT-Non-IMT 
Remarks 
Government users 1800 MHz band 
(IMT) 
15 MHz spectrum in Kerala, Odisha and 10 MHz 
spectrum in Haryana, Mumbai and Kolkata service 
areas can be re-farmed from a Government user for 
IMT applications. If NFS was handed over to the 
Government user, possibility of re-farming spectrum 
in the range of 10 to 15 MHz in rest of the service 
areas can also be explored, resulting in availability 
of more spectrum for IMT applications. 
2100 MHz band 
(IMT) 
5 to 10 MHz (paired) spectrum for IMT applications 
might be made available if proper harmonization 
from Government user was done. 
2300-2400 MHz 
band (IMT) 
Considering the actual use of spectrum by 
Government user in 2300-2400 MHz band and 
availability of alternate bands, 10 MHz out of 20 
MHz allotted for Government user can be made 
available for IMT applications.
 
Department of Space 2500-2690 MHz 
band (IMT) 
DoS and DOT need to work together to identify 
an appropriate technology solution  with 
limitations of use in such a manner that both 
terrestrial and satellite services can co-exist in 
important frequency bands. 
3400-3600 MHz 
band (IMT) 
Suitable technological solution was required for 
utilization of 175 MHz spectrum in the band for co-
existence of IMT applications and space-based 
applications. 
Ka, Ku band Spectrum capacity of GSAT-19, GSAT-29 and 
GSAT-11 created for Government use (DoT, BBNL, 
BSNL) remains unutilized since their launch in 
2017 & 2018. 
Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation 
3300-3400 MHz 
(IMT) 
Non-utilization of allotted spectrum due to poor 
contract management by ONGC and surrendered 
subsequently. 
Department of 
Telecommunications 
1427-1500 MHz 
band (IMT)  
Decision regarding making available spectrum in 
these bands for IMT applications and backhaul 
services needs to be expedited for timely and smooth 
introduction of 5G services in the country. 
mmWave bands 
(24.25–27.5 GHz 
band; 37–43.5 GHz 
band and 66–71 
GHz band) 
Airports Authority of 
India 
Various frequencies 
in non IMT bands 
Non utilization, 
under-utilization of frequency 
bands by AAI due to delay in implementation of 
projects. 
 
C. Spectrum Management issues in other Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
 
Audit had come across specific audit issues relating to other Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies 
which are summarized as under: 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
76  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
 DoS had planned and coordinated for satellite-based applications in 460-470 MHz, 
1980-2010 MHz
, 2025-2110 MHZ and 2170-2200 MHz band which are IMT band. 
This needs coordination by DoT and DoS for better utilization. 
 Instances of use of spectrum by Departm ent of Space, Indian Railways, ONGC, AAI 
without obtaining valid licenses from WPC were noticed 
 Indian Railways did not have prope r database of spectrum assigned to them, in use or 
surrendered by user units. 
The Report was discussed with DoT and representatives of Ministry of Defence, Information 
& Broadcasting, Railways and Department of Space in Exit Meeting held in September 2021. 
Views expressed in the meeting had been suitably incorporated in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:
 
 
 
 
(MANISH KUMAR) 
Director General of Audit 
Finance & Communication 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
 
 
 
 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
77 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Annexure 1.1 
(Referred to in Paragraph 1.1) 
Frequency Bands according to IEEE and Classification of Space Radio 
Communications 
Letter 
symbol 
Radar (GHz) Space Radio communications 
Spectrum 
regions 
Examples Nominal 
designations 
Examples 
L 
(Long Wave) 
1-2 1.215-1.4 1.5 GHz band 1.525-1.710 
S 
(Short 
Wave) 
2-4 2.3-2.5, 2.7-3.4 2.5 GHz band 2.5-2.690 
C 4-8 5.25-5.85 4/6 GHz band 3.4-4.2, 4.5-4.8,  
5.85-7.075 
X 8-12 8.5-10.5 - - 
Ku 12-18 13.4-14.0,  
15.3-17.3 
11/14 GHz band 
12/14 GHz band 
10.7-13.25 
14.0-14.5 
K 18-27 24.05-24.25 20 GHz band 17.7-20.2 
Ka 27-40 33.4-36.0 30 GHz band 27.5-30.0 
V 40-75 - 40 GHz band 37.5-42.5 
47.2-50.2 
W 75-110    
mm or G 100-300    
 
 
  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
78  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
Abbreviations 
 
Acronyms Description 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AFSM Aeronautical Frequency Spectrum Management  
AIP Agreement in Principle 
AIR All India Radio 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
APT Asia Pacific Tele-community 
ATM Air Traffic Management 
ATNs Action Taken Notes 
ATT Analogue Terrestrial Television 
ASMS Automated Spectrum Management System 
BARC Broadcasting Audience Research Council 
BBNL Bharat Broadband Network Limited 
BSF Border Security Force 
BSNL Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited 
BTS Base Trans receiver Station 
CAPF Central Armed police Forces 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CFA Competent Financial Authority 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CMRTS Captive Mobile Radio Trunking Services 
CNS Communication, Navigation & Surveillance 
CoS Committee of Secretaries 
CRPF Central Reserve Police Force 
DCC Digital Communication Commission 
DCN Draft Cabinet Note 
DCPW Directorate of Coordination, Police Wireless 
DD Doordarshan 
DDG Deputy Director General 
DL Decision Letter 
DTH Direct To Home 
DTT Digital Terrestrial Television  

Report No. 2 of 2022 
79 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
DoS Department of Space 
DoT Department of Telecommunication 
DPL Dealers Possession License 
DSNG Digital Satellite News Gathering 
DSPT Digital Satellite Phone Terminals 
EMC Electro Magnetic Compatibility 
EMI Electro Magnetic Interference 
EMS Electromagnetic Spectrum 
ENG Electronic News Gathering 
FDD Frequency Division Duplex 
FSS Fixed-satellite service 
GAIL Gas Authority of India Limited 
GHz Giga Hertz 
GIS Geographic Information System 
GPs Gram Panchayats 
GSAT Geostationary Satellite 
GSM-R Global System for Mobile Communication-Railway 
GSQR General Staff Qualitative Requirement 
GSO Geo Stationary Orbit 
HLMC High Level Monitoring Committee 
HTS High Throughput Satellite 
IB International Borders/ Intelligence Bureau  
ICC INSAT Coordination Committee 
IEEE Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IFAT International Frequency Allocation Table 
ILD International Long Distance 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
IMS International Monitoring Stations 
IMT International Mobile Telecommunications 
IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
IOT Internet of Things 
IR Indian Railway 
ITBP Indo Tibetan Border Police 
ITU International Telecommunication Union 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
80  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
ISP Internet Service Providers 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
ISTRAC ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network 
JCES Joint Communications and Electronics Staff 
JWA Joint Wireless Advisor 
KHz Kilo Hertz 
LAN Local Area Network 
LEC Lower extended C Band 
LOI Letters of Intent 
LOS Line of Sight 
LSA Licensed Service Areas 
LTE Long Term Evolution 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MHz Mega Hertz  
MIB Ministry of Information & Broadcasting 
MOC Ministry of Communication 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MOD Ministry of Defence 
MOR Ministry of Railways 
MSS Mobile Satellite Services 
MTRC Mobile Train Radio Communication  
MWA Microwave Access 
MWB Microwave Backbone 
M2M Machine to Machine 
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation 
NDCP National Digital Communication Policy 
NDRF National Disaster Relief Force 
NFAP National Frequency Allocation Plan 
NFR National Frequency Register  
NFS Network for Spectrum 
NGSO Non-Geo Stationary Orbit 
NLD National Long Distance 
NPC National Preparatory Committee  
NOA Notification of Award 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
81 Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
NOCC Network Operations Control Center 
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre 
NSG National Security Guard 
NTP National/ New Telecom Policy 
OM Office Memorandum 
OFC Optical Fibre Cable 
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
OSCA Orbit Spectrum Coordination and Acquisition 
PMRTS Public Mobile Radio Trunking Services 
POLNET Police Network 
PSU Public Sector Undertakings 
RB Railway Board 
RF Radio Frequency 
RLOs Regional Licensing Offices 
RRs Radio Regulations 
SACFA Standing Advisory Committee for Frequency Allocation 
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems 
SARALSANCHAR Simplified Application for Registration and Licenses 
SAS South Asia Satellite 
SMEMBS System for Management of Electromagnetic Battle Space 
SATCOM PO Satellite Communication Programme Office 
SSB Seema Suraksha Bal 
STL Studio Transmitter Links 
TDD Time Division Duplex 
TDSAT Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
TRAI Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
TSPs Telecom Service Providers 
TTC Telemetry Tracking and Command 
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
UHF Ultra-High Frequency 
VHF Very High Frequency 
VSAT Very Small Aperture Terminal 
WAN Wide Area Network 
WMO Wireless Monitoring Organization 

Report No. 2 of 2022 
82  Management of Spectrum assigned on the Administrative basis to Government Departments/ Agencies 
WMS Wireless Monitoring Station 
WOL Wireless Operating License 
WPC Wireless Planning & Coordination 
WRC World Radio Conferences 
 
 