 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Rationalisation/ Deferment of Premium in  
BOT Projects by NHAI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government
 (Commercial) 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
No. 11 of 2022 
(Compliance Audit) 

 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER/ 
PARAGRAPH 
SUBJECT PAGE 
No. 
 Preface  iii 
 Executive Summary v 
 
Chapter I Introduction 
1.1 Brief about NHAI 1 
1.2 Formulation and approval of scheme 1 
 
Chapter II Mandate, Audit Scope and Methodology 
2.1 Scope of Audit 5 
2.2 Audit objectives 5 
2.3 Audit criteria 6 
2.4 Audit methodology 6 
2.5 Acknowledgement 6 
 
Chapter III Formulation and Approval of the Scheme 
 
3.1 Formulation of scheme by going beyond clauses of 
Concession Agreements despite remedy being available 
within these Concession Agreements 
7 
3.2 Extension of undue benefit to concessionaires by resorting 
to post-tender amendments 9 
3.3 Formulation of scheme on the basis of flawed presumptions 10 
3.4 Non-consideration/ non-approval of policy/ scheme for 
rationalisation of premium by NHAI Board 12 
3.5 Non-adherence to guidelines of Cabinet Secretariat for 
circulation/approval of Cabinet Notes  12 
3.6 Non-providing of vital data to expert group for identifying a 
stressed project 14 
 
Chapter IV Implementation of the Scheme  
 
4.1 Huge variations in revenue/ traffic projections by 
Concessionaires 17 
4.2 Huge variation in total project cost of NHAI vis-à-vis 
Concessionaire’s total project cost resulting in high debt 
servicing 
19 
4.3 Non-levy of penalty of ₹ 51.01 crore resulting in undue 
f
avour to the Concessionaires 21 
  
CONTENTS 

 
ii 
4.4 Undue favour to the Concessionaires by obtaining inadequate 
bank guarantees to the tune of ₹ 429.89 crore against the 
de
ferred premium of ₹ 7,363.63 crore 
22 
4.5 Project specific deficiencies while granting approval for 
deferment of premium 24 
 
Chapter V Mechanism for Monitoring of Project  
5.1 Investment of funds amounting to ₹ 5,303.73 crore from 
e
scrow account to mutual fund 
29 
5.2 Undue favour to the Concessionaires due to non-recovery of 
excess deferment granted of ₹ 252.97 crore 
30 
5.3 Deficiencies in monitoring of real time data transferred to 
NHAI 
31 
5.4 Non-withdrawal of claims against NHAI 32 
5.5 Delay in signing of supplementary agreement between 
Concessionaire and NHAI 
32 
5.6 Project specific deficiencies in monitoring 32 
 
Chapter VI Conclusion 35 
   
 Annexures  
Annexure-I  Status of 23 projects submitted to CCEA by MoRTH under 
Option B 37 
Annexure-II NHAI sanctioned deferment of premium in respect of 20 
projects 38 
Annexure-III Statement for calculation of penalty 
 40 
Annexure-IV Undue favour to the Concessionaires by obtaining inadequate 
bank guarantees 41 
Annexure-V Project wise detail of Fund Invested by concessionaire from 
Escrow Account to Mutual funds 42 
 

iii 
  Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the Government under the 
provisions of Section 19-A of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of compliance audit of review of policy of Rationalisation/ Deferment 
of Premium in Built Operate & Transfer (BOT) projects by NHAI.  Out of 20 
projects approved for deferment of premium by NHAI, 10 projects were 
selected by Audit which consisted of 03 four laning projects, 06 six laning 
projects and one 4/6 laning project.  
Audit covered the period from March 2013 to November 2019, and the Audit 
findings have been subsequently updated upto December 2020 based on 
Ministry’s reply.  
The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
v 
 
 
 
Brief about audit of the topic: 
National Highways were being developed under differe nt mode of execution viz. Built 
Operate & Transfer (BOT) (Toll), Built Operate & Transfer (BOT) (Annuity) and 
Engineering, Procurement & Construction (EPC) Mode. In BOT (Toll) Projects, the 
prospective bidders either quote Viability Gap Funding (VGF) payable to Concessionaires 
or Negative VGF/ premium payable to NHAI by Concessionaires. National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI) proposed a scheme of Rationalisation of premium quoted by 
Concessionaires in respect of Highways Projects. The original proposal for approval 
contained two options for rationalisation i.e., Option A which provided for termination and 
rebidding of such projects; and Option B which provided for permitting rescheduling of 
total premium payment only in respect of 23 projects listed therein. However, while 
submitting the final proposal, Option C was included, which permitted rescheduling of 
premium in respect of all stressed projects and the same was approved (8 October 2013) by 
competent authority with the directions to constitute an Expert Group, which was to finalise 
its recommendation on development of framework for determining if a project is stressed 
or not, the discount rate to be used and the conditions to be imposed. Based on 
recommendations (22 January 2014) of Expert Group, the benefit under the scheme was to 
be provided to projects having shortfall in subsistence revenue i.e., Toll Inflows – 
(Operation & Maintenance Expenses + Premium Payable + Debt Servicing). MoRTH 
conveyed the approval to NHAI on 04 March 2014. NHAI granted deferment of premium 
amounting to ₹9,296.25 crore for a period of 8 years to 14 years, to 20 projects (till 
October 2019). 
Significant Audit findings on Chapter III: Formulati on and approval of the scheme 
• D espite availability of alternatives within the ambit of signed Concession Agreements, 
NHAI, instead of exploring these options, cited problems faced by Concessionaires due 
to non-achievement of Appointed Date within stipulated period and probable loss of 
revenue of ₹98,115 crore to exchequer in the event of termination 
 of these projects, 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
vi 
proposed to bring about scheme for rationalisation of premium in respect of languishing 
projects.  
(Para 3.1) 
• NHAI extended undue benefit to concessionaires by resorting to post-tender amendments. 
The premium payable by the concessionaire was laid down in a legal contract drawn up 
after an open bidding process, in which premium offered was the one and only parameter 
in deciding upon the financial bids (request for proposal). Any post tender/ contract 
amendment tantamounts to vitiating the entire tendering process, against the principle of 
sanctity of contracts and unfair with respect to other bidders.  
(Para 3.2) 
• The scheme was formulated on the basis of flawed presumptions. While proposing the 
Cabinet note, a list of 23 projects, which were awarded on premium but whose Appointed 
Date was yet to be declared, was annexed and the status of languishing projects, along 
with need for policy for revival of these projects, was highlighted in the background (Para 
2) of the Cabinet Note. Finally, Option C which proposed rescheduling of premium in 
respect of all stressed projects was approved. However, none of these listed projects 
availed the scheme. Out of the 23 projects, which formed the basis for inception of this 
policy, 18 projects could not take off and were subsequently terminated/ foreclosed while 
the remaining five projects, though started, were not completed till December 2019.  
(Para 3.3) 
• The policy/ scheme for rationalisation of premium was neither considered nor approved 
in the NHAI Board Meeting.  
(Para 3.4) 
• MoRTH failed to adhere to guidelines of the Cabinet Secretariat for circulation/ approval 
of Cabinet Notes.  
(Para 3.5) 
• MoRTH/ NHAI failed to provide vital data to expert group for identifying stressed 
projects.  
(Para 3.6) 
 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
vii 
Based on the Audit findings on formulation and approval of the Scheme for 
Rationalisation of Premium, Audit recommends that: 
 N HAI may ensure that prevailing provisions of Concession Agreements are 
followed before proposing any new scheme for granting concessions beyond 
contractual provisions.  
 N HAI should avoid post tender/ contract amendments which vitiate the entire 
tendering process and against the principle of sanctity of contracts. 
 N HAI/MORTH should abide by the extant rules, procedures and guidelines of 
government and present the full facts in its proposals, particularly in case of 
deviations. 
 N HAI should strengthen its internal systems to ensure timely availability of 
critical data for policy decisions and evolve a mechanism for fixing 
responsibility for lapses in ensuring availability of crucial data. 
Significant Audit findings on Chapter IV: Implementat
 ion of the scheme 
• I
nstances of huge variation between financial projections at the time of financial close 
and those at the time of proposal for deferment of premium were noticed. It was seen that, 
at the time of financial close (while raising debt from banks/financial institutions) the 
projections were much higher while the projections at the time of making request for 
deferment of premium were much lower. The variations in projections made by 
concessionaire varied from 31 per cent  to 85 per cent . This shows that the 
Concessionaires’ projections were made to suit their interests and requirements.  
(Para 4.1) 
• There were huge variations in total project cost of NHAI vis-à-vis Concessionaire’s total 
project cost resulting in high debt servicing. The direct implication of this higher debt 
servicing is on the subsistence revenue of Concessionaire, which in turn had direct 
relation with premium deferred.  
(Para 4.2) 
• NHAI failed to levy penalty upon the Concessionaires applying for such renegotiation. 
This was to compensate for the special benefit that was being provided to the 
Concessionaires beyond the signed agreement. In a way, this was to mitigate the moral 
hazard of reopening a signed agreement to bail out the sector. This resulted in loss of  
₹ 51.01 crore to NHAI and undue favour to the Concess
 ionaires.  
(Para 4.3) 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
viii 
• NHAI failed to ensure adequate safeguards against exchequer money as modalities of 
guarantees were left to the discretion of NHAI Board. Bank guarantees to the tune of  
₹ 429.89 crore were taken against the deferred premium  of ₹ 7363.63 crore, which were 
i
nadequate to cover the exposure.  
(Para 4.4) 
With regard to Audit findings on Implementation of t he scheme, Audit recommends 
that: 
 N HAI may consider introducing a mechanism to review the total project cost/ debt 
to protect the interest of NHAI in the long term while keeping in reference the 
termination payments and debt servicing.  
 N
HAI may ensure reasonable amount of bank guarantee to cover the risk of non-
payment of deferred premium by the concessionaire, to safeguard the Government 
interest. 
 T he deficiencies in the granting of approval for deferment of premium in six 
projects (referred in para 4.5) may be investigated and responsibilities fixed.  
Further, remaining projects not selected in Audit sampling may be reviewed. 
Significant Audit findings on Chapter V: Monitoring of
  Projects 
• T he Concessionaires of many projects regularly invested funds from escrow account to 
mutual funds and since opening of respective escrow accounts of these projects an amount 
of ₹ 5,303.73 crore was invested in mutual funds.  
(Para 5.1) 
• N HAI was irregular in timely review and recovery of excess deferment of premium. 
Undue favour to the Concessionaires was extended due to non-recovery of excess 
deferment granted of ₹ 252.97 crore.  
(
Para 5.2) 
• There were deficiencies in real time monitoring of data transferred to NHAI.  
(Para 5.3) 
• As per conditions for sanction of deferment, the concessionaire had agreed to waive all 
claims/ penalties/ damages against NHAI on account of any non-compliance of conditions 
precedent on the part of NHAI either at the time of declaration of Appointed Date or later 

Report No. 11 of 2022
ix 
to obtain the benefits of the scheme. However, in respect of four projects, the 
concessionaires, despite availing benefit of deferment of premium, preferred a claim of 
₹ 1,575.91 crores on NHAI on various counts including delay in commercial operation 
date/ non-fulfilment of conditions precedent in contravention to conditions for sanction 
of deferment of premium.  
(Para 5.4) 
• As per the conditions of sanction of deferment, the Supplementary Agreement was to be
signed within seven working days of receipt of sanction letter by concessionaire for
deferment of premium.  However, there was delay ranging from six months to one year
in respect of three projects.
(Para 5.5) 
With regard to Audit findings on monitoring of projec
 ts, Audit recommends that: 
 The NHAI may ensure that adequate mechanism for regular monitoring of 
de
posits and withdrawals to/from Escrow account is in place and is followed 
scrupulously. In case of deviations responsibility needs to be fixed 
In addition, NHAI may also review the clauses of Escr ow Agreement and explore 
other compensatory controls including joint operation of the Escrow Accounts 
etc., to ensure adequate check upon the withdrawals. 
 NHAI should ensure regularly reviewing and making timely recovery of excess 
de
ferment granted. The balance of ₹ 121.41 crore may be recovered expeditiously. 
 NHAI may review all projects covered/proposed to be covered under the scheme 
an
d address issues affecting calculation of subsistence revenue and grant of 
deferment and revise premium deferment, as required. 

CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
1 
Chapter I  
Introduction 
1.1  Brief about NHAI 
The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) was constituted in the year 1988 by an 
Act of Parliament and became operational in the year 1995 with a mandate to develop, 
maintain1 and manage National Highways vested or entrusted to 
 it by the Central 
Government.  The National Highway projects are executed by NHAI under different 
National Highway Development Programme (NHDP) phases on different modes of 
construction i.e., Built Operate & Transfer (BOT) (Toll 2, Annuity 3, Hybrid Annuity 4), 
E
ngineering Procurement & Construction (EPC) Mode5.  The bidders, in case of BOT (Toll) 
pr
ojects, either quote viability gap funding (to be payable to it by NHAI) or premium 
(payable to NHAI by it) during construction/ concession period. 
1.2 Formulation and approval of the scheme  
In March 2013, the NHAI Board considered request of M/s GMR, concessionaire of 
Kishangarh-Udaipur-Ahmedabad (KUA) project, to revive the project by rescheduling the 
premium payable to NHAI over concession period.  The current premium payment 
envisaged fixed premium escalating at 5 per cent every year over the concession period.  
The concessionaire proposed to restructure the premium payable to NHAI over the 
concession period by paying a lower premium at the initial stages of the concession and 
then gradually increasing the premium payment, duly ensuring that the net present value 
(NPV) of the total premium amount payable to NHAI is fully protected within the 
concession period. 
The Board considered that there was a general slowdown in the economy which was 
affecting traffic and revenue potential of road projects.  The developers were, thus, finding 
it difficult to access debt and equity.  The Board also noticed that 25 awarded projects, 
                                                           
1 The concessionaire has to maintain highways during the concession period in order to permit safe, 
smooth and uninterrupted flow of traffic during normal operating conditions.  This has to be ensured 
by undertaking routine maintenance, major maintenance and carrying out periodic preventive 
maintenance. 
2 BOT (Toll Mode) - The concessionaire (i.e., the pri
 vate partner) is responsible to finance, construct, 
operate and maintain the road stretch entrusted to him.  The concessionaire is entitled to collect and 
retain the toll collected during the concession period.  In case the estimated toll collection falls short of 
the project costs including return on investment, NHAI provides finance to meet the gap in the form of 
viability gap funding (VGF).  In certain cases, the concessionaires may offer premium/ negative grant 
instead of getting VGF. 
3 BOT (Annuity) mode – The responsibility for constru
 ction, operation, finance and maintenance rests 
with the concessionaire and the toll collection responsibility rests with the NHAI.  All construction and 
annual maintenance costs are initially borne by the concessionaire and the same are reimbursed by 
NHAI by way of annuity payments determined at the time of bidding.  
4 Hybrid Annuity Mode (HAM) – 40 per cent of the proj
 ect cost is to be provided by the Government as 
construction support during the construction period and the balance 60 per cent as annuity payments 
over the operations period along with interest thereon to the concessionaire. 
5 EPC Mode: NHAI is responsible to finance, construct,  operate and maintain the road stretch 
entrusted to it. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
2 
which were to yield gross premium of ₹98,115 crore to NHAI, were yet to reach the 
A
ppointed Date 6 and 13 bids invited by NHAI during 2012-13 had not received any 
response.  Thus, to revive road sector and avoid litigation in case of termination of project, 
it was envisaged that an appropriate public scheme be made to defer premium payable to 
NHAI in the initial years by concessionaires and allow the premiums to be repaid during 
concession period without disturbing the Net Present Value (NPV) i.e., present value of 
total premium at a prescribed discount/ interest rate, over the length of the concession 
period.   
Accordingly, a note (09 September 2013) and two Supplementary Notes (19 September 
2013 and 04 October 2013) were submitted by MoRTH/ NHAI to Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) to approve a Policy for ‘Rationalisation of Premium quoted by 
Concessionaires in respect of Highways Projects’, which permitted rescheduling of 
premium in respect of all stressed projects.   
The Note and first Supplementary note contained only the following two options for 
rationalisation: 
• Option A: to terminate such projects (awaiting declaration of appointed date) and go 
for rebidding;  
• Option B: to permit rescheduling of total premium payment plan as a one-time 
measure as a special case in respect of 23 projects listed therein (Annexure I).  
However, in the second supplementary note (04 October 2013) option C was also included, 
along with Option A and Option B, as follows: 
• Option C: to permit rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects.   
Approval of Option C was sought from CCEA (04 October 2013) and the same was 
accorded by CCEA on 08 October 2013 with the directions to constitute an Expert Group7, 
w
hich was to finalize its recommendation on development of framework for determining if 
a project is stressed or not, the discount rate to be used and the conditions to be imposed.  
Final decision on recommendations of Expert Group was to be taken by MoRTH with the 
approval of Minister of Finance. 
The Expert Group submitted its recommendations on 22 January 2014 which were 
considered and the approved subject to the conditions that:  
i) the financial stress was to be limited to premium payment and not to any cash 
shortfall on account of Operation & Maintenance (O&M) expenses, debt servicing etc.;  
                                                           
6 “Appointed Date” means the date on which financial c lose is achieved or an earlier date which both the 
parties may determine by mutual consent and shall be deemed to be date of commencement of the 
concession period. 
7 CCEA while approving (08 October 2013) the scheme d irected for constitution of an Expert Group 
headed by Chairman, Economic Advisory Council.  The other members in the Expert Group were 
Secretary, Planning Commission; Secretary, MoRTH; Chairman, NHAI; and Secretary, Department 
of Expenditure.  

Report No. 11 of 2022 
3 
ii) the cutoff date for such special dispensation was set as 04 March 2014 i.e., this 
dispensation was not available to projects awarded after cutoff date, and; 
iii) NHAI Board was to consider each individual case on merit and to impose such 
conditionality as deemed appropriate to ensure that the government interest was protected.  
The approved Policy was conveyed by MoRTH to NHAI on 04 March 2014.  
In pursuance of the above policy, NHAI sanctioned deferment 8 of premium in respect of  
20 
projects (Annexure II) up to October 2019, which consisted of 1 two-lane project, 9 two 
to four lane projects and 10 four to six lane projects.  The premium deferment ranged from 
8 to 14 years 9 and went upto the year 2030-31 10.  As against premium of ₹18,952 crore 
r
eceivable from these projects during the deferment period, premium amounting to  
₹ 9,296 crore was deferred.  
                                                           
8 Deferment implies rescheduling the premium payments in such a manner whereby the concessionaire 
pays lesser than contracted amount of premium in the initial years of concession and then gradually 
increases the premium payment, while ensuring that the NPV of the total premium amount payable is 
fully protected within the concession period. 
9 Beawer-Pali-Pindwara–08 years & Gomti Chauraha – Ud aipur – 14 years 
10 Gomti Chauraha – Udaipur project – from 2016-17 to 2030-31. 

CHAPTER II 
MANDATE, AUDIT SCOPE AND 
METHODOLOGY  

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
5 
Chapter II 
Mandate, Audit Scope and Methodology 
The Compliance Audit Report has been prepared under the provisions of Section 13 of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.  
The Audit has been carried out in line with the Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 
and Compliance Audit Guidelines, 2016 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
2.1 Scope of Audit  
The scope of Audit consists of review of policy for rationalisation of premium quoted by 
the concessionaires in respect of Highway Projects and its implementation by NHAI.  Out 
of 20 projects approved for deferment of premium by NHAI, 10 projects (figure 1) were 
selected by Audit which consisted of 03 four laning 11 projects, 06 six laning12 projects and 
one
 4/6 laning 13 project.  Audit covered the period from March 2013 to November 2019, 
and the Audit findings have been subsequently updated up to December 2020 based on the 
Ministry’s reply.  
Chart 2.1: Details of Premium and Revised Premium du ring the deferment period 
2.2 Audit objectives  
The Audit objectives were to assess whether: 
                                                           
11 (1) Rohtak-Panipat, (2) Beawer-pali-Pindwara, (3) G odhra-Gujrat/MP Border. 
12 (1) Etawah-Chakeri, (2) Indore-Dewas, (3) Ahmedabad -Vadodara, (4) Samakhiali-Gandhidham, (5) 
Dankuni-Kharagpur and (6) Hosur-Krishnagiri. 
13 (1) Chengapalli to start of Coimbatore bypass (6 la ne) and Coimbatore bypass to Tamilnadu/ Kerala 
Border (4 lane). 
837
1338
2334
351
4849
103
1009
1836
492
1233
262
816 835
84
3110
0 123
746
189
854
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000₹ in crore
Projects
Premium payment originally contracted during the def erment period
Revised premium receivable during deferment period

Report No. 11 of 2022 
6 
i) prescribed process was followed while formulating and approving the scheme for 
deferment of premium; 
ii) the methodology adopted for implementation of the scheme was proper and 
adequate; and 
iii) suitable mechanism for monitoring of projects was established and was in operation. 
2.3 Audit criteria  
The deferment proposals in respect of selected projects were examined keeping in view the 
following: 
i) Cabinet Note and CCEA approval thereon for the scheme. 
ii) Conditions stipulated by the Ministry while according approval to the scheme. 
iii) Provisions/ Clauses of the Concession Agreement. 
iv) Correctness of proposals received from the concessionaire(s) for deferment of the 
premium. 
v) Conditions stipulated in the Approvals/ sanction orders. 
vi) Toll revenue. 
vii) Correspondence files. 
viii) Board Agenda/ Minutes. 
2.4 Audit methodology  
An Entry Meeting was held on 04 July 2019 wherein the Audit objectives, criteria, scope 
etc., were explained to the auditee and cooperation for the conduct of Audit was solicited.  
Thereafter, examination of records of NHAI and MoRTH was taken up.  The Draft Audit 
Report was issued to the Management on 29 November 2019 and reply to the Draft Report 
was received from the management on 27 January 2020.  The draft Report was issued to the 
Administrative Ministry/ Management on 18 May 2020, and Ministry furnished its reply on 
14 December 2020.  
2.5 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the NHAI and the Ministry for timely 
completion of the audit. 
  

CHAPTER III 
FORMULATION AND APPROVAL  
OF THE SCHEME 

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
7 
Chapter III  
Formulation and Approval of the Scheme 
 
3.1 Formulation of scheme by going beyond clauses of Concession Agreements 
despite remedy being available within these Concession Agreements 
Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs approved the Scheme with Option C which was to 
permit rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects.   
In this regard audit observed that the Concession Agreements of all the BoT projects contain 
various Articles under which relief may be extended to Concessionaires, if required.  These 
clauses include:   
i) Article 28 provides for granting Revenue Shortfall Loan to Concessionaire on actual 
basis for meeting shortfall in subsistence revenue 14 occurring as a result of an Indirect 
P
olitical Event, a Political Event or an Authority Default, as the case may be, at an interest 
rate equal to two per cent above the bank rate. 
ii) Article 13.5.4 provides that in the event of extension of six/four laning date due to 
reasons not attributable to Concessionaire, the concession period shall be extended by the 
period equal in the length of period of extension in six/four laning of project. 
iii) Article 29.1.2 provides that in the event that the Actual Average Traffic falls short 
of/exceeds the Target Traffic by more than 2.5 per cent , the Concession period shall be 
deemed to be modified in the manner specified therein.   
Audit observed that inspite of the above mentioned Articles, NHAI citing problems faced by 
the Concessionaires due to non-achievement of Appointed Date within the stipulated period 
and probable loss of revenue of ₹98,115 crore to exchequer in the event of termination 
 of 
these projects, proposed to bring about scheme for rationalisation of premium in respect of 
languishing projects.  No comparative analysis of the proposed scheme and existing clauses 
of the signed agreement was done by NHAI before proposal/ approval of the scheme.  NHAI, 
thus, sanctioned deferment of premium amounting to ₹9,296.25 crore in respect of  
20 projects (till October 2019) for a period ranging
  between 08 years to 14 years15.  
A
udit observed that the alternatives available in the existing Concession Agreements for 
providing relief to concessionaires were based on actual traffic/ revenue/ events.  However, 
NHAI opted for scheme for deferment of premium, which was probabilistic and thus had a 
higher risk of being misused or manipulated.  NHAI provided relief for a future period of  
08 to 14 years to the Concessionaires.  Grant of def
 erment of premium was even more 
unjustified particularly in case of four laning projects, where tolling starts after completion 
                                                           
14 Subsistence Revenue: Total amount of fee revenue required by concessionaire in an accounting year 
to meet the sum of Operation & Maintenance expenses and Debt Service.  
15 Beawer-Pali-Pindwara – 08 years & Gomti Chauraha – Udaipur – 14 years (other projects deferred 
premium falling in between). 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
8 
of construction of the project.  Presuming in advance, that actual toll collection would 
necessarily be lower than projected, was detrimental to NHAI’s financial interest. 
Thus, approval of scheme and granting of deferment of premium for future period of 08 to 
14 years in one go, based on probable cash flows was an undue favour and detrimental to 
financial interest of NHAI.   
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that the policy was kept under the ambit of 
Article 28 of Model Concession Agreements with minimum deviation from the currently 
existing Concession Framework, as also recommended by Expert Group.  While accepting 
the fact of grant of deferment on projects, it stated that the same is subject to annual review 
and is restricted to actual revenue shortfall and concessionaire is required to pay the 
difference with interest and penal interest.  Ministry stated that the Article 13.5.4 and 29.1.2 
do not address the shortfall in subsistence revenue requirement of a particular year.  Thus, 
deferment of premium was considered necessary. 
The reply of the Ministry seems to be an afterthought as there is no mention in the original 
Cabinet Note or the supplementary notes that the policy will be kept under the ambit of 
Article 28 of Model Concession Agreements with minimum deviation from the currently 
existing Concession Framework.  Article 28 provides for grant of revenue shortfall loan in 
case the realisable fee in an accounting year falls short of the subsistence revenue (i.e., to 
meet O&M expenses and debt services) as a result of Indirect Political Event, a Political 
Event or an Authority Default. However, the scheme was proposed considering general 
slowdown in the economy and further the scheme was based on a probabilistic model where 
relief to concessionaire was granted on the basis of anticipated subsistence revenue shortfall. 
Also, NHAI provided relief to Concessionaire for future period of 08 to 14 years in one go 
instead of year to year basis as provided in Article 28.  During a period of five years ending 
31 March 2019 (from 04 March 2014 i.e., the date of approval of scheme), NHAI deferred 
premium amounting to ₹3,796.06 crore against ₹5,750.64 crore of premium payable during 
t
hat period, in respect of 10 projects selected for review.  The reply of the Ministry is also 
not tenable, as Article 29.1.2 categorically provides for extension/modification in concession 
period in the event of variation of more than 2.5 per cent between actual average traffic and 
Target Traffic and Article 13.5.4 provides extension of concession period, for six/four laning 
projects, in case of extension of scheduled completion date due to suspension of construction 
works for reasons not attributable to concessionaire. 
Further, year to year basis would have the advantage of continuous monitoring and flexibility 
to adopt to different situations.  As regards, no deferment beyond actual revenue shortfall 
during the year, it was seen that despite grant of this benefit to concessionaire in anticipation 
of future revenue shortfall, NHAI has not been able to recover the excess deferment of 
premium granted due to defective implementation and monitoring of the scheme, as 
subsequently pointed out under para 5.3.  Further, yearly review of actuals does not alter the 
fact that the deferment was granted on the basis of probable revenue loss for 08 to 14 years.  
Article 28 of Model Concession Agreements addresses the shortfall in subsistence revenue 
requirement of a particular year and Articles 13.5.4 and 29.1.2 cover the risk of 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
9 
concessionaire due to delay of work and shortfall in traffic on the road. Hence, adequate risk 
mitigation mechanism was already provided in the Model Concession Agreement to cater to 
different situations. 
Recommendation No. 1:  NHAI may ensure that prevailing provisions of Concession 
Agreements are followed before proposing any new scheme for granting concessions 
beyond contractual provisions. 
3.2 Extension of undue benefit to concessionaires by resorting to post-tender 
amendments 
The premium payable by the concessionaire was laid down in a legal contract drawn up after 
an open bidding process, in which premium offered was the one and only parameter in 
deciding the financial bids (RFP).  The bidder was expected to have done due diligence and 
factored in all the commercial risks before quoting the premium. 
Audit observed that any post tender/ contract amendment tantamount to vitiating the entire 
tendering process and is against the principle of sanctity of contracts.  This was not only 
unfair with respect to other bidders who were not awarded the contract due to lower premium 
quoted by them but also to potential bidders who could have participated, had this flexibility 
been offered at the time of bidding. Also, this was against the organisational interest of 
NHAI.  
Audit also observed that this flexibility to pay in the manner as chosen by concessionaires 
by keeping same NPV was not offered to other bidders.  Neither did NHAI explore the more 
transparent idea of calling fresh bids for these contracts after inserting this flexible clause, 
subsequent to termination of existing contracts.  It was possible that other bidders could have 
quoted more with so much flexibility provided.  Instead, this option was offered only to the 
successful bidders who had quoted premium aggressively in the first instance but were not 
able to pay.  Yet they were rewarded for their lapse by NHAI by rescheduling premium 
instead of penalising them. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that Policy of Deferment of Premium has 
been approved by CCEA and the same has been further examined by Expert Group 
constituted by CCEA.  The policy was a well thought decision of Government after 
examining all the aspects on the basis of economic stress due to various reasons like approval 
and clearances related matter, tightening of loan approvals by banks and financial 
institutions, state specific issues, court orders etc.  Further, it was stated that there are several 
factors which impact the revenue of the toll projects like competing roads, law and order 
situation, mining ban, economic slowdown etc., and the risk mitigation measures provided 
in Model Concession Agreement in the form of extension of concession period does not 
provide cushion against the shortfall in subsistence revenue requirement.  
Regarding offer of same discount rate to other bidders, it is stated that termination of these 
projects was not considered a viable option in the interest of project as explained above. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
10 
The reply of Ministry is not tenable as the issue of economic stress was taken care of by 
Planning Commission while developing framework for Public Private Partnership in 
National Highways, as articulated under Article 28.  Planning Commission also noted that 
commercial risk, such as rate of growth of traffic, and technical risks relating to construction, 
operation and maintenance were being allocated to the concessionaires, as they were best 
suited to manage them.  While economic growth would have a direct influence on the growth 
of traffic and concessionaire cannot manage this element, the Model Concession Agreement/ 
Concession Agreement, by way of risk mitigation, provided for extension of concession 
period in the event of lower than projected growth in traffic.  The reply of the Ministry 
regarding non-existence of risk mitigation measures in Model Concession Agreement is not 
tenable as Article 28 provides16 for subsistence revenue shortfall loan on yearly ac
 tuals and 
Article 29.1.2 provides for extension of concession period due to shortfall in traffic on target 
date. 
The reply regarding non-viability of option of termination of projects is also not tenable as 
none of the 23 projects for which the scheme was initially conceptualised, availed the relief 
under the scheme and 18 out of the 23 projects could not take off due to termination/ 
foreclosure. 
Recommendation No. 2: NHAI should avoid post tender/ contract amendments which 
vitiate the entire tendering process and against the principle of sanctity of contracts. 
3.3 Formulation of scheme on the basis of flawed presumptions 
NHAI referred the matter pertaining to revival of Kishangarh-Udaipur-Ahmedabad project 
to Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH/ Ministry) and also proposed that an 
appropriate public policy, for the projects which were yet to reach the Appointed Date, be 
made.  Though MoRTH declined (14 May 2013) the proposal for revival of KUA Project 
in view of legal opinion against it, NHAI reiterated its proposal and requested MoRTH to 
reconsider the matter at the highest level in the Government. 
Accordingly, MoRTH circulated (26 August 2013) draft CCEA Note on the proposed 
scheme to Planning Commission, Department of Expenditure (DoE/ Ministry of Finance), 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA/ Ministry of Finance) and Department of Legal 
Affairs for comments. 
Planning Commission, vide OM dated 03 September 2013, stated that the said 
projects might be terminated and rebid afresh.  Department of Legal Affairs stated 
(02 September 2013) that it did not see any legal or constitutional objection to the proposal 
contained in the Draft Note. 
MoRTH submitted notes on 09 September 2013, 19 September 2013 and 04 October 2013 
to CCEA on ‘Policy for Rationalisation of Premium quoted by Concessionaires in respect 
                                                           
16 A rticle 28 provides for financial assistance to concessionaire in the form of revenue shortfall loan for 
shortage in subsistence revenue as a result of indirect political event, political event or authority 
default. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
11 
of Highways Projects’.  CCEA while approving the policy (08 October 2013) directed 
formation of Expert Group for giving recommendation on development of framework for 
determining if a project was stressed or not, the discount rate to be used and the conditions 
to be imposed.  Final decision on recommendations of Expert Group was to be taken by 
MoRTH with the approval of Minister of Finance.  The Expert Group, while documenting 
their concerns on the proposed scheme, observed that decision to renegotiate had already 
been taken by CCEA and it had a limited mandate.  It submitted its recommendations on  
22 January 2014 which were considered and the approved scheme was conveyed to NHAI 
on 04 March 2014.   
In this regard, Audit observed the following:  
i) The note dated 04 October 2013 contained three options 17 viz., Option A, B and C, 
out
 of which, CCEA approved (08 October 2013) option C.  It was observed that on the date 
of proposal of Option B (09 September 2013), amicable termination of 20 out of 23 projects 
proposed for revival, had already been approved in the 96 th Board meeting dated 23 August 
2013. 
 However, this fact was not brought to the notice of MoRTH/ CCEA and a proposal 
for a policy/ scheme of revival of these projects was proposed. 
ii) It was seen that out of these 23 projects (Annexure I), 18 projects could not take off 
and were subsequently terminated/ foreclosed while the remaining 5 projects, though started, 
had not been completed till December 2019. 
iii) It was also observed that the proposals dealing with this scheme did not bring out 
direct relationship between grant of deferment and timely completion of projects.  It was 
also not clear as to how completion of project with the help of deferment of premium was 
envisaged by NHAI as even the 20 projects18 which were granted such unprecedented relief 
i
n the form of deferment of premium, could not be completed in time.  
iv) Though the purported intent of the scheme was to salvage languishing projects, this 
scheme only ended up providing relief to concessionaires in the form of deferred premium. 
Thus, Audit noticed that while the scheme was initially conceptualised to provide relief to 
23 projects which could not take off due to non-achievement of Appointed Date/ Financial 
Close, this relief was not availed by any of these projects, which shows that the premise/ 
presumptions considered for such a scheme were flawed as the scheme was subsequently 
approved (option C) for revival of all languishing projects. 
Ministry (14 December 2020) has not specifically replied to the Audit observation.  
 
 
                                                           
17 Option A provided for termination and rebidding of projects which are unable to fulfil their 
commitments of premium payment. Option B provided for permitting rescheduling of total premium 
payment only in respect of 23 projects which had not achieved appointed date. Option C permitted 
rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects. 
18 Deferment of premium granted in 20 projects till Oc tober 2019. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
12 
3.4 Non-consideration/ non-approval of policy/ scheme for rationalisation of 
premium by NHAI Board 
NHAI discussed in its 93 rd Board Meeting (26 March 2013), the issue of renegot iation of 
premium in respect of Kishangarh-Udaipur-Ahmedabad project awarded to M/s GMR 
concessionaire and also raised the issue of other languishing projects in respect of which 
Appointed Date had not yet been declared.  NHAI sought approval of its Board 19 to 
r
ecommend the proposal submitted by M/s GMR.  The same was approved despite strong 
dissent/ reservations by two Board Members i.e., Secretary, Planning Commission, 
Secretary, Department of Expenditure.  Proposal for revival of other projects which had not 
achieved Appointed Date within stipulated period was neither moved nor approved in this 
meeting.  
In this regard, Audit observed that though NHAI Board had given its specific approval for 
only the Kishangarh-Udaipur-Ahmedabad project, NHAI prepared a case for deferment of 
premium in respect of 25 supposedly languishing projects at that time and proposed the 
scheme to MoRTH. 
Thus, the approval of Board was not for proposing a scheme in respect of other projects but 
only for one project i.e., Kishangarh Udaipur Ahmedabad project. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that, NHAI had first proposed for the matter 
to be taken up with the Inter Ministerial Group.  Ministry, instead advised NHAI to take the 
matter in the Board meeting.  Thereafter, the proposal was discussed in the NHAI’s  
93rd Board meeting and with Department of Legal Affairs 
 & other Departments.  Ministry 
also stated that extension of dispensation to all stressed projects was approved by the NHAI 
Board in its 96th Board Meeting held on 14 August 2013.  Ministry fur
 ther stated that as the 
scheme of Deferment of Premium was approved by the CCEA, prior approval of Board of 
NHAI was not required/ insisted. 
Ministry’s reply is not tenable in view of the fact that NHAI Board had given its specific 
approval only for Kishangarh-Udaipur-Ahmedabad project in the NHAI 93rd Board Meeting.  
H
owever, NHAI later prepared a case for deferment of premium in respect of 23 supposedly 
languishing projects and submitted to Ministry without seeking the approval of the Board. 
3.5 Non-adherence to guidelines of Cabinet Secretariat for circulation/ approval of 
Cabinet Notes  
As per Cabinet Secretariat OM dated 16 February 2012, the proposals contained in the final 
note forwarded by the sponsoring Ministry/ Department to the Cabinet Secretariat should be 
the same as those included in the note circulated to the Ministries/ Departments at the time 
of inter-ministerial consultations.  If a sponsoring Ministry/ Department makes a substantive 
change in the original proposal(s) after inter-ministerial consultations, it would be incumbent 
upon them to re-circulate the note for completing inter-ministerial consultations.  Failure to 
                                                           
19 The then NHAI Board comprised of Chairman, NHAI and  five members who were also the executive 
heads of their functional wings.  In addition, the Board included Secretary, Planning commission, 
Secretary, Department of Expenditure, Secretary, RTH as its members. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
13 
do so would render the institutional mechanism of inter-ministerial consultations 
infructuous.  
The original Note and First Supplementary Note contained two options for rationalisation 
i.e., Option A which provided for termination and rebidding of such projects; and Option B 
which provided for permitting rescheduling of total premium payment only in respect of 23 
projects listed therein.  However, on submission of Second Supplementary Note, Option C 
was included which permitted rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects.  
The CCEA approved (08 October 2013) Option C. 
Audit observed that although Option C was a major deviation from earlier proposals of 
Option A and B, it was not put up and vetted by NHAI Board despite directions of MoRTH.  
In fact, none of the options under the scheme was discussed in the Board.  The comments of 
DoE (Ministry of Finance), Department of Economic Affairs, Planning Commission, 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law), whose comments were sought/ taken while 
putting up main Note and First Supplementary Note, were also not sought for vetting Option 
C.  This was in clear violation of Cabinet Secretariat instructions on the subject. 
Audit also observed that the CCEA was not apprised of the fact that on the date of proposal 
of Option B, amicable termination of 20 out of 23 projects proposed for revival, had already 
been approved (96th Board meeting dated 23 August 2013).   
F
urther, as per Cabinet Secretariat/ GOI instructions, proposals concerning sectoral policies/ 
policy statements, should be accompanied by an action plan with clearly identifiable 
timelines and milestones for different activities.  Planning Commission should also be 
consulted in all cases concerning matters involving economic policy.  However, Audit 
observed that these instructions were not followed while putting up/ approving the proposal 
for rationalisation of premium as despite major change in scheme (i.e., inclusion of Option 
C for approval), the comments of other departments/ ministries were not taken.  
Further, although Planning Commission, which was the apex body for framing Model 
Concession Agreement opined that contracts should be scrapped, the comments/ reservations 
of Planning Commission were ignored at the time of introducing the scheme.  Instead of 
scrapping these projects, it was decided to revive projects by resorting to deferment of 
premium. 
Thus, the above shows various procedural lapses on the part of MoRTH/ NHAI during 
appraisal and approval of the scheme to be implemented by NHAI in respect of BOT (Toll) 
projects. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that, the decision to include Option C in the 
CCEA Note was taken in the Ministry and the CCEA approved the Option C, which 
permitted rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects. 
The reply of the Ministry is silent on the issue pertaining to non-vetting and approval of 
Option C by NHAI Board, Inter-ministerial consultations and other issues raised in the Audit 
observation. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
14 
Recommendation No. 3: NHAI/ MoRTH should abide by the extant rules, procedures 
and guidelines of government and present the full facts in its proposals, particularly in 
case of deviations. 
3.6 Non-providing of vital data to expert group for identifying a stressed project  
The Expert Group 20 had to give its recommendations on the framework for  determining 
whether a project was stressed or not, the discount rate to be used and the conditions to be 
imposed. It sought data on tollable traffic, toll revenues, debt servicing obligations, O&M 
costs, premium payment schedule in respect of 50 projects.  
Audit observed that the above data was not furnished to the Expert Group.  Consequently, 
the Expert Group had to finalise its report without reviewing the above data which might be 
a priori judgement, based on logic rather than facts. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that there was some delay in providing some 
data to Expert Group and the reason for the same cannot be explained as the related files are 
not presently traceable in NHAI. 
The reply of the Ministry stating delay in submission of data is not tenable as the data was 
not furnished to Expert Group till the last. This data was fundamental and crucial for taking 
any economic/ financial decision as deferment of premium is based on revenue shortfall, 
which is calculated as the difference between subsistence revenue and projected toll revenue, 
where subsistence revenue is the sum total of amount of O&M, debt servicing and premium 
payable. However, the Expert Group had to firm up its recommendations without availability 
of this basic data, which is fundamental in determining the project to be stressed.  So far as 
non-traceability of files is concerned, it is recommended that the Ministry may make further 
efforts to trace the missing files. 
Thus, the framework of the scheme was determined in the absence of traffic data despite 
being a vital parameter.  
Recommendation No. 4: NHAI should strengthen its internal systems to ensure timely 
availability of critical data for policy decisions and evolve a mechanism for fixing 
responsibility for lapses in ensuring availability of crucial data. 
3.7 Summing Up 
At all stages of formulation of scheme, from conception till introduction of Option C in the 
CCEA Note, it was presented that there was general slowdown in the economy and 
concessionaires were finding it difficult to achieve financial closure/ Appointed Date due 
to which, many projects were languishing and NHAI was close to losing substantial 
revenues.  It was stated that these stressed projects could be salvaged by giving them certain 
                                                           
20  The Expert Group was headed by Chairman, Economic A dvisory Council to PM and consisted of 
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs; Secretary, Planning Commission; Secretary, MoRTH; 
Chairman, NHAI; Secretary Department of Expenditure; Secretary, Economic Advisory Council to PM 
and Joint Secretary, MoRTH. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
15 
concessions in the form of deferment of premium payment in the initial years to the later 
years.  NHAI, despite availability of various alternatives to provide relief to concessionaire 
within the Concession Agreement, which were based on actual revenues, chose to go 
beyond the signed agreement and brought about the probabilistic model of deferment of 
premium, deferring the premium to future periods ranging from 08 to 14 years by resorting 
to post tender amendments.  The major shift in the premise of the scheme, introduction of 
Option C, was neither put up for approval in NHAI Board nor vetted by Ministry of Finance/ 
Law or Planning Commission.  The whole foundation of scheme proposal rested on revival 
of these 23 projects, which was never achieved.  Rather, the scheme ended up in providing 
benefit to the concessionaires of those projects which were already under execution and had 
never before expressed their inability to pay premium, as none of the projects which availed 
the scheme were completed in time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER IV 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME  

Report No. 11 of 2022 
17 
Chapter IV 
Implementation of the Scheme  
The scheme for rationalisation of premium in BOT proj ects in NHAI was approved by 
CCEA and conveyed to NHAI by MoRTH, with the directions for review of each case on 
merit by NHAI Board and to impose such conditionality, as deemed appropriate, with a 
view to ensuring that Government interest is protected.  Accordingly, the scheme was 
implemented by NHAI which reviewed and sanctioned individual cases of deferment of 
premium.  
In this regard, Audit noticed the following issues during review of the implementation of 
the scheme: 
4.1 Huge variations in revenue/ traffic projections by Concessionaires 
During review of projections of tollable traffic/ toll revenue made by concessionaires, it 
was seen that, at the time of financial close (while raising debt from banks/ financial 
institutions) the projections were much higher while the projections at the time of making 
request for deferment of premium were much lower.  The variations in projections made by 
concessionaire varied from 31 per cent to 85 per cent. This shows that the Concessionaires’ 
projections were made to suit their interests and requirements; higher projections to raise 
more debt and lower projections to obtain the benefit of deferment.  However, NHAI failed 
to exercise due diligence and failed to review the huge variation in toll projections, as 
detailed below: 
i) In case of two projects 21, percentage increase in toll revenue as projected b
 y 
concessionaire at the time of request for deferment of premium was almost same (i.e., 10 
to 11 per cent) as envisaged by NHAI in the financial analysis, whereas at the time of 
financial close, the rate of growth of toll projections was kept at 14  to 16 per cent which 
shows that revenue projections were pegged up at the time of raising debt.  As can be seen 
in Etawah Chakeri project (chart 4.1), toll projections at the time of deferment were  
₹178 crore and ₹662 crore for 2013-14 and 2025-26 respectively, wher eas toll projections 
for financial close were ₹240 crore and ₹1172 crore respectively.  Similarly, in Samkhiali 
G
andhidham Project (Chart 4.2), toll projections at the time of deferment were considered 
as ₹99 crore and ₹254 crore for 2014-15 and 2024-25 respectively, howe ver, toll projections 
for financial close were considered as ₹149 crore and ₹596 crore respectively.  Financial 
A
nalysis reports, in respect of remaining seven projects, were not furnished to Audit. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
21 Etawah-Chakeri & Samakhiali – Gandhidham (Financial  analysis in r/o three projects furnished viz. 
Ahmedabad-Vadodara, Etawah-Chakeri & Samakhiali-Gandhidham )  

Report No. 11 of 2022 
18 
Chart 4.1 
 
Chart 4.2 
 
ii) Audit further observed that projections made by concessionaires were not reviewed 
by NHAI indicating that it has failed to carry out due diligence while consenting to 
Concessionaires figures of shortfall in subsistence revenue.  In respect of two projects viz., 
Indore-Dewas and Ahmedabad-Vadodara, the concessionaires had even projected 
abnormal increase in toll projections of 80.6 per cent and 125 per cent, respectively, over 
the previous year.  
The above showed that NHAI did not review the traffic projections provided by the 
concessionaire at different times and only the economic slowdown was quoted for justifying 
the scheme.  
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400₹ IN CRORE
YEAR
Etawah Chakeri
Toll projections as per financial analysis of NHAI
Toll projections as per financial Model of Concessio niare
Toll projections at the time of deferment
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2014-
15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
₹ IN CRORE
YEAR
Samkhiali Gandhidham 
Toll projections as per financial analysis of NHAI
Toll projections as per financial Model of
Co
ncessioniare

Report No. 11 of 2022 
19 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that initially projections submitted by the 
Concessionaire were considered.  However, while considering Premium Deferment, 
projection of annual revenue growth was restricted to approximately 12 per cent without 
any increase in deferred amount of premium. It further stated that higher revenue 
projections during the years in which premium has been deferred only resulted in lower 
deferment of premium.  Also, deferment granted is subject to annual review and deferment 
is restricted to actual revenue shortfall and concessionaire is required to pay the difference 
with interest and penal interest.  
Ministry has furnished amount recoverable from concessionaires i.e., ₹47.48 crore 
(
2014-15 to 2016-17) and ₹38.65 crore (2014-15 to 2015-16) in case of Indore D ewas and 
Ahmedabad Vadodara project, respectively.  NHAI has withdrawn the deferment of 
premium granted in Indore Dewas project due to which Concessionaire has gone to 
Arbitration.  The concessionaire of Ahmedabad-Vadodara project has also represented 
against the revised premium demanded by NHAI. This project is also under consideration 
for withdrawal of premium.  
Ministry has not replied on the Audit observation regarding huge variation between revenue 
projections made by Concessionaire at the time of financial close and at the time of making 
request for deferment of premium.  Management contention of restricting revenue growth 
rate to 12 per cent, is not correct as NHAI during financial analysis of a project considers 
the same at 10 per cent  as against the concessionaire projections of 15 to 18 per cent .  
Further, Ministry’s reply citing recoveries to be made from two projects, itself strengthens 
the audit contention as recovery for the financial years 2014-15 and 2015-16 has not been 
effected even after a lapse of four to five years and the concessionaires are now opting for 
arbitration.  Had the relaxation been given on the basis of yearly actuals, the benefit under 
the scheme could be stopped in case of default by concessionaire after the first year itself.  
This also points towards the defective and weak implementation and monitoring of the 
scheme. 
4.2 Huge variation in total project cost of NHAI vis-à-vis Concessionaire’s total 
project cost resulting in high debt servicing 
During review of the selected projects, Audit 
observed that in respect of all projects except 
Beawer-Pali-Pindwara & Godhra-Gujarat-
Madhya Pradesh border projects, there was 
huge variation ranging from 32 per cent to 130 
per cent between total project cost (TPC) as per 
concession agreement vis-a-vis total project 
cost as per financial close achieved by 
Concessionaire which resulted in availment of 
higher loan by concessionaires.  Further, the 
total project cost arrived at by NHAI at the time 
of Detailed Project Report/ financial analysis 
Subsistence Revenue:  Total amount of 
fee revenue required by concessionaire in 
a
n accounting year to meet the sum of 
O&M expenses and Debt Service. 
 
Additional Concession Fee i.e., Premium 
payable was considered by expert group as 
part of O&M expenses of Concessionaire. 
 
Subsistence revenue shortfall = Toll 
Inflows – (O&M expenses + Premium 
Payable + Debt Servicing) 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
20 
includes all components including civil cost, contingencies, independent consultant and 
preoperative expenses, financing cost, escalation during construction period, interest during 
construction.  NHAI’s failure in reviewing Concessionaire’s total project cost at the time 
of financial close resulted in Concessionaire availing higher debt from financial institution 
and further resulting in higher debt servicing.  The direct implication of this higher debt 
servicing is on the subsistence revenue of Concessionaire which in turn had direct relation 
with premium deferred.  
In one case, the debts availed by concessionaires were so high that they even surpassed the 
total project cost envisaged at the time of entering into Concession Agreement.  Thus, the 
Concessionaires were able to cover NHAI’s total project cost by means of debt only.  
Chart 4.3 
 
Audit observed that NHAI, despite being aware of such high availment of loan, failed to 
analyse its impact on revenue shortfall and at the time of formulation of scheme of 
deferment of premium, only fall in traffic growth due to drop in Gross Domestic Product/ 
general economic slowdown were considered as reasons for languishing projects with no 
reference to high debt servicing due to high loans by Concessionaires. 
Thus, NHAI failed to review the concessionaires project cost despite the same having 
impact on the future period subsistence revenue due to higher debt component. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020), stated that Concessionaire project cost was 
determined by bidder/ Concessionaire in consultation with lenders and NHAI had no role 
in determining the concessionaire project cost.  NHAI total project cost is based on 
applicable system of record at the time of preparation of Detailed Project Report and banks 
have their own system for assessing the project cost of Concessionaire due to which, the 
gap is bound to persist on account of varied perceptions of different authorities.  Ministry 
further stated that higher debt does not affect NHAI liability as NHAI termination payment 
liability is restricted as per NHAI total project cost only which flows from the definition of 
807
2
125
805
325
1573
2388
1396
852
535
785
1213
4880
1300
600
2251
2472
2205
1123
925
750
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Rohtak-Panipat
Ahmedabad Vadodara
Samakhiali Gandhidham
Indore Dewas
Etawah-Chakeri
Beawer Pali Pindwara
Dhankuni-Kharagpur
Chengappali-Ciobatore Bypass
Hosur Krishnagiri
Godhra-Gurat/MP border
₹ in crore
Projects
Variation between total project cost of NHAI and total 
project cost as per Financial Package of Concessioniare
Total project cost as per Financial Package Total project cost as per Concession Agreement

Report No. 11 of 2022 
21 
“Debt Due”, “Senior Lenders” and “Total Project Cost” as provided in Article 48 of the 
Concession Agreement. 
The reply is not tenable as the total project cost arrived at by NHAI includes all components 
including civil cost, contingencies, Independent Consultant (expenditure) and preoperative 
expenses, financing cost, escalation during construction period & interest during 
construction.  Though NHAI may not have any role in determining concessionaire project 
cost, NHAI cannot escape from its responsibility of diligently reviewing the reason of 
variation between NHAI’s total project Cost and Concessionaire/ Lenders’ total project 
cost.  NHAI’s failure in reviewing concessionaire’s total project cost at the time of financial 
close resulted in Concessionaire going ahead with its inflated total project cost.  This, 
ultimately, had direct bearing on the premium deferment granted to concessionaire, as debt 
servicing is the main expenditure in working out the subsistence revenue shortfall. 
Further, MoRTH in its reply has not considered the termination payment which provides 
for considering 90 per cent of ‘debt due determined on the basis of the concessionaire’s 
total project cost’ and not determined on the basis of total project cost mentioned in 
Concession Agreement.  Therefore, the termination payment is not restricted to NHAI’s 
total project cost as per Concession Agreement but the Concessionaire total project cost is 
considered. 
Hence, it was important to review the Concessionaire’s total project cost as it not only had 
bearing on the amount of deferment of premium granted but also on calculation of 
termination payment, if any. 
Recommendation No. 5: NHAI may consider introducing a mechanism to review the 
total project cost/ debt to protect the interest of NHAI in the long term while keeping in 
reference the termination payments and debt servicing. 
4.3 Non-levy of penalty of ₹51.01 crore resulting in undue favour to the 
Concessionaires 
While recommending the scheme of ‘Deferment of Premium’ by Expert Group, it was 
envisaged that a penalty with a ceiling of half per cent 
(0.5 per cent) of total project cost to be determined by 
NHAI/ Authority shall be imposed upon the 
Concessionaire applying for such renegotiation.  This 
was to compensate for the special benefit that was 
being provided to the Concessionaire beyond the 
signed agreement.  In a way, this was to mitigate the 
moral hazard of reopening a signed agreement to bail 
out the sector.  It was further provided that in case the 
Authority was at fault, no such penalty should be 
levied. 
Audit observed that in case of one project namely 
Dhankuni-Kharagpur, NHAI delayed in handing over of Right of Way (ROW) to 
Condition Precedent  means 
set of conditions given in 
Concession Agreement which 
NHAI and Concessionaire are 
required to fulfill before start of 
construction. 
NHAI, before commencement 
of work, is required to 
handover required Right of 
Way (ROW), Environment 
Clearance, GAD approval for 
ROB etc. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
22 
Concessionaire.  In case of the remaining nine projects, there was mutual waiver of non-
fulfillment of condition precedent between NHAI and Concessionaire.  
However, at the time of grant of deferment, no penalty on account of renegotiation was 
imposed on concessionaires on the grounds that NHAI delayed in fulfilling conditions 
precedent.  
Audit observed that non-imposition of penalty was an undue favour to the concessionaires 
as the penalty was to be levied for providing the special dispensation (re-negotiation) and 
to mitigate the hazard of reopening of signed agreements.  The penalty was, in a way, 
opportunity cost for government in renegotiating the terms of agreement.  The grounds of 
conditions precedent and related penalties were a different issue altogether and had already 
been addressed under different clauses.  Non-imposition of penalty at the time of 
renegotiation as above has resulted into loss of ₹51.01 crore (
 Annexure III)  to the 
exchequer.  
Thus, inspite of clear recommendation of the expert group that non-levy of penalty in case 
of only one condition i.e., NHAI fault, NHAI failed to levy the penalty in cases where 
concessionaires were also at fault. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that no penalty is to be levied as per policy 
approved for deferment of premium in case authority was at fault. 
Ministry’s reply is not tenable in view of the fact that the recommendation of expert group 
for non-levy of penalty was applicable to projects where NHAI was at fault in fulfillment 
of condition precedent.  However, in the instant cases of deferment, the concessionaires 
were also at fault in fulfillment of their condition precedents.  Thus, the question of non-
levy of penalty in cases where both the parties at fault was an undue favour to 
Concessionaires. 
4.4 Undue favour to the Concessionaires by obtaining inadequate bank guarantees 
to the tune of ₹429.89 crore against the deferred premium of ₹7,363.63 crore 
T
he Expert Group, in its recommendations, pointed out that there should be adequate 
safeguards for government for deferred premium payments.  After deliberating on scenarios 
in which the Concessionaire could decide to walk out of the project, especially in case of 
six laning projects, the Expert Group recommended for obtaining a construction milestone 
linked performance guarantee in the form of a bank guarantee during the construction 
period.  This guarantee was to be a safeguard against the quantum of the deferred premium 
including interest thereon and the modalities of this guarantee were left to the discretion of 
NHAI Board.  The details of bank guarantee obtained by NHAI in respect of 10 projects 
are given in Annexure IV. 
Out of 10 audited projects, NHAI has bank guarantee amounting to ₹123.78 crore in respect 
of
 six projects 22 against total deferred premium of ₹2,496.59 crore till March 2019. In 
                                                           
22 Ahmedabad-Vadodara, Samakhiali-Gandhidham, Dhankuni -Kharagpur, Hosur-Krishnagiri, Etawah-
Chakeri and Indore Dewas. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
23 
respect of three projects 23, no bank guarantee were taken at all against total deferred 
premium of ₹1,273.56 crore till March 2019 on the plea that bank  guarantee was not 
required in case of four laning projects.  In one project, namely Godhra-Gujrat/ Madhya 
Pradesh border, the Concessionaire paid the entire deferred premium and opted out of the 
scheme. 
Audit observed that NHAI failed to ensure adequate safeguards against exchequer money 
as modalities of guarantees were left to the discretion of NHAI Board.  Audit also observed 
that linking of bank guarantees with achievement of project milestones instead of amount 
of premium deferred was an undue favour to the concessionaires since project construction 
completion was due within a short period of 1 year to 2 years whereas the premium was 
deferred for 08 years to14 years.  This resulted in exposure of NHAI to greater risk for a 
longer period as is evident from the fact that out of 10 projects, though revised premium is 
not being paid regularly in three projects and an amount of ₹107.74 crore 24 is due to be 
r
ecovered from the concessionaires of these projects, NHAI does not have any bank 
guarantees to safeguard its interests and cannot make any recovery but is left with only the 
option of requesting the concessionaires to make timely payments. 
Thus, by not having the adequate bank guarantee, the NHAI is exposed to greater risk as 
the excess deferments were not being recovered timely by NHAI. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that as per policy/ scheme of premium 
deferment, a construction milestone linked performance bank guarantee in the form of bank 
guarantee had to be furnished by the Concessionaire during the construction period, which 
was to be a safeguard against the quantum of the deferred premium, including interest 
thereon and also against Concessionaire default, if any, during the construction period after 
having been permitted to defer the premium due.  The modalities of this guarantee were left 
to the discretion of the NHAI Board.  However, this guarantee was refundable at the end of 
the construction period.  Hence, bank guarantee was not considered by NHAI Board in 
cases where project was completed/ or no completion risk was visualized. 
Ministry’s reply is not tenable in view of the fact that the modalities of these guarantees 
were left to the discretion of NHAI Board.  However, as pointed out in the Audit paragraph, 
NHAI failed to adequately safeguard the financial interest (amount of deferred premium 
plus interest thereon) of NHAI/ Exchequer after completion of project and exposed NHAI 
to greater risk for a longer period as is evident from the fact that out of 10 projects, though 
revised premium is not being paid regularly in three projects and an amount of  
₹107.74 crore was due to be recovered from the conces
 sionaires of these projects, NHAI 
did not have any bank guarantee to safeguard its interests.  
The above fact of risk exposure can also be substantiated from MoRTH’s own reply to, 
paragraph 4.1, where NHAI/ MoRTH failed to effect the recovery ₹86.13 crore even after 
                                                           
23 Chengapalli to Start of Coimbatore Bypass and Coimb atore Bypass to TN/Kerala Border, Beawer-Pali-
Pindwara and Rohtak-Panipat. 
24 (i) Ahmedabad-Vadodra – ₹6 4.98 crore (ii) Chengapalli to Start of Coimbatore Bypass and Coimbatore 
Bypass to TN/Kerala Border – ₹33.93 crore (iii) Rohtak Panipat – ₹8.83 crore. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
24 
lapse of 4 years to 5 years and the concessionaires are also opting for arbitration.  NHAI, 
in these cases do not have any financial safeguard, for recovery of the said amount.  Hence, 
there is a need for having bank guarantees. 
Recommendation No. 6: NHAI may ensure reasonable amount of bank guarantee to 
cover the risk of non-payment of deferred premium by the concessionaire, to safeguard 
the Government interest. 
4.5 Project specific deficiencies while granting approval for deferment of premium  
4.5.1 Samakhiali Gandhidham Project 
i) The concessionaire had initially requested (17 March 2014) NHAI for deferment of 
premium for only one year i.e., 2014-15. However, NHAI directed Concessionaire to 
submit revised request indicating the cash flows in the project till the end of the concession 
period.  
Audit observed that though Concessionaire was interested in deferment of premium for one 
year only (amounting to ₹71 crore), on the directions of NHAI, the concessiona
 ire 
requested for deferment of premium for 11 years resulting into premium amounting to 
₹886.21 crore being deferred.  The above action of NH AI was against norms of financial 
propriety. 
Management in its reply (27 January 2020) accepted that the concessionaire initially 
applied for deferment of premium of only one year and would apply the same principle for 
subsequent years.  
Ministry’s reply is not specific to Audit observation. 
ii) While putting up the case of deferment of premium, the traffic on the target date 
(31 March 2019) was anticipated at 41,225 passenger car units (i.e., 32 per cent decrease) 
and an increase of 4.8 years in concession period was worked out, which was considered 
for deferment/ repayment of premium by NHAI (23 May 2014).  Audit observed that as 
per NHAI’s own Toll Plaza Information system, the passenger car units per day as on 24 
March 2017 was 62,619 which means it had already achieved target traffic two years ahead 
of the target date.  This shows that NHAI based its calculations on speculative data and 
extended undue benefit to concessionaire in the form of deferment of premium.  It was also 
observed that the initial deferment was granted by NHAI for an amount of ₹886.21 crore.  
H
owever, subsequently the same was increased by ₹46.62 crore without any justification.  
M
anagement replied (27 January 2020) that as per terms of sanction, viability of premium 
deferred was examined up to the end of concession period without considering the 
extension of 4.8 years and in view of Audit observation deferred premium for future years 
is being re-examined without considering extension of concession period as the concession 
period is not likely to be extended in view of passenger car units of target date. 
However, Ministry has not furnished reply to Audit observation. 
 
 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
25 
4.5.2 Indore Dewas Project 
i) Concessionaire requested (25 March 2014) for deferment of premium from 2014-
15 to 2022-23 which was granted by NHAI.  As per the proposal contained in the agenda 
for approval, the Concessionaire was to clear all over dues of ₹16.49 crore (for November 
2013-
June 2014). 
Audit observed that NHAI, on the one hand failed to collect premium of ₹16.49 crore due 
f
rom the concessionaire and on the other hand extended undue favour to concessionaire by 
granting deferment for the period 2013-14, beyond the approval of the Board, thus 
rendering deferment for that year irregular. 
ii) It was also observed that in its projections for def erment of premium, the 
concessionaire also showed a steep increase from ₹47.08 crore to ₹85.03 crore of the 
a
mount of toll collection in the year ending 31 March 2020 i.e., increase of 80.6 per cent 
in projected revenues of 2019-20 over previous year (Chart 4.4).  The projected amount of 
operation & maintenance expenditure during the same year was increased from ₹3.95 crore 
t
o ₹20.74 crore over the previous year on account of propos ed major repair to be carried 
out by the concessionaire as per the provisions of Concession Agreement.  Audit observed 
that the increase in the expected toll revenue may have been shown to match these increased 
operation & maintenance outflows and to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed 
deferment so that the concessionaire may be able to avail the scheme.  The projected 
increase in revenue was neither justified in Concessionaire’s request letter nor reviewed by 
NHAI. 
Chart 4.4: P
 rojections of toll revenues for deferment of premium 
 
Ministry has not furnished reply to Audit observation raised in the para.  However, it has 
stated that the deferment of premium granted has been withdrawn for non-compliance of 
the conditions of the approval by the Concessionaire. 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
2014-
15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
₹
Year
Toll projection as per financial close Toll projection for deferment of premium

Report No. 11 of 2022 
26 
4.5.3 Beawer Pali Pindwara Project 
The deferment of premium was approved (23 May 2014) considering that the project would 
achieve completion in June 2014.  However, the project achieved commercial operation 
date on 11 June 2015.  Due to this delay, the concessionaire requested for revision in 
deferment.  The same was considered and approved by NHAI without obtaining approval 
of the Board. 
Audit observed that grant of deferment even before declaration of commercial operation 
date/ start of tolling, presuming that actual toll collection would necessarily be lower than 
projected and project would be under stress was detrimental to NHAI’s interests. 
Also, while granting deferment during 2014, it was assumed that the commercial operation 
date would occur on 17 June 2014.  However, the sanction for deferment was issued on 19 
June 2014 which means that the project had already over shot its target date of commercial 
operation date.  Yet, no cognizance of actual situation on ground was taken and deferment 
was granted based on anticipations only. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that deferment was approved by NHAI 
Board on the basis of projection based on anticipated commercial operation date and actual 
commercial operation date was granted in June 2015 instead of June 2014, accordingly 
premium deferment was revised.  As the overall premium deferred and individual year 
deferment were less than the approval of Board, Board approval was not considered 
necessary. 
The Ministry has accepted the Audit observation that premium deferment was granted one 
year prior to commercial operation date based on anticipation only.  Thus, deferment was 
granted on hypothesis that the project would face economic stress after a year. 
4.5.4 Rohtak Panipat Project 
The tolling on the stretch commenced from 09 January 2014 and the concessionaire applied 
for deferment of revenue on 09 April 2014.  Thus, actual data on collection of toll was 
available only for three months on the basis of which the premium deferment amounting 
to ₹575.32 crore was granted on projections, for a period of
  13 years. 
Ministry has not replied specifically to the audit observation. 
4.5.5 Dhankuni Kharagpur Project 
The Concessionaire had been requesting NHAI to make good loss of revenue due to non-
payment of toll by operators of buses and mini-buses.  This revenue loss, as claimed by 
Concessionaire, stood at ₹72.34 crore for the period April 2012 to February 2019.  
Audit observed that till the time of deferment of premium in August 2015, the 
Concessionaire had already laid claim for loss of revenue amounting to ₹24.25 crore.  
H
owever, this issue was not looked into while considering request for deferment despite 
the fact that such non-payment of toll results in stress on the project resources which might 
result revenue shortfall and may, consequently, impact amount of premium deferred. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
27 
Ministry has accepted (22 December 2020) the audit observation and stated that all the toll 
revenue receipt including claim on account of toll shall also be considered. 
4.5.6 Ahmedabad Vadodara Project 
i) This project consists of two stretches i.e., NH8 (which was to be upgraded) and 
Ahmedabad Vadodara Expressway (already existing, shown in blue color in Figure 4.1). 
As on the date of deferment (06 June 2014), the stretch of NH-8 was not even complete 
and the concessionaire had been collecting toll on the existing stretch of Ahmedabad -
Vadodara Expressway only.  
Figure 4.1: Collection of Toll 
Audit observed that the deferment was 
g
ranted even before start of tolling on 
NH-8 which was to be six laned and 
expected toll figures were reduced 
despite a difference of approximately 1.5 
years between date of grant of deferment 
and scheduled date of completion of NH-
8.  The same was neither justified in 
Concessionaire’s request letter nor 
reviewed by NHAI.  Audit also observed 
that while putting up the proposal to the 
Board, actual toll revenue data for 
previous years was not apprised to the 
Board and the proposal was mooted and accepted on the basis of projections only.  
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that action for withdrawal of deferment of 
premium has already been initiated. 
ii) Audit also observed that at the time of projections for financial close and for 
deferment, the toll revenue was expected to increase by approximately 190 per cent and 
125 per cent respectively (Chart 4.5) over previous year w.e.f. year of COD for NH-8 
stretch despite both the stretches being parallel. Acceptance of projections of such high toll 
revenue without any valid rationale were not justified on the part of NHAI, as this 
ultimately resulted in benefit to the Concessionaire who subsequently claimed deferment 
of premium on the basis of lesser expected toll collection with respect to those 
overestimated expected toll figures. 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 11 of 2022 
28 
Chart 4.5: Projections of toll revenues for deferment of premium 
 
Audit observed that the Concessionaire went to High Court and lodged a claim for loss in 
revenue due to an alleged competitive state road.  This loss of revenue claim is again based 
on projected toll revenue figures, which, despite being overestimated was accepted by 
NHAI without critical analysis.  
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that deferment is subject to annual review 
and based on annual review of FY 2014-15 and 2015-16, an amount of ₹38.65 crore has 
be
en worked out as excess deferment. 
The reply of Ministry strengthens the Audit contention pertaining to overestimation of 
expected toll figures resulting in higher amount of deferment of premium.  Also, NHAI 
failed to recover the same even after a lapse of five years.  Due to grant of deferment of 
premium for future years, NHAI has to continue with deferment of premium for future 
years despite non recovery of excess deferred premium of previous years.  No reply was 
furnished by the Ministry on claims on account of competing road. 
Recommendation No 7: The deficiencies in the granting of approval for deferment of 
premium in six projects (referred in para 4.5) may be investigated and responsibilities 
fixed.  Further, remaining projects not selected in Audit sampling may be reviewed.  
4.6 Summing Up 
NHAI was assigned the responsibility for review of each case on merit and to impose such 
conditionality, as deemed appropriate, to ensure protection of Government interest. 
However, Audit observed various instances of lapses on the part of NHAI to adequately 
review such cases of deferment of premium. Besides other project specific deficiencies in 
review/approval of deferment of premium, there were huge, unexplained, and unjustified 
variations in revenue/traffic projections of concessionaire and also between total project 
costs of NHAI and Concessionaire. Also, not only NHAI failed to levy penalty on the 
concessionaires applying for such renegotiation of contracts, but it also failed the ensure 
adequate safeguards against exchequer money by not having adequate guarantees for the 
deferred premium. 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2014-
15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
₹ IN CRORE
YEAR
Toll projections as per financial Modal of Concessio niare
Toll projectsions at the time of deferment

CHAPTER V 
MECHANISM FOR MONITORING OF 
PROJECTS 

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
29 
Chapter V 
Mechanism for Monitoring of Projects 
The sanction letters for deferment of premium stipul ated various conditions for monitoring 
such as no change in the waterfall prescribed for withdrawal from the Escrow account, 
submission of Bank guarantees, restrictions on O&M expenditure, waiver of all 
claims/penalties/damages against NHAI by concessionaire, submission of financial details 
etc.  
In this regard, deficiencies noticed in the monitoring of conditions stipulated for grant of 
deferment of premium are as follows: 
5.1 Investment of funds amounting to ₹5,303.73 crore from escrow account to 
mutual fund 
Article 31 of the Model Concession Agreement provides for opening and management of 
escrow account as well as order of payments to be made out of it.  As per this, payment of 
concession fee carries priority over many other payments (including investments such as 
mutual funds).  Condition of the sanction letter for deferment also prohibited any change 
in this waterfall mechanism25. 
D
uring test check of records, Audit observed that out of 10 projects, the Concessionaires 
of 07 projects 26 regularly invested funds from escrow account to mut ual funds and since 
opening of respective escrow accounts of these projects, audit could map an amount of 
₹5,303.73 crore ( Annexure V)  which was invested in mutual funds.  In addition to 
investment, instances of diversion of funds to other projects were also noticed27.  This is in 
c
ontravention to Concession Agreement as well as conditions of sanction of deferment of 
premium.  However, NHAI neither took any action to enforce the above clauses of 
Concession Agreement/ sanction letter nor did it take any action against the 
Concessionaires for breach of sanction conditions/ Concession Agreement clauses despite 
the fact that out of seven Concessionaires, three Concessionaires 28 have not even been 
                                                           
25 Waterfall mechanism is the term used to describe pri ority based mechanism in flow of payments from 
the escrow account.  The escrow account is operated by the concessionaire, who gives instructions to 
the escrow banker for its operations. Article 31 of the Concession Agreement as well as the Escrow 
Agreement describe the waterfall mechanism for withdrawals and receipts from/to the Escrow Account. 
According to it, the amount in Escrow account can be used, in following order only- for taxes due and 
payable, construction of project highway, O&M expenses, Concession Fee due and payable to Authority, 
Debt servicing, payment of damages, reserve requirements etc.  Only after all these obligations of 
payments are met, the balance can be utilized elsewhere.  
26 Ahmedabad-Vadodara – ₹5
 62.25 crore, Samakhiali-Gandhidham – ₹465.76 crore, Indore-Dewas – 
₹416.08 crore, Beawer-Pali-Pindwara – ₹1,257.93 crore, Hosur-Krishnagiri – ₹243.89 crore, Rohtak-
Panipat – ₹427.40 crore & Dhankuni-Kharagpur – ₹1,930.42 crore. 
  Escrow accounts of two projects viz. Godhra-Gujarat MP border and Etawah-Chakeri were not 
furnished whereas no such instance was found in “Chengapalli to Start of Coimbatore Bypass and 
Coimbatore Bypass to TN/Kerala Border project”. Also, details of all escrow/sub escrow Accounts being 
operated by concessionaires was not furnished in r/o any of the projects. 
27 Beawer-Pali-Pindwara project. 
28 Ahmedabad-Vadodra – ₹6
 4.98 crore, Rohtak-Panipat – ₹8.83 crore, Chengapalli to Start of Coimbatore 
Bypass and Coimbatore Bypass to TN/Kerala Border – ₹33.93 crore. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
30 
paying revised premium and an amount of ₹107.74 crore is due to be recovered from these 
c
oncessionaires.  
Audit also observed that statements of escrow accounts contained numerous entries where 
no/ incomplete narration regarding nature of transfer of funds was given.  In the absence 
of narration, Audit could not review transfer of funds effected through those entries. 
Thus, NHAI failed in its responsibility to monitor the Escrow Account in violation to 
stipulated condition of sanction granted and Concession Agreement. Modification in the 
manner/order of withdrawal from Escrow Account poses risk of 
diversion/misappropriation/misutilisation of public funds which are intended to be utilised 
for specific purpose. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that investment in mutual fund are temporary 
investments and has no bearing on the calculation of revenue shortfall.  However, to check 
the same an effective monitoring system has been initiated and suitable action shall be 
initiated against the defaulting concessionaire.  In respect of Indore Dewas Project, premium 
deferment order has already been withdrawn.  Other projects are also being reviewed as a 
normal course of action to enforce clauses of CA/ sanction letter for premium deferment.  
Remedial action taken will be intimated to Audit in due course of time. 
Ministry has accepted the Audit observation and has stated that the projects pointed out by 
Audit are being reviewed and in respect one project the deferment has been withdrawn. 
Recommendation No 8: The NHAI may ensure that adequate mechanism for regular 
monitoring of deposits and withdrawals to/from Escrow account is in place and is 
followed scrupulously.  In case of deviations responsibility needs to be fixed 
In addition, NHAI may also review the clauses of Escrow Agreement and explore other 
compensatory controls including joint operation of the Escrow Account etc., to ensure 
adequate check upon the withdrawals.  
5.2 Undue favour to the Concessionaires due to non-recovery of excess deferment 
granted of ₹252.97 crore 
O
ne of the clauses of the sanction letter provides that if revenue deficit, as actually seen on 
review at the end of the year, is lesser by more than 5 per cent of the figures given under 
the projections, the concessionaire would be liable to pay a penalty of 2.5 per cent  
additional interest over and above the normal interest of bank rate plus 2 per cent on the 
said excess.   
In respect of eight projects, Financial Consultants appointed by NHAI worked out a 
recovery of ₹166.48 crore (excluding interest/ penal interest) on account of excess 
deferment granted.  However, NHAI has been able to recover only ₹26.05 crore from the 
C
oncessionaires and ₹140.43 crore remains to be recovered from the conces sionaires.  It 
was also observed that NHAI has not been regular in carrying out such reviews besides 
delay of two to four years in carrying out such reviews. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
31 
Thus, NHAI was not regular in carrying out timely review and recovering excess deferment 
of premium. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) stated that suitable action has been initiated 
against the concessionaire for non-payment of premium demanded on the basis of review 
and till December 2020, recovery of an amount of ₹252.97 crore had been pointed out by 
f
inancial consultants. Against this, ₹131.56 crore has been recovered. 
A
s can be seen from the Ministry’s reply, an amount of ₹121.41 crore was yet to be 
r
ecovered. 
Recommendation No.9: NHAI should ensure regularly reviewing and making timely 
recovery of excess deferment granted. The balance of ₹121.41 crore may be recovered 
expeditiously. 
5.3 Deficiencies in monitoring of real time data transferred to NHAI 
While sanctioning deferment of premium to concessionaires, one of the conditions 
stipulated by NHAI was real time access of NHAI to data on traffic/ toll collection at toll 
plazas.  During review of records, it was seen that NHAI got conducted audit of toll plazas 
on Hosur- Krishnagiri, Samakhiali-Gandhidham, Indore-Dewas and Ahmedabad Vadodara 
project during the period from July 2017 to February 2018, through independent auditors. 
This was done with a view to verify correctness of toll data submitted by concessionaire vis 
a vis real time data. 
The above Audit Reports pointed out various issues such as, difference in the toll revenue/ 
number of transactions between transport management system database vis a vis NHAI data 
base, non/ short reporting of transactions, duplicate transactions, delay in transfer of data to 
NHAI, discrepancy/ mismatch in class/ count of vehicles, use of hand-held devices at toll 
plazas without intimating NHAI, etc.  
However, Audit did not come across any action taken report/ follow up action on audit/ real 
time monitoring of above projects.  This has serious implications for NHAI as in all the 
above Audit Reports of independent auditors, chances of revenue loss due to above issues 
have been pointed out.  NHAI has also failed to take any action against the concessionaires29 
f
or deficiencies/ discrepancies noted in transfer of real time data to NHAI despite same 
being in contravention of sanction conditions of deferment. 
Thus, NHAI failure in efficient & effective monitoring of real time data poses a financial 
risk as the toll collection is being done by concessionaires. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020), has mentioned efforts made in capturing traffic 
data but is silent on the issues raised by Audit i.e., action taken, if any, on the real-time 
monitoring of the projects/follow up action on the audit reports. 
                                                           
29 Dhankuni-Kharagpur, Ahmedabad-Vadodara, Samakhiali- Gandhidham, Indore Dewas, Hosur- 
Krishnagiri. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
32 
5.4 Non-withdrawal of claims against NHAI 
As per conditions for sanction of deferment, the concessionaire had agreed to waive all 
claims/ penalties/ damages against NHAI on account of any non-compliance of conditions 
precedent on the part of NHAI either at the time of declaration of Appointed Date or later 
to obtain the benefits of the scheme.  The Expert Group, in its report, also stated that in lieu 
of the special dispensation being offered to the concessionaires, they must agree not to file 
any additional claims pertaining specifically to non-fulfillment of condition precedent, over 
and above what is provided in Article 4 of the Model Concession Agreement (article 
pertains to rights and obligations of the parties with respect to condition precedent). 
However, Audit observed that in respect of four projects
30, the concessionaires preferred a 
claim of ₹1,575.91 crore on NHAI on various counts including d elay in declaration of 
commercial operations date/ non-fulfillment of conditions precedent. This was in 
contravention to conditions for sanction of deferment of premium. 
Thus, in-spite of non-lodging of claims by concessionaires, being a precondition for 
sanction of deferment of premium, the concessionaires preferred claims on NHAI on 
various grounds. 
Ministry (14 December 2020) has stated that the efforts are being made in consultation with 
the project offices to take suitable action against the non-compliant concessionaires. 
5.5 Delay in signing of supplementary agreement between Concessionaire and NHAI 
As per the conditions of sanction of deferment, the Supplementary Agreement was to be 
signed within seven working days of receipt of sanction letter by concessionaire for 
deferment of premium.  However, Audit observed that there was delay ranging from six 
months to one year in respect of three projects
31. 
Thus, there was procedural failure for timely signing of supplementary agreement between 
NHAI and respective Concessionaires. 
Ministry has accepted (14 December 2020) the delay in signing of supplementary 
agreement. 
5.6 Project specific deficiencies in monitoring  
i) In respect of Samakhiali-Gandhidham Project, the Concessionaire had not been 
submitting data pertaining to toll collected from overloaded vehicles though it preferred a 
claim of ₹25.8 crore on NHAI for loss of revenue due to non-ch
 arging from overloaded 
vehicles.  
Audit observed that in the absence of data on toll collection from overloaded vehicles, the 
same could not be considered for calculation of subsistence revenue though as per 
                                                           
30 Samakhiali-Gandhidham – ₹252.22 crore, Beawer-Pali-Pindwara – ₹371 crore, Indore-Dewas -  
₹915.81 crore, Etawah-Chakeri – ₹36.88 crore. 
31 Beawer-Pali-Pindwara (Revised SA not signed), Indore-Dewas, Chengapalli to start of Coimbatore 
bypass and Coimbatore bypass to Tamil Nadu/ Kerala Border. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
33 
Concessionaire’s own estimates, 76.09 per cent  of the total vehicles were overloaded 
vehicles.  Also, even if no increase in tollable vehicles and toll rates is considered, the 
amount of toll revenue from overloaded vehicles comes to ₹77 crore (approx.) on the basis 
o
f above claim of Concessionaire, which needs to be considered for calculation of 
subsistence revenue and recovery of excess deferment from Concessionaire. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) has assured that point raised by Audit will be 
considered while calculating revised admissible deferment amount. 
ii) In respect of Rohtak-Panipat Project, it was observed that there has been evasion of 
fee by road users on the stretch. Request by the Concessionaire for setting up of temporary 
toll plazas and recommendation on the same by Independent Engineer/ Regional Office has 
not been acted upon.  No action also been taken to avoid such evasion although the delay 
on such issues might affect calculation of subsistence revenue by the concessionaire and 
ultimately have adverse consequences for payment of premium to NHAI. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) has stated the installation of temporary toll plaza 
to contain evasion of user fee by the road users is in process. 
iii) In respect of Indore-Dewas project, w.r.t. clause 3 (j) of the sanction letter, it was 
seen that despite grant of deferment of premium, the project has continued to be under stress.  
It is not even meeting its debt service payment requirements and has availed Funded Interest 
Term Loan (FITL).  However, the NHAI has not taken any action in terms of sanction letter 
such as consideration of project for termination. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) has stated that the deferment sanction has been 
withdrawn from the erring concessionaire. 
iv) In respect of Chengapalli to TN/Kerala Border (6/4 lane) project, as per financial 
close accepted by NHAI, the capital cost of project was determined as ₹1,123 crore as 
a
gainst the total project cost of NHAI i.e., ₹852 crore. The concessionaire was to infuse 
e
quity of ₹325.72 crore and term loan of ₹797.45 crore in the debt equity ratio of 71:29.  
H
owever, Audit observed that as against the above agreed arrangement, the concessionaire 
infused equity of ₹217.09 crore and raised total debt of ₹1,044.48 crore32 (₹246.56 crore in 
e
xcess of loan as per financial close).  This resulted in overleveraging of the project as debt 
ratio of the project stood at 83:17 against the approved ratio of 71:29.  
However, as the amount of interest actually due/ paid from 2015-16 to 2018-19 was not 
available, audit could not work out the impact of same on deferment during above period.  
Audit also noticed discrepancy in amount of equity and debt infused as per financial 
statement vis-a vis amount infused as per Escrow Account statement. 
Ministry in its reply (14 December 2020) has stated that deferment has been granted on the 
basis of debt of ₹797.45 crore only but has not furnished any working 
 for substantiating the 
                                                           
32 Out of ₹1,044.48 Crore, ₹861.35 crore (₹797.92 crore plus ₹63.43 crore) debt from bank, ₹124.99 crore 
CCD from IFCI and ₹58.14 crore optionally convertible debentures (initially secured loan sponsors).  

Report No. 11 of 2022 
34 
stated fact.  As regards discrepancy in the amount of debt and equity in the escrow account 
and as per financial statement, Ministry has replied that the same is under review. 
Thus, the above shows that NHAI, instead of resolving the above project specific issues 
resulting in lower substance revenue, granted relief under the scheme. 
Recommendation No.10: NHAI may review all projects covered/proposed to be covered 
under the scheme and address issues affecting calculation of subsistence revenue and 
grant of deferment and revise premium deferment, as required. 
5.7   Summing Up 
The sanction of deferment of premium entailed various conditions which the concessionaire 
was required to abide by. However, Audit noticed various instances of breach of such 
conditions of sanction of deferment.  There were many cases of investment of funds mutual 
funds from escrow account, grant of excess deferment of premium to concessionaires, delay 
in signing of supplementary agreements, non-withdrawal of cases against NHAI by 
concessionaires and other project specific cases.  These instances point towards 
inadequacies in monitoring by NHAI. 
  

CHAPTER VI 
CONCLUSION 

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
35 
Chapter VI 
Conclusion 
NHAI, citing distress in the economic environment, w herein the concessionaires were 
finding it difficult to achieve financial close for their projects, proposed a Scheme, whereby 
existing Concessionaires, who were finding it difficult to pay the premiums quoted upfront, 
were allowed to reschedule their premium payments over the concession period keeping the 
net present value of the total premium payable as the same. Hence, NHAI proposed a 
scheme for rescheduling of premium in respect of all stressed projects.  
The scheme for rationalisation of premium quoted by 
 Concessionaires in respect of highway 
projects was brought about by NHAI in violation of parameters of competitive bidding as 
well as not being in conformity with the existing clauses. The scheme was formulated on 
the basis of flawed presumptions.  Further in violation of instructions of Cabinet Secretariat 
for proposing a Cabinet Note, comments of various Ministries/Departments/Planning 
Commission were also not sought for vetting Option C, which finally formed the basis of 
the scheme.  Crucial data was not also furnished to the Expert Group for developing a 
framework to identify stressed projects, etc. The ostensible goal of NHAI for 
conceptualisation of this unprecedented relief to concessionaires was to revive languishing 
projects pending declaration of Appointed Date/start. However, none of these projects 
obtained the benefit of the scheme. Rather, the scheme was availed by concessionaires of 
projects which were already under execution and had never before expressed their inability 
to pay the quoted premium.   
Out of 10 projects test checked, Audit observed a number of deficiencies in the 
implementation of the scheme like huge variation in revenue/traffic projections by 
concessionaires, variation of total project cost of NHAI & Concessionaire, non-levy of 
penalty, extension of deferment of premium for longer period, extended benefit on 
speculative data etc. Further, insufficient bank guarantees were provided in six projects, 
while four projects did not have any bank guarantee. NHAI also failed to monitor Escrow 
Accounts in violation of Concession Agreements.  
  

Report No. 11 of 2022 
36 
NHAI thus failed in its duty to carry out due diligence during formulation, implementation 
as well as monitoring of the scheme to safeguard the interests of NHAI/ Exchequer, thereby, 
putting recovery of deferred premium amounting to ₹9,296.25 crore at risk. 
 
 
 
 (R.G. 
Viswanathan) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: (Commercial) and Chairman, Audit Board 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (Girish Chandra Murmu) 
Dated:                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

ANNEXURES 

 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
37 
Annexure I (referred to in Para 1.2) 
Status of 23 projects submitted to CCEA by MoRTH under Option B 
Sl. No. Name of the Project Whether terminated/ foreclosed 
1 Kota-Jhalawar Yes 
2 Kishangarh- Udaipur- Ahmedabad Yes 
3 Hospet- Bellary- KNT/AP Border Yes 
4 Shivpuri-Dewas Yes 
5 Raipur-Bilaspur Yes 
6 Cuttuk-Angul Yes 
7 Rampur-Kathgodam Yes 
8 Lucknow-Sultanpur Yes 
9 Vijaywada- Eluru- Gondugulanu Yes 
10 Obdullahganj- Betul Yes 
11 Solapur- Mah./KNT Border- Bijapur Yes 
12 Aurangabad- Barwaadda Yes 
13 Rajahmundary-Gondugolanu Yes 
14 Jalgaon-Gujarat/Maharashtra Border Yes 
15 Jind-Punjab/Haryana Border Yes 
16 Anandapuram- Vishakhapatnam - 
Ankapalli 
Yes 
17 Amravati-Jalgaon Yes 
18 Coimbatore-Mettupalayam Yes 
19 Hospet-Chitradurga No 
20 Mah/KNT border- Sangareddy No 
21 Solapur-Mah/KNT Border No 
22 Agra- Etawah Bypass No 
23 Barwa adda-Panagarh No 
Project mentioned from serial no 19 to 23 were ongoing as on the date of Audit. 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
38 
Annexure II (referred to in Para 1.2) 
NHAI sanctioned deferment of premium in respect of 20 projects 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
project 
Project- 
2/4/6 
lane 
Date of 
Start 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Number of years 
for which 
premium deferred 
Premium payment 
originally 
contracted during 
deferment period 
(₹ in crore) 
Premium 
deferred 
(₹ in crore) 
% of Premium 
deferred 
1 Etawah-
Chakeri 
6 laning Mar 2013 Sep 2015 Nov 2016 10 1,337.91 521.55 38.98 
2 Indore-
Dewas 
6 laning Nov 2010 May 2013 May 2015 10 350.92 267.01 76.09 
3 Ahmedabad-
Vadodara 
6 laning Jan 2013 Dec 2015 Nov 2018 11 4,849.26 1,739.37 35.87 
4 Samakhiali-
Gandhidham 
6 laning Sep 2010 Mar 2013 Feb 2015 11 1,008.71 886.21 87.86 
5 Dhankuni-
Kharagpur 
6 laning Apr 2012 Sep 2014 CC/PCC not 
issued 
10 1,835.51 1,089.37 59.35 
6 Hosur-
Krishnagiri 
6 laning Jun 2011 Dec 2013 Apr 2016 12 1,232.71 378.95 30.74 
7 Belgaum-
Dharwad 
6 laning Dec 2010 Jun 2013 Aug 2015 11 509.83 216.03 42.37 
8 Chitradurga-
Tumkur-
Bypass 
6 laning May 2011 Aug 2013 Jul 2014 10 2,044.3 405.41 19.83 
9 Chengapalli 
to 
Coimbatore 
bypass 
6/4 
laning 
Sep 2010 Mar 2013 Oct 2015 11 492.21 303 61.56 
10 Rohtak-
Bawal 
4 laning May 2011 Nov 2013 Aug 2013 10 158.51 117.66 74.23 
11 Beawar-Pali-
Pindwara 
4 laning Dec 2011 Jun 2014 Jun 2015 8 2,334.18 1,499.44 64.24 
12 Gomati 
Chauraha-
Udaipur 
4 laning Apr 2013 Oct 2015 Dec 2015 14 296.64 175.35 59.11 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
39 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
project 
Project- 
2/4/6 
lane 
Date of 
Start 
Scheduled 
date of 
completion 
Actual date of 
completion 
Number of years 
for which 
premium deferred 
Premium payment 
originally 
contracted during 
deferment period 
(₹ in crore) 
Premium 
deferred 
(₹ in crore) 
% of Premium 
deferred 
13 Godhra-
Gujarat/MP 
Border 
4 laning Mar 2011 Aug 2013 Oct 2013 10 103.4 103.4 100.00 
14 Orissa 
Border-
Aurang 
4 laning Feb 2013 Aug 2015 May 2016 13 501.33 457.16 91.19 
15 Nagpur-
Wainganga 
Bridge  
4 laning Apr 2012 Oct 2014 Jan 2015 10 327.8 143.11 43.66 
16 Hyderabad-
Yadgiri 
4 laning Aug 2010 May 2012 Dec 2012 9 142.23 115.41 81.14 
17 Baleshwar to 
Kharagpur  
4 laning Jan 2013 Sep 2015 Dec 2015 9 449.75 203.81 45.32 
18 Muzaffarpur-
Barauni 
2 laning Jul 2012 Jul 2014 Jun 2016 11 69.81 54.76 78.44 
19 Mulbagl-
AP/Karnatak
a Border 
4 laning May 2013 May 2014 Jun 2015 10 70.38 43.93 62.42 
20 Rohtak-
Panipat 
4 laning Apr 2011 Oct 2014 Jan 2014 13 836.93 575.32 68.74 
 TOTAL      18,952.32 9,296.25 49.05 
 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
40 
Annexure III (Referred to para 4.3) 
Statement for calculation of penalty 
     (₹ in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Project  Total project cost as 
per Concession 
Agreement 
Penalty @ 0.5 per cent as 
a percentage of total 
project cost 
1 Rohtak-Panipat 807 4.04 
2 Ahmedabad-Vadodara 2125.24 10.63 
3 Samakhiali-Gandhidham 805.39 4.03 
4 Indore-Dewas 325 1.63 
5 Etawah-Chakeri 1573 7.87 
6 Beawer Pali-Pindwara 2388 11.94 
7 Chengappalli to start of 
Coimbatore bypass and 
Coimbatore bypass to 
Tamil Nadu/Kerela 
border 
852 4.26 
8 Hosur-Krishnagiri 535 2.68 
9 Godhra-Gujarat/Madhya 
Pradesh border 
785.5 3.93 
 Total  51.01 
 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
41 
Annexure IV (referred to in para 4.4) 
 Undue favour to the Concessionaires by obtaining inadequate bank guarantees 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Total amount 
of premium 
deferred 
(₹ in crore) 
Premium 
deferred as 
on 31.03.2019 
(₹ in crore) 
Amount of BG 
as per sanction 
letter 
(₹ in crore) 
BG as a 
percentage of 
premium 
deferred as 
per sanction 
BG 
available as 
on Nov 
2019 
(₹ in crore) 
1 Ahmedabad- 
Vadodara 
1739.37 1192.28 315.70 18.15 21.00 
2 Samakhiali-
Gandhidham 
886.21 345.71 38.07 4.30 38.07 
3 Dhankuni-
Kharagpur 
1089.37 417.01 29.48 2.71 29.48 
4 Hosur-Krishnagiri 378.95 145.51 12.21 3.22 0.80 
5 Etawah-Chakeri 521.55 223.13 21.50 4.12 21.50 
6 Indore Dewas 267.01 172.95 12.93 4.84 12.93 
7 Chengappalli to 
start of 
Coimbatore 
bypass and 
Coimbatore 
bypass to Tamil 
Nadu/Kerela 
border 
303.01 102.39 0 0.00 NA 
8 Beawer-Pali-
Pindwara 
1499.44 919.92 0 0.00 NA 
9 Rohtak-Panipat  575.32 251.25 0 0.00 NA 
10 Godhra-Gujarat/ 
MP Border 
103.4 25.91 0 0.00 NA 
TOTAL 7363.63 3796.06 429.89  123.78 

Report No. 11 of 2022 
42 
Annexure V (referred to in para 5.1) 
Project wise detail of Fund Invested by concessionaire from Escrow Account 
to Mutual funds 
(₹ in crore) 
Name of the project Investment in Escrow Account 
Dhankuni-Kharagpur 1,930.42 
Indore-Dewas 416.08 
Ahmedabad-Vadodara 562.25 
Hosur-Krishnagiri 243.89 
Rohtak-Panipat 427.4 
Beawar-Pali-Pindwara 1,257.93 
Samkhiali-Gandhidham 465.76 
TOTAL 5,303.73 