 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
For the year ended March 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waste Management in Indian Railways 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on _______________ 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
Performance Audit  
No. 16 of 2022 

Table of Contents 
Particulars Paragraph Pages 
List of Abbreviations   
Preface   
Executive summary  i to iii 
Chapter-1: Introduction 
Organizational Structure 1.1 2 
Audit Objectives 1.2 2 
Audit criteria 1.3 3 
Audit Scope and Methodology 1.4 3 
Sample Selection 1.5 3 
Response of the Ministry  1.6 4 
Acknowledgement 1.7 4 
Chapter-2: Waste management at Railway Stations, Catering Units and Coaching 
Depots 
Establishment of EnHM wing 2.1 5 
Budget allocation and expenditure 2.1.1 6 
Constitution of Accountable entities 2.2 7 
Assessment of quantity of waste generated and its 
proper management 
2.3 8 
Regulatory requirements compliance at stations 2.4 9 
Action Plan involving verifiable indicators at 37 
identified major stations as per NGT’s order 
2.5 10 
Action Plan involving verifiable indicators at other than 
37 station (balance of 720 selected station) 
2.6 12 
Progress on actionable points under Swachh  Bharat 
Mission 
2.7 12 
Efforts made for execution of railway works through 
CSR initiative 
2.8 14 
Collection and segregation of waste generated by 
catering units and from trains covered under OBHS 
2.9 15 
Assessment and collection/segregation of Plastic wastes 
at stations 
2.10 16 
Segregation, Collection and separate accumulation of 
Municipal Solid  Waste 
2.11 18 
Transportation and disposal of solid waste 2.11.1 19 
Facilities for Management of solid waste 2.11.2 20 
Conclusion 2.12 20 
Recommendation 2.13 22 

Particulars Paragraph Pages 
Chapter-3: Management of waste generated at Railway workshops, Maintenance 
Sheds, Coaching Depots and Production Units 
Consent to Establish (CTE) or Consent for Operation 
(CFO) under the Water Act, 1974 
3.1 23 
Authorisation from SPCBs for handling of Hazardous 
and other waste 
3.2 24 
Delay in Authorisation from SPCBs for handling of 
effluents and hazardous waste 
3.3 24 
Submission of Environmental Statements 3.4 25 
Maintenance of records for storage and disposal of 
hazardous waste.  
3.5 25 
Storage of hazardous waste beyond the permissible 
period  
3.6 26 
Integrated Management System (IMS)/ Green Rating 
Certification 
3.7 27 
Conclusion 3.8 28 
Recommendation 3.9 28 
Chapter-4: Management of waste water generated at railway stations, coaching 
depots, workshops and production units 
Provision / Planning , commissioning and functioning 
of effluent/sewage treatment plant (ETPs/STPs) 
4.1 29 
Analysis of effluents /sludge discharged from 
ETPs/STPs provided in stations, coaching depots, 
workshops, sheds and Production Units  
4.2 30 
Provision of water recycling plants (WRPs) 4.3 31 
Provision of Automatic Coach Washing Plants 
(ACWPs) at coaching depots and car sheds 
4.4 32 
Progress of works related to management of waste 
sanctioned from the funds created for Environment 
Related Works (ERWs) 
4.5 32 
Conclusion  4.6 33 
Recommendation 4.7 34 
Chapter-5: Management of bio-medical waste generated at Railway Hospitals 
Authorization for handling of bio-medical waste 5.1 35 
Delay/discontinuity in renewal of authorization for 
handling of bio-medical waste 
5.2 36 
Creation of infrastructure at hospitals for handling of 
bio-medical waste 
5.3 36 
Pre-treatment of bio-medical waste before its storage 5.4 37 
Segregation and pre-treatment of liquid chemical waste 5.5 38 

Particulars Paragraph Pages 
Proper storage facility for bio-medical waste (BMW) 5.6 38 
Compliance of norms prescribed under the BMW Rules 
for disposal of bio-medical waste 
5.7 39 
Disposal of bio-medical waste at hospital level 5.8 40 
Non- submission of Annual Reports as required under 
the BMW Rules 
5.9 41 
Health check-up, immunization and training of 
healthcare workers handling bio-medical waste 
5.10 41 
Existence of monitoring mechanism for managing bio-
medical waste 
5.11 42 
Conclusion 5.12 43 
Recommendation 5.13 44 
Chapter-6: Management of E-Waste 
Absence of consolidated instructions and training for 
handling of E-Waste 
6.1 45 
Submission of stipulated Form 3 to SPCB 6.2 45 
Storage of the E-Waste beyond permissible limit 6.3 46 
Conclusion 6.4 46 
Recommendation 6.5 47 
Annexures - 1.1 to 6.2  49 - 110 
 
  

 

Abbreviations used in the Report 
 
ACWP Automatic Coach Washing Plant 
ADRM Additional Divisional Railway Manager 
AEC act The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 
AGM Additional General Manager 
ATN Action Taken Note 
Batteries Rules The Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001 
BLW Banaras Locomotive Works 
BMW Rules The Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 
BOO Build, Own & Operate 
C&W Carriage and Wagon 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CDO Coaching Depot Office 
CE Civil Engineering 
CEEW Council on Energy, Environment and Water 
CEnHM Chief Environment and Housekeeping Manager 
CFO Consent for Operation 
CHWTSDF Common Hazardous Waste Treatment Supply and Disposal 
CME Chief Mechanical Engineer 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CRB Chairman Railway Board 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTE Consent to Establish 
DEMU Diesel-Electric Multiple Unit 
DEnHM Divisional Environment and Housekeeping Manag er 
DG sets Diesel Generator Sets 
DLS Diesel Loco Shed 
DLW Diesel Locomotive Works 
DMW Diesel Loco Modernization Works 
DRM Divisional Railway Manager 
EBR(IF) Extra-budgetary Resources (Institutional Fu nding) 
ED Executive Director 
EDP Electronic Data Processing 
ELS Electric Loco Shed 
EMS Enviroment management System 
EMU Electric Multiple Unit 

EnHM Environment and Housekeeping Management 
EP Act The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
EP Rules The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 
ERW Environment Related Works 
ETP Effluents Treatment Plant 
E-Waste Electronic Waste 
EWM E- Waste Management 
EWM Rules The E-Waste Management  Rules, 2016 
FOBs Foot over Bridges 
GM General Manager 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GSD General Scrap Depot 
HWM Hazardous Waste Management  
HWM Rules The Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management & 
Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016 
ICF Integral Coach Factory 
IMS Integrated Management System 
IR Indian Railways 
IRCTC Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
IT Information Technology 
JPO Joint Procedural Orders 
Kg. Kilogram 
KLD Kiloliters per day 
LB Local Body 
MCF Modern Coach Factory 
ME Mechanical Engineering 
MEMU Mainline Electric Multiple Unit 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
MOP Measures of Performance 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRF Material Recovery Facility 
MSW Municipal Solid Waste 
MSW Rules The Municipal Solid Waste Rules, 2000 
MT Metric Tonne 
NACO National AIDS Control Organisation 
NAIR National Academy of Indian Railways 
NGT National Green Tribunal 

OA Original Application 
OBHS On-Board Housekeeping Services 
OHSAS Occupational Health & Safety Assesment Service 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PBCM Plastic Bottle Crushing Machine 
PCC Pollution Control Committee 
PCME Principal Chief Mechanical Engineer 
PED Principal Executive Director 
PRS Passenger Reservation System 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PU Production Unit 
RB Railway Board 
RCF Rail Coach Factory 
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Service 
RWH Rain Water Harvesting 
RWP Rail Wheel Plant 
S&T Signal and Telecommunication 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
Sr.DME Senior Divisional Mechanical Engineer 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
SWM Solid waste Management 
SWM Rules The Solid Wastes Management Rules, 2016 
TPD Tonnes per day 
TREM Transport Emergency 
TSDF Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility 
T.V. Television 
ULB Urban Local Body 
UTS Unreserved Ticketing System 
Water Act The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
WBPCB West Bengal Pollution Control Board 
WHO World Health Organisation 
WRP Water Recycling Plant 
XEnHM Executive Environment and Housekeeping Manager 
ZR Zonal Railway 
 
 
 

Abbreviations used for Zonal Railways in the Report 
CR Central Railway 
ER Eastern Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
ECoR East Coast Railway 
NR Northern Railway 
NCR North Central Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NFR Northeast Frontier Railway 
NWR North Western Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SCR South Central Railway 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SECR South East Central Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
WCR West Central Railway 
WR Western Railway 
RPU Railway Production Unit 
 

 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the  President of India under Article 
151 of Constitution of India.  
The Report covering the period 2015-16 to 2019-20 contains the results of Performance 
Audit on 'Waste management in Indian Railways'. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice in the course of 
test audit for the period April 2015 to March 2020 as well as those which came to notice 
in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
  

 

Executive Summary 
Report No. 16 of 2022 i 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Waste management is a process involving collection, transport, treatment and disposal 
of waste materials.  The main sources of waste in Indian Railways are:  
• Waste from core activities - Passenger and freight movement, packaging, plastic 
and paper waste, food waste, human excreta and  
• Waste from non-core activities - Institutional waste in liquid and solid form 
arising out of repair and maintenance activities (in workshops and sheds). 
This report presents the results of the audit of “Waste Management in Indian Railways” 
and covers aspects in managing waste at stations, c oaching depots, maintenance & 
Production units and bio-medical waste generated in  hospitals.  Besides, system of 
managing E-Waste has also been covered in this repo rt.  The Report also covers 
adherence to the directives of National Green Tribu nal (NGT) in their various orders.  
Major Audit findings include the following:- 
• No separate authority with clear role and responsib ility was assigned the waste 
management task as also there was no demarcated fun d allocation for waste 
management exclusively.  
(Para 1.2 - Page 2 and Para 2.1.1 - Page 6) 
• Environment & Housekeeping Management (EnHM) wings were not formed in 
11 divisions in CR, ER, NR and NEFR despite issue of directives by Railway Board 
in August 2015.  In 59 stations out of 109 selected for audit, Directives of NGT for 
obtaining Consent to Establish (CTEs) from related State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs) were not complied with (As of 31 July 2021).      
(Para 2.1 - Page 5 and Para 2.4 - Page 9) 
• Directives of the NGT for implementation of 24  Verifiable Indicators for proper 
monitoring of waste management at five per cent (36) of 720 major stations were 
not fully complied.  In 65 other stations, lack of seriousness in implementation of 
verifiable indicators was observed.  
(Para 2.5 - Page 10 and Para 2.6 - Page 12)  
• Segregated waste collected from the Pantry cars and  trains with On Board 
Housekeeping Services (OBHS) was not unloaded in se cured bags at 49 stations 
out of 109 selected for audit.  In 42 of these 49 s tations, waste collected from the 
Pantry cars or OBHS trains was not dumped in separate assigned dustbins.    
(Para 2.9 - page 15) 
• Assessment of quantity of plastic waste generated w as not done at 71 stations and 
26 coaching depots out of 109 stations and 30 coach ing depots selected for audit.  
Non-installation of Plastic Bottle Crushing Machine s (PBCMs) as planned and 
absence of provision of ‘ plastic only Bin ’ in 90 stations and 25 coaching depots 
indicated lack of efforts on important environmental issue. 
(Para 2.10 - Page 16) 

Executive Summary 
ii Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
• The basic condition of segregating bio-degradable and non bio-gradable waste was 
not ensured.  Facilities for management of solid waste such as wet waste processing, 
material recovery facility, provision of composting  plant, waste segregation and 
recycling centres were not provided at 70 per cent of the stations and 90 per cent of 
coaching yards selected for audit.  
(Para 2.11.2 - Page 20) 
• Lack of seriousness was observed in obtaining SPCB’ s authorisation in respect of 
40 units out of 131 selected (including 30 coaching  depots). Further, 
non-compliance of the rules prescribed for storage and labelling of hazardous waste 
in 102 units (out of 131 selected) remained a poten tial threat for the environment 
and people engaged in these units.       
(Para 3.5 - Page 25) 
• Audit examined the efficacy of steps taken for mana gement of waste water and 
reduction in usage of water through Automatic Coach  Washing Plants (ACWPs) 
and water recycling plants (WRPs) at selected 102 m ajor stations, 30 coaching 
depots and 101 workshop/shed/Production units.  Eff luent Treatment Plants/ 
Sewage Treatment Plants (ETP/STPs), though planned for commissioning in 
19 major coaching depots and 40 workshops, were not co mmissioned as of 
March 2020.  WRPs were not provided at 86 stations.  Installation of ACWPs at 43 
locations out of 63 sanctioned did not commence at all as of March 2020. 
(Para 4.1 - Page 29, Para 4.3 - Page 31 and Para 4.4 - Page 32) 
• Provision of secured room with reference to Bio-Med ical waste Rules for storage 
of bio-medical waste was not made in 46 hospitals o ut of 72 selected for audit.  
Further, in the absence of requisite equipment for treating bio-medical waste, 
15 hospitals managed waste disposal departmentally endangering safety of public 
health.  Review and monitoring committee did not ex ist in 52 hospitals to oversee 
the monitoring mechanism of bio-medical waste management.    
(Para 5.3 - Page 36 and Para 5.11 - Page 42) 
• Record in respect of generation of category wise E-Waste as prescribed in E-Waste 
management Rules was not maintained in 46 EDP cente rs and 32 PRS units/scrap 
depots out of 86 units (EDP/PRS/UTS/GSD) selected for audit. 
(Para 6.2 - Page 45) 
Summary of Recommendations 
i. IR needs to proactively ensure formation of EnHM wings at zonal and division 
level and constitution of accountable entities as directed by NGT to strengthen 
the waste management mechanism.  IR also needs to d efine clear cut role and 
responsibilities and fund allocation exclusively fo r waste management 
activities. Besides this, IR needs to put in place an effective monitoring 
mechanism for managing plastic as well as solid was te in an environment 
friendly manner. 

Executive Summary 
Report No. 16 of 2022 iii 
 
ii. IR needs to ensure provision of required infrastruc ture and initiate measures 
to sensitise the work force engaged in maintenance and Production Units for 
effective compliance of the Hazardous Waste Managem ent Rules thereby 
avoiding danger to health and environment as well. 
iii. IR needs to develop a robust monitoring mechanism to oversee the expeditious 
completion of the works such as provision of ETPs/STPs, water recycling plant, 
automatic coach washing plant meant for water conse rvation under Water 
Policy of IR. 
iv. IR needs to ensure effective compliance with Bio-Medical Waste Management 
Rules for handling, collection, pre-treatment, segregation, storage and disposal 
of biomedical waste and strengthen monitoring mechanism.  
v. IR needs to initiate measures for creating awarenes s on the issue of handling 
E-Waste besides devising monitoring mechanism for e nsuring effective 
compliance with E-Waste Management Rules. 
  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 1 
 
 
Indian Railways (IR) is a vast network that generat es huge quantities of waste from 
diverse sources such as passengers, vendors, cateri ng units, hawkers, Railway 
Hospitals, Workshops, Sheds, Production units, etc.  The main sources of waste are the 
waste from core activities i.e .passenger and freight movements, packaging, plastic and 
paper waste, food waste & human excreta 1 and the waste from non-core activities i.e. 
institutional waste arising out of repair and maint enance activities (in workshops and 
sheds).  In addition, Bio-medical waste generated b y hospitals, E-Waste consisting of 
end life products comprising of electrical and electronic goods are the other categories 
of waste that require handling and disposal by the IR. 
Considering the magnitude 2 and type of waste generated, a large number of con tracts 
for cleaning, collection, segregation (including Plastic waste) and disposal of waste are 
awarded by Railway Administration.  Following the Government of India’s cleanliness 
and sanitation drive under ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’,  Railway Board had launched 
‘Swachh Rail, Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’. The National Green Tribunal (NGT), in their 
various orders3, had also directed Railway Administration for adhe rence to Acts and 
Rules framed for Environment Protection.  In this b ackdrop, the efficacy and 
effectiveness of IR’s efforts for the management of waste has been reviewed in audit. 
Review on the aspect of management of waste in Indian Railways was previously done 
and commented upon in the Audit Reports 4.  The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 
had also deliberated upon and given their recommend ations on three of these Audit 
                                                 
1 The aspect of human excreta (organic waste)  at stations, tracks and in trains has been covered in the Audit 
Report Number 36 of 2017 on ‘Induction of bio-toilets in Passenger Coaches in Indian Railways’ 
2   No centralized data on quantum of waste generated  (solid or waste water) is maintained by Indian Railways.  
This was highlighted in the 3 rd Report of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in 2014.  This was also 
pointed out in the Report on ‘Cleanliness in Indian Railways’ brought out by National Academy of Indian 
Railways (NAIR) in 2015.  However, as per analysis done in June, 2016 by an independent agency viz Council 
on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) approximately 670 tonnes per day (TPD) of solid waste is 
generated at major railway stations over Indian Railways. Similarly, this analysis also states that about 22.11 
million litres of water per day each is consumed on Western Railway’s Mumbai suburban section alone. 
3  NGT ’s Orders dated 18 .03.2015, 01.10.2018, 22.01.2019, 26.03.2019, 04.12.2019& 18.08.2020 in O .A. 
Number141 of 2014 
4  Performance Audit on ‘Cleanliness and Sanitation in Indian Railways ’ ( Report Number 06 /2007); 
Performance Audit on ‘Environment Management in Indian Railways; Coverage on  Stations, Trains & 
Tracks’ ( Report Number21 /2012); Covering Workshops, Shed & Production Units ’ ( Report 
Number23/2014); Performance Audit on Hospital Management in Indian  Railways’ was issued in 2014 
(Report Number28/2014) and another Report on ‘Induction of bio-toilets in Passenger Coaches in Indian 
Railways’ was issued in 2017 (Report Number36 of 2017). 
Introduction 
Chapter 1 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
2 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Reports from time to time, more particularly as appearing in the PAC’s Report Number 
83 of 2008-09, 21 of 2009-10, 3 of 2014-15 & 38 of 2015-16. 
1.1 Organizational Structure 
The Ministry of Railways set up (April 2015) Enviro nment and Housekeeping 
Management (EnHM) Directorate in Railway Board  to deal with the issues related to 
Environment as well as Housekeeping Management of I ndian Railways. The 
environment related works included works like water  conservation, Sewage and 
effluent treatment plants, solid waste management i nfrastructure, water efficient 
fixtures and measures for mitigation of Air and Water pollution during construction and 
maintenance etc.   
EnHM wing in Railway Board (RB) functioning under the control of Member, Traction 
& Rolling Stock is headed by Principal Executive Di rector (PED)/EnHM who in turn 
is assisted by Executive Director (ED)/EnHM/ME & ED/EnHM/CE.  EnHM wings are 
also established in Zonal Railway level under the c ontrol of General Manager (GM) 
and the same is headed by Principal Chief Mechanica l Engineer (PCME) and at 
Divisional Railway level under the control of Divis ional Railway Manager (DRM) & 
Divisional Environment and Housekeeping Manager (DE nHM), under the control of 
Sr.DME of the Division.  In respect of Production U nits, Workshops and Hospitals, 
their units heads are responsible for handling the waste management related activities.  
An organisational chart depicting the hierarchy at Railway Board, Zonal and Divisional 
level is given in Annexure-1.1. 
1.2 Audit Objectives 
This Performance Audit was conducted with an aim to  assess whether the waste 
generated at different activity centres was properly assessed, managed and disposed off 
as per applicable Laws and Rules 5.  The Audit Objective inter-alia covered the 
following: - 
1. Assessment, management and disposal of waste genera ted at railway stations, 
catering units and coaching depots. 
2. Assessment, management and disposal of waste genera ted at railway workshops, 
maintenance sheds and production units. 
3. Management of waste water through effluent/sewage t reatment, water recycling 
and automatic coach washing. 
4. Assessment, management and disposal of waste genera ted at railway hospitals 
(Bio-Medical Waste). 
5. Assessment, management and disposal of E-Waste gene rated in railway 
establishments. 
                                                 
5  Applicable Laws and Rules including various orders  of the National Green Tribunal (NGT). 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 3 
1.3 Audit criteria 
The Performance Audit was conducted with reference to the provisions prescribed 
under various Acts, Rules and Orders/Circulars/Notifications (Annexure 1.2), policies 
related to environment protection, air & water pollution, hazardous waste, bio medical 
and the E-Waste management.  Further, important ins tructions issued by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), State Pollution Con trol Boards (SPCBs) and the 
Railway Board were also taken into consideration for this Audit.   
1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology  
The scope of the Performance Audit includes an asse ssment of the adequacy and 
efficacy of the policies and systems, procedures, p rocesses & activities related to 
management of waste. This included entire cycle com mencing from 
prevention/maintenance, reuse/recycle up to recover y /treatment and disposal during 
the period of last five years i.e. 2015-16 to 2019-20.  Further, the aspects related to the 
compliance with directives of National Green Tribun al (NGT), vide its order dated 
18.08.2020 was assessed for the period up to 31 March 2021; specifically, on the aspect 
of CTEs (Consent to Establish) & CFOs (Consent for Operation) which was further 
updated up to 31 July 2021. 
The audit methodology included review of records av ailable in Railway Board, 
Zonal/Divisional headquarters, production units and  field offices including coaching 
depots, workshops, loco sheds, MEMU/DEMU/Car sheds,  hospitals, Electronic Data 
Processing (EDP) and Passenger Reservation System (PRS) Centres etc.  Besides this, 
joint inspections with Railway authorities were con ducted and structured 
questionnaires were used to collect the required in formation on the aspect of waste 
management.   
1.5 Sample selection 
The sample selected amongst various activity centres is shown in Table 1.1 below.   The 
basis of sample selection is detailed in Annexure 1.3. 
Table 1.1  - Details of the sample selected for performance audi t ( Details in 
Annexure 1.4 to 1.7) 
S. No. Activity Centre Units (in numbers) 
1 A1 category stations 45 
1(a) A & B category stations 59 
1(b) C category stations (RPU & Metro Rail) 5 
2 Major coaching Depots 30 
3 Mechanical Workshops 23 
4 Signalling & Telecommunication workshop 08 
5 Civil Engineering workshop 10 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
4 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
6 Diesel/electric loco Sheds 33 
7 EMU/MEMU/DEMU/Car Sheds 19 
8 Production Units  08 
9 Central Hospitals & Super speciality Hospitals  23 
10 Divisional Hospitals/Sub -divisional/ Workshop 
Hospitals 
49 
11 EDP/PRS/UTS/GSDs  86 
1.6 Response of the Ministry  
Provisional Report was issued to the Ministry of Railways on 16 November 2021; reply 
received (May 2022) has been incorporated in the re port as appropriate . Exit 
Conference was held with the representatives of Min istry of Railways on 
17 December 2021.    
1.7 Acknowledgement  
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by vari ous directorates concerned in 
Ministry of Railways as well as in Zonal Railways i n conducting the Performance 
Audit. 
  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 5 
 
 
 
Audit objective 1 
Whether the assessment, management and disposal of waste generated at Railway 
stations, Catering units and Coaching depots was do ne as per applicable laws and 
rules 
Effective management of huge quantum of waste/garbage generated at stations requires 
continuous action by Railways authorities for asses sment, segregation, collection, 
storage and disposal of the same. Rules framed under statute (Solid Waste Management 
Rules, 2016, Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986, Water Act, 1974), instructions issued by SPCB s/CPCB and National Green 
Tribunal, recommendations of Public Accounts Commit tee (PAC) as well as the 
instructions of Railway Board are required to be co mplied with in this regard. The 
results of effectiveness and efficiency of Railways in the waste management process at 
stations, catering units and coaching depots as ass essed in Audit is brought out in 
succeeding paragraphs. 
2.1 Establishment of EnHM wing 
The Public Accounts Committee (PAC)- Fourteenth Lok  Sabha, in its 83 rd Report 
recommended (February, 2009) that the Ministry of R ailways should strengthen the 
coordination efforts and put in place an institutio nalised mechanism at the Apex level 
as also for framing a robust policy on Waste Management.  Accordingly, Environment 
and Housekeeping Management (EnHM) Directorate was setup in Railway Board vide 
office order No. 28/2015 dated 7 April 2015. Subsequently, Railway Board directed all 
Zonal Railways (August 2015) to establish EnHM wings in the Zonal offices as well as 
in Divisions.   
Railway Board’s circular (August 2015) specifying the scope and formation of EnHM 
wing at Zonal /Divisional level called for co-ordin ation and monitoring of all 
environment related issues.  The instructions issue d also covered integration of 
housekeeping functions of major railway stations, coaching trains and coaching depots 
by the EnHM wings under the control of GM & CME in Zonal Railways and DRM and 
Sr. DME in the divisions.   
EnHM wing was required to manage the Budget for Hou sekeeping of the stations and 
coaching trains which included cleanliness and sani tation of stations, coaches and 
railway colonies
6.  No clear demarcation of the waste management activities (in budget 
proposals) was, however, mentioned in the instructi ons issued by the Ministry of 
Railways. 
                                                 
6  Railway colonies not covered in this Performance Aud it 
Waste management at Railway Stations, Catering 
Units and Coaching Depots 
Chapter 2 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
6 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Audit randomly selected 109 stations across all the 17 Zones (Annexure-1.4) to assess 
the implementation of Railway Board’s orders in respect of functioning of EnHM wings 
at Zonal/Divisional level.  Audit observed the following:- 
i. Railways have taken positive steps in establishing EnHM wings in all the zones 
and in 43 out of 54 Divisions test checked by audit.  
ii. In 11 divisions,7 EnHM wings were not established during the review period.  
iii. Instructions were not issued for regular monitoring  of aspects related to 
management of waste in 13 divisions8, which included eleven divisions where the 
wing had not been formed and two other divisions in NCR where though the wing 
was formed but no instructions related to monitorin g management of waste were 
found on record.  
iv. There is no single body/agency in Indian Railways t aking ownership of waste 
management related issues.  EnHM wings were formed to undertake monitoring 
and coordination function for all environment relat ed issues, while planning, 
sanction and execution of environment related works  was left to be dealt by the 
concerned department such as Commercial and Engineering. 
Ministry of Railways stated (May 2022) that duties related to EnHM wing have been 
allotted to Mechanical Department where EnHM wing h as not been set up.  Reply is 
not acceptable as same level of dedication is unlikely from Mechanical directorate since 
co-ordination and monitoring of all environment rel ated issues was the sole objective 
of setting up EnHM wing. 
2.1.1  Budget allocation and expenditure 
EnHM wing is required to manage the Budget for Hous ekeeping of the stations and 
coaching trains.  Railways is maintaining expenditu re incurred on cleanliness related 
issue, which includes station, coach sanitation 9 and sanitation in railway colony.  
Budget allocation and expenditure incurred there fr om is shown in the Table 2.1  
below:- 
Table 2.1 - Details of Budget allocation and Expenditure 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Budget Allocation Actual Expenditure Per cent utilization  
2016-17 1751 1640 94 
2017-18 2026 1874 92 
2018-19 2281 2156 95 
2019-20 2796 2721 97 
2020-21 2081 1987 95 
Note:- Includes Coach sanitation, Station sanitatio n and Sanitation of Railway colonies.  Sanitation 
of colonies not covered in this Report. 
                                                 
7 CR- Pune & Solapur, ER- Sealdah & Malda; NFR- Lumding , Rangiya & Katihar & NR- Ambala, Delhi, 
Lucknow & Moradabad 
8  CR-Pune& Solapur, ER- Sealdah & Malda; NCR- Praygraj  & Agra, NFR- Lumding, Rangiya & Katihar, NR- 
Delhi, Lucknow, Moradabad & Ambala 
9  Coach sanitation included onboard housekeeping, cl ean train stations, mechanical coach cleaning , pest 
and rodent control and any other activity of coach 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 7 
However, planning, sanction and execution of environment related works10 were left to 
be dealt by concerned departments (Commercial and Engineering).  Provision of funds 
for environment related works (ERWs) was made as an  itemized one or on lump sum 
basis (equal to one per cent  of the cost of work).  Certain items related to wa ste 
management like provision of ETPs/STPs, WRPs, ACWPs, waste to compost, waste to 
energy plants etc. were included in the specified list of ERWs. Thes e works are to be 
managed by EnHM wing of the Zone/Division/PUs.  Pro gress on these works and 
utilisation of funds vis a vis provision has been given in detail in para 4.5.  
It is observed that the environment and housekeepin g covered a vast area with 
management of waste a part of it.  EnHM wings at different levels as mentioned in Para 
1.2 were formed to oversee cleanliness, sanitation apart from waste management.  No 
separate authority with clear role and responsibili ty was assigned the waste 
management task as also there was no demarcated fun d allocation for waste 
management exclusively.  Further, although more tha n 90 per cent  of the budget 
allocation stands utilised during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21, progress on managing 
different kinds of waste is not encouraging as brought out  in succeeding chapters. 
2.2  Constitution of Accountable entities 
The National Green Tribunal (NGT), Principal Bench, New Delhi, in their order dated 
1 October 2018 (OA No. 141/2014) directed the Ministry of Railways to identify three 
accountable entities.  The order specified that the entity should consist of at least three 
identified persons at each level (at zonal railway level, at divisional level as well as at 
every important railway station) to monitor and imp lement various issues related to 
solid waste disposal, littering of solid and plastic wastes etc.  In compliance with these 
orders, Ministry of Railways directed 11 (5 December 2018) all Zonal Railways to 
constitute three accountable entities at each level12. 
Audit reviewed the implementation of NGT orders on these aspects in case of 109 
selected stations and found that requisite accounta ble entities were not established to 
monitor the waste management related issues. Furthe r, Accountable entities though 
constituted, were not represented by requisite numb er of members and meetings/joint 
inspection were not conducted at all by the account able entities.  The position is 
indicated in Table 2.1 A below:- 
 
 
                                                 
10  Environment related works such as water conservatio n, Sewage and effluent treatment plants, solid waste  
management infrastructure, water efficient fixtures and measures for mitigation of Air and Water pollution 
during construction and maintenance etc 
11  letter No. 2018/EnHM/01/02 dated 5.12.2018 
12  (i)  At Station level- Station Director/ Station M anager, one Supervisor each from Commercial and   
       Engineering Department. 
(ii) At Division level -  ADRM, One officer each from Commercial and Engineering Department. 
(iii) At Zonal Railway level -  AGM, One officer each from Comme rcial, Engineering and Security 
Department 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
8 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Table 2.1 A - Status on constituting accountable entities 
Particulars Zonal Railway 
level 
Divisional level Station level 
Accountable entities not 
established 
ER and SWR 17 42 
Accountable entities with 
lesser representations than 
required 
ECR, NER and 
NWR 
Seven divisions13 13 stations14 
Meetings not conducted by 
Accountable entities  (as 
detailed in Annexure 2.1) 
Seven zones 23 71 
Non-compliance with the important orders of NGT adv ersely affected the monitoring 
of the key issues related to waste management as br ought out in the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
2.3 Assessment of quantity of waste generated and i ts proper 
management 
The Public Accounts Committee- (Fourteenth Lok Sabh a) in its 83 rd Report, had 
recommended that the Indian Railways must lay down a mechanism whereby the 
quantum of garbage generated at stations can be assessed realistically so that adequate 
collection, segregation, and disposal facilities along with necessary infrastructure could 
be put in place by the Authorities.  Ministry of Ra ilways, in its Action Taken Note  
stated (30 October 2009) that the quantification of garbage is done before tendering for 
fixing the appropriate agency for garbage disposal work.  Position emerging out of the 
test checked data was found to be contrary to Ministry’s claim as indicated in the Table 
2.2 below.  
Table 2.2 - Assessment of quantum of waste generation and its segregation 
Particulars Stations Coaching 
Depots 
Assessment not done at all 37 18 
Assessment done only in some years 18 1 
Segregation as bio-degradable/non bio-degradable not done 60 22 
Segregation as bio-degradable/non bio-degradable do ne in 
some of the years 
17 1 
Source:-Information captured from records in Zonal Railways (Annexure 2.2) 
Audit observed that assessment of quantum of waste generation was either not carried 
out at all during the period of review or was done sporadically during the review period.  
Further, segregation of garbage as bio-degradable & non-biodegradable was either not 
                                                 
13 ECR-Sonepur, NER-Lucknow; NWR- Ajmer, Jodhpur, Jaipur &  Bikaner WCR-Jabalpur; 
14 ECR- Hajipur, Sonepur & Muzzafarpur; NWR- Ajmer, Bikan er, Lalgarh, Jaipur, Gandhinagar Jaipur, 
Jodhpur & Rai Ka Bagh, SECR- Raipur & Gondia, SR-Melmaruvattur. 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 9 
carried out or was carried out in some of the years during the review period.  Condition 
for segregation of waste was also not incorporated in the contract in respect of 109 
stations test checked. 
Ministry of Railways also emphasized that the rag p icking contracts along with the 
garbage disposal contract should also be available at all A1, A, B & C category stations 
and that those contracts should always be current and their timely renewal be ensured.  
Review of records of all selected 109 stations and 30 coaching depots revealed that in 
23 stations, the cleaning contracts including the rag picking contracts lacked continuity 
(Annexure-2.2).  The period of discontinuation varied widely as shown below:- 
• One to three months in nine stations,  
• More than three to nine months in 10 stations 
• More than 9 to 20 months in 4 stations  
MoR stated (May 2022) that quantity of garbage is recorded properly and is mentioned 
in cubic feet dimension as disposal is done by trolleys of specific volumes in cubic feet.  
Ministry further added that the contractor quantity  of waste is also assessed by 
contractor before transporting waste to municipality/local body for disposal.  The reply 
is generic and not specific to audit comment as no such arrangements were found on 
record while auditing units mentioned in Table 2.2.   
2.4 Regulatory requirements compliance at stations 
The National Green Tribunal (NGT), New Delhi directed (26 March 2019) Ministry of 
Railways to prepare & implement an Action Plan with  24 identified verifiable 
indicators15 (mentioned in Annexure 2.3) for proper monitoring of waste management 
at 36 stations (5 per cent of 720 major stations) and periodical review of progress 
made in its implementation.  This Plan was subsequently to be replicated in phases for 
all other major stations.   
Railway Board, in compliance with NGT’s order, dire cted (17 April 2019) all Zonal 
Railways to submit Action Taken Report by 25 th of every month (commencing from 
April, 2019) on implementation of the Action Plan a t 37 identified stations 16 and also 
on preparation of Action Plan for balance (out of 7 20) major stations. This was again 
reiterated, with exhaustive list of verifiable indi cators; vide Railway Board’s letter 
dated 13 May 2019. 
NGT further directed (04 December 2019) Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to 
evaluate the performance of major Railway stations both in terms of implementation of 
Action Plans and compliance to the provisions of th e Water Act, Air Act and 
Environmental Protection Act and Rules framed there under.  CPCB, also directed 
                                                 
15  Verifiable indicators included water and energy au dit, ISO certification, provision of dustbin, rag p icking 
contracts, provision of poster, installation of ETP/ STP/WRPs, provision of Waste Composting Plant, 
Material Recovery Facilities, use of CCTV cameras for m onitoring cleanliness, co-ordination with Urban 
Local Bodies in order to prevent unauthorized dumping of waste 
16  36 stations selected as per directions of NGT and  01 additional station identified by Railway Authorities i.e. 
Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Katra 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
10 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
(2 June 2020) that all the Zones should take steps to reduce the waste water generation 
as also to identify quality of sewage and non-sewag e waste water separately and plan 
waste water recycling plants accordingly.  
The NGT also directed for obtaining requisite autho risations in respect of remaining 
major Railway stations (out of total 720) within th ree months from 18 August 2020.  
Subsequently, Railway Board, vide their letter date d 1 September 2020 directed zonal 
railways to ensure compliance with the NGT’s orders within the specified time limit. 
Audit reviewed the records of the selected 109 stat ions to assess the compliance with 
the NGT’s order by the Ministry.  Following points emerged from the review:- 
i. Some of stations selected were functioning without CTE/CFOs in violation to 
the NGT’s orders indicating the lack of monitoring at appropriate levels.  
ii. As of 31 July 2021, 59 stations17 had not even applied to the concerned SPCBs 
for obtaining CTEs.  
iii. In respect of 11 stations 18, though CTE was applied for but the same was 
awaited from respective SPCB as of 31 July 202119.  
iv. CFO was not obtained in respect of 4620 stations till 31 July 2021 and  
v. In respect of 34 stations, CFO was obtained directl y on the advice of SPCB 
without having applied for CTE. 
Delays in obtaining CTE was mainly attributed to specified equipment not provided or 
attending to the various requirements of SPCBs and rejection of applications by SPCBs 
on technical grounds.        ( Annexure-2.4) 
MoR stated (May 2022) that 577 stations out of 720 have obtained CFO in compliance 
to NGT’s order.  Reply is not specific to Audit comment.  Details of the stations where 
compliance of NGT’s order is pending have, however, not been given in the reply. 
2.5  Action Plan involving verifiable indicators at  37 identified major 
stations as per NGT’s order 
Records regarding implementation of the Action Plan  with 24 identified verifiable 
indicators at 37 identified stations were reviewed in all the Zones across IR and 
implementation in respect of most of the verifiable indicators, such as water and energy 
audit, ISO certification, provision of dustbin, rag-picking contracts, provision of poster 
etc was found satisfactory.  However, implementation of the significant indicators, such 
as installation of ETP/STP/WRPs, provision of Waste  Composting Plant, Material 
Recovery Facilities, use of CCTV cameras for monito ring cleanliness, co-ordination 
with Urban Local Bodies was not complete as brought out in Table 2.3 below:- 
                                                 
17  Since applied in August 2021 for 3 station i.e. M etro Rail Kolkata-Rabindra Sadan, Esplanade, Dum Dum 
18  Since obtained in September 2021 at 01 station i. e. WCR-Sawai Madhopur 
19 This was required to have been completed as per the  cited NGT order by 31 March 2021 and this position 
in audit was verified and updated as of 31 July 2021. 
20  Since obtained in August 2021 at 02 stations i.e. SER-Shalimar and Kharagpur 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 11 
Table 2.3 –Compliance with NGT orders for implementing 24 verifiable indicators 
S. 
No. 
Activity Status of implementation/compliance (as of 
31st March 2020) 
1 ETP/STP/WRPs Not planned in five stations21.  
In other five stations 22 though planned but the 
same were not yet installed  
2 Waste Compost Plant 
and Material Recovery 
Facilities 
Not provided at 14 stations 23 and at 16 stations 24 
respectively 
3 Usage of CCTV cameras 
for monitoring 
cleanliness activity. 
Primarily used for security purpose as well for 
monitoring cleanliness. 
4 ISO certification, Water 
Audit and Energy Audit 
Completed in all the 37 identified stations  
5 Encroachment of 
railway land, illegal 
dumping in railway 
premises and boundary 
wall to prevent 
unauthorized dumping 
on railway land 
• Encroachment found on five25 stations. 
• Illegal dumping on railway premises was 
noticed in four stations 26. 
• Boundary wall not constructed at seven 
stations27. 
6 Periodical Reports Compliance not done in respect of submission of 
periodical reports at five stations28.   
Implementation of Action Plan was satisfactory in r espect of some stations like Pune 
(CR), Sealdah (ER), Rajendra Nagar Terminal (ECR), Visakhapatanam (ECoR), New 
Delhi (NR), Katihar (NFR), Jaipur & Jodhpur (NWR), Secunderabad, Kacheguda & 
Vijaywada (SCR), Ranchi & Digha (SER), Bilaspur (SE CR), Hubballi & Mysuru 
(SWR), Jabalpur & Bhopal (WCR) and Vadodara (WR), w here 20 or more out of 24 
verifiable indicators were implemented. However, it was observed that implementation 
of the 24 Verifiable Indicators were not entirely a ccomplished even in respect of a 
single station out of the 37 stations as of 31st March 2020. 
MoR in reply stated (May 2022) that works for setti ng up of ETPs/STPs/WRPs which 
require huge infrastructure inputs have been sancti oned for the year 2022-23.  MoR 
further added that composting plant not required at stations with lesser quantum of wet 
waste.   
                                                 
21  ECR-Dhanbad, NER- Lucknow Jn. & Manduadih, SR- MGR Che nnai Central & Thiruvananthapuram 
Central 
22  ECoR- Vizianagaram, ER- Howrah, NCR- Jhansi, WR- Mumba i Central & Vadodara,  
23  CR- Nasik Road, NR- Varanasi  & Shri Mata Vaishno De vi Katra, NCR-Jhansi, Prayagraj & Agra Cant,  
NWR- Ajmer, SR- Thrivananthapuram Central MGR Chennai Ce ntral, Tiruchchirappalli Jn., SCR- 
Secunderabad & Vijaywada, SECR – Bilaspur WCR- Jabalpur 
24  CR- Nasik Road, ECR- Dhanbad ER- Howrah &Sealdah, NCR- J hansi, Agra Cant & Prayagraj,  
NEFR- Guwahati & Katihar, NER-Manduadih, NWR- Ajmer, SECR - Bilaspur& Raipur, SER- Digha,  
SWR- Hubballi, WCR- Jabalpur 
25 ER-Sealdah, SECR-Raipur, SWR-Hubballi, WCR-Jabalpur & B hopal 
26  ECoR-Vizianagram, NCR-Agra cant., SER-Ranchi, SECR-Raipur 
27 ER-Howarh, NR- Delhi, Firozpur, NCR-Agra cantt, NWR-Ajme r, SECR-Raipur, WCR-Bhopal 
28 ER- Howrah & Sealdah, NCR- Jhansi, Prayagraj & Agra C ant 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
12 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Reply of the MoR is not specific to the stations included in the audit observation above. 
Further, the fact that implementation of 24 Verifia ble Indicators was not entirely 
accomplished even in respect of a single station out of 37 stations has not been contested 
by MoR. 
2.6 Action Plan involving verifiable indicators at other than 37 stations 
(balance of 720 stations)  
Status of implementation of the action plan in resp ect of the 24 identified verifiable 
indicators in the remaining major stations (balance  out of 720 major station) was 
assessed in 65 stations (Annexure 2.5)  selected across all the zones over IR which 
revealed the following:- 
i. ETPs/STPs/WRPs were not installed in 41 stations,  
ii. Waste Composting Plants and Material Recovery Facil ities were not provided in 
43 and 46 stations respectively.  
iii. CCTV cameras were not used for monitoring cleanliness activities at 28 stations.  
iv. Non co-ordination with Urban Local Bodies /Local Bo dies (ULB/LBs) in 28 
stations and no toilets in the circulating area in 30 stations.    
v. Water Audit not conducted at seven stations 29 and Energy Audit not conducted at 
11 stations30. 
vi. Periodical Reports were submitted by all the stations except by 10 stations31. 
This indicates Railway Administration was not serio us enough in implementation of 
the much-emphasized 24 verifiable indicators.  NGT’s orders were, thus, violated. 
MoR in their reply stated (May 2022) to have compli ed the implementation of 
24 verifiable indicators.  Reply is not acceptable as audit comment was regarding 
stations not complying with the specific requirement. Reply of the Ministry is silent on 
this aspect. 
2.7 Progress on actionable points under Swachh Bhar at Mission (SBM) 
As a part of ‘Swachh Bharat’ mission, Railway Board formulated actionable Points for 
improvement of cleanliness in station premises and issued directives in July 2016 and 
September 2016.  Zonal Railways were asked to circu late these points to all major A1 
and A category stations so that the corrective/ pre ventive actions wherever needed are 
taken and systems are set up for monitoring to improve the cleanliness standards. These 
Actionable Points contained, inter-alia,  
                                                 
29  CR- Wadi, ECoR- Cuttack, NER - Kathgodam, Haldwani, Bare illy City, NWR- Gandhi Nagar Jaipur, WR- 
Bharuch 
30 CR- Wadi, ECoR- Cuttack, NER- Kathgodam, Haldwani& Bare illy City, NEFR- New Bongaigaon & New 
Jalpaigudi, WR- Bandra Terminus, Metro Rail - Dum Dum, Esplanade & Rabindra Sadan 
31 NR- Barabanki, Panipat, Rae Bareilly& Rohtak, NCR- Pray agraj Chheoki, WCR- Katni & Pipariya, Metro 
Rail- Dum Dum, Esplanade & Rabindra Sadan 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 13 
(i) Picking up of garbage from the point of arising itself using ergonomic garbage 
collector like dustpan with handle and putting insi de the garbage bin thereby 
avoiding sweeping down the solid waste to drains. 
(ii) Monitoring of cleaning staff through CCTVs and earmarking the specific beats 
for cleaning staff.  
(iii) Cleaning staff earmarked to maintain the identified beats free of garbage . 
(iv) Provision of different coloured dustbins with black  polythene bag for 
non-biodegradable waste (dry waste) and green colou red for biodegradable 
waste (wet waste) within 10 meters in all the areas of passenger movement.  
(v) Provision of dustbins and proper garbage disposal a rrangement in vehicle 
parking area.  
(vi) Foot over-bridges (FOBs) covered with wire mesh thr oughout the length to 
prevent falling of objects and garbage on to the track and sides 
Progress on these important actionable points was examined in audit at the 109 selected 
stations and 30 coaching depots.  The deficiencies noticed are indicated in Table 2.4 
below. 
Table 2.4 - Status of implementation on the actionable points on SBM 
S. 
No. 
Actionable 
point 
Status of implementations 
1 Provision of 
dustbins 
(i) Different coloured signage dustbins with polythene liner bags 
inside were not provided in 12 stations and 15 coaching depots 
for collection of wet and dry waste.   However, in case of 97 
stations (89 per cent ) different coloured dustbins were 
provided.   
(ii) At 27 stations, dustbins provided were not placed w ithin 10 
meters from any location in all the area of passenger movement.  
(iii) Covered dustbins were not provided in waiting room and toilets 
at 17 stations.  
(iv) Provision of dustbins not found in vehicle parking area at 38 
stations.            
2 Monitoring 
of cleaning 
staff 
(i) In 42 stations, the CCTVs camera at the platforms o f stations 
were not used for monitoring availability of cleaning staff at their 
areas of work.  
(ii) Beats were not earmarked for the cleaning staff at 16 stations.                                    
3 Inclusion of 
cleanliness 
aspect in the 
cleaning 
contracts 
(i) Cleaning contracts in respect of 53 stations and 18  coaching 
depots did 
not have 
specific 
clause for 
segregation 
of waste.  
 
Non-segregated waste at RBL station at Lucknow 
Division in NR 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
14 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
(ii) At seven stations garbage was not picked up from th e point of 
arising.  
  
Dustbins overflowing with waste at MAS 
4 Covering 
FOBs with 
wired mesh 
FOBs at 28 stations were not covered with wired mes h to 
prevent falling of garbage on overhead wires and track.  
In continuous efforts towards monitoring the progre ss of stations on “ Swachh Rail, 
Swachh Bharat” campaign, the Ministry of Railways engaged (2019)  Quality Council 
of India for the survey for ranking of 720 stations .  Result of progress on the aspects 
like “No littering in sight”, “Dustbin in sight and “Twin Dustbin in sight” is indicated 
in Table below.   
Table 2.4 A -  Excerpts of the result of e-survey conducted by QCI for 
implementation of Action Plan  for cleanliness at stations 
  (Figures in per cent) 
Particulars No littering in 
sight 
Dustbin in 
sight 
Twin bins in sight 
Parking area 73.98 64.6 73.77 
Main Entry 85.97 84.72 62.30 
Ticket counter 92.22 78.75 67.02 
Waiting area 94.03 84.18 61.17 
FOB &  Stairs 93.56 63.01 76.40 
Open sitting area 90.93 87.76 72.68 
Vendor area 91.68 96.13 65.60 
It may be seen that despite clear directives given by Railway Board in 2016 for 
implementation of actionable points for cleanliness  of station premises, many stations 
(out of 720) have not yet completed the implementation of action plan. 
2.8 Efforts made for execution of railway works thr ough CSR initiative 
For supplementing the Railway’s efforts in keeping the railway stations clean, Railway 
Board, instructed32 (February 2016) Zonal Railways to encourage the Co rporates and 
PSUs for sponsoring the works at stations especially falling in their business/influence 
area to execute identified railway works under corp orate social responsibility (CSR). 
These works included provision of dustbins, waste t ransport trollies, cleaning 
machines, Sewage/effluent treatment plants, waste t o compost, waste to energy plants 
                                                 
32  letter No. 2015/EnHM/06/06 dated 03.02.2016 


Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 15 
etc. at stations.  These provisions under CSR initi ative were with an objective to 
promote participation of corporation and PSUs for e xecution of environmental 
sustainability works, cleanliness works, sanitization of stations and provision of certain 
passenger amenities. 
EnHM wings of the Zonal Railway/ Division were to c o-ordinate such sponsoring of 
CSR activity and an appropriate database of the facilities created through CSR initiative 
were to be maintained by the Railway Administration. 
The measures under CSR initiative met very limited success.  Facilities provided for 
waste management at stations through CSR initiative s were reviewed across all Zonal 
Railways and the outcome is brought out in Table 2.5 below: - 
Table 2.5 - Response under CSR initiative 
S. 
No. 
Work/Item 
provided 
Numbers Division Zone Cost 
involved 
(`(` (`(` in crore) 
1 Dustbins 1906 CSMT, Delhi, 
Agra, Mumbai 
Central, Vadodara 
& Waltair 
CR, NR, 
NCR, WR, 
ECOR 
0.86  
2 Waste to 
compost plant 
10 Sealdah, Bikaner, 
Secunderabad, 
Mumbai Central,  
& Waltair 
ER,NWR, 
SCR, WR, 
ECOR 
0.75  
3 Trolleys 10 Bilaspur SECR 0.05 
4 Waste to 
Energy Plant 
1 Jaipur NWR 0.91 
2.9 Collection and segregation of waste generated b y catering units and 
from trains covered under OBHS 
Procedure order for handling waste arising out of p antry cars and static catering units 
at stations and its disposal circulated vide RB’s C ommercial Circular No 55 of 2016 
stipulated provision in the license agreement with catering contractor for collection of 
waste in two colored bins33.  Guidelines circulated vide RB’s Commercial Circular No. 
14 of 1999 and Commercial Circular no. 45 of 2011 contained instruction to have local 
Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs) in order to implement  the procedure for collection of 
pantry Car waste at platforms. For on board cleanin g and hygiene attention in running 
trains, Railways had adopted the On Board Housekeep ing Services (OBHS) Scheme 
under which cleaning and disinfection of the coache s and toilets was to be ensured by 
engaging outsourced agencies. Guidelines circulated  by Railway Board (17 February 
2016), provided for ensuring collection of garbage/ litter from the coaches in secured 
polybags/eco-friendly bags by the contractor. 
                                                 
33 Green for biodegradable waste/wet waste and black for non-biodegradable waste/dry waste in 
catering units 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
16 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Review conducted in the 109 selected stations acros s all zonal railways revealed the 
following: - 
i. Provision of collection of waste in two colored bin s as stipulated in the license 
agreement with catering contractor were not incorporated in 39 stations leading to 
consequential non-segregated collection of waste. 
ii. In respect of 58 stations contractors did not ensur e collection of polybags 
containing garbage from OBHS trains. 
iii. Joint inspection conducted by Audit revealed that t he segregated waste collected 
from the Pantry cars and OBHS trains was not unload ed in secured bags in 49 
stations.  In 42 of these 49 stations, waste collected from the Pantry cars or OBHS 
train was not dumped in the separate assigned dustbins. 
iv. JPOs were not issued in respect of 70 stations for implementing the procedure for 
collection of waste from pantry cars.  
Non-compliance of the laid down procedures for coll ection and disposal of waste of 
catering units at stations and that from OBHS trains had adverse impact on cleanliness 
at these stations. 
2.10 Assessment and collection/segregation of Plast ic wastes at stations 
Railway generates vast quantities of different type s of waste- both solid and plastic 
waste.  Public Account Committee (PAC) in its 83 rd report (2008-09) stated that, the 
Ministry of Railways must not lose sight of environ mental concern while making use 
of plastics and ensure adherence to applicable rule s.  Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB) sponsored a study through RITES regarding pl astic waste generated at three 
railway stations (New Delhi, Old Delhi and Hazrat N izamuddin station).  The report 
(December 2009) indicated that about 6758 Kg. of pl astic waste was being generated 
by these stations per day and there was no system in place to segregate degradable and 
non-biodegradable wastes generated at these station s.  In terms of the Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016, Indian Railways was identified as ‘waste generator’34. 
Railway Board issued following directives35 (October 2016) to Zonal Railways:- 
• Minimize usage of plastic,  
• Set up waste management system including collection, segregation and disposal of 
plastic waste in an appropriate manner.  
• Ensure provision for disposal of such waste in an environment friendly manner in 
all cleaning contracts. 
                                                 
34 Rule 3 (x)]. These Rules further emphasise that wast e generator shall (a) take steps to minimize generation 
of plastic waste and segregate plastic waste atsource in accordance with the Solid Waste Management Rules, 
2000 or as amendedfrom time to time and (b) not lit ter the plastic waste and ensure segregated storage of 
waste at source and handover segregated waste to urban local body or gram panchayat or agenciesappointed 
by them or registered waste pickers’, registered recyclers or wastecollection agencies. 
35  letter number 2016/Environ/01/01 dated 17.10.2016 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 17 
For better management of plastic waste, it is imperative upon railway authority to assess 
and take steps for separate collection and segregation of plastic waste at stations. 
Audit conducted at 109 stations and 30 coaching dep ots revealed that assessment of 
quantity of plastic waste generated at 71 stations and in 26 coaching depots was not 
done by Indian Railways. (Annexure 2.6). 
Railway Board directed 36 (August 2019) all Zonal Railways to enforce detail ed 
measures on Plastic Waste Management with effect from 02 October2019 which mainly 
included the following:- 
i) Strictly enforce ban on single use plastic material.  
ii) Encourage all railway venders to avoid use of plastic carry bags. 
iii) Encourage staff to reduce, reuse and refuse plastic  products and to use 
inexpensive reusable bags to reduce plastic footprint.  
iv) IRCTC to implement return of plastic drinking water bottles as part of Extended 
Producer Responsibility. 
v) Provision of Plastic Bottle Crushing Machines (PBCMs). 
Compliance to these Plastic Waste Management Rules 2016 as also the instructions of 
Railway Board were examined in Audit and based on t he record provided it was 
observed that following measures were implemented to some extent: - 
• Planning and installation of Plastic Bottle Crushing Machines 
• Provision of ‘plastic only bins’ 
Progress on the above measures is indicated below - 
i. Installation of PBCMs was planned at all the 37 major stations (included in 109 stations 
selected for Audit) in compliance to NGT orders.  T his was also one of the important 
verifiable indicators out of the 24 
indicators (referred to in Para 2.5) initially 
applicable for 37 identified major stations.  
At 14 stations , the PBCM installed were 
less than what was planned. (Annexure 
2.6)  Out of the 109 stations selected for 
Audit, PBCMs were not even planned 
in 11 37 stations and in 14 stations 38 
though these were planned but not even 
a single PBCM was installed as on 
31 March 2020. 
                                                 
36  letter No. 2019/EnHM/11/01 dated 19.08.2019 
37  CR-Igatpuri, NR-Barabanki, Rohtak; NCR-Prayagraj Chhe oki; NER-Gorakhpur, Chhapra, Haldwani; 
NFR- Hojai, New Jalpaiguri: NWR- Rai Ka bagh; SR- Melmaruvattur. 
38  NR- Panipat, Rajpura junction, Jalandhar Cantt; NCR – Agra Fort; NWR- Bikaner, Lalgarh; SR – 
Ottappallam; SWR – Yelahanka, Pandavpura,; WCR – Hosh angabad, Pipariya, Katni; WR – Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn 
Plastic Bottle Crushing Machine found choked in 
Bandra Terminus station in WR as on 15.02.2021. 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
18 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
ii. PBCMs installed at 15  stations39 were not found functioning during the Joint 
inspection conducted with the Railway Officials. Th ese included two stations 
(Hubballi & Digha) out of the 37 major NGT identified stations. 
iii. As regards provision of ‘Plastic Only Bins’ as a measure of segregation of plastic 
waste, review in Audit revealed that in 90 stations  and 25 coaching depots 
(Annexure 2.6) no such facility existed.  
iv. On the issue of steps taken to minimize the generat ion of plastic waste and 
segregation of the same at source, Audit observed t hat relevant clause was not 
incorporated in cleaning contracts in respect of 84  stations and 26 coaching 
depots.   
v. Record related to end usages of the plastic waste generated from PBCMs that were 
operational was not made available to Audit.   
MoR stated that 639 PBCMs have been installed at 44 1 out of 720 major stations.  As 
regards provision of ‘plastic only bins’ MoR has assured better management of plastic 
waste. 
Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as it is ge neric in nature and status of 
planning/installation of PBCMs on the stations commented has not been brought out in 
reply.  
2.11 Segregation, Collection and separate accumulat ion of Municipal 
Solid Waste 
The Government of India has notified the Solid Wast e Management (SWM) Rules, 
2000 / 2016.  As per Rule 4 (1), Railways are required to:- 
• Segregate and store the waste generated in three se parate streams namely 
biodegradable, non-biodegradable and domestic hazar dous wastes in suitable 
bins;  
• Handover segregated wastes to authorised waste pickers or waste collectors as per 
the direction or notification by the local authorities from time to time. 
The National Green Tribunal (NGT), in their order d ated 18 March 2015 had directed 
that all Railway Platforms should be kept clean and free of any Municipal Solid Waste 
(MSW).  MSW from platforms should be collected and disposed of in accordance with 
Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2000 to the designated MSW disposal site only 
and to no other place.  Railway Board, thus directe d40 (April 2015) Zonal Railways to 
comply with the above directions of the NGT and ensure maintaining necessary records 
for the same. 
Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016 also speci fies that no waste generator 
shall throw, burn or burry the solid waste generated by him, on streets, open public 
                                                 
39 CR-Panvel, Wadi, NR-Moradabad NWR- Jaipur, SCR- Secu nderabad, Kacheguda, SECR-Bilaspur, 
Raigharh, SER- Digha, SR- MGR Chennai Central, SWR- KSR Bengaluru, Krishnarajanpuram, Hubballi, 
WCR- Sawai Madhopur, WR- Bandra Terminus 
40  letter No. 2015/Environ/01/03 dated 30.04.2015 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 19 
spaces outside his premises or in the drain or wate r bodies.  In compliance with these 
rules, Railway Board, vide letter dated 05 Septembe r 2016, instructed zonal Railways 
to get the collected waste at station segregated at  source in differently colour coded 
dustbins and further handling of these wastes shoul d be done separately.  Railway 
Board also directed Zonal Railways (vide letter  dated 09 December 2016) to enter into 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Local bodies for disposal of solid wastes 
from stations and also to maintain records regarding the same. 
Compliance with the rules prescribed in the SWM rul es, 2016 and instruction of 
Railway Board (September 2016) ibid was assessed at all selected 109 stations and 30 
coaching depots and following was observed: - 
i. Necessary records in support of handling Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) were 
not maintained at 41 stations and three coaching depots.  In the absence of such 
records, compliance of the NGT’s order could not be ascertained. 
ii. Collected waste was not segregated at source in dif ferently colour coded 
dustbins at 16 stations and 21 coaching depots. 
iii. No storage sites/vats41 were identified for collection of segregated waste before 
final disposal at 22 stations and 10 coaching depots. 
iv. Accumulation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable  waste was not done 
separately at 47 stations and 17 coaching depots. 
The Indian Railways is traditionally dependent on t he municipal waste management 
system to evacuate its waste.  Further, in the abse nce of storage sites/vats for storing 
the segregated waste before final disposal by the m unicipal authorities, improper 
disposal of waste by burning, dumping into adjacent  canals, low lying areas, and near 
the track, causing environmental pollution can not be ruled out. 
MoR stated (May 2022) that solid waste is being col lected as dry and wet waste in 
separate bins.  MoR added that Twin bins have been provided at all major stations.  
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as it did not address specific Audit observations. 
2.11.1 Transportation and disposal of solid waste 
Audit reviewed the status of compliance of Railway Board’s instructions consequent to 
NGT’s order (as mentioned in para 2.11) regarding d isposal of collected solid waste 
and following points emerged: - 
i. Solid waste was not disposed of at final disposal s ite at 14 stations and seven 
coaching depots;  
ii. Segregated waste was not transported in covered con dition at 15 stations and 
five coaching depots;  
iii. Railway Administration did not enter in to MoU with  Urban Local 
Bodies/Local bodies for disposal of solid waste at  97  stations and 28 coaching 
depots.  
                                                 
41  Vat refers to container for putting garbage 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
20 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
iv. No record was kept for storage and disposal of waste as per NGT/RB directives 
at 65 stations and 22 coaching depots.  
v. T he system of handing over segregated waste to auth orised waste picker or to 
waste collector as envisaged in the extant instructions was not in place at 50 
stations and 13  coaching depots .  
(Annexure 2.7).  
MoR in their reply stated (May 2022) that cleaning contracts have been awarded at all 
the major 720 stations and solid waste is handed ov er to respective municipal bodies 
for disposal.  Reply is, however, silent on the issues related to storage and transportation 
of solid waste commented in the report. 
2.11.2 Facilities for Management of solid waste 
Action plan at 37 identified major railway stations, subsequently to be implemented in 
balance of 720 stations as issued by Railway Board (April 2019) in context of NGT 
directives (March 2019) contained issues related to  storage and disposal of waste like 
provisioning of Composting plant, Material recovery  facility and segregated waste 
transportation.   
The status of implementation of the above policy de cisions in compliance to NGT’s 
order dated 26.03.2019 was reviewed ( Annexure 2.8) in all the 109 selected railway 
stations and 30 coaching depots.  Following observations are made:- 
i. No provision made for wet waste processing facility  at 77 stations and 29 
coaching depots. 
ii. Material recovery facility not provided at 87 stations and 27 coaching depots.  
iii. Composting plant not provided at 77  stations and 28 coaching depots. 
iv. Waste recycling centres not set up at 102 stations and 29 coaching depots. 
Further, eight stations42 were identified43 for setting up solid waste management plants.  
RITES was engaged for bid process and project management for these plants.  Review 
of implementation of setting up of solid waste management plant at the identified eight 
stations revealed that at 7 stations (except at Patna station) the solid waste management 
plant was not set up.  
2.12 Conclusion 
Huge quantum of waste generated at the stations and at the coaching depots warranted 
continuous actions for assessment, segregation, sto rage and its disposal.  There were 
statutory rules and series of orders issued by NGT directing IR to take action on matter 
related to waste management, which were required to be complied with.   
The important recommendations of the PAC for settin g up EnHM directorate at the 
zonal and at the divisional level were partially co mplied with.  Accountable entities at 
                                                 
42 Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus, Patna, Sealda h, Howrah, Prayagraj, Varanasi, Secunderabad and 
MGR Chennai Central. 
43  Environmental Sustainability Annual Report 2016-17of  the Indian Railways 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 21 
the railway stations, divisions and at the zonal le vel were not constituted in 
38.60 per cent  of the stations test checked.  Assessment of quant um of garbage 
generated in the categories biodegradable and non-biodegradable was not done at many 
stations despite recommendations of PAC in this regard.  Despite directions of the NGT, 
a large number of stations had not even applied for CTEs/CFOs.   
The progress on implementation of action plan with 24 verifiable indicators at 37 major 
stations as directed by NGT was not satisfactory.  ETPs/STPs/WRPs, waste to 
composting plant etc remained to be provided till March 2020.  Requisite clauses were 
not incorporated in the cleaning contracts with age ncies for proper segregation and 
disposal of waste.  Efforts to execute cleanliness and waste management works through 
CSR met with little success.  Important directions of Railway Board to formulate Joint 
Procedure Orders for collection of pantry car garbage were not complied with at many 
stations.  Installation of PBCMs at stations evoked  slow response as installation of 
PBCMs (March 2020) was far short of that planned.   
Segregation of accumulated solid waste in biodegradable waste and non-biodegradable 
category in compliance to Solid Waste Management Ru les was not done at many 
stations.  Further, records for storage and disposa l of such waste were not maintained 
and in large number of stations. MOUs with ULB/LBs for disposal of waste were not 
ensured.  Progress towards construction of the required infrastructure for management 
of solid waste such as waste composting plants, was te segregation and recycling plant 
was poor in respect of the stations test checked.  The instructions issued by Ministry of 
Railways for managing environment and housekeeping works did not have 
clear.demarcation of role and responsivity of manag ing waste generated at various 
activity centres.  Besides, fund allocation exclusi vely for waste management was not 
earmarked. 
Summary of Audit findings 
• PAC recommendations for setting up EnHM directorate  at the zonal and at the 
divisional level were partially complied with.   
• Role and responsibilities with specific reference to Waste Management activities 
were not clearly defined.  Further, demarcation of the funds exclusively for 
waste management activities was also not done.  Abs ence of Accountable 
entities at various levels despite directives of NG T has adversely affected the 
monitoring of the key issues related to waste management. 
• Progress on implementation of verifiable indicator in terms of NGT’s order was 
not encouraging. 
• PBCM not installed at stations as planned and even where installed, the same 
were not functioning. 
• Requisite clauses not incorporated in the cleaning contracts with agencies for 
proper segregation and disposal of waste.  Further,  Railways lacked 
infrastructure for management of solid waste. 
 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
22 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
2.13 Recommendation 
IR needs to proactively ensure formation of EnHM wings at zonal and division level 
and constitution of accountable entities as directe d by NGT to strengthen the waste 
management mechanism.  IR also needs to define clea r cut role and responsibilities 
and fund allocation exclusively for waste managemen t activities.  Besides this, IR 
needs to put in place an effective monitoring mechanism for managing plastic as well 
as solid waste in an environment friendly manner. 
  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 23 
 
 
Audit objective 2: 
Whether the assessment, management and disposal of waste generated at Railway 
workshops, maintenance sheds and production units was done as per applicable laws 
and rules 
Indian Railways has established a network of worksh ops and maintenance sheds for 
locomotive/coaches/ wagons besides various Producti on units. During maintenance/ 
repair/ production activities, these units generate  huge quantum of solid waste and 
waste water contaminated with cleaning agents, oil,  lubricants, grease, heavy metals 
and hazardous solids.  Waste water and hazardous waste generated is an area of utmost 
concern from environmental perspective which calls for proper assessment, treatment, 
storage and disposal as per Acts/Rules framed by Ce ntre/State Pollution Control 
Boards.  Deficiencies noticed in management of waste in these activity centres (selected 
10144 Workshops, Sheds and Production Units and 30 Coach ing depots45) are covered 
in this chapter. 
3.1 Consent to Establish (CTE) or Consent for Operation (CFO) under 
the Water Act, 1974 
Sections 24, 25 and 26 of the Water (Prevention and  Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 
(as amended in 1978 and 1988) provided that no person shall except with the previous 
consent of the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB), establish or operate any industrial 
plant which is likely to discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream or well or sewer 
or on land.  If any plant was in operation before the enactment of the Water Act, it was 
required to obtain CTE /CFO within a period of thre e months.  The National Green 
Tribunal (NGT) in its directives46 issued in August 2020 held the same view. 
Compliance to statutory provisions was examined in selected units and it was observed 
that CTEs/CFOs were not obtained as of March 2020 i n 40 units47  (Details indicated 
in Annexur-3.1).  No specific reasons were available on record fo r non-obtaining of 
CTE/CFO by these units.  Despite specific stipulati on under Water Act, inadequate 
compliance in these 40 units is indicative of ineff ective monitoring on the important 
issue of environmental concerns. 
                                                 
44  22 Mechanical workshops, 09 S&T Workshops, 10 Engin eering workshops, 18 Diesel Loco sheds, 15 Electric 
Loco sheds, 19 MEMU/DEMU/EMU car sheds & 8 Production unit 
45  Across 17 Zones including RPU & Metro Railway, Kolka ta. 
46  OA number 141/2014 (Saloni Singh Vs Union of India)  issued in August 2020. 
47  02 Mechanical workshops, 05 S&T Workshops, 06 Engin eering workshops, 02 Diesel Loco sheds, 08 Electric 
Loco sheds &17 MEMU/DEMU/EMU car sheds  
Management of waste generated at Railway 
workshops, Maintenance Sheds Coaching  
Depots and Production Units 
Chapter 3 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
24 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
3.2 Authorisation from SPCBs for handling of Hazardou s and other 
waste 
Hazardous waste is defined as any waste which by re ason of any of its physical, 
chemical, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive characteristics causes 
danger or is likely to cause danger to health or environment, whether alone or when in 
contact with other wastes or substances.   
Rule 6 (1) of Hazardous and other Wastes (Managemen t, and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016, provides that every occupier of facility engaged in generation 
and handling of hazardous waste is required to obta in authorization from the State 
Pollution Control Board (SPCB).  Such occupiers, which includes Railway workshops, 
sheds and production units, are required to segrega te the hazardous waste generated 
from other wastes and store properly before its disposal as per the procedures laid down 
by the SPCBs/CPCB.  
Examination of the related records in the units sel ected revealed that 50 units 48 
(Annexure- 3.1) had not obtained CTE/CFO under the Hazardous Waste Management 
Rules from the concerned SPCBs.  Thus, the stipulat ions under these rules regarding 
identification, segregation, storage and disposal of hazardous waste by these units were 
not complied with.  The resultant impact on health of workers of these units in particular 
and neighbouring community in general could not be ruled out in the absence of 
monitoring.   
3.3 Delay in Authorisation from SPCBs for handling of  effluents and 
hazardous waste 
Rule 6(1) of the Hazardous and other Wastes (Manage ment and Trans-boundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 provides that application for  renewal of authorisation under 
these Rules may be made three months before the expiry of previous authorisation.   
Examination of the related records in the units sel ected for review in Audit revealed 
that 21 units49 (Annexure 3.2) did not comply with the said Rules/conditions.  In respect 
of renewal of CFO under the Hazardous Waste Management Rules as well as under the 
Water Act, delays in applying for renewal of authorization was noticed as indicated in 
Table 3.1 below:- 
Table 3.1 - Status on seeking authorization from SPCB 
S. No. Range of delays in seeking renewal 
for authorization from SPCB 
Number of units 
under HWM Rule 
Number of units 
under Water Act 
1 1 to 06 months  1 3 
2 06 to 18 months 1 8 
3 18 to 30 months 2 5 
4 beyond 30 months 6 6 
                                                 
48  06 Mechanical workshops, 05 S&T Workshops, 06 Engin eering workshops, 07 Diesel Loco sheds, 08 Electric 
Loco sheds &18 MEMU/DEMU/EMU car sheds 
49  06 Mechanical workshops, 01 S&T Workshops, 01 Engin eering workshops, 05 Diesel Loco sheds, 04 Electric 
Loco sheds & 04 PUs 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 25 
Reasons for such delays in obtaining renewals were not furnished by the Railway 
Authorities.  
3.4 Submission of Environmental Statements 
In terms of Rule 14 of Environment (Protection) Rul es 1986, every organisation 
carrying on an industrial operation or process is r equired to submit an Environmental 
Statement annually to the concerned SPCB as indicated in Table 3.2 below: - 
Table 3.2 - Environmental statements required to be furnished annually to SPCB 
Form Extant 
Provision/Rule 
Disclosure to be made about Scheduled date 
of filing  
Form 
4 
Hazardous Waste 
Management 
Rules, 2016 
Quantity of waste generated 
category wise, quantity dispatched to 
disposal facility or recyclers or 
others, quantity utilized in-house and 
quantity in storage at the end of the 
year. 
30th June  
Form 
V 
Water 
(Prevention and 
Control of 
Pollution) Act 
1974 or Air 
(Prevention and 
Control of 
Pollution) Act 
1981 or both 
Water and raw material 
consumption, pollutants discharged 
in the environment and quantum of 
solid wastes and hazardous wastes 
generated by the units. 
30th September 
Audit examined the position of submission of the sa id two Annual Environmental 
Statements and observed the following: 
i. Form-V under the EP Rules was not submitted to the concerned SPCBs by 
83 units 50. Of these, consent under the Water Act was not obtai ned in 40 units 
(Annexure 3.1).  
ii. Form- 4 was not submitted under the Hazardous Waste Management Rules in 84 
units51 . Of these, 50 units (Annexure 3.1) did not obtain authorisation under the 
Hazardous Waste Management. 
3.5 Maintenance of records for storage and disposal o f hazardous waste 
As the hazardous waste generated in any facility ca uses danger or is likely to cause 
danger to health or environment, the Hazardous Wast e Management (HWM) Rules 
                                                 
50 14 Mechanical workshops, 09 S&T Workshops, 10 Engine ering workshops, 13 Diesel Loco sheds, 13 Electric 
Loco sheds, 19 MEMU/DEMU/EMU car sheds & 05 Production Units 
51 16 Mechanical workshops, 09 S&T Workshops, 10 Engine ering workshops, 12 Diesel Loco sheds, 13 Electric 
Loco sheds, 19 MEMU/DEMU/EMU car sheds & 05 Production Units 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
26 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
provide various stipulations for proper segregation , storage, labelling and disposal of 
such waste.  Some of the important provisions are indicated in Table 3.4 below:- 
Table 3.4 - Gist of rules/provisions required to be followed under Hazardous 
Waste Management (HWM) Rules 
Rule Gist of rule/provision Form prescribed 
17 Proper storage of such waste in containers and it’s  
labelling 
Form-8 
Up keep of records of sale, transfer, storage, recycling, 
utilization etc .of such waste  
Form-3 
18 (2) Issuing Transport Emergency (TREM) Card for every 
sale/issue of hazardous waste 
Form-9 
19 (1) Manifest System to track hazardous waste from the 
time it leaves generator until it reaches the treatment /
disposal site 
Form 10 
Audit examined the extent to which the prescribed rules for proper storage and disposal 
of hazardous waste were followed in selected 131 units (including 30 coaching depots) 
and following points emerged: - 
i. Proper storage and labelling of hazardous waste not done in 102 units, 
ii. Records for storage, utilization, not kept in 110 units, 
iii. Transport Emergency (TREM) Card not issued for ever y sale/transfer of 
hazardous waste in 117 units, 
iv. The manifest system prescribed for tracking of haza rdous waste till its disposal, 
not followed for each issue/sale of hazardous waste in 101 units.  
(Annexure 3.3). 
Non-adherence to the prescribed rules as brought out above makes the whole system of 
monitoring mechanism grossly ineffective posing thr eat to the environment as well 
worker/staff engaged in these units.  It also highl ights a need for sensitization for 
ensuring compliance to the rules prescribed for handling hazardous waste. 
3.6 Storage of hazardous waste beyond the permissible  period 
Rule 8 (1) of Hazardous and other Wastes (Managemen t, and Trans-boundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 (HWM Rules), prescribes that the occupiers of facilities may 
store the hazardous and other wastes for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days. State 
Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) may extend the sai d period of 90 days to 180 days 
in some specified cases.  Review of related records  in the units selected revealed the 
following: - 
i. Storage period of hazardous waste 52 was in excess of the prescribed period of 
ninety days in 36 units .The actual storage period of hazardous waste ranged from 
3 to 6 months in 6 units, more than 6 to 12 months in 12 units, more than 12 to 24 
months in six units and 24 months & beyond in 12 units . 
                                                 
52  like waste oil, oil sludge, ETP sludge, paint sludg e, used filters, cotton waste mixed with grease/ lub ricants 
etc. 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 27 
ii. In some of the units53 the storage period was found as long as 8 to 9 years or even 
more. Records did not indicate as to the permission from SPCB for storage of such 
waste was sought beyond the permissible limit.  
As timely disposal of hazardous waste 
is must for its proper management and 
also for preventing the danger likely to 
be caused by it to persons or 
environment, the action of Railway 
units storing such waste for a long 
period makes the prescribed statutory 
provisions ineffective.  With such 
prolonged storage, there remained 
potential threat causing adverse impact 
to the environment.
  
3.7 Integrated Management System (IMS)/ Green Ratin g Certification  
In terms of Railway Board’s directives 54 (June 2015), Zonal Railways are required to 
put in place a system for Management of quality of environment through Integrated 
Management System (IMS) addressing the ISO 9001 for  Quality, ISO 14001 for 
Environment Management System (EMS) and ISO 18001 f or Occupational Health & 
Safety (OHSAS).  Zonal Railways were asked to take immediate necessary action to 
obtain IMS certification for all the PUs/ Workshops  as also for loco sheds and major 
coaching depots including EMU/DEMU car sheds. Later  in February 2017, Zonal 
Railways were instructed 55 to undertake Green Rating Certification of Railway  
Establishments covering the assessment of parameter s on energy conservation 
measures, use of renewables, water recycling/rain water harvesting, waste management 
(solid & liquids) and its disposal.   
Review of records of selected Railway workshops, sh eds, Production units and 
coaching depots (131 units) revealed that certifica tion under Integrated Management 
System (IMS) or Green Rating was obtained in respect of 88 units only (67 per cent).   
Thus, the system for Quality Management of environm ental issues was not fully 
established even after five years of issue of instr uctions in this regard.  Further, based 
on the study got done by Ministry of Railways through Quality Council of India (QCI) 
in 2019 it was also observed that ISO certification  and Green rating was obtained by 
only 10 and two per cent of the stations, respectively. 
 
 
                                                 
53  Signal workshop/Howrah, BLW/Varanasi, Loco carriage  and wagon workshop/ Dahod 
54  letter No. 2015/E&HM/03/02 dated 11.06.2015, 
55  letter No. 2015/EnHM/12/02 dated 01.02.2017 
Hazardous waste lying in open space at Electric 
Loco Shed/Gonda of NER  

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
28 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
3.8 Conclusion 
Maintenance, repair and production activities in th e railway units generate heavy 
quantum of solid waste and the waste water causing serious concern to the environment.  
Water Act and procedure framed by CPCB/SPCBs specif ied various provisions to 
address this aspect.  Test check in audit revealed that a large number of such units were 
operating without obtaining CTE/CFOs despite clear directives of NGT.  
Prescribed regulations related to hazardous waste management were not complied with.  
Besides, there have been cases of delays obtaining authorization from SPCBs for 
handling hazardous waste and effluents. 
System/procedure prescribed for storage, transporta tion and disposal of hazardous 
waste were not followed in its true spirit.  There were cases of hazardous waste found 
to be stored beyond the permissible limit.  
Summary of Audit findings 
• Indian Railways failed to ensure compliance on the basic requirement of 
obtaining requisite approvals (CTE/CFO) from the designated authority. 
• Due to slow progress on planning and installation o f ETPs/STPs, the system 
of managing waste viz., effluents, pollutants and hazardous wastes discharged 
in the environment by various maintenance and production units was deficient 
with reference to the provisions contained in Water Act and Hazardous waste 
management Rules.  
• Railway units failed to furnish the requisite envir onmental statements 
disclosing the nature and quantum of waste generate d thereby rendering the 
monitoring mechanism weak. 
3.9 Recommendation 
IR needs to ensure provision of required infrastruc ture and initiate measures to 
sensitise the work force engaged in maintenance and  Production Units for effective 
compliance of the Hazardous Waste Management Rules thereby avoiding danger to 
health and environment as well.  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 29 
 
 
 
Audit objective 3 
Whether management of waste water generated through  effluent/sewage treatment, 
water recycling and reduction in generation through  automatic coach washing has 
been ensured. 
Indian Railway has created vast infrastructure of stations, coaching depots, workshops, 
maintenance sheds and production units (PUs) for ma naging the volume of passenger 
and freight traffic.  The activities related to ope ration of traffic at stations and 
maintenance of rolling stock not only requires extensive use of water, but also generates 
huge quantity of waste water.   
For better management of fresh as well as waste wat er, Railways aims to follow the 
policy of ‘Reduce’, ‘Reuse’ and ‘Recycle’. This asp ect is prominently placed in the 
Indian railways Water Policy, 2017 that inter alia lays emphasis on judicious use of 
water as it is becoming a scarce commodity by each passing day.     
For reduction in water usage, as also for managing the waste water, provision of 
Effluent/Sewage Treatments Plant (ETPs/STPs), Water  Recycling Plants (WRPs) and 
Automatic Coach Washing Plants (ACWPs) is to be mad e by Railway Administration 
as per Water Policy, 2017.  Central Pollution Contr ol Board (CPCB) also directed 
(2 June 2020) that all the Zones should take steps to manage waste water as also to 
identify quality of sewage and non-sewage waste water separately and plan waste water 
recycling plants accordingly. 
The efficacy and efficiency of the efforts made by IR for managing waste water at 
stations, coaching depots, workshops, maintenance s heds and production units were 
assessed and the deficiencies noticed are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1  Provision/Planning, Commissioning and function ing of effluent/ 
sewage treatment plants (ETPs/STPs) 
As prescribed in Section 24 of the Water (Preventio n and control of Pollution) Act, 
1974, no person shall knowingly cause or permit flo w of any poisonous, noxious or 
polluting matter into any stream, well, sewer and land without treating it.  The activities 
in workshops, sheds and production units generate effluent such as waste oil, chemicals, 
sludge, waste grease etc.   
As per the special condition attached to Consent for Operation (CFO) under the Water 
Act, provision of effluent treatment plants (ETPs) is necessary for treatment of effluents 
before discharging into sewer/waste bodies.  Simila rly, for treatment of effluents 
generated at railway stations and coaching depots, Railway Board, instructed 56 Zonal 
                                                 
56  letter no. 99/LMB/9/25 dated 22-12-1999 
Management of waste water generated at  
railway stations, coaching depots, workshops  
and production units  
Chapter 4 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
30 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Railways to formulate proposals, wherever considere d economically desirable for 
setting up ETPs considering the economic, social and environment consideration.  The 
National Green Tribunal (NGT), in its order dated 1 8 March 2015 asked railway 
authorities to ensure that effluents generated at stations and coaching depots/ yards does 
not get seeped into the ground water and such efflu ents should be channelized to 
ETPs/STPs located near all major stations.  In comp liance with these orders, Railway 
Board  instructed57 (30 April 2015) the Zonal Railways to prepare a time bound action 
plan for setting up ETPs/STPs near the major stations.  
Audit examined the efficacy of steps taken for prov ision of ETP/STP at selected 102 
major stations, 30 coaching depots and 101 workshop /shed/Production units and 
observed the following shortcomings: - 
i. ETP/STP though planned but were not commissioned in 40 workshops/sheds and 
19 coaching depots. 
ii. ETPs/STPs commissioned on 87 stations were not functioning as of March 2020. 
From the position given above, it can be inferred that statutory requirement of treatment 
of waste water before its discharge could not be ef fectively fulfilled as installation of 
the ETPs/STPs fell short of that planned and many o f the installed ETPs/STPs 
remaining non-functional.  Records made available d id not indicate fund shortage 
preventing the installation of ETPs/STPs (part of environment related works).  Para 4.5 
has a mention of funds for environment related works remaining unutilised due to slow 
progress on such works.  The environment concerns of contamination of ground  
water/water bodies as well as reduction in use of f resh water consequently remained 
unaddressed. However, it was observed that ETPs/STP s were provided in all 
Production Units test checked and the same were found in working condition. 
4.2 Analysis of the effluents/sludge discharged fro m ETP/STPs provided 
at stations, coaching depots, workshops, sheds and production units 
In compliance with the provisions of the Water Act, 1974, the effluent discharged from 
railway stations, coaching depots, 
workshops, sheds and production units 
were to be treated in ETPs/STPs before its 
discharge to municipal sewage lines or to 
low lying areas/land.  As per the special 
conditions attached to consent for 
operation (CFO) under the Water Act, the 
effluent should conform to the prescribed 
standards; hence should be analysed before 
and after treatment in ETP/STP.  The sludge from th e ETP/STPs should be dried in 
sludge drying beds and testing of such dried sludge should be done to decide its disposal 
                                                 
57  letter No. 2015/Environ/01/03 dated 30.04.2015 
ETP sludge lying undisposed at Loco & 
Carriage and Wagon Workshop- Dahod at 
Ratlam Division in WR
 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 31 
method.  Such analysis/testing is prescribed to add ress the environmental concerns 
related to handling/disposal of such effluents and sludge. 
Examination of the efficacy of the process of handl ing/disposal of effluents/sludge in 
ETPs/STPs provided at railway stations, coaching de pots, workshops, sheds and 
production units revealed the following:- 
i. Analysis of liquid waste discharge from such units was not done before 
treatment in 40 units.   
ii. Treated effluents from such ETP/STPs was not analysed in 14 units.  
iii. Adequate sludge drying beds were not available with  the ETPs/STPs provided 
in the case of 12 units.   
iv. In 53 units, the sludge generated from ETP/STPs was not t ested to find out its 
disposal method.   
Thus, the sludge generated out of ETPs/STPs was dis posed without mandatory testing 
as per the norms prescribed.   
4.3  Provision of water recycling plants (WRPs) 
Water recycling refers to reclaiming waste water from industrial, residential, municipal 
sources, by treating and purifying the waste water for reuse.  Based on the extent of the 
treatment, the reclaimed water can be used for infe rior services like coach washing, 
platform aprons cleaning, gardening, etc.  Railway Board instructed58 (July 2008 and 
August 2008) Zonal Railways to provide WRPs in such stations and sheds where water 
is scarce and the demand for water is heavy.  Provi sion of WRPs at one A1 category 
station in each zone was emphasized 59 (March 2015) by Railway Board.  Railway 
Board specifically stated (December 2015) that the provision of WRPs will be extended 
to all major stations. 
Audit examined the status of the provision of WRPs in 102 selected major stations. 
Despite passage of more than 10 years since RB’s in structions, provision of WRPs in 
the 86 major stations out of 102 test checked was n ot complete as of March, 2020.  
Thus, such an important aspect of minimising the usage of fresh water, thereby boosting 
the efforts for water conservation, did not get required attention of railway authorities. 
Survey done by Quality Council of India (QCI) on the request of Ministry of Railways 
also revealed (2019) that out of 720 stations covered in their study, only 25 per cent of 
the stations had the provision of water conservatio n measures and provision for water 
reclamation/waste water use was available on nine per cent of the stations covered in 
QCI’s study.  This is indicative of poor response o n the aspect of water conservation 
despite instructions issued (2008) by Railway Board in this regard. 
                                                 
58 Letter No. 2006/LMB/09/01 dated 19.07.2006 and 04. 08.2008 
59 Letter No. 2015/LM (PA)/08/08WRP dated 04.03.2015  

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
32 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
4.4 Provision of Automatic Coach Washing Plants (AC WP) at coaching 
depots and car sheds. 
Automatic Coach Washing Plant (ACWP) is a multistag e exterior cleaning system for 
coaches/trains using pressurized soap solutions and  water jets with rotating nylon and 
cotton consignation brushes to clean complete exter ior of the coaches in a rake while 
placed on the pit-line of the coaching depots.  Use of ACWPs helps in minimization of 
fresh water consumption as well as effective manage ment of waste water thereby 
resulting in conservation of water.  Railway Board directed60 (October 2017) Zonal 
Railways to provide ACWPs on priority basis at all major coaching depots and car 
sheds.  The aspect of provision of ACWP was also em phasized upon in the Indian 
Railway Water Policy, 2017.  Provision of 63 ACWPs was sanctioned between 2017-
2020 in coaching depots/Car Sheds. However, progres s of work was very slow  as 
indicated below: - 
i. Work for providing ACWP was completed in nine cases only as of March 2020.   
ii. In 43 cases, work on providing ACWP did not commence at all.  
iii. In eight cases, the work is still in progress. 
iv. In three cases of WR, the records to confirm the pr ogress of work were not 
available.  
Thus, it is clear from the progress of the work tha t required effort lacked seriousness 
on such a priority work meant for conservation of w ater resources.  The resultant 
benefits to minimize the fresh water consumption an d recycling of waste water could 
not be achieved. 
4.5 Progress of works related to management of wast e sanctioned from the 
funds created for Environment Related Works (ERWs) 
Keeping in view it’s commitment towards cleaner env ironment as also the need to 
comply with various statutory obligations towards mitigation of environmental impact, 
Railway Board, decided61 to include environment related works (ERW) as an i ntegral 
part of Works Estimates for all Plan Heads excepts PH-17 (Computerization).  
Provision for ERWs was made as an itemized one or o n lump sum basis (equal to one 
per cent of the cost of work).  The works chargeable to EBR  (IF) were to be excluded 
for the purpose of lump sum provisioning towards ERW.  These identified works are to 
be coordinated/ managed by EnHM wing of the Zone/Di vision/PUs and such works 
should generally be completed within two years.  Ce rtain items related to waste 
management like provision of ETPs/STPs, WRPs, ACWPs, waste to compost, waste to 
energy plants etc. were included in the specified list of ERWs.  As t he progress on 
                                                 
60  letter No. 2001/M1/141/1 Vol-I dated 20.04.2010 a nd 27.10.2017 
61  letter No. 2016/EnHM/13/02 dated 13.05.2016 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 33 
ERWs was slow on Zonal Railways, Railway Board instructed62 (March 2020) all Zonal 
Railways to make more serious efforts and ensure expeditious completion of works.  
Review of position on utilisation of funds accumulated under ERW revealed that funds 
remained unutilised to the extent of 53 per cent  during the period under review as 
indicated in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1 - Statement showing the funds accumulated under ERW remaining 
un-utilised 
                      (` ` ` ` in crore) 
Year Funds 
accumulated for 
ERW during the 
year  
Fund utilized 
during the 
year 
Funds 
remaining  un- 
utilized at the 
end of the year 
Funds un-
utilised  
(in per cent) 
2015-16 0.48 0.00 0.48 100.00 
2016-17 24.90 2.96 21.94 88.11 
2017-18 83.74 30.21 53.53 63.92 
2018-19 208.53 108.67 99.86 47.89 
2019-20 285.17 137.86 147.31 51.66 
Total 602.82 279.7 323.12 53.60 
Funds created for environment related works remained un-utilised due to poor progress 
in completion of environment related works as indicated in Table 4.2 below:- 
Table 4.2 - Progress of works under ERW Funds (Annexure 4.1) 
Particulars Works 
sanctioned) 
(Numbers) 
Location Sanctioned 
cost  
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Works completed 
(Numbers) 
(March 2020) 
Provision of ETP/STP 87 11 zones 83.17 26 (30 per cent) 
Provision of WRP 54 13 zones 66.62 Nine (16 per cent) 
Provision for Waste to 
Compost 
93 14 zones 20.59 30 (32 per cent) 
Waste to Energy Plant 5 04 zones 4.91 Two (40 per cent) 
It is, thus clear that the very purpose of creating  ERW fund for expeditious execution 
of environment related works was defeated due to la ck of monitoring on the part of 
railway authorities. Consequently, the benefit envi saged from these environment-
related works remained unachieved.  This had advers e consequence on waste water 
management at these locations.  
4.6 Conclusion     
Railways use water at stations as also for units such as workshops, sheds etc.  Provision 
of ETPs/STPs/WRPs/ACWPs was envisaged in pursuance to the water policy.  NGT 
had also directed that effluents generated at stati ons/coaching depots/yards should be 
diverted to ETP/STPs and not allowed to seep in ground water.  
                                                 
62  letter No.2016/EnHM/13/02 dated 12.03.2020 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
34 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Study in Audit revealed that ETPs/STPs were not com missioned as planned despite 
availability of funds for environment related works .  Further, many of the ETPs/STPs 
commissioned were not operational.  Shortcomings in process of handling and disposal 
of effluents and sludge were noticed in some of the ETPs/STPs.  Water recycling plants 
were not found to have been installed defeating the objective of minimization of usage 
of fresh water.  Progress on the installation of ACWPs at the coaching depots/car sheds 
was very slow.  Resultantly, the objective to minim ize water consumption remained 
unachieved. 
Objective of creating ERW Fund, an initiative to commit to clean environment by way 
of providing ETPs/STPs/WRPs, compost plant and soli d waste management plant 
largely remained un-fulfilled as funds created rema ined unutilized due to slow/nil 
progress of environment related works.  
Summary of Audit findings 
• Statutory requirement of treatment of waste water b efore its discharge could 
not be effectively fulfilled due to ETP/STPs remain ing non-functional 
besides, environment concerns of contamination of ground water/water bodies 
remaining unaddressed. 
• Slow progress in providing water recycling plant an d automatic coach 
washing plant adversely affected the aspect of better management of fresh as 
well as waste water as prominently placed in the In dian Railways Water 
Policy, 2017. 
4.7 Recommendation  
IR needs to develop a robust monitoring mechanism t o oversee the expeditious 
completion of the works such as provision of water recycling plants, automatic coach 
washing plant meant for water conservation under Water Policy of IR. 
  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 35 
 
 
 
Audit objective 4 
Whether the assessment, management and disposal of waste generated at railway 
hospitals (Bio-Medical Waste) was done as per applicable Laws and Rules. 
The Railway Medical Department has the objective of  keeping employees fit and 
healthy for efficient railway operations by establi shing various railway hospitals right 
from the zonal level to dispensaries at remote fiel d levels.  These units produce huge 
quantum of bio-medical waste.  Bio-medical waste implies waste generated during the 
diagnosis, treatment or immunisation of human beings or research activities pertaining 
thereto.  
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change issued the Bio-Medical Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules (BMW Rules) in 1998 , 2016 and 2018 in exercise 
of the powers conferred under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 which provides 
a regulatory frame work for management of bio-medical waste generated in the country.  
This included collection, segregation, treatment an d disposal of bio-medical wastes in 
an environment friendly manner thereby reducing the  bio- medical waste generation 
and its impact on the environment.  Efficacy and efficiency of the process of collection, 
segregation and disposal of bio-medical waste was e xamined in audit in respect of 72 
selected railway hospitals.  Deficiencies noticed a re covered in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
5.1 Authorization for handling of bio -medical waste  
Rule 10 of the BMW Rules stipulated that every occu pier63 shall obtain authorisation 
from SPCB for handling of bio-medical waste.  The o ccupier is required to fill the 
details like quantity of waste generated, method of  treatment and disposal, mode of 
transportation of bio-medical waste and details of waste treatment equipment available 
etc. in Form-II prescribed under the Rules.  Every occu pier is mandatorily required to 
take all necessary steps to ensure that bio-medical waste is handled in accordance with 
BMW Rules and without any adverse effect to human health and the environment.  
It was observed that the required authorisation was  not obtained from the concerned 
SPCBs in the case of 26 hospitals (Annexure- 5.1).  This was attributed to: - 
• Non-conversant with the prescribed rules and procedures (NFR),  
• Non-receipt of instructions from higher authorities (ER), 
• Non-filing of application to SPCB (ECR, SR),  
• Non-pursuance of application filed with SPCB etc. (ECR, SECR, Metro Rail).  
                                                 
63 In the context any Railway healthcare facility inclu ding dispensary at lowest field level  
Management of bio-medical waste generated  
at Railway Hospitals  
Chapter 5 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
36 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Thus, such an important (authorisation from SPCB fo r handling bio-medical waste) 
matter of environmental concern for proper manageme nt of bio-medical waste 
remained unaddressed.  
MoR in their reply admitted (May 2022) that authorization is yet to be obtained for the 
hospitals pointed out in the Report, though the process for seeking authorisation under 
Bio-Medical Waste Rules was stated to be initiated for many hospitals.  
5.2 Delay/discontinuity in renewal of authorization  for handling of 
bio-medical waste  
Rule 10 read with Form-II of the BMW Rules provides for obtaining fresh authorisation 
from SPCB before the expiry of previous one by each  hospital handing bio-medical 
waste.  For any changes in the activities of the hospital such as increase in the number 
of beds, change in the handling process of bio-medical waste, a fresh authorisation was 
mandatory. 
The aspect of delay/discontinuity in renewal of aut horisation was examined in Audit 
and it was observed that the authorisation was not got renewed in time in case of 24 
railway hospitals (Annexure- 5.2).  The delay/discontinuity ranged between one to six 
months in two cases, beyond six to 18 months in thr ee cases, beyond 18 to 30 months 
in three cases and even extended beyond 30 months i n 16 cases.  Delays/discontinuity 
in authorisation was attributed to: - 
• Delay in filing application (ER, NEFR, WR, RPU); 
• Non-pursuance of application filed with SPCB (WR), absence of instructions 
from higher authorities (ER); non-payment of additional fee (SCR). 
• Renewal refused by SPCB for want of installation of ETP/STP (NR, NWR, SCR, 
WCR);  
• Required documents/ information not submitted to SP CB (WCR) and non-
collection and not disinfecting the effluents before disposal into ETP (SR).  
It is evident that lack of efficient monitoring reg arding renewal of authorisation had 
resulted in such delays/ discontinuance in authorisation. 
MoR in their reply stated (May 2022) that approval for authorisation is under process 
in many cases and in some cases, response from the concerned SPCBs is also delayed. 
5.3 Creation of infrastructure in hospitals for handlin g of bio-medical 
waste 
Rule 4 of the BMW Rules prescribed for taking all n ecessary steps to ensure that 
bio-medical waste is handled without any adverse ef fects to human health and the 
environment.  These rules also prescribed that a fa cility for a safe, ventilated and 
secured location for storage of such waste in colou red bags in containers should be 
provided within the hospital premises.  The bio-medical waste from such locations shall 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 37 
be directly transported to the common bio-medical w aste treatment facility 64 for 
appropriate treatment and disposal.  Rule 4(k) pres cribed that hospital authorities 
should ensure treatment and disposal of liquid wast e in accordance with the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, wh ich, inter-alia, included provision 
of effluent treatment plant (ETP)/ sewage treatment plant (STP). 
Examination of the related records pertaining to the infrastructure created for handling 
Bio-Medical waste revealed the following: - 
i. Provision of secured room for storage of bio-medica l waste did not exist in 46 
hospitals (Annexure- 5.3) in 14 zones, 
ii. Provision of ETP/STP was not made for treatment of liquid waste in 54 hospitals 
(Annexure- 5.3),   
iii. No specific reasons for such non-creation of infrastructure could be ascertained.  
This clearly indicated the poor level of efficacy i n monitoring such important 
environmental aspects.  The resultant ill effects on the health of hospital employees as 
well as on the patients visiting the hospitals comi ng in contact of such bio-medical 
wastes could not be ruled out. 
MoR in reply is stated (May 2022) to have provided secured room for storage of Bio-
Medical Waste and ETP/STP for treatment of liquid c hemical waste but no 
evidence/document in support of their claim was given. 
5.4 Pre-treatment of bio-medical waste before its s torage 
Rule 4, Schedule-I and Form-II of the BMW Rules prescribed for pre-treatment of bio-
medical waste before its storage.  Such waste inclu des laboratory waste, 
microbiological waste, blood samples, blood bags an d other clinical laboratory waste.  
Schedule-I of the Rules also prescribed the method of treatment for each type of the 
waste corresponding with the manner as prescribed b y the World Health Organisation 
(WHO) or National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) guidelines.  These types of 
waste, after pre-treatment, were to be packed and sent to the common bio-medical waste 
treatment facility for final disposal.  
Audit evaluated the status of pre-treatment of diff erent bio-medical waste in the 
selected railway hospitals and observed the following: - 
i. Pre-treatment of laboratory waste was not carried out in 13 hospitals in five zones. 
ii. Required pre-treatment of micro-biological waste was not done in 13 hospitals in 
six zones.  
iii. Pre-treatment of blood samples was not carried out in the case of 15 hospitals in 
seven zones.  Similarly, specified pre-treatment of  blood bags were not done in 
18 hospitals in eight zones. 
                                                 
64 Any authorized treatment facility by SPCB within a dis tance of 75 Kilometres. 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
38 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
iv. Required pre-treatment of other clinical laboratory  waste was not carried out in 
14 hospitals in seven zones.  
(Annexure 5.4).  
Thus, the stipulations contained in the BMW Rules f or pre-treatment of bio-medical 
waste were not effectively complied with.  The resu ltant adverse impact of non-
compliance of the prescribed procedure on the health of the hospital staff, patients and 
visitors exposed to such waste cannot be ruled out.    
MoR in its reply (May 2022) stated that Railway hos pitals are ensuring pre-treatment 
of Bio-medical waste before storage.  Reply is not acceptable as MoR did not furnish 
any document supporting the veracity of their claim. 
5.5 Segregation and pre-treatment of liquid chemica l waste 
As prescribed in Rule 4 and Schedule-I & III of the  BMW Rules, the liquid chemical 
waste should be segregated at source and its pre-tr eatment has to be carried out in 
accordance with the Water Act prior to its mixing w ith other waste water so that the 
combined discharge should conform to the prescribed norms.  Scrutiny of related record 
on compliance to this provision revealed the following: - 
1. Segregation of liquid chemical waste, as specified in the Rules, was not carried out 
in 22 hospitals in nine zones. 
2. Treatment of liquid waste was not done as prescribe d in the Water Act in 29 
hospitals in 12 zones (Annexure-5.5).  
Thus, the statutory provisions for safeguard of hea lth of hospital staff, patients and 
visitors in particular and public in general were n ot effectively complied with due to 
lack of monitoring on the part of hospital authorities.  
MoR in its reply (May 2022) stated that Railway hospitals are ensuring segregation and 
pre-treatment of liquid chemical waste.  MoR further added that provision of ETP/STP 
is being/will be planned. 
5.6 Proper storage facility for bio-medical waste ( BMW) 
As prescribed in Rule 8 of the BMW Rules, the storage of collected bio-medical waste 
in any hospital should be done in such a way that i t is not mixed with any other waste 
and there should not be any scattering or spillage by animals.  Rules also provide that 
untreated bio-medical waste should not be stored beyond a period of 48 hours.  In case 
it becomes necessary to store such waste beyond the  specified period, the prescribed 
authority (SPCB) be intimated about this along with  reasons for doing so.  Rule also 
provide that the containers/ bags in which segregat ed bio-medical waste is stored, 
should be labelled as specified in schedule-IV to the BMW Rules.  Audit examined the 
level of compliance of the statutory provisions for proper storage of bio-medical waste 
and observed the following shortcomings. (Details indicated in Annexure 5.6). 
1. Places for stacking BMW were not fenced to avoid an y contact with humans or 
scattering/spillage by animals in nine hospitals in six zones.  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 39 
2. Bio-medical waste was stored for more than the prescribed 48 hours in the case of 
seven hospitals in three zones. No records were mad e available to indicate if 
SPCBs was intimated for storage of bio-medical wast e beyond the permissible 
limit. 
3. Further, it was also observed that in six hospitals in five zones, the containers/bags 
used for storing bio-medical waste were not properly labelled as required under the 
Rules. 
These important regulations/ stipulations of 
safe storage of bio-medical waste were 
meant to ensure that the bio-medical waste 
is handled and stored properly thereby 
avoiding human contact.  Contrary to the 
stipulations in BMW Rules, safe storage of 
bio-medical waste avoiding impact on the 
health of patients, visitors and other public 
coming in contact with such waste was not 
adequately ensured.  The lack of effective 
monitoring by hospital authorities resulted in safety issue remaining unaddressed.  
MoR in its reply (May 2022) brought out that Railwa y hospitals are ensuring. proper 
storage and labelling of Bio-medical waste.  Reply is not acceptable as no 
evidence/documents in support of the claim was furnished with reply
.  
5.7 Compliance of norms prescribed under the BMW Ru les for 
transportation of bio-medical waste  
BMW Rules (Rule 8) prescribe various norms for proper disposal of bio-medical waste.  
As per Schedule-IV of the BMW Rules, vehicle transporting bio-medical waste should 
be labelled with the bio-hazardous symbol 65.  The containers or bags containing 
segregated bio-medical waste should be bar coded be fore sending out of the hospital 
premises for disposal. Similarly, the vehicles tran sporting such waste should be 
connected with global positioning system (GPS).  Ru les also provide for ensuring 
timely collection and transportation of the waste t o the disposal site. BMW Rules also 
provided that hospital authorities should be allowe d to inspect the treatment and 
disposal carried out by of the operator of common bio-medical waste treatment facility.  
The efficacy of compliance with the above stated ru les in the selected 72 railway 
hospitals was examined by audit and following position emerged: - 
i. Vehicles used for transportation of bio-medical was te were not labelled as 
prescribed under Rules in six hospitals in four zones. 
ii. Bar coding of containers or bags containing bio-medical waste was not done in 
41 hospitals in 14 zones.  Further, the vehicles tr ansporting bio-medical waste 
                                                 
65  Guidelines issued by CPCB in December 2016.  
Biomedical waste lying in open at Railway Hospital 
(old), Perambur at Chennai Central Division in SR 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
40 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
in 35 hospitals in 13 zones were not connected with  global positioning system 
(GPS).  
iii. In seven hospitals in four zones, the hospital auth orities did not ensure timely 
collection and transportation of bio-medical waste. 
iv. Hospital authorities were not allowed to inspect th e treatment and disposal by 
the operators of the common bio-medical waste treatment facility in the case of 
15 hospitals in six zones. 
(Annexure-5.7) 
Non-adherence to the norms for proper collection, t ransportation and disposal of 
bio-medical waste is indicative of lack of effectiv e monitoring by hospital authorities.  
Further, as a result of deficient system of transpo rtation of bio-medical waste such as 
vehicle not connected with GPS and absence of bar coding of waste, the risk of disposal 
of bio-medical waste with other municipal solid waste cannot be ruled out.   
MoR in reply (May 2022) admitting deficiency pointed out by audit stated that Railway 
Hospitals will ensure the norms for labelling, bar- coding, Global positioning system 
(GPS) provision and timely collection of bio-medical waste. 
5.8 Disposal of bio-medical waste at hospital level  
Rule 4, 5 and 7 of the BMW Rules prescribe that eve ry occupier (Railway hospital) 
shall collect segregated bio-medical waste in colou red bags/containers and send it to 
the common bio-medical waste treatment facility for treatment and final disposal. Rules 
also prescribe that no occupier shall establish on-site treatment and disposal facility, if 
a service of common bio-medical waste treatment fac ility is available at a distance of 
75 kilometres.  If such service is not available, t he occupier shall set up in-house 
treatment facility like incinerator, autoclave or m icrowave and shredders as per 
authorization obtained (from SPCB) for treatment and disposal. 
The process of disposal of bio-medical waste in railway hospitals was assessed by audit 
and it was found that: - 
i. In the case of nine hospitals in six zones, though the facility of common 
treatment operator was available within 75 kilometres, the management of bio-
medical waste was done by these hospitals departmen tally, even though in-
house treatment equipment (like incinerators, autoc laves or microwave and 
shredders) were not in existence in these hospitals.  
ii. No such operator was available within 75 kilometres  in 15 hospitals in nine 
zones.  These hospitals managed the required treatment/disposal departmentally 
though the required in-house equipment (incinerator) for treatment and disposal 
of bio-medical waste was not available with them.    
In the absence of common bio-medical waste treatmen t facility (CBWTF) disposal of 
such bio-medical waste, some of the hospitals resorted to managing bio-medical waste 
departmentally endangering the safety of public hea lth and likely impact on 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 41 
environment. This also reflected ineffective monito ring of such a vital aspect by 
hospital authorities. 
MoR in reply (May 2022) admitting deficiency pointed out by audit stated that Railway 
Hospitals are now ensuring disposal of bio-medical waste at CBWTF through 
outsourced agency.  Reply is, however, silent on th e aspect of Railway hospitals 
resorting to treatment of bio-medical waste departm entally without ensuring the 
required facility in this regard. 
5.9 Non-submission of Annual Reports as required un der the BMW 
Rules 
Rule 13 of the BMW Rules prescribes that every occupier of healthcare facility (railway 
hospital) shall submit an annual report, in Form-IV  prescribed under the Rules, on or 
before 30th June of every year to the prescribed authority (SPCB). This report contained 
various information which inter-alia includes status of statutory authorisation/consent, 
GPS co-ordinates of hospitals, quantity of waste ge nerated category wise, details of 
on-site storage and treatment facilities, liquid waste generation and treatment methods, 
etc.  These reports were subsequently compiled, rev iewed and analysed by SPCB, 
thereafter by CPCB and finally reviewed by the Mini stry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change.  
Status of the submission of the statutory annual reports was reviewed in audit in respect 
of 72 railway hospitals during the period 2015-16 t o 2019-20 and following was 
observed: - 
i. Only 11 hospitals in eight zones  had submitted the report for all the five years.   
ii. Nine other hospitals in seven zones  submitted reports for intermittent periods.  
iii. The balance 52 hospitals in 16 zones did not submit annual report in any of the 
five years (Details are indicated in Annexure-5.8).  
Thus, the objective of monitoring mechanism establi shed for management of bio-
medical waste was not fulfilled due to lack of comp liance to BMW Rules by railway 
hospital authorities. 
MoR in reply (May 2022) admitting deficiency pointed out by audit stated that Railway 
Hospitals will ensure submission of Annual Report under the bio-medical waste Rules. 
5.10 Health check-up, immunization and training of healthcare workers 
handling bio-medical waste 
As per Rule 4 of the BMW Rules, it is the duty of every occupier of health care facility 
(railway hospital) to conduct health check up of st aff involved in handling of 
bio-medical waste at the time of induction and at l east once in a year and maintain 
record for the same. This rule also prescribed immu nisation of health workers against 
diseases that are likely to be transmitted by handl ing of the bio-medical waste. Rule 
also provided for proper training to such healthcar e workers at time of induction and 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
42 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
thereafter at least once every year and details of such training should be provided in the 
Annual report.  
Compliance to the said rule by hospital selected for audit revealed the following: - 
i. Prescribed health check-up of staff involved in han dling of bio-medical waste 
was not conducted during the review period (2015-16 to 2019-20) in 13 railway 
hospitals in nine zones.  Records for conducting such health check-up were not 
maintained, in seven hospitals in five zones.  
ii. Healthcare workers were not immunized during the re view period in 14 
hospitals in eight zones. Further, in 23 hospitals in 11 zones where 
immunization was done, no records for the same were maintained.  
iii. Training programmes for healthcare workers were not conducted in 15 hospitals 
in nine zones.  In 12 hospitals in six zones  though the training programmes were 
conducted, no record for the same was maintained.  
iv. Clause for engaging only skilled staff handling of bio-medical waste (in case of 
outsourcing) was not incorporated in the contracts in 46 hospitals in 14 zones. 
Health check-up of such outsourced staff was not do ne during the period of 
2015-16 to 2019-20 in 14 hospitals in seven zones a nd immunization of such 
outsourced staff, as prescribed, was not done in 15 hospitals in eight zones.  
It is evident from this position that hospital auth orities were not serious in monitoring 
and ensuring occupational health safety of their wo rkers engaged in handling of bio-
medical waste. 
MoR in reply (May 2022) stated that many of the Railway hospitals mentioned in audit 
comment have started ensuring health check-up, immunization & training of health care 
workers handling bio-medical waste.   
5.11 Existence of monitoring mechanism for managing  bio-medical waste 
Rule 4 of the BMW Rules provides that every occupie r of healthcare facility (railway 
hospital) should establish a system to review and m onitor the activities related to 
bio-medical waste management, either through an exi sting committee or by forming a 
new committee.  Such committee shall meet once in e very six months and the record 
of the minutes of the meetings shall be submitted a long with the annual report to the 
SPCB.   
The effectiveness of the prescribed review and monitoring mechanism was assessed by 
audit in respect of selected railway hospitals and following was observed: - 
i. Review and monitoring committee was not established in 52 hospitals.   
ii. Six monthly meetings were held only in 11 out of 20  hospitals where such 
committee was established.      (Details indicated in Annexure 5.9) 
Thus, it is evident that the statutory provisions, for proper monitoring of the process of 
handling bio-medical waste was not effectively comp lied with. Resultant adverse 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 43 
implication on the quality of segregation, collection, treatment, storage and disposal of 
bio-medical waste can not be ruled out.    
MoR in reply (May 2022) admitting deficiency pointed out by audit stated that Railway 
Hospitals have initiated to establish a system to r eview and monitor the bio-medical 
waste management. 
5.12 Conclusion 
Railways have one of the largest medical care facilities across the country that generates 
large bio medical waste every day.  Several deficie ncies were noticed in the processes 
related to collection, segregation, transportation,  storage and disposal of bio medical 
waste.  
Requisite authorizations from the SPCBs in complian ce to the BMW Rules were not 
obtained and there were delays/ discontinuance in o btaining mandatory renewal of 
authorization.   
Requisite infrastructure for handling bio medical w aste did not exist and there was 
deficiency in the process of collection of bio medical waste in hospitals test checked in 
audit.  Segregation and pre-treatment of the liquid  chemical waste generated was not 
carried out in compliance to the BMW Rules.  Bio me dical waste was found to have 
been stored beyond the prescribed limit of 48 hours.  
Audit found significant shortcomings
66 in transportation of bio medical waste. 
Importantly to ensure requisite monitoring and over  sight of the BMW Rules, 
committees, which were required to be formed, were not in existence in some of the 
facilities and prescribed annual reports were not submitted to SPCBs in any of the years 
during 2015 to 2020.  
Mandatory health checkup, immunizations and trainin g to the health care workers 
including out sourcing staff engaged was inadequate.  
Summary of Audit findings 
• Railway Hospitals were functioning without requisite authorizations from the 
SPCBs and delays/ discontinuities in obtaining mand atory renewal of 
authorization was observed in some other hospitals,  which was in violation 
of BMW Rules. 
• Railway Hospitals failed to comply with requisite provisions in BMW Rules 
for treatment of the bio-medical /liquid chemical waste generated as also for 
storage and transportation of such waste. 
• Committees required to be formed to ensure requisit e monitoring under 
BMW Rules did not exist.   
                                                 
66  Mandatory labeling, bar coding and provisioning o f GPS facilities in vehicles used for transportation 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
44 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
5.13 Recommendation 
IR needs to ensure effective compliance with Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules 
for handling, collection, pre-treatment, segregatio n, storage and disposal of 
biomedical waste and strengthen monitoring mechanism. 
  

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 45 
 
 
  
Audit objective 5 
Whether assessment, management and disposal of E-Wa ste generated in railway 
establishments as per applicable rules 
Indian Railways is one of the major producer of E-Waste on account of computerization 
of the related IT infrastructure at passenger reser vation centers, EDP centers, 
unreserved ticketing systems, offices as also exten sive IT infrastructure used for 
signaling and telecom services.  These discarded it ems including computers/laptops, 
e-monitors, T.V. sets, electronic equipment; servers etc. are defined as electronic waste 
or E-Waste.  It is therefore imperative that the E- Waste is properly identified, 
segregated, stored and disposed of in a manner, which is not hazardous to human health 
and is in harmony with the environment. 
Central Government had notified E-Waste (Management) Rules, 2016 that superseded 
the E-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011.  These rules aim to enable the 
recovery and/or reuse of useful materials from E-Waste, thereby reducing the hazardous 
wastes that destined for disposal and to ensure env ironmentally sound management of 
all types of waste of electrical and electronic equipment.   
Scrutiny of the records in selected 86 units (EDP/PRS/UTS/GSD) revealed deficiencies 
such as storage of E-Waste beyond permissible limit s, non-submission of prescribed 
information to SPCB and these are covered in succeeding paragraphs.  
6.1  Absence of consolidated instructions and train ing for handling of 
E-Waste 
The rules regarding E-Waste were issued in October 2016. E-Waste Rules has, 
however, distinct procedure for handling and storage of E-Waste.  Audit observed that 
procedure of condemnation as prescribed for the oth er office items such as furniture 
etc. were followed in respect of E-Waste.  Further,  no specific training module was 
devised/ implemented for impressing upon awareness for effective storage and disposal 
of E-Waste in any of the Zones. Hence, the mechanis m for storage and disposal of 
E-Waste was weak and inadequate. 
6.2  Submission of stipulated Form 3 to SPCB  
SPCB had prescribed recording quantity of E-Waste g enerated per year in metric ton 
(MT) and the required information to be furnished to SPCB in Form 2.  Based on Form 
2 records, a consolidated data comprising of quanti ty of E-Waste generated, recycled 
and sold during the year to the dismantler was requ ired to be sent to the SPCB in the 
prescribed form 3.  The status of compliance with S PCB’s directives and findings are 
indicated in Table 6.1. 
Management of E-Waste  
Chapter 6 

Waste Management in Indian Railways 
46 Report No. 16 of 2022 
 
Table 6.1: Status of compliance of SPCB’s directives 
Particulars Status of compliance of SPCB’s 
directives 
EDP 
Centres  
PRS/UTS 
Centres  
Scrap Depots 
(GSD)   
Information in respect of generation of 
category wise E-Waste not recorded in the 
prescribed F orm 2  specified in the 
E-Waste rules 
46 (53) 16 (16) 16 (17) 
Consolidated data on quantity of E-Waste 
generated, recycled and sold during the 
year to the dismantler and details sent to 
SPCB in the prescribed Form 3. 
Since the details were not recorded in 
Form 2, the information for Form 3 
hence could not be assessed. 
Figures in bracket represent total units checked. 
The information in prescribed Form 2 & 3 was meant for monitoring the quantum of 
E-Waste generated and disposed.  In absence of the requisite information that was 
required to be recorded in Form 2 and Form 3, neith er the actual quantum of E-Waste 
generated was assessed nor the same was monitored.       (Annexure 6.1 and 6.2) 
6.3  Storage of the E-Waste beyond permissible limi t 
The E-Waste rules prescribed a period of 180 days f or its storage.  Approval of SPCB 
was required for storage beyond 180 days (up to max imum of 365 days).  Scrutiny of 
records67 revealed huge quantities of E-Waste awaiting disposal for periods beyond 180 
days as indicated below:- 
1. In 12 Zones E-Waste was stored beyond permissible 1 80 days and records made 
available did not indicate if SPCB’s approval was s ought for storage beyond the 
prescribed period of 180 days.   
2. The quantity of E-Waste stored beyond 180 days with out seeking permission 
ranged between 0.034 MT to 30.5 MT during the period from 2015 to 2020.  
6.4 Conclusion 
IR lacked mechanism for dealing with the E-Waste in  compliance to the Rules.  
Training programmes for creating awareness for hand ling of E-Waste were not 
conducted.  Important aspect pertaining to maintena nce of records, submission of 
stipulated forms to the SPCBs as also seeking appro val of SPCB for storing E-Waste 
beyond 180 days were not taken care of. 
 
                                                 
67  condemnation reports, sale and auction registers kept at the scrap depots and the divisional stores 

Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022 47 
Summary of Audit findings  
Railway Board did not initiate measures to conduct training programmes to 
sensitize the officials for handling E-Waste in conformity with E-Waste 
Management Rules.   
6.5 Recommendation 
IR needs to initiate measures for creating awareness on the issue of handling 
E-Waste besides devising monitoring mechanism for ensuring effective compliance 
with E-Waste Management Rules. 
 
 
 
New Delhi                         (SUNIL DADHE) 
Dated:                        Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
New Delhi                             (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Dated:                                 Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
 
 
 
 

 Annexures 

 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  49  
 
Annexure-1.1 
(Referred in Para 1.1) 
Organisational Hierarchy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    Railway Board level Zonal Railway level Divisional Level  
Executive Director (EnHM)/Mech. 
Engg.  
Dy. Chief Environment & Housekeeping Manager 
Asst. Engineer/Mech. Engg. (EnHM) 
Sr. Divisional Mechanical engineer 
Divisional Railway Manager 
Executive Engineer/EnHM 
Executive Director (EnHM)/Civil Engg.  
Principal Chief Mech. Engineer 
Environment & House Keeping Manager 
Chief Environment & Housekeeping Manager 
General Manager 
Principal Executive Director (EnHM) 
Additional Member/Mechanical Engineering 
Member, Rolling Stock and Traction 
Chairman & Chief Executive Officer, Railway Board 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
50  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-1.2 
(Para 1.3) 
Instructions issued by Railway Board on matters related to Waste Management 
S. 
No.  
Railway Board’s Letter 
Number& Date  
Subject  
1 
 
2015/O&M/6/1 dated 
07.04.2015 
Formation of Environment & Housekeeping Management 
Directorate 
2 2015/EnHM/06/02 dated 
28.08.2015, 
Policy on Scope and Formation of Environment & 
Housekeeping Management (EnHM) wings in Zonal Rlys. 
3 2018/EnHM/01/02 dated 
05.12.2018 
Minutes of meeting held through V.C. on 27.11.2018 regarding 
judgement of NGT on 01.10.2018 in OA Number141/2014 
4 06/TG-IV/10/Sanitation 
Policy dated 04.01.2007 
Guidelines for sanitation/cleanliness of railway stations 
5 2018/EnHM (CE)/01/02 
dated 17.04.2019 
Implementation of directions of Hon’ble NGT order d ated 
26.03.2019 in OA Number141/2014 
6 2018/EnHM/01/02 dated 
13.05.2019 
Implementation of directions of Hon’ble NGT 
7 2015/Environ/01/03 dated 
30.04.2015 
Case on Environment pollution before NGT at New Del hi in 
the matter of Saloni Singh Vs UoI & Ors. 
8 2015/EnHM/08/01 (Pt.1) 
dated 28.07.2016 
“Swachh Rail, Swachh Bharat Mission”- Actionable Points for 
improvement of cleanliness in station premises 
9 2016/EnHM/06/10 dated 
05.09.2016 
Provision of separate dustbins for biodegradable (wet) and non-
biodegradable (dry) waste at major railway stations 
10  2015/EnHM/06/06 dated 
03.02.2016 
Guidelines for execution of identified railway work s through 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) of Corporates  and 
PSUs 
11  97/TG-III/613/1 Pt. dated 
02.06.1999 
Disposal of Garbage 
12  2009/TG-III/600/25 dated 
13.09.2011 
Disposal of Waste (Catering Waste Management System) 
13  2011/TG-III/600/45 dated 
02.11.2016 
Provision of separate dustbins for biodegradable (wet) and non-
biodegradable (dry) waste at major railway stations 
14  2006/M I/165/9 dated 
17.02.2016 
Revised guidelines for On Board Housekeeping Servic es 
(OBHS) Scheme 
15  2015/Environ/01/01 dated 
17.10.2016 
Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
IR identified have been as a ‘Waste generator’ 
16  2016/EnHM/06/16 dated 
09.12.2016 
Minutes of Meeting held at Railway Board on 25.11.2 016 for 
review of performance on Housekeeping of Stations a nd 
Trains. 
17  2019/EnHM/11/01 dated 
19.08.2019 
Plastic Waste Management 
18  2019/EnHM/11/01 dated 
12.09.2019 
Plastic Waste Management 
19  2018/TG-
IV/18/Misc./2/PBCM 
dated 27.09.2019 
Plastic Bottle Crushing Machines (PBCMs) 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  51  
 
S. 
No.  
Railway Board’s Letter 
Number& Date  
Subject  
20  2015/E&HM/03/02 dated 
11.06.2015 
Environmental accreditation 
21  2015/EnHM/12/02 dated 
01.02.2017 
Policy inititiative for seeking Green Ratings of IR  
Establishments. 
22  99/LMB/9/25 dated 
22.12.1999 
Water Recycling Plant 
23  2006/LMB/09/01 dated 
19.07.2006 & 04.08.2006 
Water Recycling Plant (WRP) 
24  2015/LM(PA)/08/08/WRP 
dated 04.03.2015 
Setting up of Water Recycling Plant at Major Consum ption 
Centres 
25  2001/M I/141/1 Vol. I 
dated 20.04.2010  
Automatic “drive-through” coach washing plants on B .O.O. 
Model 
26  2001/M I/141/1 Vol. I 
dated 27.10.2017 
Provision of Automatic Coach Washing Plant with rec ycling 
facility 
27  2016/EnHM/13/02 dated 
13.05.2016 
Provision for Environment related works in the Esti mates for 
Works 
28  2016/EnHM/13/02 dated 
12.03.2020 
Monitoring of execution of Environment related works (ERW) 
on Zonal Railways 
 
 
Act, Rules and Regulations/Orders concerning subject (Para 1.3) 
• Section 6, 8 and 25 of the Environment Protection A ct 1986; Rule 14 of the 
Environment Protection Rules 1986;  
• The Water Prevention and Control of Pollution Act, 1974;  
• The Solid Wastes Management Rules, 2016 ;  
• Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 ;  
• The Hazardous and other Wastes Management and Transboundary Movement Rules, 
2016;  
• The Batteries Management and Handling Rules, 2001;  
• The Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016;  
• The E-Waste Management Rules, 2016 ; 
• The National Green Tribunal (NGT) Orders dated 18.0 3.2015, 01.10.2018, 
22.01.2019, 26.03.2019, 04.12.2019 & 18.08.2020 in O.A .Number141 of 2014 ;  
• Directions/recommendations issued by Public Accounts Committee (PAC) from time 
to time specific to the Report Number 83 of 2008-09, 21 of 2009-10, 3 of 2014-15 & 
38 of 2015-16. 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
52  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-1.3    
Basis of selection of sample for Audit study  
(Para 1.5 -Sample selection) 
 
 
 
  
S.No. Description Basis for selection 
1 Stations  
Category A1 
Total selection to be 3 in each Zonal Railway (except SER & 
SECR, where only 2 A1 category stations are availab le). In 
case of SECR, the 2 A1 category stations were selec ted and 
in case of SER, one number A1 category station i.e.  
Kharagpur was selected. 
1(a) Stations -- 
Category A & B 
10 % of total units in these categories, subject to  Minimum 
2 and Maximum  4 to be selected randomly 
2 Major Coaching 
Depots 
i)  50% of units in the category if less than 3, units to be 
selected randomly = 1 
 
ii)  50% of units in the category if between 3 and 5, un its to 
be selected randomly= 2 
iii)  50% of units in the category if above 6, units to b e 
selected randomly = 3 
(In each PU, 25 % of manufacturing shops subject to  
minimum 5 shops to be selected randomly) 
3 Workshop 
(Mechanical) 
4 Workshop (S&T) 
5 Workshop 
(Engineering) 
6 Sheds 
7 EMU/MEMU/D
EMU/Car Sheds 
8 Productions 
Units (PUs) 
9 Central 
Hospitals/ Super 
speciality 
Hospitals/ 
Production Units 
Hospitals 
One hospital in each category 
10 Divisional 
Hospitals 
 
Sub-divisional 
Hospitals 
For each category 
i)  One, where Number of hospitals is less than 04, to be 
selected randomly 
ii)  Two, where Number of hospitals is equal to  or more than 
04, to be selected randomly 
11 Workshop 
Hospitals 
One hospital in each Zone, if available 
12 Locations for 
E-Waste 
Macro study- EDP centres of Zonal Headquarters/PUs&  02 
Divisions to be selected randomly. 
Micro study-01 Divisional Scrap Depot out of any of  the 
Divisions selected for Macro study and 01 station f rom the 
list of 37 identified stations in the Railway Board ’s Action 
Plan. 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  53  
 
Annexure-1.4 
(Para 1.5 – Sample selection) 
Sample selection – Stations and Coaching Depots  
Zonal 
Railway  
A1 Category 
sstations  
A & B category 
stations  
C- category 
stations  
Major coaching 
yards  
CR Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus 
(CSMT) 
Panvel   Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
Pune Bhusawal     
  Wadi                        
Nasik Road Igatpuri     
ER Howrah Bandel   Tikiapara  
Sealdah Bardhaman     
Bhagalpur       
ECR Dhanbad jn. Sonepur   Rajendra Nagar 
Terminal 
 Hajipur   Danapur 
Muzaffarpur Danapur     
Patna Rajendra Nagar 
Terminus 
    
ECoR Vishakhapatnam Vizianagaram   Bhubaneswar  
Bhubaneswar Cuttack   Puri 
Puri       
NR New Delhi Jalandhar 
Cantonment 
  Amritsar  
Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra 
Rae Bareli    Varanasi 
Varanasi Barabanki   Hazrat Nizamuddin 
  Rajpura Jn.   Delhi S Rohilla 
  Rohtak Jn.     
  Panipat      
  Moradabad      
NCR Prayagraj Agra Fort   Prayagraj 
Jhansi Prayagraj Chheoki       
Agra       
NER Lucknow Manduadih   Gorakhpur 
Gorakhpur Kathgodam   Lucknow 
Chhapra Bareilly City   Kathgodam 
  Haldwani     
NFR Guwahati New Coochbehar   Dibrugarh 
  Dimapur     
Katihar Hojai     
New Jalpaiguri New Bongaigaon     
SER Kharagpur Ranchi   Santragachi 
  Digha   Hatia 
  Shalimar     
NWR Ajmer Bikaner    Jodhpur 
  Lalgarh   Bikaner 
Jaipur Gandhinagar Jaipur     
Jodhpur Rai-Ka-Bagh     

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
54  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway  
A1 Category 
sstations  
A & B category 
stations  
C- category 
stations  
Major coaching 
yards  
SWR Mysore Hubballi   Bengaluru 
Bangaluru Krishnarajapuram     
Yashwantpur Yelahanka     
  Pandavapura     
SR PuratchiThalaivar 
Dr M.G.R Central 
Railway station 
Tiruchchirappalli Jn.   Basin Bridge  
Coimbatore Jn. Palakkad Jn.   Mangalore  
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central 
Ottapalam    Thiruvananthapuram 
 
  Melmaruvathur      
SCR Secunderabad Nellore    Secunderabad 
Kacheguda Bhimavaram   Vijayawada 
Vijayawada Khammam     
  Ramagundam     
SECR Bilaspur Raigarh   Bilaspur 
Raipur Durg     
  Gondia     
WCR Jabalpur Sawai Madhopur   Jabalpur 
Bhopal Katni     
Kota Pipariya     
  Hoshangabad     
WR Mumbai Central Valsad   Bandra Terminus 
Vadodara Bharuch   Ahmedabad 
Bandra Terminus Billimora    Indore 
  Dahod     
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
    Dum Dum   
    Esplanade   
    Rabindra Sadan   
    Kalighat   
    Mahanayak 
Uttam Kumar 
  
Total 45 59 5 30 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  55  
 
Annexure-1.5 
(Para 1.5- Sample selection - Workshop, Sheds and Production Units)  
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Workshops Sheds selected Production 
Units 
selected 
Mechanical 
workshops 
S&T 
Workshop 
Engg. 
Workshop 
Diesel Loco 
Shed 
Electric 
loco shed 
EMU/DMU 
Car Shed 
CR Matunga  Byculla Manmad Kalyan Ajni Kurla    
Bhusawal             
ER  Liluah  Howrah  Mughalsarai  Howrah Howrah Bandel   
          Howrah   
ECR Samastipur     Samastipur  Gomoh Sonpur Rail Wheel 
Pant, BELA 
ECoR  
Mancheswar 
    Waltair Angul Khurda 
Road   
  
NR  Kalka Ghaziabad Jalandhar 
Cantonment  
Ludhiana Lucknow  Jalandhar 
City 
  
  Lucknow     Tuglakabad  Khanalam 
pura 
Carshed/G 
haziabad 
Modern 
Coach 
Factory, 
Raebareli  
            Rail Coach 
Factory, 
Kapurthala  
            DMW/ 
Patiala 
NCR  Jhansi   CPOH/SFG 
/Prayagraj  
Jhansi 
(JHS) 
Kanpur      
NER Gorakhpur   Bridge 
Workshop, 
Gorakhpur  
Izzatnagar Gonda Aunrihar   
Gorakhpur             
NFR New 
Bongaigaon 
  Bongaigaon  Siliguri   Siliguri   
      Sini 
Workshop 
Kharagpur Santragachi  Tikiapara   
Kharagpur  Kharagpur            
NWR  Ajmer Ajmer   Bhagat ki 
Kothi 
   Merta 
Road 
  
Jodhpur             
SWR Hubballi     Krishnaraja 
puram 
  Bangalore 
Cantonment  
Rail Wheel 
Factory, 
Yelahanka 
SR Perambur   Podanur  Arakkonam  Erode  Arakkonam  Tambaram Integral 
Coach 
Factory, 
Perambur 
      Kazipet       
SCR  Lallaguda Mettuguda Lallaguda Vijayawada Kazip et  Moula Ali   
 Guntupalli       Vijayawada      
SECR Raipur      Raipur Bhilai Bhilai   
WCR  Bhopal     New katni Jn.  New Katni 
Jn. 
    

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
56  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Workshops Sheds selected Production 
Units 
selected 
Mechanical 
workshops 
S&T 
Workshop 
Engg. 
Workshop 
Diesel Loco 
Shed 
Electric 
loco shed 
EMU/DMU 
Car Shed 
WR Lower Parel Sabarmati Sabarmati Vatva Vadodara Mumbai 
Central 
  
Dahod         Dahod   
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
Kolkata 
Noapara         Noapara Banaras 
Locomotive 
Works 
          Kabi Subhas  Chittaranjan 
Locomotive 
Works  
Total 23 8 10 18 15 19 8 
 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  57  
 
Annexure-1.6 (Para 1.5)  
 
Sample selection - Central and Divisional Hospitals 
 
 
 
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Hospitals selected 
Central Hospital Divisional 
Hospital 
Sub-Divisional 
Hospital 
Workshop 
Hospital 
CR 
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Hospital, Byculla, 
Mumbai 
Kalyan Igatpuri   
  Nagpur Kuruduwadi   
ER B. R. Singh Railway Hospital, Kolkata Howrah. Andal . Liluah  
  Danapur Gaya   
ECR Central Super Specialty Hospital, Patna Sonpur     
ECoR Central Hospital, Bhubaneswar  Waltair     
NR 
Super Specialty Hospital, Lucknow Moradabad Anand Vihar 
Terminal  
Jagdhari 
Central Hospital, E&PI, New Delhi Ambala Cant Amritsar   
Production Unit Hospital, MCF, Raebareli       
NCR Central Hospital, Prayagraj  Agra  Kanpur    
NER LNM hospital, Gorakhpur Varanasi Gonda Gorakhpur 
NFR 
Central Hospital, Maligaon Dibrugarh 
Town 
New 
Jalpaiguri 
  
  Katihar  Rangiya   
SER Central Hospital, Garden reach Kharagpur Bhilai   
  Adra Tatanagar   
NWR Central Hospital, Jaipur  Bikaner Bandikui    
    Abu Road   
SWR Central Hospital, Hubballi Mysuru     
Railway Hospital, Yelahanka       
SR Railway Hospital Perambur  Golden rock Villupuram   
Railway Hospital ICF, Peerambur Arakonam Podanur   
SCR Central Hospital/Lallaguda) Vijayawada   Rayanapadu   
  Nanded Purna   
SECR Central Hospital (Bilaspur) Raipur     
WCR 
Central Hospital, Jabalpur Kota  New Katni 
Jn.  
  
   Gangapur City   
WR Jagjivan Ram Hospital, Mumbai Central Ratlam  Valsa d Dahod 
  Rajkot     
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
Tapan Sinha Memorial Hospital, Tollygunge       
Central Hospital, BLW, Varanasi       
Kasturba Gandhi Hospital, CLW/  Chittaranjan        
Total 23 24 21 4 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
58  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Anexure-1.7 (Para 1.5) 
Statement showing selection of EDP Centres and scrap Depots 
Zonal 
Railway Zonal EDP centre Divisional EDP 
Centre 
Divisional Scrap 
Depots 
Station 
(PRS/UTS) 
CR EDP centre HQ Mumbai, Pune 
Mumbai Divn- 
SMM(G) Curry Road 
Depot, Mumbai 
Pune 
ER Zonal HQ, Howrah Howrah, 
Sealdah Belur Scrap Yard Howrah 
ECR Zonal HQ, Hajipur Danapur Scrap depot, Sonpur 
at Garhara  
Rajendra Nagar 
Terminal  Sonpur 
ECoR Bhubaneswar Sambalpur Scrap Depot, 
Mancheswar Vishakhapatnam 
Khurda Road 
NR 
HQ (Store section) 
New Delhi Moradabad  GSD/Shakurbasti 
(store Section) New Delhi 
DMW/Patiala Lucknow 
NCR EDP 
Centre/HQ/Prayagraj 
 
Jhansi Jhansi Agra Cantt. Agra 
NER EDP centre, 
Gorakhpur Lucknow Gorakhpur Manduadih 
NFR IT Centre/HQ/ 
Maligaon 
Lumding Pandu Katihar 
Alipurduar 
NWR EDP centre- Jaipur 
(HQ) Bikaner, Jaipur Bikaner Ajmer 
RPU & 
Metro Rl.y 
EDP Centre/ Metro, 
Kolkata, BLW-
Banaras, CLW-
Chittaranjan 
  Scrap depot, Noapara -- 
SR EDP centre, Chennai Chennai  GSD, Perambur Chennai Central EDP centre, ICF Palakkad 
SCR HQrs Secundrabad Lallaguda Secunderabad Vijaywada 
SER Zonal Hqrs/ Garden 
Reach 
Ranchi Kharagpur Ranchi Kharagpur 
SECR Bilaspur Raipur GSD- Raipur Bilaspur Nagpur 
SWR 
EDP 
Centre/Hubballi Hubballi Hubballi Mysuru 
EDP Centre/RWF Mysuru 
WR Churchgate, Mumbai  Mumbai Central Mahalaxmi Mumbai Central Ahmedabad 
WCR Jabalpur Jabalpur Divn. Scrap Depot 
Jabalpur Jabalpur Kota 
Total 22 31 17 16 
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  59  
 
Annexure-2.1 (Para 2.2) 
Statement showing the details of Zone, Division and  Station in which Accountable Entity was not 
established at various levels and Meetings/Joint Inspections not found to have been conducted. 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
Zone 
Accountable entities have not been 
established at each level 
Meeting/Joint Inspections not conducted 
in the year 2019-20 
Zone Division Station Zone Division Station 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 CR - (01) 
Solapur 
(04) 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune, Wadi, 
- (02) 
Pune, 
Solapur 
(04) 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune, Wadi, 
2 ER 01 (03) 
Howrah, 
Sealdah, 
Malda 
(05) 
Howrah, 
Bardhaman, 
Bandel 
Sealdah 
Bhagalpur 
01 (03) 
Howrah, 
Sealdah, 
Malda 
(05) 
Howrah, 
Bardhaman 
Bandel, Sealdah, 
Bhagalpur 
3 ECOR - - - - - (01) 
Puri 
4 NR - (03) 
Moradabad, 
Delhi & 
Ambala 
(05) 
New Delhi, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Rajpura Jn. & 
Moradabad 
 
01 (04) 
Moradabad, 
Delhi, 
Ferozpur & 
Ambala  
(10) 
Varanasi, 
Raibareli, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cant & 
Rajpura Jn. 
5 NCR - - - 01 (03) 
Prayagraj, 
Agra, 
Jhansi 
(05) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj, 
Prayagraj Chheoki, 
Agra Cantt., Agra 
Fort 
6 NER - - (07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani 
Bareilly City 
- - (07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani 
Bareilly City 
7 NEFR - (03) 
Lumding, 
Rangiya & 
Katihar 
(06) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon , New 
Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 
01 (03) 
Lumding, 
Rangiya & 
Katihar 
(07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Coochbehar, New 
Bongaigaon , New 
Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
60  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
Zone 
Accountable entities have not been 
established at each level 
Meeting/Joint Inspections not conducted 
in the year 2019-20 
Zone Division Station Zone Division Station 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
8 NWR - - - - - (03) 
Gandhi Nagar 
Jaipur, Jodhpur, 
Rai Ka Bagh 
9 SR - - - - - (02) 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn. & 
Melmaruvattur, 
 
10 SER - - - - - (02) 
Ranchi & Shalimar 
11 SECR - (02) 
Bilaspur, 
Raipur 
(04) 
Bilaspur, 
Raigarh,  Durg, 
Gondia 
- (02) 
Bilaspur 
Raipur 
(05) 
Bilaspur, 
Raigarh, Raipur, 
Durg, Gondia 
12 SWR 01 (02) 
Bengaluru, 
Hubballi 
 
(04) 
Hubbali, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka 
01 (02) 
Bengaluru, 
Hubballi 
(04) 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka 
Hubballi 
13 WR - (03) 
Mumbai 
Central, 
Vadodara, 
Ratlam 
(07) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus 
Vadodara, Bharuch,  
Valsad, Bilimora Jn,  
Dahod 
01 (03) 
Mumbai 
Central, 
Vadodara, 
Ratlam 
(07) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus 
Vadodara, Bharuch,  
Valsad, Bilimora Jn,  
Dahod 
14 WCR - - -  (01) 
Jabalpur 
(04) 
Hoshangabad, 
Jabalpur, Katni & 
Pipariya 
15 Metro/ 
Kolkata 
- - - 01 - (05) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra Sadan, 
Kalighat, 
Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar 
 Total 02 
zones  
17 
divisions 
42  
stations 
07 
zones  
23 
divisions 
71  
Stations 
Source: Records of selected stations and respective Divisions/Zones 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  61  
 
Annexure-2.2 
(Referred in Para 2.3) 
Statement showing the details of stations and Coach ing Depot in which quantity of waste was not 
assessed and non-segregation of generated waste as Biodegradable & Non-biodegradable 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
Assessment of 
quantity of waste 
generated not done 
at all (Stations/  
Coaching depot)) 
Assessment 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Segregation of Bio-
degradable & non-
biodegradable waste 
not done 
Segregation 
of Bio-
degradable 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Cleaning /Rag 
picking 
contract are 
discontinued  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 CR (04) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Wadi,  
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
- (05) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Pune, 
Panvel & Wadi, 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
- (03) 
Igatpuri  
(07 month) 
Nasik Road 
(03 months) 
Bhusaval  
(12 month) 
 
2 ER (01) 
Bardhaman,  
 
- (05) 
Howrah, Bardhaman, 
Bandel, 
Sealdah, Bhagalpur 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Tikiapara 
- (02) 
Bardhman  
(6 month), 
Bhagalpur  
(2 month) 
3 ECR  
- 
(02) 
Sonpur 
(19-20), 
Muzaffarp 
ur (19-20) 
 
- 
(05) 
Sonpur  
(19-20), 
Muzaffarpur 
(2019-20), 
Hajipur 
(2017-20), 
Patna 
(2018-20) & 
Rajendranag 
ar  Terminal 
(2018-20) 
(01) 
Sonpur  
(3 month) 
4 ECoR - - (05) 
Vishakhapatnam, 
Vizianagram, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Cuttack & Puri 
(02) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
Puri & 
Bhubaneswar) 
- (01) 
Puri  
(2 month) 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
62  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
Assessment of 
quantity of waste 
generated not done 
at all (Stations/  
Coaching depot)) 
Assessment 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Segregation of Bio-
degradable & non-
biodegradable waste 
not done 
Segregation 
of Bio-
degradable 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Cleaning /Rag 
picking 
contract are 
discontinued  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
5 NR (07) 
New Delhi, 
Raibareli, 
Barabanki, Panipat, 
Rohtak, Shri Mata 
Vaishno Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cantt)  
(03) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi 
Sarai Rohilla & 
Amritsar) 
(02) 
  
Rajpura 
(19-20),  
Varanasi 
(19-20) 
 
(08) 
New Delhi, 
Raibareli, Barabanki, 
Varanasi, 
Panipat, Rohtak, 
Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cantt 
(03) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi 
Sarai Rohilla & 
Amritsar) 
(01) 
Rajpura 
(19-20) 
 
(06) 
(Rae Bareli Jn 
(4 month) 
Barabanki 
(8 month) 
Panipat 
(2 month), 
Rohtak 
(4 month), 
Rajpura 
(5 month), 
Jalandhar Cantt 
(2 month) 
6 NCR (04) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj 
Chheoki, Agra 
Cantt., Agra Fort  
(01) 
 (Coaching 
Depot//Prayagraj) 
- (04) 
, Jhansi, Prayagraj 
Chheoki, Agra Cantt., 
Agra Fort  
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot//Prayagraj) 
(01) 
Prayagraj 
(done in 
2019-20 
only) 
(01) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki  
(15 month.) 
7 NER (01) 
Bareilly City 
(03) 
(Coaching 
Depot//Gorakhpur, 
Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam) 
- (01) 
Manduadih,  
(03) 
(Coaching 
Depot//Gorakhpur, 
Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam) 
- (02) 
Haldwani  
(6 month) & 
Bareilly City 
stn. (2 month) 
8 NEFR (05) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
New Coochbehar, 
New Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar  
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dibrugarh) 
(02) 
Guwahati 
(2018-19 
& 2019-
20) only) 
New 
Bogaigaon 
(2018-19 
& 
2019-20) 
(05) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
New Coochbehar, 
New Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dibrugarh) 
(02) 
Guwahati 
(2018-19 
& 
2019-20) 
only) 
New 
Bogaigaon 
(2018-19 
& 
2019-20) 
(01) 
Guwahati  
(4 month) 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  63  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
Assessment of 
quantity of waste 
generated not done 
at all (Stations/  
Coaching depot)) 
Assessment 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Segregation of Bio-
degradable & non-
biodegradable waste 
not done 
Segregation 
of Bio-
degradable 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Cleaning /Rag 
picking 
contract are 
discontinued  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
9 NWR (03) 
Bikaner, Lalgarh,  
Rai Ka Bagh 
 
(01) 
Coaching Depot/, 
Bikaner  
(03) 
Jaipur 
(19-20) 
Ajmer 
(19-20), 
Gandhi 
Nagar Jaipur 
(19-20) 
 
(03) 
Bikaner, Lalgarh & 
Rai Ka Bagh, 
 
(02) 
(Coaching 
Depot//Bikaner & 
Jodhpur) 
(04) 
Ajmer 
(19-20), 
Jaipur 
(2019-20) 
Gandhi 
Nagar 
Jaipur 
Jodhpur 
(19-20) 
(02) 
Jodhpur  
(1 month) 
Gandhi Nagar 
Jaipur  
(1 month) 
10 SR - - -  (01) 
Coaching  
Depot//Thiru 
vananthapur 
am  
(2019-20) 
(01) 
Coimbatore 
(4 month),  
11 SCR (02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Vijaywada & 
Secunderabad) 
- (01) 
Bhimavaram 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Vijaywada) 
- (02) 
Nellore  
(9 month) 
Bhimavaram 
(20 month) 
12 SER (02) 
Kharagpur, Shalimar 
 
(01)  
(Coaching 
Depot/Santragachi) 
 
(01) 
Digha 
(done in 
19-20 only) 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Hatia (2017 
to 2020) 
(02) 
Kharagpur & Shalimar 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Santagachi 
 
(01) 
Digha 
(done in 
19-20 
only) 
 
- 
13 SECR (01) 
 Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Bilaspur) 
(01) 
Durg 
(15-16 & 
18-19 
only) 
(03) 
Raigarh, Gondia, Durg 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Bilaspur) 
(01) 
Raipur 
(19-20 
only) 
- 
14 SWR (04) 
Yelahanka, Mysuru, 
Pandavpura & 
Hubbali 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
KSR Bengaluru) 
- (07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura, Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
KSR Bengaluru) 
- - 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
64  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
Assessment of 
quantity of waste 
generated not done 
at all (Stations/  
Coaching depot)) 
Assessment 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Segregation of Bio-
degradable & non-
biodegradable waste 
not done 
Segregation 
of Bio-
degradable 
done in 
some of the 
years 
Cleaning /Rag 
picking 
contract are 
discontinued  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
15 WR (03) 
Mumbai Central 
Valsad & Dahod,  
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
 Bandra Terminus, 
Ahmedabad & 
Indore) 
(04) 
Bandra 
Terminus 
(19-20), 
Bilimora 
jn (19-20), 
Vadodara 
(18-20 
only) & 
Bharuch 
(17-20) 
(05) 
Valsad, Dahod, 
Mumbai Central, 
Vadodara & 
Bilimora Jn   
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bandra Terminus, 
Ahmedabad & 
Indore) 
(02) 
Bharuch 
(19-20) 
Bandra 
Terminus 
(19-20) 
- 
16 WCR (02) 
Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad,  
(02) 
Kota 
(19-20) 
Sawaimad 
hopur 
(19-20) 
(06) 
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad,  
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Jabalpur) 
- (01) 
Hoshangabad 
(20 month) 
17 RPU & 
Metro 
Rly. 
- (01) 
Dum Dum 
(19-20) 
-  - 
Total  37 stations/ 18 
coaching depots 
18 
stations/ 
01 
coaching 
depots 
60 stations/ 22 
coaching depots 
17 
stations/ 
01 
coaching 
depots 
23 stations 
Source: Records of selected stations/coaching depots of respective Divisions/Zones  
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  65  
 
Annexure-2.3  
 (Para 2.4 - Verifiable indicators) 
   
Achievement of  ISO 14001 
(Progress) 
Pairs of Dustbins required and 
provided for segregated 
collection of solid waste (Pairs) 
Rag picking contract status 
(for approaches to station) 
(Yes/No) 
Water Audit (Progress) Transportation of segregated  
waste (Yes/No) 
Authorities nominated to 
penalize the persons involved 
in littering on platforms, 
circulating area and in trains 
(Nos.) 
Energy Audit (Progress) No. of plastic bottle crushing 
machines planned and provided  
No. of Encroachment along 
the Track which are creating 
nuisance 
Website/Webpage of the 
Railway station to receive 
public grievances and 
suggestions 
Teams formed to prevent open 
defecation on Track (Nos.) 
No. of location requiring 
boundary wall to prevent 
unauthorised dumping on 
Railway land (Nos.)  
Scope of Recycling of 
water / effluent/ sewerage  
(in KLD) 
Composting Plant at Railway 
station (Nos. & capacity) 
Nos. of toilets installed to 
prevent open defecation on 
Railway tracks. (Nos.) 
Effluent/ Water/ Sewerage 
Recycling Plant Planned 
(with TDC  & capacity in 
KLD) 
Material Recovery Facility (Area 
in Sqm) 
Nos. of toilets provided in 
circulating area. (Nos.) 
Status of cleaning contract 
(Yes/No) 
Coordination with ULB to 
prevent unauthorised dumping, 
open defecation & 
encroachments (Nos of meetings 
held) 
No. of locations for posters 
on public awareness 
campaigns (Nos.) 
Nos. of garbage bins 
installed to prevent 
unauthorised dumping 
(Nos.) 
CCTV cameras for monitoring 
for cleanliness (Nos.) 
Locations of illegal dumping 
on Railway premises (Nos.) 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
66  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-2.4 
 (Referred in Para 2.4) 
Statement showing the details of Stations where CTE/CFO was neither applied nor 
obtained as of 31 st  July 2021 
Sl. 
No. 
Zonal 
Railway 
CTE not applied  CTE applied but 
not obtained 
CFO Not 
obtained 
CFO obtained without 
obtaining CTE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 CR - 
 
(01) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus  
(01) 
Panvel 
 (01) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus* 
2 ER (05) 
Howrah Bardhaman 
Bandel, Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
- (01) 
Bhagalpur 
(04) 
Howrah Bardhaman 
Bandel &  
Sealdah 
3 ECR - 
 
- 
- 
 
 
(03) 
Patna, Rajendra 
Nagar & Danapur  
- 
 
4 ECOR  
- 
(03) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri & Cuttack 
(03) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri & Cuttack 
- 
5 NR (08) 
Varanasi, Raibareli, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra & 
Jalandhar Cant. 
- (06) 
New Delhi, 
Panipat, Rohtak, 
Shri Mata 
Vaishno Devi 
Katra, Jalandhar 
Cant. & Rajpura 
(04) 
Varanasi, Raibareli, 
Barabanki & 
Moradabad 
- 
6 NCR (05) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj, 
Prayagraj Chheoki, 
Agra Cantt. & Agra 
Fort 
- (02) 
Agra Cantt.,  
& Agra Fort  
 
(03) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj & 
Prayagraj Chheoki  
7 NER (06) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
- - (06) 
Gorakhpur, Lucknow, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam 
Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
- 
8 NEFR (07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, New 
Coochbehar, New 
Jalpaiguri & Katihar 
- (07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New 
Coochbehar, 
New Jalpaiguri 
& Katihar 
- 
9 NWR (06) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Gandhi Nagar 
Jaipur, Jodhpur, 
- (01) 
Ajmer 
 
(05) 
Bikaner, Lalgarh, 
Jaipur, Gandhi Nagar 
Jaipur & Jodhpur - 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  67  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Zonal 
Railway 
CTE not applied  CTE applied but 
not obtained 
CFO Not 
obtained 
CFO obtained without 
obtaining CTE 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
10 SR (06) 
MGR Chennai Central ,
Coimbatore Jn, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central, 
Tiruchchirapalli Jn, 
Palakkad Jn & 
Ottappalam 
- (01) 
Tiruchchirapalli 
 
 
(05) 
MGR Chennai Central, 
Coimbatore Jn, 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central, 
Palakkad Jn & 
Ottappalam 
11 SER (04) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar, Ranchi & 
Digha 
- 
 
(02) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar, 
(02) 
Ranchi & Digha 
12 SECR (02) 
Durg, Gondia 
- (02) 
Durg, Gondia  
- 
13 SWR (05) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka & 
Mysuru, 
(01)  
Hubballi 
(03) 
KSR Bengaluru,  
Yesvantpur &  
Hubbali  
(03) 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka & Mysuru 
14 WR (02) 
Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
 
(04) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bharuch, Bandra 
Terminus & 
Dahod 
(05) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bharuch, Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn , 
Dahod 
(01) 
Bandra Terminus* 
15 WCR  
- 
 
(02) 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
(06) 
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Pipariya, 
Hoshangabad, 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
- 
16 RPU & 
Metro 
Rly. 
(03) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, Rabindra 
Sadan 
- (03) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra Sadan 
- 
Total  59 stations 11 stations 46 stations 34 stations 
*Though CTE was applied, straightway CFO was given. 
Source-  Records of selected Stations (including Mechanical laundary, if any), Coaching  
Depots & respective Divisions/Zones 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
68  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-2.5 
 (Referred in Para 2.6) 
Statement showing the position of achievement against verifiable indicators. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
Major Stations 
Other than 37 
identified 
station. 
ETP/STP/ 
WRP not 
provided 
Waste 
Compost 
Plant not 
installed 
Material 
Recovery 
Facility not 
provided 
CCTV not 
used for 
cleanliness 
Non co-
ordina-
tion with 
ULB 
Toilets not 
provided 
in 
circulating 
area 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1 CR (04) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, 
Panvel, Wadi, & 
Bhusawal 
(01) 
Panvel 
(02) 
Panvel & 
Wadi 
(03) 
Panvel & 
Wadi & 
Bhusawal 
(01) 
Wadi 
(03) 
Panvel  
Wadi & 
Bhusawal 
(01) 
Wadi  
2 ER (03) Bardhaman 
Bandel 
Bhagalpur 
(02) 
Bardhaman 
& Bandel 
(03) 
Bandel, 
Bardhman 
& 
Bhagalpur 
(03) 
Bandel, 
Bardhman 
& 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
Bardhaman  
(03) 
Bandel, 
Bardhman & 
Bhagalpur 
- 
3 ECR (05) 
Hajipur, Sonpur, 
Muzaffarpur, 
Patna & Danapur  
(03) 
Hajipur, 
Patna & 
Danapur 
(03) 
Sonpur, 
Hajipur & 
Danapur 
(03)  
Hajipur, 
Sonpur & 
Muzaffarpur  
- (02) 
Sonpu & 
Muazaffa 
rpur 
- 
4 ECOR (03) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri & Cuttack 
(03) 
Bhubanes 
war, Puri 
& Cuttack 
- (03) 
Bhubanesw 
ar, Puri & 
Cuttack 
- - (01) 
Cuttack 
5 NR (07) 
Raibareli, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, Rohtak, 
Jalandhar Cant 
& Rajpura Jn. 
(07) 
Raibareli, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Jalandhar 
Cant & 
Rajpura 
Jn. 
(07) 
Raibareli, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Jalandhar 
Cant, 
Rajpura Jn. 
& 
Barabanki 
(07) 
Raibareli, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Jalandhar 
Cant  
Rajpura Jn 
& 
Barabanki. 
(06) 
Raibareli, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Jalandhar 
Cant & 
Rajpura 
Jn. 
(06) 
Raibareli, 
Moradabad, 
Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Jalandhar 
Cant & 
Barabanki 
(03) 
Rae Bareli 
Jn, 
Moradabad,  
Jalandhar 
Cant  
6 NCR (02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, Agra 
Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, 
Agra Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki,  
Agra Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki,  
Agra Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki 
Agra Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, 
Agra Fort 
(02) 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, 
Agra Fort 
7 NER (05) 
Gorakhpur, 
Chhapra, 
Kathgodam 
Haldwani 
Bareilly City 
(05) 
Gorakhpur, 
Chhapra, 
Kathgodam 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
(02) 
 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
(03) 
 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
Kathgodam 
(04) 
Gorakhpur, 
Chhapra 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
 
(05) 
Gorakhpur, 
Chhapra 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
& 
Kathgodam  
(04) 
Chhapra 
Haldwani 
Bareilly 
City 
& 
Kathgodam 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  69  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
Major Stations 
Other than 37 
identified 
station. 
ETP/STP/ 
WRP not 
provided 
Waste 
Compost 
Plant not 
installed 
Material 
Recovery 
Facility not 
provided 
CCTV not 
used for 
cleanliness 
Non co-
ordina-
tion with 
ULB 
Toilets not 
provided 
in 
circulating 
area 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
8 NEFR (04) 
Dimapur, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New 
Coochbehar & 
New Jalpaiguri 
(04) 
Dimapur, 
New 
Bongaigaon, 
New 
Coochbehar 
& New 
Jalpaiguri 
(02) 
Dimapur & 
New 
Bongaigaon 
(04) 
Dimapur, 
New 
Bongaigaon, 
New 
Coochbehar 
& New 
Jalpaiguri 
(02) 
New 
Jalpaiguri 
& New 
Bongaiga 
on 
(04) 
Dimapur, 
New 
Bongaigaon, 
New 
Coochbehar 
& New 
Jalpaiguri 
(03) 
Dimapur, 
New 
Bongaigaon, 
& New 
Jalpaiguri 
9 NWR (03) 
, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh & 
Gandhi Nagar 
Jaipur 
(02) 
Lalgarh, , 
Gandhi 
Nagar 
Jaipur 
(03) 
Lalgarh, 
Bikaner & 
Gandhi 
Nagar 
Jaipur 
(03) 
Bikaner, 
Gandhi 
Nagar 
Jaipur &  
Lalgarh 
(01) 
Lalgarh 
- (03) 
Gandhi 
Nagar 
Jaipur, 
Bikaner & 
Lalgarh 
10 SR (03) 
Coimbatore Jn 
Palakkad Jn, 
Ottappalam 
(03) 
Coimbatore 
Jn 
Palakkad 
Jn, 
Ottappalam 
(03) 
Coimbatore 
Jn 
Palakkad 
Jn, 
Ottappalam 
(02) 
Coimbatore 
Jn, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
Coimbatore 
Jn, 
Palakkad 
Jn, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
Coimbatore 
Jn, 
Palakkad 
Jn, 
Ottappalam  
(02) 
Palakkad 
Jn, 
Ottappalam 
11 SCR (04) 
Khammam, 
Ramagundam 
Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
 
(02) 
Nellore,  
Bhimavaram  
 
(04) 
Khammam, 
Ramagunda 
m, 
Nellore, 
Bhimavaram  
- (02) 
Bhimavar 
am, 
Ramagun 
dam 
- (04) 
Khammam, 
Ramagunda 
m, 
Nellore, 
Bhimavaram  
12 SER (02) 
Kharagpur & 
Shalimar 
(02) 
Kharagpur 
& 
Shalimar 
(02) 
Kharagpur 
& Shalimar 
(02) 
Kharagpur 
& Shalimar 
(01) 
Shalimar  
- (01) 
Shalimar 
13 SECR (03) 
Raigarh, Durg 
& Gondia 
- (02) 
Raigarh & 
Durg 
(03) 
Raigarh, 
Gondia & 
Durg 
- - (02) 
Raigarh, 
Gondia  
14 SWR (04) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapura 
m, 
Yelahanka, 
(02)  
Krishnaraj 
apuram, 
Yelhanka 
(01) 
KSR 
Bengaluru 
(02) 
Krishnaraja 
puram, 
Yelhanka 
- - - 
15 WR (05) 
Bandra 
Terminus 
Bharuch, 
Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Dahod 
(02) 
Bharuch & 
Dahod 
(02) 
Bilimora 
Jn., Dahod,  
(01) 
Bandra 
Terminus 
 
(01) 
Bilimora 
Jn. 
-- (04) 
Bandra 
Terminus 
Valsad, 
Bilimora 
Jn, 
Dahod 
16 WCR (05) 
Katni, Pipariya, 
Hoshangabad 
Sawaimadhopur 
, Kota 
(01) 
Pipariya 
(05) 
Katni, 
Pipariya, 
Hoshangab 
ad, Sawai 
madhopur 
Kota 
(05) 
Katni, 
Pipariya, 
Hosangaba 
d, Sawai 
madhopur 
Kota 
(04) 
Katni, 
Pipariya 
Hoshanga 
bad, 
Sawaima 
dhopur   
- -   

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
70  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
Major Stations 
Other than 37 
identified 
station. 
ETP/STP/ 
WRP not 
provided 
Waste 
Compost 
Plant not 
installed 
Material 
Recovery 
Facility not 
provided 
CCTV not 
used for 
cleanliness 
Non co-
ordina-
tion with 
ULB 
Toilets not 
provided 
in 
circulating 
area 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
17 Metro/ 
Kolkata 
(03) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra Sadan,  
N.A. N.A.  N.A.  N.A. N.A.  N.A.  
 Total 65  
stations 
41 
stations 
43 
stations 
46 
stations 
28 
stations 
28 
stations 
30 
stations 
Source- Records of selected stations and respective Divisional/Zonal offices 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  71  
 
Annexure-2.6 
 (Referred in Para 2.10) 
Statement showing the details of stations & Coachin g depots on which Plastic Bottle Crushing Machine 
not planned, installed, non-provision of ‘Plastic Only Bins and assessment and segregation of Plastic Waste 
had not been done. 
(Station shown in col. No. 3 & 4 in Italics shows PBCM installed less than what was planned) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
PBCM Planned/ installed 
at the 37  identified 
Stations as per NGT 
guidelines  
Stations and Coaching 
depot on which ‘Plastic 
Only Bins’ not 
provided 
Assessments not 
made of quantity 
of plastic waste 
generated at 
station/Coaching 
depot. 
Provision for 
collection and 
segregation of plastic 
waste specifically not 
made in the cleaning 
contracts. 
PBCM 
planned for 
installation 
Number of 
PBCM 
installed  
   
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 CR Pune-09 Pune-02 (07) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, Pune, 
Nasik Road, Wadi & 
Bhusawal  
(05) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Nasik Road & 
Bhusawal  
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus ) 
(04) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, & 
Pune 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
 
Nasik Road-
01 
Nasik 
Road-01 
2 ER Howrah-0 Howrah-03 (05) 
Howrah, Bardhaman 
Bandel 
Sealdah 
Bhagalpur 
(01)  
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(04) 
Bardhaman 
Bandel 
Sealdah 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(05) 
Howrah, Bardhaman 
Bandel 
Sealdah 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara)  
Sealdah-0 
 
Sealdah-04 
 
3 ECR Dhanbad jn.-
01 
Dhanbad 
jn.-01 
(06) 
Hajipur, Sonpur, 
Muzaffarpur, Rajendra 
Nagar Terminus, 
Danapur, Patna  
- (06) 
Hajipur, Sonpur, 
Muzaffarpur, 
Rajendra Nagar 
Terminus, Danapur & 
Patna 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Danapur & 
Rajendranagar 
Coaching Complex)  
Rajendra 
nagar 
Terminal -01 
Rajendra 
nagar 
Terminal -
01 
4 ECOR Vishakhapat 
nam-06 
Vishakhapa 
tnam-06 
(03) 
Bhuvaneshwar, Cuttack, 
Vishakhapattanam 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ Puri 
and Bhubaneshwar) 
(05) 
Bhuvaneshwar, 
Cuttack, 
Vishakhapattanam, 
Vizianagaram, Puri 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Puri and 
Bhubaneshwar) 
(05) 
Bhuvaneshwar, 
Cuttack, 
Vishakhapattanam, 
Vizianagaram, Puri 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Puri and 
Bhubaneshwar) 
Vizianagara 
m-01  
Vizianagar 
am-01  
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
72  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
PBCM Planned/ installed 
at the 37  identified 
Stations as per NGT 
guidelines  
Stations and Coaching 
depot on which ‘Plastic 
Only Bins’ not 
provided 
Assessments not 
made of quantity 
of plastic waste 
generated at 
station/Coaching 
depot. 
Provision for 
collection and 
segregation of plastic 
waste specifically not 
made in the cleaning 
contracts. 
PBCM 
planned for 
installation 
Number of 
PBCM 
installed  
   
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
5 NR Varanasi-04 Varanasi-
04 
(06) 
Raibareli, Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New Delhi, 
Panipat,  
& Rajpura Jn. 
(04) 
(Coaching Depot/ Delhi 
Sarai Rohilla, Hazarat 
Nizamuddin, Varanasi & 
Amritsar) 
(07) 
Varanasi 
Raibareli, 
Barabanki, Rohtak, 
New Delhi, Panipat,  
& Rajpura Jn. 
(04) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Delhi Sarai Rohilla, 
Hazarat Nizamuddin, 
Varanasi & Amritsar)  
(10) 
Varanasi, Raibareli, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak, 
Shri Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra, Jalandhar 
Cantt, Rajpura Jn. 
(04) 
(Coaching Depot/ Delhi 
Sarai Rohilla, Hazarat 
Nizamuddin, Varanasi 
& Amritsar ) 
New Delhi-
06  
New Delhi-
04  
Katra 
(SVDK)-05  
Katra 
(SVDK)-02  
6 NCR Prayagraj-02 Prayagraj-
02 
(05) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj, 
Prayagraj Chheoki, 
Agra Cantt., Agra Fort 
 (01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(05) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj, , 
Prayagraj, Chheoki, 
Agra Cantt., Agra 
Fort 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(05) 
Jhansi, Prayagraj, 
Prayagraj, Chheoki, 
Agra Cantt., Agra 
Fort  
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
Jhansi-03 Jhansi-02 
Agra 
Cantt.t.-06 
Agra 
Cantt.t.-03 
7 NER Lucknow 
Jn.-02  
Lucknow 
Jn.-02  
(06) 
Gorakhpur, 
Chhapra, 
Haldwani 
Manduadih, Kathgodam 
& Breilly city 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, Kathgodam 
& Aisbagh) 
 
 
- 
 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, 
Kathgodam & 
Aisbagh) 
 
(03) 
Manduadih, 
Haldwani 
Kathgodam 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, 
Kathgodam & 
Aisbagh) 
 
Manduadih-
02 
Manduadu 
adih-01 
8 NEFR Guwahati -
01 
Guwahati -
01 
(07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bogaigaon, New Cooch 
Bihar, Katihar ̮  & New 
Jalpaiguri 
(07) 
 Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bogaigaon, New 
Cooch Bihar, 
Katihar & New 
Jalpaiguri 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dibrugarh) 
(05)  
Hojai, Guwahati, 
New Cooch Bihar, 
Katihar & New 
Jalpaiguri 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dibrugarh) 
Katihar-01 Katihar-01 
9 NWR Ajmer-01 Ajmer-01 (07) (05) (07) 
Jaipur-07 Jaipur-02 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  73  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
PBCM Planned/ installed 
at the 37  identified 
Stations as per NGT 
guidelines  
Stations and Coaching 
depot on which ‘Plastic 
Only Bins’ not 
provided 
Assessments not 
made of quantity 
of plastic waste 
generated at 
station/Coaching 
depot. 
Provision for 
collection and 
segregation of plastic 
waste specifically not 
made in the cleaning 
contracts. 
PBCM 
planned for 
installation 
Number of 
PBCM 
installed  
   
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
Jodhpur-0 Jodhpur-01 Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, Gandhi 
Nagar Jaipur, Jodhpur, 
Rai Ka Bagh  
(02) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner & Jodhpur) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jodhpur, 
Rai Ka Bagh  
 
(02) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner & Jodhpur) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Gandhi Nagar Jaipur, 
Jodhpur, Rai Ka Bagh  
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner & Jodhpur) 
10 SR MGR 
Chennai 
Central-04  
MGR 
Chennai 
Central-02  
(07) 
MGR Chennai Central,  
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapuram 
central, 
Tiruchchirappalli Jn, 
Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam 
 (03) 
(Coaching Depot/ Basin 
Bridge, Mangalore & 
Thiruvananthapuram) 
(03) 
MGR Chennai 
Central 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, 
Melmaruvattur, 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Basin Bridge, 
Mangalore)  
(07) 
MGR Chennai 
Central, 
Coimbatore Jn 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Central 
Tiruchchirappalli Jn, 
Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Basin 
Bridge, Mangalore & 
Thiruvananthapuram) 
Tiruvanantha 
puram 
Central-02 
Tiruvanant 
hapuram 
Central-03 
 
Tiruchchirap 
palli-02  
Tiruchchir 
appalli-01  
11 SCR Secunderaba 
d-11 
Secunderab 
ad-11 
(04) 
Khammam, 
Ramagundam, 
Bhimavaram & 
Scecunderabad 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Scecunderabad 
& Vijaywada) 
(02) 
Bhimavaram & 
Scecunderabad 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Scecunderabad 
& Vijaywada) 
 
- 
 
Vijaywada-
04 
Vijaywada-
04 
Kacheguda-
04 
Kacheguda 
-04 
12 SER Ranchi-03 Ranchi-02 (04) 
Kharagapur, Shalimar, 
Digha, Ranchi 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ Hatia 
& Santragachi) 
(01) 
Shalimar, 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Santragachi) 
(02) 
Shalimar, 
Digha 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Santragachi) 
Digha-02 Digha-02 
13 SECR Bilaspur-03 Bilaspur-03 (03) 
Bilaspur, 
Raigarh, Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(03) 
Durg,  
Raigarh, Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(02) 
Raipur, 
Raigarh,  
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
Raipur-02 Raipur-01 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
74  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Zone 
PBCM Planned/ installed 
at the 37  identified 
Stations as per NGT 
guidelines  
Stations and Coaching 
depot on which ‘Plastic 
Only Bins’ not 
provided 
Assessments not 
made of quantity 
of plastic waste 
generated at 
station/Coaching 
depot. 
Provision for 
collection and 
segregation of plastic 
waste specifically not 
made in the cleaning 
contracts. 
PBCM 
planned for 
installation 
Number of 
PBCM 
installed  
   
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
14 SWR Mysuru-01 Mysuru-04 (07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ KSR 
Bengaluru ) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
KSR Bengaluru ) 
(04) 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura 
Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
 
 
Hubballi-04 Hubballi- 
01 
15                                                                                                                              
WR 
Mumbai 
Central-06 
Mumbai 
Central-04 
(02) 
Bandra Terminus, 
Dahod 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad & Indore 
(05) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bharuch, 
Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Dahod 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bandra Terminus, 
Ahmedabad & 
Indore) 
 
(07) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus 
Vadodara, 
Bharuch, 
Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Dahod 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Indore 
& Bandra Terminus) 
Vadodara-02  Vadodara-
02  
16 WCR Jabalpur-02 Jabalpur-02 (07) 
Jabalpur, Pipariya, 
Katni, Bhopal 
Hoshangabad, Kota & 
Sawai Madhopur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Pipariya, 
Katni, Bhopal 
Hoshangabad, Kota 
& Sawai Madhopur 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Pipariya, 
Katni, Bhopal 
Hoshangabad, Kota & 
Sawai Madhopur 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
Bhopal-04 Bhopal-01 
  
17 Metro/K 
olkata 
  (04) 
Dum Dum, Esplanade,  
Kalighat, Mahanayak 
Uttam Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra Sadan, 
Kalighat, Mahanayak 
Uttam Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, Rabindra 
Sadan, 
Kalighat, Mahanayak 
Uttam Kumar 
Total   90 stations/ 25 
coaching depots 
71 stations/ 26 
coaching depots 
84 stations/ 26 
coaching depots 
Source- Records of selected stations/coaching depots, respective Divisions/Zones and  
Joint Inspection  
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  75  
 
Annexure-2.7 
(Referred in Para 2.11.1) 
Statement showing the details of stations and Coaching depot on which transportation and 
disposal of solid waste not done incompliance to rule/instructions. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Solid 
Waste not 
disposed 
off 
Segregated 
waste not 
transported 
in covered  
No MoU between 
Rly and  ULB/LB 
for disposal of 
solid waste 
NGT/RB 
directives for 
keeping record of 
storage and 
disposal of waste  
Waste not 
picked up by 
authorised 
waste 
picker/collector  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 CR (07) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune, Wadi, Nasik 
Road, Bhusawal 
(01)  
(Coaching Depot 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
(01)  
Wadi 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
depot/ 
Lokmanya 
Tilak) 
(02) 
Panvel, 
Igatpuri 
(05) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune, Wadi,  
(01) 
(Coaching depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak) 
(04) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
- 
2 ER (05) 
Howrah, 
Bardhaman 
Bandel, Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Tikiapara) 
- - (05) 
Howrah, 
Bhardhman 
Bandel Jn, 
Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
- (05) 
Howrah, 
Bhardhman 
Bandel Jn, 
Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
3 ECR (07) 
Danapur, Sonpur, 
Patna Jn, Hajipur 
Muzaffarpur, 
Rajendra Nagar, 
Dhanbad 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Danapur &  
Rajendra Nagar 
Coaching complex) 
(01) 
Danapur 
(03) 
Sonpur, 
Muazaffarpur 
& Dhanbad 
(07) 
Sonpur, 
Muazaffarpur 
Dhanbad, 
Hajipur, Patna, 
Danapur & 
Rajendra Nagar 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Danapur & 
Rajendra Nagar 
Coaching Complex) 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Danapur & 
Rajendra Nagar 
Coaching 
Complex) 
(03) 
Hajipur, Sonpur 
& Muzaffarpur  
4 ECoR (05) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Cuttack, Puri, 
Vizianagaram & 
Vishakhapatnam 
(02)  
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & 
Puri) 
- - 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar 
& Puri) 
(05) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri, Cuttack, 
Vishakhapatnam 
& Vizianagaram 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & 
Puri) 
(05) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Puri, Cuttack, 
Vishakhapatnam 
& Vizianagaram 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & 
Puri) 
- 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
76  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Solid 
Waste not 
disposed 
off 
Segregated 
waste not 
transported 
in covered  
No MoU between 
Rly and  ULB/LB 
for disposal of 
solid waste 
NGT/RB 
directives for 
keeping record of 
storage and 
disposal of waste  
Waste not 
picked up by 
authorised 
waste 
picker/collector  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
5 NR (10) 
Varanasi, Rae 
Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak, Shri Mata 
Vaishno Devi 
Katra, Jalandhar 
Cant. & Rajpura 
Jn.  
(04) 
(Coaching Depot 
Amritsar,  
Varanasi, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin & 
Delhi S Rohilla) 
(01) 
Rohtak 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
Coaching 
Depot/Delhi 
Sarai 
Rohilla 
- (10) 
Varanasi, Rae 
Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cant. & 
Rajpura Jn.  
(04)  
Coaching 
Depot/Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi 
Sarai Rohilla, 
Varanasi & 
Amritsar 
(07) 
Varanasi, Rae 
Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak & 
Rajpura  
 
 
 
(02)  
Coaching 
Depot/Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, & 
Amritsar 
(04) 
Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno 
Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar 
Cant. & 
Moradabad 
 
 
 
(04)  
Coaching 
Depot/Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, 
Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla, 
Varanasi & 
Amritsar 
6 NCR (05) 
Prayagraj, Jhansi, 
Prayagraj Chheoki 
Agra Cantt. &  
Agra Fort 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot 
Prayagraj 
(03) 
 Prayagraj 
Chheoki, 
Prayagraj & 
Jhansi 
 
 
(01) 
Coaching 
Depot/ 
Prayagraj 
(01) 
 Agra Fort 
(05) 
Prayagraj Jhansi, 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, Agra 
Cantt.  & Agra 
Fort  
(01) 
Coaching 
Depot/Prayagraj 
(05) 
Jhansi, 
Prayagraj, 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki Agra 
Cantt., Agra Fort 
(01) 
Coaching 
Depot/Prayagraj 
(05) 
Prayagraj 
Jhansi, 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki, Agra 
Cantt.  & Agra 
Fort  
(01) 
Coaching 
Depot/Prayagraj 
 
7 NER (07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Halwani & 
Bareilly City  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow & 
Kathgodam) 
(03) 
Gorakhpur, 
Manduadih 
& Bareilly 
City  
 
(02) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Aishbagh, 
Kathgodam) 
(01) 
Manduadih 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
Coaching 
Depot/ 
Gorakhpur 
Aishbagh, 
Kathgodam 
(07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
(03) 
Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, 
Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam 
(07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
(03) 
Coaching Depot 
/Gorakhpur, 
Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam 
(07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
(03) 
Coaching Depot/  
Gorakhpur, 
Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam 
8 NEFR (07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, New 
Coochbehar, New 
Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 
(01) 
 Coaching Depot 
Dibrugarh) 
(01) 
Hojai 
(03) 
Dimapur, 
Hojai & 
New 
Coochbehar 
(07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, New 
Jalpaiguri, New 
Cooch Behar, 
Katihar 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot-
Dhibrugarh) 
(05) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
New Cooch 
Behar Katihar & 
New Jalpaiguri 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot-
Dhibrugarh) 
(04) 
Dimapur, 
Hojai, New 
Coochbehar & 
Katihar 
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  77  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Solid 
Waste not 
disposed 
off 
Segregated 
waste not 
transported 
in covered  
No MoU between 
Rly and  ULB/LB 
for disposal of 
solid waste 
NGT/RB 
directives for 
keeping record of 
storage and 
disposal of waste  
Waste not 
picked up by 
authorised 
waste 
picker/collector  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
9 NWR (07) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Jaipur 
Gandhinagar, 
Jodhpur & Rai Ka 
Bagh 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner &Jodhpur 
(01) 
Gandhi 
nagar 
Jaipur,  
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Bikaner)  
- (07) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Gandhinagar 
Jaipur, Jodhpur & 
Rai Ka Bagh  
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner, Jodhpur )  
(07) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Gandhinagar 
Jaipur, Jodhpur 
& Rai Ka Bagh  
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner, Jodhpur)  
(05) 
Ajmer, 
Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, 
Gandhinagar 
Jaipur, & Rai 
Ka Bagh 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ Bikaner)  
10 SR (07) 
MGR Chennai 
Central, , 
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapura 
m central, 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Basin Bridge, 
Mangalore & 
Thiruvananthapura 
m) 
- - (07) 
MGR Chennai 
Central, , 
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapur 
am central, 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Basin Bridge, 
Thiruvananthapura 
m & Mangalore) 
- (02) 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn & 
Melmaruvattur 
11 SCR (07) 
Secunderabad, 
Kachiguda, 
Vijaywada, 
Khammam, 
Ramagundam, 
Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot 
Secunderabad & 
Vijayawada) 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Secunderab 
ad) 
- (05) 
Bhimavaram, 
Nellore, 
Khammam, 
Kachiguda & 
Ramagundam 
(02) 
(Coaching 
Depot/Vijaywada & 
Secunderabad) 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Vijaywada & 
Secunderabad) 
- 
12 SER (04) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar, Digha & 
Ranchi 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot 
Santragachi & 
Hatia) 
- (01) 
Shalimar 
(03) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar & 
Ranchi 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot-
Santragachi & 
Hatia) 
(02) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar,  
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi) 
(04) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar, 
Digha & 
Ranchi 
(02) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Santragachi & 
Hatia) 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
78  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Solid 
Waste not 
disposed 
off 
Segregated 
waste not 
transported 
in covered  
No MoU between 
Rly and  ULB/LB 
for disposal of 
solid waste 
NGT/RB 
directives for 
keeping record of 
storage and 
disposal of waste  
Waste not 
picked up by 
authorised 
waste 
picker/collector  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
13 SECR (05) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, 
Raipur, Durg, 
Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(01) 
Raigarh 
(02) 
Raigarh & 
Gondia 
(01) 
Gondia 
(03) 
Bilaspur, Durg, 
Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot 
/Bilaspur) 
(01) 
Gondia 
14 SWR (07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
 
(01) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
KSR 
Bengaluru) 
- (01) 
KSR 
Bengaluru 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapuram 
, Yelahankaa, 
Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/KSR 
Bengaluru) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapura 
m, Yelahankaa, 
Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/KSR 
Bengaluru) 
- 
15  WR  (07)  
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus, 
Vadodara,  
Bharuch, Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Dahod 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bandra Terminus, 
Ahmedabad & 
Indore)  
(02)  
Bilimora Jn 
&  
Valsad 
- (07)  
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus, 
Vadodara,  
Bharuch, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Valsad, Dahod 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Bandra 
Terminus)  
(07)  
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra 
Terminus, 
Vadodara,  
Bharuch, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Valsad, Dahod 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad & 
Bandra Terminus)  
(04)  
Valsad, 
Billimora, 
Bharuch & 
Dahod 
16  WCR  (07)  
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Pipariya, Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad, 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
   
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur)  
- (01)  
Hoshangabad  
(04)  
Katni, 
Hoshangabad, 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(01)  
Katni,  
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot-Jabalpur) 
 
(06)  
Jabalpur, 
Pipariya, Katni, 
Hoshangabad, 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur  
(01) 
(Coaching 
Depot/ 
Jabalpur)  
17  Metro/ 
Kolkat 
a 
(05)  
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, 
Kalighat & 
Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar  
- - (05)  
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, 
Kalighat & 
Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar  
(05)  
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, 
Kalighat & 
Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar  
- 
Total  109 station s/ 30 
coaching depots 
14  station s/ 
07 
coaching 
depot s 
15  station s/ 
05 coaching 
depots 
97  station s/ 28  
coaching depots 
65  station s/ 22  
coaching depots 
50  station s/ 13  
coaching depots 
Source- Records of selected stations/coaching depots, respective Divisions/Zones and 
Joint Inspection 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  79  
 
Annexure-2.8 
 (Referred in Para 2.11.2) 
Statement showing the details of stations at which Facilities for Management of solid waste was not provided/installed. 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 CR (07) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, 
Pune, Wadi, 
Nasik Road, 
Bhusawal 
(01)  
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
(06) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, Pune, 
Wadi, Nasik Road, 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
(07) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, Pune, 
Wadi, Nasik Road, 
Bhusawal 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
(05) 
Igatpuri, Panvel, Pune, 
Wadi, Nasik Road 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus)  
(06) 
Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Terminus, 
Igatpuri, Panvel, Pune, 
Wadi, Nasik Road 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus) 
(01) 
Chhatrapati 
Shivaji Maharaj 
Terminus 
 
2 ER (05) 
Howrah, 
Bardhaman 
Bandel, Sealdah 
& Bhagalpur 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(04) 
Howrah, Bhardhman 
Bandel Jn & Bhagalpur  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(05) 
Howrah, Bhardhman 
Bandel Jnl, Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(05) 
Howrah, Bhardhman 
Bandel Jnl, Sealdah & 
Bhagalpur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
(04) 
Howrah, Bhardhman 
Bandel Jn, & Bhagalpur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Tikiapara) 
02 
Howrah,  
Sealdah  
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
80  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
3 ECR (07) 
Danapur, Sonpur, 
Patna Jn, Hajipur 
Muzaffarpur, 
Rajendra Nagar, 
Dhanbad 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Danapur &  
Rajendra Nagar 
Coaching 
complex) 
(01) 
Danapur  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot-
Danapur) 
(02) 
Danapur, Dhanbad  
-- 
(05) 
Hajipur, Sonpur, 
Muzaffarpur, Rajendra 
Nagar & Danapur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot-
Danapur) 
(01) 
Danapur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot-
Danapur) 
- 
4 ECoR (05) 
Bhubaneswar, 
Cuttack, Puri, 
Vizianagaram & 
Vishakhapatnam 
(02)  
(Coaching Depot 
Bhubaneswar & 
Puri) 
 
- 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & Puri) 
(03) 
Bhubaneswar, Puri, 
Cuttack,  
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & Puri) 
(05) 
Bhubaneswar, Puri, 
Cuttack, Vishakhapatnam 
& Vizianagaram 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & Puri) 
 
 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bhubaneswar & Puri) 
N.A. 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  81  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
5 NR (10) 
Varanasi, Rae 
Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, 
Moradabad, New 
Delhi, Panipat, 
Rohtak, Shri Mata 
Vaishno Devi 
Katra, Jalandhar 
Cant. & Rajpura 
Jn.  
(04) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Amritsar,  
Varanasi, Hazrat 
Nizamuddin & 
Delhi S Rohilla) 
(09) 
Varanasi, Rae Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, Moradabad, 
Panipat, Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno Devi 
Katra, Jalandhar Cant. & 
Rajpura Jn. 
 
 
 
(04) 
(Coaching Depot/ Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla, Varanasi & 
Amritsa)r 
(09) 
Varanasi, Rae Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, Moradabad, 
Panipat, Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cant. & 
Rajpura Jn. 
 
 
 
(04)  
(Coaching Depot/ Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla, Varanasi & 
Amritsar) 
(09) 
Varanasi, Rae Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, Moradabad, 
Panipat, Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno Devi Katra, 
Jalandhar Cant. & 
Rajpura Jn. 
 
 
 
(04)  
(Coaching Depot/ Hazrat 
Nizamuddin, Delhi Sarai 
Rohilla, Varanasi & 
Amritsar) 
(09) 
Varanasi, Rae Bareli Jn, 
Barabanki, Moradabad, 
Panipat, Rohtak, Shri 
Mata Vaishno Devi 
Katra, Jalandhar Cant. 
& Rajpura Jn. 
 
 
 
(04)  
(Coaching Depot/ 
Hazrat Nizamuddin, 
Delhi Sarai Rohilla, 
Varanasi & Amritsar) 
(01) 
Varanasi 
6 NCR (05) 
Prayagraj, Jhansi, 
Prayagraj 
Chheoki Agra 
Cantt. & Agra 
Fort 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj 
(03) 
Prayagraj Jhansi, 
Prayagraj Chheoki  
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(05) 
Prayagraj Jhansi, 
Prayagraj Chheoki Agra 
Cantt., Agra Fort  
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(05) 
Prayagraj Jhansi, 
Prayagraj Chheoki Agra 
Cantt., Agra Fort  
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(05) 
Prayagraj Jhansi, 
Prayagraj Chheoki Agra 
Cantt., Agra Fort  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Prayagraj) 
(01) 
Prayagraj  
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
82  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
7 NER (07) 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow, 
Chhapra, 
Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, 
Halwani & 
Bareilly City  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, 
Lucknow & 
Kathgodam) 
(02) 
Haldwani & Bareilly 
City 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam) 
(07) 
Gorakhpur, Lucknow, 
Chhapra, Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, Haldwani & 
Bareilly City 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam)  
(07) 
Gorakhpur, Lucknow, 
Chhapra, Manduadih, 
Kathgodam, Haldwani & 
Bareilly City  
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam) 
(02) 
Haldwani, Bareilly City 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Gorakhpur, Aishbagh & 
Kathgodam) 
N.A. 
8 NEFR (07) 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, New 
Coochbehar, New 
Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 
(01) 
 (Coaching Depot 
Dibrugarh) 
(05), 
Dimapur, Hojai, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New Jalpaiguri & 
Katihar 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dhibrugarh) 
(07), 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New Coochbehar, New 
Jalpaiguri & Katihar 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dhibrugarh) 
(06), 
Dimapur, Hojai, 
Guwahati, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New Coochbehar, New 
Jalpaiguri  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dhibrugarh) 
(03), 
Hojai, New 
Bongaigaon, 
New Cooch Behar,  
 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Dibrugarh) 
N.A. 
9 NWR (07) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Jaipur, 
Jaipur 
Gandhinagar, 
Jodhpur & Rai Ka 
Bagh 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner &Jodhpur 
(05) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, Lalgarh, 
Gandhinagar Jaipur & 
Rai Ka Bagh 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bikaner & Jodhpur) 
(06) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, Lalgarh, 
Jodhpur, Gandhinagar 
Jaipur & Rai Ka Bagh 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ Bikaner & 
Jodhpur) 
(06) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, Lalgarh, 
Jodhpur, Gandhinagar 
Jaipur & Rai Ka Bagh 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ Bikaner & 
Jodhpur) 
(05) 
Ajmer, Bikaner, 
Lalgarh, Gandhinagar 
Jaipur & Rai Ka Bagh 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ Bikaner 
& Jodhpur) 
N.A. 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  83  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
10 SR (07) 
MGR Chennai 
Central, 
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapur 
am central, 
Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot 
Basin Bridge, 
Mangalore & 
Thiruvanantha 
puram) 
(07) 
MGR Chennai Central,  
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapuram 
central, Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam 
 
 (03) 
(Coaching Depot/Basin 
Bridge, 
Thiruvananthapuram & 
Mangalore) 
(03) 
Coimbatore Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
Coaching Depot/Basin 
Bridge, 
Thiruvananthapuram & 
Mangalore 
(07) 
MGR Chennai Central,  
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapuram 
central, Tiruchchirappalli 
Jn, Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam  
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/Basin 
Bridge, 
Thiruvananthapuram & 
Mangalore) 
(07) 
MGR Chennai Central, 
Coimbatore Jn.,  
Thiruvananthapuram 
central, 
Tiruchchirappalli Jn, 
Palakkad Jn 
Melmaruvattur, 
Ottappalam  
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/Basin 
Bridge, 
Thiruvananthapuram & 
Mangalore) 
(01) 
MGR Chennai 
Central 
11 SCR (07) 
Secunderabad, 
Kachiguda, 
Vijaywada, 
Khammam, 
Ramagundam, 
Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Secunderabad & 
Vijayawada) 
(06) 
Secunderabad, 
Vijaywada, Khammam, 
Ramagundam, Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Secunderabad & 
Vijaywada) 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Vijaywada &  
Secunderabad) 
(07) 
Secunderabad, 
Kachiguda, Vijaywada, 
Khammam, 
Ramagundam, Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Secunderabad  
& Vijaywada) 
(06) 
Secunderabad, 
Vijaywada, Khammam, 
Ramagundam, Nellore, 
Bhimavaram 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Secunderabad & 
Vijaywada) 
(01) 
Secunderabad 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
84  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
12 SER (04) 
Kharagpur, 
Shalimar, Digha 
& Ranchi 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi & 
Hatia) 
(03) 
Ranchi, Digha & 
Shalimar 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi & Hatia) 
(03) 
Kharagpur, Digha & 
Shalimar 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi) 
(04) 
Kharagpur, Ranchi, Digha 
& Shalimar 
 
(02) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi & Hatia) 
(03) 
Kharagpur, Digha & 
Shalimar 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Santragachi) 
 13 SECR (05) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, 
Raipur, Durg, 
Gondia 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(03) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, Durg,  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(05) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, Durg, 
R & Gondia 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(05) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, Durg, 
R & Gondia 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Bilaspur) 
(03) 
Bilaspur, Raigarh, 
Durg,  
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot 
/Bilaspur) 
N.A. 
14 SWR 07 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yesvantpur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka, 
Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
(01) 
 (Coaching Depot/ 
KSR 
Bengaluru) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahanka, Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ KSR 
Bengaluru) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahankaa, Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ KSR 
Bengaluru)) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahankaa, Pandavpura, 
Mysuru, Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ KSR 
Bengaluru) 
(07) 
KSR Bengaluru, 
Yeshvantapur, 
Krishnarajapuram, 
Yelahankaa, 
Pandavpura, Mysuru, 
Hubballi 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ KSR 
Bengaluru) 
N.A. 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  85  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name 
of Zone 
Total Selected 
stations & 
coaching depots 
Wet waste processing 
facility not provided 
Material Recovery 
Facility not Provided 
Waste segregation and 
recycling centre was not 
set up  
Composting plant not 
planned 
Solid waste 
management 
plant not 
provided 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
15 WR (07) 
Mumbai Central, 
Bandra Terminus, 
Vadodara,  
Bharuch, Valsad, 
Bilimora Jn, 
Dahod 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/  
Bandra Terminus, 
Ahmedabad & 
Indore) 
(04) 
Valsad, Bilimora Jn, 
Bharuch Jn, Dahod 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Bandra 
Terminus & Indore) 
(06) 
Bandra Terminus, 
Vadodara,  
Valsad, Bilimora Jn, 
Bharuch Jn, Dahod 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Bandra 
Terminus & Indore) 
(07) 
Mumbai Central, Bandra 
Terminus, Vadodara,  
Valsad, Bilimora Jn, 
Bharuch Jn, Dahod 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Bandra 
Terminus & Indore) 
(04) 
Valsad Bilimora Jn, 
Bharuch Jn, Dahod 
 
 
 
 
(03) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Ahmedabad, Bandra 
Terminus & Indore) 
N.A. 
16 WCR (07) 
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Pipariya, Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad, 
Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
  (01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Pipariya, Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad, Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Katni, Pipariya, 
Bhopal, Hoshangabad, 
Kota & Sawaimadhopur 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Katni, Pipariya, 
Bhopal, Hoshangabad, 
Kota & Sawaimadhopur 
 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
(07) 
Jabalpur, Katni, 
Pipariya, Bhopal, 
Hoshangabad, Kota & 
Sawaimadhopur 
 
(01) 
(Coaching Depot/ 
Jabalpur) 
N.A. 
17 Metro/K 
olkata 
(05) 
Dum Dum, 
Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, 
Kalighat & 
Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, Kalighat 
& Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, Kalighat 
& Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, Kalighat 
& Mahanayak Uttam 
Kumar 
(05) 
Dum Dum, Esplanade, 
Rabindra sadan, 
Kalighat & Mahanayak 
Uttam Kumar 
N.A. 
Total 109 stations/ 30 
coaching depots 
77 stations/ 29 coaching 
depots 
87 stations/ 27 coaching 
depots 
102 stations/ 29 coaching 
depots 
77 stations/ 28 
coaching depots 
 
Source- Records of selected stations/coaching depots, respective Divisions/Zones and Joint Inspection  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
86  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-3.1 
(Referred in Para 3.1, 3.2, 3.4) 
Statement comprising the workshops, shedswhere CTE/CFO not obtained  
Zonal 
Railway 
CTE/CFO under water Act 
have not been obtained 
CTE/CFO under Hazardous 
waste Rules have not been 
obtained 
CR  Diesel Loco Shed /Kalyan  Diesel Loco Shed /Kalyan  
Car shed, Kurla  Car shed, Kurla  
ER  Signal workshop, Howrah  Signal workshop, Howrah  
Electric Loco Shed, Howrah  Electric Loco Shed, Howrah  
EMU Car shed, Bandel  EMU Car shed, Bandel  
EMU Car shed, Howrah  EMU Car shed, Howrah  
ECR  DEMU shed/Sonpur  DEMU shed/Sonpur  
Electric Loco Shed/Gomoh  Electric Loco Shed /Gomoh  
ECoR  Electric Loco shed, Angul  Electric Loco shed, Angul  
MEMU shed, Khurda  MEMU shed, Khurda  
NR  Charbag Workshop, Lucknow  Charbag Workshop, Lucknow  
 Carriage & wagon Workshop, Kalka  
Signal Workshop/Gaziabad  Signal Workshop/Gaziabad  
Bridge Workshop, Jalandhar cantt  Bridge Workshop, Jalandhar cantt  
Diesel Shed /Alambag, lucknow  Diesel Shed /Alambag, lucknow  
 Diesel Loco Shed /Tuglakabad  
 Diesel Loco Shed /Ludhiana  
Electric Loco Shed/Khanalampura, 
Saharanpur  
Electric Loco Shed/Khanalampura, 
Saharanpur  
DEMU/Jalandhar city  DEMU/Jalandhar city  
 EMU/Gaziabad  
NCR   Wagon Workshop, Jhansi  
Track Machine Centralized Periodical 
Overhauling, Subedarganj, Prayagraj 
Jn 
 
Track Machine Centralized Periodical 
Overhauling, Subedarganj, Prayagraj Jn 
 
 Diesel Loco Shed, Jhansi  
Electric Loco Shed/Kanpur central  Electric Loco Shed/Kanpur central  
NER  Signal Workshop, Gorakhpur  Signal Workshop, Gorakhpur  
Bridge Workshop, Gorakhpur  Bridge Workshop, Gorakhpur  
DEMU shed, Aunrihar  DEMU shed, Aunrihar  
NEFR   Carriage & W workshop, New 
Bongaigaon 
 
Engineering Workshop Bongaigaon  Engineering Workshop Bongaigaon  
 Diesel loco shed, Siliguri  
DEMU shed, Siliguri  DEMU shed, Siliguri  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  87  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
CTE/CFO under water Act 
have not been obtained 
CTE/CFO under Hazardous 
waste Rules have not been 
obtained 
NWR   Loco Workshop, Ajmer  
DEMU shed, Merta Road  DEMU shed, Merta Road  
SR   Diesel loco shed, Erode  
Electric Loco Shed, Arakkonam  Electric Loco Shed, Arakkonam  
EMU car shed, Tambaram  EMU car shed, Tambaram  
SCR  S&T Workshop, Mettuguda  S&T Workshop, Mettuguda  
Engineering Workshop/Lallaguda  Engineering Workshop/Lallaguda  
EMU Carshed/ Moula Ali  EMU Carshed/ Moula Ali  
SER  S&T Workshop, Khararagpur  S&T Workshop, Khararagpur  
Engineering Workshop, Sini  Engineering Workshop, Sini  
Electric Loco shed, Santragachi  Electric Loco shed, Santragachi  
EMU car shed, Tikiapara  EMU car shed, Tikiapara  
SECR  Electric Loco Shed, Bhilai  Electric Loco Shed, Bhilai  
MEMU Shed, Bhilai  MEMU Shed, Bhilai  
SWR DEMU shed, Bangalore Cantonment  DEMU shed, Bangalore Cantonment  
WR EMU Car shed, Mumbai Central EMU Car shed, Mumbai Central 
Metro Rly Car shed, Noapara Car shed, Noapara 
Car shed, Kabi Subhas Car shed, Kabi Subhas 
Workshop, Noapara Workshop, Noapara 
Total     
(Zones/Units)  
16/40 16/50 
Source- Records of Workshops, Loco/Car sheds, Production Units and Joint Inspection  
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
88  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-3.2 
(Referred in Para 3.3) 
Delay in Renewal of Authorization under the Water Act & the Hazardous Waste Management 
(HWM) Rules 
Zonal 
Railway 
Name of unit Delay in renewal under the 
Water Act 
Delay in renewal under the 
HWM Rules 
Period Duration Period Duration 
CR Electric Loco Works 
(POH) Bhusawal  
01.04.2017 to 
31.03.2020 
36 months 01.04.2017 to 
31.03.2020 
36 months 
Loco Shed/Ajni 01.04.2018 to 
31.03.2020 
24 months 01.04.2018 to 
31.03.2020 
24 months 
ER Diesel shed, Howrah 01.06.2016 to 
22.04.2018 
22 months 01.07.2017 to 
31.03.2020 
33 months 
Cariage & Wagon 
Workshop/Liluah 
01.01.2017 to 
14.12.2017 
12 month 01.03.2016 to 
03.07.2017 
16 months 
NR Diesel Loco Shed, 
Ludhiana 
21.10.2009 to 
15.04.2016 
01.04.2019 to 
31.03.2020 
78 months and 
12 months 
  
NCR Wagon Workshop, Jhansi 01.01.2017 to 
26.12.2019 
36 months   
Diesel Loco shed, Jhansi 01.01.2014 to 
10.04.2019 
63 months   
NER Electric Loco shed, Gonda   01.01.2020 to 
31.03.2020 
03 months 
NWR Loco workshop, Ajmer 01.03.2018 to 
21.06.2018 
03 months   
Workshop, Jodhpur 01.04.2018 to 
21.05.2018 
2 months   
 
SR 
Carriage and wagon 
workshop, Perambur 
01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2017 
24 months 
 
01.04.2015 to 
08.10.2018 
42 months 
S&T Workshop, Podanur 01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2017 
24 months 01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2020 
60 months 
Engineering Workshop, 
Arakkonam 
01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2016 
12 months   
Diesel Loco shed, Erode 01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2016 
12 months   
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur (Shell) 
01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2018 
36 months   
Integral Coach Factory, 
Perambur (Furnishing) 
01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2019 
48 months 10.04.2018 to 
31.03.2020 
24 months 
SWR Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka 
01.07.2016 to 
02.07.2017 
12 months   
Diesel Loco shed, 
Krishnarajapuram 
01.07.2015 to 
04.09.2015 
and 
01.07.2016 to 
24.07.2017 
02 months and 
12 months 
  
WR Mechanical workshop, 
Lower Parel 
01.01.2016 to 
26.09.2017 
and 
01.01.2019 to 
03.02.2020 
21 months and  
13 months 
  
Electric Loco shed, 
Vadodara 
28.03.2018 to 
30.11.2018  
08 months   

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  89  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Name of unit Delay in renewal under the 
Water Act 
Delay in renewal under the 
HWM Rules 
Period Duration Period Duration 
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
Chittaranjan Locomotive 
works, Chittaranjan  
(Main shop) 
01.04.2019 to 
25.11.2019 
07 months 01.04.2015 to 
31.03.2020 
60 months 
Chiittaranjan Locomotive 
works (ELLAU/Dankuni 
Shop) 
- - 09.09.2016 to 
12.11.2019 
38 months 
Source- Records of Workshops, Loco/Car sheds, Production Units and Joint Inspection  
 
 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
90  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-3.3 
(Referred in Para 3.5) 
Statement showing number of workshops, sheds, production units, coaching 
depots Zone wise where required forms for Hazardous waste were not maintained  
 
Zonal Railway Total 
selected 
unit  
(including 
Coaching 
Depots ) 
Form -3 for 
Records of 
waste for 
storage, re -
use / recycle, 
transfer, sale 
etc .  is not 
maintained 
Form - 8 for 
waste 
stored and 
labelled in 
a manner 
as 
prescribed  
is not 
maintained  
Form -9 for 
Transport 
Emergency 
(TREM ) 
Card, as 
prescribed, is 
not issued for 
every sale / 
issue of 
hazardous 
waste 
The 
manifest 
system 
(Form 10 ) 
is not being 
followed for 
each issue 
(sale ) of 
hazardous 
waste 
Central Railway 8 6 4 6 4 
Eastern Railway, 
Kolkata 
7 7 7 7 6 
East Central Railway 8 7 6 8 8 
East Coast Railway 6  5  4 5 5  
Northern Railway 17 16 14 16 15 
North Central 
Railway 
5 5 5 5 3 
North Eastern 
Railway 
9 8 9 9 9 
North East Frontier 
Railway 
5 5 2 4 4 
North Western 
Railway 
7 7 7 7 6 
Southern Railway 10 10 8 10 8 
South Central 
Railway 
11 9 7 6 5 
South East Central 
Railway 
5 3 4 5 6 
South Eastern 
Railway 
8 6  8 8 5 
South Western 
Railway 
5
 2 2 3 2 
West Central Railway  4 2 2 3 1 
Western Railway 11 9 10 11 11 
RPU and Metro 
Railway 
5 3 3 4 3 
Total (Units) 131 110 102 117 101 
Source- Records of Workshops, Loco/Car sheds, Production Units, Coaching Depots and  
 Joint Inspection  
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  91  
 
Annexure-4.1 
 (Para No 4.5) 
(A)  Progress of works related to management of was te water sanctioned under ERW 
Fund  
Zonal 
Railway 
Year wise 
details for 
the review 
period 
No. of 
ETP/STPs 
sanctioned  
Cost of 
ETP/STPs 
sanctioned 
(₹ in crore)  
No. of 
ETP/STPs 
completed 
as on 
31.03.2020  
No. of 
WRPs 
sanctioned  
Cost of 
WRPs 
sanctioned 
(₹ in crore)  
No. of 
WRPs 
completed 
as on 
31.03.2020  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
CR 2019-20 7 13.97 0 2 2.00 0 
ER 2019-20 3 1.39 2 1 0.50 1 
ECR 2018-19 0 0.00 0 4 8.39 0 
2019-20 0 0.00 0 2 2.37 0 
ECoR 
2017-18 6 2.72 5 3 2.86 2 
2018-19 4 0.73 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 6 2.09 0 0 0.00 0 
NR 2019-20 0 0.00 0 2 7.00 0 
NCR 2019-20 5 2.20 1 0 0.00 0 
NER 2016-17 0 0.00 0 3 4.80 0 
2017-18 0 0.00 0 2 2.53 1 
2018-19 0 0.00 0 1 1.40 0 
2019-20 0 0.00 0 1 1.46 0 
NFR 2019-20 2 4.99 2 0 0.00 0 
NWR 
2017-18 4 3.06 3 1 0.67 0 
2018-19 2 0.78 1 0 0.00 1 
2019-20 3 2.84 1 0 0.00 0 
SR 
2017-18 1 0.27 1 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 1 0.08 1 1 2.30 0 
2019-20 0 0.00 0 7 2.76 0 
SCR 2018-19 0 0.00 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 6 17.20 1 2 0.93 0 
SER 2017-18 1 0.63 0 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 2 1.67 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 11 14.60 1 6 8.03 1 
SECR 
2015-16 0 0 0 1 1.32 0 
2016-17 0 0 0 1 0.34 1 
2019-20 0 0 0 1 1.88 1 
WR 
2017-18 2 1.24 1 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 3 3.41 3 3 4.88 1 
2019-20 0 0.00 0 0 0.00 0 
WCR 
2017-18 6 1.82 2 5 2.20 0 
2018-19 0 0.00 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 12 7.48 1 5 8.00 0 
Total   87     
 (11 Zones)  83.17 26 54  
(13 Zones)  66.62 9 
 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
92  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-4.1 
(Para No. 4.5) 
(B) Progress of works related to solid waste management sanctioned under ERW Fund 
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Year 
wise 
details 
for the 
review 
period 
No. of 
waste to 
compost 
plant 
planned/ 
sanctioned 
during the 
year 
Cost of 
waste to 
compost 
plant 
sanctioned 
(₹ in crore) 
No. of 
waste to 
compost 
plant 
completed 
as on 
31.03.2020 
No. of 
Waste to 
Energy 
Plant 
planned/ 
sanctioned 
during the 
year 
Cost 
of 
waste 
to 
energy 
Plant 
(₹ in 
crore) 
No. of 
waste to 
energy 
plant 
completed 
as on 
31.03.2020 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
CR 2019-20 1 0.15 0 0 0 0 
ER 2019-20 1 0.95 0 0 0.00 0 
ECR 2018-19 0 0.00 0 1 1.02 0 
2019-20 5 0.08 0 1 0.92 0 
ECoR 2019-20 13 1.13 1 1 2.01 1 
NCR 2019-20 4 0.45 0 0 0.00 0 
NER 2018-19 12 0.05 12 0 0.00 0 
NFR 2019-20 0 0.00 0 1 0.79 1 
NWR 
2017-18 2 0.05 0 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 1 0.07 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 7 2.93 7 0 0.00 0 
SR 2018-19 1 1.18 0 1 0.17 0 
2019-20 6 4.50 1 0 0.00 0 
SCR 2019-20 3 0.15 1 0 0.00 0 
SER 2017-18 2 0.37 2 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 0 0.00 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 18 4.31 1 0 0.00 0 
SECR 2018-19 1 0.10 1 0 0 0 
SWR 2018-19 1 0.02 1 0 0 0 
WR 
2017-18 2 0.50 2 0 0.00 0 
2018-19 1 0.00 0 0 0.00 0 
2019-20 2 0.76 1 0 0.00 0 
WCR 2019-20 10 2.52 0 0 0.00 0 
Total 93 
 (14 Zones) 20.59 30 5   
(04 Zones) 4.91 2 
Source- Records of EnHM wing of the Zonal Railways/ Production Units 
 
 
 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  93  
 
Annexure- 5.1 
 (Refer Para No 5.1) 
Statement showing Railway Hospitals not obtained Au thorization for handling Bio-
Medical waste  
Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Number of such hospitals on 
the Zone 
CR Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Hospital, Byculla, Mumbai 4 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Nagpur 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Igatpuri 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kurudwari 
ER Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Andal 1 
ECR Divisional Railway Hospital, Danapur 2 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gaya 
NR Super Specialty Hospital, Lucknow 1 
NCR Divisional Railway Hospital, Agra 2 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kanpur 
NER Lalit Narayan Mishra Railway Hospital, 
Gorakhpur 
4 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Varanasi 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gonda 
Mechanical Workshop Hospital, Gorakhpur 
NEFR Central Hospital, Maligaon 2 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Rangiya 
SR Divisional Railway Hospital, Goldenrock 5 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Arakkonam 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Podanur 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Villupuram 
Railway Hospital, Integral Coach Factory 
SCR Divisional Railway Hospital, Nanded 2 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital,  Purna 
SECR Divisional Railway Hospital, Raipur 2 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Bhilai 
Marshaling yard  
Metro Rly Tapan Sinha Memorial Hospital, Tollygunge 1 
Total  26  (11 Zones)  
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
 
 
 
 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
94  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-5.2 
(Refer Para No. 5.2) 
Delay/discontinuity in Authorization for handling Bio-Medical waste 
Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Period of delay/ 
discontinuity 
Duration 
CR Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Kalyan 
01.05.2015 to 31.03.2020 59 months 
ER B.R. Singh Hospital, Sealdah 01.03.2016 to 29.01 .2018 23 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Howrah 
01.12.2016 to 24.06.2019 31 months 
Liluah Workshop Hospital, Liluah 01.08.2018 to 29.0 8.2019 13 months 
NR Central Hospital, New Delhi 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 36 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Moradabad 
02.06.2019 to 31.03.2020 10 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Ambala Cant 
01.04.2018 to 31.03.2020 24 months 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, 
Amritsar 
01.04.2016 to 31.03.2020 48 months 
NCR Central Hospital, Prayagraj 01.01.2015 to 31.03 .2020 63 months 
NEFR Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Dibrugarh Town 
01.04.2016 to 31.03.2020 48 months 
NWR Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Bikaner 
01.07.2015 to 13.02.2017 19 months 
SR Railway Hospital, Perambur 01.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 36 months 
SCR Divisional Railway 
Hospital,Vijayavada 
01.02.2017 to 31.03.2020 38 months 
CH/Lallaguda 30.06.2014 to 31.03.2020 69 month 
SER Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Kharagpur 
01.04.2019 to 31.03.2020 12 months 
SECR Central Hospital, Bilaspur 06.10.2013  to 31.0 3.2020 77 months 
SWR Central Hospital, Hubbali 01.07.2017 to 07.01.2018 06 months 
WR Jagjivan Ram Hospital, Mumbai 
Central 
01.01.2014 to 31.03.2020 75 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Ratlam 
01.07.2016 to 31.03.2020 45 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, 
Rajkot 
01.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 36 months 
WCR Central Hospital, Jabalpur 01.07.2017 to 31.03.2020 33 months 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kota 01.02.2015 to 31.03.2020 62 months 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, 
New Katni 
20.07.2010 to 19.07.2019 108 months 
RPU  Kasturba Gandhi Hospital, 
Chittaranjan 
01.01.2017 to 06.04.2017 03 months 
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  95  
 
Annexure-5.3 
(Refer Para No. 5.3) 
Creation of Infrastructure for handling Bio-Medical waste 
Zonal 
Railway  
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Hospitals in which no infrastructure created 
Secured room for storage of 
BMW 
ETP/STP for treatment of liquid 
waste 
CR 5 4 (DRH/Kalyan, DRH/ Nagpur, 
SDH/Igatpuri & 
SDRH/Kurudwadi)  
5 (CH/Byculla, DRH/Kalyan, 
DRH/Nagpur, SDRH/Igatpuri & 
SDRH/Kurudwadi) 
ER 4 - 4 (CH/Sealdah, DRH/Howrah, 
SDRH/Andal & Workshop Hospital, 
Liluah) 
ECR 4 4(Central Super Specialty 
Hospital/Patna, DRH/Danapur, 
DRH/Sonpur & SDRH/Gaya) 
3 (DRH/Danapur, DRH/Sonpur & 
SDRH/Gaya) 
ECoR 2 1 (DRH/ Waltair) - 
NR 8 6 (SSH/RDSO/LKO, PUH/RBL, 
DRH/Moradabad, DRH/Ambala 
cant., SDRH/ Amritsar, 
SDRH/Anand Vihar) 
5 DRH/Moradabad, DRH/Ambala 
cant., SDRH/ Amritsar, SDRH/Anand 
Vihar & Workshop Hosp/Jagdhari)) 
NCR 3 3(CH/Prayagraj, DRH/Agra & 
SDRH/Kanpur) 
3(CH/Prayagraj, DRH/Agra & 
SDRH/Kanpur 
NER 4 4 (Lalit Narayan Mishra 
Hospital/Gorakhpur, Mech. 
Workshop Hospital, Gorakhpur, 
SDRH/Gonda & DRH, Varanasi) 
4 (Lalit Narayan Mishra Hospital 
/Gorakhpur, DRH/Varanasi, 
SDRH/Gonda & Mech. Workshop 
Hospital, Gorakhpur) 
NEFR 5 4(DRH/Dibrugarh Town, 
DRH/Katihar,  SDRH/ New 
Jalpaiguri & SDRH, rangiya) 
4 (DRH/Dibrugarh Town, 
DRH/Katihar, SDRH/ New Jalpaiguri 
& SDRH/ Rangiya) 
NWR 4 4 (CH/Jaipur, DRH/Bikaner, 
SDRH/Abu Road & SDRH/ 
Bandikui) 
4 (CH/Jaipur, DRH/Bikaner, 
SDRH/Abu Road & SDRH/ Bandikui) 
SR 6 3 (DRH/Arakkonam, SDRH/ 
Podnur & SDRH/Villupuram) 
4 (DRH/ Goldenrock, DRH/ 
Arakkonam, SDRH/ Podnur & 
SDRH/Villupuram) 
SCR 5 - 2 (DRH/ Nanded & SDRH/Purna) 
SER 4 3 (DRH/Kharagpur, DRH/ Adra 
& SDRH/Tata) 
4 (CH/GRC, DRH/Kharagpur, DRH/ 
Adra & SDRH/Tata) 
SECR 3 3 (CH/Bilaspur, DRH/Raipur & 
SDRH/Bhilai Marshaling Yard)  
3 (CH/Bilaspur, DRH/Raipur & 
SDRH/Bhilai Marshaling Yard) 
SWR 3 1 (DRH/ Mysuru) 1(Railway Hosp./RWF) 
WCR 4 - 2 (SDRH/New Katni Jn. & SDRH/ 
Gangapur City) 
WR 5 3 (DRH/Ratlam, DRH/Rajkot & 
SDRH/Valsad) 
3 (DRH/Rajkot, SDRH/Valsad & 
Workshop Hospital, Dahod) 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
96  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway  
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Hospitals in which no infrastructure created 
Secured room for storage of 
BMW 
ETP/STP for treatment of liquid 
waste 
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
3 3 (Tapan Sinha  Memorial 
Hospital/ Tollygunge, CH/BLW/ 
Varanasi & KG Hospital, 
Chittaranjan) 
3 (Tapan Sinha Hospital/ Tollygunge, 
CH/BLW/ Varanasi & KG Hospital, 
Chittaranjan) 
Total 72 46  (14 Zones)  54 (16 Zones)  
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
CH- Central Hospital, PUH- Production Unit Hospital, SSH- Super Specialty Hospital, DRH- Divisional Railwa y 
Hospital, SDRH- Sub-divisional Railway Hospital   

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  97  
 
Annexure-5.4 
(Refer Para No 5.4) 
Pre-treatment of BMW before its storage 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Pre-treatment not carried out of: 
laboratories 
waste 
micro- 
biological 
waste 
blood 
samples 
blood Bags other 
clinical 
laboratories 
waste 
CR 5 - (1) SDRH/ 
Igatpuri 
(1)  
SDRH/ 
Igatpuri 
(1)  
SDRH/ 
Igatpuri 
(1)  
SDRH/ 
Igatpuri 
ER 4 (4)  
B.R. Singh 
Hosp./ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/ 
Howrah, 
SDRH/ 
Andal & 
Workshop 
Hosp./Liluah 
(3) 
 B.R. Singh 
Hosp./ 
Sealdah, 
SDRH/ 
Andal & 
Workshop 
Hosp./ 
Liluah 
(4)  
B.R. Singh 
Hosp./ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/ 
Howrah, 
SDRH/ 
Andal & 
Workshop 
Hosp./Liluah 
(4) 
 B.R. Singh 
Hosp./ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/ 
Howrah, 
SDRH/ 
Andal & 
Workshop 
Hosp./Liluah 
(4)  
B.R. Singh 
Hosp./ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/ 
Howrah, 
SDRH/ 
Andal & 
Workshop 
Hosp./Liluah 
ECR 4 (3) 
DRH/Danap 
ur, 
DRH/Sonpur 
& 
SDRH/Gaya 
(3) DRH/ 
Danapur, 
DRH/Sonp 
ur & 
SDRH/Gay 
a 
(3)  
DRH/Danap 
ur, 
DRH/Sonpur 
& 
SDRH/Gaya 
(3) 
DRH/Danap 
ur, 
DRH/Sonpur 
& 
SDRH/Gaya 
(3)  
DRH/Danap 
ur, 
DRH/Sonpur 
& 
SDRH/Gaya 
NR 8 (2)  
DRH/ 
Moradabad 
& SDRH/ 
Aanad Vihar  
(2) 
 DRH/ 
Moradabad 
& SDRH/ 
Aanad 
Vihar 
(2)  
DRH/ 
Moradabad 
& SDRH/ 
Aanad Vihar 
(3) 
 DRH/ 
Moradabad, 
SDRH/ 
Amritsar & 
SDRH/ 
Aanad Vihar 
(2)  
DRH/ 
Moradabad 
& SDRH/ 
Aanad Vihar 
NEFR 5 - - - (2) DRH/ 
Katihar & 
SDRH/ 
Rangiya 
- 
SECR 3 (1) 
SDRH/Bhilai 
- (1)  
SDRH/ 
Bhilai 
(1)  
SDRH/ 
Bhilai 
(1) 
SDRH/Bhilai 
SWR 3 (3)  
CH/ Hubball, 
DRH/ 
Mysuru & 
RH/ RWF 
(3)  
CH/ 
Hubballi, 
DRH/ 
Mysuru & 
Railway 
Hospital/ 
RWF/ 
Yelahanlka 
(3)  
CH/ 
Hubballi, 
DRH/ 
Mysuru & 
RH/ RWF/ 
Yelahanlka 
(3)  
CH/ 
Hubballi, 
DRH/ 
Mysuru & 
Railway 
Hospital/ 
RWF 
Yelahanlka 
(2)  
CH/ Hubballi 
& DRH/ 
Mysuru  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
98  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Pre-treatment not carried out of: 
laboratories 
waste 
micro- 
biological 
waste 
blood 
samples 
blood Bags other 
clinical 
laboratories 
waste 
Metro 
Rly 
3 - (1) Tapan 
Sinha 
Memo. 
Hosp. 
Tollygunge 
(1)  
Tapan Sinha 
Memo. 
Hosp. 
Tollygunge 
(1) Tapan 
Sinha Memo. 
Hosp. 
Tollygunge 
(1) Tapan 
Sinha Memo. 
Hosp. 
Tollygunge 
Total 
(Zones/ 
units) 
8/35 5/13 6/13 7/15 8/18 7/14 
CH- Central Hospital, PUH- Production Unit Hospital , SSH- Super Specialty Hospital, DRH- 
Divisional Railway Hospital, SDRH- Sub-divisional Railway Hospital 
Source- Records of Hospitals .  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  99  
 
Annexure-5.5 
 (Refer Para No 5.5) 
Segregation and pre-treatment of liquid chemical waste 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Segregation of liquid 
chemical waste not carried 
out 
Treatment of liquid waste was 
not  done in accordance with 
the Water Act 
CR 5 - (1)  
SDRH/ Igatpuri 
ER 4 (3)  
B.R. Singh Hosp./ Sealdah, 
SDRH/ Andal & Workshop 
Hosp./Liluah 
(4)  
B.R. Singh Hosp./ Sealdah, 
DRH/Howrah, SDRH/ Andal & 
Workshop Hosp./Liluah 
ECR 4  (4) CSSH/ Patna, 
DRH/Danapur, DRH/Sonpur & 
SDRH/Gaya 
(3)  
DRH/Danapur, DRH/Sonpur & 
SDRH/Gaya 
NR 8 (5)  
DRH/ Moradabad, SDRH/ 
Amritsar, SDRH/ Anand Vihar, 
Workshop Hospital/Jagdhari 
workshop & DRH, Ambala 
Cant. 
(5)  
DRH/ Ambala Cant, DRH/ 
Moradabad, SDRH/ Anand 
Vihar, Workshop 
Hospital/Jagdhari & SDRH/ 
Amritsar 
NCR 3 (3)  
CH/Prayagraj, DRH/ Agra & 
SDRH/Kanpur 
(3)  
CH/ Prayagraj, DRH/ Agra & 
SDRH/Kanpur 
NER 4 - (1)  
DRH/ Varanasi 
NEFR 5 (2)  
DRH/Katihar & SDRH/New 
Jalpaiguri 
(2)  
DRH/Dibrugarh Town & 
SDRH/Rangiya 
NWR 4 - (1)  
SDRH/Bandikui 
SR 6 (1)  
RH/ Perambur 
(1)  
RH/ Perambur 
SCR 5 (2) CH/Lallaguda,  
 & DH/Vijayawada 
(3)  
DRH/Nanded, SDRH/ Purna & 
DRH/Vijayawada 
SER 4 (1)  
CH/Garden reach 
(2)  
CH/Garden reach & SDRH/ Tata 
SECR 3 (1)  
SDRH/Bhilai 
(3)  
CH/Bilaspur, DRH/ Raipur & 
SDRH/Bhilai 
Total 
(Zones/ 
units) 
12/55 9/22 12/29 
CH- Central Hospital, PUH- Production Unit Hospital , SSH- Super Specialty Hospital,  
DRH- Divisional Railway Hospital, SDRH- Sub-divisional Railway Hospital 
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
100  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-5.6 
 (Refer Para No. 5.6.) 
Status of proper storage facility of BMW 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. 
of 
selected 
Units 
Places, where 
BMW is stacked, 
were not fenced 
Untreated BMW 
stored beyond 48 
hours 
Containers/ 
bags, used for 
storing BMW, 
were not 
properly 
labeled 
CR 5 1 (SDRH/ Igatpuri) - - 
ER 4 - 3(DRH/Howrah, 
SDRH/ Andal & 
Liluah workshop 
Hospital) 
- 
ECR 4 - - 1 (SDRH/Gaya) 
NCR 3 - 1 (SDRH/ Kanpur) 2 (CH/ Prayagraj 
& 
SDRH/Kanpur) 
NER 4 2 (Lalit Narayan 
Mishra Hospital 
Hospital, Gorakhpur 
& DRH/ Varanasi)  
- - 
NEFR 5 1 (SDRH/Rangiya) - 1 
(SDRH/Rangiya)  
SR 6 1 (RH/ Perambur) - 1 (SDRH/ 
Podnur) 
SER 4 - - 1 (SDRH/Tata) 
SECR 3 1(DRH/Raipur) - - 
WR 5 3(DRH/Ratlam, 
DRH/ Rajkot & 
SDRH/ Valsad) 
3 (JRH, Mumbai, 
DRH/Rajkot & 
Workshop Hospital, 
Dahod,) 
- 
Total 
(Zones/ 
units) 
10/43 6/9 3/7 5/6 
CH- Central Hospital, PUH- Production Unit Hospital, SSH- Super Specialty Hospital, DRH- Divisional Railway 
Hospital, SDRH- Sub-divisional Railway Hospital 
Source- Records of Hospitals and Joint Inspection   

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  101  
 
Annexure-5.7 
 (Refer Para No 5.7) 
Non-compliance of norms prescribed under BMW Rules for disposal of BMW 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Vehicles 
used for 
transporting 
not labeled 
as per 
BMW Rules 
Bar coding 
of 
containers 
was not 
done  
Global 
positioning 
system was 
not provided 
on the 
vehicles 
Timely 
collection of 
BMW were 
not ensured 
by occupier 
Occupier was 
not allowed to 
inspect the 
treatment 
facility by 
operator 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
CR 5 - (4) 
CH/Byculla, 
DRH/ 
Kalyan, 
SDRH/ 
Igatpuri & 
SDRH/ 
Kurudwari  
(4) 
CH/Byculla, 
DRH/ Kalyan, 
SDRH/ 
Igatpuri & 
SDRH/ 
Kurudwari 
- (2) CH/ 
Byculla & 
SDRH/ Igatpuri 
ER 4 - (1) 
Workshop 
hospital, 
Liluah 
(4) CH/ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/Howrah, 
SDRH/ Andal 
& Workshop 
hospital, 
Liluah  
(3) 
DRH/Howrah, 
SDRH/ Andal 
&  Workshop 
Hospital/Liluah 
(4) CH/ 
Sealdah, 
DRH/Howrah, 
SDRH/ Andal 
& Workshop 
hospital, Liluah 
ECR 4 (1) SDRH/ 
Gaya 
(3) CSSH/ 
Patna, DRH/ 
Danapur & 
SDRH/Gaya  
(2) DRH/ 
Danapur & 
SDRH/Gaya 
(1) SDRH/ 
Gaya 
(2) CSSH/ 
Patna  & DRH/ 
Sonpur 
NR 8 - (2) DRH/ 
Moradabad 
& SDRH/ 
Ananad 
Vihar 
(2) DRH/ 
Moradabad & 
SDRH/ 
Ananad Vihar 
- (4) DRH/ 
Moradabad, 
SDRH/ Ananad 
Vihar, SDRH/ 
Amritsar & 
PUH/ Rae 
bareli 
NCR 3 (1) SDRH/ 
Kanpur 
(2) CH/ 
Prayagraj & 
DRH/Agra 
(2) DRH/Agra 
& 
SDRH/Kanpur 
(1) SDRH/ 
Kanpur 
- 
NER 4 - (1) 
Mechanical 
workshop 
hospital, 
Gorakhpur 
(1) 
Mechanical 
workshop 
hospital, 
Gorakhpur 
- (1) DRH, 
Varanasi 
NEFR 5 (3) DRH/ 
Dibrugarh 
Town, DRH/ 
Katihar & 
SDRH/ 
Rangiya 
(5) CH/ 
Maligaon, 
DRH/ 
Dibrugarh 
Town, DRH/ 
Katihar, 
SDRH/ New 
Jalpai & 
SDRH/ 
Rangiya 
(5) CH/ 
Maligaon, 
DRH/ 
Dibrugarh 
Town, DRH/ 
Katihar, 
SDRH/ New 
Jalpai & 
SDRH/ 
Rangiya 
-  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
102  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
Total No. of 
selected 
Hospitals 
Vehicles 
used for 
transporting 
not labeled 
as per 
BMW Rules 
Bar coding 
of 
containers 
was not 
done  
Global 
positioning 
system was 
not provided 
on the 
vehicles 
Timely 
collection of 
BMW were 
not ensured 
by occupier 
Occupier was 
not allowed to 
inspect the 
treatment 
facility by 
operator 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
NWR 4 - (4) CH/ 
Jaipur, DRH/ 
Bikaner, 
SDRH/Abu 
Road & 
SDRH/ 
Bandikui 
(4) CH/ 
Jaipur, DRH/ 
Bikaner, 
SDRH/Abu 
Road & 
SDRH/ 
Bandikui 
- (2) DRH/ 
Bikaner, 
SDRH/Abu 
Road  
SR 6 - (4) CH/ 
Perambur, 
Railway 
Hospital, 
ICF, DRH/ 
Arakkonam 
& SDRH/ 
Villupuram 
- - - 
SCR 5 - (2) CH/ 
Lallaguda & 
DRH/ 
Vijayawada 
(2) CH/ 
Lallaguda & 
DRH/ 
Vijayawada 
- - 
SER 4 (01) 
SDRH/Tata 
(03) CH/ 
Garden 
Reach, DRH/ 
Khragpur & 
SDRH/Tata 
(03) CH/ 
Garden Reach, 
DRH/ 
Khragpur & 
SDRH/Tata 
- -- 
SECR 3 - (3) CH/ 
Bilaspur 
DRH/ Raipur 
& SDRH/ 
Bhilai 
(3) CH/ 
Bilaspur 
DRH/ Raipur 
& SDRH/ 
Bhilai 
- - 
WR 5 - (4) CH/ 
Mumbai, 
DRH/ 
Ratlam, 
DRH/ Rajkot 
& SDRH/ 
Valsad  
- (2) DRH/ 
Rajkot & 
Workshop 
hospital, 
Dahod 
- 
WCR 4 - (3) DRH/ 
Kota, SDRH/ 
New Katni 
Jn. & SDRH/ 
Gangapur 
City 
(2) DRH/ 
Kota, & 
SDRH/ 
Gangapur City 
- - 
Metro Rly 3 - - (1) Tapan 
Sinha 
Memorial  
Hospital, 
Tollygunge 
- -- 
Total 
(Zones/ 
units) 
 
15/67 4/6 14/41 13/35 4/7 6/15 
CH- Central Hospital, PUH- Production Unit Hospital, SSH- Super Specialty Hospital, DRH- Divisional Railway 
Hospital, SDRH- Sub-Divisional Railway Hospital 
Source- Records of Hospitals. 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  103  
 
Annexure-5.8 
(Refer Para No. 5.9) 
Annual report under the BMW Rules not submitted by Selected Hospitals 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Period for which Annual 
report not submitted  
CR 5 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Hospital, Byculla, 
Mumbai 
- 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kalyan 2015-16, 2016-17, 2018-19 
& 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Nagpur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Igatpuri 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kurudwari 2015-16 to 2019-20 
ER 4 B.R. Singh Hospital, Sealdah - 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Howrah 2016-17 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Andal 2015-16 to 2 019-20 
Liluah Workshop Hospital, Liluah 2016-17, 2018-19 &  
2019-20 
ECR 4 Central Super Specialty Hospital, Patna 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Danapur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Sonpur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gaya 2015-16 to 2019-20 
ECoR 2 Central Hospital, Bhubaneswar 2015-16 to 201 9-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Waltair 2015-16 to 201 9-20 
NR 8 Super Specialty Hospital, RDSO, Lucknow 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Central Hospital, E&PI, New Delhi - 
Production Unit Hospital, MCF, Raebareli 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Moradabad 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Ambala Cant - 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, ANVT - 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Amritsar 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Workshop Hospital, Jagdhari 2015-16 to 2019-20 
NCR 3 Central Hospital, Prayagraj 2015-16 to 2019-2 0 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Agra 2015-16 to 2019-2 0 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kanpur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
NER 4 Lalit Narayan Mishra Railway Hospital, 
Gorakhpur 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Varanasi 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gonda 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Mechanical Workshop Hospital, Gorakhpur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
NEFR 5 Central Hospital, Maligaon 2015-16 to 2019-2 0 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Dibrugarh Town  2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Katihar 2015-16 to 201 9-20 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
104  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Period for which Annual 
report not submitted  
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, New 
Jalpaiguri 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Rangiya 2015-16 to  2019-20 
NWR 4 Central Hospital, Jaipur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Bikaner - 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Abu Road 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Bandikui 2015-16, 2016-17, 2018-19 
& 2019-20 
SR 6 Railway Hospital, Perambur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Railway Hospital, Integral Coach Factory 2016-17 to  2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Goldenrock 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Arakkonam 2015-16 to 2 019-20 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Podanur 2015-16 t o 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Villupuram 2015-16  to 2019-20 
SCR 5 Central Hospital, Lallaguda 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Vijayawada 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Nanded 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital,  Purna 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital,  RYP 
(Wagon Workshop Hospital, Guntupalli) 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
SER 4 Central Hospital, Garden Reach - 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kharagpur - 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Adra 2015-16 to 2019-2 0  
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Tatanagar 2015-16  to 2019-20  
SECR 3 Central Hospital, Bilaspur 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Raipur 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Bhilai 
Marshalling yard  
2015-16 to 2019-20 
SWR 3 Central Hospital, Hubballi - 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Mysuru 2015-16, 2017-1 8 & 2018-
19 
Railway Hospital, Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka 
2015-16 & 2016-17 
WR 5 Jagjivan Ram Hospital, Mumbai Central 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Ratlam 2015-16 to 2018-19 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Rajkot 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Valsad 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Workshop Hospital, Dahod - 
WCR 4 Central Hospital, Jabalpur 2015-16 to 2019-20  
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kota 2015-16 to 2019-2 0 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  105  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Period for which Annual 
report not submitted  
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, New Katni 
Jn. 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Gangapur 
City 
2015-16 to 2019-20 
RPU & 
Metro 
Rly 
3 Tapan Sinha Memorial Hospital, Tollygunge 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Central Hospital, BLW, Varanasi 2015-16 to 2019-20 
Kasturba Gandhi Hospital, CLW/Chittaranjan  - 
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
  

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
106  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-5.9 
(Refer Para No. 5.11) 
Non-existence of monitoring mechanism required under the BMW Rules  
Zonal 
Railway 
No. 
of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Whether 
BMW 
management 
committee 
formed 
If formed 
Whether 
minimum 2 
meetings are 
held each year 
CR 5 Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Hospital, Byculla, 
Mumbai 
No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kalyan No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Nagpur No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Igatpuri No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kurudwari No N.A 
ER 4 B.R. Singh Hospital, Sealdah Yes Yes 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Howrah Yes Yes 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Andal No N.A 
Liluah Workshop Hospital, Liluah No N.A 
ECR 4 Central Super Specialty Hospital, Patna No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Danapur No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Sonpur No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gaya No N.A 
ECoR 2 Central Hospital, Bhubaneswar No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Waltair No N.A 
NR 8 Super Specialty Hospital, RDSO, Lucknow No N.A 
Central Hospital, E&PI, New Delhi Yes Yes 
Production Unit Hospital, MCF, Raebareli No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Moradabad No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Ambala Cant No N.A 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, ANVT No N.A 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Amritsar No N.A 
Workshop Hospital, Jagdhari No N.A 
NCR 3 Central Hospital, Prayagraj No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Agra No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Kanpur No N.A 
NER 4 Lalit Narayan Mishra Railway Hospital, 
Gorakhpur 
Yes Yes 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Varanasi Yes Yes 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  107  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. 
of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Whether 
BMW 
management 
committee 
formed 
If formed 
Whether 
minimum 2 
meetings are 
held each year 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Gonda Yes Yes 
Mechanical Workshop Hospital, Gorakhpur No N.A 
NEFR 5 Central Hospital, Maligaon Yes No 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Dibrugarh Town No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Katihar Yes Yes 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, New 
Jalpaiguri 
Yes No 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Rangiya No N.A 
NWR 4 Central Hospital, Jaipur Yes No 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Bikaner Yes No 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Abu Road No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Bandikui No N.A 
SR 6 Railway Hospital, Perambur No N.A 
Railway Hospital, Integral Coach Factory No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Goldenrock No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Arakkonam No N.A 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Podanur No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Villupuram No N.A 
SCR 5 Central Hospital, Lallaguda No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Vijayawada No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Nanded No N.A 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital,  Purna No N.A 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital,  RYP 
(Wagon Workshop Hospital, Guntupalli) 
Yes No 
SER 4 Central Hospital, Gardenrich Yes Yes 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kharagpur Yes Yes 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Adra Yes Yes 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Tatanagar No N.A 
SECR 3 Central Hospital, Bilaspur No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Raipur No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Bhilai 
Marshalling yard  
No N.A 
SWR 3 Central Hospital, Hubballi No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Mysuru No N.A 
Railway Hospital, Rail Wheel Factory, 
Yelahanka 
Yes No 
WR 5 Jagjivan Ram Hospital, Mumbai Central Yes Yes 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Ratlam No N.A 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Rajkot No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, Valsad No N.A 
Workshop Hospital, Dahod Yes No 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
108  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Zonal 
Railway 
No. 
of 
Units 
Name of the Railway Hospitals Whether 
BMW 
management 
committee 
formed 
If formed 
Whether 
minimum 2 
meetings are 
held each year 
WCR 4 Central Hospital, Jabalpur Yes No 
Divisional Railway Hospital, Kota No N.A 
Sub-divisional Railway Hospital, New Katni Jn.  Yes No 
Sub- divisional Railway Hospital, Gangapur 
City 
No N.A 
RPU & Metro 
Rly 
3 Tapan Sinha Memorial Hospital, Tollygunge No N.A 
Central Hospital, BLW, Varanasi No N.A 
Kasturba Gandhi Hospital, CLW/CRJ No N.A 
Total 
(Zones/units)  
17/72   Yes- 20 
No- 52 
11 
 
Source- Records of Hospitals. 
 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
 
Report No. 16 of 2022  109  
 
Annexure-6.1 
(Referred in Para 6.2) 
Statement showing non-maintenance of the records of generation, storage of E-Waste in 
the Form-2 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Unit in which details of 
E-Waste not 
maintained in Form 2 
Name of Unit 
1 2 3 
CR (03) 
EDP-02, PRS-01 
EDP/Head Quarter/Chhatrapati Shiwaji Maharaj Termin us, 
EDP/Mumbai Divn.,  PRS/Pune 
ER (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
PRS/Howrah, EDP/Head Quarter, EDP/Sealdah, EDP/Howrah  
ECR (04)  
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Hajipur, EDP/Sonpur, EDP/Danapur 
PRS/Rajendra Nagar 
ECoR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Bhubaneswar, EDP/Khurda, EDP/Sambalpur 
PRS/Vishakhapattanam  
NR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Lucknow, EDP/Patiala, EDP/Head Quarter,  PRS/New Delhi 
NCR (04) 
EDP-03 
PRS-01 
EDP/Jhansi, EDP/Head Quarter, PRS/Agra,  EDP/Agra 
NER (03) 
EDP-02, PRS-01 
EDP/Head Quarter, EDP/Lucknow,  PRS/Manduadih 
NEFR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Maligaon, EDP/Lumding 
EDP/Alipurduar 
PRS/Katihar 
NWR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01,  
PRS/Ajmer, EDP/Bikaner, EDP/Jaipur, 
EDP/Head Quarter 
SR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
PRS/Chennai, EDP/Head Quarter /Chennai, EDP/Chennai , 
EDP/Palakkad  
SCR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/ Head Quarter/SCR, EDP/Secunderabad, EDP/Vijaya wada 
& PRS/Secunderabad, 
SER (05) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Head Quarter, EDP/Kharagapur, EDP/Ranchi,  
PRS/Ranchi 
SECR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
PRS/Bilaspur,  
EDP/Head Quarter/Bilaspur, EDP/Raipur, EDP/Nagpur  
SWR 02) 
EDP-01, PRS-01 
EDP/Hubballi 
PRS/Mysuru 
WR (04) 
EDP-03, PRS-01 
EDP/Head Quarter/Church Gate, EDP/Mumbai Central, 
EDP/Ahmedabad, PRS/Mumbai Central,  
WCR (03) 
EDP-02, PRS-01  
EDP/Jabalpur, EDP/Kota and PRS/ Jabalpur 
RPU & 
Metro 
Rail 
(03) 
EDP-03 
EDP/Metro, EDP/BLW/Varanasi, EDP/CLW/Chittaranjan 
Source- Records of stations/Divisions 

Annexure – Waste Management in Indian Railways  
110  Report No. 16 of 2022  
 
Annexure-6.2 
(Referred in Para 6.2) 
Statement showing the details of non-maintenance of  Form 2 and non-submission of 
returns in Form 3 by the scrap depots and non-compl iance of manifest system for 
transportation of E-Waste. 
Name 
of 
Zone 
Name of Scrap/Store Depot where 
E-Waste data not maintained in 
Form 2 
Annual Returns 
submitted in FORM 
3 
Manifest System 
for 
transportation 
followed 
1 2 3 4 
CR SMM(G)/Curry Road No No 
ER Belur Scrap Yard No Yes 
ECR Scrap depot/Sonpur No No 
ECoR Scrap depot/Mancheswar No No 
NR General Scrap Depot/Shakurbasti No No 
NCR Divisional Scrap Depot /Jhansi No No 
NER Scrap Depot/Gorakhpur No No 
NFR Scrap depot/Pandu No No 
SR GSD/Perambur  No No 
NWR Scrap Yard/ Bikaner No No 
SCR Scrap Depot/Lallaguda No Yes 
SER Divisional Scrap depot/Kharagpur Yes No 
SECR GSD/Raipur No No 
SWR GSD/Hubballi No No 
WR GSD/Mahalaxmi No No 
WCR Scrap depot/Jabalpur No No 
Metro 
Rly 
Scrap Depot/Noapara No No 
Source- Records of stations/Divisions 