 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Follow-up on the Performance Audit of 
Preservation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Antiquities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Civil) 
Ministry of Culture 
Report No. 10 of 2022 
(Performance Audit) 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
i 
 
 
 
Contents 
Para Description Page 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v - viii 
Chapter 1: Overview 
1.1 Legislative Framework and Infrastructure 1 
1.2 Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General 4 
1.3 Initiatives undertaken by ASI since previous Report 5 
Chapter 2: Audit Approach 
2.1 Audit Objectives 7 
2.2 Audit Criteria 7 
2.3 Audit Scope and Selection 7 
2.4 Audit Methodology 8 
2.5 Structure of the Report 8 
2.6  Acknowledgement 9 
A. Policy and Regulations 
Chapter 3: Policy and Regulations 
3.1 Formulation and updation of Acts, Rules and Laws 10 
3.2 Preparation of Heritage Bye-Laws and Site-Plans 13 
B. Human Resources Management 
Chapter 4: Governance and Infrastructure 
4.1 Organisation and Governance in ASI 17 
4.2 Human Resources for Heritage Conservation 21 
4.3 Working of Circles and other offices in ASI 24 
4.4 Appointment of Members in National Monument Authority 27 
C. Financial Management 
Chapter 5: Financial Management 
5.1 Expenditure and Receipts from Conservation Activities 28 
5.2 Financial Management in ASI 32 
5.3 Revenue Generation in ASI 33 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
ii 
D. Functional Issues 
Chapter 6: Identification and Notification of Monuments and Antiquities 
6.1 National Database of all Monuments and Antiquities 38 
6.2 Database of Monuments and Antiquities with ASI 40 
6.3 Monuments of National Importance under ASI 41 
6.4 Antiquities 46 
Chapter 7: Monuments Management 
7.1 Management of Centrally Protected Monuments 48 
7.2 Preservation and Conservation works at Monuments 54 
7.3 Security and Safeguard arrangements 56 
Chapter 8: Antiquities Management 
8.1 National Level Museums 58 
8.2 ASI Site-Museums 67 
8.3 Other Museums under ASI 70 
Chapter 9: Exploration and Excavation 
9.1 Exploration activities in ASI 73 
9.2 Excavation activities in ASI 74 
Chapter 10: Good Practices in Heritage Conservation 79 - 80 
Chapter 11: Conclusions and Recommendations 81 - 85 
Annexes, Glossary & List of Abbreviations 87 - 112 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
iii 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
The Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) had 
undertaken (2012-13) a Performance Audit  of Preservation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Antiquities and the Report (No. 18 of 2013) containing the 
findings of the Performance Audit was tabled in Parliament in August 2013. The 
Performance A udit Report was discussed by the Public Accounts Commit tee 
(PAC) and several recommendations based on concerns raised by Audit were 
made vide its Reports No. 39 (April 2016) and 118 (December 2018). 
This Report of the CAG for the year ended March 2021 is a follow -up of the 
previous Performance Audit Report (No. 18 of 2013). The Report contain the 
results of examination of the action  taken by the Ministry of Culture/ASI  on the 
areas of concern reported earlier, recommendations made by the PAC and 
assurance given by the Ministry/ASI. The audit was conducted during November 
2020 to March 2021. Auditee units covered during the audit include Ministry of 
Culture, Archaeological Survey of India  (ASI), National Monument Authority, 
National Culture Fund, National Mission o n Monuments and Antiquities and six 
National level Museums. Seven States viz. Delhi, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and West Bengal were selected for examining the 
monuments, sites and offices of ASI viz.  Circles, Branch offices, Institute of 
Archaeology, Site-Museums, Monuments and Excavation sites. 
The Report  has been prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution and the audit was conducted in conformity with 
the auditing standards issued by the CAG. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
v 
 Executive Summary 
Introduction: Our archaeological heritage include over 4 lakh plus structures and 58 
lakh plus antiquities, mostly under the control of Central and State level authorities, 
museums, religious bodies, etc. In view of  our unique and priceless cultural and 
archaeological heritage,  traditional knowledge, cus toms, and also due to rapid 
urbanisation a dedicated infrastructure and legislative framework to protect our 
archaeological heritage is important. 
The Ministry of Culture is responsible for the preservation, conservation and 
promotion of Indian heritage and culture. The Ministry , through the Archaeological 
Survey of India (established in 1861) , Museums, National Monument Authority and 
other agencies is engaged in the protection of all centrally protected monuments of 
national importance, excavation of historical sites, collection and showcasing of 
artefacts, their documentation and digitisation, etc. 
The Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) had undertaken 
(2012-13) a Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of Monuments 
and Antiquities and the Report (No. 18 of 2013) was tabled in the Parliament in 
August 2013. The Audit Report w as discussed by the Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC) in its Reports No. 39 (April 2016) and 118 (December 2018).  The PAC had 
made 25 specific recommendations after reorganising the observations in four groups 
viz.  Policy, Human Resources, Financial Management and Functional Issues. 
The present Report is a follow -up of previous Performance Audit. The audit was 
undertaken to verify the actions taken on the areas of concern reported earlier and to 
examine the extent of action taken on the recommendations made  by the PAC. The 
follow-up audit was undertaken during 2020- 21. Stakeholders covered during the 
previous audit viz. Ministry of Culture, ASI, National Culture Fund, National 
Monument Authority, National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities  and various 
national level museums were included in the scope of follow -up audit. Seven States 
viz. Delhi, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and West 
Bengal were also selected for examining the monuments and ASI offices at lower 
level viz. circles and branch offices, site-museums, monuments and excavation sites.  
In the present audit report, c hapters containing issues reported previously and 
relevant contemporary findings have been arranged in four groups as discussed by 
the PAC. Despite it being a follow-up audit report, efforts have been made to present 
the findings as an independent audit report. 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
vi 
Key findings:  Important audit observations relating to compliance of the 
recommendations of the PAC and other concern areas are as below: 
• Against the recommendation of the PAC, notification of rules and conservation 
activities under National Conservation Policy, notification of Archaeological 
Excavation Policy, updation of Antiquities and Art Treasure Act, modification 
in Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act  regarding 
system for recording footfall was not done. Despite PAC’s recommendation, 
there was no uniform procedure for museums under the control of the 
Ministry/ASI. Ministry/ASI reported that most of thes e exercise were under 
process and will be finalized during the year.  
(Para 3.1) 
• National Monument Authority was constituted as a statutory body (in 2011) 
for providing no-objection certificates for undertaking construction activities in 
the prohibited/regulated area of the monuments. The basic objective was 
implementation of the statu tory provisions through preparation of Heritage 
Bye-Laws (HBL) and Site -Plans for each monument.  However, out of 3693 
Centrally Protected Monuments , HBL for only 31 monuments have been 
notified while finalisation of HBL for 210 monuments  were at different stages 
viz. notification, consultation, etc. As such there have been considera ble delay 
in the process. 
 (Para 3.2) 
• ASI had no strategy or road- map (long term/medium term) to fulfill its 
mandate. The conservation activities were being un dertaken on ad- hoc/annual 
basis. Central Advisory Board on Archaeology conceptuali sed as apex body to 
advise ASI on m atters relating to archaeology was inactive after March 2018  
and had only one meeting during 2014- 18 (in October 2014) . Despite 
recommendation of the PAC no coordination and monitoring mechanism was 
established at Central or Circle levels to check the incidents of encroachment. 
(Para 4.1) 
• With regard to human resource constraints, PAC had asked the Ministry/ASI to 
expedite the restructuring process of ASI and ma ke effort in filling the current 
vacancies. However, overall vacancy position of ASI had remained static at 29 
per cent  since earlier audit. At management levels and in important 
conservation branches of ASI the position had further deteriorated.  
(Para 4.2) 
• After 2017- 18, increase in  ASI’s overall expenditure and its expenditure on 
heritage protection activities  (40 per cent of total expenditure)  was moderate. 
Ministry had intimated the PAC regarding its decision to increase the budget 
on exploration/excavation activities to five per cent of the total budget. Despite 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
vii 
the assurance given by the Ministry , ASI’s expenditure on excavation and 
exploration activities was still less than one per cent.  
(Para 5.1) 
• To provide external budgetary funding for heritage conservation National 
Culture Fund was established in November 1996. The PAC had recommended 
that coordination between ASI and NCF should be strengthened to rope in 
more corporate groups and individuals into funding conservation and visitors’ 
amenities at monuments. In this regard , against the primary corpus of ` 19.50 
crore, endowment available with NCF rose to `  76 crore by March 2021. Less 
than 14 per cent utilisation towards the objectives of NCF indicate absence of 
its coordination with ASI.  In this regard, ASI intimated that it had prepared a 
shelf of around 50 works for sharing with prospective sponsors. 
(Para 5.1.2) 
• In view of recommendation of the PAC, ASI had revised its ticket and other 
charges for monument s and had included more monuments under the ticketed 
category. However, there was weak reconciliation and financial control 
mechanism.  
(Paras 5.2 and 5.3) 
• National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was launched by 
the Government (in 2007) to prepare a national database of all monuments and 
antiquities in the country in five years. NMMA was extended for another five 
year period (2012-17) and later m erged with ASI. Out of 4 lakh plus heritage 
structures and 58 lakh plus antiquities, only 1.84 lakh monuments and 16.83 
lakh antiquities have been documented so far. NMMA attributed logistical 
insufficiency, ineffective monitoring and budgetary constraints  as the reasons 
for defaults in achieving the target. Audit identified absence of strategy/road-
map, technical capability, mechanism to control and carry out the work as 
other reasons for this delay. 
 (Para 6.1) 
• Ministry had informed the PAC that categorisation of monuments in eight 
classified categories was completed and handed over to NMA for 
consideration and notification. It was noted that the process was incomplete. A 
list of only 915 monuments was prepared by ASI which was still under 
consideration. 
(Para 6.2.1) 
• PAC had recommended that guidelines for determination of national 
importance of monuments t o be finalised at the earliest and after this a 
comprehensive survey should be conducted to identify the exact number of 
monuments that can be protected. It was noted that guidelines was not 
prepared, no survey/review of monuments was undertaken by ASI. Instances 
defining absence of criteria for centrally protected monuments as reported 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
viii 
earlier were still existing. In this regard, Ministry/ASI inf ormed that taking of 
survey is an ongoing phenomenon and the view of PAC was not 
relevant/possible to be implemented. 
(Para 6.3) 
• Discrepancies in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments and issues related 
with de -notification of missing monuments (as reported earlier) were still 
existing despite assurance that efforts would be made for their rectification. 
Ministry/ASI stated that the observation have been noted and corrective 
measures will be taken. 
(Paras 6.3.3 and 6.3.4) 
• Joint physical inspection of selected monuments viz. World Heritage Sites, 
Adarsh and Ticketed Monuments, Living Monuments, Baolis , Kos-Minar, etc. 
revealed cases of (i) absence of public amenities viz. public toilet, d rinking 
water, parking, ramp, guide, security, etc. (ii) issues related with conservation 
works at monuments, and (iii) management of heritage gardens. In this respect 
Ministry/ASI stated that providing/upgrading visitors facilities is a regular 
phenomenon. It also intimated initiatives viz. Adarsh Smarak , Adopt -a-
Heritage scheme for improving the facilities at the monuments. 
(Para 7.1) 
• At selected national level museums  and site museums under ASI,  concerns 
related with antiquity management viz. non-formation of Art Purchase 
Committees, acquisition , accession, verification, display and rotation of 
artefacts, their storage, preservation and security have been included and al so 
depicted through photographs. 
(Paras 8.1 and 8.2) 
• PAC had asked the Ministry/ASI to draw action plan under the excavation 
policy and ensure adequate allocation and effective utilisation of funds for 
these activities. It was noted that ASI had no action plan based on its 
exploration and excavation policy. ASI had not centralised 
information/monitoring system displaying excavation proposals, their status. 
Writing of excavation reports was pending for more than 60 years and its 
expenditure on the activity was less than one per cent. 
(Para 9.2) 
Ministry/ASI was expected to take stock of its performance in view of all the 
previous recommendations made by Audit/PAC  and also in the light of issues 
discussed during the present audit to bring about a holistic change in its working and 
performance. Ministry/ASI had also assured timely action on most of the issues 
included in the Report. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
1 
 
Follow-up on the Performance Audit of  Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter 1: Overview  
India is one of the oldest civili sation in the world. Our cultural and archaeological 
heritage includes customs and traditions, ancient buildings, monuments, heritage 
gardens, antiquities, etc.  Our heritage is priceless, a source of our identity , and 
subject of interest for the entire humanity. The total quantum of India’s built heritage 
and archaeological remains is estimated as four  lakh plus heritage structures across 
the country including C entrally Protected Monuments (CPM), State protected 
monuments, heritage buildings under various religious trusts, historic ci ties and 
archaeological sites. 
According to UNESCO 1, cultural resources of a community can  also be converted 
into economic wealth by promoting the unique identity, traditions  and cultural 
products. Conservation of cultural assets and traditional knowledge developed over 
the period are very effective in strengthening the social capital of communities. Thus, 
heritage conservation can be seen as a cross -cutting factor in economic  and social 
development. The importance of protecting archaeological heritage viz. monuments, 
sites and antiquities, became a global concern  after adoption of a convention in this 
regard by UNESCO in 1972. 
Over a period of time, as a result of insensitive modernisation, urbanisation and theft, 
the legacy of our cultural heritage was being steadily eroded. Also many of our 
heritage structures are still being used in the same manner in which they continue to 
be kept, representing the ‘living’ heritage of Indi a. In view of our specific cultural 
heritage, traditional knowledge and customs , conservation of monuments through a 
dedicated infrastructure and legislative framework is of immense importan ce in the 
country.  
1.1 Legislative Framework and Infrastructure 
During the British Rule, the  Bengal Regulation s and the Madras Regulations , of 
1810 and 1817 respectively, were introduced which vested the  then governments 
with the power to intervene whenever public buildings were under threat of misuse. 
The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)  was established in 1861 to initiate legal 
provisions to protect the historical structures all over India. Important Acts were also 
passed in 1863 and in 1904 which gave authority to the government for preservation 
                                                           
1  The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation  (UNESCO) created in 1945 is 
a specialised agency aimed at promoting world peace and security through international co -
operation in education, sciences and culture. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
2 
 
of monuments. ASI draws its formal inspiration for conservation from the Indian 
Archaeological Policy (IAP), 1915, which mandates the conservation and protection 
of the monuments.  
Article 51A (f) of the Constitution of India stipulate s that ‘ it shall be the duty of 
every citizen of India to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite 
culture’. The Constitution has also divided the jurisdiction over these monuments, 
cultural heritage, and archaeological sites as below:  
Union:   Ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and 
remains, declared by the Parliament by law , to be of national 
importance. 
State: Ancient and historical monuments, other than those declared by the 
Parliament to be of national importance. 
Concurrent: Besides the above, both the Union and States have concurrent 
jurisdiction over a rchaeological sites and remains , other than those 
declared by law and the Parliament to be of national importance. 
The Ministry of Culture (Ministry) is responsible for preservation, conservation, 
promotion and dissemination of all forms of art and culture in the country. It ensures 
collection, preservation and display of antiquities  through various national  level 
museums. The Ministry, through ASI , is engaged in  conservation, preservation and 
maintenance of the Centrally Protected Monuments (CPM) declared as  being of 
national importance and excavations of ancient sites2.  
In addition to ASI , National Culture Fund, National Monument Authority have also 
been established  by the Government  to support the process of conservation and 
protection of monuments. The organisational structure available for the preservation 
and conservation of monuments a nd antiquities u nder the Ministry/ASI, is depicted 
through Chart 1.1: 
                                                           
2  Other monuments are protected by respective State Archaeological Department, Religious Trust,  
etc. 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
3 
 
Chart 1.1: Organisational structure for heritage protection 
Ministry of Culture 
Archaeological 
Survey 
of India 
Attached office of the Ministry 
working with the objectives of 
exploration, excavation, survey, 
preservation and conservation of 
monuments, archaeological sites 
and remains, antiquities.  
ASI perform its mandated role 
through lower level offices i.e. 
Circles, Horticulture Branch, Science 
Branch, Excavation Branch, 
Epigraphy Branch, Temple, Building 
and Village Survey Projects, site-
museums, etc. 
Pt. Deendayal Upadhyay 
Institute of Archaeology 
An institute under ASI for providing higher 
education in the field of Archaeology and 
related subjects. 
National Mission 
on Monuments and 
Antiquities 
Constituted with the objective to prepare database 
(documentation and digitisation) of all monuments 
and antiquities in the country. 
Museums 
National Museum, Delhi National level museums under the 
Ministry (working as autonomous 
bodies/ Sub-ordinate office s of the 
Ministry). These museums are 
having large collection of antiquities, 
manuscripts, artefacts, coins, etc. The 
artefacts are preserved, stored, 
accessioned and displayed by these 
museums.  
Indian Museum, Kolkata 
Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad 
Allahabad Museum, Prayagraj 
Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
Asiatic Society, Mumbai 
Other offices 
National 
Monument 
Authority 
Statutory Body with the mandate to regulate 
construction related activities in the 
protected/regulated areas of the notified 
monuments.  
National Culture 
Fund 
Set up with a view to enable the participation and 
involvement of Corporate and Public Sectors in 
promoting, protecting and preserving the heritage. 
National Museum 
Institute 
The institute provide courses of study, training and 
research facilities in different field of History, Art, 
Conservation and Museology. 
 
In order to efficiently perform the assigned roles, these agencies have been provided 
with following important enactments and manuals: 
The Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878  - Enacted to protect and preserve treasure 
found accidentally but having archaeological and historical value. 
The Ancient Monuments Preservation (AMP) Act, 1904 - Enacted to provide 
effective preservation and authority to the ASI over the monument, particularly those 
which were under the custody of individual or under private ownership. 
Conservation Manual by John Marshall, 1923 - Contained instructions for officials 
to be used during conservation works of monuments. 
The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(AHMASR) (Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951 - Brought out in 
fulfilment of the provision of the Constitution by which all the monuments previously 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
4 
 
protected under the AMP Act, 1904 were re-declared to be of national importance. 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 
1958 - Enacted to provide for the preservation of ancient  
and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains of national 
importance, for the regulation of archaeological excavations and for the protection of 
sculptures, carvings and other like objects . The Act was followed by AMSR Rules, 
1959. 
The Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act, 1972  - Enacted in September 1972 
for effective control over the cultural property, consisting of antiquities and art 
treasures. The Act was followed by AAT Rules, 1973. 
The AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 - The amendment made in 
AMASR Act prescribed the limits of regulated and prohibited area around a 
monument. It also provided for creation of National Monument Authority (NMA). 
This was followed by AMASR Rules 2011, and NMA Rules, 2011. 
National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological 
Sites and Remains (NPC -AMASR), 2014 - The Policy focuses on aspects of 
preservation, conservation, planning, tourism, etc. in respect of monuments of 
national importance. 
The applicable provisions of these Act/Rules have been discussed appropriately in 
the Report. 
1.2 Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General 
The Office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (CAG) had 
undertaken (2012- 13) a Performance 
Audit of Preservation and 
Conservation of Monuments and 
Antiquities and the results of the audit 
was included in the Report No. 18 of 
2013, tabled in the 
Parliament in 
August 2013. The audit was aimed at 
contributing to the process of  
preservation and conservation of 
monuments and antiquities by 
providing an assessment of the work 
being carried out by the Ministry/ASI 
and making suitable 
recommendations for improvement. 
The major findings of the Report are 
summarised in Box 1.1: 
 
 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
5 
 
Box 1.1: Major findings in CAG Report 
Chapter Brief 
2 
ASI did not have a reliable database of exact number of monuments 
under its jurisdiction. No comprehensive survey or review to identify 
monuments of national importance or to modify the existing  list was 
conducted by it . Result of joint physical inspection revealed that 92 
monuments declared as centrally protected were not traceable. 
3 
World Heritage Sites did not receive appropriate care and many  cases 
of encroachment , unauthorised construction around these sites  
including absence of public amenities were reported. 
4 
ASI did not have a conservation policy to address the conservation and 
preservation requirements of monuments. For carrying out conservation 
works, monuments were selected arbitrarily while many monuments 
were never considered for any kind of structural conservation. 
5 
ASI did not have any policy for exploration and excavation . ASI 
spending on this activity was  less than one per cent of  its total 
expenditure. There was poor documentation of the excavation works 
carried out and many excavation proposals were not undertaken. 
6 
ASI did not have a comprehensive policy  or database of the antiquities 
owned by it. Valuable antiquities were found stored in poor condition at 
national level museums. These museums were also having poor system 
for accession, valuation, display and conservation of antiquities. 
8, 11 
There was acute shortage of staff in all key positions in ASI and other  
organisations viz. museums, NMA, etc.  In the functioning of ASI and 
museums, Ministry had failed to take action on various aspects  viz. 
policy and legislation, financial management, human resources, etc. 
The Audit Report of CAG ( hereafter termed as previous Report) was discussed by 
the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) , which brought out its observations and 
recommendations in PAC Reports No. 39 (April 2016) and 118 (December 2018)3. 
The first report of the PAC contained  recommendations on 25 specific issues, of 
which 20 were accepted by the Ministry. Out of five remaining recommendations, 
PAC, in its second report, made further recommendations on four issues and decided 
not to pursue the remaining one. Observations and r ecommendations of the PAC , 
response of the Ministry  and action taken have been suitably  included in this report  
and also summarised vide Annexe 11.1. 
1.3 Initiatives undertaken by ASI since previous Report 
Apart from routine preservation, conservation, exploration related mandated 
activities, since the publication of previous Report, various new initiatives connected 
with heritage conservation were undertaken. Some of these post-audit initiatives 
(since 2013) include: 
                                                           
3   Report was discussed by PAC of 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2018-19 (sixteenth Lok Sabha) 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
6 
 
a) Engaging Google India for displaying 360 0 photography of the CPM  on the 
web including remote sensing of archaeological sites; 
b) Introduction of JATAN software for digitising collections in various museums; 
c) Environmental Impact assessment on the structure and building materials of 
CPM through Air Quality Monitoring; 
d) Selection of monuments as Adarsh Smarak to provide necessary amenities at 
selected monuments; 
e) Launching of e -ticketing facility for providing online booking facility for 
visitors; 
f) Portal on Must See sites of the country; and 
g) Launching of Adopt -a-Heritage scheme (by Ministry of Tourism)  where 
Monument Mitras were allowed to develop/maintain tourist amenities in the 
non-core areas of the monument. 
(Source: Annual Reports of the Ministry) 
In the Budget for the financial year 2020- 21, the Government had announce d 
establishment of an Indian Institute of Heritage and Conservation with the status of a 
Deemed University. A working Group under the chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog, 
with the objective to examine the management of heritage structures and sites in the 
country and provide a future roadmap for  institutional changes and to improve 
management had also prepared and submitted (May 2020) its report. During the 
current audit process some of these initiatives were also examined to make a fair 
assessment of the working of the Ministry in heritage conservation. 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
7 
 
Chapter 2: Audit Approach 
In order to  verify the actions following the concern areas reported  earlier by Audit 
and to examine the assurance given by the Ministry/ASI  to the Parliamentary 
Committee, a follow -up audit4 of the previous Report  was undertaken during 2020-  
21 with audit approach as discussed below: 
2.1 Audit Objectives 
During the follow -up audit, action taken by the Ministry/ASI  on the 
recommendations made by the PAC were examined to assess whether: 
 Process followed for  identification, documentation, protection, preservation 
of monuments and antiquities was adequate; 
 Institutional and implementation mechanism was available for ensuring 
effective heritage conservation; 
 Functioning of Muse ums under the Ministry and site -museums under ASI  
was efficient; and 
 Efficient system for financial and human resources, including internal  
control, mechanisms were available. 
2.2 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria for the follow-up audit was derived from: 
 PAC recommendations and Action Taken Notes  (ATN) on observations 
raised in previous Report; 
 Acts, Rules, Regulations, Policies and other guidelines issued for the 
preservation and conservation of monuments, museums, antiquities, 
exploration activities; and 
 Government Orders, Rules/Regulations and other Manuals. 
2.3 Audit Scope and Selection 
Stakeholders covered during the previous audit viz. Ministry of Culture, ASI 
(including its circle s and branch offices , site-museums and excavation sites), 
National Culture Fund, National Monument Authority, National Mission on 
Monuments and Antiquities were included in the audit scope of follow-up audit. The 
                                                           
4  CAG’s Performance Auditing Guidelines, 2014, describes follow -up audit as an independent 
activity where the auditor examines the corrective actions, the audited entity, or another responsible 
party, had taken on the basis of results of previous performance audits. It is an independent activity 
that increases the value added by the audit process and is not restricted to the implementation of 
recommendations but focuses on whe ther the audited entity has adequately addressed the problem 
and remedied the underlying conditions after sufficient time was allowed for this process.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
8 
 
period covered was from 2013- 14 to 2020-21; however, wherever required, records 
of earlier period were examined to draw conclusion and information updated.  
Based on the observations made in previous Report, seven States viz. Delhi, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and West Bengal 
were selected  for examining the monuments and ASI offices at lower levels. 
Following stakeholders were covered at different levels: 
Central 
Level: 
Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Survey of India, National 
Monument Authority, National Culture Fund, National Mission 
on Monuments and Antiquities, Central Antiquity Collection, 
National Museum Institute and Institute of Archaeology. 
National  
Level  
Museums: 
National Museum (Delhi), Victoria Memorial Hall Museum, 
Asiatic Society, Indian Museum (all in Kolkata), Asiatic 
Society(Mumbai) and Salarjung Museum (Andhra Pradesh). 
States Level: Circle offices (12), Science Branch, Horticulture Branch , 
Excavation Branch and Custom Branch, Site-museums (23).  
At the time of previous Performance Audit, out of then 3678 CPM, 1655 were 
selected for joint physical inspection . During t he follow-up audit, to assess the 
preservation and conservation status, 184 CPM were selected for joint physical 
inspection out of the 1655 CPM selected earlier 5. The selection , spread over seven  
States under different categories of monuments, is depicted in Annexe 2.1. 
2.4 Audit Methodology 
The entry conference was held with the representatives of the Ministry and ASI  in 
December 2020 wherein the audit approach was discussed. Draft report containing 
audit findings, results of joint physical inspection and replies to audit questionnaires  
was submitted to the Ministry in September 2021. Response furnished by all the 
stakeholders have been considered and appropriately included in this Report. 
2.5 Structure of the Report 
The previous Report, divided into 12 chapters, was discussed by the PAC after 
reorganising observations in four groups’ viz. Policy, Human Resources, Financial 
Management and Functional Issues. Accordingly, i n the present audit report, 
Chapters containing issues reported previously and relevant findings from the current 
audit have been arranged in the same four groups as below: 
 
                                                           
5  As of December 2021, 3693 monuments have been declared by ASI as CPM 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
9 
 
A. Policy Level Issues Chapter 3-  Policy and Regulations 
B. Human Resources 
Management 
Chapter 4-  Human Resources Management 
C. Financial Management Chapter 5-  Financial Management 
D.  Functional Issues Chapter 6- Identification and Notification 
of Monuments and Antiquities 
Chapter 7- Monuments Management 
Chapter 8- Antiquities Management 
Chapter 9- Exploration and Excavation 
Chapters one and two provide an overview of the subject and audit approach adopted 
during the audit  process while Chapters 10 and 11 respectively present examples of 
good practices adopted for heritage management and summary of the report. Despite 
it being a follow-up audit report, efforts have been made to present the findings as an 
independent audit report. 
2.6  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges co-operation and assistance provided by the Ministry of Culture 
and other stakeholders involved in the au dit process for providing 
information/records. The inputs provided by field level staff during joint physical 
inspection were also useful in gaining an understanding of the activities related to 
heritage management. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
Policy and Regulations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

            Martand Sun Temple (Jammu and Kashmir) 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
10 
 
Chapter 3: Policy and Regulations 
Availability of appropriate Act s, Rule s, Laws, and Guidelines and their 
contemporary relevance is a pre-requisite for preservation and conservation of 
monuments and antiquities . In this chapter , issues connected with policy  and 
regulations have been discussed. 
3.1 Formulation and updation of Acts, Rules and Laws 
Observations on various Acts, Rules and other Laws available for preservation and 
conservation of monuments and antiquities  discussed in the previous Report  were 
reviewed by the PAC. PAC had made several recommendations  prescribing timely 
formulation of  new Act/ Rules or updation of existing one. It was noted that  the 
Ministry/ASI had not taken desired level of  action on most of these  policy related  
recommendation as discussed below: 
A. National Conservation Policy 
The National Policy for conservation of ancient monuments, archaeological sites and 
remains was notified in February 2014. The PAC had recommended the Ministry to 
also notify the rules under the Policy to streamline notification and de-notification of 
monuments and their conservation activities . In this respect , the Ministry had 
intimated (April 2016) the PAC that guidelines on notification and de -notification of 
monuments had been drafted and uploaded on the website for public comments. 
However, during follow -up audit, no such document/rule was found prepared or 
notified by ASI.  
Ministry/ASI in response intimated (January/February 2022) that guidelines on 
notification and de -notification of monuments were not to be issued under the 
Conservation Policy. It was part of Rules under AMASR Act 1958 for which a 
Committee was being finalised.  
Audit noted that the reply was contrary to the earlier response of the Ministry. The 
recommended rules as envisaged by the PAC were not yet finalised and notified as of 
January 2022. 
B. National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and Explorations 
The National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and Exploration was approved by 
the Ministry of Culture in March 2015.  The PAC had asked the Ministry to expedite 
the final notification of the Policy for Excavations and Explorations  so that the 
public resources earmarked for these activities were properly streamlined and 
focused. During follow-up audit i t was noted that notification of the Excavation and 
Exploration Policy was not done. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
11 
 
Ministry/ASI in response stated (January 2022) that while notifying the said policy, 
certain observations pertaining to the policy being benchmarked to the international 
best practices and use of technology were brought to the notice of ASI by critical 
stakeholders including NITI Aayog. Therefore, the said policy was under review to 
make it more comprehensive which  will be notified before the end of the financial 
year. 
Audit noted that NITI Aayog had asked the ASI (May 2020) to revisit and update the 
document keeping in view changing scenarios, advancement of technology, etc . as 
the same was originally drafted in 2009. In this respect , ASI had intimated 
(December 2020 and December 2021) that this exercise was under process.  As such, 
there have been considerable delay in updation and finalisation /notification of 
National Policy on Archaeological Exploration and Excavation.  
C. Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act  
The PAC was concerned that the process for amending the AAT Act, which started in 
1997, was pending even after a lapse of two decades. It desired that the Ministry 
expedite the amendment in the respective Act.  In this regard, the Ministry had 
informed the PAC that in order to make the Act simple, implementable and effective, 
a committee to suggest suitable amendment or framing of a new draft was 
constituted. Subsequently, ASI intimated (August 2017) through ATN that in place 
of AAT Act, 1972, draft of two new Acts i.e.  The Antiquities and Art Treasure 
(Export and Import Control) Act, and Antiquities and Art Treasure Act was prepared 
and submitted to the Ministry for consideration. However, after recommendation of 
the Ministry of Law, it was preparing a revised single Act clubbing the two Acts.   
While responding to progress on the Act, ASI  clarified (December 2020 and 
December 2021 ) that the exercise was  a time taking process requiring meticulous 
discussions and deliberation.    ASI while accepting the facts f urther stated (January 
2022) that it was working in consultation with the Ministry on amendments to be 
carried out under the AAT Act, 1972. It also submitted that the work was likely to be 
completed in year 2022.   The fact remains that despite instruction of PAC, exercise 
was still ongoing since 1997. 
D. Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) 
Act  
PAC had asked the Ministry to carry out necessary modifications in AMASR Act and 
put in place a system of recording footfalls in non-ticketed monuments and to resolve 
the issue of delay in categorisation of monuments. It was noted that necessary 
amendment in AMASR Act had not been made and the issue of categorisation of 
monuments was pending  (refer Para 6.2.1) . Further, there was still no system of 
recording footfalls in non-ticketed monuments (refer Para 5.3.1). 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
12 
 
Ministry/ASI in  its reply (January 2022) submitted that the Bill to amend the 
AMASR Act, 1958 was placed before the Parliament in  January 2018.  The Lok 
Sabha passed the Bill on 02 January 2018 but Rajya Sabha referred the said Bill to 
Select Committee.   After various deliberations, the Bill was recommended by the 
Select Committee .  However, the said Bill was lapsed due to dissolution of the 
Parliament.  It informed that at present, final details of the amendments were being 
worked out. 
E. Uniform procedures for Archaeological Museums  and Management of 
 Antiquities 
The PAC had noted that comprehensive policy guidelines addressing all issues 
related with management of antiquities  viz. acquisition, accession, custody, rotation, 
etc.at museums under the control of the Ministry and also for site-museums under 
ASI was not available. Ministry had informed the PAC about following steps being 
undertaken by it: 
 drafting and finalisation of uniform policy for acquisition of art objects; 
 constitution of committee to work out uniform security policy; and 
 constitution of committee to prepare standard manual of procedures. 
PAC was of the view that artefacts of culture and cultural excavations are the 
pristine cultural glory of any nation and therefore it  recommended that the Ministry 
should expedite the implementation of a uniform procedures for all museums.  
Audit noted that no uniform procedure  for museums under the control of the 
Ministry/ASI covering all issues as recommended by PAC  was available. ASI 
initially stated (March 2021) that preparation, modification and following of such 
document would be based on the direction of the Ministry. Audit however  noted that 
no such document/direction was available from the Ministry. ASI further stated 
(January 2022)  that its site -museums were different from other national level 
museums and as such th eir acquisition policy may not be fit for the museums under 
ASI. The reply only indicates  the need for a comprehensive policy for ASI’s site  
museums. 
E.1   Guidelines for Site-museums under ASI 
ASI, in response to PAC remark regarding absence of guidelines for site -museums, 
intimated (November 2020) that guideline for ASI museums prepared in 2013 was 
being followed by it. ASI further intimated (March 2021) that issues like accession 
register, rotation, etc. have been covered in the 14 points museum reforms by the 
Ministry (issued in 2009). 
Audit, however, noted that ASI guideline was not a comprehensive document for 
addressing all issues related with management of antiquities. The replies were also 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
13 
 
not tenable as both the documents i.e.  guidelines for ASI museums and 14 point s 
museum reforms were available at the time of PAC meetings. The PAC, while 
making its recommendation (in 2016), would have taken into consideration these 
documents. As such, the reply ignore the PAC contention regarding requirement of a 
single comprehensive document for management of antiquities, which was initially 
accepted by the Ministry for compliance.   
In January 2022, Ministry/ASI while reiterating its earlier reply stated that the 
guidelines prepared in 2013 and 14 points museum reform suffice requirements of its 
site-museums. However, keeping in view the observations of PAC a comprehensive 
policy is being finalised. 
3.2 Preparation of Heritage Bye-Laws (HBL) and Site-Plans 
The National Monument s Authority (NMA) was constituted as a statutory body 
(2011) under the provisions of AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 to 
regulate the construction activities around the  Centrally Protected Monuments  
(CPM). Its basic objective  was implementation of the statutory provisions of 
prohibited and regulated areas of CPM  through Heritage Bye -Laws (HBL). NMA 
was to exercise and discharge its power ( i.e. providing no-objection certificates for  
undertaking construction activities in the prohibited/regulated areas of CPM) through 
Competent Authorities notified by the Central Government
6. During the follow -up 
audit, it was noted that progress  of NMA in respect of some mandated activities was 
slow. These issues are discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.2.1 Preparation of Site -Plans: The Heritage Bye-Law was to be framed on the 
basis of Site -Plan for prohibited and regulated areas of each protected monument.  
According to AMASR Rules 2011, within a period of five years , the Director 
General, ASI was to make endeavour for the purpose of preparing detailed Site-
Plans. However, in another notification issued in 2018, this period was extended to 
ten years (till 2021) . Consequently, preparation of Site -Plans and the finalisation of 
HBL had also been delayed. NMA intimated that survey plans fo r 600 monuments 
had been prepared. In this regard ASI intimated (February 2022) that the job was 
being outsourced, however c omplex ground conditions, spread of monuments  and 
size of monuments, etc. delay the process. Fact remains that preparation of HBL fo r 
all monuments had been delayed.  
3.2.2 Preparation of HBL : Under the provision of AMASR (Amendment and 
Validation) Act, 2010, NMA was to notify monuments-specific HBL. In this respect, 
five Regional Dire ctors of ASI were identified ( February 2014 ) for preparation of 
draft HBL for approval of NMA. However, only five HBL  covering 31 protected  
 
 
                                                           
6  32 Competent Authorities were notified by the Government in February 2014. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
14 
 
monuments have been notified so far (January 2022) while  165 HBL involving 210 
monuments were reported to be at various stages of finalisation7.  
3.2.3 Priority in preparation of HBL : On the basis of number of applications 
received for construction related activities, NMA had identified 230 out of 3693 
CPM as being most priority for preparation of HBL. However, as intimated by NMA 
(December 2020), out of total monuments notified/under process , so far  only seven 
pertain to the list of most priority monuments. 
3.2.4 Preparation of Guidelines for Large Projects:  NMA was to issue detailed 
guidelines for archaeological impact assessment of large scale development projects . 
Further, the Authority was to make recommendations for restoration of the cultural 
landscape, which had been damaged due to construction or like activities in the past. 
With reference to preparation of guidelines for large projects, NMA intimated 
(November 2020) that for applications having total built up area of 2000 sqm and 
above, additional information were being obtained in prescribed format while for 
cases having bui lt up area of 5000 sqm or above, archaeological impact assessment 
reports were being obtained. It also submitted that while formulating HBL , cultural 
landscape aspect of monuments were kept in mind and as such related landscape 
restoration exercise for the CPM was not being conducted. Audit is of the view that 
in the absence of guidelines and preparation/notification of  few HBL, the exercise of 
processing of applications for construction related activities was on ad-hoc basis.  
NMA intimated (January 2022) that onus of preparation of HBL primarily lies with 
ASI which was to be prepared on the basis of surveys and site -plans by its  officials 
i.e. Circles and Regional Directors  in ASI . The role of NMA was to place them 
before the Authority for approval and laying before the Parliament.  The f act remains 
that there have been considerable delays in the preparation of HBL  and Site-Plans. 
As a result,  permission for construction related activities in prohibited/re gulated 
areas of CPM were being provided by treating the application as requests for 
permission under exceptional grounds
8 provided in NMA Rules. 
Construction activities in prohibited Area of Humayun’s Tomb Complex 
The AMASR Act was amended in 2010 by introducing the constitution of NMA 
and defining its role in giving permission for renovation and construction related 
activities in prohibited/regulated area of the monuments 9. As per Para 20C of the 
amended Act, any person, who owns any building or structure, which existed in 
                                                           
7  Two HBL covering 2 CPM sent to Ministry for laying in Parliament (in September 2020), 103 HBL  
covering 128 monuments under consultation and 60 HBL  covering 80 CPM uploaded on website 
for inviting suggestions. 
8  Under Rule 15 of NMA Rules , 2011, in exceptional cases, pending the finalisation of the Heritage 
Bye-Laws, permission for construction related activities can be granted. 
9  In terms of power conferred under Rule 31 of the AMASR Rules, 1959, and notifi cation issued in 
June 1992, ASI had declared areas upto 100 meters from the protected limits of the monument and 
further beyond 200 meters to be prohibited and regulated areas respectively. The concept of 
prohibited and regulated area got further elaborated with the amendment in AMASR Act, 2010. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
15 
 
prohibited area of the monument may make an application for carrying out such 
repair or renovation, as the case may be. Further, according to Para 20A, no person, 
other than an archaeological officer, shall carry out any construction in any 
prohibited area, keeping in view the facts that- 
(a) it is necessary or expedient for carrying out such public work or project 
essential to the public; or 
(b) such other work or project in its opinion, shall not have any substantial adverse 
impact on the preservation, safety, security or, or access to, the monument or its 
immediate surrounding. 
During physical inspection (January 2021), it was noticed that a project for creation 
of modern st ructures e.g. construction of  shops, landscaping, underpass, 
conservation etc.  was being undertaken in prohibited area of Humayun’s Tomb, 
Delhi by agency other than ASI.   
  
  
ASI in a reply (August 2021) informed  that it was associated with the project 
through a multi -agency MoU 10 signed in July 2007 (later extended in December 
2017). According to the MoU, apart from conservation activities (including creation 
of site-museum and interpretation centre), the Trust 11 (executing agency) was to 
carry out various urban development activities (including creation of shops and 
restaurants) in consultation with CPWD.   
Audit pointed out (June 2021) that the  interventions were not creation of facilities 
(viz. toilet, water, par king etc.) for visitors of  the monument  and by allowing 
commercial construction (e.g. shops) to another agency in prohibited areas of the 
                                                           
10  In 2007, MoU was signed between ASI, CPWD, MCD (as Public Parties) and Aga Khan Trust for 
Culture (AKTC), Aga Khan Foundation India (AKFI) (as Private Parties).  The initiative had three 
components viz. (1) Herit age Conservation (2) Socio Economic Initiative, and (3) Environmental 
Development. In 2017, while extending the period of MoU, a Trust Deed was signed by CPWD, 
ASI, SDMC, AKFI and AKTC. 
11  According to MoU, a Trust viz. Government Sunder Nursery Management Trust was created. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
16 
 
monument, ASI had not adhered to provisions of the AMASR Act . Further, 
according to MoU, only the ownership of interpretation centre  to be built by the 
agency was to vest with ASI. 
ASI in response stated (August 2021) that AMASR Act (Section 20A(3)  authorised 
it to construct amenities in the prohibited/regulated area of a CPM and creation of 
interpretation centre, souvenir shops, underpass, etc. being constructed by the ASI 
through Aga Khan Trust  (Private Party)  were essential amenities for tourists 
visiting the W orld Heritage Site. It also informed that necessary approval from 
NMA regarding construction of interpre tation centre was obtained by it in 
November 2014. ASI while reiterating to its earlier reply to the follow -up report 
stated (January 2022) that the MoU was signed after due approval of the 
Government. 
Reply of ASI was not tenable, as NMA  had communicated12 to audit that they have 
not received any application for development of museum and shopping complex 
within the prohibited area of Humayun’s Tomb Complex. During extension of 
MoU in December 2017 also, this issue was not brought to the notice of NMA.  
By e ntering into MoU and without the approval of NMA, allowing the Trust to 
carry out construction works, ASI had not followed the provisions of AMASR Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
                                                           
12  Vide letter No. 9-1/2020-NMA (Admn) dated 24th March 2021. 
Conclusions:
 The recommendations made by PAC were essential for effective 
heritage management. However, in most cases, the exercise to carry out 
necessary amendment/notification on polic y related areas of concern 
discussed by the PAC were still in process. 
 There was delay in preparation of Heritage Bye -Laws to regulate 
construction related activities in prohibited/regulated areas of the 
monument despite constitution of National Monument A uthority 
(NMA) in 2011. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Human Resources 
Management 
  

 
 
Ajanta Caves (Maharashtra) 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
17 
 
Chapter 4: Governance and Infrastructure 
An efficient governance systems  and sufficient human resources with  technical 
capability are essential for successful heritage protection. The organisation and 
governance related issues in ASI , as discussed by various Parliamentary committees 
and in the previous audit Report, have been included in this chapter. 
4.1 Organisation and Governance in ASI 
During audit, it was noted that organisational concerns highlighted earlier continue to 
affect the successful governan ce of ASI’s mandated activities. These issues are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
4.1.1 Recognition of ASI as Scientific Department 
The ASI is a multi- disciplinary agency consisting of archaeologists, scientists, 
historians, engineers , architects and administrators . The Mirdha Committee had 
recommended (1984) that ASI should not be considered merely  as an administrative 
organisation, but in view of its highly speciali sed functions, should be accorded the 
status of a scientific and technical institution enjoying autonomy in its functioning. 
However, after notifying it as a Scientific and Technological Department (1989), no 
action was taken by the Ministry/ASI to implement the declaration. The Department 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee had shown concern ( vide Report no. 99 
of November 2005) over absence of further action in this regard.  
In the previous Report  it was pointed out that  ASI had not provided information on 
its scientific and technical activities, functions, study and research, which were 
needed for its recognition as Scientific Department. The Mirdha Committee had 
concluded that, unless the ASI converts itself fully into a scientific and technical 
organisation, the basic role and function of the organisation will be defeated. Further 
effort made for  recognition of ASI  as a scientific organisation was not found on 
record during the follow-up Audit.  
4.1.2 Absence of Strategy or Road-map 
ASI is the custodian of 3693 monuments including many famous World Heritage 
Sites. The activities of ASI include exploring the country’s rich past by continuously 
evolving archaeological narrative; preservation of monuments and archaeological 
sites, their development as centre -piece of education and providing an authentic 
cultural/historical experience for visitors. However, ASI had no road -map (long -
term/medium-term) defining strategy to accomplish these mandated activities. 
ASI had asked its Circle offices (January 2018) to prepare respective vision plans for 
a three- year period covering  structural and chemical preservation, environmental 
upgradation, museum and tourism amenities. Examination of vision plan of Delhi 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
18 
 
Circle revealed that the document was  prepared for selected monuments, mostly 
covering structural works  undertaken during the year. It was also noted that the 
conservation activities were being undertaken on ad-hoc/annual plan basis. 
Further, in Chandigarh Circle, only 10 per cent work of the vision plan was followed.   
In this respect, the Chandigarh Circle intimated (May 2021) that the deviation was 
due to following of other important conservation s chemes instructed by ASI 
Headquarters. 
Ministry/ASI while agreeing with the audit conclusion i.e. absence of mid-term/long-
term conservation strategy submitted (January 2022) that three types of conservation 
works of CPM i.e. (i) annual repairs and maintenance, (ii) special repair, and (iii) 
emergency repair were being carried out by it. 
4.1.3 Central Advisory Board of Archaeology 
Central Advisory Board of Archaeology (CABA) was conceptualised (in 1945) as an 
apex body to advise ASI on matters relating to archaeology in India viz. archaeology, 
conservation and exploration. The members of CABA include officials from various 
government organisations and eminent persons from the fields  of history, 
archaeology, culture, etc . The notification  regarding continuation and induction of 
members of CABA  for a four- year period was last issued in February 2014. As a 
result, after March 2018, CABA had become inactive. Further, during 2014-18, only 
one meeting of CABA was held in October 2014. The ASI intimated ( December 
2020) that the issue of reconstitution of CABA  was pending with the Ministry since 
August 2019 which was still under process (December 2021) . As such , apex level 
advisory for heritage conservation and for possible implementation of PAC 
recommendations was not available. 
4.1.4 Other infrastructure and governance related issues in ASI 
During audit, infrastructure and governance related issues in ASI which were 
affecting the effective management of monuments and antiquities were noticed and 
are discussed here: 
4.1.4.1 Environment for Controlling Encroachment: Encroachment, unauthorised 
constructions in and around monuments  and security of antiquities  have been  
regularly discussed in the Parliamentary/A udit reports . At the time of the earlier 
Performance Audit, the number of monuments under encroachment as reported by 
ASI were 249, which rose to 321 in February 2021 13. In the previous Report , it was 
pointed out that the position reported by ASI was incorrect as  out of 3678 
monuments, physical inspection of 1655 monuments i.e. 45 per cent  had revealed 
                                                           
13  Top states with encroached sites as reported by ASI -Uttar Pradesh (75), Tamil Nadu (74), 
Karnataka (48), Maharashtra (46), Rajasthan (22) and Delhi (11). 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
19 
 
encroachment in 546 monuments. The follow -up audit also revealed that certain 
monuments found  to be encroached upon  in Delhi, Bhopal, Jabalpur  and Kolkata  
Circles have not been included in the updated list 14 of 321 monuments.  I n 
Aurangabad, Mumbai, Bhopal, Jabalpur , Bhubaneswar  and Kolkata Circle s, it was 
noticed that unauthorised constructions have also been carried out by government 
agencies. 
While showing concern over this issue, PAC felt that matter of encroachment should 
be taken up at the highest level. It recommended, constitution of a co-ordination and 
monitoring mechanism to check the incidents of encroachments  with the co -
operation of District and Police authorities . It was, however, noted that no such  co-
ordination mechanism was available in ASI at the Central level or in Circles covered 
during the follow -up audit. The Delhi Circle intimated (January 2021) that records 
regarding any such instruction from its headquarters office was not available with it . 
In the Chandigarh Circle, the State Level Committee was formed only in February 
2020. Further, there was absence of mechanism for periodic review of 
encroachment/unauthorised construction cases after their reporting by the concerned 
monument officials. ASI intimated (March 2021  and January 2022 ) that after 
reporting by them  to the concerned authorities it is  the responsibility of the District 
Administration to remove such encroachment and convey the same to ASI .  Hence, 
active action from the side of District Administration and State Governments is vital 
for removal of encroachment or unauthorised construction.  A few instances 
highlighting the lack of adequate response and cooperation from the District 
Administrations and State Governments are highlighted in the box below:  
                                                           
14  e.g. in Delhi Circle, Tomb of Razia Sultana, Vijay Mandal, Sunehri Masjid (all identified by ASI in 
September 2015 as encroached) and Moth -ki-Masjid, Chor Minar, Tombs of Kale Khan, Bade 
Khan, Bhure Khan, (all declared by NMA in 2019 as encroached) were not in cluded in the list of 
encroached monuments provided to Audit by ASI.   
 At Bhopal Circle, pre -historic rock shelters of Bhimbetka, Tomb of Mohammad Ghaus and at 
Jabalpur Circle, group of temples, Amarkantak, Matangeshwar Temple, Shantinath Temple, 
Khajuraho, Gond Fort were found under encroachment. Similarly, in Kolkata Circle, Motijheel 
Mosque, Dubdi Monastery and Currency Building were encroached but not included in the list of 
such monuments. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
20 
 
Encroachment and lack of co-ordination 
 Mehrauli Archaeological Park (Park), Delhi is an archaeological site under 
the control of Delhi Development Authority  (DDA) which contains monuments 
protected by  both ASI15 and Delhi Government 16. NMA had conveyed to ASI 
(2019) that with a view to protect the historic settings of the Park, in consultation 
with Local Bodies/ Agencies, its development controls and guidelines need to be 
notified separately.  
In the Park, ASI had also undertaken conservation activities  in Khan-e-Shahid 
Tomb, though its  ownership/encroachment issue was under litigation with Waqf 
Board. During a visit to the Park, it was noted that various  other portions of the 
Park were under encroachment and poorly managed. But t here was no 
coordination between ASI and Delhi Government to maintain the Park and to 
avoid future encroachments. 
 In Tughlakabad Fort, Delhi  it was noted that the municipal agency had 
encroached the site by draining out the sewage water in to the protected area of the 
monument. The action destroyed the beautification works carried around the 
monument. 
  
 
 In the previous Report , a case of encroachment at the World Heritage Site 
of Bhimbetka was mentioned. The  Director General, ASI had issued (2002) an 
order to demolish the said encroachment. However, the Circle office failed to get 
the encroachment demolished due to lack of co -operation from the District 
administration. It was noticed that after March 2016, the matter was not taken up  
at appropriate levels i.e. Ministry or State Government.  
 In the previous Report, it was highlighted that Karnataka Government, vide 
a notification issued in 1976, declared 43 CPM in the State as properties of Waqf 
Board. The issue was contested by ASI and Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order 
(2004) declared the State notification as null and void. During follow -up audit, it 
was noted that ASI was  still not able  to get the joint survey of these monuments 
with State Revenue Department to ascertain the exact protected area. 
 In another case, parts of Gulbarga Fort (Karnataka) were found to be 
occupied by 282 families enjoying all the facilities viz. water, electricity, etc. from 
the State Government. Though, in accordance with the instruction of High  Court 
(June 2019) , directions were issued to D eputy Commissioner Gulbarga (March 
2020) to remove the encroachments, action was yet to be taken. 
4.1.4.2 Securing Antiquities: Despite being the custodian of invaluable antiquities 
and activities spread all over the country , ASI had no vigilance or monitoring cell to 
function as a deterrence against theft of antiquities from its monuments . Even though 
the Central Antiquity Collection (CAC), which is the largest collection of antiquities 
                                                           
15  Jamali Kamali Tomb, Balban’s Tomb, Rajon Ki Baoli, Gandhak Ki Baoli 
16  Quli Khan Tomb 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
21 
 
with ASI had not  reported any case of loss/damage, the status could not be verified  
as no physical verification of its artefacts had been  conducted after 2006. As of  
December 2021, ASI had reported theft of 17 antiquities from its monuments during 
2015 to 2021 of which only three were recovered. 
4.1.4.3 Monitoring System in ASI: The previous Report had pointed out inadequate 
Management Information System (MIS) in ASI. It was noted that a  centralised 
information or real-time MIS was still not available in ASI  (December 2021). Issue-
based information viz. horticulture, publication, court cases, grant of non- antiquity 
certificate etc. was being collected from the field offices as per their requirement. 
The Standing Committee of Parliament had recommended (March 2021) ASI to 
develop an application permitting users to report violation of rules and regulations , 
incidents of vandalism, encroachment, etc. It was noted that ASI had no centralised 
system to register online complaints/grievances of the general public on 
encroachments or illegal activities at its monuments and to monitor their redressal  
(December 2021). 
It was  also noted that  ASI’s conservation portal  displaying to  the general  public, 
status of all its conservation activities was not being updated regularly. Ministry/ASI 
intimated (January 2022) that these activities have been shifted to its eGov portal. 
However, after the arrangement, information  on conservation activities undertaken 
by ASI was not available to general public.  
In addition to these concerns , non-existence/functioning of websites of some  of 
ASI’s Circles e.g. Delhi and Aizawl Circles ( January 2022)  indicates absence of 
transparent and effective IT based monitoring system in ASI. 
4.2 Human Resources for Heritage Conservation 
Issues related to s hortage of human resources , cadre restructuring and non- filling up 
of vacancies in ASI as pointed out in previous Report  were critically examined by 
PAC. The PAC had recommended that ASI should expedite its restructuring process 
and make efforts in filling the current vacancies. PAC was of the opinion that the 
matter needs to be pursued at the highest level.  As part of the restructuring process, 
Ministry of Finance had accorded approval (28 April 2021) for creation of additional 
posts in ASI (af ter abolishing certain  existing posts).  A comparative position of 
human resources of the ASI as highlighted in the previous Report, noticed during the 
follow-up audit and after restructuring of posts ( as reported by the Ministry/ASI in 
January 2022) is shown in Table 4.1: 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
22 
 
Table 4.1: Manpower of the ASI 
Classification of 
Posts 
Sanctioned strength Vacancy percentage 
Previous 
audit 
During 
follow-up 
audit 
After 
restruct
uring 
Previous 
audit 
During 
follow-up 
audit 
After 
restructu
ring 
Group A 235 233 302 41.7 41.2 55.6 
Group B 459 844 919 28.5 32.9 40.0 
Group C 1599 1197 1354 21.4 30.7 49.1 
Group D/MTS 6152 6152 6152 30.5 27.8 41.1 
Total 8445 8426 8727 28.9 29.1 42.7 
Source: Previous audit - CAG’s Report no. 18 (2013), follow-up Audit-Report of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, March 2020 and Reply of the Ministry/ASI in January 2022 
Note: Periods of previous and follow-up audits were 2012-13 and 2020-21 respectively. 
It would be seen from the Table 4.1, that overall vacancy position in ASI had not 
improved (remained static around 29 per cent ) and the gap further increased after 
restructuring. A similar comparison of vacancy in three main Branch of ASI  (viz. 
Conservation, Horticulture and Science), which mainly include the technical posts 
(viz. Archaeologists, Engineers, Horticulturists and  Chemists) is depicted through 
Table 4.2: 
Table 4.2: Vacancies in three Branches of ASI 
Branch 
Sanctioned strength Vacancy percentage 
Previous 
audit 
During 
follow-up 
audit 
After 
restructuring 
Previous 
audit 
During 
follow-up 
audit 
After 
restruc-
turing 
Conservation 503 504 918 26.6 36.3 66.1 
Horticulture 114 114 152 7.0 25.4  47.4 
Science 140 135 134 12.1 29.6 35.1 
Total 757 753 1204 21.0 33.5 60.3 
Note: Periods of previous and follow-up audits were 2012-13 and 2020-21 respectively. 
As seen from the above two Tables, the vacancy situation had further deteriorated at  
the managerial levels and across all the branches.  
As already mentioned in previous Report, the shortage of staff ha d adverse effect on 
the performance and output of ASI. In Delhi Circle , it was noted that upto 24 
monuments were looked after by a single Junior Conservation Assistant (Kashmiri 
Gate Sub-Circle). Similarly, in Aihole and Badami Sub-Circles of Dharwad Circle,  
70 and 31 monuments respectively were being looked after by single C onservation 
Assistant. In Mumbai Circle, due to shortage of permanent staff, temporary/technical 
staff was used for handling sale/receipts at ticket counters . Similarly, in Kolkata 
Circle, 41 per cent posts of Monument Attendants were vacant . The shortage of staff 
had also led to instances of misuse  and encroachment at  monuments as depicted 
below.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
23 
 
  
Horse found stabled in Tamluk Rajbati, 
West Bengal 
Cattle shelter at Ardh Nari Nateshwar Temple, 
Solapur, Maharashtra 
The PAC had asked the Ministry to make concerted effort s in filling up all vacant 
posts in ASI and submit a compliance report within six months. Ministry/ASI in its 
reply stated (January 2022) that observations made by PAC for vacancy position and 
as shown in above Tables though factually correct was mostly on account of direct 
recruitment quota (89 per cent ) through UPSC/SSC which was being regularly 
reported to them. ASI also intimated that it had brought out an internal re -structuring 
document to rationalise its strength in all cadres across its offices. In view of 
recommendation of PAC and considerable delay in filling vacancies in ASI, 
concerted efforts needed at the highest level to resolve human resource constraints in 
heritage protection.  
4.2.1   Capability building in Archaeology and Museum related activities 
NPC-AMASR stress on need to develop, maintain and regularly update a pool of 
trained and skilled conservators, artisans and craft-persons who must be engaged in 
and exposed to a variety of conservation activities. The PAC had also recommended 
ASI to address the training need of its technical staff and build capacity of its 
officials. Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya  Institute of Archaeology  (PDUIA) and 
National Museum Institute (NMI) are two premier institutes of the Ministry for 
providing higher education and building professional manpower in archaeology, 
history, geology, anthropology  and museology. The Institute o f Archaeology, nodal 
office for capacity building of ASI, organises short-term professional training-cum-
workshops for in -service personnel in the field of archaeology. In addition to this , 
National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property  at Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh also organises six months’ conservation course. 
It was noted that all 45 posts (under different categories) in the Institute of 
Archaeology, as mentioned in the previous Report were not filled and  lapsed due to 
delay in framing of Recruitment Rules. Further, enrolment for higher studies was not 
forthcoming at the National Museum Institute . During 2013 and 2015- 17, no student 
was enrolled for  its PhD (Doctor of Philosophy)  level courses in History, 
Conservation and Museology. In this regard, NMI stated (December 2021) that due 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
24 
 
to UGC regulations restricting number of PhD students under a professor, 
availability of only five teaching faculty for three NMI PhD courses and minimum 
time of three years for completing the research work, it was not in a position to invite 
applications for the course every year. 
With the establishment of Indian Institute of Heritage ( refer Para 1.3), it is expected 
that gaps in technical capability for heritage conservation will be addressed. Ministry 
in a press statement (July 2021) had also stated that setting up of the Institute will 
impact higher education and research in India ’s rich heritage and its conservation
17. 
ASI in response stated (January 2022) that it was further strengthening its capacity 
building programme.  
4.2.2 Manpower Management of Museums  
It was reported in the previous Report that all the national museums were under  
staffed. The details of sanctioned strength and vacant posts in museums during 
follow up audit are given in Table 4.3:  
Table 4.3: Vacancies in National Museums 
Museum 
Previous audit Follow up audit 
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancy Vacancy 
percentage 
Sanctioned 
strength Vacancy Vacancy 
percentage 
National Museum, 
New Delhi 
276 122 44.2 174 36 20.7 
Salarjung Museum, 
Hyderabad 
166 39 23.5 140 46 32.8 
Indian Museum, 
Kolkata 
209 60 28.7 209 123 58.9 
Victoria Memorial 
Hall, Kolkata 
176 53 30.1 175 94 53.7 
Asiatic Society 
Kolkata 
257 45 17.5 254 81 31.9 
As seen from the above Table , except for the National Museum, New Delhi, the 
vacancy situation had further deteriorated in other national level museums. 
4.3  Working of Circles and other offices in ASI 
Conservation of monument s is a multi- disciplinary process which  does not limit 
itself to the intervention within the structure/fabric of the  monument but also 
includes protection and maintenance of the setting or environment integral to  its 
existence. While most of the mandated conservation related activities of ASI are 
carried out through its Circle offices, for horticulture and chemical conservation , 
                                                           
17 Institute is being set up at Noida, Uttar Pradesh by integrating Institute of Archaeology, School of 
Archival Studies under National Archive of India, National Research Laboratory for Conservation 
of Cultural Property, National Museum Institute and Academic wing of Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for Arts. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
25 
 
specific branches have been established. Issues related to  the functioning of these 
offices are discussed below: 
4.3.1 Circle offices: ASI functions through 37 Circle offices18 (further divided into 
sub-Circle) and issues related to their working ha ve been discussed in various parts 
of this Report. During joint physical inspection, it was noted that information/records 
pertaining to heritage conservation activities viz. nature of conservation works 
carried out, expenditure incurred, photographs, details of encroachment cases  etc. 
were available at Circle office  instead of respective monument  or sub- Circle. As 
such, Circle office s of ASI  were heavily tasked with administration/conservation 
related information for a specific monument. The PAC and the NITI Aayog had also 
reported that the technical staff of ASI’s Circle offices have been  burdened with 
administrative work including handling of court cases. 
As noted by the PAC, these additional responsibilities significantly reduce d the time 
available with the  ASI staff (already short in strength) for their prime responsibility 
of heritage conservation. 
4.3.2 Science Branch: The Science Branch of ASI was involved in the chemical 
conservation/treatment of monuments/excavated objects and air -quality monitoring 
at selected monuments. The work is being executed through a network of 
Division/Zonal offices and labs. Issues related to the working of Science Branch are  
given below: 
• In the Western Zone of the Science Branch, Aurangabad, due to a bsence of 
specific guideline or criteria, chemical treatment in many monuments was 
never taken up. 
• In Bhubaneswar Circle, Science Branch never conducted inspection of 44 
monuments to assess requirement of chemical treatment/cleaning during 2014 -
15 to 2019-20. 
• In respect of  Delhi Zone office of  the Science Branch,  the office, earlier 
located at Red Fort , was shifted (June 2019) by ASI along with its labs 19 to 
Greater Noida without ensuring provisions to establish its labs there. As a 
result, the Zonal office was working with temporary labs (January 2021) by 
again shifting its equipment back to Red Fort.  
• Similarly, in Mysuru office, average 18 annual inspections (i.e.8.65 per cent of 
218 monuments under Bengaluru and Hampi Circles ) were carried out to 
assess requirement of chemical treatment. As a result , 191 monuments have 
not been chemically treated during the period 2014-15 to 2019-20.  
                                                           
18  Status as of January 2022 
19  Archival Conservation Laboratory and Antiquity Treatment Laboratory 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
26 
 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that the office of Science Branch, Delhi had now 
been established at Delhi location for effective monitoring. It also submitted that the 
selection of monuments for chemical conservation wer e undertaken in consultation 
with respective Circles as per their requirement and availability of resources. 
4.3.3 Horticulture Branch: The Horticulture Branch of ASI , with its four 
Divisions, was associated with maintenance of two types of gardens  (1) monuments 
having gardens around them as part of their original design, and (2) gardens to 
beautify the landscape of monuments/structure not part of original concept. The 
Branch, which came into existence in 1950 with eight gardens located  around 
monuments at Delhi and Agra , now maintains 583 gardens including 25 heritage 
gardens. During follow-up audit, the Horticulture Branch of ASI was  found under-
staffed (refer Table 4.2) and the vacancy percentage had increased from 7 to 25 in 
comparison to previous Report. It was also noticed that Horticulture Branch was not 
being consulted by Circle offices in obtaining information about monument sites 
which included gardens according to their original designs . (refer Para 7.2.3 for 
issues related with management of  heritage gardens ).  Ministry/ASI stated 
(January/February 2022) that horticulture works, as and when undertaken at the 
archaeological sites, were decided amicably by in charge of garden branch and Circle 
office. It intimated that apart from restructuring of Horticulture Division, appropriate 
orders have been issued to ensure their unison with Circle offices. 
4.3.4 Epigraphy Branch: The Epigraphy Branch of ASI deals with the 
decipherment and interpretation of inscriptions found on stone or metal tables or clay 
rocks.  After deciphering and transcribing the inscriptions on stone, copper -plate and 
other materials (written in Sanskrit, Dravidian and other languages), these are listed 
in the Annual Report on Indian Epi graphy. As pointed out in the previous Report, 
there was no Act/Rules/Guidelines pertaining to the Epigraphy Branch. Further, the 
post of Director in the Directorate of Epigraphy , Mysuru was vacant since 2006. In 
addition, all the posts of Superintending Epigraphist (Sanskrit), Dy. Superintending 
Epigraphist (Dravidian) and Dy. Superintending Epigraphist (Sanskrit) were also 
vacant, which had resulted in slow progress of work in the Branc h. The Annual 
Reports of the Branch for the years 2005- 06 to 2012- 13 were pending for 
publication. The unsold publication of Epigraphy Branch had also increased from 
` 53.17 lakh (reported earlier) to ` 76.54 lakh. Ministry/ASI in its response provided 
(January 2022) details of some efforts made towards filing the vacancy in Epigraphy 
Branch viz. promotion and advertisement of posts. 
4.3.5 Publication Division: The Publication Division of ASI, operating through its 
107 sales counters, had no Policy for opening/closing of publication counter at CPM. 
In 14 ASI Circles (some having World Heritage Sites), publication counters were not 
available20. Taj Mahal, Agra operating through its two gates (Eastern and Western) 
and attracting maximum number of visitors, had only one sales counter at its Eastern 
Gate. Similarly, Jaipur Circle , with many monuments and large tourist attraction s, 
                                                           
20  Aizawl, Amaravati, Hampi, Jabalpur, Jhansi, Jodhpur, Leh, Meerut, Nagpur, Raiganj, Rajkot, 
Ranchi, Sarnath and T iruchirappalli (position in February 2021). The number of sales counter 
reported in January 2022 were 111. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
27 
 
had only one publication counter. On the other hand, despite nil or low sales, some of 
the existing publication counters were being continued.  In Kolkata Circle, poor sale 
of publications had resulted in accumulation of unsold publication of ` 15.80 crore 
(March 2020) with no physical verification during 2014-15 to 2019-20. Ministry/ASI 
stated (January 2022) that it had a provision to establish sale counters in the premises 
of all WHS and at least one in every Circle. The reply was however silent on audit 
observations regarding absence of any publication counter in some Circle .  ASI 
reported (February 2022) about its  decision to consider all sales counter of ASI 
publication throughout the country and monitoring of sales/stocks through software 
being created for the purpose . In respect of sales counter at Taj Mahal, it informed 
that its location was suitable for visitors from both gates. ASI also submitted that 
verification of publication in Kolkata Circle was delayed due to shortage of staff and 
finally done in 2021. 
4.4 Appointment of Members in National Monument Authority 
NMA was mandated to function through a Chairman, five Whole -time Member s, 
five Part-time members and a Member Secretary. Non -filling up of various posts of 
NMA was one of the focus area in the previous Report. In this regard, the PAC had 
also asked the Ministry to evolve a proper system to fill  vacancies in important 
positions in a time-bound manner. During follow-up audit, it was noted that in NMA, 
80 per cent posts of Whole -Time and Part -time Members were vacant 21. In this 
regard, NMA stated (December 2020) that it was in the process of filling  up the 
vacant posts. However, in December 2021, while updating the status, NMA reported 
there was only one  Part-time Member posted and no Whole-Time Member. This 
absence of Members in NMA had further affected its  mandated activities (refer Para 
3.2). 
 
  
                                                           
21  In respect of Whole- time Members, the posts were vacant since 2019 while in respect of Part -time 
Members, the maximum period of vacancy was since January 2014. 
Conclusions: 
 Certain areas of concern viz. requirement of strategy/road-map for 
heritage conservation, reconstitution of Central Advisory Board of 
Archaeology, filling up of vacancies, existence of a monitoring and 
grievance redressal system etc. needs to be addressed by the Ministry/ASI 
for improved working environment for heritage management. 
 Concerns related with governance, human resources and working of 
various subordinate offices of ASI hinder its operation. 
 Recent decisions of the Government to create additional posts in ASI and 
establishment of Indian Institute of Heritage may help in enhancing the 
strength and technical capability in heritage management. 

 
 
 
 
 
Financial Management 
  

 
    Nalanda (Bihar) 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
28 
 
Chapter 5: Financial Management 
India’s cultural heritage is not only an important marker of her past but also provides 
an opportunity for generating employment and income through heritage tourism and 
local development. Accordingly, Ministry allocates funds to ASI and Museums for 
heritage conservation. National Culture Fund and Adopt-a-Heritage Project have also 
been introduced for external budgetary funding through the corporate sector. 
5.1 Expenditure and Receipts from Conservation Activities 
ASI’s o verall expenditure, expenditure on conservation related activities , and 
receipts from the monuments and annual percentage growth during the period 2014-
15 to 2020-21 are depicted in Table 5.1: 
Table 5.1: Expenditure and Receipts of ASI 
(` in crore) 
Year Budget 
Estimates 
ASI’s overall 
expenditure 
 
Expenditure on 
conservation, 
maintenance, amenities, 
etc. 
Revenue earned 
from tickets, 
etc.22 
 
2014-15 680.05 629.27         247.23 102.23 
2015-16 712.28 686.96        (9.2) 251.31                  (1.7) 103.38      (1.1) 
2016-17 680.63 768.70        (11.9) 311.25                  (23.9) 227.55      (120.1) 
2017-18 924.37 939.94        (22.3) 424.46                  (36.4) 256.63      (12.8) 
2018-19 974.56 962.17        (2.4) 419.81                  (-1.1) 322.83      (25.8) 
2019-20 1036.40 1003.4        (4.3) 444.84                   (6.0) 343.61      (6.4) 
2020-21 1246.75  849.94      (-15.3) 272.50                  (-38.7)  47.62       (-86.1) 
Note:  
1. Figures in parenthesis indicate annual percentage growth with respect to previous year.  
2. Conservation expenditure include expenditure on maintenance and amenities. 
3. During 2020-21, due to Covid19 pandemic, ASI’s monument related activities were less. 
During the period 2014- 15 to 2020- 21, ASI’s average expenditure on conservation, 
maintenance and public amenities related activities was around 40 per cent of its 
overall expenditure. As is evident from Table 5.1, after 2017-18, growth in ASI’s 
overall expenditure and its expenditure on heritage protection activities was 
moderate. The budgetary allocation of ASI ha d been reduced from `1246.75 crore in 
2020-21 to `1042.63 crore in 2021-22.  
As pointed out in previous  Report, ASI was not maintaining specific budget for 
activities related to awareness, interpretation and creation of public amenities at its 
monuments. Expenditure on these accounts was  being incurred from the funds 
                                                           
22  Receipts from sale of tickets, publication, horticulture, etc. recorded as other receipts in 
Consolidated Fund of India under the head 0202-04-800 (Art and Culture). 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
29 
 
allocated for conservation activities.  Ministry/ASI in response stated (January 2022) 
that the fund requirement for awareness and interpretation centres was  met by it  
through Budget Heads ‘Advertisement and Publicity ’ and ‘Museums and 
Conservation activities ’ respectively. Fact remains that due to absence of specific 
Budget Head for public amenities, amount of actual expenditure on heritage 
conservation was not ascertainable.  
It was  also noticed that the C ircles had not prepared comprehensive plans for 
providing basic amenities at the monuments resulting in absence of these facilities as 
discussed in the succeeding part of the report.   
In respect of revenue, during 2016-17, the growth of 120 per cent, could be attributed 
to revision of entry fee (April 2016) and introducti on of e -ticketing process by ASI 
(December 2015) which provided better accounting and transparency in receipts. 
However, this growth in revenue was not evident after further revision of ticket rates 
(in August 2018) and after inclusion of 27 more monuments  (in April 2019) in the 
ticketed category.  In response to reason for dissimilar growth in receipt, ASI 
submitted (January 2022) that this may have been due to lacunae in reconciliation 
procedure. It further intimated that necessary steps had been initiated and were being 
further improved upon to carry out reconciliation of e-ticketing revenue receipts. 
5.1.1 Expenditure on Excavation and Exploration 
The two main functions of ASI are conservation and investigation. excavation and 
exploration form the major r esearch component of field archaeology. The PAC had 
noted that the ASI was spending less than one per cent  of its expenditure on 
excavation and exploration activities. It recommended adequate allocation and 
effective utilisation of funds for these activities. Ministry had also communicated to 
the PAC regarding its decision to increase the budget on exploration/excavation 
activities to five per cent of the total budget in first phase. Expenditure incurred by 
ASI on excavation and exploration activities during the period 2014-15 to 2020-21 is 
depicted in Table 5.2 below: 
Table 5.2: Expenditure on Excavation and Exploration Activities 
      (` in crore) 
 Year 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 2020-21 
ASI’s overall 
expenditure 
629.27 686.96 768.70 939.94 962.17 1003.40 849.94 
Expenditure on 
excavation and 
exploration 
4.34 5.48 3.61 5.29 6.18 3.56 2.48 
Percentage 
expenditure 
0.69 0.80 0.47 0.56 0.64 0.35 0.29 
However, a s evident  from the Table  5.2, ASI’s expenditure on excavation and 
exploration activities was still less than one per cent  of its total expenditure and in 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
30 
 
fact had come down from 0.8 0 per cent in 2015-16 to 0.35 per cent in 2019-20. ASI 
stated (December 2021) that during 2020 -21, due to cap on expenditure imposed by 
Ministry of Finance, expenditure on excavation and exploration activities was 
reduced. Further, in January 2022, Ministry/ASI stated that the recommendations 
made to enhan ce the allocation had been taken on board. However, due to Covid19  
situation, pace of work could not be expedited. It submitted that ASI was now 
focussing on excavation by re -appropriating funds  from regular budget  and 
enhancing allocation from the year 2021 -22. Fact remains that, commitment 
communicated to the PAC regarding increase in expenditure on excavation activities 
was not honoured by the Ministry/ASI during 2014-15 to 2020-21. 
5.1.2 External Budgetary Funding for Heritage Conservation 
The National Culture Fund (NCF) was established (November 1996) by the Ministry, 
with the primary mandate to establish and nurture partnership between private and 
public sectors for heritage conservation
23. The concept was a departure from the 
previous implementation strategies that viewed Government to be solely responsible 
for culture related endeavours in the country. One of the objective s of NCF was to 
administer and apply its funds  for conservation, maintenance, promotion, protection, 
preservation and up- gradation of monuments . The PAC had recommended that co-
ordination between ASI and NCF should be strengthened to rope in more corporate 
groups and individuals into funding conservation and visitor amenities at monument 
sites. The availability and utilisation of funds (including funds under the Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR)
24, under NCF during the period 2013- 14 to 20 20-21 is 
depicted in Table 5.3: 
                                                           
23 For sponsoring the projects, 100 per cent tax rebate under Section 80G of the Income Tax Act was  
provided by NCF. 
24  Corporate Social Responsibility -  As per Section 135 of the Companies Act 2013 -  Every company 
having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or 
more or a net profit of rupees five crore or more during any financial year shall ensure that the 
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent of  the average net profits of the 
company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of its 
Corporate Social Responsibility Policy on the activities as specified in Schedule VII of the Act. 
During the period 2014- 15 to 2020- 21, only ` 2489 crore was earmarked on Heritage, Art & 
Culture out of total expenditure of `  121412 crore under CSR and `  53.26 crore was received by 
NCF/ASI. (Source: CSR Portal-Ministry of Corporate Affairs).  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
31 
 
Table 5.3: Availability and utilisation of funds of NCF 
(` in crore) 
Description 13-14 14-15 15-16 16-17 17-18 18-19 19-20 20-21 
Balance 
fund at 
the end of 
the year 
Corpus* 39.19 41.33 43.69 46.15 47.77 50.52 54.33 56.71 
Endowment 15.06 14.95 23.91 25.08 26.49 64.53 58.83 19.15 
Total 54.25 56.28 67.60 71.23 74.26 115.05 113.16 75.86 
Funds 
utilised 
during the 
year, 
towards 
Admn. 1.00 0.85 0.92 0.71 0.36 0.77 0.56 0.33 
Objectives  
of NCF 
2.32 2.48 3.77 1.32 4.45 8.12 40.61 10.25 
Percentage utilisation 
of funds towards 
objectives of NCF/Total 
4.28 4.41 5.58 1.85 5.99 7.06 35.89 13.51 
*includes primary corpus of `19.50 crore, interest earned thereon and surplus 
It would be seen from the Table  5.3 that primary corpus of NCF ( i.e. ` 19.50 crore) 
had increased significantly to  ` 56.71 crore (period ending March 2021) . However, 
barring the year 2019 -20, funds available under the corpus were not being used 
primarily to meet its objectives  and t he percentage utilisation of available funds 
towards objectives of NCF was also low. In the previous Report , it was 
recommended that ASI needs to prioritise its projects requiring funding through NCF 
and a comprehensive assessment of funds was to be carried out  for this purpose . 
However, continued accumulation of funds of NCF indicates an  absence of such co -
ordination and planning while ignoring the audit recommendation. 
Ministry/ASI in response  stated (January 2022) that to strengthen coordination 
between NCF and ASI, a shelf of around 50 works to be shared with prospective 
sponsors had been prepared. M eetings of Project Implement ation Committee which 
were pending for long were also being held regularly. 
5.1.3 Other funding arrangements for Heritage activities 
The Three Years (2017-20) Action Agenda Report of NITI Aayog ( issued in August 
2017) mentions that despite a large number of foreigners travelling to India to learn 
more about our culture and ancient civilisation , low levels of funding and poor 
maintenance of museums and heritage sites prevent s them from realising their full 
potential. 
In this regard, Adopt-a-Heritage Project is a key initiative of the Ministry of Tourism 
(in close collaboration with the Ministry of Culture and ASI ) to develop the heritage 
sites/monuments and making them tourist- friendly. Under the Apni  Dharohar-Apni 
Pehchan’, ASI enter into agreements with private bodies for developing/maintaining 
visitors’ facilities at CPM. These bodies termed as Monument Mitra’  are responsible 
for operation, maintenance and up- gradation of tourist amenities, in the non- core 
areas of the monument.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
32 
 
Bye-laws being framed by the Ministry should also explore and provide adequate 
scope for the involvement of private bodies through PPP mode  for non- core 
activities. 
5.2 Financial Management in ASI 
The ASI operates through its Circles and other field offices , spread all over the 
country, having delegated financial powers  for conservation related works. Apart 
from incurring expenditure, these field units were also receiving cash on account of 
sale of tickets, permissions  of photography/event , publication, etc. In this  regard, 
following concerns indicate weak expenditure management in ASI: 
 Information on reconciliation of expenditure figures from 2015-16 to 2018-19 was 
not available with the ASI H eadquarters despite the issue being  consistently 
pursued by it.  
 There were instances at field offices of ASI, where the sanctioning authority had 
also performed the functions of Drawing and Disbursing Authority. Further, the 
internal audit of ASI had not been conducted by the Ministry after 2007.  
 Audit noted instances of incorrect details of expenditure on the preservation and 
conservation activities 25 which suggest ed ASI’s incorrect accounting with 
reference to expenditure on conservation activities. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that earlier reconciliation of expenditure was 
carried out by respective Circles with Pay and Accounts Office. However, from the 
financial year 2020- 21 onwards this exercise was being monitor ed by ASI 
Headquarters also. 
5.2.1 Financial irregularities in ASI 
In order to focus its efforts more on core conservation activities, ASI had awarded 
certain non-core works viz. (i) construction of boundary walls, toilet blocks and (ii) 
development of other public amenities at Adarsh  monuments to four Public Sector 
Undertakings26 (PSUs) in September 2016 and March 2018, respectively.  As per 
instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance 27, for projects/scheme costing more 
than `500 crore, appraisal by the Expenditure Finance Committee ( EFC) and 
approval of the Finance Minister was needed. However, though the costs of both 
these projects were over `500 crore each 28, the approval of these two projects had 
not gone through the due financial appraisal i.e. by the EFC and approval of the 
                                                           
25 Delhi Circle  reported ( January 2020 and January 2021) two different expenditure figures for 
conservation activity undertaken during 2016 -19 in the same monument. Further, expenditure on 
account of electricity and water supply charges and office up -gradation were booked against the 
conservation activities. Similarly, in Mumbai Circle, administrative expen ses incurred on Aga Khan 
Palace was treated as annual repair expenditure. 
26 WAPCOS, TCIL, NPCC and NBCC 
27 O.M.No.24(35)/PF-II/2012 dated 5.8.2016 and No.1(5)/2016-E.II(A) dated 27.5.2016 
28 For construction of boundary walls & toilet blocks: `  629.57 crore and for development of public 
amenities: ` 713.67 crore 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
33 
 
Finance Minister.  After splitting the cost, work was awarded on nomination basis 
with the approval of the Minist ry of Culture . In three Circles of Karnataka 
(Bengaluru, Dharwad and Hampi), delay in works awarded to WAPCOS  (160 works 
at a total cost of `188.79 crore) was noticed. A t est check of works done by 
WAPCOS also revealed: 
 Wood work done at Bidar Fort in Dharwad Circle was already eaten by termites 
while the toilet seat installed for differently abled came  off without eve n being 
used. 
 Boundary wall constructed at Tipu Sultan Palace, Bengaluru requir ing stone 
masonry (as per estimate) to match with the monument had been constructed in 
brick masonry with cement plastering. 
In Bhubaneswar Circle, construction work of Boundary Wall, Toilet B lock and 
access to the differently abled at Chunargarh monument, with an estimated cost of 
` 16.48 crore, was sub-contracted by TCIL (April 2018). It was noticed that for want 
of site demarcation and forest clearance, a site free from encumbrance was not 
available. As a result, the work was stopped (October 2020) by the Forest 
Department. In this regard , the Circle office intimated that the issue was under 
consideration with the respective Department. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that  the MoU for the work was signed with the 
approval of the Ministry after due vetting by Ministry of Law. However, n o 
explanation on issues viz. appraisal by the competent forum; approval  of the 
competent authority and quality of work being carried out was furnished. 
Other observations on financial  management such as irregularities in awarding 
housekeeping contracts for the monuments, non -recovery of labour cess, delay in 
deposit of receipts from ticket sale,  unutilised construction material, etc. are 
illustrated at Annexe 5.1. 
5.3 Revenue Generation in ASI 
NITI Aayog , in its Voluntary National Report presented to United Nations High 
Level Political Forum (June 2020) 29, had mentioned that tourism accounted for 6.8 
per cent of India’s GDP in 2019 and contribute to 8.1 per cent of all employment. It 
expected that over the next decade, the sector’s direct contribution to GDP would 
grow by 7.1 per cent per annum. 
Receipts through sale of tickets and permissions for film shooting, organisation of 
cultural events, etc. are the main source s of revenue for the ASI 30. The PAC had 
asked the Ministry/ASI to explore other possible avenues of revenue generation, 
consider revising the entry ticket and other charges and also bring more monuments 
under the ticketed category.  
                                                           
29  To report the efforts and progress made towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.  
30  Treated as ‘other receipts’ of the Government under the head 0202-04- 800. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
34 
 
Since the earlier Performance Audit,  ASI had revised the entry fee rates (2016 and 
2018) upwards as detailed in Annexe 5.2. Number of ticketed monuments had also 
been increased from 116 to 143 ( in April 2019 and February 2020). Besides revised 
charges for film shooting, extension of visiting hours to monuments  and discount on 
digital payments had also been introduced by ASI.   
Other issues connected with receipts of ASI are discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
5.3.1 Revenue through Ticketing 
In the previous Report, absence of specific criteria or guidelines for categorisation of 
a specific monument as ticketed monument was mentioned. Ministry had informed 
the PAC that footfall of the visitors at the monument is generally taken into 
consideration while identifying new monuments to be brought under category of 
ticketed monuments.  However, it also submitted that no record was being maintained 
at any monument in respect of monitoring footfall. As mentioned in Para 3.1, 
amendment in AMASR Act for introducing a system of  recording footfalls was still 
pending. Audit further noted: 
 Out of 3693 monuments in 33 States/UTs, ASI had 143 ticketed monuments in 20 
States/UTs, while in remaining13 States/UTs
31, having a total of 150 monuments, 
none was considered by ASI for ticketing. It was noted that there was absence of 
transparency/criteria for notifying a certain monument as ticketed. This could also 
be seen from the fact that monuments in Bhopal (Buddhist  Caves), Delhi ( Sultan 
Garhi) and Vadodara (Baba Pyara Caves) Circles with zero or negligible footfall 
were continuously included in the list of ticketed monuments. In c ontrast, the 
request of Chandigarh Circle (May 2019) regarding introduction of entry ticket in 
Jal Mahal, Narnaul, Haryana was not considered by ASI. 
 In Bhubaneswar Circle, after revision of entry fee (from 1 April 2016), between 6 
April 2016 to 22 May 2016, instead of revised ticket rates of ` 30, only ` 10 was 
charged from the visitors of Sun Temple, Konark. Circle office intimated that pre -
revised rate was charged as per the order of the Collector, Puri, Odisha. The 
violation not waived by the Ministry resulted in short collection of entry fee of  
` 44.02 lakh. 
 ASI had not issued any notification identifying its ticketed site -museums or fixing 
rate of their entry fees
32. In Delhi Circle, ` 30 and ` 350 were bein g charged 
(cashless payment) from Indian and foreign visitors , respectively, for four site -
museums located at Red Fort . However, for one site -museum at Purana Qila ` 
five was being charged only from Indian visitors . ASI was also  found charging 
entry fees from visitors to enter into lake area of Purana Qila without issuing 
notification for this purpose. 
                                                           
31 Arunachal Pradesh, Daman & Diu, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Manipur, Meghalaya , Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Puducherry, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand. 
32 Entry fee being charged for 30 site-museums  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
35 
 
 Similarly, out of five site -museums located in Madhya Pradesh, entry fee for 
Shivpuri site-museum was not being charged by ASI. There was no proposal from 
the Circle office despite considerable number of visitors arriving at the museum. 
 With reference to receipts from ticketing, variation in the amount of receipts and 
number of visitors as intimated by ASI Headquarters and Delhi Circle was 
observed. Audit had also pointed out earlier (January 2019)  about variation in the 
receipts of ASI and those reported to Pay and Accounts office. These instances 
indicate weak receipts management in ASI.  
 The Ministry/ASI had intimated the PAC regarding its decision about  opening of 
souvenir shops at selected monuments at Qutub Minar  and Sarnath 33. During 
physical inspection, no such shop was found open at Qutub Minar , Delhi.  ASI 
informed (January 2021) that it was in process to formulate a mechanism for the 
purpose. 
ASI stated (January 2022) that it had a mechanism wherein the concerned 
Conservation Assistant and Watch & Ward staff regularly informs about the number 
of visitors to a monument. Further based on data for a fairly long period (six months 
to a year), concerned Circle recommend for inclusion of the monument as a ticketed 
monument.  
Reply was not tenable as some of the monuments referred above have been 
considered by ASI as ticketed despite low visitors’ footfall for a long period. Further, 
as pointed out in Paragraphs 4.2 and 7.3, many ASI monuments had no watch & 
ward staff or being looked after by only a single Conservation Assistant.  
Monuments with Restricted Access:  As per AMASR Act  1958 and Rules made 
thereunder, the public shall have  a right of access to all protected monuments and  
ASI may prescribe entrance fee on certain specified monuments by notifying them 
as ticketed.  
In respect of non- ticketed monuments , issue of restricted public access was 
discussed in the previous Report . Audit pointed out that at some CPM , there were 
restrictions for people of some category  Further, some monuments were in the 
premises of other agencies and were not open for all visitors 34. Since ASI had not 
entered into any agreement/MoU with the management of these monuments , 
Ministry had assured the PAC that ASI would pursue the matter of individual 
written agreement with owners of these monuments , wherever feasible. However, 
during audit, ASI was unable to provide any assurance that efforts ha d been made 
towards resolving issue s of restricted access in non -ticketed monuments. 
Ministry/ASI intimated (January 2022) that at some of the religious places, such 
restrictions were in practice for long and were not interfered with, in view of the 
                                                           
33  The Ministry had intimated about signing of MoU with Handicraft and Exports Cooperation 
(Ministry of Textiles) to open souvenir shops at Qutub Minar and Sarnath.  
34  Seven monuments located in the premises of other Agencies (five in Delhi Circle and two in Patna 
Circle). 11 monuments where entry to visitors were restricted based on their religion/gender.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
36 
 
law and order situation.  
Moreover, in Delhi Circle, restricted access to six  more non-ticketed monuments 
of ASI was noticed. All these monuments were located inside a garden viz. Sunder 
Nursery which was managed privately and entry fee (upto ` 200) was being 
charged by its management for the garden  entry (including monuments). ASI in a 
reply (August 2021) submitted that it had entered into MoU with the management 
of Sunder Nursery (December 2017)  to carry out conservation activities at its 
monuments and charge  entry fee from the visitors to the garden ( including 
monuments). Fact remains that, these six monuments were not declared by ASI as 
ticketed and it had no mechanism to ensure free access to general public visiting 
these monuments. 
5.3.2 Sound and Light Shows 
ASI had entered into agreement (MoU) with different stakeholders’ viz. India 
Tourism Development Corporation, State Tourism Departments for sound and light 
shows at selected monuments. It was noted that in agreements entered by ASI, t here 
was no uniformity on the revenue sharing pattern. In respect of Sanchi -Group of 
Monuments and Hindola Mahal , Mandu, (both in Madhya Pradesh ) amount 
equivalent to entry fee ticket was agreed by ASI as its share of revenue , w hile in 
Sarnath and Residenc y, Lucknow (both in Uttar Pradesh ), ASI agreed to a share of 
40 per cent of the income generated from the show. Bhubaneswar Circle had sound 
and light shows at two monuments i.e.  Sun Temple,  Konark and Khandagiri , 
Udayagiri caves. However, audit  noticed that the facility at Khandagiri , Udayagiri 
caves was not func tional. In this regard, Circle office stated that the sound and light 
shows facility would be operative soon. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that normally revenue sharing in Sound and 
Light show is 60:40 but sometimes agencies involved in the process  request for 
lower sharing amount  (to ASI)  due to higher cost of show running. It further 
informed that guidelines for Sound and Light show were being worked out. 
5.3.3 Receipts from Publications and Horticultural activities 
PAC had noted that receipts from sales of publications and horticultural activities 
were anoth er source of revenue of the ASI . The Horticulture Branch had reported 
receipts of ` 1.08 crore from the sale of grass, dead wood and fruit auction during the 
period 2013-14 to 2019-20. However, during the same period, its Division located at 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha had shown no income from the sale of grass from any of the 
157 number of gardens under i ts control. In respect of Publication Division, there 
was no unified system for compiling sales of publication or stocking of over 460 
types of books at their designated 107 sales counters.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
37 
 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that a decision had been taken to create a unified 
application to control and access the data of sales and stock of publications. 
  
Conclusions: 
In view of recommendations of PAC, ASI had included more 
monuments under the ticketed category and also revised upward the 
rates of entry ti ckets and charges for film shooting at the monuments. 
It had introduced e -ticketing facility for online booking of entry ticket 
for monuments. Further, as part of other funding arrangements, for 
developing amenities at monuments, private bodies have been i nvolved 
under ‘Adopt -a-Heritage Initiative’. However, some areas of concern 
in financial management were found to persist.  
 Despite assuring the PAC, ASI’s expenditure on excavation and 
exploration activities was still below one per cent.  

Funds available with National Culture Fund have been 
accumulating over the years and not being utilised for its 
objectives.  
 There was lack of clear guidelines regarding categorization of a 
monument as ticketed/non -
ticketed, amount of fees to be 
levied/shared, issue of notification, etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Functional Issues 
  

 
   Laxman Temple Khajuraho 
    (Madhya Pradesh) 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
38 
 
Chapter 6: Identification and Notification of Monuments 
and Antiquities 
India’s rich repository of heritage include s an estimated 4 lakh plus heritage 
structures and 58 lakh plus antiquities 35, mostly under the control of Central and 
State level authori ties, museums, religious bodies , etc. The identification and 
documentation process of these monuments /antiquities and issues related with their 
notification have been discussed in this chapter. 
6.1 National Database of all Monuments and Antiquities 
With the objective to prepare a national database o f all monuments and antiquities, 
National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was launched  by the 
Government36 (2007), initially for a period of five years i.e. 2007-2012. In order to 
complete the  documentation process  and continue the momentum , this period was 
extended by another five year s (2012-2017) and later NMMA was merged with ASI  
(October 2017) . Delay in setting -up of NMMA and lack of planning leading to  
failure in achieving its objective was pointed out in the previous Report. 
The PAC had asked the Ministry that a national register highlighting the details of 
each and every ancient monument, sites and remains both of National and State 
importance, including artefacts lying in museums, government treasuries and/or in 
other government and private possession spread ove r the country, may be prepared. 
The progress and current status of documentation and database work initiated by 
NMMA in 2007 is depicted in Table 6.1: 
Table 6.1: Progress in Documenting Monuments and Antiquities 
Period Documentation Uploading of Data 
Monuments Antiquities Monuments Antiquities 
2007-12 34794 48411 0 0 
2012-17 1.84 lakh 15.0 lakh 9688 2.40 lakh 
2017-19*  3228 1.70 lakh 312 10.13 lakh 
2019-20 6039 32537 859 8952 
2020-21 3186 2400 703 1569 
Total 2.31 lakh 17.53 lakh 11562 12.64 lakh 
*Period counted upto/from October 
Note: For 2019-20 and 2020- 21, status report ed by NMMA (in October 2020 and December 
2021) was upto October 2020 and from November 2020 to 1 December 2021.  
It would be seen from the Table  6.1 that since 2017, the process for documentation 
of monuments and antiquities had considerably slowed down. NMMA , in its reply 
                                                           
35 Source: ASI 
36 Creation of NMMA was announced by then Prime Minister in August 2003. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
39 
 
(October 2020) , attributed logistical insufficiency, ineffective monitoring and 
budgetary constraints as the reasons for defaults  in achieving the targe ts. It also 
stated that there was a need for reviewing the existing documentation 
process/guidelines, identify and revive Documentation Resource Centres 
(DRC)/State Level Implementing Committees ( SLIC), initiate training programmes 
and workshops at the local levels. Audit, however , noted additional reasons to  
conclude that the whole project was poorly implemented: 
 There was no defined strategy or road-map for documenting the estimated 4 lakh 
monuments and 58 lakh antiquities. No annual  target or annual progress in 
documentation work was available with NMMA . After giving two consecutive 
extensions of five years each, NMMA was merged with ASI without any time -
frame for completion of the work. 
 The project was undertaken without ascertaining the availability  of technical 
capability. NMMA intimated absence of any commercial agency in the country 
to carry out the research oriented documentation work. The staff strength 
available in ASI was also inadequate to complete the work. 
 Since March 2015, no workshop was held to facilitate documentation work , 
rectify mistakes or to provide clarification  to agencies involved in the process . 
As a result, there was absence of a system for regularly up-grading the technical 
capability of executing agencies, which affected the work process. 
 The DRCs identified to carry out the work were insufficient and became 
dormant over the years. The SLICs constituted for the identification of DRCs 
and evaluation of their work were also not functional. As a result, there was 
absence of an effective mechanism to control the work output and fund 
utilisation by  DRCs
37. Further, meetings of National Mission Monitoring 
Committee to periodically review the wok of NMMA were not held after August 
2016. 
 In respect of 1.8 0 lakh monuments, the document ation work carried out  was 
based on secondary sources and not  verified through primary survey. After 
scrutinizing the work and deleting certain data, NMMA reported (December 
2021) following reduced progress status: 
Period Documentation Uploading of Data 
Monuments Antiquities Monuments Antiquities 
Revised Progress 1.84 lakh 16.83 lakh 11406 12.60 lakh 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that a large number of antiquities and sites were 
                                                           
37  Against the assigned documentation of 23,526 monuments and 8.45 la kh antiquities, DRCs had 
completed documentation of only 5,444 monuments and 2.98 lakh antiquities. Utilisation 
certificates of ` 86.2 lakh have also been reported outstanding (October 2020). 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
40 
 
under the custody of States, Private organisations, Trust s and individuals and unless 
these agencies consider for collaboration with NMMA, no target can be achieved. It 
also informed about two initiatives  (i) initiation of concept of  engaging Young 
Archaeologist for carrying out primary survey and documentation of anti quities, and 
(ii) rolling advertisement for engagement of DRCs for the work.  
A successful completion of the NMMA project would have provided an authentic 
inventory of most of the monuments, sites and antiquities in the country . The 
achievement would have been helpful in greater synergy amongst the agencies 
involved in preservation of monuments and prevention of illegal trade of antiquities. 
However, due to the reasons mentioned above, even after 14 years  of establishment 
of NMMA, documentation work of only  46 per cent monuments and 29 per cent of 
antiquities have been completed. 
6.2 Database of Monuments and Antiquities with ASI 
Out of the estimated four  lakh plus heritage structures in the country, 3693 
monuments and archaeological sites are under the jurisdiction of ASI ( December 
2021). The PAC had recommended preparation of inventory of all CPM within a 
period of two years , which was to be updated every five years . This inventory , 
displaying various information e.g. geographic location, category, distance from 
nearest city/town, historical and cultural significance, encroachment details, etc.,  
was to be made accessible to public through a portal. 
It was, however, noted that a centralised database/inventory of all CPM displaying 
all the recommended information to the public was still not available ( March 2022).  
It was further noted that i nformation on CPM, displayed online through websites of 
respective Circles, was also not uniform
38. While some Circles were displa ying the 
history, notification, location of concerned monuments ( e.g. Dehradun, Bengaluru), 
others were only providing list of respective monuments ( e.g. Agra, Bhopal). In 
Chandigarh and Bengaluru  Circles, important information i.e.  notification detail in 
respect of three39 and two40 monuments respectively were not available. Similarly, in 
Bhubaneswar Circle, out of 80 monuments/sites, Gazette Notification for only 38 
was available. Also, in Bhubaneswar Circle, against the notified four Colossal 
Matrikas (sculptures), only three were shown in the inventory. Monuments where 
final notification was not issued are also listed at Annexe-6.2(b).  
ASI intimated (December 2020) that the data with respect to Gazette Notification for 
3150 CPM had been compiled. Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that all Gazette 
Notifications will be part of Indian Heritage Mobile Application under development. 
  
                                                           
38 Also refer Para 4.1, in some of the Circles, websites were not functional. 
39 Baoli Ghaus Ali Shah-Gurugram, Shah Ibrahim Tomb-Narnaul, Shah Quli Khan’s Tomb-Narnaul.  
40 Channakesava Temple, Hassan, Someswara Temple, Shimoga 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
41 
 
However, the fact remains that the inventory is yet to be completed. 
In respect of antiquities, though ASI had estimated 58 lakh plus antiquities  at all 
India level, they had no database or inventory of antiquities in their possession.  
6.2.1 Categorisation of the Monuments 
According to AMASR ( Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010, the Central 
Government, on the recommendation of the NMA, was to classify all the monuments 
and archaeological sites under the jurisdiction of ASI in accordance with the 
prescribed eight categories 41. This categorisation was to be done on the basis of 
information provi ded to NMA by ASI which was to be exhibited on government 
website for general public. In this regard, Ministry had intimated the PAC that 
categorisation of monuments was  completed and handed over to NMA for their  
consideration and making recommendations to the Ministry.  However, NMA 
intimated (November 2020) that  a list of only 915 monuments  (out of 3693 CPM)  
had so far been prepared , which was still under consideration due to non- finalisation 
of monuments under Category III. 
Despite being pointed out in the previous Report and the PAC’s Report, insufficient 
efforts were made by ASI regarding categorisation of all the CPM. 
6.3 Monuments of National Importance under ASI 
According to AMASR Act, 1958 ancient and historical monuments, archaeological 
sites and remains declared under the AHMASR Act, 1951 42, are considered of 
national importance. AMASR Act also specifies that in case the Central Government 
is of the opinion that any ancient and historical monument or archaeological site and 
remains had ceased to be of national importance, it may declare so  by notification. In 
the previous Report, several issues connected with identification and declaration of a 
monument of national importance were reported. In this regard, PAC had also made 
several recommendations. These issues, examined during the follow -up audit , are 
discussed below:  
                                                           
41 Vide Rule 6 of NMA Rules, 2011 framed under AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act. 
Category I World Heritage Sites 
Category II Tentative list of World Heritage Sites 
Category III Identified for inclusion in the World Heritage tentative list 
Category IV Ticketed monuments (other than mentioned above) 
Category V Identified for categorisation as ticketed monuments 
Category VI Living monuments which receive large number of visitors 
Category VII Other monuments located in the Urban/semi -urban limits and in the remote 
villages 
Category VIII Other category as the Authority may deem fit 
 
42 or declared under Section 126 of the State Re-organisations Act, 1956. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
42 
 
6.3.1     Criteria for defining monument of national importance 
In the previous Report, Audit had pointed out several instances indicating  absence of 
defined set of criteria for declaring a monument to be of national importance. In this 
regard, the PAC had recommended that guidelines for determination of monuments 
of national importance be finalised at the earliest . It was noted that  these guidelines 
have still not been framed .  As a result, in below mentioned categories, ASI had 
adopted different criteria for defining monuments of national importance: 
a) Single complex, where more than one monument or independent structure 
was notified as a separate monument  while in other i nstances all structures 
within a complex were notified as single monument; 
b) Instances where only a portion of the whole structure was notified as 
monuments of national importance while its other  part of the structure was 
left unprotected 
c) Cases where Kos-Minars were also protected by State Archaeology 
Department 
These cases are illustrated at Annexe 6.1.  Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that it 
was working on guidelines as recommended by PAC. 
6.3.2  Survey to identify monuments of national importance 
The PAC had noted that a comprehensive survey to identify monuments of national 
importance for placing them in the centrally protected category wa s overdue. The  
Ministry in its ATN  (April 2016) had also agreed that there was an urgent need to 
review and survey all the ancient monuments /sites declared as being of national 
importance and find out whether they still continue to be of national importance. The 
PAC had recommended that after the finalization of the guidelines (as mentioned in 
previous para), a comprehensive survey should be conducted to identify the exact 
number of monuments of national importance that can be protected. 
During the period 2013 to 2021 (i.e. between earlier Performance Audit and current 
follow-up audit), no comprehensive survey/review to identify monuments of national 
importance that can be protected was undertaken by ASI
43.  In this regard, 
Chandigarh Circle also reported that no such guideline was received by it from ASI 
Headquarters44.  Further, t here was no effort by ASI  to identify those monuments 
which over the period had lost their significance and need to be shifted to the States. 
The initiative  was not even undertaken on a smaller scale as a pilot project in the 
selected States (December 2021). 
                                                           
43  According to the submission made by the Ministry with PAC, earlier survey undertaken by ASI was 
in 1998-99.  
44  Chandigarh Circle, however, conducted three surveys at Bara Talao and Solah  Rahi Talao, Rewari 
(June 2015), Archeology mound, Mitathai, Bhiwani (September 2020) and Archaeological mounds 
6 & 7 at Rakhigarhi, Hisar (November 2020). None of the monument was included in the list of 
CPM. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
43 
 
ASI informed (January 2022) that taking of survey or exploration to identify and 
document ancient remains, site or structure is an ongoing phenomenon. As such, the 
view of PAC was not relevant and not possible to be implemented. Further,  in 
consultation wi th the Ministry, it was working on modalities to be adopted for 
monuments which had lost their significance.  
The reply of the Ministry/ASI (January 2022) was contrary  to their earlier  response 
(April 2016) to the PAC recommendations. 
Structural remains of Tomar dynasty-King Anangpal II, founders of Delhi 
In the eleventh century A.D., rulers of Tomar dynasty shifted their royal seat 
from Anangpur (Faridabad, Haryana) to Lal Kot  (Delhi) and founded a new city 
called Dhill or Dhillikapuri in the vicinity of t he erstwhile temple township of 
Yoginipura (near Qutub Archaeological Area). With the re -establishment of the 
nail of earth ( killi-dhill– Mehrauli Iron Pillar brought from Mathura in Samvat 
1109/1051CE), King Anangpal-II45 was considered as founder of Delhi.   
Remains of the walls of Lal Kot built by King Anangpal-II have been notified by 
ASI as protected monument. Anang Tal  is another structure (reservoir) in the 
Qutub Archaeological Area, believed t o be constructed by Kin g Anangp al-II. 
ASI had undertaken excavation at Anang Tal  (1991-95) but the structure was not 
protected by ASI or Delhi State Archaeology Department. 
A visit to Anang Tal revealed that s ewage from nearby areas was being 
discharged into the reservoir  and remains of the monument were in a neglected 
state as depicted in following photographs: 
   
The PAC had recommended that ASI/Ministry may consider issuing guidelines 
whereby Ancient monuments (predating say 1700 AD) and contemporary 
monuments that  are 100 years old and of national importance stand 
automatically protected.  However, no such guidelines declaring 100 years old 
monuments as of national importance was found in existence. As a result, Anang 
Tal, a heritage structures not protected by any agency was in its  last stage of 
disappearance. Ministry/ASI intimated (January 2022) that a proposal for 
protection of the structure was under consideration. 
Historical source: National Seminar document prepared by NMA , Ministry of Culture  in February 
2021 
  
                                                           
45 Also mentioned as Anang Pal, Anangapala in sourced document. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
44 
 
6.3.3 Process of Identifying Monuments of National Importance 
The procedure followed for notifying certain monument  as being of national 
importance include d receipt of proposal from the Circle office , its scrutiny by a 
Committee at ASI Headquarter s and thereafter approval of the Minister for issue of 
relevant preliminary notification in the official gazette. ASI,  based on specific 
requests/inputs received from respective Circles, had revised the list of CPM from 
3,678 to 3,693 during the period 2013-2021. 
ASI, however, had no defined procedure/schedule for reviewing/modifying the list of 
CPM. Audit noted: 
 In respect of notification of one new monument (in 2018) and de -notification of 
two monuments46 (in 1931 and 1999), updation in the list of CPM was  carried 
out in October 2020 with significant delay. 
 In Delhi Circle, Tomb of Ghaziuddin Khan, Ajmeri Gate (notified in 1925) was 
not included in the list of CPM  (till October 2020) . It was noted that  another 
monument Tomb of  Ghiasuddin Khan, Tughlakabad was  included in the list 
twice and the correction was made in October 2020 by inserting Ghaziuddin 
Khan and removing Ghiasuddin Khan. Ministry/ASI accepted (January 2022) 
that this was due to correction of typographical mistake in the list of monuments. 
 Bhopal Circle had submitted (July 2014) a proposal with ASI Headquarters for 
de-notification of the monument i.e., Jain Temples on the Hills, Kundalpur, 
Damoh, Madhya Pradesh . Though the proposal was in accordance with the 
judgement of Apex Court (2014) declaring the monument as State protected 
monument, Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that in view of Section 3 of 
AMASR Act, 1958
47 there was no need to de-notify the monument.  Audit noted 
that despite the decision of the A pex Court, this  monument continue s to be 
included in the list of 3693 CPM.  
 Proposal sent (June 2001) by Dharwad Circle regarding inclusion of excavated 
site, Benagutti as monument of national importance was still pending with ASI 
Headquarters. In this regard, no follow -up was attempted by the Circle office to 
get the approval. 
 De-notification of monuments proposed by Mumbai Circle in September 2007 
and in November 2013 had still not been carried out by the ASI.  
                                                           
46 Three structures at internal building of Siri Fort (1931) and Site of siege battery with inscription 
(1999) both in Delhi Circle.  
47 All monuments , sites and remains which have been declared by AHMASR Act, 1951 to be of 
national imp ortance shall be deemed to be of national importance and need not be notified/de -
notified again. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
45 
 
6.3.4 Discrepancy in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments 
In the previous Report , discrepancies were pointed out in the list of CPM due to 
following reasons: 
a) same monuments were notified twice; 
b) monuments were declared protected without any notification; 
c) monuments were protected both by Centre and State; and 
d) the antiquities were declared as monument  
Despite assurance by the Ministry for rectification of  these reported discrepancies, 
the errors still existed in the list of CPM as  detailed in Annexe 6 .2. Ministry/ASI 
replied (January 2022) that the observation of PAC had been noted and corrective 
measures shall be taken to resolve the issues pointed out by Audit.  
6.3.5 De-notification of Missing Monuments 
In the previous Report , Audit had reported 92 CPM as missing. The Ministry/ASI 
intimated (August 2017/ March 2021 ) that out of 92 missing monuments , 42 had 
been traced, 14 had been affected due to rapid urbanisation, 12 had submerged under 
reservoir/dam and 24 were not traceable.  
During joint physical inspection it was observed  that two monuments in Delhi 
Circle48 identified by ASI as physically existing/traced and four  monuments in 
Bengaluru ( 3) and Jabalpur  (1) Circles49 reported as affected due to 
urbanisation/submerged under water were also not in existence. Similarly, in Kolkata 
Circle, six monuments reportedly submerged during construction of dam continue to 
be included in the list of CPM , despite proposal for their de-notification having been 
made in July 2017.  Audit further noted that 24 monuments accepted by ASI, as not 
traceable, had not been de -notified and they continue to be included in the list of 
CPM. Details of monuments which need to be de -notified due to their non -existence 
are given in Annexe 6.3.  Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that it was working on 
modalities for de -notification of untraceable monuments . It further stated  that the 
process requires strict scrutiny and takes longer time.  
Antiquities missing from submerged Monuments 
Out of six monuments declared submerged, statues pertaining to three monuments 
were reported by the Kolkata Circle as not traceable. However, during joint 
physical inspection, three statues similar to  the images available in the inventory 
with the Circle office were found lying unattended and unprotected  near the dam 
                                                           
48  Nicholson Statue (reported existing), Tomb of Capt. Mc  Barnett & others (reported affected). In the 
previous Report, it was mentioned that Nicholson Statue was gifted away (in 1960) by the 
Government of India to Government of Ireland. 
49  Pre-historic sites at Kittur, Hejjala and Chikkajala (all in Bengaluru), Fresco painting, Rewa 
(Jabalpur) 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
46 
 
site. The Circle office was unable to confirm these  unattended statues as the same  
artefacts notified along with the monuments (later submerged). It assured checking 
of its archive for confirmation. The action highlights the importance of preparation 
of database as the Circle office/ASI was unaware of its heritage collection. 
An effective laid down procedure for identification of all monuments  of national 
importance and its adherence is essential for better planning and prudent use of 
available resources for heritage conservation. However, inadequate efforts on the 
part of the Ministry/ASI to rectify discrepancies in the list of monuments indicate s 
the lack of a comprehensive strategy for management of national heritage. 
6.3.6 Hasty notification of Monuments 
In the previous Report , Audit had pointed out that ASI had notified monuments 50 in 
Kolkata Circle  without resolving the issues regarding encroachment/unauthorised 
occupancy. In this respect, the Ministry had stated (May 2013) that such actions were 
taken on the assurance given by the occupants and the State Governments. During 
follow-up audit, i t was noted that the litigation regarding  illegal occupant s at one 
monument (Tamluk, Rajbati) was dismissed (2014) by the High  Court in favour of 
ASI. However, both the monuments were still being illegally occupied by 
encroachers. Due to illegal occupants  and hasty notifications, ASI was not able to 
carry out any preservation and conservation activities at these monuments resulting 
in their being in a dilapidated condition (refer pictures at Annexe 7.2, Para 4.2)
51.  
6.4 Antiquities  
 The AAT Act empowers the Government to compulsorily acquire antiquities. 
Apart from compulsory acquisition, ASI collects antiquities through 
exploration, excavation, survey, purchase, gifts, etc. ASI is one of the largest 
repositories of antiquities in India. However, as mentioned in Para 3.1, no 
comprehensive policy document for management of antiquities had been 
prepared and the exercise undertaken for review of AAT Act was still in 
process. In a press release (July 2021), the Ministry had informed that 
digitisation of the collection of 2.8 lakh artefacts of ten government museums 
and galleries (including national level museums, site -museums and modern 
art galleries) have been completed under JATAN  software programme ( refer 
Para 1.3). 
 As mentioned in previous Report, ASI had no policy/standard for transfer/  
shifting/acquisition/custody of antiquities. It intimated (December 2020) that 
                                                           
50  (i) Tamluk, Rajbati (ii) Clive House, Dum Dum and (iii) Moti Jheel Masjid 
51  ASI had decided to shift its Tamluk site -museum from rented building to the monument. However, 
due to its illegal occupants and absence of restoration process, it had to purchase (2019) another 
land for ` 76.77 lakh for construction of the site-museum.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
47 
 
at the time of transfer of antiquities, neither any agreement with the 
associated firm nor any insurance is being done. 
 The PAC had recommended the Ministry to explore and take necessary steps 
to recover or procure antiquities which are of cultural significance to our 
country but have been sold to buyers abroad and also to bring back the 
artefacts/antiquities and /or Cultural Proper ty of Indian origin that were 
taken outside the country. Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that retrieval of 
antiquities is one of its focus area.  The process for retrieval was accelerated 
since 2014 and 199 antiquities have been retrieved till date  whereas it 
retrieved only 13 antiquities during the period between 1976 and 2013.  
 
  
Conclusions: 
 After 2014, Ministry/ASI had made significant improvement in retrieving 
artefacts of Indian origin that were taken outside the country. However, 
work regarding preparation of centralised and digitised database of 
monuments and antiquities was lagging even after 14 years of 
establishment of National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities. 
 Despite PAC recommendations and pointing out in previous Report, 
issues related with monuments of national importance viz. criteria and 
process for their selection, preparation of inventory of all protected 
monuments for public display, categorization of monuments, rectification 
of discrepancies in the list of monuments, t heir notification and de -
notification, etc., have not been resolved. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
48 
 
Chapter 7: Monuments Management 
Monuments and archaeological sites are finite and our non-renewable cultural 
resource. India’s rich repository of heritage include world heritage sites and 
monuments declared as of national importance. The conservation work of these 
centrally protected monuments /sites is a continuous process and the prime 
responsibility of ASI. 
7.1 Management of Centrally Protected Monuments 
Audit examined  issues related with management of World Heritage Sites , Adarsh 
Smarak, Ticketed monuments, Living Monuments, etc. In this regard, joint physical 
inspection of 184 selected monuments was carried out to assess availability of public 
amenities and other service related issues. Results of these assessments are discussed 
in succeeding paragraphs. 
7.1.1 World Heritage Sites 
The UNESCO designates a specific monument as a World Heritage Site (WHS). The 
citation is prestigious for any country and gives  a boost to its tourism. India has 40 
WHS (32 cultural, seven natural and one mixed) of which 24 were under the 
jurisdiction of ASI (June 2021).  
In the previous Report , after joint physical inspection,  it was reported that WHS 
faced many issues related to security, public amenities, encroachment , etc. A similar 
exercise conducted during the follow-up audit revealed that in 12 WHS, some public 
facilities were still not available.  As detailed at  Annexe 7.1, apart from public 
facilities, interpreter/guide or audio guide services were also not available.  
In response to recommendation made by the  Standing Committee of Parliament  
(March 2021) regarding development of a mobile application to  provide informative 
content about the monuments and site -museums, ASI stated (December 2021)  that 
the same was under development. 
Though audit recommendation made in the previous Report for developing a separate 
mechanism to assess the fund, security and conservation requirement s of WHS was 
accepted by the Ministry, no such procedure was found in existence. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
49 
 
World Heritage Site-Red Fort, Delhi 
The concerns raised in the previous Report, with regard to Red Fort, Delhi were 
yet to be resolved by ASI, as given below: 
 Parts of the monument viz.  Mumtaz Mahal, Shah Burj have been closed for 
the general public without approval of the competent authority. 
 Parts of the monument were still being used b y CISF, private security agency 
for their office/residence.  
 The Publication Division store of ASI was still functional from the monument 
in the colonial era building.  
 Temple, Majar constructed inside the monument were still not included in the 
list of monuments reported for encroachment. 
 There was still no system for security check of vehicles entering/leaving the 
premises of Red fort. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
World Heritage Site-Sun Temple, Konark, Odisha 
During the follow-up audit, a visit to Sun Temple, Konark revealed following: 
 Some public amenities like toilet blocks, facilities for physically challenged, 
parking, cloak room facility and interpreter services were not available. 
 There were unauthorised constructions and encroachments on the entrance of 
the monument which were later reported by ASI (January 2022) as having 
been removed. 
 Fungal/vegetation growth and stains have occurred on the structure requiring 
chemical treatment. ASI reported (January 2022) that cleaning of the 
monument was a regular process and had been undertaken by its Science 
Branch. 
 Garbhagriha of Sun Temple was closed for general public prior to its taking 
over by ASI in 1939. 
 The CCTVs installed at the monument were not functional. 
 
During the previous audit, in respect of WHS at Hampi and Pattadakal in Karnataka , 
various observations relating to incomplete conservation works, encroachments, 
absence of basic amenities for the visitors, etc. were made. Joint physical verification 
of these sites revealed that despite incurring expenditure on conservation, 
shortcomings at these monuments
52 remained unaddressed.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that some of WHS have also been considered as 
Adarsh Smarak and providing/ upgrading visitors facilities at these monuments is a 
regular phenomenon. It also informed that for s ome WHS it had entered into 
agreement under Adopt -a-Heritage scheme of Ministry of Tourism and a  separate 
mechanism for fund, security and conservation requirements of WHS was being 
developed. 
                                                           
52  Krishna Temple Complex, Old Shiva Temple, Saraswathi Temple, Underground Shiva Temple, 
Octagonal Bath, Virupaksha Temple, Vitthala Temple Complex Ananthashayana Temple, Pattabhi 
Rama Temple, Raghunatha Temple, Lotus Mahal, Chandrasekhara Templ e, Hazara Ram Temple 
(all in Hampi) and 10 monuments in Pattadakal. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
50 
 
7.1.2 Adarsh Smarak and Ticketed Monuments 
The PAC had recommended that all monuments and sites maintained by ASI must 
have clean and modern toilets, eateries, medical shops and other conveniences in 
and around their precincts for the benefit of visitors. 
The ASI ha d declared 100 monuments as  Adarsh Smarak in March 2018 (including 
WHS, ticketed
53 and non-ticketed monuments) for providing amenities and facilities 
like toilets, clean drinking water, Wi -Fi services, cafeteria, facilities for physically 
challenged, signage, cloak roo ms, interpretation centre, etc. 54. Joint physical 
inspection of 36 Adarsh Smarak and other ticketed monuments revealed absence of 
various public amenities and facilities viz. drinking water, toilet blocks, parking, Wi -
Fi, cloak rooms, facilities for physically  challenged, guide services, etc.  The 
Circle/State-wise details are given in Annexe 7.1. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that it has undertaken various initiatives  to 
provide facilities such as approach pathway, signage, toilets, drinking water  and first 
aid at Adarsh Smarak  and were available in over 82 per cent such monuments 
undertaken. However, wheel chairs, toilet s for Divyang, baby care room s, vehicle 
parking were available in less than 56 per cent of such monuments. 
Ticketed Monument-Sultan Garhi, Delhi 
Sultan Garhi, Delhi had been notified by ASI as a ticketed monument. During a 
visit, it was noticed that the monument had no facilities for visitors such as 
drinking water, toilet, cultural signage, cloakroom, Wi -Fi and electricity. There 
was no pathway , vehicle parking or facilities for physically challenged. The 
monument area was being  used for defecation. It had multiple entry/exit points , 
and with its boundary wall broken, the monument was not secure. The staff was 
unaware of the demarcation of the monument area. No horticulture activity was 
found to have been carried out  at the monument. In a study conducted for NITI 
Aayog (2020), the monument was termed as the worst ticketed monument. Being a 
ticketed monument, ASI need to enhance the visitors’ facilities at Sultan Garhi. 
7.1.3 Other Monuments 
The Ministry had intimated  the PAC that there was no specific policy for 
preservation/conservation of different category/types of monuments. It informed that 
the protection work of monuments was taken up on the basis of studies carried out by 
field officers. Different types of monuments viz. living monuments, Baolis , Rock -
Edicts discussed in the previous Report and relevant recommendations made by PAC 
were revisited during the follow-up audit. Findings in this regard are discussed below 
and also detailed at Annexe 7.1. 
                                                           
53  Out of 143 ticketing monuments, 54 have been included in the list of Adarsh Smarak .  
54  Scheme was launched in December 2014 with 25 monuments and 75 monuments were added in its 
second phase. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
51 
 
7.1.3.1  Living Monuments: According to John Marshall’s Manual of Conservation, 
structures still in use for the purpose for which they were originally  designed at the 
time of notification are living monuments. AMASR Act, 1958 also requires the 
Government to enter into an agreement with the owner of these living monuments for 
their maintenance and restriction on their destroying, removing, altering or defacing.  
The PAC, while considering the need for protection and conservation of  these living 
monuments, felt the requirement of: 
 evolving guidelines on the use of living  monuments to ensure their safeguard 
and preservation; 
 laid down policy for notification of sites with contested ownership or 
encroachments; and 
 ensure signing of MoUs with users/occupants based on the said guidelines for 
retaining integrity of the monument. 
Despite recommendations of PAC, no guidelines or policy document on living 
monuments was prepared by ASI. ASI had identified 955 monuments being used for 
worship and prayers. However, as pointed out in the previous Report, ASI did not 
have the details of those monuments where prayers/worships were started 
before/after the issue of notification. Further, ASI/Ministry did not provide details of 
efforts made by it in signing MoU with the users/occupants  of living monuments 
during the period 2013-20.  
In Delhi Circle, all three monuments report ed as living monuments
55 were found 
encroached upon. In Kolkata Circle, one living monument (St. John’s Church) was 
controlled/maintained by the Church authorities and not handed over to ASI. Further, 
in Delhi , Aurangabad, Mumbai, Bengaluru, Dharwad and Kolkata Circles , 
significant changes in the structure of the monuments used for religious activities viz. 
construction of toilets, rooms, modern fittings, paints, etc. were found to have been 
made. A few of these changes made in the monuments are depicted below: 
  
Modern constructions made at  
Palam Mosque, Delhi 
Ply boards used and original murals 
covered at Dubdi Monastery, Sikkim 
                                                           
55 Sunehri Masjid, Palam Masjid, Nili Masjid 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
52 
 
 
 
Paints used on the walls of  
Ghrishneshwar Temple, Ellora 
Monument painted in white and green at 
Jod Gumbaz, Vijayapura 
In respect of Dubdi Monastery, Sikkim, Circle office stated that the M onk 
Committee for the respective monument did not co-operate and carried out the works 
on their own without expert advice . Though the NPC -AMASR accepts the role of 
local communities in conservation of living monuments , it also prohibits any change 
in the structure/fabric of the monument.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022)  that except forceful attempts, the religious 
worship was not allowed in any monument where it was not in practice at the time of 
its central protection or if it was discontinued since long. ASI however did not 
respond to audit comments regarding (a) absence of details of monuments where 
prayers/worships were started before/after the issue of notification  (b) no n- 
preparation of guidelines or policy document for living monuments (c) absence of 
efforts for entering into MoU with users/occupants of living monuments and (d) 
changes made in these monuments. 
7.1.3.2 Baolis: The ASI in a reply to  Parliament (August 2010) had intimated that in 
Delhi Circle, fifteen water bodies ( Baolis) were under its jurisdiction, of which two 
were dry and the other 13  were clean. These water bodies were being maintained by 
ASI as part of CPM for public viewing. The PAC , while discussing the issue , had 
asked the Ministry/ASI to take care of Baolis, specifically in Delhi region. During the 
follow-up audit, it was found that condition of these Baolis had deteriorated. ASI 
reported (January 2021) that  out of 13 wet Baolis, ten had become dirty. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that Covid19 lockdown had hampered 
conservation works which would be taken up from the forthcoming financial year. 
Agarsen Ki Baoli 
In the previous  Audit Report, it was pointed out that ASI had signed MoU (in 
2009) with Global Vaish Organisation (GVO) for the maintenance of A garsen Ki 
Baoli, Delhi. In this respect , Project Implementation Committee  (PIC) of ASI  to 
define the scope and schedule of work was not constituted. Further, works agreed 
upon in MoU viz. maintenance of the monument, printing and distribution of 
publications, etc. was  not carried out by GVO. Instead, an unauthorised Porta 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
53 
 
Cabin in the protected area of the monument was set up  by GVO for use as its 
office. The MoU was renewed by the ASI in January 2011 (for five years ), 
November 2017 and November 2019 (for two years each).  
During follow-up audit, it was noted that PIC had still not been constituted. Despite 
agreement, facilities viz. drinking water, toilet for ladies and gents , etc. were not 
provided by GVO. Further, in accordance with the terms of agreement, Porta Cabin 
was not converted into publication sale counter and cloak room  and was still used  
by GVO as its office. Instead  of removing the encroachment, ASI continue d to 
extend the agreement with GVO.  
7.1.3.3 Rock Edicts: These are inscriptions carved on stones containing messages of 
King Ashoka. The PAC noted that there was no specific policy for preservation of 
Rock Edicts. It recommended ASI to make concerted efforts to ensure their 
conservation and preservation as they have pristine value and depict a definite era in 
historical evaluation of our national culture. Joint physical verification of Ashoka 
Rock Edict at Udaegolam and Nittur (Hampi Circle) revealed that both  the sites 
lacked proper approach roads  and demarcated protected area. Further, translation of 
the rock inscriptions w as also not available for the benefit of the visitors of these 
sites. Similarly, absence of public facilities and encroachment in the monument were 
noticed at the Ashoka Rock Edict in Delhi Circle. 
Salimgarh Fort is another monument in the 
vicinity of the Red Fort complex. The Fort 
built in 1546 (before Red Fort) was turned 
into a prison during the period of Aurangzeb 
(capturing his  brother Murad Baksh and 
daughter Zebunissa). During the revolt of 
1857, Salimgarh Fort was used to im prison 
freedom fighters. Further, during India’s 
freedom struggle, it was used as a prison to 
confine Indian National Army soldiers 
including Major General Shah Nawaz Khan, 
Major Gurbaksh Singh Dhillon and Captain 
Prem Kumar Sehgal.   
During visit of Salimgarh Fort it was noted that the Jail built inside the monument 
was lying in a neglected sta te. There were cracks and seepage on the walls and it 
was not receiving much deserved care and protection for its heritage value.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that the monument was included in the Annual 
Conservation Plan (2021-22) and the work will be carried out. 
Source: Publicity material on Salimgarh Fort published by ASI 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
54 
 
7.1.3.4 Kos-Minar: Kos-Minars56 are medieval infrastructure (pillars) constructed 
across the highways as an important part of travel and communication. In the 
previous Report, it was mentioned that ASI had never researched and analysed Kos -
Minars as a specific category of monuments. Dur ing joint physical inspection of 
Kos-Minars (in Delhi and Haryana Circles) it was noted that there was no specific 
plan for preservation of the Kos -Minars. In respect of Kos -Minar at Gharunda, 
(South Karnal), Haryana, since the period covered in the previous  audit (2007), no 
expenditure was incurred on the repair of the monument.  During visits, ASI officials 
also acknowledged that these monuments were in need of chemical treatment for 
preservation. 
The joint physical inspection of selected monuments revealed  several shortcomings 
in providing facilities to the visitors . In some monuments, newly constructed toilet 
blocks were found non-functional (January 2021)  due to non- availability of water . 
Further, some of the monuments were either fully encroached upon or were in a 
neglected state or some of their parts were closed for visitors without the approval of 
the competent authority i.e. Director General, ASI (refer Annexe 7.1). 
7.2 Preservation and Conservation works at Monuments 
One of the prime mandates of ASI is to ensure the conservation and maintenance of 
all protected monuments throughout the country
57. The issues connected with 
conservation work of these monuments/sites are discussed here. 
7.2.1 Implementing the National Policy for Conservation 
The ASI had  intimated the PAC about release  (February 2014) of a National Policy 
for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(NPC-AMASR). During follow-up audit, it  was noted that in  11 Circles
58, one or 
more important instructions of NPC -AMASR, as mentioned below,  were not being 
followed properly: 
a. preparation of short-term (up to two  years), mid-term (two to five years) and 
long-term (five years and above) monitoring and maintenance plans; 
b. regular inspection by the archaeological officers, at least once a year; 
c. preparation of Site Management Plans (SMPs); 
d. peer review of conservation work undertaken; 
e. documentation of entire conservation process through maps, drawings, 
photographs, digital records, field notes; 
f. identification of craftsman for conservation works; and  
                                                           
56  Mile pillars constructed at a distance of 3.2 kilometres i.e.one Kos. 
57  ASI also undertake conservation projects for State Governments and other countries.  
58  Delhi, Aurangabad, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Bhopal, Jabalpur, Bhubaneswar,  Bengaluru, 
Dharwad and Hampi. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
55 
 
g. trainings to Monument in-Charge for disaster management. 
NITI Aayog in its Report had  also mentioned that NPC -AMASR, 2014, despite 
being a well -structured document covering significant aspects of conservation, was 
not being followed by ASI. Further, in Aurangabad, Mumbai , Bengaluru, Dharwad, 
Hampi and Kolkata Circles, irregularities in planning of conservation works 59 and 
non-preparation of Annual Conservation Plan 60 were also noticed.  Any deviation 
from the prescribed conservation procedure in NPC -AMASR may affect the heritage 
conservation process. Ministry/ASI only responded (January 2022) to sub- paragraph 
‘c’ and ‘g’ and stated that the process of preparing SMPs had been initiated for 
selected WHS  and assured that respective officials  will be asked to contact the  
concerned agencies for necessary training on disaster management.   
7.2.2 Improper Preservation Works at Monuments 
NPC-AMASR, 2014, contains detailed instructions regarding maintaining the 
original structure and fabric of the monument. Joint physical inspection of 
monuments in all the selected States revealed instances of improper conservation 
works, monuments requiring chemical conservation, c hanges made in the structure  
and neglected state  of monuments of  national importance . Instances of these 
improper conservation works carried out by ASI are illustrated in Annexe 7.2. 
7.2.3 Management of Heritage Gardens 
During joint physical inspection, cases of growth of excess vegetation were noticed 
at 51 monuments in the States of Delhi (11), Haryana (5), Karnataka (18), Madhya 
Pradesh (3), Maharashtra (7), Odisha (2) and West Bengal (5). Instances of improper 
garden management/excess growth of vegetation at the monuments are illustrated in 
Annexe 7.3. 
Further, out of 25 heritage gardens under the  jurisdiction of Horticulture Branch of 
ASI, three are located in Delhi. It was noticed that information on landscape of  these 
heritage gardens 61 was not available with the concerned Horticulture Division. ASI 
had undertaken work to revive the ancient water channel at Mehtab Bagh, Red Fort, 
Delhi. Though Mehtab Bagh was identified by ASI  as its archaeological garden, 
concerned Horticulture D ivision (Delhi Circle)  was unaware of any such activity  
being undertaken and was not involved in the process. It was also noticed that there 
was absence of co-ordination between the Horticulture Branch and Circle office , as 
the works of horticulture nature viz. uprooting of vegetation, jungle cleaning , etc. in 
other parts of  monuments were being executed by Circle office. Similarly, in 
Horticulture Division, Mysuru, instances were noticed where Circle offices were 
maintaining/ developing gardens without the assistance of the Horticulture Branch.  
                                                           
59 Selection of monuments for annual maintenance/special report, delay in submission of Revised 
Conservation Programme, approved works not undertaken, non-maintenance of log books, etc. 
60 Preparation of plan without prior information, non -preparation of estimates for approval, over  
    estimations by Sub-Circles. 
61 Located at Humayun’s Tomb, Red Fort and Safdarjung Tomb 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
56 
 
Ministry/ASI attributed (Febru ary 2022) Covid19 and shortage of human resources 
as the reasons for the reported status of its gardens . ASI informed that in order to 
have more co-ordination, its horticulture offices have been integrated with the Circle 
offices. Further, in respect of conservation works at Mehtab Bagh, Red Fort, it 
submitted that its water channel was part of the conservation work carried out by the 
Circle office. 
7.2.4 Preservation of Estampages 
Estampages are paper impression of stone or coppe r plate inscription s. Estampages 
are preserved by Epigraphy Branch in a controlled environment to stop their 
deterioration. During a visit to the Estampages store of the Epigraphy Branch, 
Mysuru, it was noticed that the Estampages were not preserved under temperature 
and humidity-controlled environment.  
In this respect, Epigraphy Branch stated (January 2021) that action was underway in 
consultation with the experts to preserve estampages in a more scientific manner for 
increasing their longevity. 
7.3 Security and Safeguard arrangements 
The PAC had observed gaps in the management of security and safeguard around 
important monuments and museums. It recommended the Ministry to develop a 
comprehensive security policy for all monuments and museums under its  control by 
addressing the shortage of security personnel. The PAC had also asked the Ministry 
to explore the possibility of taking the help of ISRO for aerial survey and installation 
of satellite cameras and other agencies for IT based security.  The Ministry had  
submitted through ATN that use of ISRO maps or satellite camera for security may 
not be advantageous for security purpose. It was , however, noted that ASI had 
entered into MoU with ISRO for a web-based utility which allows users to explore 
map based content prepared by ISRO.  
The Ministry had brought out  (March 2016) a comprehensive security policy for 
museums under its control  (i.e. other than site -museums). However, ASI intimated 
(March 2021) that archaeological museums under ASI are mostly located near CPM , 
and accordingly , security guidelines issued for monuments were being followed. 
Audit noted that there were no separate security guidelines  or standards for 
manpower requirement for the CPM. 
Issues related with security and safeguard arrangements noticed during joint physical 
verification of selected monuments are included in the Annexe 7.1. In Mumbai and 
Aurangabad Circles , ASI had not deployed security personnel in 173 out of 192 
monuments. In Delhi Circle,  due to deployment of insufficient number of security 
personnel, ASI was not able to control large number of public visiting certain 
ticketed monuments on specific  days of the week . In Karnataka, out of 45 
monuments selected in three Circles (Bengaluru, Dharwad and Hampi) , 26 did not 
have security guards.  In Bhubaneswar Circle, security guards have been deployed 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
57 
 
only at three monuments and three site -museums. Similarly, in Chandigarh Circle, 
out of total 91 CPM under Haryana Sub- circle, security equipment was provided at 
only one CPM. 
Further, while visiting the central store of Publication Division located at Red Fort, 
New Delhi, it was noted that there were no fire-safety arrangements for securing the 
published stocks.  
 
  
Conclusions: 
 Based on recommendation of PAC, ASI had started Adarsh Smarak 
Initiative in its 100 monuments to provide amenities to the visitors of these 
monuments.  
 Joint physical inspection of selected monuments , however, revealed that in 
most of the monuments, concerns regarding management of monuments 
including provision of visitors’ facilities, conservation works, security etc. 
remained unaddressed. 
 Provisions/ instructions contained in NPC-AMASR were not being followed 
    

Report No. 10 of 2022 
58 
 
Chapter 8: Antiquities Management 
Antiquities are mostly acquired and maintained by various national/ State level 
museums across the country. Besides, antiquities found during excavations are kept 
and displayed by ASI at its site-museums.  
8.1 National Level Museums 
Under the Ministry, seven national level museums function as its subordinate office s 
or autonomous bodies . The Ministry had intimated the PAC that no uniform laid 
down procedure for management of antiquities was being followed in these museums 
as they were independent entities working under the direction of their Board/Society.  
Ministry had , however, reported to the PAC regarding  steps being taken  by it 
towards drafting and finalisation of a uniform policy for acquisition of art objects. As 
pointed out in Para 3.1, against the recommendation of PAC, uniform 
policy/procedure for all museums (except security policy  mentioned in Para 7.3) had 
not been framed. The Ministry had also informed the PAC regarding digitation 
process of art objects in the museums through JATAN software.  
In the previous Report, several observations  in antiquity management viz. 
acquisition, registration, documentation, accession, physical verification, storage, 
display, security and human resources were made . Though the PAC had not  made 
any specific recommendations for any national level museums, areas of concern 
noticed in their working during the follow-up audit are discussed below: 
8.1.1 National Museum, Delhi 
The Nation Museum, Delhi (NM), which was formally inaugurated in August 1949, 
has around 2.06 lakh works of exquisite art  of both Indian and foreign origin,  
covering more than 5000 years of cultural heritage, in its possession. During the 
period 2014-15 to 2020-21, annual average fund allocation of NM was ` 36.65 crore 
against which average annual expenditure was ` 34.62 crore. Audit  noted that 
concerns in the functioning of NM raised by two Committees  viz. Varadarajan 
Committee (2004) and Yechury Committee (2011) and  also mentioned in previous 
Report were still existing. In this regard, following observations are being made: 
 The sanctioned strength of NM , which was 276 at the time of the earlier audit, 
was reduced
62 (July 2019) by the Ministry to 174, against which 36 posts were 
found (December 2020) vacant. Some of the posts viz . Additional Director 
General, Joint Director General, were vacant since 2014. 
                                                           
62  Including nine posts of Curator/Deputy Curator and five posts of  Conservator/Deputy Conservator, 
Deputy Chemist. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
59 
 
 Except acquisition of objects through gifts, NM had not purchased any artefa ct 
since the period covered in the previous Report i.e.2007.  It was noticed that 
the Art Purchase/Acquisition Committee of NM was  defunct since 1997 and 
was not reconstituted, resulting in no new addition in the collection of the 
museum. 
 NM had no policy/ guidelines/instructions for handing/taking over of objects 
including their physical verification. D elay in handing/taking over of objects 
and their physical verification was noticed in various sections of NM. In  a 
statement made by NM (September 2019) after the digitisation of all the 
artefacts and their further linking with JATAN  Software (along  with details 
provided in accession register), the verification process would be considered as 
completed63. However, out of 2.06 lakh artefac ts, NM had digitised records of 
1.73 lakh objects , of which photography/digitisation of  only 0.81 lakh art 
objects was completed (January 2021).  
 The Yechury Committee, while pointing out absence of physical verification 
(since 2003) of artefacts in NM, ha d felt that when the verification process 
would be taken up, some of the objects might be reported missing. The issue of 
discrepancy in the number of artefacts in NM was also included in the previous 
Report. During the current audit, it was noted that in various sections of NM , 
the number of objects reported were different from those mentioned by the two 
Committees. Further, instances of missing/untraceable artefacts in  some 
sections of NM were also noticed.  
The section -wise position regarding delay in handing/taking over/verification 
process and missing/untraceable artefacts are provided in Annexe 8.1. Some 
instances are illustrated below: 
 In the Numismatic Section only ten  per cent of coins have been physically 
verified. The 15 antique coins recovered (2008) from the almirah of an ex -
Curator as discussed in the previous Report had still not been verified and 
accessioned with museum records. Due to inadequate verification, there was 
no record to correlate coins removed from the reserve and displayed in the 
gallery.  
 In the Pre -History Section, only 1942 artefacts against 5437 objects were 
handed/taken over. The Curator had no information on whereabouts of the 
remaining artefacts. In Pre-Columbian & Western Art Section, against 2909 
objects ( identified by Yechury Committee), only 1208 were reported. 
                                                           
63  In a submission made (September 2019) by the National Museum with High Court, it was explained 
that as a part of the digitisation project through JATAN , all the information  appearing in the 
Classified Accession Register (CAR) are entered into the system. Thereafter, every object appearing 
the CAR is physically verified and photographs taken as proof of physical verification.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
60 
 
Similarly, in Anthropology Section, 501 objects were  reported missing/gg 
untraceable. 
 In the previous Report , it was pointed out that due to irregularities in the 
Accession Register of the Manuscript Section, its charge was not handed over 
to the new Curator. As detailed in the Annexe 8.1, 35 per cent of manuscripts 
(4871) have still not been physically verified. 
 In the Painting Section, the complete handing/taking over process was 
pending since 2016. Audit noticed that a painting described in the accession 
register as Thanka had a missing Buddha picture.  
  
As per accession register In possession 
The Section  reported (March 2021) to audit  that two paintings  have been  found 
marked with a single accession number. It had also reported  (January 2020) to the 
museum authority that various artefacts of the Section were missing. However, there 
was no record of action taken by the NM (March 2021). Similarly, in the Pre-History 
Reserve, objects were found lying in the reserve without any accession number. 
 NM had 26 galleries of which, Arms & Armours, Manuscripts, Paintings, Pre -
Columbian & Western Art, Jewellery, Epigra phy and Textile galleries were 
found closed. The Yechury Committee had noted that apart from reasons of  
up-gradation/renovation, shortages of staff and display materials, galleries have 
also been closed for pending cases involving  theft and vigilance  matters. It was 
noted that some of the galleries viz. Pre-Columbian & Western Art, Manuscript, 
mentioned closed in previous Report have still not been opened on the pretext of 
their up-gradation. Further, in most of the sections, only upto nine per cent of art 
objects were on display.   
On this issue, NM replied (April 2021) that the closure of the galleries was not 
on account of pending cases involving theft and vigilance. It further submitted 
that low percentage of antiquities on display was due to dis play area being less. 
Fact remain s that the low percentage  of display of artefacts and closure of 
galleries deprives the general public from experiencing our rich heritage. 
 As mentioned in the previous Report , in the reserve collections of different 
Sections of NM , security cameras were also not available. Audit noted that the 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
61 
 
art objects were being kept in rooms/sections ( e.g. Paintings, Central Asian 
collection) in wooden almirah without ensuring their fire-safety.  
Aurel Stein Collection–Central Asian Antiquities 
Aurel Stein  (1862-1943) was an archaeologist, known for his explorations and 
discoveries. Amongst the non- Indian collections of NM, the Central Asian Arts 
Collection is a significant one as it has some of the mos t outstanding wall 
paintings, silk banners, sculptures, art objects, etc. This  collection was explored 
and collected by Aurel Stein, during 1900-1916, on three major expeditions.  
  
 
In the previous Audit Report, it was pointed out that a part of this collection 
consisting of 700 art objects  was loaned to Victoria & Albert (V&A) Museum, 
London by Government of India ( through ASI) between 1923 and 1933. The 
loaned art objects have not been  received back64. It was noted that no effort was 
made to retrieve the collection from V&A Museum. Further, some of the objects 
from this collection were still lying in the conservation lab of NM (for over 50 
years).  
Source: CAG Report No. 18 of 2013 (Page 142) 
 During the follow-up audit, it was noted that priceless statues of NM  were lying 
in an unsecured environment , gathering dust  as depicted in following  
photographs and Annexe 8.2. 
   
                                                           
64  According to V&A website V&A The Stein Collection (vam.ac.uk) the collection, on loan from the 
Government of India, includes nearly 600 textile fragments and over 70 ceramic and Buddhist 
objects dating between 200 BC and 1200 AD. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
62 
 
8.1.2 Asiatic Society, Mumbai  
The Mumbai Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society was founded in 1826 by merging 
the Literary Society of Bombay with the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland. A siatic Society, Mumbai (ASM)  is a Library and Research Society in 
possession of Buddhist relics , antique coins, manuscripts etc. During audit it was 
noted that except for coins, ASM was not maintaining any Accession Register. The 
work regarding cataloguing of coins, started in 2014- 15, was still incomplete and the 
physical verification of coins and other antiquities was pending since 2008.  
8.1.3 Salarjung Museum, Telangana 
The Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad (SJM) was established in 1951 and was declared 
as an institution of national importance in 1961. It has  a collection of art objects and 
antiquities acquired from all over the globe. Audit observed  the following during the 
period 2013-14 to 2020-21:  
 SJM Act, 1961, provides for a Board to manage the museum efficiently and to 
plan, promote, organise and implem ent the development of the museum. T he 
Board had met only twice  during the period against the mandatory four 
meetings (at least) in a year adding to a  total 28 required meetings. As such,  
apex level advise for effective management of the museum was not available. 
Shortfall of similar nature in the schedule d meetings of sub- committees i.e. 
Executive Committee (71.43 per cent ), Finance Committee (35.71 per cent ) 
and Building Advisory Committee ((85.71 per cent) was also noticed. 
 The sanctioned strength of SJM was 166 at the time of earlier audit which was 
reduced to 140 in 2020- 21. Against the reduced strength, the overall shortage 
of manpower (ranging from 20 months to 16 years) was 46 i.e.  32.86 per cent 
(including 21 posts of technical staff). SJM replie d (June 2021) that due to 
budget constraints, posts could not be filled. 
 During the period 2014-15 to 2020-21, annual average fund allocation of SJM 
was ` 24.33 crore. As the grants were not being allocated separately for 
preservation and conservation acti vities, such works were being undertaken on 
the basis of priority and availability. During this period, (2014-20) expenditure 
on preservation and conservation activities (including expenditure on 
upgradation of security system, digitisation, etc.) ranged from 0.09 to 5.83 per 
cent. 
 SJM had not acquired any new artefacts and its Art Acquisition Committee was 
not constituted. SJM replied (June 2021) that there was no acquisition after 
1992 and the Committee was not constituted as it was felt that no new item 
would fit in SJM collection and the process would involve huge costs.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
63 
 
 SJM was in po ssession of 46,216 art objects, 8,191 manuscripts and 69,225 
books. Out of 46,216 art objects, 16,606 objects were displayed by it and 
29,610 (64 per cent ) were kept in reserve. It was noted that SJM had no 
rotation policy . In this regard, SJM  replied that  in view of gallery designs, 
prime and limited displayed artefacts, objects from reserves were being 
displayed wherever possible or on special occasions/exhibitions. The reply was 
not tenable, as a bsence of rotation/display policy results in many of the ar t 
objects lying in reserve without being ever put on display and, thereby, 
depriving the visitors from an enhanced experience. 
 Physical verification certificates in respect of art objects were issued without 
date, name and seal of the verifying authority as depicted in Annexe 8.3. 
Further, SJM had no guidelines for evaluation of genuineness of art objects.  
SJM replied (April 2021) that the genuineness of art objects was being verified 
during the process of their physical verification and the aspect of for mulation 
of relevant guidelines would be placed before the Board for approval. Reply of 
SJM was, however, not acceptable as the physical verification process was a 
routine procedure and not undertaken with the objective to assess the 
genuineness of the objects. 
 SJM had digitised 100 per cent of art objects and 54 per cent of manuscripts. It 
carried out RFID tagging of all books and manuscripts. However, in respect of 
art objects, RFID tagging of only 10,000 objects (22 per cent ) was conducted. 
SJM stated that the digitisation work of manuscripts would be completed in the 
next two years while the limited numbers of RFID tagging was on account of 
the Ministry’s project quota. 
 SJM was unable to up-grade its existing CCTV cameras as recommended by its 
security agency i.e. Central Industrial Security Force due to budget constraints. 
Further, in the absence of policy/guidelines , expenditure of SJM on 
preservation and conservation activities (including up- gradation of security 
system, digitisation, etc.) ranged be tween 0.09 and 5.83 per cent  of its total 
expenditure. 
8.1.4 Victoria Memorial Hall Museum, Kolkata  
The Victoria Memorial Hall Museum, Kolkata ( VMH) was established under the 
Victoria Memorial Act, 1903 and was declared as institution of national importance 
in 1935. VMH has a collection of sketches and drawing, coins and medals, arms and 
armour, books and manuscripts, etc. Audit observed the following during the period 
2014-15 to 2020-21: 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
64 
 
 The vacancy position of VMH had increased from 30.1 per cent  (during earlier 
audit) to 53.7 per cent. Out of 175 sanctioned posts, 94 posts were vacant for 
period ranging from three months to 32 years. 
 During the period 2014-15 to 2019-20, annual average fund allocation of VMH 
was ` 37.49 crore against which average annual utilisation was ` 27.37 crore, 
indicating poor utilisation of allocated grants. 
 Since the period covered in previous Report  i.e.  2007, VMH had not acquired 
any new artefacts. VMH was in possession of 33,497 artefacts 65, of which 
28,394 (85 per cent) have been accessioned and 26,611 (79 per cent ) were 
digitised/documented. Apart from  incomplete documentation, the Accession 
Register of VMH was found to be  in bad condition without any soft copy  
backup. Also, only 18 per cent objects have been tagged for RFID. 
 In the previous Report  it was pointed out that out of 28,394 artefacts with 
VMH, 18 ,979 remained unverified in respect to their antique and intrinsic 
value. It was noted that during 2017- 18, VMH had conducted physical 
verification of its objects. However, concerned report was not prepared by it.  
VMH, in its reply , assured that initiative would be taken to complete physical 
verification and authentication of its collection. 
 Out of 33,497 objects available with it, VMH had displayed only 817 objects 
(2.44 per cent ) in the galler ies (March 2020). VMH stated that efforts were 
made to rotate the artefacts in display through temporary exhibition, objects -of 
the-month display and changes in permanent exhibition. Facts remain that the 
number of objects displayed in the gallery was very low. Also, various galleries 
of VMH viz. Portrait gallery, Indian School of Art, Queen’s Hall, etc. had 
remained closed for period upto 23 months on account of  their renovation or 
repair.  
 Rabindra Bharati  Society had provided 5,103 paintings to VMH (2011) on 
loan. According to the terms of agreement (2007), VMH was to pay loan 
amount of   `  10 lakh annually to Rabindra Bharati  Society. However, only 
nine paintings  were displayed and VMH was unable to utilis e the remaining 
paintings. Further, physical verification of 303 acquired paintings had not been 
carried out by VMH.  
 Against the recommendation of its Security Committee for two Baggage 
Scanners and 13 Hand-held Metal Detectors, VMH was in possession of only 
one and six such machines. The museum had not installed any Air-conditioners 
in its storerooms  while CCTV cameras had been installed in only three out of 
eight stores. VMH had no fire alarm, smoke detectors, sprinklers, etc. and there 
                                                           
65 33,493 as per previous report 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
65 
 
was no firefighting  equipment in the stores. Despite purchase of four data 
loggers (March 2015) for recording environmental parameters , same have not 
been put to use. 
8.1.5 Indian Museum, Kolkata  
The Indian Museum, Kolkata ( IM) was founded in 1814 and is the lar gest and the 
oldest institution of its kind in the Asia Pacific Region. The Museum is a repository 
of both Indian and trans -Indian objects displayed through 35 galleries. In the 
previous Report , it was pointed out that the Institute had failed to formulate a 
uniform conservation policy resulting in deterioration of its artefacts. In this regard, 
IM stated that the policy was awaiting approval of the Ministry since 2015.  
During the period 2014- 15 to 2019- 20, annual average fund allocation of IM was 
` 22.25 crore against which average annual utilisation was ` 21.36 crore. During 
2018-19 and 2019-20, the allocation had shown percentage growth of 64.5 and 88.2 
respectively. Other observations on the working of IM are illustrated below: 
 The vacancy position of IM had increased from 28.7 per cent  (during earlier 
audit) to 58.9 per cent. Out of 209 sanctioned posts, 123 posts were vacant for 
a period ranging from six months to 25 years. 
 IM had not acquired any new artefacts. IM was in possession of 1,08, 000 
artefacts, of which 72,984 (67 per cent ) have been accessioned and 46,008 (43 
per cent ) were digitised . IM had photo documented its 60,224 objects while 
only eight per cent objects have been tagg ed for RFID. Further, repetition of 
accession numbers was observed as different sections were maintaining their 
own accession registers. 
 In the previous Report , it was pointed out that physical verification of objects 
in IM (started in 2005) was completed for 38 per cent  of the artefacts  (upto 
March 2012). During audit it was noted that 11 per cent  of the objects had still 
not been verified (March 2020). Further, survey to identify the objects 
requiring conservation was also not conducted by IM. Instances of improper 
conservation work noticed at IM are depicted below: 
  
Patch work was noticed in the 
Gajasurasamhara Murti of Shiva 
The red sand stone Yakshi had been entirely 
changed into black. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
66 
 
IM accepted the observation on improper patch work.  In respect of Yakshi , it stated that this 
was due to darkening of the coating, with added pigment. It also mentioned possibility of 
deposit of pollutants, as the statue was situated near to a road. 
 Out of 1,08,000 objects available with it, IM had displayed 2 ,554 objects (2.36 
per cent ) in the gallery (March 2020). In this regard, IM replied that in the 
public interest, rotation of artefacts  was maintained by means of holding 
exhibition inside and outside the museum arena. However, there was no 
rotation policy and number of objects displayed in the gallery was very low. 
Further, due to renovation/repair related issues , some of the galleries v iz. 
Cultural Anthropology Gallery, Bronze Gallery, Pre -Proto History, South East 
Asian Gallery had remained closed during the period covered under audit. 
Status of artefacts displayed at the galleries is depicted in Annexe 8.2. 
 Air-conditioners for controlling the ideal temperature and CCTV cameras  had 
not been installed in the stores. The museum had no fire alarms, smoke 
detectors, sprinklers and fire extinguishers have been provided in only five 
stores (out of ten). 
8.1.6 Asiatic Society, Kolkata  
The Asiatic Society, Kolkata ( ASK) was founded in 1784 by Sir William Jones and 
was declared as an institution of national importance in 1984. ASK has large 
collections of paintings, manuscripts, coins etc. During the period 2014- 15 to 2020-
21, annual average fund allocation of ASK was ` 24.09 crore against which average 
annual utilisation was ` 22.29 crore. In respect of ASK following was noted: 
 The vacancy position of ASK had increased from 17.5 per cent  (during earlier 
audit) to 31.9 per cent. Out of 254 sanctioned posts, 81 posts were vacant for 
period ranging between two months and 24 years seven months. 
 Based on recommendations of Art Purchase Committee , ASK had acquired 
166 art objects (including 35 gifts)  during 2015 and 2017. However, due to 
absence of defined procedures for ensuring the genuineness of acquired 
antiquities, it was able to verify only 10 objects through ASI.  
 ASK was in possession of 3,01,626 artefacts, of which 2,86,363 (95 per cent ) 
were accessioned. However , ASK had digitised  and photo documented only 
9,165 (five per cent) and 1,774 (three per cent) objects respectively. It assured 
audit regarding formation of a committee to finalise the remaining work.  In 
addition to poor documentation process, ASK did not have any back -up copy 
of its Accession Registers.  
 In the previous Report , it was mentioned that rare coins available with ASK 
had never been counted and physically verified. During the follow -up audit, it 
was noted that the position regarding number of available coins and their 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
67 
 
verification had remained unchanged. Except paintings and manuscripts, busts, 
stone sculptures, coins had never been surveyed by ASK for their conservation. 
Further, in respect of t en per cent of  manuscripts identified for  immediate 
restoration, work had been delayed for last two years . Conservation status of 
artefacts at ASK is also depicted in Annexe 8.2. 
 No unique pattern of accessioning was found to be followed by ASK 66. The 
maps held by ASK had not been assigned any accession numbers.  
 Security equipment viz. Door-Framed Metal Detectors, Baggage Scanners, 
Walky-talkies, etc. were not available with ASK and it had not undertaken any 
exercise to assess its requirement. Out of 180 CCTV cameras installed by the 
ASK, 80 were non-functional. Except fire extinguishers, no fire alarms, smoke 
detectors, sprinklers etc. had been installed. 
8.2 ASI Site-Museums 
The ASI had 50 archaeological site -museums under its jurisdiction spread all over 
the country. In respect of site-museums, Ministry had intimated the PAC that a broad 
policy prepared in 1915 was being re -examined and re- defined. It informed that a 
draft document on vision, mission and guidelines for archaeological museums is 
being finalised. However, as observed in Para 3.1, the guidelines, being implemented 
for ASI site-museums was not a comprehensive document as recommended by PAC. 
ASI had incurred expenditure aggregating  ` 58.34 crore on the maintenance of its 
site-museums during the period 2013- 14 to 2019-20. During the follow-up audit, 23 
ASI site-museums were examined and the findings are discussed below:  
 
8.2.1 ASI had five site -museums in Madhya Pradesh at  Chanderi, Gwalior, 
Khajuraho, Sanchi and Shivpuri.  
 The overall shortage of m en-in-position at  the five site-museums ranged 
between 25 and 67 per cent of sanctioned strength.  Against, the mandatory 
posts67 of one Assistant Superintendent Archaeologists (ASA) and two 
Assistant Archaeologist (AA) for each site-museum, only three posts  of ASA 
and AA (to look after all five site-museums) have been sanctioned.  
 None of the site-museums had any rotation policy for displaying the objects. In 
all the museums, except Chanderi, total objects kept in reserve ranged from 76 
to 99 per cent. During 2013-14 to 2019-20, physical verification of objects had 
                                                           
66 Objects accessioned according to their serial numbers, year of accession or their types 
67  Para 6.8 of guidelines for ASI Museums 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
68 
 
not been conducted in four site -museums, except at Sanchi (conducted in 
2015). 
 In three site -museums viz. Chanderi, Gwalior and Shivpuri, description in 
respect of many artefacts kept in galleries was not available. At site-museum, 
Gwalior, photo documentation of many art objects and mention of their 
accession numbers in documented photos were not made. 
 Antiquities kept in reserve at site-museum, Gwalior were found in a deplorable 
condition. At site -museum, Chanderi, 407 objects were displayed in the open 
without any CCTV  camera. As the whole are a was covered with a thin wire 
fencing, their display in the open is fraught with the risk of theft/loss or 
deterioration due to weather. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that they have posted ASA for site-museums in 
Madhya Pradesh since December 2021. Further, a ll in -charge site- museums have 
been directed to regularly rotate and verify the exhibits. 
8.2.2 ASI had three site -museums at its Kolkata Circle viz. (i) Hazarduari Palace 
Museum, Murshidabad, (ii) Cooch Behar  Palace Museum, Cooch Behar, and (iii) 
Archaeological Museum, Tamluk.  
 Cooch Behar Palace Museum had accessioned only 4.9 per cent  of available 
6,963 artefacts. This was due to non -verification of genuineness of available 
antiquities. Further, in Archaeolo gical Museum, Tamluk, only 3.6 per cent of 
available 8,074 objects have been digitised. 
 The three site -museums were found to be displaying only 3.2 per cent to 13.5 
per cent of the objects kept by them. There was absence of rotation policy for 
displaying the artefacts. The physical verification of antiquities had not been 
conducted during 2013-14 to 2019-20. 
 Though more than 87 per cent  of the artefacts were kept in reserve there was 
absence of storage facilities with effective air -conditioning, humidity c ontrol 
system, CCTV camera, etc.   
 During joint physical inspection of these site -museums, public amenities  viz. 
guide service, parking, facility for physically challenged, complaint register, 
etc. were not found available. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that digitisation of all the three museums under 
Kolkata Circle including provision of humidity control, surveillance systems, and 
amenities would be completed by March 2023. 
                                                                                                                                                                     
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
69 
 
8.2.3 ASI had six site -museums in Karnataka at Srirangapatna, Halebeedu, Aihole, 
Badami, Vijaypura and Hampi.  
 None of the site -museum had any rotation policy for displaying the objects. In 
all the museums, except Badami, total objects kept in reserve ranged from 53 
to 94 per cent. In Vijaypura, site-museum none of the object was digitised. 
 In four site-museums viz. Aihole, Badami, Halebeedu and Hampi, description 
in respect of many artefacts displayed w as not available. At site -museum, 
Halebeedu, an artefact (wooden doorsill) was displayed without taking it into 
accession. Similarly, in Aihole site-museum, sculptures were found lying near 
the boundary wall and backyard without their being taken into accession.  
 At Halebeedu  site-museum, dust and sand had gathered over the sculptures 
displayed in the gallery. Fungus and moss had accumulated over most of the 
sculptures/artefacts lying in the open reserve collection and require d chemical 
conservation as depicted in the following photographs: 
   
Displayed sculpture covered 
in dust 
Fungus formed on 
sculptures 
Damaged fencing 
 At Halebeedu site-museum, undocumented artefacts ha d been kept in a room 
with a broken gate. Out of 12 CCTV cameras, two were not functional. Also, 
the fire extinguishers in the museums were not functional.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that all sculptu res lying in the Aihole museum 
premises had been documented and shifted to a safer location. Further sculptures in 
the Halebeedu museum were being scientifically preserved. 
8.2.4 ASI had five site -museums in Delhi Circle (four at Red Fort and one at 
Purana Qila). However, ASA was not posted in any of them. In the previous Report, 
it was pointed out that four stolen antiquities of the Indian War Memorial Museum, 
Red Fort were lying with the Daryaganj Police Station since 1989.  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
70 
 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that they ha d posted ASA for site -museums in 
Delhi Circle since December 2021 and had received two antiquities from the Polic e 
Station. 
8.2.5 ASI had three site-museums at Konark, Ratnagiri and Lalitgiri in Odisha. 
 Physical verification of antiquities at site-museum Konark was not conducted 
during the period 2016- 17 to 2019- 20. The Circle office assured that the 
verification would be done soon. It was noted that an Expert Committee had 
reported (December 2015) 13 ant iquities to be untraceable. However, no 
effort was made to trace the missing antiquities. 
 Audit noticed that antiquities of site -museum were lying at the monument 
(Sun Temple, Konark) instead of being placed at the museum. 
 None of the site -museums had any rotation policy for displaying the objects. 
In Ratnagiri site -museum, out of 3,540 artefacts, 92.9 per cent (3,288) were 
kept in reserve. Only 1.7 per cent (60) of the objects were digitised. Further, 
Circle office intimate d that the digitisation work would be taken up after 
approval from ASI Headquarters regarding engagement of required 
manpower. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that all museums ha d been directed to adopt 
rotation policy and verify antiquities once in a y ear. Further, the expert Committee 
had traced four antiquities while efforts for others were being made. It also intimated 
that artefacts kept in the open at Konark were being properly displayed and their 
digitisation work was in progress. 
 8.3 Other Museums under ASI 
Audit observations from other museums/repository under ASI are discussed below: 
8.3.1 Central Antiquity Collection 
The Central Antiquity Collection (CAC) at Purana Qila, Delhi was established by 
ASI in 1960 for storing antiquities/artefacts collected during surveys, explorations,  
excavations and confiscations. CAC is a rich repository of rare antiquities collected 
from various parts of the country. Audit noted that some of the confiscated and 
retrieved antiquities have been put on display for general public (since August 2019). 
Notable improvement in storing of artefacts at CAC reserve since the previous 
Report was also noticed as depicted in the following photographs: 
 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
71 
 
  
 
Condition of antiquities at 
CAC –previous Report 
New gallery and reserve collection of CAC 
–follow-up audit 
 
However, there was still no provision for controlled air environment for the 
antiquities. CCTV cameras and other security equipment were not installed at CAC 
reserve. Despite having a huge collection of AA/A (very rare and rare) category of 
antiquities, CAC was managed by only one Assistant Archaeologist. 
8.3.2 Maritime Archaeology Museum 
The PAC had desired that maritime museums displaying antiquities and monuments 
of India’s great maritime past may be established at appropriate location. The 
Ministry/ASI had informed (April 2016) the PAC about their proposal regarding 
opening of maritime museum in Mumbai. Though no such museum was found 
opened by the Ministry/ASI, it was noted that Ministry of Shipping had initiated 
(February 2020), construction of National Maritime Heritage Complex (NMHC) at 
Lothal, Gujarat which proposed to house National Maritime Museum, Maritime 
Heritage based theme park, Maritime Research Institute, etc. 
8.3.3 Development of sculpture sheds as Site-Museums 
In the previous Report it was pointed out that despite recommendation made in 2009 
by a sub-committee of CABA regarding converting the existing sculpture sheds and 
other sites into site -museums, progress had not been made. Audit ha d pointed out 
that there was no progress in this regard. 
During the follow -up audit  a joint physical inspection at Rabd entse site, Sikkim 
(Kolkata Circle)  visited during the previous audit was undertaken. As reported 
earlier, the artefacts were still being  placed at the shed without accession numbers 
while glass box es built for the purpose were empty. Though the Circle office stated 
that this was only a sculpture shed, it was unable to take any corrective action on the 
issue highlighted earlier. 
 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
72 
 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that comprehensive documentation as per 
NMMA format was in progress. However, reason for not taking any action on 
observation made in previous Report was not provided.  
8.3.4 ASI’s Children Museum 
The ASI’s Children Museum, is a replica museum located in New Delhi. The 
Museum was specifically created to educate children on the cultural, archaeological 
and historical heritage of India through approximately  50 numbers of replicated 
structures of famous antiquities. ASI reported ( December 2020) that annual footfall 
to the Museum was 1,500-2,000. During inspection it was noted that various replicas 
were displayed in the Children Museum without showing their cultural history.  
Further, no dedicated staff or budget was being provided for the Museum and ASI 
had not undertaken any initiative for its publicity or awareness. 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that process of refurbishment of the Children 
Museum was under progress. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Conclusions: 
In the national level museums and site -museums under the Ministry/ASI, 
issues related to management of antiquities viz. shortage of staff, lack of 
digitisation and accession of artefacts, their display, verification, 
conservation, storage and security were still existing. These concerns 
already pointed out in the previous Report were affecting the effective 
working of these museums 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
73 
 
Chapter 9: Explorations and Excavations  
Excavation of archaeological remains  is one of the primary responsibilities of the 
ASI. In this chapter, audit observations  connected with exploration a nd excavation 
related activity of ASI have been discussed. 
9.1 Exploration activities in ASI  
Exploration forms part of e xcavation activities which include functions such as 
excavation, exploration, building survey, temple survey, pre -history, under -water 
archaeology and village to village survey. ASI ha s dedicated branches for 
undertaking these activities.  
9.1.1  Village to Village Survey 
In the previous Report , audit had pointed out that due to shortage of human 
resources, village to village survey was not being undertaken by ASI.  Though the 
village survey process was restarted by ASI, it was not uniformly undertaken in all 
the Circles. During 2014 -15 to 2019- 20, no survey was conducted in four Circles 68 
while in four  Circles69 survey was conducted only in a single year. ASI did not 
provide any specific reason for undertaking village survey in selected Circles/year. 
However, some of its Circles cited shortages of human resources as the reason for 
fewer village surveys.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that all Circles have been instructed  to include 
village to village survey in their annual strategy plan. 
9.1.2  Maritime Archaeology 
Maritime archaeology is a specialist branch in ASI for its under-water exploration. In 
the previous Report  it was pointed out that the branch, established in 2001, had 
become defunct due to lack of specialised human resources . During the follow -up 
audit, it was noted that the status ha d not changed. Apart from shortage of human 
resources, there was no perspective plan or policy with ASI for maritime  
archaeology. 
Ministry/ASI intimated (January 2022)  that the thrust of training the willing 
archaeologist for underwater archaeological exploration had been recognized and 
initiated and a ccordingly, a separate cell in ASI to focus on this area had been 
strengthened. 
                                                           
68 Amravati, Delhi, Guwahati and Srinagar 
69  Bhubaneswar, Hampi–Mini Circle, Jodhpur and Mumbai  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
74 
 
9.2  Excavation activities in ASI 
Excavations at archaeological sites is an important function of ASI. The ASI grant 
excavation licences, based on the proposals received from different agencies like ASI 
Circles, Branches, Universities and Research institutions. The PAC while discussing 
the excavation related issues had asked the Ministry to draw an action plan under 
the exploration and exc avation policy and ensure adequate allocation and effective 
utilisation of funds for these activities. 
During the follow-up audit, it was noted that the recommendations made by the PAC 
and below mentioned excavation related issues as highlighted in the previous Report  
have not been resolved: 
 The ASI had no action plans based on its Exploration and Excavation Policy. 
The excavation  work was being undertaken without any priority list , 
perspective plan  or setting up measurable performance parameters and 
guidelines.  
 ASI had no centralised information/monitoring system displaying  excavation 
proposals received by it, reasons for their recommendation or rejection , status 
of accepted proposals and their monitoring.  
 There was significant delay in writing of the report on excavation. In some 
cases, reports were pending for more than 60 years. For some major 
excavations e.g. Mathura, Sravasti, Ropar , started in 1954- 55, 1958- 59 and 
1953-54 respectively, reports were yet to be completed. In this regard, ASI had 
reported constraints that due to expiry and retirement of the excavator the work 
of report writing get delayed. 
 In Bhubaneswar Circle , antiquities recovered from excavation sites (since 
2011-12) were found to be kept by excavators for report writing. Also, out of 
5,915 antiquities pointed out in previous Report  as kept in store of Excavation 
Branch, 4,272 were still at the store room of which only 449 were documented. 
 The expenditure on exploration/excavation was still below one per cent of total 
expenditure of ASI (refer Para 5.1.1). 
In the previous Report, status of excavation sites and their protection was commented 
upon by audit. Neglected condition of excavated site at Purana Qila, Delhi, which 
was regularly used by ASI for excavation since 1954, noticed during joint physical 
inspection is depicted through photograph below: 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
75 
 
  
Last excavation done in November 2019 During follow-up audit in January 2021 
 
Protection of Archaeological Sites 
The Excavation Policy of ASI identif ies over 500 archaeological sites in India as 
important for excavation/exploration. From the list, two sites in Delhi region viz. 
Mandoli and Bhorgarh  were last excavated by Delhi State Archaeological 
Department in 1987 and 1992- 94 respectively 70. According to the excavation 
reports, the findings  had revealed vestiges of Late- Harappan period. It was noted 
that despite important findings, further action t o secure these sites  was not taken .  
During the follow -up audit, visits to  these two sites revealed that both have been 
fully encroached upon and were no longer in existence. 
Ministry/ASI intimated (January 2022) that efforts were being made to conserve 
the excavated remains immediately after their exposure71. 
The PAC had desired focused streamlining of the public resources earmarked for 
excavation and exploration of archaeological remains. However, in the absence of 
action plan, adequate allocation of funds and monitoring , there continues to be no 
assurance on concerns raised.  
Ministry/ASI stated (January/February 2022) that the draft excavation policy 
incorporating all observations and comments would be shortly finalised. A 
monitoring format for excavation activities was  being put in place and respective 
regional officers were being involved.  
It accepted the delay in writing of excavation reports and submitted that this was 
being prioritised and the new policy also takes this issue into account. In re spect of 
observation pertaining to Bhubaneswar Circle it submitted that the documentation of 
antiquities recovered from excavation was being prepared. 
                                                           
70 ASI and its officials were involved in the previous excavations of these sites.  
71 Excavated sites viz . Gottiprolu, Andhra Pradesh (2018- 2020) and Sitagarha, Jharkhand  (2020-21) 
selected for protection in view of their importance and exposed structure. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
76 
 
9.2.1 Excavation at Kanaganahalli, Dharwad, Karnataka 
Kanaganahalli is an important and rare Buddhist site under ASI Dharwad Circle. 
The excavations at the site carried out by ASI  (between 1994 -2001) had revealed 
remains of a unique Mahastupa, pre -historic artefacts, structural remains and ancient 
vestiges dating back to first century BC E72. In response to shortcomings in 
conservation and protection of the site , as pointed out in the previous Report, ASI 
informed about various steps taken by it. Th ese include construction of temporary 
sheds for excavated panels, their chemical preservation works and creation of a 
Committee (in July 2020) to suggest suitable measures for the preservation and 
conservation of the excavated site.   Joint physical inspection  carried out during the 
follow-up audit revealed that following concerns at the excavated site were still 
persisting. 
 Even after 20 years of excavation and reporting  by audit, the panels and other 
remains of the site were lying scattered in open, subject to vagaries of nature. 
 Walls of the closed sculpture shed created for preservation of Buddha idol had 
developed big cracks. C ement beds created at  the open shed for placing artefacts 
had cracked. 
 The site spread over an area of 23 acres was covered with thi ck vegetation and 
grass posing fire threat to the artefacts. The CCTV camera installed at the site was 
not functional while the lighting system was not adequate. 
Scattered panels at the excavated Kanaganahalli site 
 
Previous Report Follow-up audit 
Ministry/ASI stated (January 2022) that the conservation of the excavated remains of 
Kanaganahalli and providing shelters/shifting to the nearest building will be its 
priority in the coming financial year 2022-23. 
                                                           
72 Case Study 6 at Page 111 of CAG Report No. 18 of 2013  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
77 
 
Shifting of Antiquities discovered during excavation at Sanauli 
During the year 2018- 19, ASI’s Institute of 
Archaeology had undertaken excavation at 
ancient site of Sanauli in District Baghpat, Uttar 
Pradesh. The major excavation finds were life 
size chariots, implements like swords, chisel, 
knife, mirror, combs, etc. made of copper and 
dating back to 2000 BC to 1800 BC. 
 
 
The discoveries from 
archaeological excavation at  
Sanauli were considered significant 
as they provided a new insight into  
the chalcolithic culture of the 
Indian sub- continent and provided 
data for interpretation of Great 
ancient Indian literatures such as 
Vedas, the Mahabharata, etc
73. 
 
 
Artistic visualisation of excavated 
chariot. 
 
It was noted that after their discovery at 
Sanauli, ASI had shifted all the valuable 
antiquities to Red Fort, Delhi and then 
again to  the newly created office at  
Greater Noida. As mentioned in Para 6.4, 
there was no policy or standards for 
shifting these antiquities. However , ASI 
intimated (December 2020)  that while 
moving antiquities it takes utmost 
precaution regarding their safety. 
 
 
 
                                                           
73 Illustrated report on the discoveries at Sanauli, UP- published by ASI 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
78 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Conclusions: 
Issues connected with exploration and excavation activities viz. non -
existence of action plan, absence of centralized information and monitoring 
mechanism for excavation activities, delay in report writing work, 
insufficient budget allocation etc. as pointed out in previous Report have not 
been resolved. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
79 
 
Chapter 10: Good Practices in Heritage Conservation 
As part of its World Heritage Capacity Building Strategy, UNESCO  had been 
sharing best practices in heritage conservation. In the previous Report , practices 
followed by Victoria and Albert Museum, London and Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj 
Vastu Sangrahalaya, Mumbai were discussed  as examples of good practices in 
museum management. ASI had  also shown its technical capability in heritage 
management through conservation activities undertaken at national and international 
levels. The restoration work undertaken by ASI at Rani -ki-Vav, a stepwell situated in 
Patan, Gujarat is depicted in the following photographs: 
   
  
Rani-ki-Vav was built in 11th century. The stepwell was flooded by Sarasvati river and silted over for 
centuries before getting rediscovered in 1940 74. After restoration by ASI , it was declared as a World 
Heritage Site in 2014.  
Recent projects undertaken by the Government viz. Adarsh Smarak , Monument 
Mitras, HRIDAY75, agreement with ISRO for monument mapping, are also examples 
of good initiatives undertaken by ASI in heritage conservation. During the follow -up 
audit, some of the concern areas were examined with a view to identify best practices 
followed elsewhere. These examples, as discussed below, could be considered by the 
Ministry in addressing the relevant issues. 
                                                           
74  Source: ASI 
75 Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY) scheme launched by the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
80 
 
A.  Database of Monuments and Antiquities  
The work regarding preparation of database of all monuments and antiquities in the 
country by NMMA had been lagging. Similarly , PAC recommendation regarding 
creation of an inventory of all CPMs displaying to the public various information had 
not been implemented.   
Audit noted that the digital management of archaeological sites/objects is an initiative 
followed by universities and governments in the world. A  ‘Heritage Information 
System’ can provide a framework to store and organize all monument/antiquities 
related information to generate a central database to facilitate inquiries, research and 
better heritage management works. Integration of similar process with the data base of 
monuments and antiquities (under process) will facilitate a comprehensive  and 
dynamic heritage information and management system in the country. 
(Paras 6.1 and 6.2) 
B. Antiquities declared as monuments 
The AMASR Act define s any coin, sculpture, 
manuscript, epigraph or other work of art/ craftsmanship 
including article, object  or thing detached from a 
building or cave as antiquity. However, as illustrated in 
Annexe 6.2 (d), canons, guns statues have also been 
notified by ASI as independent monuments.  
 
Jahan Kosa Gun, an  antiqtuity 
notified as monument 
It was noted that relevant laws of many countries viz. Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Saudi Arab, 
define their antiquities as movable or immovable.  The issue of incorrect declaration 
of an immovable antiquities as monument ( e.g. statue carved on a stone, immovable 
mounted cannons) could be resolved by further elaborati ng the  
definition and 
notification of antiquities as movable/immovable. 
{Para 6.3.4(d)} 
C. Management of Antiquities in the Museum 
The management of antiquities  begins with their acquisition, followed by  accession, 
safe placement in the museum gallery, reserve or at sculpture shed. In this Report , 
several issues on antiquity management viz. absence of database of artefacts, 
incomplete handing/taking over, their verification, storage and display, have been 
pointed out. In this regard, the best example of collection management mentioned by 
the Ministry 76 was at Glasgow Museum Resource Centre (GMRC), Scotland. 
According to the Ministry, GMRC had a comprehensive security system for storing 
about 10 lakh objects from seven regional museums of Scotland managed through 
computerised records, location charts and interlocking areas. The concerns  raised by 
audit could be resolved through a centralised storage centre of artefacts with 
computerised database system for their management. 
(Para 8.1) 
 
                                                           
76  In Comprehensive security policy for museums documented by the Ministry 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
81 
 
Chapter 11: Conclusions and Recommendations 
The Public Account Committee (PAC), after thorough study, review and discussions  
of CAG’s  Performance Audit Report on Preservation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Antiquities  (No. 18 of 2013) , had made several recommendations 
vide reports No. 39 (April 2016) and 118 (December 2018)) for better management 
of Monuments and Antiquities . The  Ministry was expected to  initiate appropriate 
action on these instructions for effective heritage managemen t. The follow -up audit 
was undertaken to assess the extent of action taken on PAC’s  recommendations and 
concern areas reported by Audit. 
Since the previous audit, Ministry/ASI had undertaken various new initiatives for 
heritage management viz. use of softw are for digitising antiquity collections in 
museums, launching of e -ticketing facility for visitors, launch of Adarsh Smarak 
initiative to provide necessary amenities at monuments, etc. The follow -up audit, 
however revealed that most of the recommendations of PAC viz. updation of relevant 
Act/Rules, preparation of Heritage Bye-Laws, requirement of an efficient governance 
system, digitisation of data of monuments and antiquities, financial management, etc. 
were yet to be complied  by the Ministry/ASI.  Further, specific recommendations of 
PAC viz. constitution of a co-ordination mechanism with the local government/  
agencies, need for comprehensive survey of monuments, were not even conveyed to 
Circle offices for action.  An analysis of recommendations made by PA C and 
compliance thereon by the Ministry/ASI is presented at Annexe-11.1. 
A summary of focus areas discussed in this report and further recommendations 
made thereon are as under: 
Chapter Conclusions Recommendations 
 The first report of the PAC contained 
recommendations on 25 specific issues, 
of which 20 were accepted by the 
Ministry. Out of five remaining 
recommendations, PAC, in its second 
report, made further recommendations 
on four issues and decided not to pursue 
the remaining one.  However, action on  
most of these recommendations are yet 
to be completed  even after six years of 
its recommendation. 
Ministry/ASI is urged to 
ensure compliance  of the 
recommendations of PAC 
with utmost urgency and 
priority. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
82 
 
3: Policy and 
Regulations 
The recommendations made by PAC  in 
2016 were essential for effective 
heritage management. However, it was 
noticed that in most cases, despite the 
passage of time, the exercise to carry 
out necessary amendment/notification 
on policy related areas of concern 
discussed by the PA C w as still in 
process. 
The Ministry/ASI needs to 
immediately evolve a 
comprehensive strategy to 
ensure time -bound 
amendment in the relevant 
Acts/Rules. It may  also 
expedite preparation of 
Heritage Bye -Law for all 
protected monuments to 
minimise and prevent 
encroachment.  
There was substantial delay in 
preparation of Heritage Bye -Laws to 
regulate construction related activities 
in prohibited/regulated areas of the 
monument despite constitution of 
National Monument Authority (NMA) 
in 2011. The significant delay in timely 
preparation of Bye-Laws is indicative of 
gross laxity on the part of Ministry/ASI 
with resultant growth in incidents of 
encroachment. 
 4: Governance 
and 
Infrastructure  
Certain areas of urgent concern viz. 
requirement of strategy/road -map for 
heritage conservation, reconstitution of 
Central Advisory Board of 
Archaeology, filling up of vacancies on 
priority, existence of a monitoring and 
grievance redressal system etc. needs to 
be addressed by the Ministry/A SI for 
improved working environment for 
heritage management. 
Ministry/ASI must take 
immediate steps to address 
the PAC recommendations 
on issues related to 
Governance and 
Infrastructure to ensure 
effective heritage 
management. The Central 
Advisory Board of  
Archaeology and 
Coordination Committees 
for dealing with cases of 
encroachment should be 
constituted forthwith 
without delay. 
Severe constraints  related to 
governance, human resources and 
working of various subordinate offices 
of ASI, which has also been pointed out 
by PAC, hinder its operation. 
5: Financial 
Management 
Despite assurance to PAC, ASI’s 
expenditure on excavation and 
exploration activities was still below 
one per cent. This was in sharp contrast 
to Ministry’s stated position in its 
Action Taken Report to PAC earlier. 
ASI needs a robust and 
transparent financial 
management system. It 
must increase expenditure 
on excavation and 
exploration activities and 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
83 
 
Funds available with National Culture 
Fund have been accumulating over the 
years and not being utilised for its 
objectives. Time bound finalisation of 
Heritage Bye- Laws for all monuments 
was also important in efficient 
execution of PPP mechanism in heritage 
management. 
make efforts to rope in 
more Corporates and high 
net-worth individuals into 
funding conservation and 
visitor’s amenities as 
recommended by the PAC 
and in convergence with 
Tourism Policy.   Specific 
guidelines also need to be 
framed f or categorization 
of monuments as ticketed/ 
non-ticketed as the 
absence thereof may 
adversely impact revenue. 
Despite recommendation of PAC for 
categorisation of a monument as 
ticketed/non-ticketed, amount of fees to 
be levied/shared, issue of notification, 
etc., there was lack of  clear guidelines 
on these aspects. 
 6: 
Identification 
and 
Notification of 
Monuments 
and 
Antiquities 
Work regarding preparation of 
centralised and digitised database of 
monuments and antiquities was lagging 
even after 14 years of establishment of 
National Mission on Monuments and 
Antiquities. 
Issues related to 
documentation & 
digitisation of monuments 
and antiquities, 
categorisation and 
notification of monume nts 
must be immediately 
addressed by the Ministry 
as a part of a 
comprehensive strategy for 
heritage management. It 
should review the process 
of identifying a certain 
monument as of national 
importance and revisit 
their notifications and 
other documents for A SI’s 
ownership. 
Antiquities identified as 
monuments need to be 
declared as movable or 
immovable through 
notification.  
Despite pointing out in previous Audit 
Report and  PAC recommendations 
thereon, issues related to monuments of 
national importance viz . criteria and 
process for their selection, preparation 
of inventory of all protected monuments 
for public display, categorization of 
monuments, rectification of 
discrepancies in the list of monuments, 
their notification and de -notification, 
etc., have not been resolved. 
 7: Monument 
management 
Joint physical inspection of selected 
monuments, revealed that in most of the 
monuments, concerns regarding 
management of monuments including 
provision of visitors’ facilities, 
Increase in encroached 
monuments noticed during 
the present audit compared 
to findings of previous 
audit i ndicated poor and 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
84 
 
conservation works, security etc. 
remained unaddressed despite specific 
recommendations on maintenance of 
Baolis, Living and other monuments by 
PAC.  
unenthusiastic response 
mechanism of 
Ministry/ASI towards 
neglect, damage, loss/theft, 
encroachment etc. of 
monuments and 
antiquities.  
Concerns related to 
Monument management 
need to be urgently 
addressed by the Ministry. 
 8: Antiquities  
Management 
In the national level museums and site -
museums under the Ministry/ASI, 
issues related to management of 
antiquities viz. shortage of staff, lack of 
digitisation and accession of artefacts, 
their display, verification, conservation, 
storage and s ecurity were still existing. 
These concerns already pointed out in 
the previous Audit Report and PAC 
report were affecting the effective 
working of these museums. 
A secure centralised 
storage facility needs to be 
created for safe custody, 
upkeep and mainte nance 
of artefacts with 
computerised database 
system for their proper 
management. Concerns in 
the functioning of national 
level museums and site -
museums under the 
Ministry/ASI reported in 
the present Audit Report 
have not been addressed 
despite having been  
pointed out in the previous 
Audit Report should be 
taken on priority basis. 
 9: Exploration 
and 
Excavation 
Issues connected with exploration and 
excavation activities viz . non- existence 
of action plan, absence of centralized 
information and monitoring mechanism 
for excavation activities, delay in report 
writing work, sufficient budget 
allocation etc. as pointed out in previous 
Audit Report and also discussed by 
PAC have not been resolved. 
The approach of the 
Ministry/ASI to ensure an 
effective system to  resolve 
issues related with 
exploration and excavation 
has been found grossly 
wanting.  Ministry/ASI is 
recommended to deploy its 
resources and funds 
expeditiously for 
exploration and excavation 
activities. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
85 
 
PAC in  its second report (December 2018), had shown concern over delay on the 
part of the Ministry in responding to suggestions made in its first report (April 2016).  
Further, PAC was appalled to note the tepid response of the Ministry in furnishing 
Action Taken Notes and that even after two and a half years, action on its 
recommendations was stated by the Ministry as under process. During the follow -up 
audit, Ministry/ASI had assured (January 2022) timely action  on most of these still 
delayed issues.  In order to bring about a  holistic change in heritage management, i t 
would be  important that the Ministry/ASI  take stock of its performance on all the 
previous/present recommendations, and ensure accountability of individuals/units 
responsible for previous failures and ensure time-bound action to avoid such lapses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRAVIR PANDEY) 
Director General of Audit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
  Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
New Delhi 
Dated: 31-03-2022
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 31-03-2022
(Home, Education & Skill Development) 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXES 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
87 
  
Annexe 2.1 
(Refer Para 2.3) 
Selection of Centrally Protected Monuments for joint physical inspection 
States/Category Circles 
covered 
World 
Heritage 
Sites under 
ASI 
Adarsh and 
Ticketing 
Monuments  
Monuments  
reported traced 
or affected due 
to urbanisation/ 
submerging  
Monuments 
reported 
encroached 
upon 
Other sites/ 
monuments 
(including 
non-
ticketed) 
Total 
Site 
Museums 
covered 
  Selection*   100% 100% 25% 30% 12%    
Delhi 1 3 6 3 6 10 28 5 
Haryana 1 0 3 0 2 5 10 1 
Karnataka 3 2 8 1 6 28 45 6 
Madhya Pradesh 2 3 6 0 1 13 23 5 
Maharashtra 2 3 4 2 7 10 26 0 
Odisha 1 1 4 0 11 4 20 3 
West Bengal 21 0 5 6 2 19 32 3 
Total selection 12 12 36 12 35 89 184 23 
*Selection percentage was (minimum) in respect of monuments available in the specific category in each of the selected States 
1.   Other sites/monuments include those monuments which were not covered in other categories but were commented upon in the earlier Report. 
2.   Based on preliminary findings/report, additional monument/sites were inspected and commented in this Report. 
3.   Under three World Heritage Sites in Madhya Pradesh, 26 monuments have been covered. 
 
                                                           
1  In August 2020, the Ministry had announced creation of seven new Circles including ‘Raiganj’ in West Bengal. Though some monu ments earlier under the 
jurisdiction of Kolkata Circle shifted to Raiganj Circle these have still been addressed in the report as under ASI Kolkata Circle.  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
88 
  
 
Annexe 5.1 
(Refer Para 5.2.1) 
Financial irregularities in ASI 
State Circle/ 
Division 
Remarks 
Delhi Delhi Circle  For some Sub-Circles, while inviting tenders for 
providing housekeeping services at the monuments, specific 
clause i.e. experience required in providing manpower at 
heritage sites was inserted. As a result, in seven cases, only 
two agencies participated in the bidding process  of which 
only one qualified for financial bidding. There was lack of 
competition in the process of awarding contract for 
housekeeping works at the ASI monuments. 
 
 The Circle was awarding housekeeping contracts for 
monuments (i) where there was agreement w ith other agency 
for providing daily maintenance service ( Agarsen ki Baoli ), 
(ii) which have been fully encroached, were not under the 
administrative control of ASI and it had initiated their  
de-notification process ( Sarai Sahji, Rajpur Cemetery , 
D’Eremao Cemetery), (iii) which were inside area controlled 
by other agency and their daily maintenance by ASI was not 
possible (
Sunderwala Mahal, Bada Batasha, Lakkarwala 
Tomb, Sunder Burz – all inside  Sunder Nursery). Audit 
estimated that during the period from April 2015 to October 
2020 an expenditure of ` one crore was incurred by ASI in 
providing daily housekeeping services at these monuments. 
 The scope of work awarded (September 2018) for the 
housekeeping work at Kotla Feroz Shah included jungle 
cleaning, uprooting of rank vegetation, grass, trees, bushes 
from wall, pathway, removing vegetation including their 
dumping, etc. It was noted that despite inclusion in the scope 
of work awarded, Circle awarded the same work to another 
agency, thereby causing loss of revenue of ` 0.57 lakh. 
Delhi Horticulture 
Division 
 Irregularities in awarding and finalising contracts for 
maintenance of archaeological gardens viz.  error in 
calculation, receipt and finalisation of bids after last date of 
their submission, award of contract for more area, incorrect 
estimation of area and required manpower, etc. were noticed 
in the Division. Also, against their annual approval, works 
were being awarded on monthly basis to cartel of selected 
bidders.  
Haryana Chandigarh 
Circle 
 Circle had incurred an expenditure of ` 1.65 crore  for 
appointing 65 number of MTS during 2016-2020, in excess of 
their sanctioned strength of 71. 
 Receipts on account of ticket sale were deposited in the 
government account after delays ranging from 19 to 59 days. 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal Circle, 
Jabalpur 
Circle 
 Labour cess amounting to ` 1.33 lakh on account of 
construction work was not recovered. In this regard, Bhopal 
Circle stated that it was not aware of the provision. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
89 
  
State Circle/ 
Division 
Remarks 
 
 In Bhopal Circle, c onstruction material amounting to  
` 11.29 lakh obtained in June 2019 had deteriorated (not 
useful for the work) due to non- finalisation of labour related 
tender (June 2021). 
 Despite being pointed out in the earlier report, chemical 
worth ` 3.66 lakh purchased during 2005- 09 was not utilised, 
of which chemical worth ` 2.14 lakh expired before it could 
be used. 
Maharashtra Aurangabad 
Circle,  
Mumbai Circle 
 During the period from 2014-15 to 2019-20, labour cess 
amounting to ` 57.49  lakh (@ One  per cent  of the 
conservation and maintenance work) was not levied. In this 
regard, Mumbai Circle stated that due to scarcity of 
manpower and ignorance of rules, cess was not collected. 
 Receipts on account of ticket sale were deposited in the 
government account after delays ranging from 3 to 122 days. 
Odisha Bhubaneswar 
Circle 
 During the period from 2013-14 to 2019-20, labour cess 
amounting to ` 52.70 lakh (@ one  per cent  of the 
conservation and maintenance work) was not levied. In this 
regard, Bhubaneswar Circle stated that concerned official had 
been asked to follow the rules from forthcoming estimates. 
 In the Circle, despite completion of works, advances 
amounting to ` 1.14 crore and paid to various parties were not 
adjusted for period ranging from three to seven years. The 
Circle office intimated that the matter had been reviewed and 
the outstanding advance would be adjusted.  
 Receipts on account of ticket sale were deposited in the 
government account after delays ranging upto 250 days. 
West Bengal Kolkata Circle  Receipts on account of ticket sale were deposited in the 
government account after delays ranging from 10 to 55 days. 
 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
90 
  
 
Annexe 5.2 
(Refer Para 5.3) 
 Revision of entry fees (in `) 
 For Indian citizens, citizens of 
SAARC and BIMSTEC countries2 
and overseas citizens of India 
For other foreign visitors 
 Before 
01.04.2016 
After 
01.04.2016 
Since 
01.08.2018 
Before 
01.04.2016 
After 
01.04.2016 
Since 
01.08.2018 
World Heritage 
Sites 
10 30 40 250 500 600 
Other ticketed 
Monuments 
5 15 25 100 200 300 
 
Since August 2018, following provisions were added:  
1. At Red Fort, Delhi, charges from Indian Citizens, etc. are ` 50 per head and for 
cashless payment ` 35 per head. 
2. At Taj group of monuments, Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Humayun’s Tomb and 
Qutub    Minar charges from Indian Citizens, etc. for cashless payment are ` 35 per 
head.  
3. At Taj  group of monuments, Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Humayun’s Tomb, Red 
Fort and Qutub Minar charges from foreign visitors for cashless payment are  
` 550 per head. Additional charges have been prescribed for foreign visitors 
desirous of availing additional fa cilities - (` 850 per head and ` 800 per head for 
cashless payment).   
4. Another ` 200 per head (for all categories of visitors) charged for entry to main 
mausoleum of Taj Mahal- since December 2018 
5. At Akbar’s Tomb, Mariam’s Tomb, Itimad-ul-Daul’s Tomb, Rambagh and Mehtab 
Bagh (all in Agra), Jantar Mantar , Khan-i-khana, Purana Quila, Tughlaqabad 
Fort, Kotla Ferozshah, Safdarjung Tomb (all in Delhi) charges from Indian 
Citizens, etc. for cashless payment are ` 20 per head.  
6. At Akbar’s Tomb, Mariam’s Tomb, Itimad-ul-Daul’s Tomb, Rambagh and Mehtab 
Bagh (all in Agra), Jantar Mantar, Khan- i-khana, Purana Quila, Tughlaqabad 
Fort, Kotla Ferozshah, Safdarjung Tomb (all in Delhi) charges from foreign visitors 
for cashless payment are ` 250 per head. Additiona l charges have been prescribed 
for foreign visitors desirous of availing additional facilities -  (` 400 per head and 
` 350 per head for cashless payment).   
After 1 April 2016, charges for film shooting by professional and other 
agencies have also been increased from ` 5,000 per day (for all types of 
monuments) to ` one  lakh per day for World Heritage Sites and ` 50,000 per 
day for other monuments. 
 
  
                                                           
2  SAARC countries include –Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and 
Sri Lanka . BIMSTEC countries include –Bangladesh, Bhutan, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri  Lanka 
and Thailand 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
91 
  
Annexe 6.1 
(Refer Para 6.3.1) 
 Anomalies in the list of CPM due to absence of notification criteria   
State Circle Monument  details 
a.1 Instances where more than one monuments located in the same complex  were 
notified as separate monument 
 Complex  Monuments 
Delhi Delhi Roshanara Bagh Complex 2 
Qudsia Garden Complex 2 
Bihar Patna Barabar & Nagarjun Hills 7 
Kurisaria 5 
Ancient Structure, 
Rajgir,Nalanda 
3 
Maner, Patna 4 
Karnataka Dharwad Mallikarjuna Temple 
Complex, Bagalkot 
3 
Kontigudi, Bagalkot 2 
Odisha Bhubaneswar Gangadharaswamy temple, 
Jagadisvaraswamy temple 
2 
Uttarakhand Dehradun  Jageshwar Temple Complex, 
Almora 
6 
a.2 Instances where all structures within a complex were notified as single monument 
 Monument 
Delhi Delhi Red Fort 
Qutub Complex 
Karnataka Hampi Bidar Fort 
b.  Instances where part of the monument was not declared protected 
 Name of 
protected 
monuments 
Area not defined as 
protected 
Delhi Delhi City wall of 
Shahajahanabad, 
Darya Ganj 
Some portion of the wall 
across t he road was left as 
unprotected. 
Karnataka Dharwad Basadis at 
Chandragiri Hills, 
Sravanabelagola 
Out of 14 basadis, 11 were 
not declared as protected 
and were left unprotected. 
Remarks: In the earlier Report, the Ministry was unable to provide any documented 
reasons in support of its reply (part b above) for categorisation adopted in such cases. 
c. Instances where some Kos-Minars were protected by State Archaeology Department 
In Delhi Circle ASI was protecting one Kos -Minar (inside Delhi Zoo)  whereas three were 
protected by State Archaeology Department of Delhi Government (located at Badarpur).  
Note: As pointed out in earlier Report 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
92 
  
 
Annexe 6.2 
(Refer Para 6.2 and 6.3.4) 
Discrepancies in the list of Centrally Protected Monuments 
State Circle Monument 
a. Cases where same monument was notified twice 
Delhi Delhi Iron Hindu Pillar was also included in the monuments notified 
under Qutub complex  
Hauz Shamsi also notified as Shamsi Talab 
b. Monuments where final notification was not issued (as reported earlier) 
Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad Ancient Site at Puslapadu, District Prakasam 
Kerala Thrissur Shiva temple, Thiruvanchikulam 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal Kamlapati Mahal and adjoining areas, Bhopal 
Painted rock shelters, two Buddhist stupas  and other remains, 
Sehore 
Jabalpur Ladaki-ka-Tila, Katni 
The site of Kankalidevi temple including the Devi temple and 
ruined temple close to them, Katni  
Tripura Aizwal Ancient mound called Shyam Sunder Till 
Pujakhola, Tripura 
Uttar Pradesh Sarnath Long mound, Distt. Chandauli, Uttar Pradesh 
Large rectangular shape mound, Distt Chandauli, Uttar Pradesh  
Small conical mound of ruins call ed Devi -ka-Sthan, Distt. 
Chandauli, Uttar Pradesh 
Ancient Buddhist site known as Chaukhandi Stupa, Distt. 
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 
West Bengal Kolkata St Johns’ Church 
The Circle office accepted that the final notification regarding 
declaring the monument as of nation importance was not 
available with it. 
c. Monuments protected by both Centre and State 
Andhra Pradesh Amaravati Fort in ruins, Dharanikota  Notified both by ASI and State 
Department. In the earlier Report, 
ASI had stated that the State 
Department would be requested to 
delete these monuments from the 
State list. 
Bhimeswara temple at 
Samalkot, East Godawari 
District  
Uttar Pradesh Sarnath Stone group of a gigantic 
lion standing on a small 
elephant  
Also included in the protected list 
of State Archaeology Department, 
Uttar Pradesh. 
d. Instances of Antiquities protected as Monuments  
 
Assam 
 
Guwahati 
Eight Canons of the Ahom period on the bank of the Sibsagar 
tank, Sibsagar  
Gun of Emperor Sher Shah, Sadiya  
Two Swivel guns belonging to the Mughal Nawwara, Sadiya  
Chhattisgarh Raipur Ganesh statues, Barsur, Dantewada 
Karnataka Dharwad All old guns on ramparts and in trophy, Vijaypura  
Maharashtra Mumbai Mahadev Stones, Sholapur  
Carved Stones, Palghar  
Odisha Bhubaneswar Three Colossal Matrikas, Jajpur 
Three Buddha sculptures, Jajpur 
Rajasthan Jaipur Looted guns, Bharatpur  
Marble Jhoola, Bharatpur  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
93 
  
State Circle Monument 
Tamil Nadu Chennai The Cannon, Vellore  
Uttar Pradesh Jhansi Five life sized elephant statues, Mahoba 
Sarnath Stone group of a gigantic lion standing on a small elephant. It is 
lying on Akbar’s bridge  
West Bengal Kolkata Dalmadal gun and the platform on which it is mounted  
Jahan kosa gun, Murshidabad  
Reply of the Circle that the two monuments were being protected prior to the 
passing of AMASR Act, 1958 was not tenable since ASI/Circle had not initiated any 
action for their de-notification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
94 
  
 
Annexe 6.3 
(Refer Para 6.3.5) 
Monuments not de-notified by ASI 
State Circle Monuments reported by ASI  
As still missing (24) As affected due to urbanisation (14) As submerged under reservoir (12) 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Amaravati  Ancient Buddhist remains and 
Brahmi Inscriptions on the 
monuments 
Hills of Nagarjunakonda with the ancient remains, 
Sculptures, carvings, images on the ancient mound, 
Naguavaram 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Guwahati The ruins of copper temple, Paya, 
Lohit 
  
Assam Guwahati Guns of Emperor Sher Shah, Sadia   
Delhi Delhi Bara Khamba Cemetery, Delhi 
Inchla Wali Gumti, Mubarakpur 
Kotla, 
Mound known as Jogabai 
Pool Chadar 
Alipur Cemetery 
Tomb of Capt. Mc Barnett and others, 
Site of siege battery bearing the inscription, 
Site of siege battery, Major Edward Kaye, 
Site of siege battery at Quadasia Mosque garden (2) 
 
Gujarat Rajkot  Ancient Site, Sejakpur, 
Historic Site No. 431-435 Vadodara 
 
Haryana Chandigarh Kos Minar, Mujesar, Faridabad, 
Kos Minar, Shahabad, Kurukshetra 
  
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Srinagar   Rock carving of Sitala, Narda, Brahma and Radha Krishan, 
Kathua, 
Rock carving of Devi riding a lion, Kathua, 
Visveswara and other cave temples, Kathua 
Karnataka Bangalore  Pre-historic site, Chikkajala 
Pre-historic site, Hejjala 
Pre-historic site, Kittur 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Jabalpur Rock Inscription, Satna   
Maharashtra Mumbai Old European Tomb, Pune, 
One Buruj, Agarkot 
  
Rajasthan Jaipur Inscription in Fort, Nagar, Tonk, 
12th Century Temple Baran 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
95 
  
State Circle Monuments reported by ASI  
As still missing (24) As affected due to urbanisation (14) As submerged under reservoir (12) 
Uttarakhand Dehradun Kutumbari Temple, Dwarahat, 
Almora 
  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Sarnath, 
Lucknow, 
Jhansi 
Ruins of three small linga temple circle 1000 AD, Ahugi, Mirzapur, 
Three sites with megaliths on the western and north eastern toes of 
the hills, Chandauli, 
Tablet on treasury building, Varanasi, 
Telia Nala Buddhist ruins, Varanasi, 
A Banyan grove containing traces of ancient building Amavey, 
Balia, 
Closed cemetery, Katra Naka, Banda 
Gunner Burkill’s Tomb, Mehroni, Lalitpur, 
Three Tomb, Lucknow-Faizabad Road, 
Cemeteries at miles 6 & 7, Jahraila Road, Lucknow, 
Cemetery at Gaughat, Lucknow, 
Large ruins site called Sandi-Khera, Pali, Shahbad, Hardoi 
Cemetery (Bus 
Stand), Jalaun 
 
West Bengal Kolkata, 
Raiganj 
Ruins of fort, Bamanpurkur, Nadia  A mound and a statue of Surya, Pareshnath,  
A mound with a Jain statue, Pareshnath, 
Image of Durga slaying Mahishasura under a tree, 
Sarengarh, Bankura, 
Temple site now represented only by a mound, Sarengarh, 
Bankura, 
A mound with an image of Nandi on it, Sarengarh, 
Bankura, 
A mound with statues of Ganesh and Nandi on it, 
Sarengarh, Bankura, 
Note: ‘In Bold letters- not found existing during joint physical inspection 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
96 
  
 
Annexe 7.1 
(Refer Para 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 7.1.3 and 7.3) 
Results of Joint Physical Inspection of Monuments 
 Description State Circle No. of Monuments Photographs and descriptions 
WHS Adarsh 
and 
Ticketed 
Available at World Heritage Site, Adarsh and Ticketed monument 
Public amenities  
(one or more) viz. 
drinking water, 
toilet block, facility 
for physically 
challenged not 
available at 
Delhi Delhi -- 4 
 
Toilet Block at Tughlakabad  
Fort, Delhi Circle was not 
working due to water supply 
problem. ASI in October 2021 
had asked DDA for water 
supply. 
Haryana Chandigarh -- 3 
Karnataka Bengaluru, 
Dharwad, 
Hampi 
-- 4 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal, 
Jabalpur 
2# 1 
Maharashtra Aurangabad, 
Mumbai 
-- 2 
Odisha Bhubaneswar 1 1 
West Bengal Kolkata, 
Raiganj 
 
 
4 
Tourist facilities  
(one or more) viz. 
cloak room, Wi -Fi, 
parking, pathways, 
guide, interpreter, 
audio guide 
services, publicity 
material not 
available at 
Delhi Delhi 3 6 
 
Damaged QR code scanne r at 
Sultan Garhi, Delhi Circle 
also declared as ‘worst’ 
ticketed monument. 
Haryana 
 
Chandigarh -- 3 
Karnataka Bengaluru, 
Dharwad, 
Hampi 
2* 6 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal, 
Jabalpur 
3 4 
Maharashtra Aurangabad, 
Mumbai 
3 3 
Odisha Bhubaneswar 1 1 
West Bengal Kolkata, 
Raiganj 
 6 
 
All monuments 
Monument 
attendant, Cultural 
and Protection 
Signage, Site -map, 
Security Guard and 
Security Equipment 
(not available at 
one or more),  
monument or its 
part closed for 
public 
Delhi Delhi 16 
 
Monument Bibi Sahib’s Masjid, Bhopal 
Circle was closed for visitors without the 
approval of DGASI, since 1970 -72. Circle 
office, intimated that an enquiry followed 
by appropriate action would be initiated in 
this regard. 
Haryana 
 
Chandigarh 2 
Karnataka Bengaluru, 
Dharwad, 
Hampi 
5 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Bhopal, 
Jabalpur 
22 
Maharashtra Aurangabad, 
Mumbai 
4 
Odisha Bhubaneswar 18 
West Bengal Kolkata, 
Raiganj 
17 
Note: Some monuments in Raiganj Circle (earlier under Kolkata Circle) are located in Sikkim 
*=Group of nine monuments, Hampi and one at pattadakal 
#=include group of monuments at Khajuraho  
  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
97 
  
Annexe 7.2 
(Refer Para 7.2.2) 
Improper conservation and unauthorised encroachments/constructions at Monuments 
Circle Photographs and descriptions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delhi 
Out of 25 monuments (excluding three missing), cases of big cracks (11), plaster 
coming off (15), seepage (3) and requiring chemical treatment (5) were noticed. 
  
Pump room was constructed at the monument 
- Purana  Quila  
Corridor covered to create rooms at the 
monument - Safdarjung Tomb  
  
False ceiling created at the monument - Rang 
Mahal in Red Fort 
Lift provision was being provided at the 
colonial era building in Red Fort 
Aurangabad, 
Mumbai 
Out of 27 monuments, cases of big cracks (6), plaster coming off (6), seepage (9) 
and requiring chemical treatment (13) were noticed. 
  
Dilapidated condition of Dominican Church 
and Convent Agarkot 
Modern tiles flooring in Siddheshwar 
Mahadev, Toka 
 
 
Unauthorised construction by Maharashtra 
Tourism Development Corporation at Ajanta 
Encroachment in Ghrishneshwar Temple 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
98 
  
 
Circle Photographs and descriptions 
 
 
Chandigarh 
Out of 10 monuments, cases of big cracks (8), plaster coming off (6), seepage (5) 
and requiring chemical treatment (8) were noticed. 
  
Unauthorised construction at monument–Ala Vardi Khan Mosque, Gurugram, Haryana 
 
 
 
 
Bhopal, 
Jabalpur 
Out of 46 monuments, cases of big cracks (12), plaster coming off (10), seepage 
(11) and requiring chemical treatment (31) were noticed. 
  
Black stains on the outer wall of monument-
Sas-Bahu Temple, Gwalior Fort 
Big cracks in monument Teli ka Mandir, 
Gwalior Fort 
  
Electrical equipment and photos at monument-
Shantinath Temple, Khajuraho 
Antiquities lying in the open at monument – 
Bhojshala, Dhar 
 
 
 
 
Kolkata,  
Raiganj 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Out of 26 monuments (excluding six submerged), cases of big cracks (8), plaster 
coming off (8), seepage (6) and requiring chemical treatment (2) were noticed. 
  
Dilapidated conditions of monuments - Tamluk Rajbati and Clive House 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
99 
  
Circle Photographs and descriptions 
  
New constructions carried out in protected area 
of monument-Dubdi Monastery 
Patch work not symmetrical to the original 
work carried out at Currency Building 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bengaluru, 
Dharwad, 
Hampi 
Out of 45 monuments (including one missing), cases of big cracks (16), plaster 
coming off (13), seepage (16) and requiring chemical treatment (30) were noticed. 
  
Defaced ceiling at Dariya Daulat Bagh, 
Mysuru after four years of chemical 
conservation 
Abandoned chain pulley system, Old Shiva 
Temple, Hampi 
  
Modern bricks and cement used, Chitradurga Changes made at Bidar Fort, Bidar for ASI 
office 
  
In respect of Saraswathi Temple and under-ground Shiva Temple (Hampi Circle), despite 
assurance given by ASI regarding necessary action to address the issues reported in previous 
Report, ASI had not incurred any conservation expenditure on these monuments during the 
period from 2015 to 2020. 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
100 
  
 
Circle Photographs and descriptions 
Bhubaneswar Out of 20 monuments, cases of seepage (17) and requiring chemical treatment 
(20) were noticed.  
  
Unauthorised construction at encroachment at Sun Temple, Konark 
  
Hotel constructed in the protected area of 
monument-khandagiri caves, Bhubaneswar 
Antiquities lying exposed to  climate at 
Buddhist site, Ratnagiri 
 
  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
101 
  
Annexe 7.3 
(Refer Para 7.2.3) 
Improper management of gardens/excess growth of vegetation at monuments 
Circle Photographs and descriptions 
Delhi 
  
Garden waste not being picked (for one 
year) at monument – Jantar Mantar 
Unchecked vegetation growth at 
monument – Nai ka Kot 
Aurangabad, 
Mumbai 
  
Excess vegetation in Janjira Fort, Murud and in Dominican Church Agarkot 
Kolkata, 
Raiganj 
  
Excessive vegetation growth at monument- Barkona Deul and Nilkunthi Mounds 
Bengaluru, 
Dharwad, 
Hampi 
  
Thick vegetation at Dariya Daulat Bagh, 
Mysuru 
Thick vegetation around the fort, 
Gulbarga 
Bhubaneswar  
 
Horticulture godown in protected area of 
monument- Brahmeswar Temple, 
Bhubaneswar 
Non-maintenance of garden at 
Trilochaneswar Temple, Jajpur 
 


Report No. 10 of 2022 
102 
  
 
Annexe 8.1 
(Refer Para 8.1) 
Handing/taking over, verification and missing artefacts in National Museum  
Section 
Number of artefacts 
reported by 
Remarks  
(Status noticed during follow-up audit) 
 Varadarajan 
Committee 
 Yechury 
Committee 
Anthropology 10,552 9,480 
Intimated that out of 9 ,452 objects, 8 ,952 were 
handed/taken over and remaining 501 were 
missing/untraceable. 
Archaeology 9,414 9,650 
Reported 9 ,655 objects of which 9 ,416 were 
physically verified (in December 2018) and 241 
loaned/transferred. 
Arms & 
Armours 6,457 6,722 Reported 6 ,457 objects were physically verified in 
October 2018. 
Central Asian 
Antiquities 12,382 12,382 Reported 12 ,382 objects of which 125 were on 
display. 
Decorative Arts 9,415 9,444 
Reported 9 ,433 objects of which 9 ,358 physically 
verified/taken over  (June 2019) . Some objects viz. 
Golkunda Rumal, Bidri Pandan, Ganjifa card, 
Metallic Peacock, ivory flag  reported missing.  125 
objects were on display 
Jewellery 535 569 Reported 535 objects.  
Pre-History 5,437 5,437 
Curator r eported taking over of only 1 ,943 objects 
(1,296 + 35 in gallery and 612 in reserve) and had no 
information on whereabouts of the remaining 
artefacts. 
Manuscripts 14,160 14,143 
Reported 14 ,143 objects. However,  against the 
Yechury Committee report, out of 8,718 (Persian & 
Arabic) and 5,452 (Sanskrit) manuscripts, only 7,814 
(Persian & Arabic) an d 1,458 (Sanskrit) have been 
physically verified (December 2020). 
Numismatic & 
Epigraphy 1,19,791 1,19,926 Reported only 12 ,744 objects as physically 
verified/handed/taken over. 
Paintings 16,135 16,323 
Curator reported that only 2,959 paintings have been 
verified and taken over. The process of physical 
handing over of artefacts started in August 2019 was 
pending (March 2021). 
Pre-Columbian 
& Western Art 2,435 2,909 Reported only 1 ,205 objects (physically verified in 
2011) of which three were missing. 
Total 2,06,713 2,06,985  
 
  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
103 
  
Annexe 8.2 
(Refer Para 8.1) 
Conservation and display status of artefacts at various museums 
National Museum, Delhi 
  
   
  
Pic 1-vehicles parked alongwith artefacts endangering their safety, Pic-2-garbage dumped in front 
of statues, Pic 3 -construction material k ept with the statues, Pic -4,5-artefacts lying neglected in 
basement and other parts of museum  (epigraphy gallery), Pic 6,7-work being undertaken wit hout 
ensuring safety of art objects. 
Indian Museum, Kolkata 
  
Artefacts wrapped in plastic and placed one 
upon another  
Artefacts wrapped in plastic and placed one 
upon another  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
104 
  
 
   
Cement and other materials used on artefacts for fixing with wall/pedestal 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
   
Manuscript requiring restoration Rare book in brittle condition Lithoplates stacked 
 
  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
105 
  
Annexe 8.3 
(Refer Para 8.1.3) 
Physical verification certificates in Salarjung Museum, Hyderabad 
Certificates issued without date and name of the verifying authority for different number of art 
objects in each year (against available 46,216) and with same typography mistakes.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


Report No. 10 of 2022 
106 
  
 
Annexe 11.1 
(Chapter 11) 
Compliance position of recommendations made by PAC  
S. No. Issue  Observations and Recommendations  
of the PAC in 39 Report of 2015-16 
Response of 
the 
Ministry/ 
PAC 
Observation 
(paragraph no. in parenthesis) 
Reply received from Ministry/ASI (January 2022) included at 
the respective paragraphs 
1 National 
Conservation 
Policy 
Notify the rules under the Policy to streamline 
notification and de-notification of monuments and 
the conservation activities under the new policy 
within three months. 
Accepted No such document/rule notified by ASI (3 .1).  
De-notification of monuments declared as not traceable was 
pending (6.3.5). Important instructions  included in the Pol icy 
were not being followed (7.2.1).  
2 Exploration and 
Excavation Policy 
Expedite the final notification and drawing up of 
action plan under the National Policy on 
Archaeological Excavations and Explorations. 
Ensure adequate allocation of funds and its 
effective utilisation in exploration and excavation. 
Accepted The Excavation and Exp loration Policy approved by Hon’ ble 
Minister was not notified (3.1). There was no action plan based 
on excavation policy and ASI’s expenditure on the activity was 
still less than one per cent  of its total expenditure  (9.2 and 
5.1.1).  
3 Acquisition of 
Antiquities and 
Art Treasures 
PAC had shown serious concern and displeasure 
on delay in carrying out amendment in AAT Act 
and had asked to expedite the finalisation of the 
draft started in 1997. It asked the Ministry to 
explore and intimate within three months 
necessary steps taken 
to recover or procure 
antiquities which are of cultural value but have 
been sold abroad. 
Accepted The exercise was still in process (3 .1). However, the Ministry 
had made progress in recovering the artefacts (6.4).  
4 Management of 
Living 
Monuments 
Progress made in signing MoU with management 
of living monuments to be appraised. Enhance 
efforts in conservation and protection of ancient 
monuments, rock edicts needed. 
Accepted ASI did not have the details of those monuments where 
prayers/worships were started after the issue of notification.  It 
was unable to provide the details of MoU entered into with 
management of living monuments (7.1.3.1).  
5 Uniform 
procedure for 
Archaeological 
Museums under 
the Ministry 
Finalised comprehensive policy guidelines for 
management of antiquities owned by ASI 
(through site museums) addressing issues raised 
by audit viz. acquisition, accession register, 
rotation, etc. National register of CPM and 
antiquities also to be prepared. 
Accepted A comprehensive guidelines addressing all issues pertaining to 
antiquities owned by ASI was not prepared. Further, there was 
no uniform procedure for museums unde r the control of the 
Ministry (3.1 and 6.4).  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
107 
  
S. No. Issue  Observations and Recommendations  
of the PAC in 39 Report of 2015-16 
Response of 
the 
Ministry/ 
PAC 
Observation 
(paragraph no. in parenthesis) 
Reply received from Ministry/ASI (January 2022) included at 
the respective paragraphs 
6 Shortage of 
Manpower and 
Restructuring 
Issue of cadre restructuring process i n ASI was to 
be taken up with Ministry of Finance  to overcome 
the shortage of manpower.  
 
Further 
recommendat
ions made by 
PAC in its 
second report 
Some progress in r estructuring process of ASI was noticed as 
approval for creation of additional 758 posts was issued by the 
Ministry of Finance in April 2021. However, overall vacancy 
position in ASI had further deteriorated (4.2).  
7 Filling current 
vacancies 
Ministry sh ould make concerted effort to fill all 
vacant posts in ASI within six months. 
8 National 
Monument 
Authority 
Ministry evolve an internal mechanism to set 
targets and monitor timelines for its various 
agencies and units in consultation and fill up the 
vacant posts. 
Further 
recommendat
ions made by 
PAC in its 
second report 
Only five Heritage Bye -Laws covering 31 protected 
monuments have been notified while finalisation of 165  
Heritage Bye-Laws was at different stages. Posts of Whole and 
Part Time Members were still vacant since March 2019 and 
January 2014 respectively (3.2). 
9 Security and 
safeguard 
arrangements 
ASI to constitute a co -ordination mechanism with 
representatives of respective State Governments at 
each circle to check the incidence of 
encroachments with the co -operation of District 
and Police authorities. Strengthen the manpower 
for security, advances in IT for enhancing security 
by developing a comprehensive security policy for 
all monuments and museums. All ASI monuments 
and museums to have public amenities. 
Further 
recommendat
ions made by 
PAC in its 
second report 
The co-ordination mechanism was not found existing (4.1.4.1). 
ASI had entered into MoU with ISRO for web- based utility , 
which allows users to explore map based content prepared by 
ISRO. The Ministry had also brought out comprehensive 
security policy for museums under its control (7.3 ). Public 
amenities were being created at the monuments by declaring 
them as Adarsh Smarak (7.1.2).  
10 Training and 
implementation of 
expert group’s 
report 
ASI should implement the new HRD policy to 
overcome shortage of trained personnel. Training 
institute in Red Fort with UNESCO recognition. 
Accepted The Ministry/ASI had the infrastructure for building capability 
towards its heritage activities. However , the posts have not 
been filled and the enrolment of students was short. It was 
expected that with the establishment of new Institute of 
Archaeology, gaps will be addressed (4.2.1).  
11 Budgetary 
allocation 
Demands for funds must be raised on the basis of 
actual projection for requirements of ASI. For this 
purpose ASI to carry out pre-budget planning. 
Accepted After 2017 -18, growth in ASI’s overall expenditure and its 
expenditure on heritage protection had remained moderate  
(5.1).  
12 Revenue 
generation 
Structured system for categorisation of 
monuments as ticketed and non- ticketed must be 
developed and a comprehensive revie w carried 
out to bring more monuments in ticketed category. 
Accepted Though ASI had brought more monuments under ticketed 
category and revised the entry charges, the criteria adopted was 
not transparent (5.3). However, amendment in AMASR Act for 
introducing a system of recording footf alls was still pending  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
108 
  
 
S. No. Issue  Observations and Recommendations  
of the PAC in 39 Report of 2015-16 
Response of 
the 
Ministry/ 
PAC 
Observation 
(paragraph no. in parenthesis) 
Reply received from Ministry/ASI (January 2022) included at 
the respective paragraphs 
Ticket and other charges should be reviewed and 
suitably revised. Ministry/ASI to explore 
enhancing revenue generation through premium 
renting of well -known sites for social and family 
events with proper guidelines. 
(5.3.1).  
13 Non-budgetary 
funding 
Coordination between ASI and NCF should be 
strengthened to rope in more corporate groups and 
individuals into funding conservation and visitor 
amenities at monument sites. 
Accepted The funds of NCF were not being used for heritage activities as 
its primary corpus of Rs. 19.50 crore increased to Rs. 56.71 
crore by 2020-21. (5.1.2) 
14 Identification 
criteria and 
survey 
PAC noted that a comprehensive survey to 
identify monuments of national importance for 
placing such monuments in centrally protected 
category is overdue. It recommended that 
guidelines for determination of national 
importance of a monument be finalised at the 
earliest (within six months) and thereafter a 
comprehensive survey with target timeline should 
be conducted to identify the exact number of 
monuments of national importance that can be 
protected. 
Accepted Guidelines have not been framed and instances defining 
absence of criteria in notifying a certain monument wer e still 
existing ( 6.3.1). No comprehensive survey/review to identify 
monuments of national importance that can be protected or to 
identify those monuments which over the period had lost their 
significance and need to be shifted to States was undertaken by 
ASI (6.3.2).  
15 Notification 
issues 
ASI to conduct workshops for circle office 
personnel for effective preparation of proposals 
for notification. Finalisation of de -notification 
guidelines may be expedited. Action may be taken 
against Circles and officers found to be defaulting 
in preparation of inventories of monuments under 
them within a prescribed time-frame. 
In view of 
reply by the 
Ministry, 
PAC decided 
that no 
further action 
was required 
ASI had no defined procedure/schedule for 
reviewing/modifying the list of Centrally Protected 
Monuments (6.3.3).  
16 Missing 
monuments 
ASI to expedite the physical verification, 
condition and existences of the notified 
monuments. Committee felt that in the absence of 
reliable database of monuments , ASI was unable 
Accepted Centralised database/inventory of CPM displaying to the 
public all the recommended information was not available 
(6.2). Monuments accepted by ASI as non -traceable were no t 
de-notified (6.3.5).  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
109 
  
S. No. Issue  Observations and Recommendations  
of the PAC in 39 Report of 2015-16 
Response of 
the 
Ministry/ 
PAC 
Observation 
(paragraph no. in parenthesis) 
Reply received from Ministry/ASI (January 2022) included at 
the respective paragraphs 
to fulfil its basic mandate effectively 
17 Process of 
notification 
ASI/Ministry put in place a system of periodic 
review of old notifications to verify the physical 
existence. ASI/Ministry may consider issuing 
guidelines whereby Ancient monuments 
(predating say 1700 AD) and contemporary 
monuments that are 100 years old and are of 
national importance stand automatically protected. 
Accepted System of period review of old notification was not existing 
(6.3.3).  Further, no such guidelines declaring 100 years old 
monuments as of national importance was found in existence. 
18 Categorisation of 
monuments 
The concept of categorisation of monuments was 
made in the absence of any provision for assessing 
footfalls at the monument. Committee asked for 
necessary modifications in AMASR Act to 
address lacunae regarding categorisation of 
monuments and put in place a system of recording 
footfalls in non-ticketed monuments  
Accepted The work of categorisation of monument was still in process 
(6.2.1). Amendment in AMASR Act for introducing a system 
of recording footfalls and categorisation of monuments was 
pending (3.1).  
19 Encroachments 
and unauthorised 
activities 
Committee recommended that ASI/ Ministry 
should consider evolving clear guidelines on the 
use of protected monuments and ensure MoU are 
signed with users/occupants based on the said 
guidelines. ASI should have a laid down policy 
for notification of sites with contested ownership 
or encroachments and constitute a co -ordination 
body with representatives of respective State 
Governments at each circle to check incidents of 
encroachments with the co -operation of District 
and Police authorities. 
Accepted Efforts not found to have been made to enter into MoU  with 
management of living monuments. The position of encroached 
monuments reported by ASI was found incorrect. There was 
absence of mechanism for period review of 
encroachment/unauthorized construction cases. Further, 
guidelines or policy document on livi ng monuments was not 
prepared by ASI (7.1.3.1).  
 
20 Use of 
monuments for 
other purposes 
Use of parts of monuments for residence should 
be done away with and usage as offices by ASI or 
any agency should be discouraged. Ministry may 
expedite and finalise guidelines 
allowing cultural 
events in the CPM. 
Accepted During joint physical inspection, monument found still being 
used for other purposes (e.g. in Red Fort space occupied for 
various offices of ASI and security agencies) (7.1.1).  

Report No. 10 of 2022 
110 
  
 
S. No. Issue  Observations and Recommendations  
of the PAC in 39 Report of 2015-16 
Response of 
the 
Ministry/ 
PAC 
Observation 
(paragraph no. in parenthesis) 
Reply received from Ministry/ASI (January 2022) included at 
the respective paragraphs 
 
21 Inventory of 
centrally 
protected 
monuments 
Prepare an inventory of all CPM and display the 
same on portal within two years for the public to 
get various information viz. category, circle and 
State, location and distance from nearest city, 
historical and cultural significance, encroachment 
details, etc. 
Accepted ASI intimated that the data with respect to Gazette Notification 
for 3 ,150 monuments had been compiled.  However, 
database/inventory of CPM displaying to the public all the 
recommended information was still not available (6.2).  
22 Maritime 
Archaeology 
Committee recommended a separate wing of ASI 
with relevant expertise specially tasked to bolster 
efforts in this direct ion. Setting up of maritime 
museums displaying antiquities and monuments 
of our great maritime past. 
Accepted In the related branch, in addition to  shortage of manpower, 
there was no perspective plan or policy with ASI for taking 
underwater archaeology ( 9.1.2).  Further, no such maritime  
museum was found opened by the Ministry/ASI (8.3.2).  
23 Leveraging IT for 
preservation and 
promotion 
Enhanced efforts must be made to fully leverage 
the advantages of IT in preserving perishable 
monuments and antiquities. Develop a roadmap 
for preserving historical and cultural monuments 
using electronic data and images. Earmark funds 
specifically for awareness, interpretation, etc. 
Accepted ASI had entered into agreement with ISRO for  
web-based content on its monuments (7.3). However, there 
was absence of strategy or road -map for heritage conservation. 
(4.1.2) 
24 Maintenance of 
Baolis and other 
monuments 
Committee recommended the ASI to strengthen 
its efforts in restoring monuments and works in 
collaboration with some of the pioneering private 
organisation active in the field. 
Accepted During the follow-up audit, position of fifteen Baolis under the 
jurisdiction of Delhi Circle was found deteriorated as out of 13 
wet Baolis, 10 had become dirty. 
Further, issues in respect of Agarsen Ki Baoli , as mentioned in 
earlier Report, have not been resolved 7.1.3.2).  
25 Restoration of 
damaged 
Monuments 
The Committee issued instruction regarding 
restoration work of damaged monuments and 
preservation of removed parts for display. 
Accepted Though conservation of monuments is a continuous process, 
improper conservation works/changes made in the original 
structures, construction in the prohibited areas of the 
monument, etc. as noticed during physical inspection, have 
been included in the report. 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
111 
  
Glossary 
‘Antiquity’ includes any coin, sculpture, painting, epigraph or other work of art of 
craftsmanship; any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave which is 
of historical interest, or declared by the Central Government to be an antiquity , which 
has been in existence for not less than one hundred years.  
‘Chalcolithic’ i.e. Chalco + lithic means copper + s tone. This represent  culture or 
period when copper tools as well as stone tools were used.  
‘Conservation’ means the processes through which material, design and integrity of 
the monument is safeguarded in terms of its archaeological and architectural value, its 
historic significance and its cultural or intangible associations. 
‘Kos-Minars’ are medieval infrastructure (pillars) constructed across the highways as 
an important part of travel and communication.  
‘Living Monument’ means monument that was still in use for the purpose for which 
they were originally designed at the time of notification of the monument.  
‘Monument’ includes any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or place 
of internment, or any cave, rock, sculpture, inscription or monolith, which was of 
historical, archaeological or artistic interest and which had been in existence for not 
less than one hundred years, and include- 
(i) The remains of an ancient monument, 
(ii) The site of an ancient monument, 
(iii) Such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be 
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument, 
and 
(iv) The means of access to an convenient inspection of an ancient monument’ 
‘Preservation’ means maintaining the status quo of a monument including its setting 
thereby not allowing any changes, either through deliberate human interventions or 
due to action of natural agents of decay to its fabric or its immediate environment. 
‘Prohibited Area’  means area of the protected monuments declared as of national 
importance and extending to a distance of 100 meters in all direction. 
‘Protected Area’ means any ancient monument which is declared to be of national 
importance by or under the Act. 
‘Regulated Area’  means area in respect of every ancient monuments and 
archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance and extending to a 
distance of 200 meters in all direction. The distance could be further extended. 
‘Restoration’ means bringing back the monument or any part thereof, as nearly as 
possible, to an earlier known state or condition. 
‘Sculpture Shed’ is a place where the archaeological remains belonging to the site 
and the adjoining area are kept in safe custody, under a shed. 
‘Social Capital of Community ’ is the networks of relationships among people who 
live and work in a particular society, enabling that society to function effectively. 
‘Waqf Board’ is a body which hand les certain movable, immovable Islamic 
properties. 
 
 

Report No. 10 of 2022 
112 
  
 
List of Abbreviations 
 
 
 
AA Assistant Archaeologist 
AT The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 
AHMASR The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and 
Remains Act 
AMASR The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 
AMP The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act 
ASA Assistant Superintendent Archaeologist 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BCE Before Common Era 
CABA Central Advisory Board on Archaeology 
CAC Central Antiquity Collection 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CCTV Closed-circuit Television 
CE Common Era 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CPM Centrally Protected Monuments 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
DDA Delhi Development Authority 
DRC Documentation Resource Centre 
GVO Global Vaish Organisation 
HBL Heritage Bye-Laws 
IM Indian Museum 
MCD Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MTS Multi-Tasking Staff 
NBCC National Building Construction Corporation 
NCF National Culture Fund 
NM National Museum 
NMA National Monument Authority 
NMHC National Maritime Heritage Complex 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NPC-AMASR National Policy for Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, 
Archaeological Sites and Remains 
NPCC National Projects Construction Corporation 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
RFID Radio Frequency Identification 
SDMC South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
SLIC State Level Implementing Committee 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
TCIL Telecommunications Consultants India Ltd.  
UPSC Union Public Service Commission 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation 
V&A Victoria & Albert 
WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services 
WHS World Heritage Sites 