Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
Union Government 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
Report No. 4 of 2022 
(Performance Audit) 

 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
i
 
Table of Contents 
Contents Pages 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter 1  Introduction  1 
Chapter 2 Institutional Framework 7 
Chapter 3 Project Clearances under CRZ Notifications 14 
Chapter 4 Post Clearance Monitoring and Enforcement of CRZ Notifications 26  
Chapter 5 Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  40 
Chapter 6 Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 52 
Chapter 7 Sustainable Development Goals 63 
Chapter 8 Conclusion and Recommendations 67 
 Annexures 73 
 Abbreviations 113 
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
i
i 
  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
i
ii 
Preface 
This Report for the year ended March 2020 has been p repared for 
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India.  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains 
the observations of Performance Audit on Conservation of Coastal 
Ecosystems for the period 2015-20.  
The instances mentioned in this Report are those which came to notice 
in the course of test audit for the period 2015-20 as well as those which 
came to notice in earlier years but could not be reported in previous 
Audit Reports; matters relating to the period subsequent to 2019-20 
have also been included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
v 
Executive Summary 
Introduction and Background 
The coastal zone is an interface between the  land and the sea which comprises of coastal 
land, intertidal area, coastal ecosystems including rivers, estuaries, marshes, wetlands and 
beaches. India has a coastline of about 7516 kms of which the mainland accounts for about 
5422 kms, Lakshadweep coasts extend to 132 kms and Andaman & Nicobar Islands have a 
coastline of about 1962 kms. The coastal zone is endowed with a very wide range of natural 
resources. Beside the coastal waters, the other major ecosystems found in the coastal 
environment are Mangroves; Coral reefs; Sea Grass; Mud Flats; Estuaries/backwaters; 
Lagoons; Sand Dunes etc. The coastline supports a huge human population, which is 
dependent on the rich coastal and marine resources. However,  increasing human 
population, urbanisation and accelerated developmental activities has put huge pressure on 
the fragile coastal ecosystems of India.  
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) and Ministry of Earth 
Sciences (MoES) are the two nodal Ministries which deal primarily in the coastal and ocean 
areas. The Environment (Protection) Act,1986 authorises the central government to protect 
and improve environmental quality, control and reduce pollution from all sources, and 
prohibit or restrict the setting and/or operation of any industrial facility on environmental 
grounds.  The Government has issued notifications under Section 3 and 5 of Environment 
Protection Act 1986 to regulate the activities in coastal space so as to protect the coastal 
environment from various anthropogenic activities. Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 
(CRZ) 2019 which was superseded by its earlier versions in 1991 and 2011 implemented by 
MoEF&CC aims to classify the coastal area into different zones and manage the activities in 
an integrated manner. Pre-audit studies conducted to understand the risks in coastal zone 
management revealed that there were large scale CRZ violation in the coastal stretches. 
Incidence of illegal construction activities (reducing coastal space), effluent discharges from 
local bodies, industries and aquaculture farms have been recorded from various data 
sources. It was imperative to assess the implementation of Coastal Zone Regulation 
Notification 2011 by the coastal states as well as the centre in order to evaluate on the 
efforts of the Government of India towards protection and conservation of coastal 
environment. 
Also, Given the significance of Sustainable Development Goals and the commitments of the 
country towards achieving them, we have attempted to evaluate the  efforts viz. planning, 
implementation and delivery mechanism towards attaining the targets  under SDG 14- Life 
Below Water. 
Accordingly, we decided to take up a Performance Audit on ‘Conservation of Coastal 
Ecosystems’ with the following   objectives: 
1. To examine if institutional mechanism exists at Cent re as well as State to regulate
the activities in CRZ areas as per the provisions of CRZ notification 2019.

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
v
i 
2. To examine if CRZ clearances granted by the Governmen t is as per due procedure, to
conserve coastal ecology
3. Whether post clearance monitoring as well as enforcem ent of CRZ notifications
safeguarded coastal ecosystems
4. To examine if the project development objectives unde r Integrated Coastal Zone
Management Programme (ICZMP) were successful.
5. To evaluate the measures taken up by the Government t owards achieving the targets
under SDG-14.
Key Audit Findings 
Chapter 2: Institutional Framework 
MoEF&CC has not notified NCZMA as a permanent body with recommended members. 
NCZMA is reconstituted every few years and in the absence of defined membership, it was 
functioning as an ad-hoc body, devoid of permanent members. Further, the composition of 
NCZMA has not been uniform over these years, indicating a lack of continuity of approach 
towards coastal conservation issues. 
(Para 2.1 a) 
Instances were observed where Expert Appraisal Committees (EAC) granted clearances, 
though domain experts were not present during the project deliberations. Also, cases were 
noted where the members of EAC were less than half of the total strength during the 
deliberations as there was no fixed quorum for EAC members. 
(Para 2.1 b) 
SCZMA was not reconstituted in the state of Karnataka and there was delayed reconstitution 
in the states of Goa, Odisha and West Bengal. SCZMAs held meetings without fulfilling the 
quorum requirements and lacked representation from relevant stakeholder bodies. SCZMAs 
in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Odisha and West Bengal did 
not have sufficient manpower to perform their mandate. 
(Para 2.1 c & d) 
DLCs of Tamil Nadu lacked participation from local traditional communities. In Andhra 
Pradesh, DLCs were not established in all the nine coastal districts as on March 2021. In Goa, 
DLCs were formed in 2017 after delay of six years of promulgation of the CRZ notification. 
DLCs are yet to be reconstituted in two coastal districts of Karnataka as on March 2021. 
(Para 2.1 e) 
Absence of any active and functional website to disseminate the information related to 
NCZMA such as the agenda notes, minutes of the meetings was against the mandated 
responsibilities of the institution.  
(Para 2.3) 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
v
ii 
Chapter 3: Project Clearances under CRZ Notifications 
Projects were approved despite inadequacies in the EIA Reports which included non- 
accreditation of the consultant involved with the preparation of the EIA Report, usage of 
outdated baseline data, non- evaluation of environmental impacts of the project, non- 
addressal of disasters which the project area was prone to. 
(Para 3.1) 
Activities forming a part of the mitigation plans like mangrove conservation/ replantation,  
biodiversity conservation plan, rain water harvesting plan  failed to be included in the 
Environment Management Plan as the same was left to the project proponent (PP) to be 
carried out.  
(Para 3.2) 
Projects were approved where MoEF&CC failed to make independent efforts to verify the 
veracity of the information given by private consultants and merely relied on the information 
submitted by the Project Proponent with respect to potential ecological risks due to the 
project activities. 
(Para 3.4) 
Instances were observed where the SCZMA usurped the powers of clearance granting 
authorities and granted clearance to the projects. Further, there were cases of project 
approvals where the SCZMAs recommended the projects without the submission of 
mandatory documents. 
(Para 3.7) 
Modification of CRZ notifications for approval of specific projects defeated the efforts to 
conserve the coastal ecosystems.  
(Para 3.8) 
Cases were observed where projects were approved without undergoing the multistage 
process of EIA as major infrastructure projects are not comprehensively covered under the 
EIA Notification 2006. 
(Para 3.9) 
Chapter 4: Post clearance monitoring and enforcement of CRZ Notifications 
Instances were observed where the Project Proponent failed to comply with conditions 
mentioned in the Clearance and did not submit the mandatory half yearly compliance 
reports to the Regional Offices of MoEF&CC. There were cases where the projects 
commenced without obtaining any CTE or CTO from the concerned State Pollution Control 
Board. 
(Para 4.1) 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
vi
ii 
The enforcement of CRZ provisions by SCZMAs and DLCs were reviewed and instances were 
observed where SCZMAs failed to take action against CRZ violations and the DLCs too failed 
to identify violations and report the same to SCZMAs. 
(Para 4.2) 
Chapter 5: Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
Despite serious reduction and degradation of the live coral cover in the Gulf of Mannar 
Islands, no viable strategy to mitigate the propagation of the invasive species had been 
devised by the Department of Forest, Tamil Nadu. Issues such as absence of a monitoring 
system for coral reefs, and non- preparation of management plans for turtle nesting sites in 
Goa were observed. Instances were observed where prohibited activities like infrastructure 
development in areas of coastal sand dunes were observed in Goa. Gaps in the efforts to 
conserve mangroves in Goa and Gujarat were noticed. Instances were observed where the 
sewage treatment plants were either altogether absent or were functioning without any 
monitoring leading to discharge of harmful effluents into coastal waters. 
(Para 5.1 and 5.2) 
Chapter 6:  Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
Although the entire work of mapping of Hazard Line was completed in August 2018, the 
ground demarcation of the Hazard Line was yet to be done by MoEF&CC. The Integrated 
Management Plans (IMPs) for Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCAs) were yet to be 
prepared by the coastal states.  
(Para 6.1) 
In the marine field stations at Mandvi and Jamnagar in Gujarat, it was observed that out of 
40 instruments installed under the project at these two places, 33 instruments were 
operated only for checking and calibration and were never used for the intended purpose 
i.e., to study the physiochemical parameters of soil and water of the intertidal area of the
Gulf of Kutch. 
(Para 6.2) 
Insufficient capacity building measures at Odisha State Pollution Control Board (OSPCB) 
were noticed as Against the targets set for the collection and analysis of samples there was 
a huge shortfall ranging from 33% to 59%. Further, the Centre was working at 55 % of the 
required manpower and this resulted in non- operation of the equipment procured for the 
analysis of the samples. 
(Para 6.3.2) 
We observed that even after the incurring an expenditure of  6.23 crore, the objective of 
effective sea patrolling in Gahirmatha Sanctuary remained unachieved. A research 
laboratory at Dangmal, Kendrapara District, Odisha constructed in 2016 could not be made 
functional till date. We observed Idling of infrastructure created under the activity relating 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
ix
 
Hygienic drying of fish at Gopalpur in Odisha where the solar dryers could not be made 
functional enough to provide livelihood support to the community, the expenditure of 6.72 
crore on creation of facilities under the ICZMP. 
(Para 6.3.3 and 6.3.4) 
Chapter 7: Sustainable Development Goals 
Audit examined the stakeholder map and found that a few significant stakeholder 
organisations like the Indian Coast Guard and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
were not included in the map. We observed that the indicators do not holistically address 
the SGD target and do not conform to global indicators, as the indicator essentially measured 
only the output of the programmes developed for management of mangrove ecosystems. 
The list of activities planned to achieve the target should have also formed the sub-indicators 
and biodiversity, fisheries indices etc., should have ideally formed the output indicators for 
the target. We observed that the State Indicator frameworks were not prepared by the 
states of Maharashtra and Kerala. It was observed that with the exception of Gujarat, all 
other coastal states adopted the national indicators as developed by MoSPI without 
adapting them to the state specific environmental aspects. Also, in the states where SIFs had 
been formulated, further localization to District levels was done only by the State of 
Karnataka by notifying District Indicator Framework (DIF). 
(Para 7.1, 7.2 and 7.4) 
Recommendations 
We recommend that: 
1. SCZMAs and NCZMAs may be made as permanent bodies wit h
  full time members to
carry out all the mandated activities for protecting the coastal environment.
2. The DLCs may be formed and reconstituted without delay  in all the relevant districts.
The composition of DLCs may be inclusive in nature representing all the relevant
stakeholder sectors.
3. MoEF&CC needs to ensure that the NCZMA/ SCZMAs share i nformation regarding their
discussions/minutes of meetings with the public in a uniform manner. Interactive
Grievance Redressal Mechanism may be adopted by the SCZMAs.
4. The Ministry may ensure that the PP carry out in-depth
  ecological evaluation of the
project environment before granting the clearances to the projects as well as enforce
the practice of cumulative assessments already defined in the EIA Notification, 2006.
5. MoEF&CC may ensure that the PPs  submit a viable EMP a
 ddressing all the risks to the
environment and the EMP along with the Impact Prediction analyses are largely
coherent. Also, the mitigation proposals may be clearly brought out in the EMP and
costed.
6. MoEF&CC may revisit the roles and composition of diff e
 rent agencies to strengthen the
post clearance monitoring.

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
x
 
7. Expert cells, which are well versed in GIS tools may be created in DLCs to effectively and
efficiently monitor the changing landscape on the coastline and track irregular
developments. Presence of such a surveillance mechanism would not only track
irregular activities but would also serve as a deterrence tool.
8. The State Governments may make necessary efforts for  mapping and preparation of
Management Plans for the coral reefs, turtle nesting sites etc.
9. Efforts may be made by MoEF&CC to notify the IMPs for  Ecologically Sensitive Areas at
the earliest.
10. MoEF&CC should ensure deploying sufficient manpower w ith technical expertise at
SICOM and various institutes strengthened under the project. Efforts should be made
to rationalise the manpower deployment to ensure optimum utilisation.
11. MoES and MoEF&CC may review the stakeholder mapping t o ensure the inclusion of all
relevant institutions with respect to SDG 14 targets.
12. Localisation of the indicators should be prioritised in the stakeholder states by ensuring
formulation of District Indicator Frameworks in the states.

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Coastal areas comprise some of the most dynamic natu ral ecosystems of our planet, where 
three main components—the hydrosphere, the lithosphere, and the atmosphere—meet and 
interact, forming interconnected systems. Coastal ecosystems including marshes, mangroves, 
near-shore coral reefs, seagrass beds, sandy beaches and dunes provide numerous benefits 
like livelihood through fisheries, protection from sea surges/cyclones.  These benefits have 
ensured that demographic pressures on coastal resources have increased over the past 
several decades: 38 percent of the world’s population lives within 100 km of the coast. 
Recognising the significance of life under water, the United Nations included SDG 14, aims at 
conserving and sustainably using the oceans, seas and marine resources, to be achieved by 
all the member countries of UN SDG 14. 
India, with a coastline of about 7516 kms, is one 
among the 12 mega biodiversity countries and 25 
hotspots of the richest and highly endangered eco 
regions of the world. Coastal regions of India provide 
home to 13.36% of the people of the country and thus 
place tremendous pressure on the resources along 
the coast. There are nine coastal states in the country, 
namely, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, 
 
Fig. 1: Coastal states of India 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West Ben gal. 
The nodal institutions at the national level, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC), and Ministry of Earth Sciences along with various stakeholder ministries 
and other key scientific and research bodies all over India has been entrusted with the 
responsibility of protecting the coast and the fragile coastal resources and ensuring their 
sustainable use. The most significant among these is the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 
in 1991, 2011 and 2019 promulgated by MoEF&CC. This is the overarching legislation for 
management of activities in Indian coastal space. Thus, evaluation of enforcement and 
implementation of this zonation mechanism is central to the assessment of Government 
measures to protect the coastal ecosystems.  
1.1 Regulation of activities in coastal areas 
T
he Central Government notified the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 1991 with a 
view to ensuring the livelihood security of fishermen and other local communities living in the 
coastal areas, to conserve and protect coastal stretches and also to promote development in 
a sustainable manner. The Notification also imposed restrictions on setting up and expansion 
of industries from operating in the CRZ areas.  CRZ Notification was revised in 2011 1 and in 
2
019, based on the recommendations of a committee chaired by Sh. Shailesh Nayak. All CRZ 
                                                           
1  Based on the recommendations of the Committee chair ed by Prof. M.S. Swaminathan in 2009 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
 
notifications had demarcated the coastal areas into zones, with only permitted activity 
allowed in these zones. Under the CRZ notification 2011, the coastal regulated areas are 
categorised as CRZ I, CRZ II, CRZ III and CRZ IV:  
 
 
All states had to prepare Coastal Zone Management Plans (CZMP), based on cadastral maps 2 
a
nd demarcation of high tide and low tide lines, to regulate specific activities under these 
zones. Further, a World Bank assisted project called Integrated Coastal Zone Management 
Project (ICZMP) was introduced for building national capacity for implementation of 
comprehensive coastal management approach in the country, starting with three coastal 
states of Odisha, West Bengal, and Gujarat.  
                                                           
2  A cadastral map is a map that shows the boundaries  and ownership of land parcels 
•areas which are ecologically sensitive, form the geomorpho logical features which play a
role in the maintaining the integrity of the coast.
• includes-mangroves and 50 m buffer area for mangroves exceeding 1000 sqm.; corals,
coral reefs and associated biodiversity; sand dunes; biologically active mudflats;
•national parks, marine parks, sanctuaries, reserve forests, wildlife habitat and other
protected areas notified as biosphere reserves;
•Salt marshes; turtle nesting grounds; horse shoe crab habitats; sea grass beds; nesting
grounds of birds;
•areas or structures of archaeological importance/heritage sites/area lying between the
Low Tide Line and High Tide Line
CRZ I
•areas within the existing municipal limits/other urban are as which are substantially
built-up and drainage, approach roads and other infrastructural facilities
CRZ II
•relatively undisturbed /do not belong to either CRZ-I or II; This includes coastal zone in
the rural areas, areas within the existing municipal limits or other urban areas which are
not substantially built up.
CRZ III
•designated to the water area from the Low Tide Line to twelve n autical miles on the sea
ward side and inland waters influenced by tide
CRZ IV
•for the purpose of protecting critical coastal environment /difficulties faced by local
communities; consist of -CRZ area falling within municipal limits of Greater Mumbai;
•the CRZ areas of Kerala including the backwaters and backwater islands;
•CRZ areas of Goa and Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas like Sundarbans
•other ecologically sensitive areas identified as under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
and managed with the involvement of coastal communities including fisherfolk.
Areas requiring special consideration in the CRZ

Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
 
1.2 Institutional Mechanisms involved in the conservatio n of coastal areas 
Institutional Mechanism for implementation of CRZ Notifications 
 
Institutional Mechanism for Implementation of ICZMP 
 
Institutional Mechanism for Implementation of selected targets of SDG-14 
 
•The Impact Assessment Division of the Ministry regulates de velopmental activities of
the coastal areas falling within CRZ. The Ministry constitutes Expert Appraisal
Committees with domain experts for grant of approvals to Category A project
proposals along the coasts.
MoEF&CC
•National Coastal Zone Management Authority is the apex agen cy for coastal
regulation. It advises central government on the matters for changes in the
classification of coastal zone areas and CZMPs. It also provides guidance and
technical assistance to SCZMAs.
NCZMA
•State Coastal Zone Management Authorities evaluate the pro ject proposals from
their respective states and recommend them to MoEF&CC or SEIAA for approval.
SCZMAs
•State Environmental Impact Assessment Authorities are sta te bodies responsible for
granting project clearance to Category B projects on the basis of recommendations
of SCZMAs. The composition of SEIAA is similar to that of Expert Appraisal
Committees at the centre.
SEIAA
•DLCs are the district level authorities for monitoring and e nforcement of CRZ
Notification
DLC
•Society of Integrated Coastal Management (SICOM) is a regis tered society under the
aegis of the MoEF&CC, it is the designated National Project Management Unit for
planning management, execution, monitoring and implementation of ICZMP.
SICOM
•It is the data source Ministry for SDG 14.1- Prevention and re duction of marine pollution
of all kinds and SDG 14.3- Minimisation of impacts of ocean acidification. National
Centre for Coastal Research, an attached office of MoES collects all the data pertaining
to SDG 14.1 and 14.3 in the country.
MoES
•It is the data source Ministry for SDG 14.2 sustainably manag e and protect marine and
coastal ecosystems and 14.5-Conservation of at least 10% of coastal and marine areas.
MoEF&CC

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
 
1.3 Audit Objectives 
A
udit framed five overarching objectives encompassing the relevant activities of the key 
players in the coastal environment. The audit objectives are as follows:  
(i) To examine if institutional mechanism exists at Cent re as well as State to regulate 
the activities in CRZ areas as per the provisions of CRZ notification 2019.  
(ii) To examine if CRZ clearances granted by the Governme nt are as per due procedure, 
to conserve coastal ecology 
(iii) Whether post clearance monitoring as well as enforce ment of CRZ notifications 
safeguarded coastal ecosystems 
(iv) To examine if the project development objectives und er Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management Programme (ICZMP) were successful.  
(v) To evaluate the measures taken up by the Government towards achieving the targets 
under SDG-14. 
1.4 Audit Criteria 
The main sources of audit criteria for the performance audit were CRZ Notification,  
2011/20193; Environment Impact Assessment Notification 2006; a genda and minutes of 
Expert Appraisal Committees;  state specific Coastal Zone Management Plans; Terms of 
References of Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC), Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) and 
Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for project clearances, conditions imposed in 
Environment Clearance and CRZ clearance; records at Society of Integrated Coastal 
Management (SICOM), National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) and 
National Centre for Coastal Research; General Financial Rules and SDG 14 related records at 
MoES.  
1.5 Audit Scope and Sampling 
Audit covered the activities of institutions under the MoEF&CC and the MoES for the period 
from 2015-2020 with regard to implementation of CRZ notifications. In this regard, records at 
the State Coastal Zone Management Authorities (SCZMAs) of all the nine coastal states (West 
Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Goa, Maharashtra and 
Gujarat) for the period 2015 to 2020 were examined. We also reviewed the implementation 
of ICZM projects in the states of Gujarat, Odisha and West Bengal. Further, given the 
significance of Sustainable Development Goals and the commitments of the country towards 
achieving them, we have also attempted to evaluate the efforts viz., planning, 
implementation and delivery mechanism towards attaining the targets related to coastal 
regulations under SDG 14- Life below water.  
                                                           
3  CRZ notification 2011 is the criteria for clearanc es as on February 2022 as the CZMPs based on CRZ 2019 
are yet to be prepared by the States and approved by the MoE&FCC. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
 
1.5.1 Sampling of Project clearances for examination under  audit 
(i) MoEF&CC accords two kinds of clearances. (a) composite clearance 4, and (b) CRZ 
c
learance5. 71 composite clearances and 139 CRZ clearances wer e granted by MoEF&CC 
during the period 2015-2019, of which 15 composite clearances and 28 CRZ clearances were 
sampled6. 
(
ii) 118 project clearances were sampled and examined by the state audit offices out of 1978 
project clearances accorded by the State Bodies7 .  
(
iii) Two districts in each of the nine coastal states were examined 8 to evaluate the health of 
c
oastal environment with focus on endemic vulnerable flora and fauna. 
(iv) We also examined 128 CRZ violations that formed 20 percent of the total reported 
violations (1898 violations) in the states to assess the measures taken by the State Coastal 
Zone Management Authorities on the CRZ violation cases reported to them9.  
(v) We examined 13 pilot projects undertaken under ICZMP in the states of Odisha, West 
Bengal and Gujarat.  
1.6  Audit Methodology 
Entry conference was held on 1 st July 2020, with representatives from the constituen t units 
of MoEF&CC and MoES, wherein the audit objectives/ criteria/ scope and methodology of the 
performance audit were discussed.  Field audit included examination of records at MoEF&CC, 
MoES, National Centre of Coastal Research, and State Coastal Zone Management Authorities 
(SCZMAs) of the nine coastal states. Joint physical verifications were conducted to ascertain 
the status of sampled reported violations. Audit used GIS tools to map the approved CZMP 
for selected region with satellite images from Google Earth to observe unreported violations. 
                                                           
4  Where the projects require Environmental Clearance  (EC) as per the EIA Notification 2006 as well as CRZ 
clearance. 
5  Where the project requires only CRZ clearance, in accordance with the Coastal Regulation Zone 
Notification in place. 
6  Based on criteria a) inherent risk associated with  the developmental activity b) vulnerability of marine 
ecosystems in and around the project site c) sufficiency of gestation period of the project (most of the 
selected projects, which had been granted clearance in the earlier part of the audit period). 
7  SEIAA, Town Planning Authority, Municipalities, Pa nchayats etc. 
8  The districts were sampled based on a number of fa ctors such as risk from ongoing developmental 
activities, presence of endemic flora and fauna, reports on deterioration of coastal environment etc. The 
selected districts are as: Andhra Pradesh (East Godavari and Srikakulam), Goa (North Goa and South Goa), 
Gujarat (Bhavnagar and Gir Somnath), Karnataka (Dakshin Kannada and Udupi), Kerala (Ernakulam and 
Thiruvananthapuram), Maharashtra (Mumbai Sub Urban and Sindhudurg), Odisha (Kendrapara and 
Ganjam), Tamil Nadu (Chennai and Ramanathapuram), West Bengal (South 24 parganas and Purba 
Medinipur). 
9  The cases which were sub-judice were left out and sa
 mpling was done from the remaining cases for each 
state. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
 
Audit findings were shared with the respective ministries for their response. The exit 
conference was held with MoEF&CC and MoES on 16th February 2022. 
T
he draft report on this Performance Audit was issued to both MoEF&CC and MoES on 9 th 
D
ecember 2021. Despite repeated requests, till the time of finalization of this report, with the 
exception of MoES, the SICOM and Statistical Division of MoEF&CC, no responses to the draft 
report have been received from the MoEF&CC.  
  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
7
 
Chapter 2: Institutional Framework 
The three institutions responsible for the implement ation of the CRZ notification are: i) the 
National Coastal Zone Management Authority (NCZMA) at the centre ii) State/Union Territory 
Coastal Zone Management Authorities (SCZMAs/UTCZMAs) in every coastal state and union 
territory10 iii) District Level Committees (DLCs) in every dist rict that has a coastal stretch and 
where the CRZ notification is applicable. MoEF&CC and State-level Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) 11 approve projects located in CRZ areas based on the 
r
ecommendations of the SCZMAs. The monitoring and enforcement related to CRZ violations 
is carried out by concerned Pollution Control Boards (PCBs), Regional offices of MoEF&CC and 
DLCs. 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in April 1996, on the basis of a writ petition filed by Indian 
Council For Enviro-Legal Action (1993) observed that the Pollution Control Boards are not only 
overworked but simultaneously have a limited role to play in so far as it relates  to controlling 
of pollution and for the purpose of ensuring effective implementation of the notifications of 
1991, the Central Government should consider setting up State Coastal Management 
Authorities in each State or zone and also a National Coastal Management Authority under 
Section 3 of the Environment Protection Act 1986. 
Examination of the constitution of these bodies and their role in preparation of the coastal 
zone management plans revealed the following: 
2.1 Constitution of NCZMA, SCZMA & DLC 
a
)  Composition & functioning of NCZMA  
Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) constituted NCZMA on 26 
November 1998 for a period of two years for protecting and improving the quality of the 
coastal environment and preventing, abating and controlling environmental pollution in 
coastal areas. The authority was empowered for the following: 
a)  Coordination of actions of the SCZMAs and UTCZMAs under the EP Act 
b) Examination of proposal for change in classification of CRZ areas and in Coastal Zone 
Management Plans received from SCZMAs and UTCZMAs and make specific 
recommendations to the Central Government 
c) Review of cases involving violation under EP Act 1986 for coastal areas and issuing 
directions for compliance 
d) File complaints in case of non-compliance to the directions issued for cases involving 
violation.  
                                                           
10  Nine SCZMAs in Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Karna taka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and 
West Bengal, and four UTCZMAs in Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and 
Puducherry. 
11  SEIAA can grant clearance to projects below a thre shold limit in terms of EIA notification 2006. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
8
 
Audit observed that the MoEF&CC has not notified NCZMA as a permanent body with 
recommended members. It had also not specified the desired composition of NCZMA, 
inclusion of non-official members and domain expertise of the members. NCZMA is 
reconstituted every few years and in the absence of defined membership, it was functioning 
as an ad-hoc body, devoid of permanent members. The members of NCZMA comprised of 
officials from various ministries/technical bodies who carried out the duties in ex-officio 
capacity. Further, the composition of NCZMA has not been uniform over these years, 
indicating a lack of continuity of approach towards coastal conservation issues.  
Further, audit observed that in the absence of defined number of meetings to be held, it 
meets as and when necessitated (14 times during 2015-2020) to consider the proposals 
received from various SCZMAs, primarily for reclassification of CRZ areas and to update on 
the status of completion of CZMPs.  
Despite the wide range of responsibilities entrusted to it, audit observed that NCZMA in its 
meetings did not deliberate on environmental issues relating to coastal regulation zone. Audit 
also noted that the meetings held by NCZMA are demand driven with very specific agendas, 
related to either reclassification of CRZ areas or matters related to CZMP. Further, scrutiny of 
minutes of meetings held by NCZMA showed that NCZMA did not discuss any issue related to 
violations under the CRZ notification after April 2015. No reasons for the same were found in 
the records. As such, NCZMA was effectively not involved in monitoring and discussion of 
action on CRZ violations, which was one of the responsibilities assigned to it.   
b)  Absence of domain expertise in Expert Appraisal Committees  
The Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC), constituted for examination of projects by MoEF&CC, 
gives recommendations to MoEF&CC on project proposals after considering the project 
impact. Based on EAC’s recommendation, MoEF&CC either rejects the proposal or grants 
clearance with conditions that would mitigate the impacts on the coastal ecology. As per the 
requirements of the EIA Notification 2006, the EACs shall include members with requisite 
expertise and experience in the concerned field or discipline. The EACs comprises of 10-15 
members, including experts in wildlife and forestry, life science experts in floral and faunal 
management, environment quality etc.  
Audit observed that one EAC is dedicated for the appraisal of projects under CRZ notification. 
During audit, instances were found where EACs granted clearances, even though domain 
experts were not present during the project deliberations. Also, cases were noted where the 
members of EAC were less than half of the total strength during the deliberations as there 
was no fixed quorum for EAC members.  
c)  Composition & functioning of SCZMAs 
With regard to SCZMA, audit observed that SCZMAs were not reconstituted after the term 
had expired. In Karnataka, the SCZMA was not reconstituted for 11 months after the term 
expired in March 2020. Similarly, SCZMA was reconstituted after a delay of 5 and 8 months 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
9
 
respectively in Kerala and Andhra Pradesh. Instances of delayed reconstitution of SCZMAs 
were also noted in states of Goa, Odisha and West Bengal.  
As per the orders of MoEF&CC in 2005, the SCZMAs should be composed of one NGO, four 
expert members and five to six ex-officio members from various stakeholder organisations 
such as Pollution Control Boards, fisheries, environment, urban development etc. The 
Chairman of the authority should be Secretary, Environment Department of the concerned 
state. Audit observed that many SCZMAs held meetings without fulfilling the quorum 
requirements. In Karnataka, 15 out of 21 meetings during 2015-20 were held without quorum. 
Thus, SCZMAs recommended the projects without fulfilling the mandatory quorum 
requirements. 
One of the major responsibilities of SCZMA was to inquire into cases of violation of CRZ 
Notification, file complaints against violations and review these violations. Failure of SCZMA 
to discharge this responsibility effectively is discussed in Chapter 4 (Para 4.2). 
Audit also found that the SCZMAs lacked representation from relevant stakeholder bodies. 
Maharashtra SCZMA did not have participation from Department of Tourism, though it is a 
significant stakeholder organisation responsible for sustainable management of tourism 
activities in coastal areas. Goa SCZMA did not have any member from the Directorate of 
Fisheries. Goa and West Bengal SCZMAs lacked participation from respective SPCBs. Also, it 
was noted that significant stakeholder institutions did not participate in the meetings of 
SCZMAs. The members from key departments such as Urban Development Department, 
Fisheries and Revenue Department did not participate in most of the meetings held by the 
SCZMAs of Maharashtra and West Bengal.    
d)  Manpower in SCZMAs 
Audit observed that the SCZMAs in most of the coastal states did not have sufficient 
manpower to perform their mandate. In Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Odisha 
and West Bengal, the functions of SCZMAs were carried out by the officials of the State 
Department of Environment or the State Pollution Control Boards. It was found that 58 posts 
were lying vacant against the sanctioned strength of 73 posts for SCZMA and DLCs in Goa. In 
Odisha, the SCZMA was functioning with one Junior Scientist and Technical Assistant without 
any secretarial manpower.  
e)  Composition of DLCs 
As per section 6(C) of CRZ notification 2011, DLCs were to be established to assist SCZMAs in 
enforcement of the CRZ notification under the chairmanship of the District Magistrate, 
comprising of at least three representatives of local traditional coastal communities including 
from fisher folk. DLCs of Tamil Nadu lacked participation from local traditional communities. 
During examination, instances were found where the SCZMAs failed to constitute DLCs. It was 
also noted that DLCs were not reconstituted after the term had expired. In Andhra Pradesh, 
DLCs were not established in all the nine coastal districts as on March 2021. In Goa, DLCs were 
formed in 2017 after delay of six years of promulgation of the CRZ notification. DLCs of seven 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
1
0 
coastal districts of Odisha were reconstituted after a delay of two years from the expiry of its 
term. In Karnataka, the term of the DLC expired in May 2018, however DLCs are yet to be 
reconstituted in two coastal districts as of March 2021.   
Thus, the composition of these bodies and lack of manpower impeded their development into 
specialised bodies for coastal protection, as envisaged in the CRZ Notifications. 
As such, deficiencies in the constitution and functioning of NCZMA, SCZMA and DLCs would 
dilute their effectiveness in addressing challenges in ensuring sustainable development of the 
coastal areas.   
2.2  Role of agencies in preparation of Coastal Zone Management Plans 
The coastal states and the union territories were to prepare the Coastal Zone Management 
Plans (CZMPs) within a period of twenty-four months from the date of issue the CRZ 
Notification 2011. The State/UT Government CZMA were to submit the draft CZMPs to 
MoEF&CC along with its recommendations on the CZMP within a period of six months, after 
incorporating the suggestions and objections received from stakeholders.  MoEF&CC was to 
consider and approve the CZMPs within a period of four months from the date of receipt of 
the CZMPs complete in all respects.  In this regard, audit observed the following: 
(i) Delay in demarcation of High Tide Lines and delay in preparation of CZMPs 
MoEF&CC identified National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) for 
demarcation of the High Tide Line 12 (HTL) in August 2015 and the same was completed in 
O
ctober 2016. The coastal states and the Union Territories were to prepare the CZMPs within 
a period of twenty-four months from the date of issue of the CRZ Notification 2011. The 
State/UT Government CZMA were to submit the draft CZMPs to MoEF&CC along with its 
recommendations on the CZMP within a period of six months, after incorporating the 
suggestions and objections received from stakeholders. The delay in demarcation of various 
components (Hazard line and HTL) of CZMP resulted in the delay in finalisation of CZMPs by 
the states as indicated below:  
Table 2.1: Delay in finalisation of CZMPs in coastal
  states 
S. No. State  Approval by MoEF&CC 
1 Andhra Pradesh February 2019 
2 Goa Not yet approved  
3 Gujarat  February 2020 
4 Karnataka August 2018 
5 Kerala   February 2019 
6 Maharashtra  February 2019 
7 Odisha  August 2018 
8 Tamil Nadu  October 2018 
9 West Bengal  October 2018 
                                                           
12  HTL means the line on the land up to which the hig hest water line reaches during the spring tide and is 
important as it indicated the level to which the coastal waters reach.  
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
1 
In the absence of the approved CZMPs as per the CRZ notification 2011, MoEF&CC kept 
extending the validity of CZMPs prepared in 1991 from time to time, which resulted in the 
grant of CRZ clearances to various projects on the basis of 1991 CZMPs, which were not 
reflective of ground realities.  
(ii) Lack of assessment of Accuracy levels for maps 
The MoEF&CC Manual on Demarcation of HTL, LTL 13 and preparation of CZMPs prescribed 
s
pecific accuracy level14 for HTL, LTL as well as CZMPs. The accuracy of refe rence line is critical 
to ensure the accuracy of the CZMPs.  It was noticed that eight coastal states15 failed to assess 
t
he accuracy of reference lines though more than a year has lapsed since CZMP were 
approved by MoEF&CC. Furthermore, achievement of accuracy threshold is important since 
CZMP as per CRZ Notification 2019 would be prepared by updating the CZMP already 
prepared on the basis of CRZ Notification 2011. 
(iii) Lack of digitization of Cadastral Maps 
Cadastral maps were required by the local bodies for land use planning. CRZ notification, 2011 
stipulated preparation of cadastral 16 (village) level CZM maps for the use of local bodies  and 
other agencies to facilitate implementation of the CZMP.  MoEF&CC had issued guidelines 
and prescribed digitisation and integration of village cadastres to the Geographic Information 
System (GIS).  We noticed that cadastral information in respect of any coastal state except 
Goa has not been digitised and brought to the GIS.     
(iv) Failure to prepare action plans for protection of Ecologically Sensitive Areas  
MoEF&CC in 2014 directed the coastal states to prepare action plan that provides a detailed 
road map for conservation and protection of Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs), protection of 
life and property of local communities and infrastructure and to undertake developmental 
activities in a sustainable manner. The action plans were to provide adequate budgetary 
provisions and details of agencies involved in such implementation.  We noticed that all the 
coastal states failed to prepare the action plans for conserving these areas till now.  
Failure to prepare the CZMPs in time and lack of plans to conserve the ESAs would pose great 
risks to the coastal ecology. 
 
 
                                                           
13  Low tide Line which is the line on the land up to which the lowest water line reaches during the spring 
tide. 
14  90% classification accuracy at 90% confidence inte rval for classification accuracy. Positional accuracy of 1 
metre, 2 metre and 5 metre for HTL, LTL and CZMP demarcation respectively. 
15  Karnataka assessed the aaccuracy level for the ref erence lines. 
16  The cadastral maps contain survey boundaries and s urvey numbers of individual plots, the basic 
infrastructure such as roads, institutions including religious and the like, rivers/ canals/ ponds and survey 
stone locations.  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
1
2 
2.3 Lack of public outreach 
One of the primary functions of NCZMA is to hold review of cases involving violations of the 
provisions of the Environment Protection (EP) Act 17, either s uo-moto , or on the basis of 
complaint made by an individual or body, or organisation. It is also empowered to issue 
directions under Section 5 of the said Act. Further, the constitution order mandates NCZMA 
to post agenda items and minutes of the meeting on the website. 
In this connection, we observed that NCZMA did not maintain its own website. We found that 
the matters related to NCZMA are being hosted in a small window on the website 18 related 
t
o project submission and approvals for CRZ clearances. The links provided on the website to 
access the agenda or minutes do not provide any information. Further, we noticed that in the 
constitution order of NCZMAs, it is required that the Authority shall place information 
regarding the agenda and minutes of its meetings in the public domain, including through a 
designated website19. The website mentioned in the order, however, leads
  to general website 
of the MoEF&CC, where information related to NCZMA is not easily accessible. 
Absence of any active and functional website to disseminate the information related to 
NCZMA such as the agenda notes, minutes of the meetings goes against the orders of the 
constitution of NCZMA. There was no option to register complaint or report any violations in 
the coastal environment on the website in public domain. West Bengal and Tamil Nadu 
SCZMAs also do not have websites for public dissemination of information. In remaining 
states, even though websites have been created, important information such as violations, 
action taken, court cases, agenda minutes and minutes of meeting are not regularly posted. 
In absence of such facility, NCZMA/SCZMA cannot expect to receive any complaints from the 
public, thus hindering its ability to issue directions under Section 5 of the EP Act, one of its 
mandated activities.  
2.4 Conclusion 
• NCZMA as well as the SCZMAs failed in carrying out t heir primary responsibilities due 
to ad-hoc status and manpower constraints. Despite the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
directions for setting up NCZMA and SCZMAs for effective implementation of CRZ 
notifications, the NCZMA as well as the SCZMAs depended on MoEF&CC and the 
respective coastal state environment departments for funds and functionaries.  
• DLCs have not been established in Andhra Pradesh as 
 of March 2021 and there are 
delays in reconstitution of DLCs in other coastal States.  
                                                           
17  and the rules made thereunder, or any other law wh ich is relatable to the objects of the said Act 
18  http://environmentclearance.nic.in/NCZMA.aspx 
19  www.envfor.nic.in  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
3 
• Though preparation of the Coastal Zone Management Pl ans formed the primary step 
in the process of sustainable development of coastal areas, the states failed to come 
up with CZMPs in the stipulated time.  
• Though the institutions had a major part in protecti ng the coastal environment, their 
role shrunk to mere deliberations or decision making on reclassification of CRZ areas 
and recommendation for approval / grant of approval of developmental activities.  
• NCZMA and SCZMA did not maintain dedicated websites for dissemination of 
information related to their functioning.   
  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
1
4 
Chapter 3: Project Clearances under CRZ Notifications 
To implement the CRZ notifications which sought to r egulate developmental activities in the 
coastal areas, MoEF&CC classified the coastal areas into different zones based on their 
vulnerabilities. Activities in these zones were to be restricted to the activities specified in the 
CRZ notifications and industries falling in the CRZ areas had to seek prior clearance from the 
MoEF&CC/SEIAA, based on recommendations of NCZMA/SCZMA. Over the last two decades, 
development activities were granted clearances according to the provisions of the EIA 
Notification 2006 and CRZ Notification 1991/ 2011/2019 (whichever applicable). The 
clearances were accorded by the following authorities subject to recommendations given by 
the concerned SCZMAs: 
Table 3.1: Various authorities mandated to accord cl
 earance to projects in CRZ areas 
Type of Projects Authorities mandated to accord 
clearance 
For the projects attracting EIA Notification 2006 MoEF&CC or SEIAA 
For the projects not covered by the EIA Notification, 
2006 but attracting para 4 (ii) of the CRZ Notification  
MoEF&CC 
For construction projects involving more than 20, 000 
sq.m. built up area 
MoEF&CC  
For construction of building projects less than 20,000 
sq.m. built up area 
State /Town Planning authorities 
Projects are approved by MoEF&CC/SEIAA based on the Environment Impact Assessment 
(EIA) report submitted by the Project Proponents 20 (PP). EIA report consists of the 
E
nvironment Management Plan (EMP) which proposes mitigation measures to be taken by 
the PP to reduce adverse environment impact. EIA process aids the decision maker to carry 
out a cost benefit analysis of the project proposals and are the most important tool to ensure 
sustainable management of the coastal space. The main steps in the EIA process depicted in 
the (Annexure 1) in the form of a process flowchart.  
Audit studied the project clearance process of sampled projects that were accorded approvals 
by MoEF&CC /SEIAA. The audit observations are given in the succeeding paragraphs.  
3.1 Project approvals despite Inadequacies in EIA report s 
Audit observed many infirmities in preparation of EIA reports, despite which the projects 
based on these EIA reports were approved. This would affect the quality of decision making 
regarding the conservation of coastal ecosystems. Some of these are discussed below: 
(i)  Preparation of EIA by non- accredited consultants  
MoEF&CC in its instructions (March 2010) stipulated that the EIA received for a given project 
after July 2010 would be considered for Environmental Clearance, only if the EIA was 
conducted by the consultants accredited by National Accreditation Board of Education & 
                                                           
20  The agency which proposes to set up a project. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
5 
Training (NABET)/ Quality Council of India (QCI). Further, the consultants could carry out EIA 
in only those sectors for which they were accredited.  
Audit observed 21 project approvals (Annexure 2) where the EIA consultant was non-
accredited or was not accredited for the sector specific to the project. A few cases are 
illustrated as below: 
Table 3.2: Preparation of EIA by non-accredited cons
 ultants 
Project  Project 
approval 
Consultant for EIA 
Laying of Natural Gas pipeline by 
Mahanagar Gas Ltd, Maharashtra 
Accorded 
clearance 
by 
MoEF&CC 
in 2018 
The project entailed transportation and 
distribution of natural gas by laying of pipelines 
from Uran to Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation. 
The consultant JV Analytical Services, Pune was not 
accredited for Pipeline Sector. 
Construction of Hotel Building in 
Mangalore, Dakshina Kannada District 
by M/s. Motimahal Hotels Pvt. Ltd., 
Karnataka 
Accorded 
clearance 
by 
MoEF&CC 
in 2017 
The Environment Management Plan and the 
Disaster Management Plan which formed a part of 
the EIA was proposed by the project proponent 
itself and an accredited consultant was not 
appointed for this project. 
(ii)  Use of outdated baseline data for Environment Impact Assessment: 
MoEF&CC in its instructions (August 2017) had specified that the baseline data 21 should not 
b
e older than 3 years, at the time of submission of the proposal for grant of Environmental 
Clearance. Audit observed 12 project approvals (Annexure 3 ) where the EIA made use of 
outdated baseline data, where the data collected was outdated by 2 to 11 years. Some cases 
are discussed below: 
A.   The project ‘Construction of 35 Km Road coastal road from Princess Flyover to Worli 
in Mumbai’, was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC in 2017. Government of Maharashtra in 
June 2011 constituted a Joint Technical Committee (JTC) to examine various options in the 
construction of the Coastal Road in Mumbai and its impact on the environment. The JTC 
report, a component of EIA study (2016) justified the construction of road for smoother traffic 
movement based on comprehensive Traffic Studies conducted for Mumbai Metropolitan 
Region in 2008. MoEF&CC approved the project in 2017 without updating the baseline study 
and without taking into account the major infrastructural development projects in the vicinity 
during this period.  
B. The project ‘Development of the petroleum, chemical and petrochemical 
investment region’  ( PCPIR) in Dahej, District Bharuch of Gujarat  aimed to establish 
production facilities for petroleum, chemicals and petrochemicals in the region. As per the 
Terms of Reference approved by MoEF&CC in 2013, the project proponent was to carry out 
surface water quality analysis. Audit observed that the EIA report of the project included 
                                                           
21  Baseline study serves the purpose of a base refere nce against which the changes due to implementation 
of the project are measured. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
1
6 
water quality analysis data pertaining to 2010-11. The baseline data was outdated by more 
than 7 years. The project was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC in 2017.  
C.   The project ‘ Construction of  Mumbai Trans- Harbour Sea link (MTHL)’ by M/s 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC 
in 2013. As the impacts of the project on mangroves, habitat of flamingos and mudflats were 
not addressed in the EIA, the National Green Tribunal in October 2015 ordered that MoEF&CC 
needs to consider the project afresh. Audit observed that the project proponent applied to 
MoEF&CC in 2015 and the project was granted clearance in December 2015 based on EIA 
report which used the baseline data of only air, water, noise, soil quality, pertaining to the 
year 2011 while the information regarding the migratory birds visiting the area pertained to 
200822. Thus, the baseline data was outdated by four to se ven years.  
(iii)  Environment impacts not fully analyzed in the EIA 
EIA aims in evaluating the full range of effects on the environment of the proposed project 
which begins with the evaluation of ecological significance of the project area i.e., 
identification of significant biodiversity in the project area. The ecological evaluation is 
followed by a detailed impact prediction analysis.  Audit observed that MOEF&CC granted 
project approvals even though the EIA did not comprehensively address the ecological 
aspects in the project area. It was observed that in respect of 14 project clearances 
(Annexure 4 ) out of 43 sampled projects approved by MoEF&CC, the environment impact 
studies failed to identify key biodiversity in the area and did not include mitigation measures 
to alleviate the risks faced by the unique biodiversity. Some cases are illustrated below: 
Table 3.3: Cases where Environment Impact Studies fa
 iled to identify key biodiversity in the area 
Project Approved Biodiversity not assessed/mitigation 
measures not taken up 
Expansion of facilities at port 
Redi, Sindhudurg, by M/s 
Redi Port Ltd. in Maharashtra 
Accorded clearance by 
MoEF&CC in 2018 
The project area was home to 56 species of 
phytoplanktons, 27 species of freshwater fishes 
and mangroves. EIA study did not assess the 
impact of reclamation activities on these. 
Laying of Natural Gas 
pipeline, Mumbai by 
Mahanagar Gas Ltd, 
Maharashtra 
Accorded clearance by 
MOEF&CC in 2018 
The EIA study, failed to identify the presence of 
mangroves existing in the area and did not 
assess the impact of the project on these 
ecosystems. 
Deepening of Approach 
Channel by Mormugao Port 
Trust in Goa 
Accorded clearance by 
MoEF&CC in 2016 
Neither the impacts nor the mitigation plan for 
endangered species windowpane oyster 23, 
corals and associated life forms in Chicalim-
Sancole Bay, four kms away from the dredging 
area. These biotas were identified by the PP and 
formed a part of the EIA report  
                                                           
22  Assessment made by the Salim Ali Center for Ornith ology and Natural History (SACON). 
23  Which is classified as endangered species by IUCN.  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
7 
(iv)  Disaster management not fully addressed in the EIA  
EIA studies include assessment of large scale technological and sudden onset of disasters 
resulting from natural hazards to prevent and mitigate consequent environmental damage. 
The Disaster management plan (DMP) is one of the key prerequisites that the project 
proponent has to submit to the approval authorities. We observed 16 projects clearances 
(Annexure 5) by MoEF&CC that were either devoid of DMPs or did not specifically address 
disasters. A few cases are highlighted below: 
Table 3.4: Clearances granted in absence of DMPs or where they did not address specific disasters 
Project Approval Deficiency in Disaster management 
plan   
Redevelopment of Edible Oil 
Transit Terminal by Ruchi 
Infrastructure Limited at 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
Accorded clearance by 
MoEF&CC in 2018 
The project area was prone to floods 
and cyclones. The EIA did not contain 
Disaster Management Plan to 
address these issues. 
Setting up of Mini Bulk Carriers 
Handling Facility by Kolkata 
Port Trust, West Bengal 
Accorded clearance by 
MoEF&CC in 2017 
Project site was classified as a severe 
intensity seismic zone 24. As per the 
r
ecommendations of the WB SCZMA, 
the project area was prone to 
cyclonic storms. The EIA report was 
devoid of disaster management plan 
to address this. 
Development of four berths in 
Western Dock Arm in New 
Mangalore port, Karnataka 
Accorded clearance b y 
MoEF&CC in 2016 
Project site was classified as Zone III 
in accordance with the BIS, 2000, 
Seismic Map of India and had 
moderate exposure to earthquakes, 
storms, cyclones and Tsunami. The 
Disaster Management Plan did not 
envisage any mitigation measures. 
 
Thus, deficiencies in the preparation of EIA reports like use of old baseline data, EIA reports 
made by non-accredited consultants, lack of efforts to address disasters and failure to address 
the full range of ecological impacts in the EIA would weaken the process to conserve the 
coastal ecosystem.  
3.2 Deficiencies in the Environment Management Plan (EMP)  
The EMP consists of all mitigation measures under each activity of the project during 
construction, operation and the entire life cycle of the development activity, along with costs 
and aims to minimize adverse environmental impacts of the project. As per the EIA 
Notification 2006, the project proponent was required to make provisions for and earmark 
detailed budget for EMP. Also, as per the EIA Notification 2006, the EMP should include 
                                                           
24  in accordance with the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 2000, Seismic Map of India. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
1
8 
description of all the administrative aspects of ensuring that mitigation measures are 
implemented and their effectiveness monitored. 
(i)  Mitigation Activities not included in EMP 
We observed in 13 project clearances (Annexure 6) where activities forming a part of the 
mitigation plans like mangrove conservation/ replantation  biodiversity conservation plan, 
rain water harvesting plan failed to be included in the EMP as the same was left to the project 
proponent (PP) to be carried out. Also, we observed that MoEF&CC did not verify whether 
the same had been carried out by the project proponent as directed. A few cases are 
highlighted below:  
A)  The project ‘ Modification of existing iron ore terminal to handle coal at Kamarajar 
port’ Tamil Nadu was approved by MoEF&CC in 2018. MoEF&CC, while granting the 
clearance, directed the PP to design a management plan for prevention of fires. Also, the PP 
was to create an inventory of floral composition of the biota of marine and intertidal biotopes 
and draw up a detailed marine biodiversity conservation management plan. However, it was 
observed that these activities did not form a part of the EMP, and the cost of implementation 
was not worked out by the PP. 
B) The project ‘ High Speed Railway Project across CRZ areas’ in Mumbai was approved 
by MoEF&CC in 2019. While recommending this project, the EAC imposed a specific condition 
that a robust conservation and management plan for Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary with 
detailed action plan for immediate implementation in consultation with the concerned 
agency in the State. However, it was observed that the EMP was devoid of any information 
regarding the costs to be incurred for this activity.  
(ii)  We observed that in nine project clearances (Annexure 7) by MoEF&CC, the project 
proponent had neither earmarked any quantifiable funds for EMP nor provided details of the 
cost break-up of the EMP budget. Further in two cases, we observed that project proponent 
did not include cost of activities that were to be undertaken as a part of mitigation measures. 
A few instances are highlighted below: 
A) The project which entailed setting up of ‘ Sewage Treatment Plant in CRZ-I area in 
Malad, Maharashtra’ was approved by MoEF&CC in 2017. Around 36 hectares of mangrove 
cover was required to be compromised and compensatory afforestation of 180 hectares was 
required under the project. The CRZ clearance required the Project Proponent to develop a 
mangrove conservation plan in consultation with the Mangrove Foundation of Maharashtra 
or any reputed Institute for rehabilitation of mangroves. We observed that though the EMP 
stipulated removal and replantation of the mangroves, the cost for the same were not 
prescribed.  
B) Another project ‘Construction of Mumbai Coastal Road’ in Maharashtra  which was 
approved by MoEF&CC in 2017 involved reclamation of around 90 hectares. The mitigation 
measures involved installation of noise barriers all along the coastal road, appropriate 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
1
9 
handling of solid and liquid wastes and preparation of marine biodiversity conservation plan 
for the region from an institute which had an expertise in the field. However, the EMP only 
comprised of activities relating to management of air, water, soil and noise pollution around 
the project site. 
Failure of the EMP to address the full range of ecological impacts of the project would weaken 
the process of ensuring projects are not detrimental to the coastal area.  
3.3  Absence of cumulative impact studies for project cl earances  
Cumulative environmental impact assessments are significant to study the incremental 
effects resulting from the combined influence of various actions at the project area.  
Mitigation, monitoring and management of the environment can be recommended taking 
into consideration the risks from the combined effects of the projects in an area. As per the 
EIA Notification 2006, PPs were to provide information regarding the factors which could lead 
to detrimental environmental effects or which have the potential for cumulative impacts of 
the project with other existing or planned activities in the locality. We observed that in 11 
project clearances (Annexure 8), no information was given regarding the cumulative effect. 
Instances were noted where the PPs did not conduct any substantive cumulative impact 
studies.  A few cases are highlighted below. 
A.  The project ‘Laying of an effluent pipeline’ by Madhu Silica Pvt. Ltd. (MSPL) in 
Bhavnagar, Gujarat was granted clearance by MoEF&CC in 2015.  The project envisaged for 
10 MLD of effluent disposal to the marine outfall which was already disposing 20 MLD of 
effluents from Chitra Industries Association and Bhavnagar Municipal Corporation.  CPCB had 
had listed Bhavnagar as one of heavily polluted industrial clusters. Despite this, that clearance 
was granted to the project without conducting cumulative environmental impact assessment 
studies 
B.  In two projects, ‘ International Leather Complex by Adani Port and SEZ Ltd.’  and 
‘Marine disposal of treated effluent through dedicated pipeline by M/s Hyacinths Pharma 
Pvt. Ltd.’ in Andhra Pradesh, the EAC recommended (2014) a cumulative study to assess the 
impact of marine disposal, considering the presence of other marine outfalls in vicinity of the 
proposed project.  EIA studies did not include any cumulative EIA and the projects were 
approved in 2015. In another pharmaceutical project, ‘ Setting up of bulk drug unit by Divi’s 
laboratories, East Godavari District in Andhra Pradesh’ was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC 
in 2019.Though the EIA report had identified a number of marine outfalls around the project 
site, no cumulative study was undertaken by the PP. The EAC failed to address this during the 
appraisal. 
Failure to address cumulative effects of the project in light of other projects in the area would 
increase the risks to the ecology of the coastal areas. 
 
 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
0 
3.4 Non-verification of information provided by project proponents 
We observed three cases of project approvals where the MoEF&CC failed to make 
independent efforts to verify the veracity of the opinion given by private consultants. 
MoEF&CC merely relied on the information submitted by the Project Proponent with respect 
to potential ecological risks due to the project activities. It is to be noted that some of the 
project clearances were quashed later by the NGT on learning that the PP had deliberately 
suppressed vital information while requesting for clearance. 
A. The project ‘M umbai Trans-harbour sea link (MTHL) by M/s Mumbai Metropolitan 
Region Development Authority (MMRDA)’  was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC in 2013. 
The clearance as per the information provided by the project proponent indicated that the 
area of mangroves and mudflats affected under the project was 0.18 hectares. As per the 
Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority (MCZMA) recommendation, the affected 
area was 0.99 hectares (i.e. 0.06 hectares at Sewri and 0.93 hectares at Chirle). The project 
involved diversion25 of 38.58 hectares of mangrove areas along with 8.84  hectares of forest 
land. It was also observed by NGT the impacts on costal ecosystem comprising of mudflats 
and flamingos had not been evaluated by the PP. The clearance thus granted by MoEF&CC 
was quashed in October 2015 on grounds that critical information had been suppressed by 
the project proponent. The project was considered afresh and was granted clearance in 
December 2015 after addressing the requirements of NGT. 
Fig. 2: Mangroves in the Sewri area in 2018 Fig. 3: Mangroves in the Sewri area in 2021  
B.  The project ‘ Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline in the Gulf of Kutch at 
Mithapur in Gujarat by M/s Tata Chemicals Ltd’  was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC in 
2017. According to an EAC meeting, Poshitra Bay which is adjoining area to the effluent 
discharge point was known to be the last remaining feeding ground of Critically Endangered 
Dugong species26. Poshitra was also an endemic site for critically e ndangered molluscs27. The 
EIA study was silent about marine fauna around the project site and the EIA report merely 
stated that ‘marine reptiles and mammals common to the Gulf would not be affected due to 
the construction activities since they keep away from such sites.’  It was observed that 
                                                           
25   As per the appeal filed by Sh. Dileep B.Nevatia in  the NGT in 2013. 
26  The Western Indian population was confined to this  part of Gulf of Kutch. 
27  Such as S akuraeolis gujaratica and Anteaeolidiella poshitra. 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
2
1 
MoEF&CC accepted the PP’s assertion and did not recommend environmental impact analysis 
to verify the critical facts.  
C.  The project ‘ Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port in Gujarat’  involved 
reclamation of 23 hectares of intertidal mudflats. They are areas of high biological 
productivity with abundant invertebrates which provide food for migratory birds. Also, they 
function as breeding grounds for many fish species. However, the EIA study of this project 
stated that the mudflats in the project area were biologically inactive. Audit observed that 
MoEF&CC accepted the opinion of the PP and did not independently examine this issue and 
accorded clearance in 2016. 
Thus, failure on part of MoEF&CC to verify information critical to conservation of the coastal 
ecosystem would impact its conservation.  
3.5 Deficiencies in the process of Public Hearing 
P
ublic hearings provide an opportunity to those directly affected by the project to express 
their views on the environmental and the social impacts of the proposal. Public consultation 
may provide new information, improve understanding and help the EIA process to be 
transparent and fair. Public hearings are to be conducted for projects attracting EIA 
Notification 2006. We observed five cases of project approvals (Annexure 9 ) where the 
project proponent failed to adhere to various provisions regarding public consultation. 
Audit observations for some cases are as follows:  
A.  The project ‘ High-Speed Railway corridor by National High Speed Rail Corporation 
Ltd.’  approved by MoEF&CC in 2019 passed through the states of Gujarat, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Maharashtra. The Public hearing for this project was conducted in 12 locations in 
these states.  It was noticed that the notice period for public hearing in all the 12 locations 
ranged between 03 to 15 days 28, and the notice was published only in a local newsp aper29 . 
Also, in response to the issues raised during public hearing regarding the impact of vibrations 
on Greater flamingos of Thane bird sanctuary, the PP stated during the public hearing that 
the impact of vibrations caused by construction activities would have no adverse impact on 
flamingos. However, when the same concern was raised by the EAC, the PP responded that 
the impact of vibrations would be understood only when the site work starts. Mismatch 
between the information given in public hearing and that furnished during the EAC meeting 
was noted by the audit. 
B.  The project involving setting up of ‘ Mini Bulk Carriers Handling Facility at Haldia 
dock Complex, by Kolkata Port Trust’ was granted EIA clearance by MoEF&CC in 2017. It was 
observed that 46 persons apart from the SPCB and the port authorities had attended the 
public hearing. However, the EIA report did not include any of the responses from the local 
communities raised during the hearing.  
                                                           
28  The minimum notice period is 30 days. 
29  One national paper and 1 vernacular paper.  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
2 
Deficiencies in the process of public hearings which provide valuable input on impacts to local 
community, would violate the principles of equity and that of sustainable development.  
3.6 Grant of clearance to projects without giving due co nsideration to Ecologically 
Sensitive Areas (ESAs) 
During examination of the project clearances, we observed two instances where clearances 
were granted without factoring in the presence of Ecologically Sensitive Area in and around 
the project area. Some of these cases are illustrated below. 
Table 3.5: Non-factoring in the presence of Ecologic
 ally Sensitive Area in and around the project area 
Project Approval Sensitive area not considered 
Cochin Residential Development 
Project by TRIF Kochi Projects 
Accorded clearance 
by MoEF&CC in 2016 
It was observed that though Mangalavanam 
Bird sanctuary was situated within a distance 
of 400 metres from the project site, clearance 
from NBWL was required as it was located 
within 10 Kms of an ecosensitive zone around 
a wildlife sanctuary, however, the same was 
not taken. 
Mumbai Manmad pipeline project 
by Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited, Maharashtra, 
Accorded clearance 
by MoEF&CC in 2015 
It was observed that against 3.17 hectares of 
mangroves to be replanted, no replantation 
was taken up. 
Such clearances would affect the ecosystem balance of these fragile and vulnerable areas.  
3.7 Irregular Grant of clearances and recommendations by  the State Coastal Zone 
Management Authorities 
3.7.1  SCZMA exceeded authority to clear projects 
The SCZMAs are required to examine the project proposals, assess the risks posed by the 
project and potential impact of the same on the ecosystem.  As per CRZ Notification 2011, 
SCZMAs are to examine the project proposals that attract the notification and recommend 
them to approval authorities i.e., MoEF&CC or SEIAA for grant of clearance. Audit observed 
20 cases where the SCZMA usurped the powers of clearance granting authorities and granted 
clearance to the projects. A few cases have been highlighted below: 
A.  MoEF&CC stipulated (December 2012) that if a project requiring Environmental 
Clearance was located within the eco-sensitive zone around a Wildlife Sanctuary or National 
Park30, the PP was required to obtain prior clearance of N ational Board of Wildlife (NBWL).  
We observed that the project Establishment of Kundhukal Fishing Harbour in TamilNadu was 
located within 1 km from Kurusadai Island which was a part of the Core area of Gulf of Mannar 
Marine National Park (GoMMNP), in which activities can be carried out only after obtaining 
prior approval from the NBWL. However, TN SCZMA granted CRZ clearance for the project in 
2018 without the requisite prior clearance from the NBWL.  
                                                           
30  Or in absence of delineation of such a zone, within  a distance of 10 kms from its boundaries. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
2
3 
B.  SCZMA of Karnataka in 2015, granted CRZ clearance to a project with an objective to 
strengthen the 7.76 km long embankment along the left bank of estuarine stretch of 
Aghanashini River.  Though the proposed project area was in ecologically sensitive zone(CRZ 
I), it was observed that the SCZMA accorded clearance without carrying out an EIA or a 
detailed study of the environment, the aquatic life and effect on the mangroves. Also, grant 
of clearance by SCZMA was irregular as SCZMAs could only recommend for clearance as 
MoEF&CC/SEIAA are the approval bodies. 
3.7.2  Project approval without submission of mandated documents 
We observed 46 project approvals where the proponent failed to submit mandatory 
documents such as EIA reports, disaster management report, risk assessment report, CRZ 
maps, No Objection Certificate from the concerned State Pollution Control Boards for the 
projects involving discharge of effluents, sewage etc. as detailed at Annexure 10. Some cases 
are illustrated below: 
A.  The project  ‘Construction of Tuna Fishing Harbour in Tiruvottiyur, Chennai by 
Fisheries Department, Govt. of Tamil Nadu’  was granted clearance by TN SCZMA in 2017. 
The project aimed at decongesting the Chennai fishing harbour and to create facilities for 
catching, processing of Tuna Fish. the EIA report of the project proponent revealed that the 
project involved construction of Desalination plant, intake of Sea water, discharge of treated 
effluents, RO rejects into the Sea. The SCZMA in its clearance had stipulated provision of ETP 
of adequate capacity for treatment of sewage and trade effluents from vessel washing. Also, 
the unit was advised not to generate effluents from fish packing facility in the harbour. This 
necessitated the requirement of No objection Certificate from SPCBs, however, we observed 
that the same had not been taken in the extant case. 
B.  The project ‘ Additional Salt Works (2395.15 acres) located at village Kalatalav and 
Narmad, Bhavnagar district in Gujarat’ was granted clearance by SEIAA in 2017. We observed 
that the clearance was granted in the absence of mandatory documents, namely EIA Report 
including the marine and the terrestrial components, risk assessment report, Environment 
Management Plan, the CRZ map with HTL/LTL marked by the authorized agency which was 
highly irregular. 
Grant of project approvals in excess of its authority and without mandatory documents would 
weaken the checks placed in the approval mechanism and thus, hinder conservation of the 
coastal ecology.  
3.8 Modification of CRZ notification to permit specific projects 
MoEF&CC amended the CRZ notification 2011 to allow for two specific development projects 
in the state of Maharashtra. The projects are discussed as below. 
A.  The project for ‘ Construction of a Coastal Road in Mumbai by Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM)’ was accorded clearance by MoEF&CC in 2017.  The 
project required reclamation of land in CRZ-I area which was not permissible as per the 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
4 
provisions of the CRZ Notification 2011. Hence, on the basis of a recommendation received 
from SCZMA of Maharashtra, MoEF&CC amended the CRZ Notification 2011 in 2015 allowing 
for construction of road by way of reclamation in CRZ area.  
B.   A project of ‘ Construction of a  memorial and a statue of Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj, at Nariman Point, Mumbai’ along with art museum, amphitheatre, exhibition 
gallery, marine aquarium, coastal/ marine resources interpretation centre, cafeteria, 
lavatories, medical facilities, stalls and offices were also planned. Maharashtra Coastal Zone 
Management Authority recommended the project to MoEF&CC in 2014 as a special 
dispensation under the CRZ Notification 2011.  Based on the recommendation of the 
Maharashtra SCZMA, MoEF&CC in December 2014 amended CRZ Notification 2011 to allow 
for the construction of the memorial in CRZ-IV areas (which included water areas from the 
low tide line to 12 nautical miles on the seaward side) on case-to-case basis. However, audit 
examination revealed lapses in the EIA process of the project. Audit observed that the EIA 
was prepared by a non-accredited consultant and EIA lacked comprehensive ecological 
evaluation of the project site. Further, though the project attracted EIA appraisal as per the 
EIA Notification 2006, the project was exempted from public hearing and was granted 
environmental clearance in 2015. 
Modification of CRZ notifications for approval of specific projects not only sets a bad 
precedence but also ends of defeating the efforts to conserve the coastal ecosystems.  
3.9 Non-inclusion of major infrastructure project catego ries in the EIA Notification 
The provisions of CRZ notification requires the projects that attract both EIA Notification 2006 
and CRZ Notification to undergo the approval process as per the EIA Notification. However, 
the EIA Notification 2006, does not comprehensively cover all kinds of development projects.  
Audit noted that projects by nature and scale of operation attracted the comprehensive EIA 
assessment in addition to CRZ clearances. However, these projects were approved without 
undergoing the multistage process of EIA. This gap in the project approval mechanism 
resulted in awarding project clearance without Terms of Reference (ToRs) and public 
consultation. The projects are discussed below:  
A.  Mumbai Coastal Road : As construction of municipal roads do not fall in any of the 
categories of project attracting EIA Notification, the proposed project of Mumbai Coastal 
Road was granted clearance under CRZ Notification in 2017. Thus, the project which had 
otherwise significant environmental concerns bypassed the critical stage of public hearing as 
CRZ Notification does not provide for public consultation in the approval process. It is 
pertinent to note that Rule 4 (e) of the Notification envisaged that MoEF&CC may under a 
specific or general order specify the projects which require prior public hearing of project 
affected people. 
B.  Mumbai Trans-harbour Sea link (MTHL):  The project involved construction of a 22 
Km long road bridge across Mumbai Harbour between Sewri and Chirle. The bridge passed 
through CRZ-I area comprising of mudflats (at Sewri and Shivaji Nagar), mangroves and a 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
2
5 
flamingo breeding site. The project was granted environmental clearance as per EIA 
Notification 1994 and CRZ Notification 1991 in 2005. As the project work could not begin in 
the stipulated time period, the EC expired. In 2015, the project was granted clearance as per 
the provisions of the CRZ Notification 2011. The project did not attract provisions of EIA 
Notification 2006 as standalone bridges did not fall into any category of EIA Notification. This 
resulted in approving the project without ToRs and public consultation, though the project 
included land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement of local residents. It is pertinent to 
note that the standalone bridges now find a place in the Draft EIA Notification 2020, however 
the bridges with the built-up area >= 1,50,000 sq. m or 15 hectares, as this project, would be 
treated as Category B2 project and its clearance would require only two processes i.e., 
preparation of Environment Management Plan and its appraisal by SEIAA. Thus, the project 
would still not be considered in a comprehensive manner as main processes such as public 
consultation and preparation of an EIA Report would be skipped. 
 
3.10 Conclusion 
• There were deficiencies in the project approval mech anism of MoEF&CC. EIA studies 
lacked holistic ecological evaluation and failed to identify the key ecological risks and 
downplayed potential ecological impacts. Clearances were granted to the Project 
Proponents though the projects failed to address the impact on vulnerable flora and 
fauna.  
• Failure to perform cumulative impact assessment resu lted in the grant of clearances 
to projects without studying the combined effects of individual impacts in the project 
area.  
• MoEF&CC failed to ensure that the Project Proponents  earmarked budget for EMP.  
• The Ministry relied on the Project Proponent without  carrying out independent 
verification of the information furnished by the Proponent/EIA studies.  
• There were cases where MoEF&CC amended the CRZ notif ication to facilitate for 
approval of individual projects. These modifications were made without conducting 
any technical studies on the repercussions of the same to ecosystems and impacted 
the entire coastline.  
• As such, the process of grant of clearances for sett
 ing up projects could not ensure 
fully that the proposed projects would not have a detrimental impact on the coastal 
ecology.  
  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
6 
Chapter 4: Post clearance monitoring and enforcement of CRZ Notifications 
Monitoring is an essential component for sustainabil ity of any developmental project. It forms 
an integral part of any environmental assessment process. Monitoring of the project after its 
approval helps in verifying the outcome of the implemented mitigation measures and also to 
alter the mitigation measures in case of identification of problems.  
4.1  Effectiveness of post clearance monitoring 
We examined the effectiveness of post clearance mechanism of the approved projects 
through site verification, and examination of the compliances to the conditions as stipulated 
by SCZMAs as well as the clearances granted by MoEF&CC. Regional Offices of the MoEF&CC 
have been assigned the responsibilities for monitoring compliances to the conditions 
stipulated in the clearances. PPs are to submit half yearly compliance reports and annual 
environmental statements to the Regional Offices. SPCBs are to monitor the compliance to 
the conditions while granting ‘Consent to Establish/ Operate’. Our observations in this regard 
are given in succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1.1  Non-compliance to conditions stipulated in the Clearances  
We observed that in 18 projects (Annexure 11), the Project Proponent failed to comply with 
conditions mentioned in the Clearance as well as the conditions stipulated by SCZMA while 
recommending for the clearance. A few cases are illustrated below. 
A.  The proposed project of  Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal, 
Karnataka Port by Tropicana Liquid Storage Pvt. Limited  was accorded clearance by 
MoEF&CC in 2015. Audit observed that oil spillage contingency plan as required under the 
clearance was not formulated and dedicated boats were not deployed to avoid oil spillage, as 
specified while granting approval. There was no computerized SCADA (Supervisory Control 
and Data Automation) system at the project site to identify leakages in the pipeline and to cut 
off the pumping immediately. The project proponent had not set up separate environmental 
management cell for effective implementation of the stipulated environmental safeguards as 
instructed by MoEF&CC while granting clearance.  
B.  The proposed project of Integrated Cooum River Eco-restoration Project by Chennai 
Rivers Restoration Trust, Tamil Nadu  was granted clearance by MoEF&CC in 2017. While 
recommending clearance for this project, TN SCZMA allowed for de-siltation of 5,08,177 cu.m.  
silt of the Cooum River. Also, MoEF&CC imposed condition that the silt generated through 
dredging was to be scientifically disposed outside the CRZ area. Bunding and landscaping 
changes were also prohibited. It was observed that the project proponent carried out 
desiltation of 8,94,757 cu.m, and only 40 percent of the silt generated was sent to dump 
yards. The remaining silt was deposited on the river banks, leading to formation of bunds that 
affected the landscape. 
 C.  A proposed project of Cochin Residential project by TRIF, Kochi Projects Pvt Ltd. In 
Kerala was approved by MoEF&CC in 2016. As per the EC, no development was to be carried 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
2
7 
out within 0 to 200 metres from the High tide Line. It was observed that the entire project 
was carried out within 200 metres from HTL. The CRZ Notification 2011 permitted drawl of 
groundwater only when done manually through ordinary wells for drinking requirements, 
horticulture and fisheries, and where no other source of water was available. Audit noticed 
that water was drawn from a tubewell which met the entire water requirement for 
construction related activities.  
D.  A proposed project Mumbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by MMRDA , Maharashtra  
approved in 2016, aimed to divert 47.41 ha of forest land. MoEF&CC granted clearance while 
imposing the condition that the Government of Maharashtra should create and maintain 
alternate habitat for the avifauna whose nesting trees were cleared under the project. 
Artificial bird nests made out of the eco-friendly material was to be used in the area including 
forest area and human settlements adjoining the forest area being diverted for the project. 
We observed that although a total of 669 number of trees were removed for the project, no 
alternate habitat for the affected avifauna was created. 
Thus, MoEF&CC and its regional offices failed to ensure that the project proponents adhere 
to the conditions prescribed in the clearances. Non-compliance to these key conditions have 
an adverse impact on the surrounding ecosystem of the project as well as indicate inefficient 
monitoring on part of the MoEF&CC and its regional offices. 
4.1.2  Non-submission of mandatory reports  
The post clearance mechanism for the projects which are granted clearance under EIA/CRZ 
Notification mandate submission of half-yearly compliance reports in respect of the 
stipulated terms and conditions of the environmental clearance. These are to be submitted 
to the concerned Regional Offices of MoEF&CC and form the basis for monitoring by different 
authorities.  
(i)  Non-submission of half-yearly reports 
Audit observed that the project proponents in 13 cases (Annexure 12) granted clearance by 
MoEF&CC failed to periodically submit these reports. MoEF&CC, while granting clearance 
stipulates a condition that it has the right to revoke the clearance in the event of non- 
compliance to the provisions of the notifications. However, audit could not find any case 
where MoEF&CC initiated action on the project proponent in this regard. 
MoEF&CC assured (February 2022) that the ministry is planning for online submission of the 
half yearly monitoring reports by the project proponents. 
(ii)  Non submission of annual environment statements 
As per the provisions of the notification, the proponent has to submit an annual 
environmental statement to the concerned State Pollution Control Board. It was noticed that 
this statement dealt with generic issues of air and water quality and, did not contain the 
details specific to the project. It was also observed that the mandatory annual environmental 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
2
8 
statement was not furnished for 17 projects (Annexure 13 ) out of 43 sampled projects 
granted by MoEF&CC during 2015-20.  
(iii)  Consent to Operate/ Establish  not obtained before commencement   
As per Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974, all industries 
and local bodies discharging any domestic sewage or trade effluent into water, stream, well, 
sewer or on land are required to obtain Consent to Establish (CTE) from the State Pollution 
Control Board for establishment of any new unit or before carrying out construction activities. 
The units are also required to obtain Consent to Operate (CTO) before commencing 
commercial production. 
We found that 13 projects in the CRZ areas (Annexure 14) were observed to have commenced 
without obtaining any CTE or CTO from the concerned State Pollution Control Board. Further, 
no project proponent was penalized though contravention of Section 25 of this Act was an 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not less than one year and six months but 
which may extend to six years and with fine. 
As such, the system of post monitoring of clearances suffered due to lack of necessary 
information from the project proponents regarding the environment impact of the projects. 
Further, audit noticed instances where the clearance conditions were not followed by the 
project proponents, indicating failure of MoEF&CC and its regional offices to monitor 
effectively. These infirmities would impair the ability of regulatory agencies from noticing and 
stopping any negative impacts on the coastal environment as a result of the approved 
projects.  
4.2  Enforcement of CRZ provisions  
CRZ Notification 2011 authorises SCZMAs to recommend grant of approvals to permissible 
projects and ensure compliance of their orders, identify violations, if any and direct the 
concerned authorities for follow up action. Audit reviewed the enforcement of CRZ provisions 
by SCZMAs and DLCs and observed instances where SCZMAs failed to take action against CRZ 
violations. Also, the DLCs failed to identify violations and report the same to SCZMAs. Audit 
reviewed the status of sample CRZ violations 31 in the states and observations in this regard 
are detailed below.  
4.2.1 Irregular development activities in CRZ 1 areas 
(i)  Construction on Olive Ridley Turtle Nesting Sites 
Audit observed irregular construction of a jail complex in CRZ 1A area located at Bangar in 
Puri district, Odisha. The construction was inside Balukhand-Konark Wildlife Sanctuary, which 
                                                           
31  Cases of violation reported in the para are of two  kinds. First is reported violations, wherein a complaint 
was made to SCZMAs and audit conducted a joint physical verification, which is mentioned in report, 
wherever applicable. Second type are the unreported violations where audit have used GIS tools to 
compare the satellite images of irregular construction with approved CZMPs for the place to conclude if 
they are in prohibited zones. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
2
9 
also has Olive Ridley Turtle nesting sites on the beaches. The figures below indicate the 
approved CZMP for the area and the satellite images obtained by audit for the area in 
December 2020. 
 
Fig. 4: CZMP for the coast around Balukhand sanctuar y and Turtle reserve, indicating CRZ 1A zone in green 
shade and irregular construction is marked in red  
Further, satellite images obtained by audit below in dicates that there was no construction 
in the area in 2011. 
 
Fig. 5: Satellite Image (October 2011) of area befor e construction of jail complex showing empty land within 
the red marked area 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
3
0 
 
Fig. 6: Satellite Image (December 2020) of jail comp lex at Bangar within the red marked area 
(ii)  Irregular construction of racetrack in CRZ 1 a rea in Pattipulam, Tamilnadu  
Audit observed that a racetrack was constructed at Pattipulam, Chennai in CRZ 1 area. The 
figures below indicate the approved CZMP for the area and the satellite images obtained by 
audit for the area in March 2021. As per the approved CZMP, the area where racetrack is 
constructed (marked in red) falls partly in CRZ 1A area and partly in No Development Zone 
(NDZ). The satellite images obtained by audit from March 2021 indicates the presence of 
irregular construction of the racetrack in the restricted area. 
   
Fig. 7: Approved CZMP of Pattipulam area indicating 
 CRZ 1A zone in green shade and NDZ in yellow shade 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
1 
 
Fig. 8: Satellite image (March 2021) of racetrack co nstructed in CRZ 1A and NDZ area 
4.2.2  Irregular activities in No Development Zone 
a
)  Irregular construction of Beach Resort in No Development Zone  
A complaint was received at TN SCZMA about the construction of a resort (Golden Bay 
Resorts) in No Development Zone in Kuvathur area of Kanchipuram district. The CZMPs 
approved as per CRZ notification 2011 defines No Development Zone as area upto 200 
metres32 from HTL on the landward side in case of seafront a
 nd 100 metres along tidal 
influenced water bodies or width of the creek whichever is less. Audit assessed the follow up 
action of TN SCZMA and found that DLC, Kanchipuram district visited the resort and reported 
to TN SCZMA that the resort has been in operation since 2013 without a valid Consent to 
Establish Certificate. It was also reported that the resort had been discharging untreated 
sewage to the sea.  TN SCZMA issued show cause notice to the resort in 2017. It was noted 
that no further follow up action was taken by TN SCZMA as on March 2021. Audit obtained 
satellite images of the area and compared it with the approved CZMP, as shown below. 
                                                           
32  Revised to 50 meters from the HTL, or width of the  creek whichever is less, along the tidal influenced 
water bodies, as per CRZ notification 2019. 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
3
2 
Fig. 9: Approved CZMP for the area with NDZ indicated in yellow shade 
 
Fig. 10: Satellite Image (October 2021) of the resor t in No Development Zone 
During JPV by the audit team and relevant officials from the State in March 2021, the presence 
of the resort as well as a boat jetty was confirmed.  
(b)  Irregular construction of Jetty extension in No Development Zone  
Gujarat SCZMA received a complaint in June 2018 about an irregular construction in 
Devbhumi, Dwarka and instructed the Gujarat SPCB for site inspection. Gujarat SPCB 
confirmed the illegal construction of a 30-meter-long jetty and instructed the violators to 
remove the construction. Audit obtained satellite images of the area as shown below: 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
3 
 
Fig. 11: Satellite image (November 2015) of area wit hout jetty extensions in yellow marked region 
 
Fig. 12: Satellite image (September 2021) of the jet ty extensions 
From the images above, it is observed that even thou gh the Gujarat SPCB instructed the 
violators to remove the construction in 2018, the structure still remains even as of 2021, 
indicating ineffective follow up on part of concerned authorities. 
c)   Encroachment and CRZ violations in Vembanad Lake region 
Vembanad lake33 is the largest lake in the state of Kerala and is d esignated as Critically 
Vulnerable Coastal Area. Approved CZMP for the region identifies the islands in the lake 
ecosystem as No Development Zone. The Vembanad ecosystem is under developmental 
pressures from irregular reclamation and construction in and around the lake area.  
Kerala SCZMA in June 2018 received a complaint about construction of a resort in 
Nediyathuruth island in Panavally panchayat, Alleppey district. As per approved CZMP for the 
region, the island is designated as No Development Zone. The Hon'. Supreme Court in January 
2020 declaring the resort as encroachment in the lake region, directed to demolish the resort. 
It was found that the resort is yet to be demolished. While analysing the satellite images of 
                                                           
33  With an area of 2033 sq. kms. and a maximum length  of 96.5 km, it is the second largest Ramsar site in 
India 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
3
4 
the project area, audit identified another resort, Grand Ayur Island in Anjuthuruthu island in 
Panavally panchayat, Alleppey district. These islands formed a part of No Development Zone 
in the lake region under CRZ notification. The figures below indicate the approved CZMP for 
the island area (NDZ indicated in yellow shade) and satellite images obtained by audit for the 
area indicating irregular construction in No Development Zone.  
 
Fig. 13: Approved CZMP of the area on left and satel lite image from 2021 for the area on right 
d
)  Irregular development activities in Akkulam lake region 
Akkulam lake in Trivandrum is a wetland ecosystem in Thiruvananthapuram, that has 
continuously been threatened by reclamations and construction activities34 in the lake region. 
A
udit observed that based on a complaint received by Kerala SCZMA about illegal 
constructions and reclamation in the Akkulam lake region, Kerala SCZMA directed Municipal 
Corporation of Thiruvananthapuram to furnish an Action Taken Report (ATR), to which 
response is still awaited. DLC conducted a site verification September 2020 and found 
irregular construction in the region.  While analysing the satellite imagery of the region, audit 
found irregular construction of a residential building on the HTL. We observed that the 
residential complex is constructed around the HTL and an approximate area of 1.48 Hectares  
falls in the intertidal zone (seaside from HTL). The images for the same are given below: 
                                                           
34  T he MoEF&CC conducted a study on Akkulam lake in 2017 and observed that reclamation and 
modification on many parts of backwaters resulted in the shrinkage of wetland area. Kerala State Remote 
Sensing and Environment Centre (KSREC) reported construction of public offices within the lake region. 
These activities have resulted in shrinkage of wet land area of 28.49 hectares from 1967 to 2020.  


Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
5 
Fig. 14: Site image in 2021 indicating approx. 1.48 hectares construction in intertidal zone (HTL in purple shade) 
e)  Construction of a mall in No Development Zone 
M
/s Lulu International Shopping Mall is constructed in the NH Bypass Road near Aakkulam in 
Thiruvananthapuram. JPV conducted by the audit revealed that the portion of land adjacent 
to the boundary line with nearby TS Canal falling under NDZ area has been reclaimed and 
concrete beams and basins for fixing high mast lights were constructed. A stone wall with an 
average height of three metres with a wire mesh fencing on the top of it was constructed in 
the CRZ area adjacent to TS canal, as shown in the following photos:   
  
Fig. 15: Images indicating reclamation and construction of stone wall in No Development Zone 
f)  Illegal Road construction in No Development Zone in Udupi district, Karnataka 
A complaint was received by Karnataka SCZMA about illegal construction of a road in the 
islands of Shambhavi River. During the site inspection, it was observed that a road and two 
bridges were constructed without obtaining CRZ clearance. Further, it was reported that 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
3
6 
mangrove plantations were destroyed for construction of the road. Though show cause notice 
was issued to the state works department, no follow up action has been taken by Karnataka 
SCZMA.  The presence of the road was verified by the audit team during JPV.  Audit obtained 
satellite images of the site which clearly show the road as depicted below: 
 
Fig. 16: Satellite image of the road constructed in the middle of the island (No Development Zone)  
g)  Irregular approval of a commercial project in wetland area of Vembanad Lake by 
M/s TRIF, Kochi 
The proposed project of residential complex by TRIF was recommended for clearance by EAC 
of MoEF&CC in September 2011. MoEF&CC raised query to Kerala SCZMA about the nature 
of the land and the clearance was kept in abeyance. The report of Kerala SCZMA declared the 
project area as CRZ area and that reclamation cannot be carried out for commercial activity 
in the project area, which is a part of wetland. Kerala SCZMA conveyed the same stance when 
MoEF&CC in 2012 sought the status for the nature of land.  In 2016, clearance was granted 
for the project by MoEF&CC. During audit examination, it was found that the project 
proponent started construction in 2013, much before the grant of clearance. It was noted 
that MoEF&CC granted approval to the project though the project area falls in notified 
wetland area in violation of the provisions of CRZ notification 2011 as well as Wetland 
notification 2010. 
h)  Discharge of untreated effluents by coastal aquaculture units in Guntur district, 
Andhra Pradesh 
Complaints were received by Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board (APPCB) in 2018 about 
discharge of wastewater from the prawn seed hatcheries namely M/s Gayathri Hatchery-I and 
M/s Surya Vamsi Shrimp Hatcheries 35 operating on shore area causing contamination of 
c
oastal waters. APPCB while issuing show cause notice, directed the firms to stop further 
discharge of untreated wastewater outside the premises within three days. Audit conducted 
a JPV with APPCB at Gayatri hatcheries in August 2021 and found that the hatcheries 
continued to discharge untreated effluents directly into the sea (CRZ IV).   
                                                    
        
35  M/s Gayathri Hatcheries-I, Pandurangapuram Village , Adavi Panchayat of Bapatla Mandal, Guntur District.  


Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
7 
We further observed that APPCB issued show cause notices (March 2018) and closure orders 
(May 2018) as they did not obtain/renew consent. The firms applied (May/June 2018) for 
CTOs by claiming ignorance of law and the APPCB granted/renewed consents revoking 
(May/June 2018) the closure orders subject to condition that they shall not discharge 
untreated effluents outside the industry premises under any circumstances. Audit obtained 
satellite images of the area which showed the existence of many hatcheries which were 
releasing their effluents into the sea. 
 
Fig. 17: Surrounding area of Gayatri Hatchery on Kot
 hapeta Rural Beach side in East Godavari district, 
indicating direct release of effluents in the sea by many other hatcheries 
We further examined the aerial imagery of the Konapapapeta beaches in East Godavari 
district and observed that Konapapapeta beach also has clusters of hatcheries and shrimp 
farms that release effluents directly into sea as seen in the satellite image from March 2021 
below: 
 
Fig. 18: Presence of many hatcheries on coastline an d open discharge of the effluent into sea by hatcheries on 
Konapapapeta beach, East Godavari district. 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
3
8 
(i)  Irregular operation of Ice plants and Fish Packing Units in CRZ areas of Kanyakumari 
district, Tamil Nadu 
Setting up and operation of ice plants in CRZ areas require CRZ clearance. We noted cases of 
ice plants operating in Kanyakumari district without obtaining CRZ clearances. During JPV, it 
was observed that a fish packing unit was operating within the premises of an ice plant. The 
activities were irregularly granted clearance by DLC, Kanyakumari. TN SCZMA in August 2020 
directed DLC, Kanyakumari to take penal action against the violation and report on the same. 
It was noted that DLC is yet to take any action in this regard till March 2021.  
   
Fig. 19: Pictures taken during JPV for unauthorised operation of Ice plant and Fish Packing unit 
Another instance of irregular operation of an ice pl ant was noted in Kanyakumari district, 
where the plant discharged wastewater directly to the sea. It was also found that the ice plant 
was drawing ground water, violating provisions of CRZ notification. Though TN SCZMA 
directed DLC to take penal action, DLC was yet to take any action in this regard.  
      
Fig. 20: Pictures taken during JPV for open discharge of wastewater to sea by the Ice plant  
4.2.3  Storage of impermissible products in port areas  
As per the CRZ Notification 2011, 15 specified petroleum and chemical products were 
permitted for storage in CRZ area. While examining the compliances to the terms of clearance 
granted, we observed that in two cases, impermissible items were allowed to be stored in the 
CRZ area: 
A.  Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port by Adani Petronet Port Private Limited 
(APPPL) was granted clearance in October 2016. The project involved expansion of cargo 
handling capacity along with reclamation of 23 hectares back- up area to store and handle dry 
multi-purpose cargo (steel and silica sand) and development of additional coal stockpile l. 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
3
9 
Development of a storage area for the aforesaid dry bulk cargo in the intertidal zone (CRZ-IB) 
and development of coal stockpile in CRZ- III zone in the instant case was in contravention to 
the CRZ Notification 2011 as none of the aforementioned items were included in the list of 
permissible products of the notification.  
B.  Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal at Karwar by Tropicana 
Liquid Storage (P) Limited was granted CRZ clearance in March 2008. We observed that the 
facility was used to store bitumen by the project proponent, which does not figure in the list 
of the petroleum products permitted for storage in the port areas as per the CRZ Notification 
1991 and 2011. Even though the fact that the facility was being used to store bitumen was 
indicated in the compliance report submitted by the PP, no action was taken against the 
violation. Though storage of bitumen in CRZ area is now allowed under the new CRZ 
Notification 2019, the fact remains that EIA Report prepared then for seeking CRZ clearance 
had evaluated only the impacts of storing and transferring liquid petroleum in the tanks.  
Thus, SCZMAs and DLCs did not proactively monitor the violations in coastal space and 
irregular constructions in restricted CRZ zones were carried out.  
MoEF&CC stated (February 2022) that information related to violations are of utmost 
importance to the Ministry and assured that the recommendations would be taken up at the 
highest level of the Ministry. 
 4.3  Conclusion 
• Post clearance monitoring of the project was ineffec tive as mandatory reports such as 
half yearly compliance reports and annual environmental statements were not being 
furnished by project proponents. Project proponents did not adhere to the conditions 
prescribed in the clearance.  
• SCZMAs did not take proactive action against the CRZ
  violations and in the instances 
where they acted upon, follow up action was ineffective.  With help of GIS tools, we 
identified unreported violation such as irregular constructions in CRZ 1A zone and No 
Development Zone.  
• NCZMA did not monitor the activities of SCZMA relate d to monitoring and follow up 
of violations. Lack of monitoring and enforcement actions would result in providing 
ineffective deterrence for the destruction of coastal ecology by development projects.  
 
  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
0 
Chapter 5: Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
Audit sampled two coastal districts from each of the  nine coastal states to assess the health 
of vulnerable and fragile marine ecosystems due to impacts of anthropogenic activities. 
Observations in this regard are discussed below. 
5.1 Threats to biodiversity 
(
i)   Threats to Corals in the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve, Tamil Nadu 
Coral reefs are referred to as tropical forests of the ocean as they provide food, protection, 
shelter and breeding ground to nearly one-quarter of all the known marine species globally. 
They are classified as Ecologically Sensitive Areas under CRZ Notification 2011.  
The key coastal habitats in the Gulf of Mannar are coral reefs, sea grass and mangroves. These 
habitats are some of the most diverse and valuable ecosystems on Earth. In 1989, the entire 
Gulf of Mannar area covering 10,500 sq. km was declared as the Gulf of Mannar Marine 
Biosphere Reserve by Government of India. The Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve Trust 
(GoMBRT) was formed in 2002 to implement the UNDP-GEF (United Nations Development 
Program – Global Environmental Facility) funded project on the conservation and sustainable 
use of the marine resources of the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve. After completion of 
the project in 2012, the Government of Tamil Nadu took over the functions of the trust from 
2013. The following deficiencies were noticed: 
a)  Absence of baseline data for marine environment at the Biosphere Reserve   
Audit observed that no baseline data for monitoring the status of coral reefs had been 
maintained at the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve till 2018. It was only in 2019 that a 
Baseline survey of the Coastal habitats and associated biodiversity between Rameshwaram 
and Kanyakumari in the Gulf of Mannar was conducted by a research institute 36 that was 
c
entrally sponsored by the MoEF&CC under the National Adaptation Fund for Climatic 
Change.  
b)   Alien invasive algae species at Biosphere Reserve 
Smothering effects of the Kappaphycus alvarezi, an algal species introduced for commercial 
cultivation37 in 1990, on live corals in Gulf of Mannar were repo
 rted in 2007-08. An alarming 
increase in the percentage of dead corals in all four group of islands in the Gulf of Mannar 
was noticed during 1998-2014. Joint Physical Verification of Coral reefs in the island of 
Thalayari (Keelakarai group of islands, Ramanathapuram) with officials of the Wildlife Range, 
Keelakarai, confirmed this situation.  
                                                           
36  Named Suganthi Devadason Marine Research Institute  at Thoothukudi, Tamilnadu. 
37  An alternative livelihood income generation for th e coastal community. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
4
1 
 
 
  Fig. 21: Dead coral covered with algae 
A
udit observed that out of the 100 sq. km coral area in Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park, 
the department removed these seaweeds only to an extent of two sq. km (2% of the total 
reef area) during 2015-16 to 2019-20 as targeted in the management action plans for the 
Conservation and Management of Corals Scheme of MoEF&CC. Also, despite the serious 
reduction and degradation of the live coral cover, no viable strategy to mitigate the 
propagation of the invasive species had been devised or implemented by the Department of 
Forest, Tamil Nadu.  
(ii)  Absence of a monitoring system for coral reefs, Goa 
As per the World-Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) India survey of coral reefs at Grande Island in 
2018, one of the few coral sites in Goa, a long-term periodic monitoring system for the 
protection and conservation of the reefs was required. The corals are classified as CRZ IA. We 
however observed that: 
• The Forest Department had not done any mapping or id
 entification of the areas 
inhabited by corals and as a result, a management action plan for their protection was also 
not prepared. 
• No guidelines from Forest Department or Goa CZMA wer e issued to the Department 
of Tourism or operators of waterborne vehicles who carry out water sports activities around 
Grande Island, with an aim to preserve the Corals in the area.  
• WWF-India, in its survey, had found rare marine spec ies in these reefs. However, no 
guidelines for the fishing activities around these reefs were issued by any state government 
authority to the Fisheries Department which regulated fishing activities in Goa with an aim to 
protect and conserve such species.  


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
2 
(iii)  Olive Ridley Sea Turtles in Goa 
Olive Ridley turtles are legally protected 
under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection 
Act, 1972, which prohibits trade in the 
turtle products. Olive Ridley is the only 
species of sea turtle known to nest at the 
beaches of Goa. There are four designated 
nesting sites38 as per the CRZ Notification. 
A
s per CRZ notification 2011, management 
plans for turtle nesting sites was required 
to be prepared. Audit observed that
 
 
 
Fig. 22: Olive Ridley Turtles39 
management plans for these sites were not prepared. Further, as per the provisions of the 
notification, no development activities were permitted in these turtle nesting sites. However, 
we observed shacks being allowed at the nesting sites of Agonda , Morjim and Mandrem 
beaches, as shown in the pictures below- 
  
Fig. 23: Wooden huts at Agonda Beach Fig. 24: Beach beds in intertidal zone (turtle nesting 
sites) at Morjim Beach 
 ( iv)  Coastal Sand Dunes in Goa 
A coastal sand dune is a mount, hill or ridge of sand formed mainly by aeolian action that lies 
behind the beach affected by tides. They provide natural coastal protection against storm 
surge and high waves, preventing coastal flooding and structural damage, as well as providing 
important ecological habitat. The Coastal Regulation Zone, 2011 declared the sand dunes as 
CRZ I(a) areas and dressing or altering the sand dunes for beautification, recreation has been 
declared as prohibited activities within the CRZ.  
To carry out mapping of coastal sand dunes along the Goa coast, on the request of the Goa 
Coastal Zone Management Authority (Goa SCZMA), the National Centre for Sustainable 
Coastal management (NCSCM) Chennai prepared a ‘Sand Dune Report’. The report assessed 
                                                           
38  Mandrem and Morjim beaches in North Goa and Galgib ag and Agonda beaches in South Goa 
39  Source: K Sivakumar, Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun  


Report No. 4 of 2022 
4
3 
the collective length of sand dunes demarcated across Goa 40. It also depicted that 
c
onstruction of hotels/resorts/guesthouses, dune reclamation for making approach road to 
the beaches, and landscaping were the major causes of destruction of sand dunes of Goa, 
prominently along the coastal stretches of Betul to Cansaulim, Sinquerium to Baga, Arambol, 
and middle of Morjim.  
Audit observed that Goa SCZMA despite existence of sand dunes, gave permissions for 
infrastructure development and construction of hotel and residential houses in these areas. 
Some of these instances are highlighted below: 
A.  Goa SCZMA, in March 2015, granted recommendation to Chakshu Properties Private 
Limited in for construction of a hotel in Morjim Village, Pernem Taluka, Goa . The PP 
approached Goa SCZMA again in December 2015 with a revised plan for construction of villas 
instead of hotel consisting of two floors (Ground and First Floor). Despite the fact that the 
proposed site was a pristine beach area having sand dunes (three to four metres in height) 
covered with vegetation, Goa SCZMA recommended the revised proposal. 
B.  A proposed project for Construction of  four lane National Highway 17 B from 
Varunapuri to Sada Junction (Mormugao) near Baina beach  was recommended by the Goa 
SCZMA in 2015 despite observations of the site inspection team which stated that Baina beach 
contained sand dunes covered with vegetation and that it was prone to annual cycles of 
erosion which made it ecologically sensitive. The report also stated that digging of huge pits 
for the foundation of several columns was bound to disturb the ecological stability of a 
sensitive beach. 
During a JPV, it was observed that the sand dune was cut and flattened to make space for 
new beach shacks as shown below: 
Fig. 25: Destruction of sand dunes for new beach sha cks 
                                                           
40  22.62 km (99 patches); with 6.90 km of the coastal stretch (24 patches) in North Goa and 15.72 km of the 
coastal stretch (75 patches) in South Goa 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
4 
C. The Sand Dune report also revealed sand dune erosion  along the coastal stretches of  
 
Morjim, Ashwem and Colva beaches. The South 
Goa Collector, under the provisions of the 
Motor Vehicle Act, issued directions in 2018 
according to which movement of all kinds of 
motor vehicles were prohibited on beaches. 
However, audit observed that there was no 
monitoring to stop the vehicle movement on 
the beaches as vehicles were seen 
plying/parked on the beaches at Utorda and 
Morjim Beach (which is also designated Turtle 
Nesting Site). 
Fig. 26: Motor vehicles plying on beaches
 
(v)  Mangroves 
Mangroves are salt tolerant plant community found in tropical and  
sub-tropical inter tidal regions and are unique eco-systems which provide breeding and 
feeding ground for many aquatic species. Mangrove forests have also proved to be capable 
of acting as a protective belt against the tsunami waves and as such require effective 
conservation and scientific management intervention. They are designated as Ecologically 
Sensitive Areas (ESAs) under CRZ I under the CRZ notifications.  
(a)  Gaps in the Mangrove conservation efforts in Goa 
In order to protect the mangroves that occupied about 2000 hectares of area 41, the 
Go
vernment of Goa in 2011, notified 14 Mangrove species as protected species and their 
cutting and felling was banned. We, however, noted several instances of cutting of mangroves 
and other issues in conservation of mangroves in the state as detailed under: 
• Goa SCZMA, in 2015, granted permission to the propos al of cutting of 247 mangroves 
for the Construction of bridge over river Mandovi (Atal Setu) by M/s Goa State 
Infrastructure Development Corporation. One of the conditions in the permission stipulated 
that the project proponent was to carry out plantation of the same number of mangroves on 
completion of the project. However, the replantation had not been carried out by the 
proponent. 
• Goa SCZMA, in 2017 granted permission to the proposa l of cutting of 69 Mangrove 
trees for Construction of bridge across river Zuari on NH-17 by M/s Public Works 
Department, Panaji, Goa.  The permission envisaged a condition that the project proponent 
should deposit with the Mangrove Society of India, an amount for the plantation of the 
mangroves. However, it was observed that mangrove replantation had not been carried out. 
 
                                                           
41  Along the estuaries of Zuari, Mandovi, Terekol, Ch apora, Sal, Talpona, Galgibag and Cumbarjua Canal. 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
4
5 
(b)  Failure of Gujarat SCZMA to restore mangrove destruction in Kutch, Gujarat 
Deendayal Port Trust (DPT)42 a major port of India, owned by the central governm ent, leased 
out areas (CRZ-I) to salt manufacturers for extraction of salt.  
Audit noticed that though salt manufacturing was a permitted activity as per the CRZ 
Notification 2011, CRZ clearance for undertaking salt works in the area was not sought by the 
lessees. In 2018 Gujarat SCZMA received a complaint regarding large-scale destruction of 
mangroves at Nani Chirai and Moti Chirai areas of Bhachau Taluka, Kutch. Further, Kachchh 
Camel Breeders Association (KCBA), Bhuj besides making a complaint to DLC, filed an appeal 
before National Green Tribunal (NGT) regarding mangrove destruction in 2018. On the 
directions of NGT, Gujarat Pollution Control Board (Gujarat SPCB) and the Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) conducted site inspection and prepared a report which revealed 
substantial work of bunding and blocking of creeks which restricted the flow of tidal water to 
the mangroves, thus, resulting in their destruction. On the orders of NGT, Gujarat SCZMA 
carried out assessment by remote sensing (July 2020) which revealed that the bunds 43 had 
b
een constructed in the Jangi area and nearly 32 hectares 44 of mangroves had been 
d
estroyed. The destruction of these mangroves in CRZ I areas not only proved to be costly to 
ecosystems like mangroves but also posed threat of extinction to unique breed of “Kharai” 
camels which were dependent on the mangroves in the area for their food. The decrease in 
mangrove areas as seen in satellite photos obtained by audit is shown below:  
 
      Fig. 27: Mangrove area (indicated in red shade) before allocation of lease in 2016 
                                                           
42  E rstwhile Kandla Port Trust.  
43  With a total length of 5,271 metres. 
44  Total mangrove area before allocation of lease in 2016 was 159.26 ha which was reduced to 127.34 ha in 
the year 2020 due to creation of bunds. 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
6 
  
      Fig. 28: Mangrove area (indicated in red shade) reduced to 127.34 hectares in the year 2020 
The non- compliances as noticed by Audit are as foll ows: 
• As per the NGTs order (September 2019), all obstruct ions in the creeks were to be 
removed and continuous flow of estuarine water in the creeks was to be ensured. 
Neither the persons responsible for obstruction of creeks were identified nor the 
restoration of mangroves was initiated even till February 2021. 
• The NGTs order also stated that the quantum of damage  caused to the mangroves 
shall be assessed by the Gujarat SCZMA the same shall be recovered from the persons 
responsible for the same within a period of one month from the issue of the order. 
However, Gujarat SCZMA could not ascertain whether creation of bunds and 
destruction of mangroves was done by lease holders or by other miscreants. 
Therefore, no compensation for creation of bund and destruction of mangroves could 
be collected as of February 2021. 
• NGT in its order directed the Forest Department, Gov
 ernment of Gujarat to take 
immediate action to restore the damaged mangroves within a period of 6 months 
from the issue of the order. It was observed that although Gujarat SCZMA directed 
DPT to carry out compensatory afforestation at the rate of three times of total 
mangrove destruction, no action for restoration of mangroves was taken till date.  
(vi)  Gaps in the management of Khazan lands in Goa 
The eco sensitive low-lying areas that are influenced by tidal action known as Khazan lands 
are used primarily for cultivation, fish farming and salt panning. As they have been classified 
as ESA, all types of development activities were prohibited therein. We observed that the 
State of Goa had demarcated the Khazan lands and also had not prepared the Management 
plan these lands as required under the CRZ Notification.  Details regarding the Khazan land 
was limited to that available with the Town Planning Authorities of Goa. 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
4
7 
It was further observed that due to non-demarcation of Khazan lands by the State, Goa 
SCZMA granted approvals to projects which were otherwise impermissible in these protected 
areas.  For instance, clearances for projects involving construction of a bypass from Bambolim 
plateau to Verna Plateau and for cutting of 69 mangroves and temporary land filing in the said 
area were granted by Goa SCZMA in December 2015 and October 2017, respectively, without 
ascertaining that the projects involved use of Khazan Lands. Although, Goa SCZMA in their 
reply stated that the permission granted by Authority for construction of bypass was 
temporary in nature, the fact that 12 columns constructed in the salt pans under the project 
were of permanent nature and were impermissible in the Khazan Land. 
5.2 Pollution caused by untreated municipal waste  
T
he CRZ Notification 2011 prohibited activities leading to the disposal of untreated wastes 
and effluents into coastal waters and dumping of city and town wastes like construction 
debris, industrial solid wastes in CRZ areas. it provided that the concerned authorities shall 
implement schemes for phasing out:(i) the existing practice of discharging untreated waste 
and effluents within a period not exceeding two years from the date of issue of the 
Notification; (ii) the existing practice of dumping of solid wastes within one year from the 
commencement of the Notification. 
Audit observations of the test checked districts indicated that the sewage treatment plants 
were either altogether absent or were functioning without any monitoring, leading to 
discharge of harmful effluents into coastal waters as detailed below:  
(i)  Municipal sewage discharge into the sea at coastal districts of Karnataka 
Out of the 12 Urban Local Bodies45 located along the coast of Karnataka, only Mangalor
 e City  
 
Corporation had a sewage 
network to cover 100 per cent of 
its area with four STPs.     
The City Municipal Council of 
Udupi, Karwar and Bhatkal had a 
partial sewerage network that 
catered to only 25 per cent, 14 
per cent and 25 percent area 
respectively. 
Fig. 29: Flow of untreated sewage from wet wells of 
 the western 
area of Mangalore City to the Arabian sea 
Rest of the households either had individual septic tanks or soak pits to treat sewage. As per 
the Status of sewage generation, treatment and disposal in the coastal area prepared by the 
                                                           
45  There 12 urban local bodies located along the coas tline of Karnataka (Mangalore city Corporation, CMC 
Ullal, TMC Mulki, CMC Udupi, TMC Kuap, TMC Kundapura, TP Saligrama, TMC Bhatkal, TP Honnavar, TMC 
Kumta, TMC Ankola, CMC Karwar). 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
4
8 
Karnataka Pollution Control Board (Karnataka SPCB) in December 2019, there was a gap of 
26.85 MLD in sewage treatment in the coastal areas in Karnataka, out of which 7.6 MLD of 
untreated sewage was being discharged into the sea. The satellite pictures obtained by audit  
show the flow of 
untreated sewage from 
the wet wells of western 
area of Mangalore City 
to the Arabian sea. We 
also observed that 
untreated waste from 
the coastal towns of 
Karwar, Murudeshwar 
was being let into the 
sea. 
 
Fig. 30: Urban sewage directly entering coastal waters at Murudeshwar Beach 
The matter of Urban untreated sewage being let into coastal waters was brought to the notice 
of Karnataka Pollution Control Board during 2017-19 by the State Environment Department 
of Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada, however no further action was taken by Karnataka 
SPCB. 
(ii)  Inadequate monitoring of Sewage Treatment Plant effluents, Goa 
A total of seven 46 STPs were functioning in Goa and another two STPs a
 t Bandora and Colva 
were under construction as of December 2020. We observed that out of seven STPs, three 
STPs namely, Baina (20 MLD), Margao (20 MLD) and Durbhat (1 MLD) were functioning since 
2017 without obtaining ‘Consent to Operate’ from Goa Pollution Control Board (Goa SPCB). 
We observed that these three STPs were discharging effluents directly into the sea. As per 
coastal data prepared by Goa SPCB for the month of October 2020, fecal coliform present in 
the coastal waters of eight out of 10 Goan Beaches47 ranging from 110 to 140 (Most Probable 
N
umber/100ml) that were more than the prescribed limits (i.e.100 MPN/100 ml). 
Goa SPCB while issuing (August 2018) a renewal of Consent to Operate for STP Margao, had 
specified that the treated effluent should not be discharged into any river/creek/nallah and 
should be recycled to the maximum with the remaining being used for gardening activities. 
However, this STP after utilizing some effluent for gardening and non- potable use in the 
premises was discharging treated effluent into River Sal. However, no action was taken by 
Goa SPCB.  
 
                                                           
46  Panaji -Tonca (15 mld), Panaji Tonca (12.5 mld), M argao (20 mld), GMC Bambolim (1.35 mld), Vasco-Baina 
(20 mld), Ponda-Durbhat (1 mld), Sanquelim (0.80 mld). 
47  Samples taken from Miramar, Calangute, Morjim, Mobor , Baina, Galgibag, Colva and Vagator beaches. 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
4
9 
(iii)  Discharge of untreated sewage into the sea by the Municipal Corporations/ 
Municipalities in Maharashtra 
On the request of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board, National Institute of Oceanography 
(NIO), Mumbai, carried out a study (2018) which showed that the domestic wastewater was 
the major contributor to degrading ecology of creeks and estuaries that received such wastes. 
The report suggested that the inshore areas should be freed from unplanned release of 
sewage.  
We observed that nine48 Municipal Corporations (MCs) in the coastal region 
 of Maharashtra 
discharged untreated sewage into the rivers, seas and creeks during 2015-16 to 2019-20. 22 
Municipal Councils coming under Palghar, Raigad, Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts of 
coastal region generated 71.80 MLD of sewage in 2015-2020, which was not treated at all and 
was disposed directly into water bodies. 
The Mumbai region alone had 8 operational STPs. Audit analyzed the data relating to the 
annual performance evaluation of the STPs in Mumbai region by Maharashtra Pollution 
Control Board (MPCB) during 2015-16 to 2019-20 and observed that the treated sewage too, 
did not meet the standards prescribed by MPCB. We, further, observed that though the MPCB 
issued directions49 to these local bodies wherein they were instructed 
 to provide adequate 
STPs, achieve the consented standards prescribed by MoEF&CC and implement short term & 
long- term measures for treatment of sewage, no further action or follow up was taken up by 
MPCB against these bodies. In a few cases, it was observed that show cause notices issued by 
MPCB stipulated environmental compensation that was required to be paid by the errant 
local bodies for the discharge of untreated/ partially treated sewage. However, no efforts 
were made by the MPCB to ensure that the same had been paid by the offenders. 
5.3 Waste from Fish processing industry at Veraval, Guja rat 
Processing and preserving of fish, crustaceans in India annually generate 70 million m3 waste/ 
e
ffluents. Among the coastal states, maximum fish processing waste generation was observed 
in Gujarat (30.51%) followed by Maharashtra (23%).  
We observed the discharge of sewage generated at the Veraval Fishing Harbour directly into 
the sea.  Though Veraval harbour was designed for 3,500-4,000 boats it was observed to 
handle approximately 8,000 boats, which would increase the waste being generated. The 
harbour lacked an effluent treatment facility due to which untreated effluents and the sewage 
generated at the harbour were being discharged directly into the harbour waters. Further, 
the directions issued by the Gujarat SPCB envisaged regular dredging of the harbour, 
provision for collection of fish waste from the harbour area to compost units. However, we 
observed that the Veraval Harbour did not comply with the directions issued by Gujarat SPCB. 
                                                           
48  Greater Mumbai, Navi Mumbai,Thane, Bhiwandi Nizampur ,Ulhasnagar, Kalyan-Dombivli, Mira-
Bhayander, Vasai Virar and Panvel. 
49  Under Water (Prevention & Control of Pollution), Ac t 1974. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
5
0 
Also, Gujarat SPCB took no further action against the harbour. Hence, Veraval Fishing Harbour 
continues to operate without Composite Consent and Authorisation (CCA) discharging 
untreated effluent into Veraval Sea.  
5.4 Aquaculture Waste Discharge at Coringa Wildlife Sanc tuary, Andhra Pradesh 
Entire Coringa, East Godavari as well Krishna in Andhra Pradesh, has been identified as CVCA50 
s
ite as per CRZ Notification 2011.  The Government of Andhra Pradesh declared the Coringa 
Sanctuary as Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary (CWLS) in 1978 51 and contains  mangrove swamps, 
m
udflats, sandy beaches and sandy islands. Coringa mangrove forest is the second largest 
mangrove region along the east coast of India.  
It was observed that out of 1483.05 Ha. of land registered under aquaculture in Tallarevu 
Mandal, an area encompassing the CWLS on three sides, around 861.64 hectares was within 
the periphery of Coringa Sanctuary. 
Audit observed that eleven aqua/shrimp units located around CWLS in Tallarevu Mandal were 
discharging their untreated effluents into the drains which eventually joined the Coringa river.  
Due to discharge of untreated effluents in Coringa waters, except for pH value which was 
w
ithin the set standards of Coastal Aquaculture Authority (CAA), the remaining values of the 
effluent analysis were found to be abnormally higher52 than the standards prescribed.  
We observed that the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Contro l Board (APPCB) issued show cause 
notices to five out of the aforementioned 11 units during 2017-20 as most the units were 
operating without a ‘Consent to operate’. However, no further action in the form of 
imposition of penalty or legal proceeding as per the provisions of the Water (Prevention & 
Control of Pollution), Act 1974 was taken by APPCB against these five units. Also, APPCB failed 
to take any action against the other 6 units that were also discharging their waste without 
treatment.  
Audit observed that the Fisheries department accorded permissions for operating the aqua 
culture units without ascertaining the method for effluent treatment and the area for its 
disposal. The Regional Office, APPCB accorded Consents for Establishment (CFE) and 
Operation (CFO) without ascertaining the presence of facilities in the units for treatment of 
effluent.  Audit noticed no ETP facility in any of the units during joint physical inspection with 
                                                           
50  In all, there are 34 species of mangroves, 312 est uarine fish species, 14 species of prawns, 34 species of 
crustaceans, a wide range of 103 species of molluscs, 65 species of phytoplankton besides other species 
of snails and reptiles. As many as 257 avian species have been identified as visitors every year. 
51  Under the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. 
52  Higher level of BOD results in more rapid depletio n of oxygen in the stream and availability of less oxygen 
to higher forms of aquatic life. A greater amount of oxidizable organic material in a sample with high levels 
of COD, would reduce dissolved oxygen (DO) levels. Presence of abnormally high Total Suspended Solids 
(TSS) in the effluents discharged results in clogging of fish gills, either killing them or reducing their growth 
rate. They also reduce light to penetrate through which impairs the ability of algae to produce food and 
oxygen, which can be fatal to life below water which would adversely impact the marine ecosystems of 
the sanctuary.  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
1 
the officials of APPCB. Further, prior recommendation from Andhra Pradesh SCZMA and 
clearance from State/Town Planning Authorities was mandatory as the area fell under CRZ-I, 
however, these were not obtained. Audit also observed that the zoning regulations related to 
CRZ were ignored which resulted in establishment of aquaculture units within the 100 meters 
zone from the high tide/flood line from the Coringa which was in contravention to the CRZ 
Notification 2011.  
5.5 Conclusion 
• There were many deviations from the approved CZMP wh ich affected vulnerable 
biodiversity of the fragile ecosystems. Further, many activities which were banned in 
these sensitive coastal areas continued unabated, with the PCBs/SCZMAs not taking 
any action to stop these violations.  
• State Government did not prepare management plans fo r vulnerable ecosystems 
such as the coral reefs, turtle nesting sites etc. which impacted their conservation. 
Despite the existence of CRZ notifications, coastal areas continued to be impacted 
by anthropogenic activity, often resulting in their degradation.  
  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
5
2 
Chapter 6:  Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project 
To achieve the objectives of integrated and sustaina ble coastal management, MoEF&CC 
approached the World Bank in March 2010 to seek technical and financial assistance for 
taking up an Integrated Coastal Zone Management Project (ICZMP) which was approved 53 in 
M
arch 2010. The World Bank proposed to extend financial assistance to the Government of 
India for ICZMP with overall cost of ₹ 1153.63 crore in which the World Bank component was 
₹ 896.37 crores which was 77.7 percent of the project cost. The balance of ₹ 177.66 crore 
(15.4 percent) was proposed to be borne by the Government of India and ₹ 79.60 crore (6.9 
percent) was to be borne by the participating State Governments. 
The project’s objective (PDO) was capacity development in sustainable coastal management 
approach for India’s coastal zones, and piloting integrated coastal zone management 
approaches in select states, namely Gujarat, Odisha and West Bengal. The components of the 
Project are depicted in the table below: 
Table 6.1: Components of ICZMP 
 
T
he project had four implementing agencies i.e., MoEF&CC at the National Level with lead 
responsibility and the Department of Forest & Environment (DoFE) in each of the three 
participating states for implementing the project 54. In addition, Steering Committees at the 
N
ational and state levels were set up for inter-sectoral coordination.  
Our observation on the activities taken up under four different components of the ICZMP are 
given below: 
                                                           
53  By the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
54  Each of the four implementing agencies set up Spec ial Purpose Vehicles in the form of registered societies, 
i.e., National Project Management Unit (NPMU) at the National Level and State Project Management Unit 
(SPMU) at the State level to manage the Project Development Objectives, coordinate project activities 
and directly execute some of the relevant project sub-components.  
National 
C
omponent 
•mapping, delineation and 
d
emarcation of hazard 
lines, ecologically sensitive 
areas (ESAs) and 
delineation of coastal 
sediment cells all along the 
mainland coast of India
•capacity building of 
MoEF&CC as the 
secretariat for (NCZMA), 
setting up of the National 
Centre for Coastal Zone 
Management and nation-
wide training program for 
ICZM
State component 
(
Gujarat) 
•piloting ICZM approaches 
i
n the state of Gujarat 
which included 
preparation of ICZM Plan 
for the Gulf of Kachchh 
and capacity building of 
departments such as 
Forest and Environment, 
State Pollution Control 
Board
• priority investments in the 
Gulf of Kachchh region like 
conservation and 
protection of coastal 
resources, pollution 
abatement and Livelihood 
security of coastal 
communities.
State component
(
Odisha) 
•Piloting ICZM approaches 
i
n the state of Odisha 
which included 
preparation of an ICZM 
plan for coastal stretches 
of Paradip-Dhamra and 
Gopalpur-Chilika
•Capacity building of state 
departments including the 
Chilika Development 
Authority.
•Priority investments in 
Orissa for Gopalpur-Chilika 
and Paradip-Dhamra, 
conservation and 
protection of coastal 
resources, pollution 
abatement and livelihood 
security of coastal 
communities.
State component 
(
West Bengal)
•preparation of ICZM plan 
f
or West Bengal
•capacity building
• priority investments in the 
two targeted coastal 
stretches of Digha-
Shankarpur and Sagar 
Island in the Sundarban

Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
3 
6.1 Assessment of activities under the National componen t of ICZMP (Component 1) 
6.1.1 Absence of Ground Demarcation of Hazard Line 
T
he concept of Hazard Line55 was central to the implementation of IZMP. Hazard Li ne mapping 
aimed to identify and thus mitigate risks from various disasters to life and property in the 
coastal areas. The mapping was to be carried out for the entire coastline of the country by 
the Survey of India at a cost of ₹125 crore, which was later revised to ₹139.04 crore in 2018.  
Expenditure of ₹112.49 crore was incurred under the project till March 2020.  The entire work 
of mapping of Hazard Line was completed in August 2018. The composite hazard line was to 
be marked on the ground by iron tip pegs in private land and stone pillars were to be erected 
on government land subject to requisite approvals taken by MoEF&CC. However, the same 
was yet to be done by MoEF&CC. As such, the lack of a visible hazard line on the ground 
prevented its use as tool for planning for local purposes. 
6.1.2 Non preparation of Integrated Management Plans (IMPs
 ) for Critically Vulnerable 
Coastal Areas (CVCAs)  
Considering the vulnerability to developmental and other threats, the CRZ notification had 
designated 1256 ecological sensitive areas as CVCAs. The same were to be declared as CVCAs 
through a process of consultation with local fisher folk and coastal communities with the 
objective of promoting conservation and sustainable use of coastal resources and habitats. 
MoEF&CC was to develop and notify guidelines detailing the process of identifying, planning, 
and implementing such CVCAs in consultations with the stakeholders 57. Also, Integrated 
M
anagement Plans (IMPs) were to be prepared for the CVCAs keeping in view the 
conservation and management of mangroves, needs of local communities 58 and the impact 
o
f sea level rise and other natural disasters.  
We observed that though the guidelines for IMPs, had been prepared by National Centre for 
Sustainable Coastal Management (NCSCM) and submitted to MoEF&CC in September 2016, 
it was yet to be notified and disseminated to the States. As such, the IMPs could not be 
prepared by the coastal states. The CVCAs thus remained unprotected, and their sustainable 
development could not be ensured even after their identification.    
MoEF&CC stated (February 2022) that the guidelines would now be notified to enable the 
coastal States/UTs to prepare the IMPs. 
                                                           
55  Hazard Line is the line at which natural hazards lik e adverse weather incidents and tsunami are likely to 
impact the coast. 
56  Sunderbans mangrove area, Gulf of Khambat and Gulf  of Kutchchh in Gujarat, Malvan, Achra in Ratnagiri 
in Maharashtra, Karwar and Kundapur in Karnataka, Vembanad in Kerala, Gulf of Mannar in Tamil Nadu, 
Bhaitarkanika in Orissa, Coringa, East Godavari and Krishna in Andhra Pradesh. 
57  State Government, local coastal communities and fis herfolk inhabiting the area. 
58  Dispensaries, schools, public rain shelter, commun ity toilets, bridges, roads, jetties, water supply, 
drainage, sewerage. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
5
4 
6.2 Assessment of activities under Component 2 of ICZMP:  Piloting ICZM approaches in 
State of Gujarat 
6.2.1 Delay in the preparation of the ICZM Plans 
U
nder ICZM Programme, ICZM Plans were to be prepared for selected coastal stretches of 
the state of Gujarat within 2 years i.e., 2012 from the start of the project. However, Gujarat 
could complete the preparation of ICZM plan only in 2018. Inordinate delay in the preparation 
of these plans resulted in the implementation of pilot investment activities which did not 
emerge from the ICZM plans and thus, these activities could not complement the plans to this 
extent. 
6.2.2 Capacity building of various stakeholder institution
 s such as Gujarat Ecological 
Education and Research Foundation (GEER) and Gujarat Pollution Control Board 
(Gujarat SPCB)   
A project for capacity building and coral transplantation activities under the ICZMP was 
undertaken by SPMU through GEER in the year 2010 at an estimated cost of ₹ 15.74 crore. 
The project aimed at capacity building of the project staff and establishing marine field 
stations at different places. During the physical verification of two of the marine field stations 
at Mandvi and Jamnagar, it was observed that out of 40 instruments installed under the 
project at these two places, 33 instruments were operated only for checking and calibration 
and were never used for the intended purpose i.e., to study the physiochemical parameters 
of soil and water of the intertidal area of the Gulf of Kutch. Further, as against four persons 
required to be deployed at each field station, only one person at Mandvi and two persons at 
Jamnagar field station were found deployed. 
MoEF&CC attributed (February 2022) the non-utilisation of the equipment to COVID-19 
pandemic. However, the fact remains that the equipment had not been utilized during 
2016-19 i.e. before the pandemic.   
In a similar instance, under the capacity building of Gujarat PCB, the laboratory infrastructure 
was to be enhanced by purchase of sophisticated analytical instruments. Gujarat SPCB 
developed State of Art Laboratory at Gandhinagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar and Rajkot and procured 
18 sophisticated Scientific Analytical Instruments under ICZM Project. During the joint 
physical verification of visited Central laboratory at Gandhinagar, it was observed that four 
scientific instruments, costing ₹4.47 crore were procured under the project, but were never 
used by the Gujarat SPCB for sample analysis and were lying idle in the labs. The 
Comprehensive Maintenance Contracts of these instruments also lapsed in the year 2019. 
6.3 Assessment of activities under Component 3 of ICZMP:  Piloting ICZM approaches in 
State of Odisha 
6.3.1 Delay in the preparation of the ICZM Plans 
U
nder ICZM Programme, ICZM Plans were to be prepared for selected coastal stretches of 
the state of Odisha within 2 years from the commencement of the project. However, ICZM 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
5 
plan was prepared only in 2018. Also, the ICZM plan of Odisha was yet to be accorded the 
formal approval by MoEF&CC. Inordinate delay in the preparation of this plan resulted in the 
implementation of pilot investment activities which did not emerge from the ICZM plan and 
thus, these activities could not complement the plan to this extent. 
6.3.2 Insufficient capacity building measures at Odisha St ate Pollution Control Board 
(OSPCB) and Chilika Development Authority (CDA) 
(i)  Owing to various industrial activities in the Paradeep- Dhamra coastal stretch in 
Odisha, the region figured as one of the worst polluted coastal stretches in terms of various 
coastal Water Quality parameters.   OSPCB established a Centre for Management of Coastal 
Ecosystems in 2010 which aimed to analyse the sources, levels and pathways of various 
pollutants in the Paradeep-Dhamra coastal stretch. 19 laboratory equipment was procured at 
Rs. 2.76 crore during the period of 2013-2015. This Centre was to collect water and soil 
samples and assess the coastal water quality parameters. It was noted that during the period 
2015-20, the Centre failed in carrying out this activity effectively. Against the targets set for 
the collection and analysis of samples there was shortfall ranging from 33 per cent to 59 per 
cent. Further, the Centre was working at 55 % of the required manpower 59 and this resulted 
i
n non- operation of the equipment procured for the analysis of the samples. Though the aim 
of the Centre was to address the coastal pollution in the region by identifying the local sources 
of pollution, the Centre could not achieve the same.  
MoEF&CC stated (February 2022) that the step-wise recruitment is in process. 
(ii)  For effective management of Chilika Lake eco-system 60, a study 61 revealed that the 
n
orthern sector of this eco-system was getting infested with an invasive weed, Phragmitis 
karka on an area of nearly 150 sq. km, considerably reducing the water holding capacity of 
the lake. To address this issue, one multipurpose Amphibian Weed Harvester (AWH) was 
procured (December 2018) under ICZMP at a cost of ₹2.14 crore. Audit observed that the 
machine was handed over to CDA at Ansupa lake (a freshwater lake) instead of the research 
center at Chilika Lake which had entered into the agreement for procurement of the weed 
harvester. It was also observed that the deployment of the machine at Ansupa Lake was more 
than at Chilika where the weed infestation was major. Although CDA could furnish satellite 
images of deweeded area of Ansupa Lake, it could not furnish the data regarding the area 
deweeded at Chilika. Thus, the effectiveness of the Weed Harvester remained unassessed at 
Chilika for which it was procured. 
MoEF&CC stated (February 2022) that the weed harvester machine was currently deployed 
at Ansupa Lake and would be deployed at Chilika after deweeding at Ansupa is over. 
                                                           
59  Deficient staff with 22 persons as against the req uirement of 41 personnel as of February 2021. 
60  A Ramsar Site that is known to support the largest  congregation of migratory birds and Irrawaddy dolphins 
besides supporting the livelihood of more than 0.2 million local communities. 
61  Study ‘Qualitative and Quantitative assessment of biological diversity of macrophytes of Chilika Lagoon’ 
was conducted by Regional Plant Resource Centre, Bhubaneshwar. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
5
6 
Further, the CDA had been collecting water and sediment samples from 30 pre-determined  
stations of the lake at an interval of 30 days. As the salinity gradient of the lake changes with 
every tidal cycle, the monitoring of the lake at an 
interval of 30 days was found inadequate. Hence, 
CDA decided to deploy sensor-mounted floating 
data buoys, powered by solar panel, at 10 strategic 
locations in four ecological sectors of the Lake to 
monitor various parameters 62. These parameters 
w
ould be measured in each station on real-time 
basis and transmitted to the modelling computer at 
the Wetland Research & Training Centre at Chilika. 
Ten Water Quality Monitoring Buoy System, twelve multi-parameter Water Quality 
Monitoring System (WQMS) with sensors and one Control Centre Data reception were 
purchased and installed (October 2012) at 10 different locations in Chilika lagoon at 
₹ 2.69 crore. 
O
n scrutiny of records, we observed that within one year and four months of deployment, 
out of 10 WQMBS, six were stolen and only four buoys were in operation as of June 2016. 
Also, the pH data had not been received from any of the buoys since 2014. Thus, without 
complete and continuous data from 10 stations, the monitoring of Chilika Lake despite an 
expenditure of ₹2.69 crore could not be achieved by Chilika Development Authority. 
6.3.3 Activities under the sub component Conservation and 
 protection of coastal 
resources in Odisha 
(i)  Inadequate protection of Olive Ridley turtles in Odisha  
Gahirmatha rookery near Dhamra river mouth, Rushikulya river mouth and Devi River mouth 
of Odisha have become important mass nesting sites of Olive Ridley sea turtles which are 
designated as ‘vulnerable’ species under the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. To provide 
protection to the Olive Ridley turtles, Rajnagar Forest Division, Kendrapara District in March 
2016 procured two highspeed sea going vessels for coastal patrolling in Gahirmatha Marine 
Wildlife Sanctuary for ₹ 6.23 crore. Both the vessels were operated between September to 
October 2017, after which defects arose in both.  Even though one vessel was made 
operational in December 2018, audit observed that the engines of both the vessels became 
defective in February 2020 and thereafter could not be repaired.  Thus, even after the 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 6.23 crore, the objective of effective sea patrolling in 
Gahirmatha Sanctuary remained unachieved. 
 
 
                                                           
62  Salinity, temperature, conductivity, dissolved oxy gen, pH, depth, turbidity, chlorophyll and blue green 
algae. 
 
Fig. 31: Water Quality Monitoring Buoy 
System 


Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
7 
(ii)  Non-operation of research laboratory at Dangmal , Kendrapara District, Odisha 
Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary, a unique biodiversity hot spot supports a rich biodiversity 
including mangroves, largest population of estuarine crocodiles, and other wildlife 63. There 
w
as no facility available for rescue and treatment of injured wild animals, analysis of viscera 
of dead wild animals for assessment of food habits, pathological/microscopic studies for 
diseases and development of treatment protocol, preservation of various parts/organs of wild 
animals for study and analysis.  
To facilitate these objectives, under ICZM Project, a research laboratory at Dangmal was 
constructed in November 2016 at a cost of ₹ 32.78 lakh. Audit observed that the laboratory 
was not functional since beginning. During physical verification of the laboratory, we 
observed that the laboratory was still not functional, and the facility was in a dismal state, as 
shown in the following photographs: 
 
F
ig. 32: Room no.1 of the laboratory at Dangmal  Fig. 33: Room no.2 of the laboratory at Dangmal  
(iii)  Efforts towards conservation of the Mangroves  
The mangroves along the coast of Odisha are threatened due to high density of population in 
these areas and competing demand for land for agriculture and prawn farming. Under ICZMP, 
mangrove plantation was taken up over 228 ha of land in Mangrove Forest Division, Rajnagar 
and Puri Wildlife Division in three phases during 2016-2018. Audit observed that one of the 
activities envisaged under the Management Action Plan for Conservation of Mangroves in the 
Mahanadi Delta of Odisha was construction of trenches and channels to facilitate tidal 
inundation and smooth flow of tidal water. Audit observed that the flow of tidal water was 
obstructed as most of the feeder channels around the plantation sites were filled with sand. 
The survival rate of mangrove plantation carried out under the project ranged from zero to 
35 per cent.  
(iv)  Shore line protection at Pentha in Odisha:  
Pentha is an agricultural village located in the south of Dhamra in Paradeep-Dhamra stretch 
in Kendrapara District of Odisha. To prevent the shoreline erosion at Pentha, a proposed pilot 
                                                           
63  Such as rare white crocodile, largest water monito r lizard, snakes, varieties of resident and migratory birds 
and mammalian species (spotted deer, sambar, wild boar, fishing cat, jungle cat, otter) etc. 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
5
8 
project ‘Laying of geosynthetic tubes 64 as protection measure for control of erosion’ was 
gr
anted clearance by Odisha Coastal Zone Management Authority in 2012. An embankment 
was to be created by covering the geotubes filled with river sand by gabion boxes that are 
made up of stones tied up by polypropylene ropes. The work was awarded (2012) to 
M/s Garware Wall Ropes Pvt. Ltd at a cost of ₹32.96 crore and was completed by June 2016. 
We examined the following deficiencies relating to the construction of embankment: 
• During the visit of the review committee in January 2014, it was observed that a part 
of the wall constructed was damaged by the tidal waves during the cyclone Phailin in 2013 
and that most of the rope gabion boxes exposed to the seaside were damaged, as a result of 
which the stones filled inside the rope gabions had come out and were scattered due to loose 
filling of granite stones. The damage was due to poor construction, as the size of the stones 
used were smaller than those specified in the contract agreement. 
• The clearance awarded by OCZMA and the DPR of the pr oject had envisaged that 
coastal afforestation was to be taken up between the Sea and the Geo-tube embankment 65.  
T
he species identified for the sustainability of the project were casurina, prospsis, neem, 
pandanas and babul. However, it was observed that the plantation was not done, citing that 
there was no space available in front of geo-tube embankment.  
• The armoury stone protection works in front of the ge
 o-textile tube embankment 
that were to act as a first line of defence to high tide waves was taken up for an additional 
cost of ₹4.65 crore from the State Fund and completed in March 2018. This armoury section 
of the geo-tube embankment was damaged in May 2019 when the coast of Odisha was hit by 
severe cyclonic storm ‘Fani’.  The embankment suffered further damage in August 2019 when 
some miscreants set some gabion ropes on fire. This entailed an additional expenditure of 
₹ 3.28 crore. 
6
.3.4 Provision of Alternative Livelihood to the coastal c ommunities 
(i) Idling of infrastructure created under the activity relating Hygienic drying of fish:  
As the fishermen of Odisha lose almost seven months livelihood support in a year due to ban 
on fishing for the protection of Olive Ridley turtles, ICZMP aimed at providing livelihood 
support to the fishermen living in the periphery of Chilika Lake and Gahirmatha Wildlife 
Sanctuary. An activity relating to Infrastructure development for dry fish production was 
taken up under the project66in 2014. 
                                                           
64  Under this scheme, geo-synthetic tubes were to be laid in the beach over a length of 675 metres of the 
coast followed by coastal afforestation with an objective to reduce the wave energy on the coast and 
facilitate the settlement of sand between the geo-tube and the coast. 
65  So as to break the wave energy and to increase the  stability and functioning of the Geo-Tube. 
66  The project involved purchase of solar drier, cons truction of concrete platform, godown, installation and 
operationalizing the same. This activity was executed by the Fisheries & Animal Resources Department 
(F&ARD) as Pilot Executing Agency with formation of Self- Help Group (SHG).   

Report No. 4 of 2022 
5
9 
We observed that a total of 150 SHGs were formed in Puri and Ganjam districts which were 
provided ₹ 1.50 lakh each towards seed money and 99 solar dryer s67 were installed for 
₹ 5.23 crore in 2014.   During the Joint Physical veri fication (August 2021) of 82 solar dryers 
under Gopalpur cluster, the following deficiencies were noticed: 
a)  Audit observed that the Gopalpur site was devoid of any solar dryers except the 
godowns constructed for the purpose. The site where the solar dryers were installed was 
occupied by a garbage processing plant installed by the Gopalpur Notified Area Council. 
Further, it was reported by F&ARD department that as the project had become defunct since 
2016 and the equipment installed had got damaged and was stolen, the solar dryer yard was 
demolished by the district administration to facilitate another project under ‘Swachha Bharat 
Mission’ to develop Micro Composting Centre. 
b) At Sana Aryapalli, audit observed that only platforms had been constructed for the 
installation of the solar dryers. The sheds and solar panels had been damaged in cyclone and 
the dryers were stolen. 
c)  At Purunabandha and Nolia Nuagaon, we observed that the dryers were rusted and 
in a non-functional condition. 
Fig. 34: Damaged Solar Panels at Nolia Nuagaon F
 ig. 35: Rusted dryers left unused at Purunabandha 
As none of the dryers examined in audit was function al enough to provide livelihood support 
to the community, the expenditure of ₹6.72 crore on creation of facilities under the ICZMP 
was rendered unfruitful.   
(ii)  Infructuous expenditure on activities for promotion of Eco-tourism 
To address the livelihood issues through ecotourism for long term conservation of biodiversity 
along the coast of Odisha, a few activities like construction of camp infrastructure 68 were to 
b
e undertaken at the three sites namely, Gahirmatha Wildlife sanctuary, Bhitarkanika Wildlife 
Sanctuary and Chilika Coast. 
                                                           
67  A solar dryer is a system for hygienic drying of f ish using solar energy. 
68  With a provision of kitchen, drinking water, solar  lighting, along with furniture and fittings, construction 
of platforms for pitching tents etc. 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
0 
(a)  Audit observed that even though five camp infrastructure along the Chilika coast 69 
w
ere constructed in 2018 after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.46 crore, the same could not 
be made functional due to lack of proper water supply and electricity.  
(b)  A project on Development of Participatory Eco-tourism at Chilika and Tampera under 
Livelihood security was taken up by Odisha Tourism Development Corporation (OTDC). 
Scrutiny of records revealed that various assets like construction of food courts, public 
convenience, parking, tourist information centre etc., were created by OTDC at an 
expenditure of ₹ 2.97 crore to enhance tourism potential through Eco-tourism Development 
Society (EDS). Although, these assets were handed over to EDS during May 2016, they could 
not be made operational by EDS by September 2021, as such the site failed to attract tourists. 
(c)  To promote livelihood through eco-tourism in Chilika coast and Bhitarkanika, seven 
transit boats, four luxury boats and three catamaran boats were purchased between March 
to July 2014 by Wildlife Division of Chilika, Forest Division of Rajnagar and Forest Division of 
Berhampur respectively at a cost of ₹ 7.95 crore.   
On scrutiny of records, it was observed that the seven transit boats purchased by the Chilika 
Wildlife division were operated for only 11 months 70 by the department. However, due to 
h
uge consumption of fuel, these boats were not found useful from the ecotourism point of 
view.  Three catamaran boats purchased by Berhampur Forest division were transferred to 
Rajanagar Forest Division in February 2016 after lying idle for almost two years from the date 
of purchase. These three boats were operated up to September 2017 and thereafter left 
defunct. Audit noticed that four luxury boats under the Forest Division of Rajnagar also could 
not be made operational. After remaining idle for one year and three months, an agency 
which was engaged (January 2016) to operate the boats up to September 2017, exited from 
operation in October 2017 as it sustained huge loss due to lack of support from the 
department.  
6.4 Assessment of activities under Component 4 of ICZMP:  Piloting ICZM approaches 
in State of West Bengal 
6.4.1 Delay in the preparation of the ICZM Plans 
U
nder ICZM Programme, ICZM Plans were to be prepared for selected coastal stretches of 
the state of West Bengal within 2 years from the start of the project. However, the 
preparation of ICZM plans could take place only in August 2020. Inordinate delay in the 
preparation of these plans resulted in the implementation of pilot investment activities which 
did not emerge from the ICZM plans and thus, these activities could not complement the 
plans to this extent. 
 
                                                           
69  Rambhartia, Berhampura, Khirisahi, Balianla, Pokha rikuda. 
70  December 2014 to October 2015.  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
6
1 
6.4.2 Gaps noticed in respect of activities under the Envi ronment and pollution 
management sub- component of the ICZMP in West Bengal 
(i)  Poor functioning of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) at Digha leading to release of 
polluted water into sea  
Under the Environment and pollution management sub- component of the ICZMP in West 
Bengal, a project namely ‘Renovation of Sanitary Sewerage Scheme at Digha’ was undertaken 
by the Public Health Engineering Directorate (PHED), West Bengal in December 2012. The 
project envisaged construction of an STP with a capacity of 201 million litres per month at an 
estimated cost of ₹ 34 crore. The same was constructed in September 2016 at a cost of ₹ 
28.87 crore.   
It was observed that although parameters relating to Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), 
Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), suspended solids, Nitrogen, Phosphate, etc. were 
measured, no periodicity was fixed for collection and testing of the samples. Further, the 
parameters of the treated water, namely pH, Total Dissolved Solids, Oil & Grease were found 
to exceed the permissible limits. Further, it was observed the tests for checking the fecal 
coliform in effluent were not carried out during 2015-20.  Thus, even after incurring an 
expenditure of Rs. 28.87 crore on construction of the STP, the treated sewage water 
continued to carry pollutants in excess of permissible limits, thereby threatening the marine 
ecosystems. 
(ii)  Non- implementation of Solid Waste Management at Digha 
One of the objectives of the ICZMP in Digha and Shankarpur area was to develop a scientific 
management plan to tackle the issues associated with municipal solid waste collection, 
transportation and sanitary disposal and reduce the coastal pollution. Digha Shankarpur 
Development Authority (DSDA) was the implementation agency for this project. 
DSDA took up the work in 2010 and got a feasibility study conducted through a consultancy 
firm71 after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 24.22 lakh. Th
 e study showed that out of the total 
waste generated i.e., 12.43 TPD, on normal days and 33.64 TPD during peak season, only 3.36 
TPD on normal days and 7.86 TPD during peak season could be collected by DSDA and the 
same was found to be dumped in an open area. This open dumping site was operational since 
2002 and had a composting facility which was non- operational. Audit observed that this 
project was dropped due to paucity of funds as the DSDA authorities pointed out that they 
would not be able to provide Rs. 2.20 crore per annum required as annual maintenance and 
operation charge of the project. We also observed that no other project was subsequently 
taken up by the State Government. Thus, the objectives of reducing the coastal pollution 
remained unaddressed. 
 
 
                                                           
71  M/s CRISIL Risk and Infrastructure Solutions Limit ed. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
2 
(iii)  Renovation of Fish Auction Centre at Digha 
An unhygienic temporary fish auction centre was operating without a proper drainage and 
disposal of solid waste at Digha Mohana in the district of Purba Medinipur for more than two 
decades.  Under ICZMP, the fish auction centre was proposed (2010) to be renovated by 
March 2015. The West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited (WBFCL), an enterprise of the 
Government of West Bengal was entrusted with the responsibilities for planning, designing 
and executing the construction of fish auction centre at a cost of Rs 6.75 crore. WBFCL 
prepared the Detailed Project Report after proper site selection and survey of the land 
required for executing this project. However, it was observed that the land earmarked for 
construction of Fish Auction Centre that had been transferred to WBFCL by Digha Fisherman 
and Fish Traders Association was reallocated to BENFISH (West Bengal Fishermen's Co-
operative Federation Ltd) for construction of an ice plant without intimating WBFCL. Further, 
the World Bank experts on their site visit to Digha noticed that there was shortfall in the area 
of the land for construction of proposed auction centre and the actual area on the ground did 
not match with the drawing based on which the bid document was prepared, and the 
advertisement was made.  
The project was dropped in the 11th Governing Council Meeting of SICOM held in 2014 for 
the reason that it had not obtained necessary clearances.  Thus, the absence of necessary 
ground survey by WBFCL before initiating the bidding process resulted in a total expenditure 
of Rs 18.00 lakh incurred on advertisement cost, pre-bid meeting, bid opening meeting, site 
visit for measurement of land etc. wasteful.  
6.5 Conclusions 
• Although the ICZM project, Phase I was termed succes sful, a number of deficiencies 
were noticed during the audit of this project at both the Centre and the States. The 
lack of a visible hazard line on the ground prevented its use as tool for planning for 
local purposes.  
• The IMPs for CVCAs could not be notified even after completion of Phase-I of ICZMP 
and remain unprotected in the absence of specific management plans. The 
preparation of ICZMP plans were also delayed, resulting no linkage between the plan 
and actual projects undertaken.  
• The project could not strengthen the capacity buildi ng of the selected institutes as 
most of them were operating with insufficient manpower. Infrastructure created 
under the project was lying defunct due to the inability of the State authorities to raise 
funds to maintain the same. The monitoring and protection measures of the coastal 
resources were found to be inadequate. Non- execution of critical projects which had 
the potential of reducing the coastal pollution to a great extent defeated the very 
purpose of this project. As a result, the ICZM project was not very successful in the 
development of capacity for sustainable coastal management for India’s coastal 
zones.  
  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
6
3 
Chapter 7: Sustainable Development Goals 
The United Nations adopted the Sustainable Developme nt Goals (SDGs) in September 2015 
as a universal demand for actions to end poverty, protect the planet and to ensure that all 
people enjoy peace and prosperity by 2030.   17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were 
formally adopted for the next 15 years by the 70 th Session of the UN General Assembly with 
t
he adoption of the document titled ‘Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development’ on 25 September 2015. At the session, each of the countries, 
including India, accepted the primary responsibility for follow-up and review, at the national, 
regional and global levels, in relation to the progress made in implementing the goals and 
targets over the coming 15 years. The SDGs came into effect from 01st January 2016.  
 
SDG 14- ‘Life below water’ 
This Sustainable Development Goal aims to 
conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and 
marine resources for sustainable development. The 
targets under this goal relevant to conservation of 
coastal areas which were examined in audit are as 
detailed below: 
Target Description 
14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular 
from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution 
14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid 
significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action 
for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans 
14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced 
scientific cooperate on at all levels 
14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with 
national and international law and based on the best available scientific information 
 
In India, National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) has the overall responsibility 
of SDGs implementation and aligning government schemes/ programs to SDGs. It was 
entrusted with the responsibility for identification of national targets for the SDGs and 
assigning them to the Ministries/ Departments concerned for implementation. NITI Aayog, 
designated Ministry of Earth Sciences as a nodal ministry for the implementation of activities 
towards SDG-14. Audit reviewed the efforts of the Government towards achieving targets 
under the goal. Audit focused majorly on the preparedness of the Ministries strategy as well 
as the by the relevant institutions. 
7.1 Incomplete stakeholder mapping 
S
takeholder mapping aids the decision maker to assess how the interest of the stakeholder is 
to be addressed in the project plan, policy and programme or other action. NITI Aayog carried 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
4 
out stakeholder mapping with respect to the targets under SDG-14. Accordingly, the 
stakeholder/ line ministries for SDG-14 were- Ministry of Earth Sciences; Ministry of 
Environment Forest and Climate Change; Department of Fisheries, Ministry of Fisheries, 
Animal Husbandry, & Dairying; Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer’s Welfare. This mapping 
was revised in August 2017 and August 2018. 
Audit examined the stakeholder mapping and found that a few significant stakeholder 
organisations were not included in the mapping. The Indian Coast Guard, designated as the 
central coordinating agency for combating oil pollution, has the mandate of surveillance of 
maritime zones of the country against oil spills. Despite being a significant stakeholder in the 
activities related to SDG 14.1 (Marine Pollution), Indian Coast Guard was not identified in the 
stakeholder mapping.  
Ship source pollution is one of the significant causes of marine pollution affecting marine 
biodiversity. Various provisions under Merchant Shipping Act 1958 mandates the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping and Waterways to prevent and contain pollution arising from ships, ship 
wrecks, ship building and ship repair industries and ship breaking. The stakeholder mapping 
did not include Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways. 
MoES stated (February 2022) that the recommendations related to stakeholder mapping for 
achievement of SDG-14 have been noted and the issue would be taken up with NITI Aayog 
and other stakeholder ministries in this regard.  
7.2 Inadequacies in the National Indicator framework   
S
DG Indicators are the quantitative outputs that helps the implementer to assess the progress 
of implementation efforts. UN General Assembly in 2017 adopted 232 indicators as the Global 
Indicator Framework (GIF) of SDGs. The member countries were to prepare the National 
Indicator framework (NIF) based on the GIF which would give appropriate directions to the 
policy makers and implementers of various schemes and programmes to track their progress 
on achieving related SDG targets. The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
(MoSPI) was entrusted with the responsibility of developing National Indicator Framework 
(NIF) for measuring the progress of SDGs and associated targets. MoSPI in July 2019 came up 
with the guidelines for development of SDGs State Indicator Framework (SIF). Given the 
significance of SDG indicators in assessing the progress towards SDGs, the national indicators 
were to align with the Global indicators taking into account the country specific 
environmental aspects. In this regard audit reviewed the indicators framed against the 
individual SDG 14 targets and found a few shortcomings.  
7.2.1 The global indicators for SDG 14.1 include ‘Index of
  coastal eutrophication and plastic 
debris density’. While the national indicator Coastal Water Quality Index (CWQI) prepared by 
MoES takes into account the nutrient pollution, MoES was yet to prepare an indicator related 
to plastic debris density. MoES stated (January 2022) that they have initiated collection of 
preliminary data with regard to this indicator in 2019.  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
6
5 
7.2.2 The Global indicator for SDG target 14.2 was ‘use of  ecosystem-based approach to 
manage marine areas.’ The ecosystem approach promotes integrated management of land 
water and living resources in a way that achieves mutually compatible conservation and 
sustainable use and delivers equitable benefits for people and nature. The National indicators 
for SDG 14.2 were ‘percentage change in area under the mangroves’ and ‘percentage change 
in marine protected areas. We observe that the indicators do not address holistically the SDG 
target and do not conform to global indicators to this extent as the indicator essentially 
measured only the output of the programmes developed for management of mangrove 
ecosystems.   The list of activities planned to achieve the target should have also formed the 
sub-indicators and biodiversity, fisheries indices should have ideally formed the output 
indicators for the target. 
7.2.3 As per the NIF prepared by MoSPI, ‘Implementation of
  CRZ notification 2011’ was 
included as one of the national indicators for Global indicator SDG 14.2.1. We observed that 
this indicator was later removed in 2020 due to the fact that the indicator was static in nature 
and that it was not suitable for measurement. However, the enforcement of CRZ is critical to 
the implementation of ecosystem-based approach in the coastal environment. 
Implementation of CRZ as well as ICZMP involves a sequence of activities that begin with the 
preparation of CZMPs, demarcation of CVCAs, demarcation and ground marking of various 
spatial reference lines. However, these deliverables were not brought into the indicator 
framework. 
7.3 Data quality related issues 
Q
uality data is vital to track the progress on implementation of SDG targets. Tracking progress 
on SDG targets require collection, analysis and integration of data from different sources. 
Audit assessed the data gaps related to SDG-14 output indicators and observed the following: 
a)  CWQI is one of the significant indicators to assess the achievement of SDG 14.1 related to 
marine pollution. Various parameters forming the CWQI are measured by MoES under Sea 
Water Quality Monitoring Programme (SWQM) by National Centre for Coastal Research. The 
objective of the SWQM was to periodically monitor water quality parameters in the coastal 
waters of India. The programme included collection and analysis of data from selected major 
towns / cities on land-based sources of marine pollution such as domestic, industrial, 
agriculture and aquaculture wastes. Audit found that the data collection points reduced 
drastically from 81 locations during 1990-2011 to 17 in the year 2017. The number of data 
collection points were further increased to 50 in 2021. Also, it was observed that data was 
not collected continuously for all the four seasons by all the participating institutes. Lack of 
continuous data will affect the analyses that were to be conducted to understand the data 
patterns over time.  
7.4 Localisation of indicators 
W
hile reviewing the state indicators for SDG targets, it was found that most of the coastal 
states had not come up with localized indicators based on their individual critical 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
6 
development priorities and data requirements. We observed that the State Indicator 
frameworks were not prepared by the states of Maharashtra and Kerala. It was observed that 
with the exception of Gujarat, all other coastal states adopted the national indicators as 
developed by MoSPI without adapting them to the state specific environmental aspects. Also, 
in the states where SIFs had been formulated, further localization to District levels was done 
only by the State of Karnataka by notifying District Indicator Framework (DIF).  
7.5 Conclusion 
• The stakeholder mapping for SDG-14 does not factor i n some of the key players 
associated to the target achievement.  
• Localisation of SDGs is in its nascent stage with tw o of the coastal states yet to notify 
the State Indicator Frameworks and only the state of Karnataka developing a District 
Indicator Framework for SDG-14.  
  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
6
7 
Chapter 8: Conclusion and Recommendations 
Coastal and estuarine ecosystems deliver a wide range  of goods and services, many of which 
provide material benefits such as food supply, regulation of water-quality processes, storm 
protection, and carbon storage. For conservation of the coastal ecosystem and ensure its 
sustainable use, the Government of India introduced the CRZ notifications and the ICZMP 
project. We audited the CRZ notifications and the implementation of ICZMP project to arrive 
at conclusions about their efficacy and effectiveness.  
1. Adequacy of Institutional mechanism at Centre as wel
 l as State to regulate the 
activities in CRZ areas as per the provisions of CRZ notification 2019 
Our examination of the institutional mechanism to regulate the activities in CRZ areas as per 
the provisions of CRZ Notification 2019, existing at Centre/States showed that the NCZMA 
was not a permanent body with defined members. NCZMA largely met to clear the proposal 
for projects and did not fulfil the other research and advisory role assigned to it. The Expert 
Appraisal Committee lacked technical members in the meetings, thus its recommendations 
lacked scientific basis. SCZMAs in the states were not reconstituted in time, lacked 
participation from important stakeholders, were not sufficiently resourced, and cleared 
projects without quorum. DLCs were not reconstituted in many states, and lacked 
participation from significant stakeholders; thus, could not function effectively to enforce the 
CRZ notifications. As such, deficiencies in the constitution and functioning of NCZMA, SCZMA 
and DLCs would dilute their effectiveness in addressing challenges in ensuring sustainable 
development of the coastal areas.  Also, the different agencies involved in implementation of 
CRZ notifications could not ensure timely preparation of Coastal Zone Management Plans as 
well as plans for the protection of Ecologically Sensitive Areas in the coast which was a key to 
the sustainable development of the coastal areas. Thus, the institutional mechanism to 
regulate activities in the coastal areas as per CRZ notification was weak and could not function 
as effectively as envisaged in the CRZ notifications. 
2.  Procedure for grant of CRZ clearances by the Government, to conserve coastal 
ecology 
We examined whether CRZ clearances granted by the Government were as per due 
procedure, to conserve coastal ecology. As per CRZ notifications, only permitted activities are 
allowed in different coastal zones and projects are approved, based on the environment 
impact studies and the mitigations plans to address risks posed to the coastal ecology. Audit 
observed that even though the environment impact studies had various inadequacies like 
preparation of environment impact reports by non-accredited consultants, use of old baseline 
data, lack of complete analysis of environment impacts, disaster management not fully 
addressed in the EIA reports, projects based on these EIA reports were approved by 
MoEF&CC/SCZMAs.  

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
6
8 
Further, mitigation plans to address the risks to environment posed by these projects were 
not adequate as the risks were only cursorily addressed in many projects. Cumulative impact 
studies were not prescribed as a precondition for approval, to check if the addition of the 
project would alter the coastal ecology. Further, MoEF&CC accepted and did not verify critical 
environment parameters for the project. Audit also observed that the process of public 
hearing which would have valuable input on impacts to local community were short-changed. 
Audit also observed that clearances to projects were given without considering that they were 
located in Ecologically Sensitive Areas, which would affect the ecosystem balance of these 
fragile and vulnerable areas. Grant of project approvals in excess of its authority and without 
mandatory documents by SCZMAs would weaken the checks on the approval mechanism and 
hinder conservation of the coastal ecology. Audit also observed that the CRZ notifications 
were amended to allow for specific projects, hence mitigation plans to reduce the risks to the 
coastal ecology that these projects would lead to, would not be ensured.  
Hence the safeguards put in place to ensure that the projects did not impact the environment 
were contravened. As such, these projects could have a detrimental impact on the coastal 
ecology. 
3.  Safeguard of coastal ecosystems by post clearance monitoring as well as 
enforcement mechanism of CRZ notifications  
Monitoring of projects after their approval by MoEFF&CC and its agencies ensures that the 
conditions under which the project was approved are being complied with. Audit examination 
showed that MoEF&CC and its regional offices failed to ensure compliance to conditions 
stipulated in the clearances. Further, the project authorities did not submit mandated reports 
timely, which would have facilitated the monitoring process. Critical clearances like Consent 
to Operate and Consent to Establish were not taken by the project proponents. Thus, the post 
clearance mechanism was not effective in ensuring compliance to the provisions of CRZ 
notifications. As such, the risks posed by these projects to the coastal ecology would go 
unchecked.  
Further, audit observed that the enforcement mechanism to detect and punish violations of 
CRZ notifications suffered from a lot of infirmities. With the help of satellite imagery, Audit 
observed that there were irregular development activities in CRZ 1 areas like construction on 
the nesting sites of Olive Ridley turtles in Odisha and construction of racetrack in CRZ 1 area 
in Pattipulam, Tamil Nadu. With help of GIS tools, we identified unreported violation such as 
irregular constructions in CRZ 1A zone by construction of Beach Resorts in Kachipuram district 
and jetty extensions built in the No development Zone in Devbhumi, Dwarka. Audit also 
observed encroachment and CRZ violations in the eco-fragile Vembanad Lake and Akkulam 
lake region, construction of a mall in NDZ in Thiruvananthapuram, road construction in No 
Development Zone in Udipi district, Karnataka, construction of a commercial residential 
project in wetland area of Vembanad Lake. Further, audit observed that many industries 
caused pollution of the coastal areas like coastal aquaculture units in Guntur district, Andhra 
Pradesh and ice plants and fish packing units in CRZ areas of Kanyakumari district, Tamil Nadu. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
6
9 
No effective action was taken by authorities like SCZMA/Pollution Control Board/DLCs. As 
such, in the absence of effective action against violations, there was no deterrence and 
degradation of the coastal areas continued.  Thus, the post clearance monitoring and 
enforcement of CRZ notifications were ineffective which would result in irreversible changes 
to the coastal ecosystem.  
Audit also sampled two coastal districts from each of the nine coastal states to assess the 
health of vulnerable and fragile coastal ecosystems due to impacts of anthropogenic 
activities. We found that coastal biodiversity like corals in the Gulf of Mannar Biosphere 
Reserve and in Goa faced threats due to absence of data to monitor their spread and 
condition. The Coastal Sand Dunes in Goa suffered as construction permission was given in 
the areas where they existed. Mangroves were also not fully conserved as instances of cutting 
of mangroves for development projects were observed in Goa.  In Gujarat, SCZMA failed to 
restore mangrove destruction in Kutch and impermissible activities affecting mangroves was 
allowed in the Khazan lands in Goa.  
Further, the coastal ecology suffered due to municipal sewage discharge into the sea at 
coastal districts of Karnataka, and Discharge of untreated sewage into the sea by the 
Municipal Corporations/ Municipalities in Maharashtra. Audit also observed waste from fish 
processing industry at Veraval, Gujarat being dumped in the coastal waters, and aquaculture 
waste discharge at Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary, Andhra Pradesh. 
As such, despite the existence of CRZ notifications, coastal areas continued to be impacted by 
anthropogenic activity, affecting vulnerable biodiversity and resulting in their degradation.  
4.  Achievement of Project development objectives under Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management Programme (ICZMP)  
The aim of ICZMP programme was capacity development in sustainable coastal management 
for India’s coastal zones, and piloting integrated coastal zone management approaches in 
Gujarat, Odisha and West Bengal. We observed that at the central level, preparation of 
Integrated Management Plans for Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas (CVCAs) could not take 
place and there was no ground truthing of the hazard line. This impacted the conservation of 
the CVCAs and the objective of safeguarding them was defeated. Audit scrutiny of ICZMP 
program in Gujarat showed delay in the preparation of the ICZM Plans and the capacity of 
various stakeholder institutions were not developed. In Odisha also, the preparation of ICZM 
plans were delayed, capacity building measures at Odisha State Pollution Control Board 
(OSPCB) and Chilika Development Authority were insufficient. Further, measures to protect 
of Olive Ridley turtles in Odisha were inadequate, capacity of labs for analyses of coastal water 
data was inadequate and alternate livelihood initiatives did not succeed. Measures taken 
under ICZMP for conservation of the mangroves and shore line protection at Pentha in Odisha 
were not successful. Audit examination of ICZMP in West Bengal also showed delay in 
preparation of ICZM plans, and activities taken up under ICZMP like sewage treatment plant 
at Digha, solid waste Management at Digha, renovation of fish auction centre at Digha were 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
7
0 
ineffective in stopping pollution of the coastal areas. As such, the ICZM project was not very 
successful in the development of capacity for sustainable coastal management for India’s 
coastal zones.  
5. Evaluation of the measures taken up by the Governmen t towards achieving the 
targets under SDG-14. 
Audit also examined the efforts of the Government towards achieving targets under the SGD 
14 which aims to conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for 
sustainable development. We found that all the stakeholders in the field of coastal 
management were not mapped, Ministry of Earth Sciences was yet to prepare an indicator 
related to plastic debris density which was a vital part of action to preserve the coastal and 
marine ecosystem. Further, National indicators for SDG 14.2 were not completely defined in 
terms of activities and outputs. Implementation of CRZ as well as ICZMP involves a sequence 
of activities that begin with the preparation of CZMPs, demarcation of CVCAs, demarcation 
and ground marking of various spatial reference lines. However, these deliverables were not 
brought into the indicator framework. The there was a lack of sufficient data collection 
centres to monitor coastal water quality which would affect the analyses that were to be 
conducted to understand the data patterns regarding coastal water quality over time. 
Further, states had not localised their Indicator frameworks to suit their local conditions. As 
such, the measures taken up by the Government towards achieving the targets under SDG-
14 need further impetus.  
Recommendations 
1. SCZMAs and NCZMAs may be made as permanent bodies wi
 th full time members to 
carry out all the mandated activities for protecting the coastal environment. 
2. The DLCs may be formed and reconstituted without del ay in all the relevant districts. 
The composition of DLCs may be inclusive in nature representing all the relevant 
stakeholder sectors.  
3. MoEF&CC needs to ensure that the NCZMA/ SCZMAs share  information regarding their 
discussions/minutes of meetings with the public in a uniform manner. Interactive 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism may be adopted by the SCZMAs. 
4. The Ministry may ensure that the PP carry out in-dep
 th ecological evaluation of the 
project environment before granting the clearances to the projects as well as enforce 
the practice of cumulative assessments already defined in the EIA Notification, 2006.  
5. MoEF&CC may ensure that the PPs submit a viable EMP 
 addressing all the risks to the 
environment and the EMP along with the Impact Prediction analyses are largely 
coherent. Also, the mitigation proposals may be clearly brought out in the EMP and 
costed.  
6. MoEF&CC may revisit the roles and composition of dif
 ferent agencies to strengthen the 
post clearance monitoring. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
71 
7. Expert cells, which are well versed in GIS tools may be  created in DLCs to effectively and 
efficiently monitor the changing landscape on the coastline and track irregular 
developments. Presence of such a surveillance mechanism would not only track 
irregular activities but would also serve as a deterrence tool. 
8. The State Governments may make necessary efforts for m a pping and preparation of 
Management Plans for the coral reefs, turtle nesting sites etc. 
9. Efforts may be made by MoEF&CC to notify the IMPs for E cologically Sensitive Areas at 
the earliest. 
10. MoEF&CC should ensure deploying sufficient manpower wi t h technical expertise at 
SICOM and various institutes strengthened under the project. Efforts should be made 
to rationalise the manpower deployment to ensure optimum utilisation.  
11. MoES and MoEF&CC may review the stakeholder mapping to ensure the inclusion of all 
relevant institutions with respect to SDG 14 targets. 
12. Localisation of the indicators should be prioritised in  the stakeholder states by ensuring 
formulation of District Indicator Frameworks in the states.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:  
(SANJAY KUMAR JHA) 
Director General of Audit 
Environment and Scientific Departments 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated:     
 
 
 
 
 
(GIRISH CHANDRA MURMU) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
7
3 
Annexure 1: Process flowchart entailing the main steps involved in the CRZ Project approval 
(Reference: Introduction, Chapter 3 of the report) 
 
 


Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
7
4 
Annexure 2: Employment of non-accredited consultant/ non- accreditation of the consultant in a particular 
category of the project 
(Reference: Para 3.1 (i) of the report) 
S. No. Project  Project 
approval by 
MoEF&CC 
Consultant for EIA 
1. Laying of Natural Gas pipeline by 
Mahanagar Gas Ltd, Maharashtra 
2018 The consultant JV Analytical Services, Pune 
not accredited for Pipeline Sector. 
2. Construction of Hotel Building in 
Mangalore, Dakshina Kannada 
District by M/s. Motimahal Hotels 
Pvt. Ltd., Karnataka 
2017 The Environment Management Plan and the 
DMP which formed a part of the EIA was 
proposed by the PP itself and an accredited 
consultant was not appointed. 
3. Expansion of port facilities by Redi 
Port Ltd in Maharashtra 
2018 The consultant engaged was not accredited 
in the areas of Air Pollution, Prevention, 
Monitoring and Control, Hazardous Waste 
Management, Ecology and Biodiversity. 
4. Construction of Petroleum Products 
Storage Terminal at Karwar, 
Karnataka Port by M/s Tropicana 
Liquid Storage (P) Ltd. , Karnataka 
2015 The Environment Management Plan was 
prepared by Marine Science Research 
Institute, Karwar, which was not an 
accredited consultant organisation.  
5. Establishment of intake and outfall 
facility for Nuclear Power Plant at 
Mithivirdi, District Bhavnagar, Gujarat 
by M/s Nuclear Power Corporation of 
India Limited, Gujarat 
2015 M/s Engineers India Limited, appointed as a 
consultant for this project was not 
accredited by NABET for “Nuclear Power 
and processing of fuel” sector. 
6. Development of the petroleum, 
chemical and petrochemical 
investment region (PCPIR) at Dahej, 
Vagra, District Bharuch by M/s 
Gujarat Industrial Development 
Corporation Gujarat 
2015 The consultant, NEERI, Nagpur was not 
accredited under by National Accreditation 
Board of Education and Training/ Quality 
Council of India. 
7. Mumbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by M/s 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority, Maharashtra 
2016 A consortium of Arup, Consulting Engineers 
and KPMG had been appointed as 
consultants for this project. However, the 
NABET Accreditation certificate annexed in 
the records pertaining to M/s Consulting 
Engineers Services Pvt. Ltd and the same 
was not accredited for sea link construction 
sector.  
8. Laying of an effluent pipeline by 
Madhu Silica Pvt. Ltd. (MSPL) in 
Bhavnagar, Gujarat 
2015 Consultant M/s Indomer Coastal Hydraulics 
(P) Ltd., Chennai was not accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Education 
and Training/ Quality Council of India 
9. Widening and improvement of the 
existing highway of Bhavnagar- 
Pipavav- Porbandar-Dwarka Section 
of NH-8E, Gujarat 
2016 The consultant M/s STUP Consultant Pvt. 
Ltd., Kolkata was not accredited by National 
Accreditation Board of Education and 
Training/ Quality Council of India 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
7
5 
S. No. Project  Project 
approval by 
MoEF&CC 
Consultant for EIA 
10. Additional Salt works (2846.15 acres) 
located at village Kalatalav & Narmad, 
Taluka & Dist. Bhavnagar 
Accorded 
clearance by 
SEIAA in 
2017 
The consultant National Institute of 
Oceanography-CSIR was not accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Education 
and Training/ Quality Council of India 
11. Mumbai Coastal Road Project (South) 
- Princess Flyover to Worli end of Sea 
Link by M/s Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai 
2017 Certificate of accreditation provided by 
consultant did not state the period of 
validity due to which it could not be 
ascertained, whether at the time of 
preparation of EIA report, the consultant 
was eligible for the same. 
12. High Speed Railway Project across 
CRZ areas in Mumbai, Mumbai Sub-
urban, Thane and Palghar District by 
M/s National High Speed Rail 
Corporation Ltd, Maharashtra 
2019 The Consultants, M/s GPS Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd was not accredited by National 
Accreditation Board of Education and 
Training/ Quality Council of India 
13. 2X800 MW Uppur Supercritical 
Thermal Power Plant at District 
Ramanathapuram by TANGEDCO, 
Tamil Nadu 
2017 The consultant was not accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Education 
and Training/ Quality Council of India. 
14. Laying of treated effluent disposal 
pipeline from their Plant to final 
disposal point in the Gulf of Kutch at 
Mithapur by Tata Chemicals Limited, 
Gujarat 
2017 The consultant National Institute of 
Oceanography-CSIR was not accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Education 
and Training/ Quality Council of India 
15. Setting up of Bulk Drug 
Manufacturing Unit in East Godavari 
District by M/s Divi’s Laboratories 
Limited, Andhra Pradesh 
2019 The Consultant M/s Indomer Coastal 
Hydraulics Pvt. Ltd. was not accredited by 
National Accreditation Board of Education 
and Training/ Quality Council of India. 
16. International Leather Complex at 
Kothapatnam village, Nellore District 
by M/s Adani Port and SEZ Ltd., 
Andhra Pradesh 
2015 The Consultant Environment Protection 
Training and Research Institute (EPTRI) was 
not accredited by National Accreditation 
Board of Education and Training/ Quality 
Council of India. 
17. Deepening of approach channel for 
capesize vessels at Mormugao Port by 
M/s Mormugao Port Trust, Goa 
2016 The Consultant M/s WAPCOS Limited, 
Gurgaon was not accredited by National 
Accreditation Board of Education and 
Training/ Quality Council of India. 
18. Rerouting of Mumbai Manmad 
pipeline by M/s Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Limited, Maharashtra 
2015 The Consultant M/s Eco Chem Sales and 
Services, was not accredited by National 
Accreditation Board of Education and 
Training/ Quality Council of India. 
19. Proposal for 5 MLD Hybrid 
Desalination Project at IREL Complex, 
Chatrapur, Ganjam District by M/s 
Indian Rare Earths Limited, Odisha 
2018 It was observed that the accreditation 
certificate pertaining to Mecon, Ranchi, was 
placed on the records instead of 
accreditation certificate of Mecon Ltd., 
Bangalore which was actually involved. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
7
6 
S. No. Project  Project 
approval by 
MoEF&CC 
Consultant for EIA 
20. Integrated Cooum River Eco-
Restoration Project by M/s Chennai 
Rivers Restoration Trust, Tamil Nadu 
2017 The Consultant M/s SV Enviro labs and 
consultants, was not accredited by National 
Accreditation Board of Education and 
Training/ Quality Council of India. 
21. Converting open parking into covered 
parking in beach resort at 
Chengalpattu Taluk, District 
Kancheepuram by M/s Adayar Gate 
Hotels, Tamil Nadu 
2015 The Environmental Management Plan 
submitted by the PP did not mention the 
name of the accredited consultant 
organisation which prepared it.  
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
7
7 
Annexure 3: Employment of old baseline data 
(Reference: Para 3.1 (ii) of the report) 
S.No. State Name of the Project Date of  
Project 
clearance  
Years by 
which the 
data was 
outdated  
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Development of offshore LNG FSRU Facility at Kakinada 
Deep Port Water by Andhra Pradesh Gas Distribution 
Corporation Limited (APGDC) 
09.02.2016 3 to 4 years 
2. Andhra 
Pradesh 
I
nternational Leather Complex at Kothapatnam village, 
Nellore District by M/s Adani Port and SEZ Ltd. 
19.12.2015 4 years 
3. Gujarat Establishment of intake and outfall facility for Nuclear 
Power Plant at Mithivirdi, District Bhavnagar, Gujarat 
by M/s Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited 
03.05.2015 3 years 
4. Gujarat Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline from th eir 
Plant to final disposal point in the Gulf of Kutch at 
Mithapur by M/s Tata Chemicals Limited 
10.07.2016 6 years 
5. Gujarat Common treated effluent disposal pipeline project 
along river Kolak upto deep sea via Kolak Estuary by 
M/s Wel Treat Enviro Management Organization 
05.09.2016 6 years 
6. Gujarat Development of the Petroleum, Chemical and 
P
etrochemical Investment Region (PCPIR) at Dahej, 
Vagra, District Bharuch by M/s Gujarat Industrial 
Development Corporation 
  
7. Karnataka Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal 
at Karwar, Karnataka Port by M/s Tropicana Liquid 
Storage (P) Ltd. 
17.06.2015 7 years 
8. Maharashtra M umbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by M/s Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
  
9. Maharashtra Mumbai Coastal Road Project (South) - Princess Flyover 
to Worli end of Sea Link by M/s Municipal Corporation 
of Greater Mumbai 
  
10. Maharashtra Malad sewage treatment plant 2 8.08.2017 8 years 
11. Odisha Multi- product SEZ/ Industrial Park at Gopalpur, 
Ganjam, Odisha by M/s Tata Steel SEZ Ltd.  
20.09.2018 2 years 
12. Tamil Nadu 2X 800 MW Uppur Supercritical Thermal Power Plant at 
District Ramanathapuram by M/s Tamil Nadu 
Generation & Distribution Corporation Ltd. 
(TANGEDCO) 
  
 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
78 
Annexure 4: EIA failed to assess the possible impacts of the projects on marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas 
(Reference: Para 3.1 (iii) of the report) 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Risk to marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas Mitigation measures not envisaged in 
the EIA 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Marine disposal of treated 
effluent by M/s Covalent 
Laboratories Pvt. Ltd 
As per the information available in the EIA, the pipeline passed 
through CRZ-III area, the 'NDZ' and the inter-tidal zone with patches of 
sand dunes with coastal vegetation of height less than 3 meter all 
along the shoreline.  
EIA did not include any impact on the sand 
dunes and no mitigation measures was 
envisaged. 
2.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Development of offshore 
LNG FSRU Facility at 
Kakinada Deep Port Water 
by Andhra Pradesh Gas 
Distribution Corporation 
Limited (APGDC) 
The only mitigation measures that were included in the EIA of this 
project was that piling operations should use a soft start so as to allow 
marine fauna to leave the area before high noise levels are generated.
 
 
EIA report did not deliberate upon the 
impact of the project on any of the marine 
life forms except fishes in the study area 
which clearly indicated that the mitigation 
of the environmental impacts of the 
project on marine ecosystems were not 
considered. 
3.  Goa Deepening of approach 
channel for capesize 
vessels at Mormugao Port 
by M/s Mormugao Port 
Trust 
1. The EIA report stated there was significant pressure due to tourism 
on the Humpback dolphin and the coral reefs surrounding Grande 
Island and that dredgers and associated vessel movement may harm 
the dolphins, due to collision, propeller action etc. Studies have shown 
that the risk of a collision occurring and the likelihood that it will result 
in severe or lethal injury increases when vessels exceed 10–14 knots 
and as the vessels to be considered in the approach channel were to 
move at a speed of 11 knots, it was likely to cause injury. 
The Impact studies for the same were not 
carried out in the EIA as a result of which 
no mitigation measures were stipulated. 
2. As per the EIA report, Chikalim- Sancole bay known for its intertidal 
marine biodiversity was just 4 kms away from the dredging area and 
was known to harbour more than 200 faunal and 34 phytoplankton 
species in addition to mangroves and windowpane oyster (Placuna 
placenta) (schedule-4 species). The EIA report also mentioned that 
dredging influence was normally restricted to a maximum of 4 km of 
the activity. 
The impact of dredging was not carried 
out for such an eco-sensitive zone within 
the study area and no mitigation 
measures were stipulated. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
79 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Risk to marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas Mitigation measures not envisaged in 
the EIA 
3.The EIA Report exhibited that the intertidal area of Zuari estuary 
which included Chicalim- Sancole Bay, Grande Island, Caboraj- Siridao 
rocky patch within the study area showed species diversity comprising 
of 186 aquatic species (150 finfish comprising of pelagic and demersal 
fishes and 36 shell fish comprising of crustaceans and molluscs). The 
Grande Island was rich in Coral, sponge, fish and the intertidal habitats 
between Caboraj- Dona Paula- Siridao had high seaweed abundance 
and diversity.  
Although, the report listed the impacts 
such as land reclamation, mining, 
industrialization and dredging posing 
considerable threat to the marine flora 
and fauna. The mitigation measures to be 
taken for their conservation and 
management were not elaborated in the 
EIA 
4.  Gujarat Expansion of Adani 
Petronet (Dahej) Port, 
Bharuch District by M/s 
Adani Petronet (Dahej) 
Port Pvt Ltd 
The EIA Report envisaged generation of wastewater during concrete 
casting, cleaning of construction equipment, vehicle garage workshop, 
oil spills from the operation of construction equipment and Diesel 
Generating set and the same was stated to affect the marine water 
quality near the shoreline.  
Despite the identification of the impacts, 
no mitigation measures were enunciated 
in the EIA report. 
The population of the intertidal macro benthos indicated relatively 
high standing stock of macro benthos with moderate group diversity. 
The EIA further stated that the reclamation would impact nearly 23 ha.  
of benthic habitat and no recovery of benthic organisms was possible 
as the habitat would be permanently lost due to reclamation. 
No mitigation measures were envisaged 
for the protection of benthic organisms in 
the project area.  
5.  Gujarat Establishment of intake 
and outfall facility for 
Nuclear Power Plant at 
Mithivirdi, District 
Bhavnagar, Gujarat by M/s 
Nuclear Power 
Corporation of India 
Limited 
1.         The EIA report indicated that the project area was moderately 
productive in terms of phytoplanktons and zooplanktons. Mangrove 
vegetation comprising of Rhizophora and Avicennia species was found 
in good number on the river banks near Alang shipyard and coastal 
vegetation comprising of Cassia species, Prosopis, Azadirachta species. 
The project area near the Alang shipyard had vast expanse of Tidal 
flats/ mudflats.  
Both the EIA Report and the CRZ 
clearance were silent on the impacts of 
the project on such varied flora and fauna 
in and around the project area. As the 
impacts were not identified, no mitigation 
measures were stipulated. 
2.    The EIA report stated that the temperature of Condenser cooling 
water (CCW) would be 7° C above the ambient temperature of the sea 
water and it would probably be the only major impact on the marine 
ecosystem. From the scientific data available in the public domain, it 
The effect of increased temperature was 
studied for fishes only, even when the fish 
landing was reported to be the lowest in 
the region. The same was not studied for 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
80 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Risk to marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas Mitigation measures not envisaged in 
the EIA 
could be understood that increased temperature reduces the 
solubility of oxygen in water, thereby increasing the Biological Oxygen 
Demand (BOD).  
phytoplanktons and zooplanktons which 
showed moderate productivity. 
4.         According to the marine EIA, Alang- Sosiya Ship Breaking Yard 
(ASSBY) was located at 5 kms south of the project area and according 
to the information available in the public domain, there was heavy 
metal contamination in the intertidal zone of the shipbreaking yard. 
Also, a proposed Kalpsar project dam across Gulf of Khambat was at a 
distance of 18 kms north of the Chhaya (Mithi Virdi) site. The site 
selection report (June 2007) of Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), 
had recommended that a detailed study should be conducted to 
examine the effect of Kalpasar dam in the upstream of Nuclear Power 
Plant site on the flooding of the proposed site due to breaking of dam 
in the event of an earthquake of very high magnitude as the Kalpasar 
dam was located over deep silted fault.  
The impact of the Alang shipbreaking yard 
and Kalpasar Dam on the project was not 
taken into account. As no impacts were 
identified, no mitigation measures were 
envisaged. 
6.  Maharashtra Mumbai Coastal Road 
Project (South) - Princess 
Flyover to Worli end of Sea 
Link by M/s Municipal 
Corporation of Greater 
Mumbai 
1. The EIA stipulated that the mangroves in the project area would be 
impacted leading disappearance of reproduction and food zone for 
species of fish, aquatic and migratory birds, Irreversible salinisation 
and acidification and Coastline erosion. 
Against such consequences, the 
mitigation measures suggested are 
merely perfunctory such as dust 
suppression measures, sprinkling of 
water, monitoring of noise etc. and did 
not directly address the impacts 
identified. 
  2. The EIA report identified impacts, such as: Formation of sediment 
plumes that would affect fish and benthos, increased turbidity 
affecting the growth of the plants, increase in PH of the water causing 
algal bloom, increase in temperature with reduced dissolved oxygen, 
Immediate and long term degradation of sensitive and essential 
breeding and nursery habitats for marine organisms leading to long 
term reduction in commercially important fish.  
It was observed that the mitigation 
measures suggested like the use of best 
practicable technology, appropriate 
handling of liquid and solid wastes 
 
and adequate noise control measures did 
not directly address the identified impact. 
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
81 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Risk to marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas Mitigation measures not envisaged in 
the EIA 
7.  Maharashtra Malad sewage treatment 
plant by M/s Municipal 
Corporation of Greater 
Mumbai 
 
1. The EIA Report catered to development of existing facilities to 
improve the environmental conditions in and around the Mumbai city 
instead of focusing on Malad STP alone. As such it failed to incorporate 
the terrestrial and aquatic ecology comprising of the Benthos, 
Phytoplantktons, zooplanktons in and around the project area.  
As no details of terrestrial and aquatic 
fauna were included in the EIA, no 
impacts on them were identified and no 
mitigation measures were envisaged. 
8.  Maharashtra Laying of Natural Gas from 
Uran (District Raigad) to 
Navi Mumbai Municipal 
Corporation pipeline by 
M/s Mahanagar Gas Ltd. 
The pipeline was passing through villages of Uran, Bokadvira, 
Dronagiri, Funde, Sonari, Jasai, Ulwe and Killegaothan, all of which 
were famous for their mangroves. The presentation given by the PP 
during the EAC meeting also showed an image of the pipeline passing 
through a dense patch of mangroves. 
 Instead of devising mitigation plan for 
protection and conservation of the 
mangroves, the EIA Report denied the 
presence of mangroves itself along the 
route of the pipeline. 
9.  Maharashtra Expansion of facilities at 
port Redi, Sindhudurg, by 
M/s Redi Port Ltd  
The EIA report only identified Turbidity of water as an impact during 
reclamation of the area with dredged material. 
EIA did not deliberate upon the impacts of 
land reclamation and dredging in terms of 
loss of marine habitats; effect on marine 
benthos; No mitigation measures were 
proposed for even identified threats to 
environment.  
10.  Maharashtra All weather Greenfield 
Jetty' at Nandgaon of 
Taluka Palghar, District 
Thane, Maharashtra by 
JSW Infrastructure Ltd. 
As per the EIA Report the entire facility was to be created on reclaimed 
land. We noted that only conceptual layout of the jetty at Nandgaon 
was available in the EIA Report. However, this conceptual layout was 
not further deliberated upon anywhere in the EIA report. 
As no impacts of land reclamation were 
identified, no mitigation measures were 
envisaged. 
11.  Maharashtra Mumbai Trans Harbour 
Sea Link by M/s Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority 
The MCZMA in its recommendation stated that the PP was to consult 
an expert agency, undertake training programmes for construction 
personnel regularly to minimize the damage to mudflats before 
commencement to construction work. Also, the proponent was to 
take expert opinion from Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS) 
regarding safeguards to be placed so as to mitigate the disturbances 
to flamingo habitat. etc.  
Niether any studies for evaluation of 
impacts on mudflats and flamingos was 
carried out by the proponent nor any 
expert agency was consulted. As no 
impacts were identified, no mitigation 
measures were envisaged. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
82 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Risk to marine flora and fauna, ecologically vulnerable areas Mitigation measures not envisaged in 
the EIA 
12.  Odisha Multi- product SEZ/ 
Industrial Park at 
Gopalpur, Ganjam, Odisha 
by M/s Tata Steel SEZ Ltd.  
The project area showed rich diversity in terms of phytoplanktons, 
zooplanktons and moderate diversity of Benthic fauna (polychaete 
worms, crustaceans, gastropods etc.). and the project envisaged 
laying of pipeline.  
The impact of trenching on the benthic 
fauna and the mitigation measures to 
ward off such impact were not studied. 
13.  Tamil Nadu Intake and outfall facility 
of Marine Algae in District 
Ramanathapuram by M/s 
EID Parry (India) Ltd 
The EIA report mentioned ecologically important specialized 
ecosystems like sand dunes, seagrasses or mangroves in the project 
area.  
As no impacts were identified, no 
mitigation measures were envisaged. 
14.  West Bengal Setting up of Mini Bulk 
Carriers Handling Facility 
on the upstream of 3rd oil 
Jetty and west bank of 
river Hooghly at Haldia 
Dock Complex, Kolkata 
Port (West Bengal) by M/s 
Kolkata Port Trust  
The EIA Report showed the area had a rich density of phytoplanktons, 
zooplanktons and benthos. The dominant flora of the Haldia industrial 
zone comprised of various species of trees, shrubs, herbs and 
climbers, fern species. The study area comprised of Nayachar island at 
the mouth of the Hooghly River which had mangroves.  
The impacts on phytoplanktons, 
zooplanktons, benthos, flora including 
mangroves were not identified in the EIA 
Report. As the impacts were not 
identified, no mitigation measures were 
stipulated. 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
8
3 
Annexure 5: EIA was either devoid of DMP, its specific details or the onus of framing the suitable DMP was 
left to the project proponent 
(Reference: Para 3.1 (iv) of the report) 
Cases where onus of framing specific details of DMP  were left to PP 
S.No State Name of the Project Criteria Observations 
1. Goa Deepening of 
approach channel for 
capesize vessels at 
Mormugao Port by 
M/s Mormugao Port 
Trust 
Emergencies like accidents 
involving vessels, Oil spill from 
vessels, Fire/explosion on board 
vessels within the Port limits and 
berths, Breakdown of ship engine 
in the sea, and earthquake were 
mentioned in the EIA Report and 
the project site fell under the Zone 
-III of Seismic Map of India- a 
moderate intensity zone. 
We observed that no 
mitigation measures for 
the delineated 
emergencies were found 
incorporated in the DMP . 
2. Karnataka Development of four 
berths in Western 
Dock arm in New 
Mangalore port by 
M/s New Mangalore 
Port Trust 
Highlighted in the Report.  
3. Maharashtra High Speed Railway 
Project across CRZ 
areas in Mumbai, 
Mumbai Sub-urban, 
Thane and Palghar 
District (PH) by M/s 
National High Speed 
Rail Corporation Ltd 
The EIA Report stated that the 
project site was classified under 
the Zone -III, a moderate intensity 
earthquake zone and that the 
western coast was subject to 
occasional severe cyclonic storms. 
DMP  did not envisage 
mitigation measures to be 
taken by the PP during such 
disaster and whether 
earthquake resistant 
structures were used for 
construction and operation 
phase. 
4. Maharashtra Construction of Hotel 
Building (Resort 3) in 
Mauje Karde, 
Ratnagiri District, 
Maharashtra by M/s 
Dajikaka Gadgil 
Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
The project site was classified 
under the Zone -IV of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS) 2000, 
Seismic Map of India, a zone 
having major damage risk.  
 The DMP  delineating the 
types of disasters and the 
mitigation measures to be 
taken by the PP during such 
disaster was not found on 
the records.  
5. Maharashtra Mumbai Trans 
Harbor Sea Link by 
M/s Mumbai 
Metropolitan Region 
Development 
Authority 
As per the Rapid EIA Report 2012, 
the project site was classified 
under the Zone -III of the Bureau 
of Indian Standards (BIS) 2000, 
Seismic Map of India, a moderate 
intensity zone and that the 
western coast was subject to 
occasional severe cyclonic storms. 
DMP  did not detail 
mitigation measures to be 
taken by the PP during such 
disaster and also if 
earthquake resistant 
structures were to be used 
for construction of this sea 
link. 
6. Maharashtra Construction of Hotel 
Building (Resort 2)  in 
As per the EIA report, the project 
site was classified under the Zone 
 It was observed that a 
DMP  delineating the types 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
8
4 
Mauje Karde,  
Ratnagiri District, 
Maharashtra by M/s 
Dajikaka Gadgil 
Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
-IV of the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) 2000, Seismic Map 
of India, a zone having major 
damage corresponding to 
intensity VII on the MM (Modified 
Mercalli Intensity) scale. 
of disasters and the 
mitigation measures to be 
taken by the PP during such 
disaster was not prepared 
by PP. 
7. West Bengal Setting up of Mini 
Bulk Carriers 
Handling Facility on 
the upstream of 3 rd 
o
il Jetty and west 
bank of river Hooghly 
at Haldia Dock 
Complex, Kolkata 
Port by M/s Kolkata 
Port Trust  
Highlighted in the report.  
Projects where the EIA Reports did not contain any DMP  
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project 
1.  Gujarat Development of Greenfield Beach Resort at Mandvi, District Kutch by M/s Tourism 
Corporation of Gujarat Ltd. 
2. Gujarat Common treated effluent disposal pipeline project along river Kolak upto deep sea via 
Kolak Estuary by M/s Wel Treat Enviro Management Organization 
3. Gujarat Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline and diffuse system for disposal of treated 
wastewater at Marine outfall point in Gulf of Kutch at Mithapur by M/s Tata Chemicals 
Limited 
4. Gujarat Construction of marine bridge between Beyt and Okha, Dwaraka by Road & Building 
Department 
5. Gujarat Additional Salt works (2846.15 acres) located at village Kalatalav & Narmad, Ta. & Dist. 
Bhavnagar by Nirma Limited 
6.  Karnataka Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal at Karwar, Karnataka Port by M/s 
Tropicana Liquid Storage (P) Ltd. 
7. Maharashtra Rerouting of Mumbai Manmad pipeline by BPCL 
The risk assessment study of the proposed installations which were to be used to 
formulate the DMP  was put as a specific condition in the clearance letter issued to the 
PP 
8. Tamil Nadu Intake and outfall facility of Marine Algae in District Ramanathapuram by M/s EID Parry 
(India) Ltd 
9. Tamil Nadu Highlighted in the report 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
85 
Annexure 6: Clearances granted by MoEF&CC where crucial prerequisites were left to the PP to prepare and adhere to after grant of clearance 
(Reference: Para 3.2 (i) of the report) 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Important prerequisites not ensured before the grant of 
clearance 
Remarks 
1.  Gujarat Development of the petroleum, 
chemical and petrochemical 
investment region (PCPIR) at 
Dahej, Vagra, District Bharuch by 
M/s Gujarat Industrial 
Development Corporation 
A specific condition in the clearance letter, stipulated that a firm and 
time bound action plan for conservation of mangroves and mudflats 
in CRZ area was to be prepared through a reputed institute and 
adequate funds were to be earmarked for its implementation. The 
plan was required to be monitored by a committee comprising 
representatives of PPs , Gujarat State Forest Department and the 
Gujarat Maritime Board. 
It was observed that action plan for 
conservation of mangroves and mudflats in 
CRZ area was not made as a pre-requisite 
before granting clearance to the project. The 
Ministry left the matter of protection of 
mangroves and mudflats in the area to PP’s 
convenience.  
Another specific condition of clearance letter required preparation 
of scientific studies for Coastal Management Plan by a reputed 
expert institution. The results were to be implemented by all the 
stakeholders keeping in view the river ecology and dependency for 
sustenance on fisheries in coastal areas. Alternate water resources 
were also to be explored to meet the huge water demand for the 
project, in addition to exploring the best recycling practices. 
The condition should have been made a pre 
requisite by the ministry before the grant of 
clearance as it is unlikely for any PP to carry 
out scientific studies and explore alternative 
methods or resources after receiving a 
clearance letter from the ministry for its 
project. 
2.  Gujarat Laying of treated effluent disposal 
pipeline from their Plant to final 
disposal point in the Gulf of Kutch 
at Mithapur by M/s Tata 
Chemicals Limited 
A specific condition of clearance letter required the PP to develop 
the Baseline for Marine and coastal biodiversity of Poshitra Bay and 
monitor the same bi-annually with specific focus on sea grass beds, 
and endemic species Sakuraeolis gujaratica  and Anteaeolidiella 
poshitra (molluscs species). 
As a baseline could not be recorded 
retrospectively after initiating a project, 
inserting such a condition in the clearance 
letter was meaningless. The same should 
have been made as a pre-requisite of the 
project clearance.  
3.  Gujarat Construction of Residential 
project ‘Sun City’ at Barbodhan 
village, Surat by Pramukh 
Organizers LLP 
Some part of construction area proposed by PP was falling within 
CRZ-III. Instead of insisting for revised project lay out map from the 
PP, GCZMA sought only undertaking from the PP that it will not carry 
out any construction activity in the CRZ-III 
Gujarat SCZMA in its recommendation letter 
to SEIAA had put a condition that PP should 
not carry out any construction in NDZ. SEIAA 
did not insist upon the revised project lay out 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
86 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Important prerequisites not ensured before the grant of 
clearance 
Remarks 
map before granting clearance to ensure 
adherence to this condition.  
4.  Gujarat Development of Greenfield Beach 
Resort at Mandvi, District Kutch by 
M/s Tourism Corporation of 
Gujarat Ltd. 
Some part of construction area proposed by TCGL was falling within 
NDZ (NDZ) i.e., 200 m landward side from HTL.  
 
Gujarat SCZMA in its recommendation letter 
to MoEF&CC had put a condition that PP 
should not carry out any construction in NDZ. 
EAC did not insist upon the revised project lay 
out map from the PP to ensure adherence to 
this condition.  
5.  Karnataka 
  
Construction of Hotel Building in 
Mangalore, Dakshina Kannada 
District by M/s. Motimahal Hotels 
Pvt. Ltd. 
  
The proposed project site fell in the CRZ-II area and the proposed 
construction activity was at a distance of 34 metres from the HTL of 
Gurupur River.  The clearance letter stipulated that the parking site 
should be shifted beyond the ‘NDZ’ of 200 metres from the HTL. 
It was observed that the EAC left it on the PP 
to shift the parking site beyond NDZ and did 
not require a revised conceptual plan before 
recommending the project for clearance. 
The clearance letter required that a robust rainwater harvesting 
system should be installed in consultation with the concerned 
authority.  
The submission of the rain water harvesting 
plan was not made as a pre-requisite before 
grant of clearance.  
6.  Maharashtra High Speed Railway Project across 
CRZ areas in Mumbai, Mumbai 
Sub-urban, Thane and Palghar 
District (PH) by M/s National High 
Speed Rail Corporation Ltd 
While recommending the project the EAC required that 
comprehensive mangrove plantation and management plan was to 
be prepared by The Mangrove Cell, Thane, Forest Department, 
Government of Maharashtra. 
Preparation of comprehensive mangrove 
plantation and management plan was not 
made a pre-requisite condition but was 
instead put as a specific condition in the 
clearance letter. 
While recommending the project the EAC required that a robust 
Conservation and Management Plan for Thane Creek Flamingo 
Sanctuary with detailed action plan for immediate implementation 
in consultation with the concerned agency in the State be 
developed in consultation with the concerned agency in the State. 
Fulfilment of this requirement was not 
insisted before granting clearance to the 
project. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
87 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Important prerequisites not ensured before the grant of 
clearance 
Remarks 
A feasibility study on muck transportation for possibility of 
alternative mode of early transportation of muck was to be 
submitted to the MoEF&CCC within six months of CRZ clearance for 
further examination and possible inclusion as part of the project 
programme.  
Feasibility study of this nature should have 
preferably been a part of the prerequisites of 
the project clearance. In the instant case, no 
such studies were later submitted by PP. 
The Expert Appraisal Committee highlighted the need for a separate 
clearance from the Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection 
Authority as Dahanu taluka had special protection since 1991 
(MoEF&CC — at the behest of the Supreme Court — had passed a 
notification declaring the area as ecologically fragile one and had 
restricted hazardous industries in the area, among other things). 
We observed that separate clearance from 
the Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection 
Authority before granting clearance was not 
made as a pre-requisite before grant of 
clearance.  
7.  Maharashtra Malad sewage treatment plant by 
M/s Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai 
 
 
The mangrove replantation was made a specific condition of the 
CRZ clearance letter. As per Clearance letter, five times the 
mangrove cover area was to be replenished under this project i.e., 
180 ha (36 ha X 5). The PP however approached the Ministry stating 
that it would not be possible for it to obtain 180 ha of land for 
replantation and requested for amending the specific condition and 
replacing the condition of replantation of five times the area with 5 
times the mangroves affected. The same was granted approval by 
modifying the clearance letter in December 2018  
We noted that the Ministry amended the CRZ 
Notification 2011 for allowing this particular 
project in CRZ-I area. 
The Ministry further allowed modification of 
the specific condition of the clearance letter. 
 
Both these exceptions were against the spirit 
of protection of marine environment, which 
is the actual mandate of the Ministry.  
The PP in the 196 th EAC meeting informed that it had already 
acquired 24 ha of Government land suitable for mangrove 
replantation in the adjoining Thane district and the same had been 
handed over to the additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests 
(Mumbai Mangrove Cell) for further process. The balance 11 ha. 
land was being acquired. However, no evidence relating to this 
acquisition of the land was found on the records.  
Land acquisition is a time taking process but 
MoEF&CC did not make land acquisition for 
mangrove replantation a pre-requisite for 
grant of clearance. The mangroves affected 
in this case were the best stock in Mumbai 
region. Also, compliance to conditions of the 
project clearance was not assured. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
88 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Important prerequisites not ensured before the grant of 
clearance 
Remarks 
8.  Maharashtra Mumbai Coastal Road Project 
(South) - Princess Flyover to Worli 
end of Sea Link by M/s Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
As per CRZ clearance, proponent was to develop a marine 
biodiversity conservation plan from an institute with domain 
expertise and to submit the same to MoEF&CC within one year.  
Grant of clearance in absence of marine 
biodiversity conservation plan defeated the 
purpose of the granting clearance itself.  
9.  Maharashtra 
  
Construction of Hotel Building 
(Resort 3) in Mauje Karde, 
Ratnagiri District, Maharashtra by 
M/s Dajikaka Gadgil Developers 
Pvt. Ltd. 
  
The cadastral map (1:4000 scale) of the proposed site showed that 
a portion of the Resort 3 was in the 'NDZ (NDZ)' which according to 
the site plan was to be used for building service roads and parking 
place. But the clearance letter categorically stated that no 
construction (including cemented/concretized parking space) 
should be made in the NDZ area. 
The EAC did not ask the PP to submit a revised 
site plan showing construction for parking 
space/service roads, beyond the NDZ area 
before recommending the project and the 
clearance letter was issued for the project by 
MoEF&CC without ensuring the same.  
The clearance letter condition required that a robust rainwater 
harvesting system should be installed in consultation with the 
concerned authority.  
The plan was not made as a pre-requisite 
before recommending the project  
10.  Maharashtra Construction of Hotel Building in 
Mauje Chandranagar , Ratnagiri 
District, Maharashtra by M/s 
Dajikaka Gadgil Developers Pvt. 
Ltd.  and 
Construction of Hotel Building in 
Mauje Karde , Ratnagiri District, 
Maharashtra by M/s Dajikaka 
Gadgil Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
The clearance letter enunciated that a robust rainwater harvesting 
system should be installed in consultation with the concerned 
authority.  
The rain water harvesting plan was not made 
as a pre-requisite before grant of clearance.  
11.  Odisha Multi- product SEZ/ Industrial Park 
at Gopalpur, Ganjam, Odisha by 
M/s Tata Steel SEZ Ltd.  
Odisha CZMP as per CRZ Notification 2011 was approved by 
MoEF&CC in August 2018 and the clearance to this project was 
granted in September 2018.  A specific condition was inserted in the 
EC/CRZ clearance letter of this project that the PP should ensure 
that the project is in consonance with the new Coastal Zone 
EAC left the onus of complying with the new 
CZMPs on the PP itself, whereas it the 
responsibility of the EAC to deliberate upon 
and ensure such compliance. The Ministry in 
this case should have granted clearance only 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
89 
S. 
No. 
State Name of the Project Important prerequisites not ensured before the grant of 
clearance 
Remarks 
Management Plan. We however observed that the appraisal of the 
project was done as per CRZ Notification 1991 zonation. 
after PP got a fresh demarcation done based 
on the new CZMPs. 
12.  Tamil Nadu Modification of existing iron ore 
terminal to handle common user 
coal at Kamarajar port by M/s 
Kamarajar Port Ltd. 
A specific condition in the clearance letter stipulated that the PP 
would have to draw up and implement a management plan for the 
prevention of fires due to handling of coal. 
By clearing the project without a fire 
prevention plan due to coal handling, 
ministry disregarded an important disaster 
management and mitigation aspect.  
The PP was to inventorise the floral composition of the biota of 
marine and intertidal biotopes and draw up a detailed marine bio 
diversity conservation management plan based on possible 
impacts. 
Such an inventory was to serve as a basis of 
any environment management plan and the 
fact that this work was not finished before 
the grant of clearance raises doubts over the 
impact assessment done by the PP. 
13.  Tamil Nadu Alignment of conveying main to 
Buckingham Canal for the 
discharge of treated sewage from 
the proposed 36 MLD Sewage 
Treatment Plant (STP) by M/s 
Chennai Metro Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board Sholinganallur 
A specific condition in the clearance letter stipulated that the 
marine environment of the Buckingham Canal during construction 
and operational phase was to be watched through a robust marine 
environment management plan. 
Marine environment management plan was 
ideally required to be prepared by the PP and 
approved by the Ministry before the project 
was granted clearance. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
9
0 
Annexure 7: Non- provision of separate budget towards EMP 
(Reference: Para 3.2 (ii) of the report) 
S. No. Name of the Project Remarks 
1.  Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline 
from their Plant to final disposal point in 
the Gulf of Kutch at Mithapur by M/s Tata 
Chemicals Limited, Gujarat (2017) 
No separate budget was earmarked for carrying out 
environment management activities. 
2.  Discharge of treated effluent in Bhavnagar 
creek by M/s Madhu Silica Pvt. Ltd., 
Gujarat (2015) 
PP did not earmark any fund for implementing the EMP. 
3.  Development of four berths in Western 
Dock arm in New Mangalore port by M/s 
New Mangalore Port Trust, Karnataka 
(2016) 
Although, an EMP costing Rs. 30 lakh was earmarked for 
the project, the detailed budget (capital and recurring 
cost) was not mentioned in the EIA. 
4.  Laying of Natural Gas from Uran (District 
Raigad) to Navi Mumbai Municipal 
Corporation pipeline by M/s Mahanagar 
Gas Ltd., Maharashtra (2018) 
PP did not make any provisions for detailed EMP budget. 
5.  Mumbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by M/s 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority, Maharashtra 
(2016) 
Although, an EMP costing Rs. 335 crore was earmarked 
for the project, the detailed budget (capital and recurring 
cost) was not mentioned in the EIA.  
6.  Rerouting of Mumbai Manmad pipeline by 
BPCL, Maharashtra (2015) 
PP did not make any provisions for detailed EMP budget 
7.  Multi- product SEZ/ Industrial Park at 
Gopalpur, Ganjam, Odisha by M/s Tata 
Steel SEZ Ltd., Odisha (2018) 
Although, an EMP costing Rs. 45.28 crore was earmarked 
for the project; the detailed budget (capital and recurring 
cost) was not mentioned in the EIA. 
8.  Relaying of Pipeline & Redevelopment of 
Edible Oil Transit Terminal at Chennai by 
M/s Ruchi Infrastructure Limited, Tamil 
Nadu (2018) 
Although, an EMP costing Rs. 1.5 lakh was earmarked for 
the project; the detailed budget (capital and recurring 
cost) was not mentioned in the EIA. 
9.  Integrated Cooum River Eco-Restoration 
Project by M/s Chennai Rivers Restoration 
Trust, Tamil Nadu (2017) 
PP did not make any provisions for detailed EMP budget. 
 
  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
9
1 
Annexure 8: Cases where cumulative studies were not conducted to assess the overall impact 
(Reference: Para 3.3 of the report) 
S. No. State Name of the Project Remarks 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Marine disposal of treated 
effluent by M/s Covalent 
Laboratories Pvt. Ltd 
A pharma industry was 1.9 km away from the outfall. 
Cumulative studies to check the effect of the effluents 
discharged from both the pipelines were not done. 
2.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Marine disposal of treated 
effluent by M/s Hyacinth 
Pharma Pvt. Ltd 
EAC desired a cumulative impact study to assess risk 
posed by many outfall points in the region. However, 
the PP did not assess the same. 
3.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
Setting up of Bulk Drug 
Manufacturing Unit in East 
Godavari District by M/s Divi’s 
Laboratories Limited 
Nothing on record indicated that a similar exercise to 
identify other marine outfalls in vicinity and need for 
a cumulative assessment was done. 
4.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
International Leather Complex 
at Kothapatnam village, 
Nellore District by M/s Adani 
Port and SEZ Ltd. 
ToRs for the project required a cumulative impact 
study of marine disposal, considering other marine 
outfalls in vicinity. However, no such studies were 
submitted by PP to APCZMA 
5.  Goa Deepening of approach 
channel for capesize vessels at 
Mormugao Port by M/s 
Mormugao Port Trust (MPT) 
Proposed project was within the active “Port 
Basin/Navigational Channel” area of the MPT 
Complex. There were large scale activities already on-
going in this region with many industries and many 
Barge Yards and Ship Building units along the bank of 
Zuari River.  EIA report too mentioned that the 
impacts on marine ecosystems will be of cumulative 
nature. But PP did not study them. 
6.  Gujarat Discharge of treated effluent 
in Bhavnagar creek by M/s 
Madhu Silica Pvt. Ltd. 
Cumulative studies for assessing impacts on the Creek 
due to disposal by PP in addition to existing 20 MLD 
disposal of Chitra GDC was not carried out. 
7.  Maharashtra High Speed Railway Project 
across CRZ areas in Mumbai, 
Mumbai Sub-urban, Thane and 
Palghar District (PH) by M/s 
National High Speed Rail 
Corporation Ltd 
Cumulative studies for studying the adverse effects of 
other infrastructure development projects such as 
Thane Creek Bridge III on the biodiversity of Thane 
Creek was not done.  
8.  Maharashtra Construction of Hotel Building 
(
Resort 3) in Mauje Karde,  
Ratnagiri District, Maharashtra 
by M/s Dajikaka Gadgil 
Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
The cumulative effects due to proximity to two similar 
hotel construction sites (Resort 1 and 2) were not 
assessed. 
9.  Maharashtra Construction of Hotel Building 
(Resort 2) in Mauje Karde,  
Ratnagiri District, Maharashtra 
by M/s Dajikaka Gadgil 
Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
The cumulative effects due to proximity to two similar 
hotel construction sites (Resort 1 and 3) were not 
assessed. 
10.  Maharashtra Construction of Hotel Building 
(
Resort 1)  in Chandranagar,  
Ratnagiri District, Maharashtra 
The cumulative effects due to proximity to two similar 
hotel construction sites (Resort 2 and 3) were not 
assessed. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
9
2 
S. No. State Name of the Project Remarks 
by M/s Dajikaka Gadgil 
Developers Pvt. Ltd. 
11.  Odisha Desalination plant for 5MLD 
hybrid Desalination project. 
Cumulative studies for assessing the damage to 
Marine environment by disposal of brine waste in 
addition to existing STP discharge into the ocean was 
not carried out by PP. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
9
3 
Annexure 9: Issues related to public hearing 
(Reference: Para 3.5 of the report) 
S.No. State Name of the Project Issues related to public 
hearing 
Remarks 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
International Leather 
Complex at 
Kothapatnam village, 
Nellore District by M/s 
Adani Port and SEZ Ltd. 
While examining the records 
related to the public hearing, it 
was noticed that all the 
documents were in vernacular 
language.  
Method adopted to 
deliberate upon the material 
in vernacular language by the 
EAC was not described. 
Further, the minutes of the 
meeting, public grievances, 
their resolutions were not 
available in the EIA Report. 
2. Goa Deepening of approach 
channel for capesize 
vessels at Mormugao 
Port by M/s Mormugao 
Port Trust 
The EAC in had asked PP to 
upload Volume- II of the EIA 
Report as it was claimed that 
the public hearing proceedings 
were covered in the said 
volume.  
The same was not available 
on the records, thus, it could 
not be ascertained if the due 
procedure was followed. 
3. Gujarat Widening and 
improvement of 
existing highway by 
NHAI 
Mismatch between the 
information given during 
public hearing and that 
furnished in the EIA. 
In public hearing, as per PP, a 
total of 35652 trees were to 
be cut for the project, 
however, as per EIA report, 
15000 trees were to be cut. 
4. Maharashtra High Speed Railway 
Project across CRZ 
areas in Mumbai, 
Mumbai Sub-urban, 
Thane and Palghar 
District (PH) by M/s 
National High Speed 
Rail Corporation Ltd 
i. Non-provision of the 
minimum notice period of 
30 days.  
Public hearing was held in 12 
places and the notice period 
at these places ranged  
between 03 to 15 days only.  
ii. Advertisement for public 
hearing needs to be 
published in one major 
National daily and regional 
Vernacular daily. 
The notice was published in 
only local newspaper. 
iii. Mismatch between the 
information given in public 
hearing and that furnished 
during the EAC meeting. 
On the issue of effect of 
vibrations on the Thane creek 
flamingos due to construction 
of tunnels, PP submitted in 
public hearing that vibrations 
would not propagate upto 
creek surface, so there is no 
adverse impact on flamingos. 
But PP in its submission to 
EAC stated that it was not 
possible to predict the impact 
of vibrations on flamingos till 
the work actually started. 
5. West Bengal Setting up of Mini Bulk 
Carriers Handling 
Facility on the 
As per public hearing 
procedure, the final EIA report 
should incorporate the 
The EIA Report sent to the 
Ministry was devoid of the 
responses of the people, the 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
9
4 
upstream of 3rd oil Jetty 
and west bank of river 
Hooghly at Haldia Dock 
Complex, Kolkata Port 
(West Bengal) by M/s 
Kolkata Port Trust  
concerns expressed in the 
public hearing along with 
action plan and financial 
allocation, to address those 
concerns before it is sent to for 
appraisal. 
action taken by the PP to 
address the concern raised in 
the public hearing. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
95 
Annexure 10: Non submission of mandatory documents by the PPs  
(Reference: Para 3.7.2 of the report) 
                                                           
72  including marine and terrestrial components 
73  By authorised agency 
S. No. Name of the project/State 
Rapid 
EIA72 
Dis-
aster 
Mgmt
. 
Repor
t 
Risk 
Assmt. 
& 
Mgmt. 
Plan 
CRZ 
map 
with 
HTL 
and LTL 
marked
73  
Project 
layout 
laid on 
CRZ 
map 
Map 
with 
CRZ 
zones 
NoC from 
SPCBs for 
effluent 
discharge 
1. Deepening of approach channel for capesize vessels at Mormugao Port by M/s 
Mormugao Port Trust, Goa (2016) 
      X 
2. Installation of TIC, Toilet block, rain shelter Gazebos, Utorda, Goa        
3. Provision of Mobile Toilet block (GTDC), Querim Beach, Goa        
4. Construction of resort (Amit C Prabhu) , Goa        
5. Construction of residential house (Anicito Fermino Fernandes) , Goa N.A.      N.A. 
6. Construction of residential house (Etelvina Rodrigues), Goa N.A.      N.A. 
7. Construction of Public Conveniences (GTDC), Candolim Beach, Goa        
8. Construction of toilet blocks, rain shelter and TIC , Terekhol, Goa        
9. Permanent Toilet block, Upgradation/beautification of places of touristic interest (GTDC), 
Palolem Beach, Cancona, Goa 
       
10. Const. of terminal building over existing jetty in Panaji        
11. Beautification of Rua De Orem Creek and Convention Centre, Goa        
12. Beautification of Beach Front Promendade, Goa        
13. Construction of residential house (Luisa Desouza) , Goa N.A.      N.A. 
14. Construction of Sweage Treatment Plant at Colva (SIDCL) , Goa        
15. Construction of STP (SIDCL), Bandora, Goa        
16. Const. of Sewage Treatment Plant (1mld) (SIDCL), Durbhat, Goa        

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
96 
17. Construction of residential House (Yuvraj K Bandodkar) , Goa N.A.      N.A. 
18. Construction of new KCL storage unit (Zuari Agro Chem.), Goa        
19. Expansion of Adani Petronet (Dahej) Port, Bharuch District by M/s Adani Petronet (Dahej) 
Port Pvt Ltd, Gujarat (2016) 
       
20. Development of Greenfield Beach Resort at Mandvi, District Kutch by M/s Tourism 
Corporation of Gujarat Ltd.(2015) 
       
21. Discharge of 10 MLD industrial effluent in Bhavnagar creek, Bhavnagar by M/s Madhu 
Silica Pvt. Ltd., Gujarat (2015) 
¤ 
 
      
22. Common treated effluent disposal pipeline project along river Kolak upto deep sea by 
M/s Wel Treat Enviro Management Organization, Gujarat (2016) 

       
23. Laying of treated effluent disposal pipeline at Marine outfall point in Gulf of Kutch at 
Mithapur by M/s TCL, Gujarat, (2017) 
¤ 
 
      
24. Revival of Existing Jetty with Liquid Storage Terminal, Pipeline Road Connectivity, 
Gandhidham, Kutch by Ahir Salt & Allied Product Pvt. Ltd, Gujarat 

       
25. Residential (Subplot Type) purpose project ‘Sun city’ at Barbodhan Village, Olpad Taluka, 
Surat by Pramukh Organisers LLP, Gujarat 
       
26. Construction of marine bridge between Beyt and Okha, Dwaraka by Road & Building 
Department, Gujarat 
¤
       
27. Additional Salt works (2846.15 acres) located at village Kalatalav & Narmad, Ta. & Dist. 
Bhavnagar by Nirma Limited 
¤       
28. Mumbai Coastal Road Project (South) - Princess Flyover to Worli end of Sea Link by M/s 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (2017), Maharashtra 

       
29. Intake and outfall facility of Marine Algae in District Ramanathapuram by M/s EID Parry 
(India) Ltd.(2016), Tamil Nadu 
       
30. Alignment of conveying main to Buckingham Canal for the discharge of treated sewage 
from proposed 36 MLD Sewage Treatment Plant (STP)  by M/s Chennai Metro Water 
Supply And Sewerage Board Sholinganallur (2017), Tamil Nadu 

       
31. Construction of Training Walls for Permanent Stability of Bar Mouth at Pulicat Village by 
Fisheries Department, Tamil Nadu 
       
32. Widening of North Chennai Thermal Power Station Road & Ennore Port Road by Tamil 
Nadu Road Development Company, Tamil Nadu 

       

Report No. 4 of 2022 
97 
¤ EIA report did not contain terrestrial component 
33. Development of Mall at Thiruvottiyur Village, Chennai by M/s. Alwarpet Properties Pvt. 
Ltd., Tamil Nadu 
       
34. Development of Fishing Harbour at Vellapallam Village, Nagapattinam by Fisheries 
Department, Tamil Nadu 
       
35. Renovation of Fishing Harbour at Mudhunagar, Cuddalore by Fisheries Dept, Cuddalore        
36. Proposed Development of Eco-Park Bharathy Nagar, Tondiarpet Village, Chennai by 
Greater Chennai Corporation, Tamil Nadu 

       
37. Construction of new Fishing Harbour at Tharangambadi, , Nagapattinam District by 
Assistant Director of Fisheries, Nagapattinam North, Tamil Nadu 
       
38. Construction of Fish Landing Centre at Kunthukal, Ramanathapuram District by Assistant 
Director of Fisheries, Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu 

       
39. Construction of Government Guest House Building (Government Kerala) at Kanyakumari 
by Additional Director (Hospitality), Department of Tourism, Government of Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu 
       
40. Construction of Residential building by Brahma Kumari Beena, Kanyakumari by Prajapita 
Brahma kumaris, Ishwariyavishwavidhyalaya, Tamil Nadu 

       
41. Construction of Memorial for former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Selvi J. Jayalalitha by E 
E , Building & Construction Division I, P W D, Tamil Nadu 
       
42. Proposed Residential Complex at Ernavur village, Thiruvottiyur, Thiuvallur District by M/S. 
Coromondal International ltd, Tamil Nadu 

       
43. Construction tenements at Four shore Estate in R.S No. 7581, 7582 of Mylapore Village by 
M/S. Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board, , Tamil Nadu 
       
44. Modernization of Foundry unit at survey Nos.39 A &39 B, Kathivakkam village, Ambattur 
Taluk by M/S. Hinduja Foundries, Tamil Nadu 

       
45. Proposed Construction of packing of Dry Fish and Chilled Fresh Fish by M/S. GVD 
International, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 
       
46. Construction of Tuna Fishing Harbour, Tiruvottiyur, Chennai by Fisheries Department, 
Ponneri, Tamil Nadu 

       

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
98 
Annexure 11: Instances where the conditions as per the clearance letter as well as the conditions stipulated in the SCZMA recommendations  
were not being complied with by the PP 
(Reference: Para 4.1.1 of the report) 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
1.  Goa Deepening of approach channel 
for capesize vessels at Mormugao 
Port by M/s Mormugao Port Trust 
As per EIA the report, the PP had to provision Rs. 35 lakhs under Environmental Management Plan. However, 
no funds were provisioned by PP under Environmental Management Plan. 
2.  Gujarat Development of Proposed 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petro-
Chemical Special Investment 
Region, (PCPIR) by Gujarat 
Industrial Development 
Corporation 
i. A scientific study for Coastal Management Plan was to be prepared by an expert institution and the same 
was to be implemented by all the stakeholders. However, the study was not undertaken by the PP. 
ii. PP had to prepare environmental policy and get the same approved by its Board of Directors. However, 
the Environmental Policy was not prepared by the PP. 
3.  Gujarat Laying of treated effluent pipeline 
and disposal of effluent into 
Bhavnagar creek 
i. Online monitoring sensors were to be provided at the pipeline outlet and at the creek outfall. However, 
no monitoring sensors were provided by the PP. 
ii. Plantation of mangrove plantation in 25 ha. land was to be done and reported to the Forest & 
Environment Department/ MoEF&CC. No plantation was carried out till date (August 2021) by the PP. 
4.  Gujarat Laying of pipeline along the river 
Kolak up to deep sea for CETP in 
Village Morai, Vapi 
PP was required to set up separate environmental management cell for effective implementation of the 
stipulated environmental safeguards under the supervision of a Senior Executive. The PP did not set up the 
cell. 
5.  Gujarat Laying of treated effluent disposal 
pipeline from their Plant to final 
disposal point in the Gulf of Kutch 
at Mithapur by M/s Tata 
Chemicals Limited 
i. Baseline data for Marine and coastal biodiversity of Poshitra Bay were to be developed and monitored 
bi-annually with specific focus on sea grass beds, and endemic species Sakuraeolis gujaratica and 
Anteaeolidiella poshitra. Baseline studies were not conducted by PP. 
ii. Submission of annual environment audit reports to GCZMA. Annual environment audit reports were not 
submitted by PP.  
iii. Comprehensive EIA Report was to be prepared and submitted to GCZMA. PP did not submit any 
Comprehensive EIA Report to GCZMA. 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
99 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
6.  Gujarat Revival of Existing Jetty with liquid 
Storage Terminal, Pipeline, Road 
connectivity, Railway line & sidings 
at Mithirohar, Gandhidham, Kutch 
i. PP had to obtain all necessary permissions from different Government Departments/ Agencies before 
commencing their activities. GPCB granted Consolidated Consent and Authorisation (CCA) for laying off 
only five pipelines,  
ii. During site visit, we noticed that PP had laid six pipelines each of 1800-meter length.  
iii. Thus, PP laid and operated an additional pipeline without obtaining CCA from GPCB. 
iv. The PP had to carry out mangrove plantation in 50 ha. area in consultation with GEC/ Forest Department 
within a period of two years from the date of commencement of the project. No plantation (August 2021) 
was carried out by the PP.  
v. PP was required to take up massive green belt development activity in consultation with GEC/ Forest 
Department/ GEER Foundation and submit a comprehensive plan to forest department/ SEIAA. PP 
neither consulted Forest Department/ GEC/ GEER Foundation nor submitted any comprehensive plan. 
vi. PP had to spend ₹ 20.67 lakh and ₹ 2.51 lakh included as Capital cost and Maintenance cost for green 
belt development as per the EMP. PP did not incur any expenditure for this purpose till date. 
7.  Gujarat Additional Salt works (2395.15 
Acres) located at Village Kalatalav 
& Narmad, Bhavnagar 
i. As per the condition imposed by GCZMA as well as SEIAA, PP was required to carry out mangrove 
plantation in additional 50 ha area. This condition was not complied by the PP 
ii. PP shall commission a comprehensive EIA through a reputed institute. Comprehensive EIA was not 
prepared by PP 
iii. PP was to regularly carry out study on environmental surveillance covering the status of mangroves and 
other coastal and marine ecosystems in the vicinity through the reputed institute and submit the report 
every year to the F&E Department.  No such study was carried out by the PP. 
iv. PP was to submit annual environmental audit report indicating the changes with respect to the baseline 
environmental quality in the coastal and marine environment by the PP to F&E Department and SEIAA. 
This condition was not complied by the PP 
8.  Gujarat Construction of Marine bridge 
between Beyt Dwarka and Okha 
by Road and Building Department, 
Jamnagar, GoG 
i. PP was required to set up separate environmental management cell. No such cell was created by PP. 
ii. Permission for Non-agricultural use for the land to be obtained. The construction camp was established 
on the agricultural land without permission for Non-agricultural use 
iii. Records related to monitoring of fugitive emission in the work area required to be maintained. Such 
records were not maintained. 
iv. Used oil to be sold to registered recyclers only. According to PP, used oil was being sold to local vendors 
and not registered recyclers. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
100 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
v. Annual environment audit reports indicating changes, with respect to the baseline environmental quality 
in the coastal and marine environment was to be submitted to Forest and Environment Department by 
the PP. Annual environment audit after commencement of construction was not carried out. 
vi. Construction Camp was to be kept outside CRZ area. We observed using Google Maps as well as the 
approved CZMP for the area that a part of the construction camp fell under CRZ area 
vii. Construction/installation of settling ponds and oil receptors to prevent the entry of the surface runoff 
from fuel and other contaminants into the marine water. No such settling ponds and/or oil receptors 
were observed at project site. 
9.  Karnataka Construction of Petroleum 
Products Storage Terminal at 
Karwar, Karnataka Port by M/s 
Tropicana Liquid Storage (P) Ltd. 
i. There is no Proper oil spillage contingency plan put in place. Dedicated boats fitted with booms/skimies 
etc. are not deployed to avoid oil spillage. The PP had not tied up with the Karwar Port for firefighting 
and oil spill mitigation measures. 
ii. There is no computerized SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Automation) system for identifying 
leakage in the pipeline to cut off pumping immediately. 
iii. The PP has not set up separate environmental management cell for effective implementation of the 
stipulated environmental safeguards under the supervision of a Senior Executive. 
10.  Kerala Cochin Residential Development 
Project by M/s TRIF Kochi Projects 
Private Ltd, Ernakulam 
i. As per specific condition I(iv) of EC, there shall be no development within 0-200 metres from HTL. We 
observed that the entire construction of the project was carried out within 200m of HTL. No action has 
been taken by MoEF&CC/KCZMA against the violations of the conditions of EC. 
    ii. Specific condition I (xxx) of EC stipulated that, under the provisions of EP Act, 1986, legal action shall be 
initiated against the PP if construction of the project was started without EC. The Chief Town Planner, 
Thiruvananthapuram approved (June 2012) the layout of buildings and usage of the plot subject to the 
condition that EC should be obtained for the project and, Kochi Municipal Corporation should ensure that 
construction is according to CRZ Notifications. However, Corporation of Kochi has issued (March 2011& 
July 2012) building permit to the project before the issue (February 2016) of EC by MoEF&CC. No punitive 
action was taken by MoEF&CC/KCZMA in this regard. 
iii. Clause 3(xi) of CRZ Notification 2011 drawl of ground water is permissible only when done manually 
through ordinary wells for drinking, horticulture, agriculture and fisheries and where no other source of 
water is available.  

Report No. 4 of 2022 
101 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
But during JPV it was noticed that the main source of water was Ground water for which a Tube well was 
constructed for meeting the entire water requirement. 
iv. As per specific condition II (vi) of EC, the installation of the Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) should be 
certified by an independent expert and a report in this regard should be submitted to the Ministry before 
the project is commissioned for operation. The project was commissioned without the certification by an 
independent expert on the installation of STP. 
11.  Kerala Construction of Star Hotel at 
Alapphuzha West Village, District 
Alapphuzha by M/s East Venice 
Hotels and Resorts Pvt Ltd 
Construction of basement shall be allowed only if NOC is obtained from State Ground Water Authority. NOC 
from Ground Water Authority was not obtained for construction of the basement. 
12.  Maharashtr
a 
Mumbai Coastal Road Project 
(South) - Princess Flyover to Worli 
end of Sea Link by M/s Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
Condition on rehabilitation and resettlement of the fishermen communities in the event project impacts 
existing livelihood pattern of these communities.  Observation taken in the main report. 
13.  Maharashtr
a 
Mumbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by 
M/s Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority 
(MMRDA) 
i. MMRDA was to ensure that fishing activity is not hampered during construction and operation of the 
project and assess loss of business to the project affected fishermen due to the project.  
ii. The MoEF&CC approved (January 2016) for diversion of 47.41 ha of forest land for MTHL provided 
MMRDA in consultation with the State Government shall create and maintain alternate habitat/home for 
the avifauna whose nesting trees are to be cleared in this project. Bird nests artificially made out of the 
eco-friendly material shall be used in the area including forest area and human settlements adjoining the 
forest area being diverted for the project. Chief Conservator of Forest (T), Thane permitted (May 2017) 
cutting of trees before the commencement of construction work of MTHL.  
It was noticed that although a total of 669 no of trees were removed for the project no alternate habitat 
/home for the affected avifauna was created. MMRDA stated (September 2021) that based on the 
estimation of Rs 1.50 lakh for the purpose of artificial nests along with Rs 61 lakh for soil and moisture 
conservation work by the Deputy Conservator of Forest, Alibag it had deposited (November 2016) Rs 
62.50 lakh with the forest department. 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems 
102 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
14. Tamil Nadu Integrated Cooum River Eco-
Restoration Project by M/s 
Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust 
i. Desiltation of the Cooum River in CRZ area was permitted for a quantity of 5,08,177 cu.m only. Against 
this, PWD had carried out desiltation of the river for a quantity of 8,94,757 cu.m, (i.e.) 3,86,580 cu.m. in 
excess of the quantity permitted by TNSCZMA in its recommendation. 
ii. Silt generated through dredging was to be scientifically disposed outside the CRZ area. Bunding and 
landscaping changes were prohibited activities. 
   Public Works Department removed only 40% of the silt generated to dump yards, and the remaining silt 
was deposited on the riverbank, which led to formation of bunds that affected the landscape. The above 
violations were neither detected by the TNSCZMA nor by the DCZMA, Chennai region. Thus no action was 
taken by the authorities against the above violations.    Further, due to unauthorized dumping of 
excessive silt and raising of bund height by PWD, the Greater Chennai Corporation had abandoned its 
ambitious Cooum River Front Development Project of construction/development of Parks, Walkways, 
Nature Trail Park etc at a cost of Rs.32.17 crore and terminated all contracts related to the project. 
15. Maharashtr
a 
Rerouting of Mumbai Manmad 
Pipeline 
The clearance letter stipulated that in all the major water bodies, the Horizontal Directional Drilling (HDD) 
method should be used to avoid damage to the mangroves. The Regional office, MoEF&CC, Nagpur was 
required to monitor the implementation of environment safeguard through inspection and the BPCL was 
required to submit half-yearly compliance reports.  
The Regional office has not monitored the project and BPCL had not submitted the mandatory half-yearly 
compliance reports to the regional office. 
Regional office, MoEF&CC, Nagpur stated (January 2021) that BPCL had not submitted any information 
pertaining to HDD. It was further cited deficient manpower for non monitoring. 
16. Tamil Nadu Alignment of conveying main to 
Buckingham Canal for the 
discharge of treated sewage from 
the proposed 36 MLD Sewage 
Treatment Plant (STP)  by M/s 
Chennai Metro Water Supply And 
Sewerage Board Sholinganallur 
i. Allocation of 2% of the project cost towards fulfilling its Corporate Environment Responsibility (CER) 
during the currency of the project. Account of measures taken should be maintained and should also be 
submitted to the CZMA every six months. This condition was not complied with. 
ii. Regular soil and ground water test in and around the project site to ensure monitoring ground water 
quality / leaching of heavy metals and other toxic contaminants. This condition was not complied with. 
iii. Time bound action plan for treating the sewage and usage of resultant effluent for industrial and other 
applications was to be made. This condition was not complied with. 
iv. Uploading compliance report on the stipulated conditions on the website of the PP was not done 

Report No. 4 of 2022 
103 
S. No. State Project Name Observation 
v. Submission of report on year wise expenditure from the funds earmarked for environment protection to 
the ministry and its regional office was not done 
17. Tamil Nadu Relaying of Pipeline & 
Redevelopment of Edible Oil 
Transit Terminal at Chennai by 
M/s Ruchi Infrastructure Limited 
i. Allocation of 2% of the project cost towards fulfilling its Corporate Environment Responsibility (CER) 
during the currency of the project was to be made. Account of measures taken were to be maintained 
and were also to be submitted to the SCZMA every six months. This condition was not complied with. 
ii. Uploading compliance report on the stipulated conditions on the website of the PP was required. This 
condition was not complied with. 
iii. Submission of report on year wise expenditure from the funds earmarked for environment protection to 
the ministry and its regional office was required. This condition was not complied with. 
18. Tamil Nadu 2X800 MW Uppur Supercritical 
Thermal Power Plant at District 
Ramanathapuram by TANGEDCO 
i. Allocation of 2% of the project cost towards fulfilling its Corporate Environment Responsibility (CER) 
during the currency of the project was to be made. Account of measures taken were to be maintained 
and were also to be submitted to the SCZMA every six months. This condition was not complied with. 
ii. Uploading compliance report on the stipulated conditions on the website of the PP was required. This 
condition was not complied with. 
iii. Submission of report on year wise expenditure from the funds earmarked for environment protection to 
the ministry and its regional office was stipulated. This condition was not complied with. 
 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
104 
Annexure 12: Cases where PPs did not submit any half yearly compliance report 
(Reference: Para 4.1.2 (i) of the report) 
State Name of the Project 
Goa Deepening of approach channel for capesize vessels at Mormugao Port by M/s 
Mormugao Port Trust 
Gujarat i. Widening and improvement of the existing highway to 2-lanes paved shoulder/
4 lane/ 6 lane of Bhavnagar- Pipavav- Porbandar-Dwarka Section of NH-8E by
National Highway Authority Limited
ii. Development of Greenfield Beach Resort at Mandvi, District Kutch by M/s
Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Ltd.
iii. Common treated effluent disposal pipeline project along river Kolakupto deep
sea via Kolak Estuary, Vapi by M/s Weltreat Enviro Management Limited
Karnataka Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal at Karwar, Karnataka Port by 
M/s Tropicana Liquid Storage (P) Ltd. 
Kerala i. Cochin Residential Development Project by M/s TRIF Kochi Projects Private Ltd,
Ernakulam: As compared to 8 half yearly reports, only 3 compliance reports
were submitted to KSPCB.
ii. Construction of Star Hotel at Alapphuzha West Village, District Alapphuzha by
M/s East Venice Hotels and Resorts Pvt Ltd
Tamil 
Nadu 
i. Integrated Cooum River Eco-Restoration Project by M/s Chennai Rivers
Restoration Trust
ii. Intake and outfall facility of Marine Algae in District Ramanathapuram by M/s
EID Parry (India) Ltd
iii. Eco-restoration of Adyar River (2000 m – 4000 m chainage) from Thiruvika
Bridge to 400 m upstream to Kotturpuram Bridge
iv. Alignment of conveying main to Buckingham Canal for the discharge of treated
sewage from the proposed 36 MLD Sewage Treatment Plant (STP)  by M/s
Chennai Metro Water Supply And Sewerage Board Sholinganallur
v. Relaying of Pipeline & Redevelopment of Edible Oil Transit Terminal at Chennai
by M/s Ruchi Infrastructure Limited
vi. 2X800 MW Uppur Supercritical Thermal Power Plant at District
Ramanathapuram by TANGEDCO

Report No. 4 of 2022 
105 
Annexure 13: Non- submission of Environmental Statement by the PP 
(Reference: Para 4.1.2 (ii) of the report) 
S. No. Name of the project 
1. Alignment of conveying main to Buckingham Canal for the discharge of treated sewage from the 
proposed 36 MLD Sewage Treatment Plant (STP)  by M/s Chennai Metro Water Supply And Sewerage 
Board Sholinganallur, Tamil Nadu 
2. Relaying of Pipeline & Redevelopment of Edible Oil Transit Terminal at Chennai by M/s Ruchi 
Infrastructure Limited, Tamil Nadu 
3. 2X800 MW Uppur Supercritical Thermal Power Plant at District Ramanathapuram by TANGEDCO, Tamil 
Nadu 
4. Cochin Residential Development Project by M/s TRIF Kochi Projects Private Ltd, Ernakulam, Kerala 
5. Construction of Petroleum Products Storage Terminal at Karwar, Karnataka Port by M/s Tropicana 
Liquid Storage (P) Ltd., Karnataka 
6. MMPL rerouting project, Maharashtra 
7. Mumbai Trans Harbor Sea Link by M/s Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority, 
Maharashtra 
8. Mumbai Coastal Road Project (South) - Princess Flyover to Worli end of Sea Link by M/s Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Maharashtra 
9. Malad sewage treatment plant by M/s Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, Maharashtra 
10. Construction of Holiday Resort at Alibag, Dist. Raigarh by M/s Savitri Nandkishor Dube, Maharashtra 
11. Proposal for Transportation and Distribution of Natural Gas from Uran to Navi Mumbai Municipal 
Corporation, Mumbai, Maharashtra, Maharashtra 
12. Construction of Resort on Plot at Mauje Chandranagar, Tal: Dapoli, District Ratnagiri, Maharashtra 
13. Construction of Resort on Plot at Mauje Karde, Tal. Dapoli, District  Ratnagiri, Maharashtra 
14. Construction of Resort on Plot at Mauje Chandranagar, Tal. Dapoli, District  Ratnagiri, Maharashtra 
15. High Speed Railway Project across CRZ areas in Mumbai, Mumbai Sub-urban, Thane and Palghar District 
(PH) by M/s National High Speed Rail Corporation Ltd, Maharashtra 
16. All weather Greenfield Jetty' at Nandgaon of Taluka Palghar, District Thane, Maharashtra by M/s JSW 
Infrastructure Ltd. , Maharashtra 
17. Expansion of facilities at port Redi, Sindhudurg by M/s Redi Port Ltd, Maharashtra 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
106 
Annexure 14: SCZMAs granted recommendations in the absence of CTE/CTO certificate from the concerned 
State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) 
(Reference: Para 4.1.2 (iii) of the report) 
Central Sampled Projects 
Tamil Nadu i. Integrated Cooum River Eco-Restoration Project by M/s Chennai Rivers
Restoration Trust
ii. Intake and outfall facility of Marine Algae in District Ramanathapuram by
M/s EID Parry (India) Ltd
iii. Eco-restoration of Adyar River (2000 m – 4000 m chainage)from Thiruvika
Bridge to 400 m upstream to Kotturpuram Bridge
Maharashtra Rerouting of Mumbai Manmad pipeline by BPCL 
State sampled Projects 
Tamil Nadu i. Construction of Tuna Fishing Harbour, Thiruvottiyur
ii. Construction of residential buildings at Kottivakkam Village, Sholinganallur
Taluk, Kanchipuram District by M/s.  Perungudi DevelopersPvt. Ltd
iii. Proposed development of Fishing Harbour at Vellapallam, Nagapattinam by
Asst. Director, Fisheries department, Nagapattinam (South)
iv. Renovation of Fishing Harbour at Mudhunagar, Cuddalore by Asst. Director,
Fisheries department, Cuddalore
v. Proposed widening of North Chennai Thermal Power station Road and
Ennore Port Road by M/s. TN Road Development Company Ltd (TNRDCL)
Maharashtra Redevelopment on property in Mazgaon, Mumbai, renamed as "Harbour 
Heights” by M/s. Sumer Buildcorp Pvt. 
Goa i. Construction of 20 MLD STP at Baina
ii. Construction of 20 MLD STP at Margao
iii. Co nstruction of 1 MLD STP at Durbhat

Report No. 4 of 2022 
107 
Abbreviations 
1. BENFISH West Bengal State Co-operative Federation Ltd. 
2. BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
3. BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
4. CAA Coastal Aquaculture Authority 
5. CCA Composite Consent and Authorisation 
6. CDA Chilka Development Authority 
7. COD Chemical Oxygen Demand 
8. CRZ Coastal Regulation Zone 
9. CTE Consent to Establish 
10. CTO Consent to Operate 
11. CVCA Critically Vulnerable Coastal Areas 
12. CWLS Coringa Wildlife Sanctuary 
13. CWQI Coastal Water Quality Index 
14. CZMP Coastal Zone Management Plans 
15. DIF District Indicator Framework 
16. DLC District Level Committees 
17. DMP Disaster Management Plan 
18. DoFE Department of Forest & Environment (State body) 
19. DPR Detailed Project Report 
20. DPT Deendayal Port Trust 
21. DSDA Digha Shankarpur Development Authority 
22. EAC Expert Appraisal Committee 
23. EIA Environment Impact Assessment 
24. EMP Environment Management Plan 
25. EP Act The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
26. ESA Ecologically Sensitive Areas 
27. F&ARD  Fisheries & Animal Resources Development … 
28. GEER Gujarat Ecological Education and Research Founda tion 
29. GIS Geographic Information System 
30. GoMMNP Gulf of Mannar Marine National Park 
31. HTL High Tide Line 
32. ICZMP Integrated Coastal Zone Management Programme 
33. IMP Integrated Management Plans 
34. IUCN International Union for Conservation of Nature 
35. IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
36. JPV Joint Physical Verification 
37. JTC Joint Technical Committee 
38. KCBA Kachchh Camel Breeders Association 
39. LTL Low Tide Line 

Performance Audit Report on Conservation of Coastal Ecosystems  
108 
40. MCGM Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
41. MCs Municipal Corporations 
42. MLD Millions of Liters Per Day 
43. MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
44. MoES Ministry of Earth Sciences 
45. MoSPI Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
46. MPCB Maharashtra Pollution Control Board 
47. MT Metric Ton 
48. NABET National Accreditation Board of Education & Trai ning 
49. NBWL National Board of Wildlife 
50. NCSCM National Centre for Sustainable Coastal Manageme nt 
51. NCZMA National Coastal Zone Management Authority 
52. NDZ No Development Zone 
53. NGT National Green Tribunal 
54. NIF National Indicator Framework 
55. NIO National Institute of Oceanography 
56. NPMU National Project Management Unit 
57. NW National Waterway 
58. PCB Pollution Control Board 
59. PDO Programme Development Office 
60. PHED Public Health Engineering Directorate 
61. PP Project Proponent 
62. QCI Quality Council of India 
63. SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Automation 
64. SDG Sustainable Development Goals 
65. SCZMA State Coastal Zone Management Authorities 
66. SEIAA State Environmental Impact Assessment Authoritie s 
67. SICOM Society of Integrated Coastal Management 
68. SIF State Indicator Framework 
69. SPMU State Project Management Unit 
70. STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
71. ToR Terms of Reference 
72. TPD Tonnes Per Day 
73. TS Canal Trivandrum- Shornur Canal 
74. UNDP-GEP United Nations Development Program Global Env ironmental Facility 
75. WBFCL West Bengal Fisheries Corporation Limited 
76. WQMBS Water Quality Monitoring Buoy System 
77. WQMS Water Quality Monitoring System 
78. WWF World Wildlife Fund 